THE LIFE OF THE EMPEROR Theodosius the Great.

Written originally in French by the famous Abbot Flechier, now Bishop of
Nimes, of the French Academy, for the Use of the Dauphin.

Englished by Mr. FRANCIS MANNING.

Est quoddam tentare. Ovid.
December. 15. 1692. Imprimatur Edmund Bohun.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for F. Saunders, at the Blue Anchor in the New
Exchange; And T. Bennet, and J. Knapton, at the Half Moon and Crown in St. Paul
's Churchyard. 1693.

TO THE Deservedly Honored Charles Duncomb, Esquire
SIR,
I Am bold to present you with the Life of the Great Theodosius, whom Pagans
Authors have extolled above the Princes his Predecessors, and whom the Fathers
of the Church have proposed for an Example to Christian Princes, who ought to
pursue his Steps.

This History, Sir, includes great Events, and one may collect from hence
Instructions of singular Importance. You will observe herein, on one side
Barbarians repulsed to their ancient bounds; Rebels brought overby Swetness, or
reduced to obedience by Force; Tyrants rewarded for their Cruelty and
Perfidiousness, and the Empire thrice established by the Valor of Theodosius:
On the other side Heresy pulled down, Idolatry confounded, the Abuses of the
Age reformed, and the Church, after an Oppression of several Reigns, restored
to its former Liberty, by the Edicts of this wise and pious Emperor.

You will observe here, Sir, the Spirit and Character of a Prince, who tempers
his Power by his Goodness; who never separates the Interests of Religion from
those of the State; who knows how to give Laws to Men, and to submit himself to
those of God; who triumphs over his Enemies, as much by Virtue of his Faith and
Prayers, as of his Courage and his Arms, and who unites in his Person, Valor
and Piety, the Grandeur of the Age, and a Christian Moderation.

I doubt not, Sir, but you will admire, the different Virtues, that he
practiced in the different Conditions of his Life. He served Emperors, as soon
as his Age would permit him to bear Arms. Scarce had he served any time in the
Armies, but he was found capable of commanding them. The Reputation which he
gained in great Employments, procured him the Envy and Disgrace of even those,
who ought to have protected him: but he supported his adverse Fortune without
Weakness, as he enjoyed his Prosperity without Pride. He came to the Empire at
a time, when there was not only a Necessity to govern it, but to re-establish
it; and his first cares extended to the making his Subjects happy. He was a
lover of Peace, and feared less to suffer an injustice, than to commit one. He
put an end to several Wars through his Valor, and undertook not one through
Ambition. He was always more inclined to pardon, than to punish; and having
once abandoned himself to his Anger, he expiated by a public Penance the
Fault, which he had committed rather by the Persuasion of his Mnisters, than by
a Depravation of Mind.

This long Retinue of glittering Actions might induce you to believe, Sir, that
I send you the Panegyric of this Emperor, and not his History; but you will
see, that I don't aggravate his Virtues, nor yet dissemble his Faults: and that
without exceeding those bounds which are preseribed me, I expose the actions,
which are advanced as real truths, founded upon the Testimony of ancient
Authors, and not as Idea's of Perfection, that are only imaginary.

It were to be wished, that the manner of Writing were answerable to the
Dignity of the Subject. But I hope, Sir, that you will excuse what is wanting
in the one, and that you will approve of the choice which is made of the other.
As for me, I pretend to nothing* but the Glory of having brought in the
execution of my Design, all the Care and Exactness I am capable of: Happy, if
my Labors shall become acceptable to You, whose extraordinary Merits have
engaged me to take the Liberty of presenting you with this piece, which may
serve to divert you sometimes, after the Fatigues of weightier Business.

It is sufficiently known, Sir, that your endowments are excellent, that your
thoughts are equally strong and sublime, that you have not less of Delicacy,
than Penetration and Vivacity, and that your Answers are as just and agreeable,
as ready and decisive. All these advantages of Mind, that shine in you, in a
peculiar manner are supported by a noble Air, a greatness of Soul, and a
Thousand Virtues which distinguish you so advantagiously in your Country.

These eminent Qualities don't render you inaccessible to those, who are
inferior to you; and far from discouraging my approach to you, they have
suggested to me the Design of giving you this Testimony of that profound
Respect, with which I am,

SIR, Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, F. M.
Tuddington, Jan. 1st. 1693.
The CONTENTS of the First BOOK.
I. PReface. II. The Birth and Education of Theodosius. III. Changes in the
Empire. IV. Election of Valentinian. V. Valens associated to the Empire. VI.
State of the Empire. VII. State of Religion. VIII. England is ravaged by the
Barbarians. IX. Theodosius the Father is sent thither, takes his Son with him,
defeats the Enemy. X. Theodosius the Son signalizes himself in this War. XI.
Theodosius the Father discovers a Conspiracy. XII. Revolt of Firmus in Africa.
XIII. Theodosius the Father is sent into Africa with his Son against the
Rebels. XIV. He treats with Firmus. XV. He defeats the Rebels in two Battles.
XVI. He makes a Treaty with Firmus. XVII. He re establishes the City of
Caesarea. XVIII. He punishes the Deserters. XIX. He finds himself engaged in
the Mountains. XX. He happily escapes the danger he was in. XXI. Theodosius the
Son is sent to Court. XXII. Valentinian associates his Son Gratian to the
Empire. XXIII. Expedition of Valentinian against the Germans. Theodosius the
Son has Orders to follow him. XXIV. Irruption of the Quades, and the Subject.
XXV. Theodosius the Son is made Governor of Maesia. XXVI. Theodosius the Father
pursues Firmus. XXVII. He declares War against the Isaflians. XXVIII. Battle
against Igmazen King of the Isaflians. XXIX. Igmazen sues to Theodosius for
Peace. XXX. Imprisonment of Firmus, his Death; End of the African Wars. XXXI.
Theodosius makes Peace with the Isaflians. XXXII. Valentinian's Expedition
against the Quades. XXXIII. Embassy of the Quades. Death of Valentinian. XXXIV.
Diverse reasonings upon the death of Valentinian. XXXV. The part that
Valentinian had in the Election of St. Ambrose. XXXVI. Valentinian the younger
is made Emperor. XXXVII. The cause of the disgrace of the two Theodosius's.
XXXVIII. Enterprises against the Emperor Valens. XXXIX. Magical Consultation.
XL. The Answer. XLI. Theodorus is seized, and condemned to dye. XLII.
Persecution of Philosophers, and others. XLIII. Valens orders the destruction
of several persons whose names begin by Theod. XLIV. Subjects of Jealousy
against Theodosius the Father. He is condemned to dye. XLV. Exile of Theodosius
the Son. XLVI. (...) of Theodosius into Spain. XLVII. Original, Progress,
Division and Religion of the Goths. XLVIII. Irruptions of the Huns. XLIX. The
Goths chased by the Huns. L. The Goths sue for a Retreat into Thrace. LI. The
Goths are received by Lupicin. LII. The Goths revolt, and vanquish Lupicin.
LIII. Siege of Adrianople. LIVE. Valens persecutes the Catholics. Themistius
pacifies him. LV. War of the Sarazens against the Romans. LVI. The Persians
declare War. LVII. Valens sends to Gratian for Succor, and concludes a Peace
with the Sarazens and Persians. LVIII. News of the Battle, and Retreat of
Trajan and Ricomer. LIX. Gratian marches to the Relief of his Uncle. LX. Famous
Victory of Gratian over the Germans. LXI. Generous Answer of Trajan. LXII.
Valens arrives at Constantinople. He is murmured against. He departs. LXIII.
Prudence of Fritigern King of the Goths. LXIV. Valens i^ ill advised. He
deliberates whether he shall LXV. Fritigern amuses the Emperor. LXVI. Valens
marches to the Enemy. Fritigern makes new Propositions. LXVII. The Armies
engage. The Right Wing of the Romans disordered. LXVIII. The Left Wing defends
it self valiantly. LXIX. Entire Defeat of the Romans. LXX. Valens saves
himself. He is wounded, and burnt alive in a house. LXXI. Great loss of the
Romans. Gratian stops at Sirmium. LXXII. Reflections of Gratian. LXXIII
Re-establishment of the exiled Bishops. LXXIV* Gratian calls home Theodosius.
LXXV. Occupations of Theodosius during his Exile. LXXVI. Di verse Enterprises of
the Goths. LXXVII. Th Goths beaten by the Sarazens before Constantinople
LXXVIII. St. Ascole defends Thessalonica by his Prayers. LXXIX. Horrible
Massacre of the Goths in the East. LXXX. Theodosius arrives at Sir mium. LXXXI.
Theodosius defeats the (...) LXXXII. Theodosius's Dream. LXXXIII. Gratian is
resolved to choose a Colleague. LXXXIV. Theodosius destined Emperor. LXXXV.
Ausonius i^ made Consul. LXXXVI* Victory of Theodosius confirmed.

THE LIFE OF Theodosius the Great. BOOK I.
II. THE Empire began to fall from that State of Grandeur and Power wherein
Constantine had fixed it by his Piety and victorious Arms. Constantius and
Constance, two of his Sons, governed one the East, the other the West; but as
they enjoyed not the great qualities of their Father, so were they neither
beloved of their Subjects, nor feared of their Enemies like him; and they had
much ado to sustain a part of that burden, which he himself had born with so
much glory.

It was about the ninth year of their Reign, when Theodosius was born at
Italica, a little City of Spain, upon the banks of the River Betis. He was of a
very Noble Family, and descended from the race of Trajan, whom he was always
very desirous to resemble. His Father's name was Theodosius, and his Mother
Thermantia, both endowed with all the virtues that were agreeable to their Sex.
He soon made appear an admirable nature, and he was educated with abundance of
care. He had for his Tutor, one Anatolius, a learned man, that despised Riches,
but forgot nothing for his advancement to Honors. This Philosopher taught him
the first principles of humane Sciences; and foreseeing that they would soon
rob him of his Scholar to send him to the War, he made haste to frame his
Genius, and rendered him in a little time capable to judge of the merit and
works of learned men. He made it his principal business to inspire him with
good and generous Sentiments, by observing to him in History those Examples,
which he ought to pur^^e; and gave him the first impressions of honor and
probity, which since ruled all the actions of his Life. Scarce was Theodosius
past his Infancy, but his Father, who by his valor and his prudence was
advanced to the chief employments of war, resolved to take him along with him
to the first expedition, that should be attempted against the Barbarians.

III. In the mean while the Empire in a little space of time had undergone
several revolutions! Constance had miserably perished by the treachery of the
Tyrant Magnentius: Constantius his Brother was dead in Cilicia, vexed at the
ill success of those wars he had as ill sustained against the Persians. Julian
his Successor being inconsiderately engaged in the conquest of Persia, had been
killed in battle. And Jovian, a valiant and religious Prince, after having
reigned eight months, came to dye suddenly in his bed, being stifled with the
smoke of Coals, which had been kindled in his Chamber, in order to make it dry.

IV. The Troops, which were then in Bithynia, advanced as far as Nicaea, and
without giving leisure to pretenders to make their factions, the Army assembled
to elect a new Emperor Valentinian was proposed; and although he was absent, and
there was some reason to fear his austere and inflexible humor, he was
notwithstanding unanimously chosen. He was born at Cibalis in Pannonia.

Gratian his Father had raised himself by his virtue above his birth, and of a
simple Soldier was become General of the Roman Armies. It is reported that he
was so strong, that five men Aure^. ^^ctor.
could not force out of his hands a Cord, which he held tied fast. It was by
that means he came to make himself known to the Emperors. Be it as it will, he
fell as suddenly as he was raised; and the same Constantius who had loaded him
with honors and possessions, deprived him thereof, being much disturbed that he
had received in his house the Tyrant Magnentius.

Valentinian having found the fortune of his Father ruined, was obliged to
labor himself to the advancement of his own. He passed through all the degrees
of warfare, and acquitted himself of those employments which he had, with so
much courage and prudence, that the Soldiers saw him prosper without envy, and
were accustomed to say of him, that he deserved much more than was conferred
upon him. Jovian had made him Captain of his second Troop of Guards, and left
him at Ancyra, the chief City of Galatia, to command there.

It was there they deputed to him, to give him advice of his election. He
departed forthwith, and came to the Army the 24th of February. He would not
appear the next day, because 'twas the day of Leap-year, which an ancient
superstition made pass for unlucky amongst the Romans. The day following, the
Army being assembled in the morning, he came to the Camp, and was conducted
with ceremony to the Tribunal, which was prepared for him. He was invested with
the Purple and the Crown, and proclaimed Emperor in the accustomed forms. After
he had enjoyed for some time the pleasure of the military acclamations, he was
for making an Oration to the Army: but scarce had he opened his mouth, but
there arose a great noise amongst the Troops. Whether it was a Cabal of
discontented Officers, or nothing else but a whimsey of the Soldiers, they
cried from all parts, he must have a Colleague. It seemed either that they
repented of the choice they had made, or that they had a mind to impose Laws
upon him, whom they had elected for Master.

Valentinian observed this tumult without disorder; and regarding first on one
side, then on the other with a severe and threatening behavior, he made a sign
with his hand, that he would speak.

As soon as there was a silence made, he turned himself toward those that had
appeared to him the most warm; and after he had called them mutinous and
seditious, Companions, said he to them, to give me the Empire was at your
Disposal; but since I have received it, it depends upon me to judge of the
necessities of the State, and it is your business to obey me. He pronounced
these words with so much assurance, that all the World was silent, and remained
in that respect which was due. Then smoothing himself a little, he gave the
Army thanks for the honor they had done him, and assured them that he would
choose a Colleague, when it should be convenient; but that he would precipitate
nothing in an affair of that importance. He descended from his Tribunal,
encircled with Eagles and Colors; and went quite through the Camp, marching
fiercely in the midst of a crowd of Officers, who ranked themselves about him,
the better to court his favor.

Some days after, whether it was to accommodate himself to the necessity of
Affairs, or that he had resolved to satisfy the Troops; or that he had a mind
to succeed more dexterously in the design he had to associate his Brother
Valens to the Empire, he assembled together the chief Officers of the Army, and
asked their advice concerning the Choice he was about to make. Degalaife,
General of the Horse, answered him with freedom: If you love but your own
Family, my Lord, you have a Brother; If you Ammian. lib. 26.
love the State, choose one that is able to assist you in the government of it.
The Emperor was touched at this Answer, but he dissembled his displeasure, and
resolved to do himself by Authority, what the Soldiers would hardly have done
by Complaisance.

V. He parted then from Nicaea in haste, and arrived the first of March at
Nicomedia, where he made Valens Great Master of the Horse, and General of the
Armies of the Empire. He raised him to these Dignities, in order to dispose him
insensibly to ascend to a greater. But being come to Constantinople, he kept no
longer any measure. He carried his Brother into the Suburbs of the City, and
without troubling himself about the consent of the Army, or the forms of
Election, he made him to be proclaimed Augustus, without having before declared
him Caesar; which thing had not as yet been practiced. He put the Diadem upon
his Head, and invested him with the Imperial Robes; and, to conclude the
Ceremony, he carried him in the same Chariot along with him. Valens had not one
quality that might attract him the esteem, or friendship of the People; for
besides his swarthy Complexion, his Eyes staring, and something of rude and
despicable in all his person, he had an irregular mind, which joined to an
insupportable presumption, an extreme ignorance: so his Election was no further
approved, than as they durst not oppose it. Valentinian himself did not
dissemble his desects, and held him in so great a dependence, that one would
have said he had made him his Lieutenant, and not his Colleague.

VI. The Empire was then in a deplorable condition: it seemed that all the
barbarous Nations were combined together at the same time, to ransack and
destroy all the Provinces of their Neighborhood. The Germans made a horrid
waste in Gaul. The Sarmats and the Quades were entered into Pannonia. The Picts
Ammian. lib. 26.
and Saxons disturbed the Peace of England. The Moors made Incursions in Africa.
The Goths came to pillage Thrace, even to the very Precincts of Constantinople.
The King of Persia renewed his ancient Pretensions upon Armenia, and threatened
to break the Peace he had but just concluded with the Romans. It was to be
feared too, lest these disorders should continue under two Emperors, whereof
one had not sweetness enough to gain the People, the other neither capacity
enough, nor resolution, to bring affairs to an end with his Enemies.

VII. The business of Religion was as much embroiled, as that of the Empire.
The Reign of Constantius had been a time of continual persecution against the
Church. This Prince had spared no endeavors to extirpate the Faith of the
Nicaean Council, and to establish the Heresy of Arrius. Jovian was not content
to persecute the Church, he had used all his efforts to destroy it; and after
having solemnly abjured the Faith of Jesus Christ, wherein he had lived near
twenty years, he undertook to restore the adoration of false Gods, and to renew
the Pagan Superstitions. Jovian his Successor being desirous to remedy these
disorders, protested to the Soldiers, who chose him Emperor, That he would not
accept of the Empire, but upon condition they would all prove Christians like
him; and they unanimously cried, They either were, or did design to be. A
little while after he recalled the exiled Bishops, and favored the Catholics;
blaming the rest, but yet referring them to the judgment of their Conscience,
without being willing to enter into the bottom of different Ecclesiastics.

It was believed that Valentinian would carry his Piety farther, as well
because he was naturally hot, and went to his ends without much conduct; as
also, that he had formerly confessed the Faith of Jesus Christ with abundance
of zeal. The business was thus; Julian, after his Apostasy, went one day to the
Temple of Fortune to offer Sacrifices there, according to his usual custom. He
was accompanied with a crowd of Courtiers, whereof the greatest part disposed
themselves, through Policy, to the Religion of the Prince. Valentinian marched
behind him in the quality of Captain of his Guards. As they were upon entering
the Temple, one of the Ministers of the Sacrifice, whose business was to attend
them there, with an intent to purify them, cast water upon them which was
consecrated to Idols. The Emperor, and those of his Retinue, received the
Ceremony with respect. But Valentinian being sensible of some drops of this
water upon his left hand, and discerning more upon his clothes, struck the Man
rudely that came to throw it, in presence of the Emperor, then shook his hand,
and tore off that part of his garment which had been sprinkled. Julian,
offended at the injury done to his Gods and him, expelled him his Court, and
banished him to Melisina in Armenia. His Brother Valens follewed him,
preferring rather to be degraded from his Arms, and to renounce his Fortune,
than to act contrary to his Faith.

The remembrance of this bold Confession filled not a few with hopes, that the
two Brothers would highly re-establish Religion. But they were deceived herein;
for Valentinian was more remiss thereupon than could be imagined, and protected
the Catholics without disturbing the Arrians. Valens on the other side so far
abandoned himself to the Arrians, that he oppressed the Catholics.

Such was the disposition of the Empire, when the two Emperors divided it
amongst themselves. Valentinian chose the Western Provinces with all Illyrium,
and left those of the East to his Brother. They came together as far as Naisse,
where they shared the Armies, and the chief Commanders, and at last parted at
Sirmium, the one for Milan, the other to return to Constantinople.

VIII. Valentinian immediately applied himself to examine the condition of
those Provinces that lay most exposed to the Insults of Barbarians. He passed
into Gaul, and fought the Germans, who had made an Incursion therein with a
great Army. After their defeat, he departed from Amiens to go to Treves. There
he was in hopes to enjoy in peace the advantage of his late Victory, when he
received advice from several places, that all England was ransacked and wasted
by the Enemy; that the French and Saxons had made a descent therein on that
side nearest Gaul; that the Picts and Scots made a destruction to the very
heart of the Country; that they had killed the Governor, and surprised the
General of the Army; and that if things were not suddenly remedied, the Empire
would infallibly lose one of its fairest Provinces.

IX. This News astonished the Emperor, and occasioned to him great
disturbances. He commanded Theodosius, the Father of him whose History we
write, to pass into that Island with Troops that were advanced that way,
judging him alone capable of restoring to a better state an Affair which
appeared desperate. Theodosius departed in haste, and took his Son with him,
that he might learn the Trade of War. He rende vouz d at Bologne the Army that
was destined for him, and crossing the Sea with an assurance, which seemed to
foretell the Event, he advanced toward London, and searched for the Enemies to
give them Battle. He routed several of their Parties which he found rambling
through the Country. He took away their Men, their Cattle, and all the rest of
the Booty which they dragged along, and made a Declaration in all places round
about, that every one should come to see and repossess his own, reserving but a
little part of the Booty for those Soldiers who were most fatigued. His
chiefest care was still to ease the People, and his first Instructions to his
Son were Examples of Humanity and Justice; necessary Virtues, but rarely known
to Men of War. After these first Successes, he entered London, and encouraged
the City, who already acknowledged him for her Deliverer.

As he had to do with Enemies who dispersed themselves, and rallied at all
moments to surprise him; he resolved to baffle them at their own game, and to
weaken them by little Skirmishes, being unable to engage them to a Fight.
Whereupon he took the Field, possessed himself of advantageous Posts, divided
his Army into several Bodies, and falling without delay upon one or the other of
these Barbarians, who had their separate Interests, and who came rather with a
design to pillage than to fight, he defeated them entirely, and established
security in City and Country. In all these Encounters he made appear as much of
Valor, as Discretion; Ammian. lib. 28.
and it is reported of him, that he never commanded his Soldiers to an Attempt,
but he first gave himself for an Example.

X. Theodosius showed himself a worthy Son of this renowned Captain, and
afforded in these first occasions, marks of his future greatness. Maximus, by
birth an English man, who took a pride in boasting of his Descent from the Race
of Constantine, served at the same time in the same Army. These two young Men,
who were one day to dispute between them the Empire of the World, came to know
one another, and signalized themselves by Emulation in this Expedition. They
were almost of the same age, their spirits, their courage were alike; and both
enjoyed the same great passion to exalt themselves by way of Arms; but they
were different as to manners. Theodosius was free, courteous, and generous;
Maximus deceitful, morose, and jealous of the desert and reputation of another.
The one was brave by virtue, the other so by fierceness; the one pretended to
no more than the glory of serving Emperors, the other would gladly have
consented to usurp their place.

XI. Scarce was this War concluded, but a Conspiracy was found of no less
danger. The Heads of which were arrested, and condemned to death. But it was
not judged convenient to put them to the question, lest there should be too
many Accomplices to punish, or their despair should revive those Troubles,
which were but just appeased. After which, Theodosius returned to the Court of
Valentinian, and presented to him his Son, who had been the Companion of his
Labors. It was there that this young Lord made himself known to Prince
Gratian, who, although a very Child, was already much inclined to favor Virtue
and Desert.

XII. The Joy which was entertained for the happy Success of the English
Affairs, was soon disturbed, by the News which was received of an Insurrection
of a part of Africa Firmus, one of the chief Lords of the Country, was Captain
of the Rebellion. He was accused for having caused the Assassination of one of
his Brothers. The Roman Governor of the Province had attempted to destroy him;
he supported himself by his Friends, and Reputation. They wrote to the Court,
the one his Accusations and Complaints, the other his Justifications.
Valentinian was of a humor severe enough; but there were some convenient
moments, when he suffered himself to be easily wrought upon. In the greatest
necessities of Affairs he had been careful to ease the People, but not so
vigilant upon those, that governed them: and although he was, of his own temper,
inexorable for the slenderest Faults, yet he would not so much as hear
Complaints relating to his Officers; whether it was that he thought to hurt his
own Authority by lessening theirs, even when they abused it; or else, that
according to his Politics, it was necessary to treat the People with an
extreme Rigor.

XIII. This was the occasion of the Revolt of Firmus. He had Advice, that they
had suppressed his Letters at Court; that those of his Enemy were looked upon;
that the Ministers were won, and the Prince prepossessed. As he saw himself
upon the point of being overwhelmed, he had recourse to Arms. He raised the
People, that were even impatient at the Violences and Rapines of their
Governor, took on himself the Crown, and was proclaimed King. He took the Field
forthwith, consumed all that made resistance, surprised the City of Caesarea,
which he abandoned to his Troops, (lest Fire and Sword should be omitted) and
^ngross'd his Army with a great number of Moors, who came in multitudes to
fight under his Banner. Theodosius had Orders to depart with his Son in haste,
in order to oppose the Rebels. He embarked with the Troops that were designed
him, and descended upon the Coast of Africa. There having met the Governor of
the Province, he learnt of him the posture of Affairs; and after having softly
reproached him for the Disturbances he had caused, he sent him to give Orders
for the security of Places, and to visit the Garrisons. In the mean time he
advanced as far as the City of Setifi, where he sent to Firmus to enjoin him to
lay down his Arms, and to return to his Duty, and that he should take his
choice either of Peace, or War. Whilst he expected his resolution, he
considered how to manage his Troops, who were not accustomed to the heats of
those Climats, and to prevent the Tyrant, who was no less formidable by his
Artifice and Cunning, than for his Arms and Force.

XIV. Firmus was at present uncertain of the Choice he was to make. A little
while after he sent Deputies to Theodosius, to represent to him, that he had
taken up Arms through Necessity, and not through Ambition; that he aimed not at
the Empire, but a particular Enemy, who abused the Emperor's Authority; that he
had not pretended to revolt, but to defend himself; that he might have Justice
done him, or at least his Life preserved, and he would abandon his Resentments,
and disband his Army. Theodosius promised him his Pardon, if his return was
cordial and sincere, and ordered him to send Hostages. In the mean time he
visited the Coast, made his Legions assemble, joined to them some Troops of the
Country, and commanded all his Officers to observe an exact Discipline, saying,
That the Roman Soldiers ought not to subsist but upon the Expense of their
Enemies, and that they were no better than Rebels, when they incommoded the
Citizens: which attracted to him the affection of the People.

Firmus was of a Family that was numerous and powerful, by reason of the Lands
which it possessed, and by its alliance with the principal Lords amongst the
Moors. Mascizel, and Mazuca his Brothers, marched with two great Bodies of an
Army; and Cyria his Sister, a Lady of great courage, assisted them with Men and
Money, and raised by her Intrigues all Mauritania.

XV. Theodosius foreseeing that it would be difficult to oppose so many Forces,
if he should give them time to join, advanced by great Journies toward
Mascizel, and presented him Battle. The Moors accepted of it, and vigorously
sustained the first charge of the Legions: but at length they were broken; the
Vanguard cut in pieces, and the rest saved themselves in disorder. Theodosius
made himself Master of the Field, and took some important places for his
security, where he made great provisions of Necessaries: and as he went to
advance further in the Country, he had advice that Mascizel was returning with
the Moors which he had rallied, and some fresh Troops which he had received. He
joined him in a little space of time, fought him, routed his whole Army, and
pressed upon him so briskly, that he scarce left him opportunity enough to save
himself.

XVI. The Rebels were in a consternation at the loss of these two Battles; and
Firmus not knowing whom to address himself to, had recourse to some Bishops,
whom he entreated to repair to Theodosius, and to obtain of him a Pardon for
his Rebellion upon any condition whatsoever. These Deputies were received with
Honor; and upon the favorable Answer they brought back, Firmus himself
departed with a small Attendance, and came to the Camp of Theodosius, where
this General attended him without his Tent. The Legions were under Arms with
their Ensigns displayed, and every Soldier at the first noise of the arrival of
the Captain of the Rebels, had redoubled his fierceness.

Firmus alighted from his Horse, as soon as he perceived Theodosius; and
approaching him with a profound Respect, he prostrated himself at his Feet to
the very ground, and asked him pardon for his offense, his tears in his eyes,
sometimes accusing his rashness, sometimes his misfortuue, with all the marks
of an unfeigned repentance. Theodosius received his Submissions but coldly, and
after a long Conference which they had together, the Accommodation was
concluded. The Conditions were, that Firmus should furnish Provisions for the
Army; that he should leave some of his Relations for Hostages; that he should
release all the Prisoners he had made since the Troubles; that he should
restore to the City of Icosium the Roman Ensigns, and all that he had taken
upon the Subjects of the Empire; and after that he should licentiate his
Troops, and enter into the Emperor's Favor.

XVII. Firmus returned well satisfied, and accomplished in less than two days
the greatest part of the Treaty. Theodosius feeing such fair dispositions to a
Peace, marched toward Caesarea, to repair the Ruins of that City which had
been burnt in the beginning of the Wars. He received in his way a deputation
from the Maziques, a People of Africa, who had unseasonably joined with the
Rebels, and came to ask Pardon for their Treason; but his Answer to them was no
more, than that he knew how to forgive his Enemies, but that he could not
endure Traitors; and so sent them away^with menaces, that he would soon ^e with
them toochastise them* He was jus^come out of Caesarea, where he had left the
first and second Legion, in order to repair the Fortifications of the place,
when he received information that Firmus had only disguised his Treachery under
appearances of Peace and Submission; that he debauched with Promises and Money
the very Troops of the Empire; that a Squadron of Archers had gone over to his
Party; and that a Tribune had had the insolence to put his Collar in form of a
Diadem upon the head of this Rebel.

XVIII. Theodosius resolved to use all the extremities of War against the
Traitors. He marched with an incredible diligence toward Tagavia, where he
surprised a party of the revolted Archers, whom he delivered to the vengeance
of the Soldiers, in order to make them learn to fear what he made them exercise
against the culpable. The Tribune was executed, after his hand cut off* the
other Officers were beheaded, and all the rest punished, as they deserved. This
irritated General besieged, a few days after, a Fortress where the most
seditious of the Moors were retired. He took it by Storm, put the whole Garrison
to the Sword, and razed the Walls to the very Foundations. He presently turned
upon the Coast of Tangier, where the Maziques were assembled, and after having
defeated them several times, he afforded them that Pardon which he had refused
before.

XIX. At last the heat of War having engaged him in the Enemy's Country further
than he imagined, Cyria, the Sister of Firmus, suddenly caused an Insurrection
of the whole Province. All the People put themselves in a posture of Battle, as
if the Signal had been given, and marched against the Romans. Theodosius, who
had then but a little Foot, with a Body of 3500 Horse, and who saw this
innumerable crowd of Enemies, was some time in suspense, whether he should
hazard a Battle, or retire. The shame of yielding to those Enemies so many
times overcome, and the fear of disgracing the Arms of the Empire, determined
him to fight. But after having considered the condition of Affairs, he judged
that it was better to want the obtaining of one Battle, than to lose the
advantage of all the rest which he had gained. So he retired, always possessing
himself of advantageous Posts, for fear of a surprise; but the Enemies persued
him obstinately, cut off all passages, and reduced him to the necessity of
exposing himself to an unequal Combat in order to save himself.

XX. Hazard kept off the danger, for the Maziques, whom he had just fubdued,
were obliged to furnish him with Troops, and they performed it. Some Roman
Squadrons advanced before to conduct them to Theodosius, not knowing the
condition he was in. The Moorish Couriers discerned this Succor at a distance,
and returned full speed to give the Alarm to their Camp, as if entire Armies
were approaching to disengage the General. They that kept the passages
abandoned them, and Theodosius taking the advantage of the moment, and gaining
the Defiles, went to encamp under the City of Taves, where he secured his Army
in the beginning of the month of February; from thence he observed the Enemy,
and labored to disunite them by secret Negotiations, till he might be able to
reduce them by force.

XXI. In the mean time he dispatched his Son to the Emperor Valentinian, to
give him an account of the state of the African Troubles, and to procure new
Troops, in order to the entire destruction of the rebellious Party. The young
Theodosius was received at Court with all the consideration that his Fathers
Services and his own deserved. Gratian was extremely glad to see him again, and
from this time he conceived an esteem for him, which was since known to the
whole World.

He was a Prince* in whom was scarce accomplished thirteen years, who was
already very understanding; and who made great advances in the study of
Learning under Ausonius his Tutor, one of the finest Genius's of his Age. He
won the affection of the People by his sweet and obliging ^at^e^ and it was
judged from thence that he would have the good qualities of his Father, without
his defects. He had been declared Augustus not long since in a conjuncture
pressing enough.

Ammian. l.
XXII. Valentinian was fallen into a distemper, whereof it was not expected
that he would recover. Every one destined him a Successor according to his
fancy, as if the Empire had been certainly vacant: The Gaulish Officers, that
were of credit in the Army, cast their eyes upon Julian, first Secretary of
State, cruel, and violent. Others made their Intreagues for Severus, Colonel
of the Foot, who was not a whit more moderate than Julian. The Emperor being
cured, contrary to all appearance, reflected upon the danger he had run, and
resolved to break all these Cabals, to associate his Son to the Empire. He
sounded the inclinations of the Soldiers; and as he was assured of their
intentions, he ordered the Army to assemble in a spacious plain, where he came
in Person, with his whole Court. He ascended upon his Tribunal, taking his Son
by the hand, whom he had brought expressly for the purpose; and after he had
shown him to the Troops, he prayed them to consent to the resolution he had
taken to share the Empire with him.

He represented to them that he did not pretend to use his own Rights any
further, than as the Army should think them reasonable, and that he would
always have more regard to the Interests of the State, than to those of his
Family; that he presented to them his Son, that was brought up amongst them,
and destined to fight with them for the defense of the Empire; that indeed he
was a Child, that had neither strength nor experience, but who appeared so well
born, that it was probable he would be no dishonor to them; that he applied
himself already to the study of Sciences, and to all sorts of noble Exercises,
to the end that he might be pleasing to them, and know how to distinguish
persons of merit; that he would soon put him in a condition to march with them
under the Standards of the Empire, without fearing the incommodity of Seasons,
or the fatigues of War; that he would recommend to him above all things the
observance of the public good, as his own, and to prefer the State above his
Family.

At these words, the Soldiers, transported with joy, interrupted him, and
strove who should be loudest in proclaiming Gratian, Augustus, by clattering of
Arms, and sound of Trumpets. The Emperor encouraged by these Acclamations
invested his Son with the Imperial Habits, then he kissed him, and with a
gravity mixed with joy and tenderness, Behold your self, My Son, said he to
him, invested with the Purple of Emperors. I was desirous of doing you this
favor, and our Companions, whom you see here present, have agreed thereto.
Endeavor to make your self able to ease and assist your Father, and your Uncle,
whose Colleague you commence, from this time: Dispose your self to remain under
Arms with the patience of a simple Soldier; and to pass over the Danube and
Rhine frozen, at the head of the Foot: spare not, if it is convenient, your
blood and life for the People whom you govern: Esteem nothing below you that
has any reference to the safety or glory of the Empire. This is the principal
Advice I can give you here. The greatest employment of my Reign hereafter,
shall be to instruct you how to reign. Then turning himself toward the Troops,
As for you, said he, support the Honor of the Empire by your Arms, continue to
assist us in our Wars; and preserve to this young Emperor, whom I refer to your
cares and affection, an inviolable fidelity.

Thereupon arose another mighty Shout: Euphraxus Secretary of State cried out,
that Valentinian and his Son deserved yet more. The whole Army renewed their
Acclamations, and every one pressed forward to view this August Youth at a
nearer distance: whose Eyes were lively and sparkling, his Face agreeable, his
Behavior sweet and noble; and a certain modest Majesty, without Pride, drew him
the Love and Admiration of all that beheld him. This Prince, from this time,
was the Delight of the People, and his Virtues increased with his Age.

XXIII. Valentinian was then upon the point of entering Germany with a puissant
Army, to tame that wild and troublesome Nation, that always kept the Frontiers
of the Empire in alarm. His Son he took with him, and carried him beyond the
Rhine in the Enemies Country, to accustom him betimes to the fatigues and even
dangers of War. This Expedition was an important one, the Emperor undertook it
of himself, and went there to command in person. Wherefore he made choice of
his best Troops, and all his Officers of Reputation in the Empire. He ordered
the young Theodosius to follow him, and observed in him so much Valor and
Prudence in the diverse Events of this War, that he judged him capable of
commanding the Armies in chief, and resolved to employ him. The sudden
irruption of the Quades soon furnished him with an occasion, to the great
satisfaction of Gratian, who already interessed himself much in the fortune of
Theodosius.

The Emperor Valentinian, who loved glory, and was always meditating upon some
great design, that might tend to his Honor, and the Advantage of the Public,
attempted to make a Causey be continued from the Springs of the Rhine, to its
very mouth in the Sea. He made himself a draught of the Forts he would have
erected on both sides of the River, according to the disposition of the places;
and having perceived that the Waters insensibly ruined a Fortress which he had
built upon the Neckar, he turned the Course of the River by a Channel which he
caused to be made, by force of Labor and Silver: He had a mind to fortify the
Banks of the Danube, like those of the Rhine, to serve as two Barriers to
oppose the barbarous Nations, and to render the Empire inaccessible to them. He
sent Orders to Equitius, who commanded in Illyrium, to pass into the Country of
the Quades, and there to erect a Citadel, where he might hold a considerable
Garrison.

XXIV. The Quades lived peaceably then under their King in Moravia; and as they
had no design to usurp the Lands of their Neighbors, they thought themselves
under no necessity to mind their own. It was formerly a puissant, and warlike
People; but they had degenerated from their ancient Valor, and languished for
some time in a Laziness, which rendered them almost despicable. Equitius
preparing himself to execute the Orders of the Emperor, the Quades remonstrated
to him softly the injury that was done to them, and sent Deputies to Court for
to complain. Equitius during the time an answer was expected, gave Orders for
the works to cease, for fear of exciting Disturbances: but Maximin, a man cruel
and active, accused him of Negligence and Cowardice, and charged himself with
the Commission. He went upon the place, and ordered the continuance of the
Forts which were begun, without asking the consent of the Barbarians, which
they would undoubtedly have granted, rather than have brought a war upon
themselves. Gabinius their King went to find him, and represented to him
modestly, that it was an insult committed upon them without reason; that it was
but just to let a peaceable Nation live in Peace, that disturbed not that of
others; that they had no longer the Ambition of Conquest, but that still there
remained with them that of being Masters in their own Country; that they left
the Grandeur and Glory of subduing the World, to those who were spurred on
thereto; that as for them, they esteemed themselves happy enough in their
freedom; In a word, that they asked no Favor, but begged that they might have
no Injustice done them.

Maximin made an appearance of being affected with the reasons of this Prince;
and for a testimony of his Friendship, invited him with some of his Retinue to
a great Feast, where he caused him to be inhumanly murdered. The People, after
having lamented for some time the death of their King, took up Arms to revenge
it. Despair was to them in the place of Courage; and the Sarmats being joined
to them, they passed the Danube together, and dispersed themselves in the
Country, burning the Villages, and destroying all they met in their way. The
Princess Constantia, Daughter of the Emperor Constantius, who had been
betrothed to Gratian, was coming then from the Eastern Court, to that of the
West, and was taking some refreshment at a Country House. Her Train was
pillaged, some of her Servants taken, and she herself had fallen into the hands
of these Barbarians, if Messala, who had been sent to receive her, had not
clapped her into a Chariot they met by accident, and brought her full speed to
Sirmium.

Probus the Praefectus Pretorio, a fearful man, and little used to War, was in
the City, and prepared his Horses to make his escape in the night. They
endeavored to make him understand, that the Danger was not so great as he
imagined, that his flight would discourage the Citizens, and that he would
answer for all the mischances, that should happen to the Princess. At last, he
recovered himself a little from his fright, and gave orders to repair the
Fortifications, forthwith, and to get dispatched from the Neighboring Garrisons
some Companies of Archers, to defend the place in case of a Siege.

The Enemies were contented to keep the Field. There was sent against them two
of the best Legions of the Empire, who would, undoubtedly, have given them a
defeat: but they fell out about Pretensions, and Disputes of Preference; and
the Sarmats having forced them separately into their quarters, cut them in
pieces one after another. The young Theodosius was sent to stop the course of
these disorders; and that he might act with more Authority, he was advanced to
the Government of Moesia, and the command of the Troops of that Province.

XXV. He parted without delay; and after having observed the posture of
affairs, he assembled a considerable body of an Army. His first application was
to establish an exact Discipline amongst his Troops, and to chase out of the
Country a remainder of rambling and disbanded Barbarians, who pillaged it with
Impunity. He put some to death, and contented himself with having expelled the
rest out of the Limits of the Empire. Aster which, having information, that the
Sarmats appeared upon the Frontier* and that their Army was enlarged by a
multitude of People in League with them, he resolved not only to oppose their
Passage, but likewise to draw them to a fight. The Enemies, who confided in
their numbers, divided themselves into several bodies, to make irruptions
through diverse places: But Theodosius beat them in every encounter; and after
having obliged them to reunite themselves, he went to attack them in ^^eir
very Camp. Notwithstanding the oppo^^tion they immediately made, he forced
them, and made so great a slaughter, that they entreated him for a Peace, upon
such conditions as he thought fit to impos^* and durst not infringe it, so long
as he continued in this Province.

XXVI. Whilst Thoodosius the Son served the Empire so successfully in Moesia,
the Father was employed in the Reduction of the revolted Moors in Africa* He
had already disingaged a great number from the Interests of Firmus, some by
Menaces, and some by Promises and Rewards. Firmus, who perceived some
alteration, fearing on one side to be abandoned, and on the other vexed to
entertain so many Troops at his own expense, went out of his Camp by night, and
saved himself in the Mountains. As soon as Theodosius had advice, that this
Army without a Captain was divided, and retreated in disorder, he took the
field, defeated one part of them, and obliged the rest to lay down their Arms.
This multitude of enemies being thus dispersed, he put in the Cities Governors
of an assured fidelity, and pursued Firmus to the Mountains.

XXVII. Scarce was he entered therein, but he was informed, that the Captain of
the Rebels was fled to the Isaflians, and that he was assured of their
protection. Theodosius turned his cour^e on that side, after he had refreshed
his Troops, and summoned the people to deliver up to him to Firmus, Mazuca his
Brother, and the Chief Officers that were with him. As they refused to do it,
he declared War against them, and begun it by a battle, wherein they were
defeated, Mazuca mortally hurt, and Firmus put to flight with the remainder of
his Troops. It was then Igmazen, King of the Isaflians, assembled all his
Forces, and ^arched against the Romans, who were already far advanced into his
Dominions. He went himself to meet Theodosius with a small attendance, and
being come to him, he asked him who he was? and why he came to disturb the
peace of a King, who had an independent power, and was answerable for his
actions to no one, but himself? Theodosius replied, That he was one of the
Lieutenants of Valentinian, the Emperor, and Master of the World; that he was
come to chastise a Rebel; and that if he was not delivered into his hands, he
had orders to destroy as well Kings, as People, that should be so unjust as to
protect him.

Igmazen retired stung with this Answer, and the next morning betimes presented
himself in Battel-Aray at the head of 20000 Men. He had left hard by a Body of
Reserve, and hid behind his Battalions some auxiliary Troops, who were to break
out in round Bodies, in order to encompass the Romans, who were in little
number. Theodosius on his side put his Troops in order, laid before them their
past Victories, and encouraged them so well, that they fought an entire day
without their Ranks being disordered. Toward evening Firmus appeared upon an
Ascent, covered with a rich Vesture of Scarlet, and cried out to the tired
Soldiers, That they would be certainly overwhelmed by number, and that they
must expect no quarter, if they delivered not up their General to the King
Igmazen. This discourse encouraged some to fight more fiercely, and so
disturbed others, that they abandoned their Ranks.

XXIX. The Night having put an end to the Engagement, Theodosius retired with
little loss of his side, and severely punished all those Soldiers whom the
threats of Firmus had discouraged. A little while after having reinforced his
Army, he renewed the War, and defeated in several Encounters the best Troops of
the Isas^ians. Igmazen vexed that he should be so often overcome, and observing
that he had to do with a cautious and successful Captain, who would at last
overwhelm him and his Dominions, began to consider how to live in peace. He
sent him secret advice, that he was at no Controversy with the Empire, and that
he would abandon to him Firmus and all the Rebels; but that his People were
gained, and himself no more their Master; that the only means to fix them to
their duty, was to afford them no respite, and to reduce them to consider their
own proper safety, rather than the defense of a Stranger; that it was necessary
for the Inconveniences which they received to be much greater than the
Advantages they were promised, and that Theodosius should make himself more
formidable, than Firmus had made himself beloved.

XXX. Theodosius made use of this advice, and omitted no occasion to fatigue
the Isaf^ians, sometimes defeating them in Parties, sometimes forcing them from
their quarters, burning their Cities and Towns, and ravaging the whole
Country. Igmazen abandoned them to their evil Counsels, and made their Losses
appear to them more considerable than they really were. They found themselves
at length so weak and tired, that they began to look to themselves. Firmus
observed this coldness, and mistrusting the King, upon some Conferences he had
with Masilla Prince of the Maziques, he had a desire to fly once more to the
Mountains. Then Igmazen discovered himself, and stopped him. The Rebel seeing
himself enclosed, and guarded at a distance, resolved to prevent his punishment
by a voluntary death. He made his Guards drunk in the Night, and as they were
asleep, he arose, and finding by chance under his hand a Cord proper for the
design he entertained, he strangled himself in a corner of the Chamber.

XXXI. Igmazen, who was to have conducted him the next day to the Camp of
Theodosius, was sensibly displeased at this Accident. He attested the public
Faith, brought Masilla for a Witness of this misfortune, and charged the Body
of this Wretch upon a Camel, which he went to present himself to Theodosius, as
a pledge of the friendship and affection which he had for the Empire.
Theodosius made the Body be acknowledged by the People of the Country, and by
some Prisoners, who all swore that it was the Body of Firmus. Then he made
great Caresses to the King, and a few days after he took the Road of Siti^i,
and was received in Triumph in all the Cities where he passed. He hoped that he
should be called to Court after so long and fortunate an Expedition; but he had
Orders to remain in Africa, and to fix entirely the Affairs of that Province,
which the avarice of the Governors, and the cruelty of the Rebels had almost
brought to Ruin.

XXXII. In the mean time the Emperon Valentinian made great preparations for
War; and departed from Treves in the beginning of the Spring to go into
Illyrium in all haste. All the adjoining Nations were startled, and sent
Ambassadors to him upon his way, humbly to sue for Peace. His answer was no
more, than that he came to chastise them, if they were culpable, and that he
would judge of that when he came upon the place. Every one thought, that he
came to punish the Assassinate of the King of the Quades, or the disorders that
were excited in the Provinces, at which the Governors were alarmed.
Notwithstanding he used toward them his usual Policy, and gave them not so
much as a Reprimand. He passed almost the whole Summer, at Carnunte in Pannonia
in gathering his Troops, and supplying his Magazines: and of a sudden having
laid a Bridge over the Danube, entered into the Country of the Quades with his
Army, being resolved to exterminate them for their last irruption.

Although this Nation, poor and fearful, was not in a condition to defend it self,
they put all to Fire and Sword that they could meet with, both in City and
Country, without distinction of Age or Sex. The greatest part of the
Inhabitants saved themselves in the Mountains, being amazed to see amongst them
Roman Eagles, and an Emperor in person; and regarding at a distance their
Cities smoking, and their Habitations reduced to Ashes, they lamented the
Destruction of their Neighbors, and the Desolation of their Country.
Valentinian a few days after changed his mind; and whither it was that he
wanted provisions, or that the season was too far advanced; or whether he was
asham^^ to insult over a People, that was more unfortunate than culpable, who
could make no resistance, he repassed the Danube, and put his Army into Winter
Quarters.

XXXIII. The Quades returned a little from their fears, and made choice of the
most qualified amongst them to go and ask the Emperors pardon, with assurances
to serve him upon what conditions he would be pleased to impose on them. These
Deputies arrived at Bergiteon, a little Castle in Pannonia, where Valentinian
was retired. There they obtained at last an Audience, where they were
introduced by Equitius; and falling at the feet of the Emperor, they continued
there for some time without rising, seized with respect and fear; then they
most humbly entreated him in the behalf of all the Nation to pardon them, and
to aff^rd them Peace. Valentinian. surprised at the Poverty and ill looks of
these Ambassadors, cried out that he was very unhappy in having to treat with
such a sort of People; and reproached them with their insolence and
perfidiousness. As they cast themselves upon frivolous excuses, he fell into a
passion, and spoke to them with so much vehemence, that he broke a vein, and
fell halfdead amongst his Officers, the Blood issuing out of his Mouth. He died
some hours after in Convulsions, upon the seventeenth day of November* in the
Fifty fifth year of his Age, and the twelfth of his Reign.

XXXIV. Every one reasoned upon this death Ammian. l. 3. Zoz. l. 4.
according to his fancy; some observed that a Comet had appeared a little
before; that a Thunderbolt had fallen upon the Palace; that a great Owl had
perched upon the top of the Imperial Baths, from whence they could not chase it
away; that the Emperor had seen the Empress in a Dream with a mourning habit*
and going out that morning, with more sadness in his looks than was usual, with
an intent to get on Horseback, the Horse fell a prancing against his Custom.
The wiser sort, instead of those vain and ridiculous observations, remarked
that he died as he lived, in trouble and agitation; that he was a severe Judge,
rather than a good Master; that of all the Emperors, there was none but him
that had passed his Reign without signing one Pardon; that one would have said,
he punished more out of Peevishness than Justice; that there was a little
^varice in this severity, and that confiscations too often followed the
condemnation of Criminals; that he made War in fury, and never went to engage
the Enemy, but he had a design to exterminate them; and that by a just judgment
of God* his anger, which had occasioned so many deaths, was at last the cause
of his own.

Many said in his favor, that he had endeavored to overcome his temper, but
could not; that this excessive severity was not becoming an Emperor, but had
been very useful to the Empire; that in ordering the first Eunuch of the Palace
to be burnt alive for having injured a Widow, he had thereby saved all Widows
and Orphans from oppression; that as to the rest, he enjoyed more Virtues than
Defects; that he had spared the goods of the People, Ammian. l. 20.
lessened the Taxes, regulated the Soldiers, trained up excellent Officers,
fortified the Frontier Places, and obtained battles by his Lieutenants, and by
himself; that he had led a life pure and irreproachable, banished from his
Court Corruption and Debauchery, as well by his Edicts, as his own Example, and
showed in all his conduct Spirit, Courage, Politeness and Grandeur.

The Zealots for Religion blamed him, for having espoused Justine, an Arrian;
for suffering himself to be carried over to the Principles of Sozam. l. 6. c.
6. and 7.
Auxentius Archbishop of Milan, who made an appearance of being a Catholic; and
above all for having permitted every one to live according Socrat. l 4. c. ^
to his Belief, and for not concerning himself, under the pretext of a Layman,
in the differences of the Church. Others alleged on the contrary side, that
this was necessary policy, that Jovian had used the same before him; and that
it was much better to persuade men to truth by sweetness, than to draw them to
it by open force. They agreed notwithstanding, that this Prince had always
retained the Faith of the Church in its Purity; that he was at variance
thereupon with his Brother Valence, so far as to refuse him succor Theod. l. 4.
c. 31.
against the Barbarians, as an Enemy to God, whom it was his Duty to abandon;
and that he begged Saint Ambrose to reprehend him, if he was wanting either in
Piety, or the Doctrine of the Church.

XXXV. It will not be improper to give a relation here of the part Valentinian
had in the ordination of this Archbishop, of whom we shall so frequently speak
in the course of this History. Auxentius the Arrian being dead, after having
held for several years the Sea of Milan, Valentinian desired the Bishops to
assemble in order to elect a new Pastor. He advised them to chose a man of a
profound knowledge, and irreproachable life, To the Theod. l. 4. c. 6 and 7.
end that, said he, the Imperial City may be sanctified by his instructions and
examples, and that the Emperors, who are Masters of the World, and cease not to
be great Sinners, may receive his advice with confidence, and his corrections
with respect. The Bishops prayed him to nominate himself such a one as he
desired; but he answered to them, that it was an affair beyond his capacity,
and that he had neither wisdom, nor piety sufficient to be concerned therein;
that this choice belonged to them, because they had a perfect knowledge of the
Laws of the Church, and were filled with the lights of the Spirit of God.

The Bishops upon this assemble with the rest of the Clergy to proceed to an
Election, and the People whose agreement was required, were called thereto. The
Arrians named a person of their Sect, the Catholics were for one of their
Communion. The two Parties grew hot, and the Dispute Socrat. l. 4. ^. ^0.
was turning to a Sedition, and an open War. Ambrose Governor of the Province,
and City, a man of sense and probity, was advertised of this disorder, and went
to the Church to appease it. His presence made all the controversies cease, and
the Assembly being reunited on a sudden, as by a divine inspiration, demanded
Ambrose for their Pastor. This thought appeared to him fantastical; but as they
persisted to demand him,* he remonstrated to the Assembly that he had always
lived in secular employments, and that he was not yet so much as baptized; that
the Laws of the Empire forbid those, who are exercent in public charges, to
enter in the Clergy without permission of the Emperors; and that the choice of
a Bishop ought to be made by an inspiration of the Holy Ghost, not by a popular
fancy. Notwithstanding all his reasons, and his resistance, the People would
conduct him to the Episcopal Throne, to which God had designed him, he was
ordered Guards for fear he should escape, and a Request Paulin. in vita Ambr.
preferred to the Emperor to beg his consent to this Election.

The Emperor most willingly agreed to it, and gave Orders that he should be
forthwith baptized, and consecrated 8 days after. It is reported that this
Prince would himself assist at his Consecration, and that at the end of the
Ceremony lifting up his Eyes and Hands to Heaven, he cried out transported with
Joy; I render thanks to thee, O God, in that thou have confirmed my choice by
thine, in Theod. l. 4. c. 7.
commiting our Souls to him, to whom I had appointed the Government of this
Province. The holy Archbishop applied himself entirely to the study of the
Sacred Scriptures, and the establishment of Faith and Discipline within his
Diocese. Having observed the commission of some abuses by the Magistrates under
the Emperor's Authority, he went to find him in his Palace, and remonstrated to
him the zeal he ought to have for the Service of God, and the observation of
Justice.

This Prince replied to him wisely, that he received his advice in good part;
that he knew him him of a long time for an upright Man and incapable of
dissimulation, or flattery; that in accepting of him for his Bishop, he had
well foreseen, that he chose to himself a Judge incorruptible in his life; that
he had not ceased to confirm his Election, judging that one could not give too
much Authority to a good Man; that he might use then his ordinary liberty; that
he might reprove by a holy severity the irregularities of the Court; and that
he should not fear to advertise even him of his mistakes, and to apply those
remedies which he should judge convenient according to his Prudence, and the
Maxims of the Law of God.

The holy Archbishop supported by the Emperors power, labored to exterminate
the Errors, which his Predecessor Auxentius had sowed in the Imperial City: all
the Church expected much from this protection, but this Prince died a little
while after, as we have already said. His body was carried to Constantinople,
and laid in the Sepulcher of the great Constantine with the usual Solemnities.

XXXVI. Gratian, the eldest Son of Valentinian, and of Severa his first Wife,
had been associated to the Empire about seven years before, and was then at
Treves, where his Father had lest him. The young Valentinian, Son of the second
bed, between eight and nine years old, was coming forward with the Empress
Justine his Mother; and as he was not far from the Army, the chief Officers
conspired together to create him Emperor. Cerealis his Uncle managed all the
Intreigue with Dexterity, and presently obtained Merobades, who commanded the
Infantry. They cut off the bridges, and guarded all the passages which led to
the Quarters of the Gauls, Troops that were mutinous and disaffected. All that
were suspected to them had orders to march, before they understood any thing of
the Emperors death. They took care to remove in particular the Count Sebastian,
a firm and peaceable man, but too much beloved of the Soldiers in such an
occasion. After having thus disposed all things, Cerealis went to seek his
Nephew, and made him to be declared Augustus six days after his Fathers death.

They that were concerned in this Election, wrote to Gratian, that the Enemies
having retaken courage since the death of his Father, the Army wanted the
presence of an Emperor; and that they had been constrained to elect the Prince
Valentinian, before stirring spirits could have time to take other measures;
that they begged his Majesty Zoz. l. ^*
to excuse them, i^ they had not staid for his consent; and to pardon them a
fault, which they had not committed but for the good of the State, and the
interest of his Family. Gratian being offended at their proceedings, was upon
the point of being severe with some: but he was appeased almost at the same
time, and confirming the Election of this young Prince, he not only accepted of
him for a Colleague, but would also be to him instead of a Father. He contented
himself with the Provinces which are on this side the Alps, and left him Italy,
Africa, and Illyrium to govern.

XXXVII. The death of Theodosius the Father, and the disgrace of his Son
arrived in this time, by the jealousy of the Ministers of the Empire, and the
Intrigues of the Emperor Valens, who could not endure those whom he thought
worthy to succeed him. This hatred was founded upon Predictions and Horoscopes
which he thought inevitable, and yet would endeavor to avoid them.

He was a Prince who had many defects, and whose good qualities were
extinguished by the bad. Sometimes he took Resolutions good enough, but he
often wanted the force or capacity to execute them. He stopped the Ambition and
Insolence of the Grandees, but it was almost always in their oppression. He
might have enjoyed the glory of being a good Friend, if he had known how to
choose his friendships. He did not charge the Provinces with Taxes, but he
ruined the best houses of the Empire, and would regain upon the confiscations
of particulars, what he lost in lessening the public Imposts. As soon as any
one was accused before him to be rich, 'twas sufficient to prove him guilty;
and without putting himself to the trouble of discerning truth from falsehood,
he never ceased to punish when it would prove to his advantage. He was always
ready to give long Audiences to Flatterers, and was tired when they began to
justify themselves; which gave occasion for Oppressions and Calumnies.

XXXVIII. There had been diverse Attempts made against him since his Reign,
which made him fearful and suspicious. Some corrupted Courtiers made their
advantage by this infirmity of the Emperor, and persuaded him at every turn,
that he incurred some great danger; some to get themselves esteemed, and to
render themselves necessary; others to get rid of their Enemies without
punishment, by accusing them of disaffection to the Prince. All the Intrigues
of Court rolled upon none but false Reports, and imaginary Attempts. Matters
were come to that point, that it was a Crime to explicate a Prediction, or to
speak of the Successor of Valens; this easiness to believe and fear all things,
was the occasion of the loss of several great Men, and particularly that of old
Theodosius.

Palla^ius, a Man of an inferior birth, and much given to Magic, having been
arrested as an Accomplice of some Lords at Court, who were accused for robbing
the Exchequer, was put into the hands of Modestus Praefectus Praetorio. He was
Ammi^n. lib. 29.
examined, and would discover nothing. He was put to the Rack, which he soon
endured with constancy enough; but when he found himself still pressed with
Torments, he cried out that he had things to tell of more importance than those
he was examined for, and which had relation to the person of the Prince. He was
permitted to recover his breath, and as he was encouraged to speak, he declared
that there had been lately held a secret Cabal, wherein by Witchcrafts and
detestable Presages, they had learnt the Destiny of the Emperor, and the Name
of him who was to succeed him in the Empire. He went so far as to name those
who were assistant in it; they were arrested upon the spot, and durst not deny
a thing, whose circumstances were already known.

XXXIX. It was an Intrigue of some persons of Quality, and several Pagan
Philosophers, who were associated to know what should happen after the
Emperor's death. The Aversion which they had for the Christian Religion, and
the desire of Sozom. l. 6. ^. 34. Zoz. l. 4.
seeing theirs established, gave them this Curiosity. They were in hopes the
Oracle would name some of their Party; they had already beforehand cast their
eyes upon Theodorus, one of the Secretaries of Valens, of a very noble Family
amongst the Gauls, esteemed for his Probity, his Parts and Courage, who lived
in the quality of a mighty Lord, and in a tumultuous Court was beloved of all
the World, besides that he kept up in his actions and discourses a generous
liberty. These great qualities made him to be looked upon as a person capable of
restoring the worship of the Gods, to which he was very much disposed.

These Philosophers being possessed by this thought, assembled privately
together in one of their houses. There they made a Trivet of Laurel Branches
resembling that of Delphos, and consecrated it with Imprecations, and
extraordinary Ceremonies. They put over it a Basin composed of different
metals, about which they ranked the four and twenty Letters of the Alphabet at
an equal distance. The most expert Magician of the Company, being covered with
a linen cloth, and bearing in his hands some Vervein, went forward, and began
his Invocations, bowing his head sometimes on one side, then on the other. At
last he stopped short, holding upon the Basin a Ring tied to a File^. As he made
an end of murmuring his magic words, it is reported that the Trivet Amm^^n.
lib. 29. Zoz. ^. 4.
was suddenly observed to move the Ring to leap and agitate insensibly, and at
length to fall here and there upon those Letters it seemed to have chosen.
These Letters being thus touched, left their places, and went successively to
rank themselves upon the Table; one would have said that an invisible hand had
thus collected them together: they composed Answers in heroic Verses, which
all the Assistants diligently remarked.

XL. The first thing that the Oracle informed them, was that their Curiosity
should cost them all their Lives, and that the Emperor should soon after die at
Mimas of a horrible kind of death: then they were for knowing the Name of his
Successor. The enchanted Ring continuing to jump upon the Letters, collected
these two Syllables The-o: the d came presently to join them. Whereupon one of
the Assistants interrupted the Charm, and cried out, That their wishes were
accomplished, and that it was the Orders of Destiny that Theodorus should reign
after Valens. They asked no further; and without considering the misfortune
that the Oracle had foretold them, as it is natural to believe easily what one
wishes to come to pass, they all expected the accomplishment of the destiny of
Theodorus.

XLI. As soon as the Affair had been thus discovered at Antioch, Valens knowing
that Theodorus was at Constantinople for some domestic Affairs, sent Guards
thither to take him, and to bring him safe: which was done. He was examined,
and he replied that he had no share in this Intrigue; that since he came to
know it, he had a design to reveal it to the Emperor, but that he was assured
it was nothing else but a Philosophical Curiosity; that it was a hideous Crime
to attempt the usurpation of the Empire, but that it was lawful to expect from
Destiny, whose Orders were inevitable; that as for him, he had neither
enterprized, nor depended any thing thereupon. Letters were produced to him, by
which he was convicted of having flattered himself with the Prediction, and
consulted his Friend about the time, and means of putting it into execution.

XLII. The Emperor caused his Head to be taken off, and commanded an enquiry
after all his Accomplices, and to exterminate all the Philosophers that since
the Empire of Julian made open profession of Magic. It was represented to him,
that all the Prisons were already full of persons convicted, or suspect, and
that some favor would be most just in the number: but he was offended with
this Remonstrance, and gave Orders for all to be put to death indifferently
without other form of Process. This cruel Sentence was executed, the Innocents
were confounded with the Guilty, some perished by the Sword, others by Fire,
many were torn in pieces by the Rack; above all, they burned the Magicians with
their Books, and no one durst appear in a Gown throughout all Asia, lest the
resemblance of the Habit should make them go for Ammian. l. 31.
Philosophers. There was nothing to be seen in Antioch but Blood diffused,
Houses consumed, and Fires kindled; which rendered the Emperor so odious, that
they made throughout the City this public Imprecation against him, That Valens
might himself one day be burnt alive.

That which was most deplorable herein, was, that they made a sovereign
judgment upon simple Suspicions, without entering into any manner of discussion.
A Lady was condemned to dye, for boasting that she was recoved of a Quartan
Ague Ammian. l. 29.
by pronouncing certain words. The Estate of a Great Lord was confiscated, for
having got the Nativity of one of his Children calculated. A Rich Burgess was
executed, because there was found amongst his papers the figure of one of his
Brothers, named Valence. A young man was put to death, for having affirmed
himself to be cured of a distemper in the Bath, by carrying his Fingers one
after another to his Stomach, and naming the vowels so many times.

XLIII. As great passions are not only criminal, but also ridiculous: Valens
imagined to himself, that he could destroy this fatal Emperor, which the Oracle
had expressed but by halves; not thinking that there is a Divine Providence,
that laughs at humane fore*sights, and that a Tyrant never killed his
Successor. He attempted to destroy all Persons of Quality, whose names began by
the two syllables suspected, and made so exact an Sozom. l. 6. c. 26.
enquiry, that many to preserve themselves, were obliged to quit their names,
and to take others not so dangerous,

XLIV. The THEODOSIVS's had acquired too much reputation to escape the
persecutions of a Prince, so cruel and suspicious. Theodosius the Father was
still in Africa, where Valentinian had esteemed him necessary for the repose of
the Province. After he had extinguished the fire of Rebellion, he had informed
the Court of the misery of the People, and made high complaints of the Roman
Count, who had consumed them by his avarice and inhumane dealings. He had
rigorously punished some of his Accomplices, and feared not to publish the
intelligences of this Governor with some interessed Ministers, who made an
advantage of his concussions, and protected him near the Emperor. This firmness
of Theodosius had procured him the hatred of those powerful men, who stuck
close to the Prince after having abused him, and who affording themselves the
freedom of committing things unjust, would debar others of that of discovering
them, and making complaints.

The Emperor Valens was contented to entertain these enmities* underhand,
without daring to attempt any thing in the life time of Valentinian; but after
his death, he kept no measures any longer, and took the same ascendant over his
Nephews, that his Brother had formerly taken over him. He gained the Ministers
of Gratian, already prepossessed by their Jealousies. He joined with the
Empress Justine, an Arrian, as violent as himself, and made so good a use of
the favorable conjuncture of these new Reigns, that mixing the Interests of
the State with those of Religion, and the Passions of others with his own, he
brought Theodosius to his trial. He was arrested in Carthage; and whether he
was accused for intending to make himself Master of Africa, or had other crimes
supposed against him, he was condemned to die in those very places, where he
had triumphed a little before.

XLV. Theodosius seeing himself oppressed by envy, employed the remaining part
of his time in thoughts of his Salvation. He received Baptism, which through
the evil custom of that time he had deferred, and died innocent before God, as
he had lived without reproach, and with Glory before Oros. l. 7. c. 33.
men. His Son was still in Moes^a, where he commanded the Army, beloved of the
People, esteemed of the Soldiers, and dreaded of the Enemies of the Empire. As
he was no less to be feared for his virtues than his Father, he would
infallibly have run the same fortune with him; but he quitted Ambros. in fun.
Theod.
all his employments, and fled forthwith into Spain, where he sheltered himself
from the persecution of Valens, who upon the subject of suspicions, was not of
a humor to leave a crime imperfect. Although the Emperor Gratian was at an age to
apply himself to business, and was acquainted with the disgrace of Theodosius,
whose deserts he knew, he left him in his Exile; and whether it was that he
feared to displease his Uncle, or that he had not the force to express the
passions of his Ministers, or else that things were concealed from his
knowledge; and he would not put himself to the trouble of examining them
himself, he abandoned the two greatest Captains of the Empire to the oppression
and violence of their Enemies. Thus the best Princes, by a soft Policy, or
criminal Laziness, become oftentimes as dangerous as the bad.

XLVI. Thoodosius passed some years in Spain, using this exile as a time of
repose, and living obscurely with some of his Relations and Friends, till such
time as the affairs of the Empire were embroiled in such a manner, that they
were reduced to run to him, as the only man capable to establish them. I think
my self obliged to recite here a little at large all these troubles, as well to
give an account of the state of the Eastern Empire, and make the course of this
History the more intelligible, as to show the methods which God made use of to
chastise the Emperor Valens, and to fix Theodosius in his place.

XLVII. Of all those barbarous people, that went out in multitudes from the
Northern parts, and drove one another to the very banks of the Danube and the
Rhine, there was none more formidable to the Roman Empire than the Goths. They
inhabited originally a part of that wild and barren Country, which lies between
the Northern Ocean and the Baltic Sea. Being weary of a place so unfruitful,
and pushed on by their natural fierceness, they descended as far as the
adjacent parts of the River Vistule, above three hundred years before the birth
of Jesus Christ. There being increased by a crowd of Vandals whom they had
subdued, and finding themselves too much straightened, they extending their limits
upon the Neighboring States, and advanced since as far as the Palus Meotis,
under the conduct of King Filimer, forcing all they encountered in their
passage. The resistance which they found in this place constrained them to turn
their course to another side, and to pass at length after many windings into
the Country of the Dacians and Getes, where they remained some time in peace.
The correspondence which they had there with people, that were more human and
polite than they, having made them lose a little of their grossness, they
imposed Laws upon themselves, and divided into two Nations under Commanders
worthy to govern them. They that possessed the most Eastern parts were called
Ostrogoths, or Eastern Goths, and acknowledged for their Kings the Princes of
the Royal Family of the Amales. They that inhabited toward the West took the
name of Visigoths, or Western Goths, and disposed themselves under the Princes
of the ancient Race of the Baltes.

These Barbarians, who were then no otherwise separated from the Provinces of
the Empire than by the Danube, made oftentimes irruptions into Thrace,
Illyrium, and Pannonia; notwithstanding as they made War in disorder, they were
almost always beaten, and made no progress. But after they had been a long time
either Enemies, or Allies to the Emperors, they accustomed themselves to
Discipline, and by serving the Romans they learnt to conquer them.

Sozom. l. 6. c. 37.
Division being introduced amongst them under the Empire of Valens, they came
to an open War, there happened a bloody Battle; Athanaric King of the Ostrogoths
remained Victor, and Fritegern King of the Visigoths was defeated. The last had
recourse to the protection of the Emperor, who sent him a very considerable
Relief. He overcame Athanaric at his turn, and as an acknowledgment to the
Emperor, and so many Christians, who came to his assistance, he embraced the
Christian Religion, and would have his Subjects do the Theodor. l* 4. c. ult.
Oros. l. 7. c. 32.
same. Valens did not lose this occasion of advancing the Arrian Sect, pursuant
to the Vow he had made at his Baptism. He sent forthwith to Fritegern men that
were passionate for this Doctrine, who inspired the Prince therewith, as also
his Subjects by the treachery of Vlphilas their Bishop, the first Inventer of
the Gothic Letters, and Translator of the Holy Scriptures into his Language,
which they had effected in the time of his Embassies at Constantinople.

XLVIII. These two Kings began to reunite, and demanded nothing more than
Peace, after so many foreign and domestic Wars, when they were assaulted of a
sudden both one and the other, and expelled with their whole Nation from those
Lands which they had conquered. A People unknown, and till then enclosed
between the River Tanais, and the frozen Sea, went out of their own Country,
and dispersed themselves like a Torrent into all the adjoining Provinces.

They were the Huns, a Nation without Honesty, Justice, or Religion, hardened to
Labor from Ammian. l. 31. Zoz. l. 4.
their Infancy, nourished with savage Roots, and raw Flesh, always encamped, and
avoiding Houses as if they had been Tombs, wandering all day, and sleeping at
night on Horseback, being accustomed to fall out with one another, and to be
Friends again immediately, without any other Reason, than that of their natural
Inconstancy.

Claudian. in Ruff. in l. 1. Jornand. c. 24.
Their innumerable Horse, and prodigious number of Chariots which followed
them, loaded with their Wives and Children; their manner of fighting in round
Bodies, and of rallying again, a moment after their defeat; the very figure of
these Men, in stature small, but strong, and well compact; their Faces rugged,
their Eyes but small, and Heads of an unsuitable bigness: all this cast a
terror in the minds of People, who were not so barbarous as they.

XLIX. They attacked the Alains presently, who were constrained to seek their
Friendship. They pushed on their Conquests as far as this side the Boristhenes,
driving, or massacring all that made resistance, and extended themselves
toward Datia. At the noise of this formidable march, all the Goths run to
their Arms. Athanaric, who was the most exposed, collected all his Troops, and
advanced himself toward the Banks of the River Danast, in order to dispute the
Enemies passage. Ammian ibid.
He sent in the mean time several Parties above twenty Leagues beyond, to
observe them, and to bring him the News. But notwithstanding all his
Precautions, the Huns prevented these Parties, and passed the River by favor of
the night, partly by fording, and partly by swimming. Although Athanaric had
hardly leisure to put his Army in order, yet he sustained their first Attack
with abundance of vigor: but as he saw himself overwhelmed by number, he
retired with as much of his Army as he could save, and gained the mountains,
where he retrenched himself, whilst the Enemies amused themselves by laying
waste the Platcountrey.

L. In the mean time the affrighted Goths advanced all toward the Banks of the
Danube; Videric King of the Grotungues, a Youth under age, came to join them
under the conduct of Alathee, and Saphrax, two excellent Captains. They were
too great a number to subsist in so small a space, and too few to oppose such
powerful Enemies. In this Extremity they sent an Embassy to the Emperor Valens,
humbly to request of him some Lands in Thrace, where they might live in peace
under his protection, promising to serve him in his Wars, and to preserve
themselves the Frontiers of the Empire. The Affair was debated in Council. They
that consulted the Public Good, were of opinion to reject the Proposition, and
remonstrated to the Emperor, that it was necessary ^o mistrust a People who had
often broke their Faith with him, and would become insolent, as soon as they
should cease to be miserable.

Others, to accommodate themselves to the humor of the Prince, represented to
him, that it was for his glory to give Retreat to the unfortunate; that he
might increase his Armies with a great number of these strangers; and that
discharging the Provinces from the Recruits they were obliged to furnish, he
might draw from them every year considerable Sums as a compensation. These
Reasons affected the Emperor. He granted the Goths their demands, and sent
Orders to Lupicin Governor of Thrace, to furnish them with Necessaries, and to
receive them into his Province, upon condition still that they should enter
therein without Arms, that they should not exceed the limits which should be
set out to them, and that they should send their Male Children into the East,
to be Zoz. l. 4.
brought up there in the exercise of Roman Discipline.

LI. Lupicin went as far as the Banks of the Danube, accompanied with Maximus,
Commander of the Foot. They saw King Fritigern arrive with his Subjects, and
distributed Provisions to them, and some Lands to cultivate. The River at that
time had overflowed, so that this multitude of Barbarians were many days and
nights in passing over. Valens, as if he had secured the Empire, Socrat. l. 4.
c. 34. Sozom. l. 6. c. 38.
thought he had no further need of the old Troops, levied no more new ones, and
neglected the Recruits, which he ordered to be paid him in money, to the value
of fourscore Crowns in gold for every Soldier. In a little time the Armies grew
weak, and the Officers were discontented.

The Goths on their side began to want Provisions, and found themselves
reduced* by the avarice of the Governor, to give their Goods, and sell their
very Children for bread. They endured these Extremities, till such time as
Despair made them begin to murmur. Lupicin, mistrusting a Revolt, being
resolved at the same time not to relax, kept himself upon his guard, and got
the Thracian Army together on this side. Alathee and Safrax, to whom Valens had
refused to give Retreat, coasted the Danube at that time, and finding some
places but ill guarded, made shift to get some Boats, and made their Horse pass
over in disorder. As for Athanaric, he durst not ask any favor of the Emperor,
who had hated him of a long time, and threw himself upon a quarter of the
Sarmats, where he established himself by force of Arms.

In the mean time King Fritigern retained the Fury of the Goths, and
dexterously managed the humor of the Romans, till he could discover his
resentment with more security. Having information by Spies, that Alathee and
Safrax had passed the River, and foreseeing that he should have occasion for
Horse, he marched toward them by small Journies, and By*ways, to give no
suspicion of intelligence. At last he encamped near Mart^anopol^, where Lupicin
received him into his house, and entertained him magnificently. Whilst they
were at Table, some Goths coming to the gates of the City to make their
Provisions, the Soldiers of the Garrison repulsed them; they grew hot on both
sides, came to handy Blows, all the Burgesses took Arms, and the whole Camp of
the Goths mutined.

The Governor being advertised of this disorder, was not much disturbed at it;
and as he was half drunk, he gave Orders softly to murder those Ammian. l. 31.
of the King's Retinue, who attended him in the next Hall. This Order could not
be executed so secretly, but Fritigern mistrusted it, and even heard the Cries
of those whose Throats were cut. He arose from the Table of a sudden, without
giving the Governor time to take any Resolution, and went out of the City under
a pretense of showing himself, and to chastise the mutinous. As soon as he was
in safety, he took Horse, and run every where to encourage his People to
revenge. In a little time, the whole Nation rose up, and Valens had for Enemies
those whom he looked upon as his Hosts and Allies.

LII. They presently fell a ravaging the Country, and put several Villages to
Fire and Sword. Fritigern let them satiate their first anger, after which he
put them in what order he could, and made them march under their Colors*
Lupicin on his side assembled his Troops, and thought his appearance would
suffice to disperse this storm: but he suffered himself to be surprised, and
this crowd of Barbarians without order, and hardly arms, having fallen upon him
and his army, he made a scandalous flight. The Goths after having killed the
greatest part of the Soldiers and Officers, took the habits and arms of the
dead, and pillaged all Thrace without resistance. The Slaves which they had
sold for necessaries, broke their Chains, and run to them from all parts. A
Troop of Ammian. ib.
Malcontents came to join with them, and showed them places where they might
enrich themselves, Zoz. l. 4.
and where to retrench. At the same time an ancient Regiment of Goths, which had
their Winter quarters at Adrianople, was expelled thence by the Inhabitants,
albeit it had no concern in the revolt, aad had always served the Empire with
fidelity.

LIII. These Barbarians being full of indignation at this treatment, sent to
their Companions for succor, and besieged Adrianople. They made several
assaults, and were always repulsed. Fritigern, seeing that they consumed
themselves in vain before this place, made them understand that they should
fight with Men, and not with Walls; that it was of little importance to take a
City, when they might gain several Provinces, where there was more spoils to
take, and less danger to incur. These Troops, pursuant to the King's advice,
raised the Siege, and dispersed themselves into Thrace, Moesia, and Pannonia.

LIVE. The Emperor Valens was then at Antioch, where by the counsel of some
Arrian Bishops, and applications of the Empress, he was employed in persecuting
the Catholics. Some died in Torments, others were cast into the Orontes. The
most holy Prelates were expelled their Churches, and Fire and Sword were
carried to the very solit^des of Egypt. The Pagans themselves were mollified
and reduced to pity: and the Philosopher Themistius went to find out the
Emperor, to tell him, That he persecuted good men without reason; that it was
not a crime to entertain different thoughts, and a belief different from his;
that he ought not to be amazed Socrat. l. 4. c. 32. Sozom. l. 6. c. 36.
at this diversity of Opinions; that the Gentiles were much more divided
amongst themselves, than the Christians; that every one had a prospect of the
Truth through some place, and that it had pleased God to confound the pride of
men, and to render himself the more venerable by the difficulty of knowing him.
The Emperor was touched at the discourse of this Philosopher, and diminished a
little of that false zeal of Religion which had possessed him entirely. He
received almost at the same time the news of the Revolt of Fritigern, the
defeat of Lupicin, and the desolation of the Provinces. Then he repented of the
Faults he had committed, and resolved to revenge himself for the ingratitude of
the Goths, and to fall upon them with all the Forces of the Empire.

LV. This Affair wonderfully disturbed him, because he had already many
Adversaries upon his hands. The Sarasins were the most formidable. They had
lost their King some time since, Socrat. l. 4. c. 36. Sozom. l 6.* c. 38.
and the Queen Mauvia his Wife was left Regeut. Although she was an Ally of the
Romans, they began to trouble her, and thought they might with safety provoke a
Nation, that was governed only by a Woman. She made her Complaints, and could
receive no satisfaction. She broke the Alliance then her Husband had contracted
with the Emperor, took the Field with a puissant Army, and ravaged Palestine,
Phoenicia, and that part of Egypt which is between the Nile, and the Red Sea.
The Governor of Phoenicia presented himself often to oppose her passages, but
he was always beaten, and lost the best part of his Troops. He must have
recourse to the Count Victor, General of the Eastern Armies. This General
advanced with a great Body of Horse and Foot, and slighting the Governor who
came to join him, he ordered him to stand aside, and to leave him the honor of
a Victory which he could not obtain himself. With this assurance he approached,
gave Battle, and lost it; his whole Army was defeated, and himself had
perished* if the Governor had not run to disengage him, and to favor his
flight. After this Victory, the Queen was in a condition to push on her
Conquests further without controulment.

LVI. At the same time the Persians required the Emperor to abandon Armenia,
which was a subject Ammian. l. 30.
of perpetual War between the two Nations. The Emperor sustained his Rights; and
after diverse interpretations of the last Treaties, and several Embassies on
both sides, it was resolved to determine this difference by Arms, which they
could not decide by Negotiation* King Sapor sent Orders to his
Lieutenant General to render himself Master of some places, and disposed
himself to march at the head of an Army in the beginning of the Spring.

LVII. There was no less occasion to fear within the Empire, than without. The
Provinces being tired with the Tyranny of the Governors, and the persecution of
the Catholics, were upon the point to rise. Valens, who was afraid of being
overwhelmed, dispatched Couriers to the Emperor Gratian his Nephew for
assistance, and made haste to satisfy the Persians and Sarasins, that he might
have only the Goths upon his hands, and might collect all his Troops into a
Body.

He gave immediate Orders to Count Victor to go and find Queen Mauvia, and to
conclude a Peace with her upon any Conditions whatsoever. This Negotiation was
more fortunate than War; for the Queen, who had as much Wisdom as Valor, stopped
the course of her Victories, and was contented with having reduced an Emperor
to fear her. Victor of his side managed the humor of that Princess with so much
ingenuity, running upon her admirable qualities, and making it an honor to be
overcome by her, that in a few days she granted him a Peace, and even bestowed
her Daughter upon him in marriage. Nevertheless, as she was zealous for the
Christian Religion, which she had but lately embraced, she would not consent to
sign the Treaty, before he had engaged to let her have for a Bishop one of her
own Subjects, called Moses, who lived in the reputation of holiness in the
Sozom. l. 6. c. 38.
solitudes of Egypt. The Condition appeared very agreeable, and the Treaty was
concluded and executed almost at the same time.

Victor had Orders to pass into Persia, in order to terminate as well as he
could the differences between the two Crowns, and to bring along with him those
Legions which were in Armenia, as soon as there should be a Peace determined.
The Emperor relaxed much from his Pretensions, and consented to an
Accommodation, which would have been scandalous, without a real necessity; it
was even convenient to bear with some infractions of the Treaty, whereof it was
not a time to complain, and to dissemble an Affair which was not at that
juncture the most pressing. There remained nothing more than to satisfy the
People, which was done by repealing the exiled Bishops, and letting every one
live in the exercise of his Religion without disturbance.

LVIII. Valens then thought his Affairs to be in a good posture, and was
preparing to go from Antioch, when he received advice that Trajan, who
commanded the Legions of Armenia, had attacked the Goths in Thrace, that he had
put them to the Rout, and chased them to the very Streights of Mount Haemus;
that he had gained the Defiles upon them, and had kept them enclosed for some
time; but that hunger and despair having made them perform extraordinary
things, he had been constrained to retire, and to abandon to them the passages.
A little while after he learnt that Trajan had joined Ricomer, a French Prince,
that was sent from the West with some auxiliary Troops; that these two Captains
had approached the Camp of the Goths, with a design to force them in their
Trenches if it were possible, or else to fall upon the Rear-guard if they
decamped in disorder, as they were used to do; that after they had observed one
another for a long time, they came to handy blows; that the Fight had lasted
from morning till night; and that the number of the Barbarians having at last
prevailed over the Valor of the Romans, Trajan had made his Retreat as a
Soldier* and Ricomer was returned to the West, in order to bring a more
considerable Relief.

The Emperor was so much the more disturbed at this News, in that he learnt
that a great many Officers were slain, and that the Goths securely made
Irruptions to the very Suburbs of* Constantinople. He dispatched a Body of
Horse to Trajan, that he might keep the Field all the rest of Autumn.

LIX. In the mean time Gratian, in the impatience he was in to relieve his
Uncle, had made the greatest part of his Army pass toward Illyrium, and
prepared himself to march in the midst of Winter to be in the East at the
opening of the Campaign. He left Merobaudes King of the French in Gaul, to
secure it; and knowing that the destiny of Princes is in the hands of God, and
that they ought to expect Victory rather from their Piety, than the Number or
Courage of their Soldiers, he Ambros. de Fide ad Great.
had entreated St. Ambrose to compose for him a little Treatise of the True
Faith, which he might read during his Expedition.

LX. But as he was upon the point of parting, the Germans thin^^ng to take
advantage of his absence, passed the Rhine upon the Ice in the month of
February, and began to destroy the lands of the Empire. For all they were above
forty thousand men, this young Emperor showed nothing of amazement; he made the
Troops march, which he had retained in Gaul, and recalled those which Ammian.
l. 31.
he had sent toward Pannonia. He advanced himself at the head of them, and
encountering the enemy about Strasbourg, he attacked them so seasonably, and
with so much resolution, that he gave them an entire defeat. There remained
upon the place five and thirty thousand, all their Commanders, and their King
himself being killed Gratian persued those that fled to the very Woods and
Mountains, and compelled the whole Nation humbly to request a Peace, and to
give as Hostages all the young men of the Country, whereby he reinforced his
Army. That being done, he gave orders, and marched by great journeys toward
Pannonia, notwithstanding he was extremely incommoded with an intermitting
Fever.

LXI. Valens on his side went very slowly to Constantinople; and gave out
orders to his General Officers, who met him upon the Road. Trajan came before
him, to give him an account of the condition of those Troops he commanded. As
soon as he appeared, the Emperor fell into a passion, and charging him with the
loss of the last Theodoret. l. 4. c. 33.
Fight, reproached him outragiously for his small Conduct and Valor. Trajan
heard these Reproaches without being moved; and as he was a person of great
Piety, he replied to the Emperor, If we are overcome, my Lord, it is you that
obstruct our Conquest. You make War with God himself, and God assists the
Barbarians who are at War with you. It Is he that gives Victory to those who
fight in his Name, and takes it away from those who are his declared Enemies.
You will acknowledge that you are so, if you consider what the Bishops are,
whom you have banished from their Churches, and those you have advanced in
their places. The Emperor being offended at this discourse, was going to fly
out; but Arintheus and Victor, the Generals of his Army, made him understand,
that he had very sensibly touched a Man of Courage; that the zeal of Religion
had made him speak; and that it was convenient to pardon this Remonstrance,
which was perhaps but too well grounded. Valens was a little pacified, and was
contented with depriving Trajan of his charge of Colonel of the Foot, which he
had exercised with much Reputation.

LXII. At last the Emperor arrived at Constantinople toward the end of May,
with part of his Socrat. l. 4. c. 38.
Army. The Goths continued their Courses to the very gates of the City, and to
ransack the Country as before. As for him he kept himself enclosed, whether it
was that he durst not undertake any thing before he had received News from
Gratian, or that he had a mind to chastise the City by Soldiers who consumed it
within, and the Barbarians who pillaged it without; for he was not reconciled
to it, since it had taken the Tyrant Procopius's part against him. Whereupon
they began to murmur, and talk openly that the Emperor held intelligence with
the Barbarians, and delivered his Subjects to them; insomuch that one day when
he assisted at some Horse-courses, they cried out on all sides, Let us fall to
our Arms, and go out and Socrat. ib, Sozom. l. 6. c. 39.
take the Field, whilst the Emperor diverts himself in the Circus. He was
touched at these seditious words, and departed the City in anger upon the 11th
of June, threatening to return after the War, and destroy it without remedy.

He retired to Melanthias, a Pleasure-house of the Emperors, some few miles
from Constantinople. There, as he got his Troops together, he received Letters
from Gratian, which purported to him the defeat of the Germans, and assured him
of his sudden arrival with his victorious Army. In effect, he was upon march
with his Horse, and came to Sirmium to attend his Foot and Equipage. On the
other side, the Count Sebastian, who kept the Field with 2000 choice Men, had
surprised several Parties, and made a great slaughter of Goths near Adrianople.

LXIII. In the mean time King Fritigern judging that it was necessary to come
to a Battle, ceased his pillages and wasting of the Country, and commanded all
his scattered Men to come and join the gross of the Army, as well to prevent
their falling into the Ambuscades of the Romans, as to accustom them to the
discipline of the Camp. He sent Couriers to Alatheus and Safrax, to pray them
to approach in diligence with their Horse. He encamped Ammian. ib.
no longer but in Plains, and near Cities, for fear of being surprised, or at a
loss for Provisions. As soon as he had advice that the Emperor was near, he
retired as if he had an intention to avoid the fight, and covered so well his
march, dividing his Army into several different bodies, that the enemies Scouts
could discern but a part of them. He had detached some Batallions, to seize
upon the advanced Posts: and had cut off the provisions of the Romans, if he
had not been prevented. In a word, he managed himself with so much prudence and
caution, that one would have taken Fritigern for the Roman Prince, and Valens
for the Barbarian.

LXIV. As soon as the Emperor was come to Adrianople, they that had been sent
to view the Ammian. ibid.
Goths, reported to him that they were not above ten thousand men; that they
were retired in disorder, and durst not be seen out of their Trenches. Then he
believed the Victory was certain. At the same time Ricomer came from Sirmium,
to advertize him that Gratian was upon the march, and that he would suddenly
arrive. This young Prince wrote to his Uncle, and conjured him to attend him,
and suffer him to partake at least the fatigues and dangers of this War, if not
the glory of it.

Valens assembled the Council, and put the affair into consideration: Victor,
General of the Horse, was of opinion to precipitate nothing; and represented,
that the Enemies were stronger than was imagined; that their Army might be
increased in a little time with an infinite number of Troops, that were
dispersed in the Country; that they had a vigilant Captain, who knew how to
make use of opportunities; that it would be a hard matter to force them in
their Camp, or to defeat them in battle with the single forces of the East; but
that they might be assured of subduing them without recovery, if they attended
the assistance of the Gauls. He added, that it was to offend an Emperor, who
came in person to relieve them, to fight without necessity when he was upon the
point of arriving. The chief Officers of the Army were of the same opinion.

Sebastian on the other side sustained, that it was necessary to give Battle
forthwith. This was a ^oz. l. 4.
great Captain, lately come from the Western Courts, where he could not agree
with the Ministers. He commanded the Infantry since the disgrace of Trajan, and
sought all occasions to signaliz^ himself in his charge, and to get into credit
with the Emperor. As long as he observed this Prince to be amazed and
irresolute, he advised him to continue near Constantinople with his Army; but
as soon as he saw him disposed to fight, he propose^ to attack the enemy, whom
he represented to ^ weakened by his losses, frighted and trembling ^ his Camp,
and not in a condition to recollect his scattered forces. All the young men of
the Court and Army took this part, some to comply with the Emperor, others to
acquire glory; even many stirred up by a false emulation, cried out, that they
would never suffer others to come and conquer for Ammian. ^. 31.
them. Valens, who was assured of Victory, and was otherwise jealous of the
reputation which his Nephew had acquired, chose the counsel which flattered
most his passion, and resolved to go directly to the enemies before Gratian's
arrival.

LXV. Fritigern on his side knowing that he should have two great Armies, and
two Emperors upon his hands, if the Affair was not soon determined, judged it
convenient either to compound with Valens, or suddenly engage him to a genera
Battle. Whereupon he sent Ambassadors to him, and made him reasonable
Propositions in very respectful and submissive terms. He hoped thereby that the
Emperor would either grant him Peace, or that he would interpret his
Submissions for marks of fear and weakness, and be the more desirous for
Battle. The Bishop Vlphilas, who had the Secret of the Embassy, went without
delay to the Camp of Adrianople, where he was honorably received, and
presently conducted to an Audience. He presented his Letters in public, by
which the King his Master, in the name of all his Subjects, requested the
Emperor to leave undisturbed an unhappy Nation, chased from all parts, which
had not taken up Arms but in extremity, was ready to depose them, and
considered only how to live and serve the Empire, and to manure in peace those
Lands which had been afforded them in Thrace.

This Prelate had Orders to demand a secret Audience, and to render a second
dispatch into the Emperor's own hand, in case the first took no^effect.
Fritigern wrote to Valens, that he was resolved to be his Friend and his Ally,
and that he had endeavored to reduce the Goths to Reason; but that they were
Barbarians, who could not imngine to themselves that they durst be assaulted;
notwithstanding there was nothing more to do, than to show them the Army, and
they would fubmit to all things, as soon as they were frighted with the name
and presence of an Emperor.

LXVI. These Ambassadors were dismissed without any Answer; and Valens was so
much the more impatient, inasmuch as he thought the Goths had an intention to
shun him. He disposed all Ammian. ibid. Idat. in fast.
things, and marched the next day, being the 9th of August, at daybreak,
leaving all his Equipage near Adrianople, in order to make the more haste. He
arrived about Noon in prospect of the Enemy, and put his Army in Battel-aray,
all fatigued, as it was, with a march of twelve miles, through difficult ways,
and an excessive heat.

The King of the Goths sent Deputies to the Emperor forthwith, to offer new
Proposals of Peace; for as he was wise and ingenious, he feared the consequence
of a Battle, and was desirous of getting time whatsoever happened, till the
Cavalry, which he expected, was come up. In the mean time he visited his Camp,
gave Orders to his Captains, and disposed his Troops behind an Intrenchment of
all the Chariots of his Army. He gave directions for great Fires to be kindled
throughout the Country, to the end that the Romans heated and thirsty by the
sultriness of the day, coming still to breathe a burning Air, might be less in
a condition to fight. At the same time he had advice that the Emperor had
despised his Deputies, and would make no Treaty but with the Chief of the
Nation. He sent him word that he would come himself, if he would beforehand
dispatch to him some of the Lords of his Court as Hostages. This Negotiation
made a kind of a Truce for some hours, during which time Alatheus and Ammian.
ibid.
Safrax arrived with their Horse, and formed two great Squadrons at the head of
the Camp of the Goths.

LXVII. The Proposition of the King was accepted in the Emperor's Council, and
they had already deliberated upon the choice of Hostages* when the two Parties
found themselves, as it were, insensibly engaged: for Ba^urius, Captain of the
Iberians, who were placed at the head of the Right Wing, having perceived
toward the Enemy's Camp a Body of Horse, composed of Huns, and Alains,
detached himself without order, and immediately run to charge him. The
Barbarians, without being moved, attended him, and repulsed him with great loss
of his side; whereupon arose a great noise on both sides. Some Squadrons
advanced to support the Iberians, who retired in disorder; but Alatheus
suddenly thundered upon them, and after having cut in pieces all that had the
^ourage to resist him, he pressed upon the rest so ^riskly, that he overturned
Horse and Foot, and ^ut the whole Right Wing in disorder, insomuch that it was
never able to recover itself.

LXVIII. In the mean time Fritigern went out ^o Battle with a part of his
Troops, and run head^ong upon the Right Wing, where were the Le^ions commanded
by the Count Sebastian, and en^ouraged by the presence of the Emperor. Both one
and to other fought courageously, but at last the Goths gave way; and whether
it was that they ^ould not sustain the Enemy's Encounter, or else ^ad a mind to
draw them near their Camp, that ^hey might not escape; they retired as far as
the ^ntrenchment of the Chariots. There they stood ^irm, as if they had resumed
new Forces. The Romans also made their utmost efforts to keep their ^dvantage:
but some Companies of Archers who guarded the Camp, drawing upon them on one
^ide, and Alatheus on the other, who returned from persuing the Horse, charging
them in the Flank* and an innumerable multitude of the Barbarians encompassing
them on all sides, they considered no further than to sell their Lives as dear
as they could.

LXIX. After having fought some time at a distance with flights of Arrows, they
came to Spear and Sword. According as the Enemy got ground, they stood close,
till such time as their Force being exhausted, and overwhelmed by number, they
were for the most part cut in pieces* The Count Sebastian Colonel of the Foot,
Valerian Great Master of the Horse, Equitius nea^ Kinsman of the Emperor, and
Great Master ^ his Palace, a matter of five and thirty Tribunes* and an
infinite number of other Officers remaine^ upon the place. The Emperor seeing
this disorder, could not tell what to resolve on. Two Companies of his Guards
protected him with their Shields. Trajan was come to his assistance near his
person, with the greatest part of the Volunteers, and cried out that there was
Relief a coming* But all things were in confusion. The Batavians* who composed
the Body of Reserve, had taken flight. Victor and Ricomer could not succeed i^
rallying their Men. Then Night being come, Trajan advised the Emperor to save
himself; and sustaining himself alone the whole power of the Enemy, he received
several wounds, and generously dyed for his Country, and a Prince, who had
abused, and shook him off not long before.

LXX. Valens, to conceal his flight, joined company with some Soldiers, who
fled as well as he. He advanced but little, because the night was dark, and the
Country covered with dead bodies; and to complete his misfortune, he was hurt
with an Arrow, by some rambling Barbarians, who shot at random wheresoever they
heard a noise. He fell from his Horse, and was carried by some of his Domestics
into a Country House they met in their way. They had no sooner stopped the blood,
and laid on, as well as they could, the first apparel to his wound, but a Troop
of disbanded Goths came in disorder with a design to plunder the Ammian* ^. 31.
House, without knowing its Inhabitants at that time. They attempted to force
the doors; and as they found resistance, they renounced an Enterprise, which
they thought not to succeed in, and where they did not expect to find much
advantage. Notwithstanding to revenge themselves of those, who opposed them in
the House, they set fire to it, and passed on.

It was there Valens, overwhelmed with grief, and pressed with the remorses of
his conscience, was burnt alive upon the ninth of August, in the fourteenth
year of his Reign, and the fiftieth year of Ammian. ib. Zoz. l. 4. Hieronim. in
Ch^onic. Oros. l. 7. c. 33. Chrystost. Epist. ad vid.
his Age. The Barbarians learnt his death by one of his Domestics, who was
saved from the combustion, and were afflicted at the loss of an opportunity to
make an Emperor Prisoner, and to make advantage of his Spoils. Such was the
deplorable end of Valens. He had the fortune of evil Princes; hated in his
life, and dying without being lamented.

LXXI. History reports, that since the battle of Cannae, the Romans had not
sustained a more considerable loss. There remained upon the place Ammian. l. 31.
above two thirds of their Army, the rest were dispersed and lodged in the
Cities on all sides. The Count Victor and Ricomer run with expedition to the
Emperor Gratian, to give him advice of this defeat, and to hinder his
advancement too far. In the mean time the Goths thought only how to gather the
fruits of their Victory, and to plunder the Provinces, whereof they esteemed
themselves masters. Gratian, touched at the loss of this battle, and his
Uncle's death, which he understood at the same time, considered whether he
should continue his March, or return. The Goths were powerful, he had but few
Troops to oppose them; he lost the Empire, if he should be overcome. These
reasons obliged him to retire to Sirmium, till he should assemble greater
Forces, or that in the heat of Pillage, division should arise amongst the
Barbarians.

LXXII. In the mean while he reflected in his mind upon all the circumstances
of this war; the blindness of the Court, who had taken for Defenders of the
State, those who were its most dangerous Enemies; the imprudence of the
Emperor, who had always either too much feared them, or too much despised them;
the fatal adventure of this Prince, who came to experiment the cruelty of
those, whose Faith he had debauched. He considered he had writ to him a little
(...) ^. ^. de Fide.
before, That the blood of so many Martyrs, and the banishment of so many
persecuted Bishops, was the true cause of the Revolutions of the Empire; that
Princes could not assure themselves of the fidelity of men, when they are not
themselves faithful to God; and that the ^nsurrection of an Arrian Nation,
against an Arrian Emperor, was an effect of the divine Justice, which punished
impi^ty by impiety it self.

LXXIII. To remedy these disorders, and to render Heaven favorable to him, he
made forthwith an Edict, whereby he repealed the Bishops, that Theod. l. 5. c.
1 and 2. Socrat. l. 5. c. 2. Sozom. l. 7. c. 1.
were exiled for the Catholic Faith, and re-established them in their Sees. He
commanded Sapor one of his Lieutenant Generals, to go and execute this Order
throughout the East, to chase the false Bishops from the Churches they had
usurped, and to suffer none but those, who were in the Communion of Pope
Damasus. Notwithstanding judging it convenient to manage the humors of the
People, and joining Sweetness to Piety, he allowed every one the free exercise
of his Religion, and prohibited no public Assemblies but to certain Sects,
which appeared to him either ridiculous, or scandalous.

LXXIV. After having delivered the Church from its Oppression, it was necessary
to consider of means in order to save the State. Valens died without Children,
and the young Valentinian, who had the Title and Quality of Emperor, was not
yet of an age to exercise the functions of it; so Gratian alone was charged
with all the cares of the Empire. He saw at the same time the Goths victorious
in Thrace, and other barbarous Nations ready to make an irruption into the
Lands of the Empire. Being unable himself to suffice the whole, or to know
where his presence would be most necessary, he searched for a man that was
capable to assist him in his wars, and to command in the East in his absence.
He cast his Eyes upon Theodosius, whose Valor and Wisdom he was acquainted
with; and whether he had already resolved to associate him to the Empire, or
only designed to give him the command of the Army; he wrote to him, and sent
him Orders to come forthwith to Sirmium.

LXXV. Theodosius was then in Spain, where he was retired, as we have already
said, to avoid the Persecution of Valens, and the Envy of those Courtiers, who
could not dispense with his Reputation, nor his Merit. He lived in his retreat
without complaining either of Emperors, or his Fortune. Sometimes he was at the
City amongst his fellow Citizens, composing the differences of some, assisting
others in their necessities, obliging Pacat. in Panegyr.
all the world, and preferring himself to no one; sometimes in the Country,
where he manured himself his Gardens, and addicted himself, with satisfaction
to all the cares of Husbandry. Making this advantage of his disgrace, he learnt
to gain the Friendship of the People, and accustomed himself so well, to all
the Offices of a civil life, that he retained the sweetness and modesty of a
private person, even when he was raised to Sovereign Dignity. He was in this
condition when he received Gratian's Letters; he put his domestic affairs in
order, and departed a few days after.

LXXVI. In the mean time the Goths, after their Victory, went, against the
advice of King Fritigern, Ammian. lib. 31.
to besiege Adrianople, where they received information that Valens had enclosed
his Treasures, and all that he had most precious in the Empire. They made their
approaches tumultuously, and gave several assaults; but it was with so much
precipitation and disorder, that they were always repulsed and lost their best
Troops. They had won some Soldiers of the Garrison, who were to deliver to them
one of the City gates; but the intelligence was discovered. At last being
incommoded with the rains that fell several days together, pelted with the
Artillery of the besieged, and discouraged with the tediousness of the Siege,
they passed as far as the Precincts of Perinthus, where they hoped to find a
more considerable booty.

LXXVII. As they durst not attack this place, they plundered the Countty, and a
pproached Constantinople with a design to invest it, and to take it either by
Assault or Famine. The Empress Do^inica, the Wife of Valens, opened the public
Treasure, and encouraged so well, by her Discourse and Largesses, the
Inhabitants and Soldiers, that they made a Sally, and charged a body of the
Barbarians, which was advanced toward the City. The fight was bloody, and
finished by an action which surprised the Goths, and cast a terror into their
whole Army.

Zoz. l. 4.
Some Sarazin battalions which Queen Mauvia had sent to the assistance of the
Empire, and which Valens had left in Garrison at Constantinople, where at handy
blows with the Enemy, and the Victory was yet uncertain, when of a sudden a
Soldier of that Nation was seen to appear with a Dagger in his hand, and
muttering some dismal words. He went out of the ranks all naked, and falling
upon the first Goth he met with, stabbed him in the breast, and instantly cast
himself upon him to suck the blood which trickled from his wound The Goths
amazed at this brutish action, which they took for a prodigy, fled in disorder,
and had not the courage to assault the Sarasins.

LXXVIII. They were not more successful before Thessalonica, they attempted
several times to become Masters of this City, which was not in a condition to
resist them: but St. Ascole the Bishop thereof, defended it by the sole virtue
of his Ambros. Ep. 59.
Prayers. It is reported that a secret fear possessed these Barbarians, as soon
as they approached; that they lost, without knowing for what reason, that
natural fierceness which they had at other times; and that the wisest of them
were of opinion to abandon the attempt, and to leave undisturbed a Ammian. ^*
31. Hier. Ep. 3. Zoz. l. 4.
City, which God so visibly protected by the intercession of this Holy Prelate.

At length after they had lost the Pillage of these three Cities, they threw
themselves into Macedon, Thrace, Scythia, Mesia, and dispersed themselves as
far as the Julian Alps, which confine Italy on this side, ravaging all these
Provinces, and leaving every where fatal Testimonies of their avarice and fury.

LXXIX. The East was going to fall into a like disorder, if there had not been
a sudden stop put to the course of a Conspiracy, which was already formed. When
the Goths were received in Thrac^, one of the Conditions imposed upon them was,
that they should give up their Children for Hostages, and Necessity obliged
them to consent to it. They hoped by that means to secure the fidelity Zoz. l.
4.
of their Fathers, and to accustom the Children insensibly to the Laws and
Discipline of the Romans, in order to make both serve in the Wars of the
Empire. Julius, who commanded in the East, was charged with the Education of
these Barbarian Youths. He dispersed them in the Cities of his Governments, and
instructed them, according to the Orders he had received from Court. Many of
them were already of an age to carry Arms, and notwithstanding the care which
was taken to conceal from them the Victory of their Nation, they came to
understand the News.

Then returning to their nature, they concerted amongst themselves how to seize
upon certain Cities, and to put those Garrisons to the Sword who should not be
upon their guard. Those that were together, advertised their Companions
secretly, and the Conspiracy was suddenly to take effect. Julius had advice of
it, and was resolved to prevent them. He visited the places, gave Orders to the
Governors, and proclaimed throughout the whole extent of his government, that
the Emperor, to gratify these strangers, Ammian. l. 31. Zoz. l. 4.
and to engage them the stronger to the service of the Empire, had commanded to
distribute to them not only Money, but also Lands and Houses, and that they
should be treated as natural Subjects.

The day was appointed for this distribution. The Barbarians hoping to take the
advantage of the Money, and Favors which were to be allowed them, and to render
their Rebellion more easy and secure, were softened a little. They came to the
Cities whose Garrisons were underhand reinforced; and as they were assembled in
the great Streets, some Troops that were lodged in the adjacent Houses, fell
upon them with their Swords, and slew the greatest part: the rest thinking to
save themselves by the cross-ways, were knocked down with stones by the
Citizens.

They did not so much as spare those who were not of an age to do an injury,
and by an inhumane Prudence Julius delivered these Provinces from the danger
they were in. The affair was managed with so much dexterity, and orders given
and executed so opportunely, that this Massacre the same day went throughout
the East, without the Goths conceiving the least suspicion of it, or the
possibility of one's escaping.

LXXX. Things were in this condition, when Theodosius arrived at Sirmium.
Gratian received him so much the more favorably, inasmuch as he was ashamed of
having banished him his Court, and that he was upon entrusting him with the most
important affair of the Empire. He made him General of his Army, and dispatched
him against the Goths with a part of those Troops he had in Illyrium.

Theodosius marched forthwith toward Thrace, where the Enemies were assembled
in a vast number. He knew that several Companies of Alains, Huns, and Taifals,
had joined them since their last Victory, and that they were of opinion to have
reduced the Emperor to dare no further to appear in Field. But he learnt at the
same time that their best Soldiers were disbanded, that the chief Officers were
divided amongst themselves; that Fritigern was no longer Master of them, and
that there was neither Order nor Discipline amongst such a heap of Barbarians,
who were come to assist them in their Pillage, and not to fight.

LXXXI. Then he advanced with much assurance; and having encountered the Enemy,
he gave them Battle, slew the greatest part, obliged the rest to repass the
Danube, and went himself to carry the News of this defeat to Court. Theodoret
Theod. l. 5. c. 5. and 6.
reports, that Theodosius left so great a number of them slain upon the place,
made so many Prisoners, and obtained so much Spoil, that being come with an
extreme diligence to give the Emperor an account of his Victory, it appeared
immediately incredible.

His Rivals durst accuse him of having been defeated, and of having fled
himself; and Gratian being astonished, was at a stand how to employ his Faith.
Theodosius entreated him to send his Accusers upon the place, to the end they
might examine the truth, and give a testimony of it themselves. The Emperor, to
satisfy his pressing Solicitations, charged persons of degree and reputation to
go forthwith and learn the particulars of this Action, and to return with a
clear Information to him.

LXXXII. The same Historian reports, that it was in this time that Theodosius
saw in a Dream a Bishop, who put a Crown upon his head, and invested him with
the Imperial Robes; and that one of his intimate Friends, to whom he discovered
this Vision, assured him that it was a certain Presage of that Grandeur to
which God would advance him.

The Bishop who appeared to him, was since known for Meletius Bishop of
Antioch. This holy Prelate, by virtue of the last Edict of Gratian, was then
returned to his Church, after a banishment of several years. The Confessors of
Jesus Christ were seen to pass through the whole Empire, some followed by a
Troop of Infidels whom they had converted, others delivered from their Chains,
and bearing still upon their Bodies the glorious marks of the Torments which
they had endured. They transferred even with honor the Relics of those who
died in their Exile.

The greatest part were received with abundance of Joy by the People, whose
Conduct and Protection they came to resume. But as the Emperor, notwithstanding
all his Piety, had not Authority enough to make himself obeyed, there were
some, who by the Cabals of Heretics, underwent more Misfortunes in this time
of Peace, than they had endured in the time of Persecution. Many observing
their Sees to be supplied with Arrians, offered to share with them the
Government of their Flock, upon condition they would reunite themselves to the
Catholic Faith and Communion. Others were even ready to yield up their Dignity
entire, in order to establish the Peace and Unity of the Church.

LXXXII. Amongst so many holy Bishops, it seemed that God had made choice of
the most renowned, to give Theodosius the first hopes of the glory to which he
designed him. This Presage was suddenly accomplished. For Gratian having learnt
that the People who inhabited along the Rhine were entered into Gaul, and
moreover finding himself as it were encompassed with an inundation of
Barbarians, who were dispersed in the Provinces of the East, resolved to
associate Theodosius to the Empire. He considered that he must be unable
himself alone to oppose so many Enemies; that a Lieutenant discharged him but
of a part of his Cares; that it was convenient to have a Colleague, who should
have his Wars apart, and should defend the State, as his own proper
inheritance; that it would be more for his Reputation and Glory, to give one of
his Empires voluntarily, than to retain it with disturbance; and that he was
happy in the possession of any thing, whereby to recompense a great merit in
the establishment of his own repose.

LXXXIV. The Friendship and esteem which he had entertained for Theodosius from
his Infancy, determined him still more; and the impatience which he had to go
and relieve Gaul, where he was educated, pressed him to declare his design. But
it was proper to attend the confirmation of the last Victory of Theodosius, to
the end that his Rivals might themselves be obliged to approve his Election,
after having suffered the confusion which their Calumny deserved.

Claudian. Pacat. in Paneg.
This choice was so much the more glorious to Theodosius, inasmuch as he had
not looked after it. He was even modest enough to refuse this honor, when
Gratian offered it to him; and this refusal was attended with so many marks of
Moderation and Sincerity, that it was easy to judge it was no vain ceremony,
but a real wisdom, which made him regard, as a difficult and hazardous
employment, this Dignity, wherein is sought for the most part nothing, but the
repose and pleasure of commanding.

LXXXV. About this time Ausonius was nominated Consul, although absent, and
regardless of factions to procure this honor. Gratian, after having advantaged
himself by his instructions, lost no occasion of testifying to him his
acknowledgment. He raised him to the charge of Questor, and a little after to
that of Praefectus Praetorio; at length he declared him Consul, and forgot
nothing that he could imagine to be most obliging, and most honorable.

He gave him for a Colleague Olibrius Gallus, a young man of a very noble and
ancient Family: and as people were curious to know which of the two he named
first; to favor Ausonius, without offending the other, he answered that he
pretended to determine their rank, not by Birth, but Age, and the antiquity of
their Praefecture. After that, he dispatched forthwith a Courier to Ausonius,
to give him advice of his nomination to the Consulship, Auson. in great. act.
and wrote to him in these terms; As I considered some time since to create
Consuls for this year, I invoked the assistance of God, as you know I am
accustomed to do in every thing I undertake, and as I know it conformable to
your desire. I was of opinion, that I was obliged to nominate you first Consul,
and that God required of me this acknowledgment for the good instructions I
have received from you. I render to you then what is your due; and knowing that
one can never acquit himself toward his Father, nor toward his Master, I
confess that I still owe you what I have endeavored to render you. To the end
that nothing might be wanting to the favor which he had done, he accompanied
this Letter with a Present, and sent him a very glorious Robe, wherein was
embroidered in Gold the figure of the Emperor Constantius, his Father-in-Law.
And Ausonius on his side employed all the force and delicacy of his Genius to
make in Verse and Prose, the Panegyriek of his August Benefactor.

LXXXVI. A few days after this action of Gratian's, those who were sent to the
Army arrived, and reported that the defeat of the Goths had been very
considerable; that the number of the dead, Theod. l. 5. c. 9.
and prisoners, and the quantity of spoils went beyond what Theodosius affirmed
of them. Then his very Enemies were obliged to commend his valor and modesty,
and the Emperor thought it high time to share the Empire with him.

The End of the First Book.
The CONTENTS of the SECOND BOOK.
I. GRatian shares the Empire with Theodosius. II. Theodosius goes to
Thessalonica, and receives the Deputations there. III. He undertakes a War
against the Goths. IV. He sends Modarius to view them. V. He surprises them,
and defeats them entirely in Thrace. VI. He grants them Peace, and returns to
Thessalonica, where he learns the Victory of Gratian. VII. He has a design to
pull down the Arrains. VIII. The Original and Progress of this Sect* IX.
Theodosius falls sick, and is baptized by Ascole Bishop of Thessalonica. X. He
sets forth an Edict against the Arrians. XI. Maximus the Cynick usurps the
Episcopal See of Constantinople; his Crimes, and his Cheats. XII. Theodosius
repulses Maximus. XIII. Perfidiousness of the Goths. XIV. The Goths attack the
Emperor in his Trenches. XV. Treason of the Goths in the service of the Empire:
Retreat of Theodosius. XVI. Theodosius rallies his Army, and receives the
assistance of the Gauls. XVII. Consternation of the Goths. XVIII. Different
Opinions touching Peace or War. XIX. Theodosius grants the Goths a Peace. XX.
Diverse Effects produced by the Edict of Theodosius for the Catholic Religion
in Constantinople. XXI. Theodosius disbands the Gaulish Troops, and repairs to
Constantinople. XXII. Theodosius receives the Civilities of the Arrians; the
Catholics murmur at it* XXIII. State of Religion in Constantinople. XXIV.
Theodosius declares for the Catholics. His Conference with Gregory of
Nazianzum. XXV. He orders all the Churches of the City to be restored to the
Catholics. XXVI. He represses the Arrians, and goes himself to instal Gregory
of Nazianzum. XXVII. Policy of Theodosius. XXVIII. Difference of Fravitas and
Eriulphus. XXIX. Malice of the Historian Zozimus. XXX. Conspiracy of the
Arrians against Gregory of Nazianzum. XXXI. Sweetness of Gregory. XXXII. New
Edict of Theodosius against the Arrians. XXXIII. Pride of Athanaric King of the
Goths; his hatred against Valens, and against the Empire. XXXIV. Fritigern
unites himself with the Grotungues, and after several Incursions they chase
Athanaric from his Territories. XXXV. Athanatic begs the protection of
Theodosius. XXXVI. Theodosius gives Athanaric a Retreat in his Court. XXXVII.
Theodosius shows Athanaric Constantinople: Original and Greatness of this City.
XXXVIII. Death of Athanaric. XXXIX. Effects of the goodness of Theodosius. XL.
Theodosius calls the Council of Constantinople. XLI. He calls the Macedonian
Heretics to it. XLII. Number of the Bishops of the Council, and their
different Prospects. XLIII. Respect of Theodosius for Miletius President of the
Council. XLIV. Election of an Archbishop of Constantinople. XLV. Gregory of
Nazianzum is chosen, he refuses this dignity, is obliged to accept of it. XLVI.
Points of Faith regulated. XLVII. Rules for Discipline. XLVIII. Synodal Letters
addressed to Theodosius. XLIX. Death of Meletius Bishop of Antioch: Honors
rendered to him by Theodosius. L. Theodosius Answers to the Bishops, and
confirms the Ordinances of the Council. LI. Schism of Antioch; its Original and
Progress. LII. It is proposed to choose a Successor to Meletius; Division of the
Fathers upon this Subject. LIII. Theodosius calls the Bishops of Egypt and
Macedon to the Council. LIVE. Protestation against the Election of Gregory of
Nazianzum. LV. Gregory resigns his Archbishopric, and goes out of the
Assembly. LVI. Gregory demands his Conge of Theodosius. LVII. Last Sermon of
Gregory, and his Re^reat. LVIII. Theodosius complains of the Contests of the
Bishops. LIX. Orders given for the Election of a new Archbishop. LX. The
Emperor chooses Nectarius. LXI. Remonstrance of the Bishops to Theodosius. LXII.
Ordination of Nectarius. LXIII. Conclusion of the Council: Translation of the
Relics of St. Paul, Archbishop of Constantinople. LXIV. Victory of Theodosius
over the Huns, Scyrians, and Carpodacks. LXV. King Sapor seeks the friendship
of Theodosius. State of the Persian Affairs. LXVI. Famous Embassy of the
Persian King to Theodosius. LXVII. Alliance of Theodosius with the King of
Persia. LXVIII. Deputation of the Council of Aquileia to Theodosius. LXIX.
Theodosius does not consent to the Convocation of a General Council at Rome.
LXX. New Intrigues of Maximus the Cynick. LXXI. Theodosius re-assembles the
Bishops of the East at Constantinople. They refuse to go to Rome. LXXII. The
Goths of Athanaric's Retinue praise the grandeur and goodness of Theodosius.
LXXIII. Fritigern seeks the Alliance of Theodosius. LXXIV. New Instances of the
Italian Bishops for the Convocation of a Council at Rome.

THE HISTORY OF THEODOSIUS the Great. BOOK II.
Anne. 379.
I. THE Army which was then in quarters about Sirmium, had Orders to
Rendezvous, and upon the sixteenth day of January, Gratian repaired to it,
accompanied with Theodosius, and the other Lords of his Socrat. l. 5. c. 2.
Court. He was conducted to the midst of the Camp; the Troops being drawn round
him, he exposed to them the deplorable State of the Empire, the misery of the
people, the weakness of the Armies, the irruptions of the Germans in Gaul, and
the ravages, which so many barbarous Nations had committed in the Eastern
Provinces. He represented to them that one single man could not sustain so many
Wars at a time, nor remedy so many disorders. That as for him, he preferred
August de Civit. De^.
the pleasure of having a faithful Colleague before the ambition of Reigning
alone; and that in the design of making a choice, which should be advantageous
to the S^ate, and agreeable to them, he had cast his Eyes upon Theodosius.

At this name the Troops interrupted him, and testified their Joy by long
applauses. Gratian continued his discourse, and after having made the Encomium
of Theodosius, he gave him the Purple Aur. Victor in Theod.
and the Crown. Then the Soldiers who had heretofore esteemed him worthy of the
Empire, redoubled their acclamation; and the Officers came in multitudes to
Salute the new Emperor, who being but of the Age of three and thirty years, and
joining to the strength and vigor of his Age, a great experience, and
consummated Wisdom, caused them to hope for the entire reestablishment of
Affairs.

Gratian gave him for his Division Thrace, and all the Provinces that Valens
had possessed. He Sozom. l. 7.
added thereto that Eastern part of Illyrium, whereof Thessalonica was Capital,
taking off from the Empire of the West, that Province, which lay exposed to the
courses of the Barbarians, and which neither he because of his Remoteness, nor
his Brother Valentinian, by reason of his inferior Age, could defend. A few
days after this Election, the two Emperors parted. Gratian took the Road of
Gaul to go and chase the Germans, who plundered it; and Theodosius marched
toward Thessalonica to rendezvous his Army there, in order to renew a war
against a formidable multitude of Zoz. l. 4.
Alains, Goths, and Huns, who since his last Victory were again entered into
Thrace, after having run through Mysia, and Pannonia.

II. The noise was soon dispersed, that Theodosius was Emperor, and that he
advanced with a part of the Western Army, which Gratian had enforced him with.
The People, whom the Unhappiness of the last Wars, and Rigor of the late Reign,
had extremely cast down, began to breath again. The Troops, which the Enemies
had kept close in their Garrisons, took heart, and made Incursions in the
Country; and the Officers, who saved themselves from the last defeat, and had
got themselves into strong places, were ready to appear at the first order, and
to collect the scattered remains of the Roman Legions, in order to conduct them
to Theodosius. All the Cities disposed their Deputations; and Constantinople,
which Valens had sworn to destroy at his return from the war, was glad to be
under the dominion of a Prince, who deserved their love; and was capable to
protect them.

Theodosius in the mean time arrived at Thessalonica; where resorted
immediately from all the Provinces of the Empire, those whose Rank or Duty
called them to Court, and those who came to render an account of the public
Affairs, or to solicit their particular ones. There he began to do all the
Functions of a great Emperor, dispersing his Orders every where, receiving
Persons of Quality and Merit with Honor, and the rest with Goodness; giving
Audiences at every hour, and rendering Justice indifferently to all his
Subjects; refusing nothing that he could reasonably grant; adding to his favors
an obliging way of doing them, and sweetning refusals by expressions of good
will. So they who obtained their demands Zoz. l. 4.
were satisfied; and they who could not, returned at least with comfort.

III. The care he took for the satisfaction and repose of the People, did not
hinder him from giving all convenient orders for preparations of war. The Chief
Officers were already near his Person, the Infantry came out of their Garrisons,
and the whole Army rendezvous'd in the beginning of the Spring. Although it was
not considerable in number, it was so in courage, and by the confidence it
reposed in its Emperor. Theodosius then took the field, and advanced by great
Journeys toward Thrace. The Barbarians were divided into several bodies, and
without applying themselves to the siege of any place, wherein they never
succeeded; they pillaged all the Country without opposition. They were armed
after the Roman manner since the defeat of Valens: Fritigern, had taught them
to rally, and to observe some Discipline, their Army increased every day with
an infinite number of their Companions, whom the noise of Victory, and the
hopes of a great Booty drew from all parts. Thus they were formidable. But they
had scarce any Captains. Fritigern, whom they had refused to obey, had
abandoned them. As soon as they gave themselves to pillage, they no longer
observed any order; and this multitude, that came to join them, served but to
increase the confusion, and to cause divisions amongst them for the sharing of
the Prizes they had made.

IV. Theodosius entered into Thrace: He defeated immediately some Parties of the
Enemy, who were separated from the body of the Army; and having learnt of the
Prisoners the place, where was encamped the greatest part of these Barbarians,
he thought he might easily subdue them, if he could surprise them* before they
were advertised of his March. He commanded Modarius, Prince Zoz. l. 4.
of the Blood Royal of the Scythians, who was in the Service of the Emperors,
and by his fidelity and valor had deserved the first employments in their
Armies, to advance with some Horse in order to observe the Enemy, whilst he
marched himself withthe utmost diligence.

A few days after, Modarius returned, and gave Theodosius notice, that the
Enemy was not far off; that they were encamped in Plains, commanded by Ascents,
which it would be easy to possess; that their Camp was defended but by one
Intrenchment of some Chariots ill placed, which might be forced without any
difficulty; that there was a great number of men, but few Soldiers; that in all
likelihood they would not quit a Post, where they found all sorts of commodity
to subsist on; and in a word not suspicious of any thing, but thinking the
Emperor at a great distance from them, they might be oppressed, before they
would be in a condition to defend themselves.

The Emperor was extremely pleased to hear this News, and sent back Modarius
with a great Detachment, to seize upon those Posts he should judge necessary,
whether to prevent the Goths from being informed, or to fight them with
advantage if they were disposed for battle. Pretty near the Camp, and almost in
prospect of the Enemy, there was a little Hill which extended a good way, and
toward the middle of its brow left a space of land compact, and large enough
to lodge a reasonable number of Troops. Modarius in the night conveyed his
there, without being discovered. He possessed himself of all the passages, and
knowing that the Goths, without fear or caution we^e asleep in the Plain; he
expected with impatience the arrival of the Emperor to charge them. At
daybreak Theodosius being arrived, viewed himself the place, and forthwith
disposed himself for an onset^ He commanded the Soldiers to quit their heavy
Arms, and to keep nothing but the Sword and Buckler. He gave orders to the
Captains to extend the ranks, to leave nothing behind them, and to make the
Army appear more numerous. He exhorted them all to fight with courage, without
obliging themselves too much to the accustomed forms of warfare, in an affair
whose event depended as much upon haste, as upon order.

V. The Goths in the mean time were in great tranquillity; some were just come
into the Camp loaded with booty; others were gone to make incursions in the
Country, and to gather up the remains of the other days Pillage. Many fatigued
with the courses they had made in the Night, were lain down here and there, and
the most part buried in Wine, flept in peace, in the midst of the provisions
they had heaped up. Their Captains, men of little experience and power,
notwithstanding the advice they had received of the appearance of Roman Troops,
could not be persuaded that they would come to attack them. Even those that had
seen them, took them not for the entire Army, but for a party come out of the
adjacent places, who did not deserve to have Arms taken up against them, and
who would soon enclose themselves in Garrisons.

They were in this condition, when they heard the noise of the Trumpets, and
cries of the Soldiers, which was the Signal of the onset. Modarius descended
from the hill with the Foot which he commanded, enlarging his batallions, as he
advanced in the Plain, and marched directly to the head of the Camp. Promotius,
one of the Lieutenant-Generals of the Emperor, went to the Left with part of
the Horse; and the Emperor with the rest coasting the hill to the Right,
approached the Enemies to take them in the Flank. The Goths, who saw this Army
pouring down upon them on a sudden, which their consternation made them think
innumerable, judged very well that their ruin was inevitable: Their Captains
were sensible of their fault, when it was no longer time to repair it; terror
and confusion were dispersed through the whole Camp. Some running to their
arms, lost their lives before they were in a condition to dispute them: Others
to avoid the danger which they saw, met with another which they saw not, and
found the enemies employed in every place. The number of those that fled,
hindered them from flying. In a few hours all these Barbarians were either
killed, or made prisoners. They took their Wives and Children, and four
thousand Chariots, which served to carry them in their Marches. Thus all Thrace
was once more delivered from the desolation, to which those foreign Nations had
reduced it.

VI. The noise of this defeat being spread abroad, the Alains and Goths who
plundered the other Provinces, stopped short, and made proposals of Peace. They
would have been glad to have revenged the death of their companions; but as
Sozom. l. 7. c. 4.
they knew the Emperor was coming to them, they submitted to what he pleased,
and signed a Treaty, which they designed to observe no longer, than the first
occasion they had to infringe it. Theodosius of his side granted them more than
they demanded; for he preferred an honest Peace before a glorious War; and did
not think it proper to expose the few Troops he had to doubtful fights, against
enemies who had overcome the Romans, and suffered themselves not always to be
surprised.

All things being thus regulated, Theodosius visited the places, reinforced the
Garrisons, and gave orders for the security and ease of those Provinces, which
were almost consumed by War; then he took the Road of Thessalonica, to pass the
Winter there, and to provide from thence for the most urgent necessities of the
State. The Joy, which these first successes of his Reign gave to him, was still
increased by the News of Gratian's being no less fortunate than himself; that
having joined to his Troops, those that were commanded by Merobaudes Sozam* ib.
Socrat. l. 5. c. 6. Zoz. l. 4.
King of the French, he had attacked the Germans, conquered them, and chased
them out of Gaul; that he had cut in pieces the greatest part, and reduced the
rest to shut themselves within their Country, from whence they could not come
in haste to trouble the repose of People subject to the Empire. Theodosius
rendered thanks to God in a solemn manner for his Victories, and for those of a
Prince whose glory affected him, as much as his own.

VII. As soon as he was discharged of the cares of war, he thought he should be
unworthy of the favors, which he had received from Heaven, and the protection
which he expected from thence, if he made it not his utmost application to
establish the Catholic Faith, whereof he had made profession all his Life. In
order thereunto he resolved to pull down the Arrians, which his Predecessors
had set up, and which at that time filled the whole East with confusion and
disorder. The attempt was difficult, and to succeed therein* there was need of
much Resolution and Wisdom, as well as an exemplary piety.

VIII. This Sect arose under the Reign of Constantine the Great, and occasioned
against the Church a sort of Persecution, more dangerous than that of the
Tyrants, from which it was just freed. Arrius was the Author of it. He was born
in that part of Libya, which is adjoining to Egypt; and went to Alexandria in
hopes of making himself known there, and to advance himself to the first
charges of the Church. As he was ingenious* learned, and eloquent, with some
appearance of Virtue, the Patriarchs of this City thought he might be
serviceable to them, and raised him soon to Orders, others to Ecclesiastical
Ministry. But they soon observed that it was an unquiet, presumptuous, and
untractable Spirit, ready to side with the good or evil Party, according as it
suited with his Fortune, or his Pride. In his younger days he threw himself
into the Schism of Meletius Bishop of Lycopolis, in the Country of Thebais. He
left it, and returned again. At last he reconciled himself with the Patriarch
Achillas, and feigned to be his Friend, in order to become his Successor. Then
covering his Ambition with the veil of an affected Modesty, winning some by a
fawning behavior, deceiving others by an outward gravity and composedness,
whilst he aspired secretly to the Bishopric.

But his hopes were frustrated. The Sea came to be vacant, and the merit of
Saint Alexander prevailed over the intreigues of Arrius. He was vexed at it;
and the envy which possessed him, made him regard him as his Enemy, whom he
should have respected as his Father. He resolved to ruin him; and being unable
to exclaim against his Life, which was very innocent, and exemplary, he
attempted to assail his Doctrine, although it was exceeding pure and wholesome. He
accused him, as of a Crime, for sustaining, That Jesus Christ was equal to his
Father, eternal and immutable, as well as he, and had but one Essence: After
having reproached him with this Truth, as a Heresy, he proposed himself his own
Heresy as a Truth; and began to publish, That the Son of God was but a
Creature. That the word had been made out of nothing; that his nature was
mutable, and changeable; that he was the Son of God but by Adoption, and that
if he was called God, it was not to be understood that he was so by Nature, but
only by Participation. As he was learned in the Scriptures, and above all a
dexterous Logician, he collected from the sacred books all that might favor his
Opinions, and wrapped up the question in so many difficulties, and gave to his
Error so much probability, that several went over to his Party. The Patriarch
endeavored to bring him over by his admonitions, his reasons, and his
threatenings; but finding that these ways of sweetness and exhortation served
but to encourage him the more, and give him more opportunity to divulge his
impiety, he excommunicated him in a Council ^ an Hundred Bishops, whom he had
assembled f^ that purpofe out of Egypt and Libya.

This blow astonished him, but not pulled him down. He retired to Palestine,
from whence he wrote to the Emperor; he went himself to find him, and in a
little time got some Protectors and a great number of Disciples, who fixed
themselves to him, some through the sole love of Novelty, others through that
false Compassion for a man oppressed, many were gained by his persuasions and
caresses. Constantine being informed that the Bishops and People began to
separate, and that Synods were assembled of both Parties, was afraid of the
consequence of this division. He wrote from Nicomedia, which was at that time
the usual residence of the Eastern Emperors, a common letter to St. Alexander
and Arrius, to exhort them to reunite themselves, and to agree upon a matter
which appeared of little importance for the Faith, and which would disturb the
peace of the Church. Osius Bishop of Cordova in Spain, who was by chance near
the Emperor, had orders to go into Egypt, to endeavor for an accommodation,
and acquitted himself of his Commission with much fidelity, but with little
success.

To reduce this obstinate Sect, and determine the point of Doctrine in dispute,
it was necessary to come to an Universal Council, that should establish truth,
and condemn the error by a decisive Judgment. Nice, one of the chief Cities of
Bithinia, was chosen for the place of this Assembly; the Bishops from all parts
of the World were invited thither; they arrived there at the appointed time, to
the number of threehundred and eighteen. Constantine himself was there, to be a
Witness, and as Mediator of the Peace, and reunion of the Church. Arrius and
his Partisans were called; They were heard, convicted, and condemned. The
Divinity of Jesus Christ was acknowledged; and to take from the Arians all
pretense of disguising their error under ambiguous terms, they were obliged to
make use of the word Consubstantial in their Professions of Faith, and to sign
the consubstantiality of the word. This expression since this time, was as a
certain mark, which distinguished Catholics from those who were not so, or
were, but not sincerely; and the Fathers of the Council inserted it in their
Creed.

Arius and the Bishops who protected him, after many difficulties feigned to
submit themselves to the decisions of the Council, and to avoid the troubles
they were threatened with, publicly abjured their Heresy. But they abandoned not
their enterprise, and expected a favorable Season to disperse again abroad the
poison, which they had been forced to shut up in their hearts.

In the mean time they drew to their Party those who might assist them with
their Credit, or their Favor. They made their submission to be thought sincere
by the Emperor, in order to the more easy abusing of his goodness; and whilst
they revered in appearance the Faith of Nice, they sought to ruin by calumnys
and false imputations, those who were defenders of it. At length by the
applications of Eusebius, Bishops of Nicomedia who was become the chief of
their Party, by the credit of the Princess Constantia, the Emperors Sister, and
by reiterated protestations of fidelity and obedience, they came to be
considered as Orthodox.

Arius himself, being brought as it were in triumph by his Friends, to be
received in the Communion of the Church at Constantinople, if he had not
suddenly departed an unquiet and criminal Life, by a terrible and shameful
Death.

Although these Heretics were for the most part passionate and seditious Spirits,
yet they durst not rise, and disturb openly the peace of the Church, as long as
Constantine the Great ruled the Empire; for although he had sometimes a little
too much easiness, yet he had much zeal for Religion, and as it was not
impossible to surprise him, so it was dangerous if he perceived himself to be
so. Thus they were obliged to be cautious of this Prince, who might be ignorant
of the truth, but who was not able to suffer an injustice. But when they saw
themselves fortified by the Authority of Constantius his Son, and Successor,
they kept no longer any bounds. They not only published their false Doctrine,
but they oppressed even those who had the courage to oppose them. Their
insolence extended as far as to chase the most holy Prelates from the first
Sees of the East, to proscribe even the Patriarchs, and to take away the
liberty of Athan. ad Sol. p. 831.
Votes in Councils, where the Emperor came in person to be an Accuser of the
Saints, and said aloud, that his Will ought to stand for a Rule and Decision in
the Church.

The Reign of Valens was not less favorable to them. They exercised in his
name their usual Violences. They obtained Letters of him to the Governors of
Provinces to persecute the Catholics. They went even to the farthest part of
the deserts of Thebais to chase from thence those solitary persons, who led a
life perfectly Celestial. The persecution was bloody, and under a Christian
Prince there were almost as many Martyrs, as under Infidel Tyrants. Such were
the beginning^ and progress of this Heresy.

IX. Albeit it was not only difficult, but likewise dangerous in a new Reign to
assault a powerful Sect, that had been of a long time accustomed to rule;
Notwithstanding Theodosius, considering that the first duty of Sovereigns is to
make him reign, by whom they reign; and suspecting but with reason the fidelity
of those who had revolted against the Church, formed a design to bring them
over with sweetness, or to repress them with Authority. He went to publish his
sirst Edicts at Thessalonica.

Claudian. de laud. Seren.
The Empress Flaccilla his wife whom he tenderly loved, Thermantia, and Serena
his Nieces, whom he had adopted since the death of Honorius his brother, were
lately arrived there. Some of his friends were observed every day to come
thither, particularly those who had been assistant to him in the time of his
disgrace. He had invited them Aurel. Victor Theod.
to come from Spain into the East, to the end he might reward them, and raise
them to employments. His gratitude increased with his power; and as soon as he
was Emperor, he remembered all the services he had received when he was but a
private man, and forgot nothing but the injuries which he had suffered.

The Joy he conceived at the sight of persons who were so dear to him, was soon
disturbed; for scarce was he come to Thessalonica, but he fell dangerously ill:
He immediately disposed himself Socrat. l. 5. c. 6. Sozom. l. 4. c. 7.
to receive Baptism, and to dye like a Christian. As he had a great affection
for the Orthodox Faith of the Trinity, and was afraid of giving in this
occasion any advantage to the Heretics; before he sent for Ascole Bishop of
that City, he informed himself of his Manners, and the Faith which he
professed. He learnt that he was a Prelate of a consummated Virtue; that he had
been educated from his Infancy in the Monasteries of Achaia; that upon the
reputation of his Sanctity, Ambros. Ep. 28. 22.
the people of Macedon had taken him from his Solitude, to make him their
Archbishop; that they had ordained him very young, without having regard to
the rules of Age; that he had always been inviolably fixed to the doctrine of
the Church; that St. Basil had honored him with his friendship, and that Pope
Damasus had a particular

Theodosius was very glad to fall into the hands of so holy a man. He ordered
him to be called; and having been farther satisfied by himself, that he
professed the Apostolic Faith, confirmed by the Council of Nice; he demanded
of him, with respect, the Sacrament of Regeneration. He immediately received it
with an exemplary piety, and esteemed himself more glorious in becoming August
de* Civit. Dei.
a member of the Church than in being Master of a part of the World. Then he
thought himself obliged to re-establish Religion through the whole Empire, and
God blessing his intentions, restored him in a few days to a perfect health. He
conversed several times with Ascole upon the means of executing his design. He
instructed himself in the chief points of the doctrines in contest, of the
difference of the new Sects* of the Faith, of the Bishops, and the state of the
principal Churches of the Eastern Empire.

X. After having thus examined all things, he thought it prudent to bring Men
over gradually, and to begin with Laws, which should make them know his Will,
and fear his Justice. Then he published an Edict dated at Thessalonica, whereby
he ordered the People of his obedience to follow that Faith which the Church
had received of the Apostles, and which was taught by Pope Damasus* and Peter
of Alexandria, a Prelate of an Aposto^ical Sanctity, and enjoined them to
confess and acknowledge one Divinity, in the Trinity of the Persons of the
Father, Son* and Holy Ghost; pursuant to the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the
ancient Tradition of the Church. He declares afterward, that only those who
should profess this Faith, were to be taken for Catholics; and that those who
should reject it, were to be treated as infamous and senseless Heretics, who
besides the Punishents they deserved from the Divine Justice, were likewise to
expect from him Chastisements, suitable to the enormity of their Crime.

XI. He addressed this Edict to the People of Constantinople, to the end that
it might be forthwith performed in this Imperial City, which was as i^ it were
the Theater of Heresy, and from thenc^ might pass with the more expedition,
into the other Cities of the Empire. It was about this time that Maximus came
to cast himself at the feet of Theodosius, entreating him to maintain him in
the Sea of Constantinople, which he had lately usurped Maximus was of
Alexandria, by profession a Cyni^ Philosopher, of a moderate knowledge, an
irregular life, and profound dissimulation. His Parents had brought him up in
the Christian Religion, wherein he was notwithstanding but slightly instructed.
He had spent part of his Youth in running from City to City, to acquire Wealth
or Reputation, and had been every where cried down, where he endeavored to fix
himself; and although he was expertat disguising himself, he could not avoid being
surprised in actions, which occasioned his banishment to the Desert of Oasis,
where h^ remained four years entire. At last seeing himsel without honor, and
without recovery, spurred on b^ his ambition and his misery, he went to
Constantin^ple with the rash design of usurping that See.

He declared presently, that he was of a Family illustrious by its Nobility,
and still more by it^ Piety; that his Father was dead for the defense of the
Faith; that his Sisters were the example of Christian Virgins in Alexandria. He
boasted that he had himself suffered a tedious exile for Jesus Christ, making
that the glory of Religion, which had been the punishment of his crimes. The
Fable of these pretended Martyrs, supported by so many premeditated
circumstances, and some appearances of an affected piety, got him the esteem
and friendship of all the Catholics in Constantinople. Although he was dressed
after the Cynic mode, which Habit was not becoming a Christian, this outside
was even excused him, so much were they possessed of the bottom of his Merit
and Virtue.

Anno 380.
Gregory of Nazianzum had at that time the care of the Church of
Constantinople. He had been sent thither about a year before by the Council of
An^ioch, according to some, or else had been invited by ^he People and the
Bishops of Thrace, he seems to Greg. Naz. Carm. de vita sua.
observe himself. He immediately exercised by commission the pastoral Functions
in that Church, where he revived the almost extinguished Faith, ^oyning the
example of his Life to the force of his Eloquence, and re-uniting by his cares
the remains of a fold, which the late tempests had dispersed. But the number of
Catholics being in a little time ^otably increased, they chose him for their
Pastor. Peter Patriarch of Alexandria, confirmed this Election by his Letters
and his Vote; and sent him ^he Marks of his Dignity. Notwithstanding that
Gregory had refused to accept this Dignity, alledg^g that he could not be
chosen but by a Council, ^ey did not cease to look upon him, as their
Arch^ishop. He himself being touched at the testimonies f their Affection,
redoubled their Zeal, and forot nothing that he thought capable to establish ^e
Faith* and fervency of Religion. The Heretics

He began to enjoy the fruit of his labors, when Maximus was presented to him.
Gregory received him not only with civility, but also with respect, as a
Confessor of Jesus Christ: he listened to the false history of his life, and
judging of another by himself, he believed it. He kept him in his house, let
him partake of his Table, and discovered to him his study, and designs; and
supposing it was honorable and advantageous to have in a reviving Church a Man,
taken for a Martyr, he proposed him for an example, and recited publicly a
discourse, which he had made in his commendation.

This Impostor on his side got more and more into the favors of this holy
Prelate, by a dexterous insinuation, by frequent invectives against the
Arrians, and by an Air of Piety, which appeared to be sincere. In the mean time
he managed his intrigues with privacy. He engaged therein a Priest of
Constantinople, to whom the Elevation and Merit of the Archbishop were become
insupportable. They turned so well the Spirit of the Patriarch of Alexandria,
by the powerful correspondencies they had near his Person, that he entered into
the interests of Maximus, whether it was that he had a mind to favor his
Countryman, or that he was afraid of giving occasion to the aggrandizing of
the Sea of Constantinople, if he put in a man of extraordinary Reputation, or
that he believed the Election, which he had but lately approved of, had not
been done according to form.

It was then by his orders, that seven Bishops were chosen to go and support
the Party of this Philosopher, under pretense of conducting the Fleet, which
conveyed Corn every year from Egypt to Constantinople: As soon as they were
arrived, Maximus encouraged them by his discourse and presents. He won an
Ecclesiastic of the Isle of Thasse, who came to buy some Marble for his Church,
and borrowed his Money of him to distribute it amongst the Mariners, whom he
had resolved to make use of. There remained nothing more, than to take a time
for the Ordination. The Egyptian* Bishops at their arrival, had refused to
communicate with the Arrians, and had united with the Catholics. Gregory had
received them in his house, with much civility and respect. As the entrance of
the Church was free to them at all hours, they came there one night, when this
Prelate was carried sick to a Country House Greg. Naz. Carm. d^ vita sua.
near the City: They began the ceremony of the consecration of Maximus, in
presence of a great number of Mariners, for the most part strangers, who
represented the people. But the day having surprised them, and the Clergy
running up and down, the whole quarter was stirred up; the people assemble, the
Magistrates are called, and Maximus is driven away, with all his accomplices,
who saved themselves in disorder in the house of a certain Flute-master, where
they concluded their Sacrilegious ordination.

The indignity of this action. which was matter of horror to the very
Heretics, gave occasion to enquire after the life of this Impostor. People
began to undeceive themselves of the Martyr he boasted of, and they discovered
the crimes which he had the dexterity to conceal till then: which caused him to
be shamefully banished from the City.

XII. This ill success did not astonish him. After having wandered some time in
Thrace, he went, accompanied with the Bishops who had consecrated him, to find
Theodosius, to prepossess him, if he could, in his favor. But Ascole, to whom
Pope Damasus had often sent concerning the affairs of the Church of
Constantinople, was already advertized of all that had passed, and had informed
the Emperor: Maximus being arrived with his companions, and entreating him to
maintain him by his Authority, this Prince replied with indignation, That he
was informed of his Cabals; That he hated all those who disturbed the peace of
the Church, and hindered the progress of Religion; That he knew how to chastise
him and his Partisans, as they deserved, if they had ever the insolence to
pursue their attempt. They would have justified themselves, but the Emperor
interrupted them, and sent them away, without the trouble of hearing them, or
seeing them any more.

XIII. Whilst Theodosius, who was now in a fair way of Recovery, took so much
care for the advancement of Religion, he got his Army together, and prepared to
take the Field, as soon as he should have regained his strength. The Goths,
upon the information they had received of his sickness by their Deserters, and
the Hostages they had of his train, made a mock of the last Treaty. They were
so far from leaving the territories of the Empire, as they had promised, that
they called in to their assistance some new Troops of Barbarians, and were more
sevese in pillaging than before: Those of their Nation, who had entered in great
numbers into the Emperors pay, secretly advised them of their contributing
toward an easy passage into the Provinces. Terror was dispersed amongst the
people; the Soldiery receiving from the Court but slow, and undetermined
orders, could not tell what to resolve on. Thus all things remained as it were
immovable, by the indisposition of a Prince, who governed only by himself, and
was not at that time in a capacity to act.

Upon the first noise of this renewing of the War, Couriers were suddenly
dispatched to the Emperor Gratian, to give him advice of the danger wherein
Theodosius was; and to solicit him to send with expedition a considerable
relief toward Macedon. Some Officers of the Army, with what Troops they could
assemble, in the mean time opposed the enemies, and disputed the passes with
them. But the number of these Barbarians increasing continually, they made
themselves masters every where. As soon as they had received the succors they
expected, they plundered the frontiers, and threw themselves into Thessaly and
Macedon. Theodosius made his Army march that way, and went there himself, as
soon as his health would permit him. After he had sent to view the enemies,
notwithstanding he was so inferior in number, he advanced with a design to
fight them; but he was prevented, and whatsoever cautions he had taken, he saw
himself on a sudden betrayed by the Goths, whom he had retained in his service.

This Prince, after the conclusion of the Treaty of the preceding year,
considering the weakness of the Empire at that time, and judging that he could
not improve it without the assistance of those very people, who had occasioned
its decay, made it to be proclaimed in their Camps, that he desired to live
with them in good intelligence, and that he would receive all those who would
come into his Armies. These Barbarians came in multitudes to inroll themselves
in the service of the Romans, and had obliged themselves before by execrable
Oaths to take all occasions of doing them harm, in making an appearance of
serving them. Theodosius thought he had engaged them to him by caresses and
liberalities: notwithstanding being afraid lest their number should prevail,
which already exceeded that of his own Troops, he made several detachments of
them. He sent a party into Egypt, under the conduct of Hormisaas, a Persian by
Original, Son of a Captain of that name, who assisted in the War of Julian
against the Persians. He distributed the rest in places, where Zoz. l. 4.
there was a Roman Garrison, with orders to the Governors to observe them. The
War being come unlooked for, those who seemed to be most faithful, were made
choice of, and composed a Body to serve in the Field. These being resolved to
accomplish their Oath, and becoming more affectionate to their Countrymen, as
they approached them, gave them information of all that passed in the Emperors
Army, and promised to join with them, if they would come to assault him by
night in his Camp.

XIV. The Goths, upon this advice, prepared themselves for battle, and began to
march. Theodosius on his side being advertized of their design, entrenched
himself, put his men in order of battle, visited the quarters, particularly
that of the strangers, whom he found more gay and pleasant than the rest, and
more disposed in appearance to defend themselves well; and after having kindled
fires throughout the Camp, and given all necessary orders, he attended the
Enemy. The Night advanced, and the Barbarians taking the advantage of their
number, and dividing themselves into several bodies, whereof each was almost
equal to the whole Army of the Emperor, extended themselves in the Plain in
tolerable order, and came with fearful cries to thunder upon all sides almost at
the same time; but they found every where more resistance than they had
imagined, and were repulsed with great lo^s of theirs. The strength of the
attack fell upon the Emperors Quarter, which they knew either by the signal
that the Traitors had given them, or by the great number of fires, which they
themselves had observed. They hoped to overwhelm this Prince, or at least to
hold him employed there, whilst they laid a snare for him on another side. They
gave several charges, but they lost so many men, that they were at length
disheartened.

XV. Theodosius saw things in this condition, when there arose a great noise
toward the Quarter of the Strangers, which made him apprehend some disorder.
He learnt at the same time, that the Goths of his Army had joined the Enemies,
and that he would be enclosed, if he was not cautious of himself. He detached
immediately some Squadrons to seize upon certain Posts, which might secure his
retreat; and as he knew that a party of the Legions were at handy blows with
these Rebels, he ordered his Cavalry to advance in haste, which sell upon them
so briskly and so opportunely, and withal made so great a slaughter of them,
that there remained but few, who received no Recompense for their Rebellion.
Those that supported them, had well nigh the same Fortune. But at length the
Romans could not make such great efforts without much loss; and the Goths,
whose number continually increased, had forced the Trenches in several places.
Theodosius, before he came to be overwhelmed by the multitude, rallied his
weakened Troops, who began for the most part to give way. He charged himself
with the care of making his Retreat, amusing the Enemies by detachments made on
purpose, turning head from time to time to assault those who pursued him in
disorder, till he had gained the advanced Posts, which his men were possessed
of, and had secured the remains of his Army.

This battle might have proved entirely fatal to the Empire, if the Goths had
known how to reap the advantage of their Victory; but they disbanded themselves
immediately. Those who had fought least, were the sirst that run to plunder;
and those who pursued the Enemy, were afraid of losing their part of the booty,
and returned speedily to the Camp. Thus a retreat was made without much
difficulty. Thessaly and Macedon in the mean time remained exposed to the
insults and pillages of these Barbarians, who ravaged the Country, and left the
Cities undisturbed, because the Emperor had thrown some Troops therein, and
they were in hopes of drawing from thence considerable contributions. After
they had ruined all this Country, as if their Avarice and Revenge had been
satisfied, they began to lament so many brave Soldiers, whom they had lost in
battle, and their Victory appeared to them not so great as before. They found
themselves in small number; and thought the Emperor was every hour at their
backs to assault them.

XVI. In the mean while Theodosius, who was retired toward Thessalonica,
formed a body of Troops sufficient to oppose their progress. He had received in
his way some Recruits. A Party of the Legions of Egypt, which he had sent for,
came to join him, and he was in a condition to take the field again in a few
days, when Rusticus arrived from the Western Provinces, to satisfy him of the
concernment of Gratian, and his whole Court for his indisposition, and their
joy for his recovery. The Journey of this Officer had been tedious, because he
had passed through Italy, and stopped at Rome to receive Baptism. There he had
received new orders, and came with Letters from Pope Damasus, and the Emperor
Gratian. The first wrote to Theodosius, to thank him for the protection he gave
the Catholics, and to beg of him to establish in the Church of Constantinople
an Orthodox Bishop, with whom might be preserved Peace and Communion. The
second gave him advice, that he sent him a considerable assistance; that he
would have conducted them himself, if the affairs of the Empire would have
suffered him; but that he had picked out his choicest Troops, and his best
Captains to command them; that they were upon March, and had orders to repair
with speed to the confines of the two Empires, where they might know the course
they were to take.

Theodosius was wonderfully pleased to learn this news; and a little while
after, he was informed, that the Auxillary Troops were arrived upon the
Frontires of Illyrium. Baudon and Arbogastes, Frenchmen by birth, Captains of
great Reputation, very affectionate to the Romans, and very skilful in the
profession of War, who were the chief of this expedition, sent two of their
principal Officers to Court, to know what they were to do. The Emperor
dispatched to them forthwith Persons of credit and intelligence, to acquaint
them with the posture of affairs, and to get them to approach toward Macedon,
where he was resolved to come and join them. Upon which these two Generals
advanced by great journeys, and happily fell upon some Parties of the Enemy,
whom they cut in pieces. Theodosius at the same time began his March.

XVII. Then there arose a consternation in the Army of the Barbarians, who
believed that they were going to be overwhelmed, and that all the Forces of the
East and West were united in order to fall upon them. The presence of the
Emperor, the approach of two great Captains, the defeat of some of their Party,
all astonished them. They assembled together, and fearing to be surprised in
Thessaly, and Macedon, where two Armies came to thunder upon them, they fled
into Thrace. But being unable to subsist there by reason of the destruction
they had made the preceding years, and not questioning but they should be
pursued, they sent Deputies to Theodosius, humbly to sue for Peace.

XVIII. Albeit they were as yet in a state of fighting, they consented to be
treated as if subdued; and offered to retire into their own Country, or to
serve the Empire; promising to accomplish faithfully all the conditions that
should be laid upon them. The affair was put under deliberation. Baudon and
Arbogastes, who were near the Emperor, advised the extirpation of these
Barbarians, and represented to him that they were irreconcilable Enemies to
the Empire; that they sued for Peace, only when they were incapable of making
War; that the Danube was a Barrier, which they had accustomed themselves to
leap over; that their past infidelity ought to serve as a caution for the
future, and that it was for his repose, and that of the State, to destroy a
Nation always disturbing to the Emperors, whether in serving them, or making
war against them.

Others sustained on the contrary, that it was better to prefer a certain Peace
before an uncertain Victory; that it was not humane to reject the submissions
of the Enemy, nor safe to expose themselves to their despair; that they would
be more quiet on the other side of the Danube, when they should be forced to
repass it; that it was not Policy in the present Conjunctures to neglect the
service of this Nation, and that it would be an easy matter to be cautious of
their Treasons. In a word, that the Empire was a Body grown feeble by the long
Wars, and could not possibly recover itself, but by Intervals of Peace.

XIX. Theodosius praised the resolution of the first, and followed the counsel
of the second. He granted the Barbarians a Peace. The Conditions were, that
they should lay down their Arms, and swear never to resume them up against the
Empire; that they should send the Chief of their Captains in Hostage; that they
should immediately leave the Provinces of the Empire, whose Frontiers they
should defend against other People; that they should furnish out a certain
number of chosen Troops, to be distributed into all the Bodies of the Roman
Army; and that the Emperor should also protect them, and look upon them as his
Friends, and his Allies. The Goths accepted these Conditions, and began to
execute the Treaty in reality.

XX. In the mean time, the Ordinance of Theodosius in favor of the Catholic
Faith, had been published in Constantinople, where it had produced very
different effects. Those who professed the Faith of Nice, took courage, and
united themselves* more strictly with Gregory of Nazianzum, whom they regarded
as their Pastor. They run in greater throngs to his Sermons, and urged him
often to make use of the Authority of the Prince, and to demand of the Arrians,
the Churches which they had usurped: But as the Edict did not expressly bear
this restitution, and that it was not yet time to touch that Point, the Saint
moderated their Zeal, and exhorted them to attend the Emperor's conclusion of
what he had begun.

The greatest part of the Officers and Magistrates of the City, who favored
the Heretics before, were of opinion that they ought to accommodate themselves
to the time, and respect the Religion of the Prince. But the Arrians proclaimed
their resentments in every Encounter. The news of the Baptism of Theodosius had
much alarmed them. They gloried in the honor of baptizing the Emperors of the
East till now; and as i^ it had been a right of Prescription for the time to
come, they complained that Ascole had administered this Sacrament to Theodosius,
which Eusebius of Nicomedia had administered to Constantine the Great, Euzoius
of Antioch to Constantius, and Endoxius of Constantinople to Valens. They well
foresaw the consequences of this Action.

But afterward when they heard published a Law, which disgraced them and
condemned them, they were like furious persons; they complained highly that
they were dishonored without a cause, and fell upon Gregory of Nazianzum, who
without making use of the advantages of the time, and the protection of the
Prince, opposed to their Violences nothing but Remonstrances and Prayers. They
proceeded to that excess of fury, that they massacred at Noonday a reverend
old Man, who was just returned from Exile, where he had been sent under the
Reign of Valens for the defense of the Faith. After which they observed no
Bounds, abusing the Catholics, to deprive them of all hopes of being restored,
and rising up against the Magistrates, to terrify the Emperor; and to make him
fear a general Revolt, if he undertook to ruin a Party which his Predecessors
had so firmly established.

XXI. Theodosius was informed of these disorders, and wisely dissembled, till
he was in a condition to rectify them. He pressed the Barbarians to execute the
Treaty, and to repass the Danube, which they performed in a little time. Then
he disbanded the Auxiliaries, after having distributed Rewards to the Officers
and Soldiers, as if they had fought. He gave so many marks of esteem and good
will to the two Generals, that they returned with the sole regret of not
finding an opportunity to expose their lives (...) ^im. At the same time he
sent an Embassy (...) ^he Emperor Gratian, to give him an account of the
affairs of the East, and to render him thanks for the cares he had taken
toward his assistance in this War, and to help him to preserve that Empire,
which he had so generously given him.

All things being thus composed, this Prince gave orders for the fortifying of
the Frontier places, gave Quarters of refreshment to his Army, wherein he
incorporated those chosen Troops, which the Goths had furnished him with; and
after he had secured the adjacent Provinces from the insults of the Enemy, he
took the Road of Constantinople. As he foresaw he should have to do with
obstinate, and seditious Spirits, he thought it proper to march with a part of
his Troops, and upon the twenty fourth day of November he was received in Idat.
Marcell. Com. in Chron. Chron. Sozom. l. 5. Sozom. l. 4.
his Imperial City, where they had prepared for him not only a Magnificent
entrance, as for a new Emperor, but also a Triumph, as Conqueror of the
Barbarians, Some days passed in the reception of the different bodies of the
City, who came to salute him, and in giving those pressing orders, which are
necessary in all new establishments.

XXII. As the affair of Religion was the most considerable, and ought perhaps
to be regulated one of the first, it was expected what the Success would be.
The two Parties, as it happens for the most part in divisions, observing all
the motions of the Prince, to draw from thence conjectures upon their
Interests. The Arrians seeing him appear with so much grandeur, whose Laws they
had despised, expected to be used as they deserved. Although they were afraid to
come near him, yet they could not dispense themselves from* going to see him,
because they composed the Body of the Clergy, and besides it was of importance
to them to discover what was suspected to have been resolved against them. The
Emperor received them with honor, and without being willing to enter into any
discussion of Religion, answered to their Civilities, as he had done to those
of others.

The Catholics, who were desirous to see them humbled, were offended at the
good entertainment they had received. Although they were assured of the good
intentions of Theodosius, they questioned his having the force to execute them.
They affirmed openly, that he had made no distinction Greg. Naz: Carm. de vita
sua.
between Catholics and Arrians; that he encouraged the Heretics in sparing
them; that the present mischiefs of the Church could not be cured, but by
violent applications; that it was strange, that wicked Emperors should be so
fervent in maintaining Impiety, and that the good should be so slow and
circumspect in keeping up the truth. Greg. Naz. ibid.
Gregory of Nazianzum himself complained of this conduct; but he was convinced
at length that this Prince managed himself very prudently, because in matter of
Faith, sweetness and complaisance is the most effectual means to bring over the
minds of People, and that the business of Religion is to persuade, and not to
command.

XXIII. Theodosius, without seeming much concerned at these Controversies,
stayed for a convenient time to execute his design. He judged that to
re-establish the Orthodox Faith, it was most proper to begin with
Constantinople, which was the common place of the East and West and as it were
the Center, where the extremities of the world reunite, and from whence the
Faith would afterward easily communicate itself to all the parts of the
Empire. But the Enterprise was not without difficulty. This City had been
founded by a Catholic Emperor, and instructed in the Faith by two of the holy
Bishops of that Age. It had not long enjoyed the fruits of the Peace, which
that Prince had there maintained, nor of the instructions which those Prelates
had given there. The Emperors being turned Arrians at the solicitation of their
Pastors who were already so, and the temporal Authority uniting with the
spiritual for the destroying of the Faith, there happened in a little time a
wonderful Revolution. The Clergy followed the Doctrine of the Archbishops, the
Court framing itself to the Religion of the Prince, and the People was drawn by
the example of both. Those who persisted in the ancient Faith were contented to
bewail in private, or else were dispersed by the Persecutions.

During these Troubles, diverse Sects were established in this Capital of the
Empire, where every Novelty found always Partisans. The Macedonians there made
a Body, and a separate Communion. The Apollinarists held their Assemblies
Socrat. l. 5. c. 8. Greg. Naz. Orat. 44. Sozom. l. 4. c. 25. Ruffin. l. 1. c.
23.
there in peace* The Novatians had public Churches there. The Catholics alone
had neither the means nor liberty to assemble. They made from time to time some
endeavors to raise themselves, but they were immediately oppressed. This
oppression had continued for the space of 40 years, when Gregory of Nazianzum
was sent thither. As ^e Greg. carm. l. p. 511.
was under the protection of Theodosius, whose Rescript he carried, they durst
not persecute him* but not being able to obtain a Church for him and his, he
made in the house of Nicobulus, hi^ Kinsman, and his Friend, a Chapel which he
called the Anastasy, or Resurrection, because 'twas there the Catholic Faith,
which was as it were Orat. 26.
dead in Constantinople, had happily begun to revive.

The cares and labors of this Apostolical Man had pretty well succeeded, and
the number of the Faithful was considerably increased; but yet compared to the
Arrians, they made but a small Body, and all the Church they had was the
Anastasy. Demophilis, who had heretofore signalized himself by the persecution
which he had made to Pope Liberius, and by the zeal which he testified for the
Party; had been translated from the Sea of Ber^haea, to that of Constantinople.
Valens had established him therein, and for about ten years he had governed
this Church, encouraging his People to the defense of Heresy; and making the
hatred he showed for the Catholics, to be a point of godliness.

XXIV. Theodosius, after he had sedulously instructed himself in all these
things, judged it high time to make himself appear. He went in Ceremony,
accompanied with all his Court, to the Anastasy, where all the Catholics being
assembled, received him with extraordinary Joy and Acclamations. Gregory
advancing to salute him, the Greg. Naz. Carm. de vita sua.
Emperor embraced him with much tenderness, and publicly commended his Piety,
his Prudence, and his indefatigable Zeal for the re-establishment of Religion;
then turning toward the People, he exhorted them to persist in the Faith, and
assured them of his protection. He assisted at the Celebration of the Divine
Mysteries; and when they were concluded, he had a pretty long Conference with
the Bishop. He discovered to him the design he had to use his Authority against
the Arrians, and to restore the Catholics to their ancient Rights.

This Saint reports, that he spoke to him in these terms, or to the like
effect: God makes use of us, my Father, to establish you in this Church. It Is a
Reward that is due to your Virtue, and your Labors. The whole City is
disordered, and pretends either to contradict Greg. Naz. ibid.
my Orders, or to make me consent to leave it in its possession. But nothing
ought to discourage a Prince that sustains so pious a Cause. The undertaking
appears impossible to many, till such time as I shall have performed it. I go
to work with the assistance of Heaven. I cannot make a better use of my power,
than to employ it in the service of God, from whom I hold it, nor do any thing
of greater advantage for one of the principal Churches of the world, than to
prefer to it such a Pastor as you.

Gregory replied to the Emperor, That the resolution which he had taken to
maintain Religion, was worthy of him; that all good Men had expected to be
happy under his Reign; that he was unquestionably designed to repair the faults
of his Predecessors; that God would bless his Intentions, since he had none but
just ones; and that after having fixed the Empire in peace, there remained no
more than to fix the Church likewise therein.

As to the honor Theodosius would do him, he returned him thanks in terms full
of acknowledgment and humility, representing to him, That he demanded no other
recompense for his services, if he had been happy enough to render any to the
Church, than to be sent back to his solitude of Arianze, from whence he had
been drawn; that he was not fit for the society of the Grandees of the Age;
that whatsoever affection he entertained for his Flock, he would from
henceforth abandon it without trouble, since he left it under the protection of
so pious an Emperor; that he entreated so much the more instantly the
permission of retiring, Socrat. l. 5, 6, 7.
because he was regarded by some as a stranger, who came to seize upon the
Episcopal See of Constantinople. But notwithstanding all his Reasons, he could
not obtain his Conge, and was not so much as heard upon this Point.

XXV. Theodosius being returned to his Palace, and knowing the perplexity
wherein the Arrians were, sent the same day to demand of Demophilus their
Bishop, if he would embrace the Faith of Socrat. ib. Sozom. l. 7. c. 4.
Nice, and reunite the People in one Body. This Heretic answered, that he
could not change his opinion, nor consent to an accommodation. Then the Prince
commanded him, that since he refused to side with the truth, and that he
persisted in his inclination to harbor a division in the Metropolis of the
Empire, to abandon without delay all the Churches of the City, and to restore
them to the Catholics, as they had enjoyed them under the Reign of Constantine
the Great. Demophilus astonished at a Command so rough, and unexpected, was
some time incapable of speaking; and returned at last no other Answer, than
that he would acquaint the People with the Emperor's pleasure.

In the mean time he was thinking how to elude this Order, either by artificial
Requests, or by affected delays, or else by an open Rebellion. But having
considered the difficulty of resisting Power, and imposing upon an enlightened
Prince, that was resolved not to relax upon this Point, he assembled the People
in the Church, and rising up in the midst of them, exposed to them the Command
he had received. After which he said to them, that being unwilling to subscribe
to the decisions of the Council of Nice, and unable to oppose the Authority of
the Emperor, he was reduced to follow Matthew. 10.
this Precept of the Gospel, When they shall persecute you in one City, fly
into another; that thus yielding to necessity, he would hold his Assembly the
next day without the City. He departed in effect the same day with Lucius the
false Patriarch of Alexandria, who had retired to his house for some time.

XXVI. The Heretics were so affected at the words of Demophilus, that they put
the whole City in emotion. Some taking up Arms ran to the Churches in order to
seize upon them; others went in a tumult to the gate of the Palace, to implore
the Emperors mercy; some of them invested the Anastacy, and threatened to
revenge the retreat of their associates upon the Bishop of the Catholics. The
places and the streets were full of women, children, and old men bathed in
tears. There Greg. Naz. Carm. devi^a sua.
was heard from all parts nothing but cries, and lamentations; and there was
seen in Constantinople the image of a City taken by assault. Theodosius, who
foresaw this disorder, had sent Soldiers in the principal Quarters, to disperse
the Mutineers that assembled there, and particularly to possess themselves of
the Cathedral Church, and to seize upon all the Avenues.

There remained nothing more, but to install Gregory of Nazianzum, and he would
be present at this action. He went to take him in the Anastacy, and carried him
himself, as it were in triumph, in the midst of his Guards to the Church, where
a thanksgiving was solemnly rendered to God. The prayers being ended* the
greatest part of the People lifting up their Voices, wished a thousand
blessings to the Emperor, and entreated him, as a complement of favors, to
give them Gregory for their Bishop. The Saint suffering impatiently the heat,
which transported them, and being unable to make himself heard by reason of his
weakness, prayed him that was seated near him, to speak to them from him, that
they should cease to cry so; that they were assembled to adore the Trinity, and
not to choose a Bishop; and that upon a day so happy as that, their only
business was to praise and glorify God.

The People received this correction with respect, and testified by their
applauses how much they were affected with the modesty of this Prelate. The
Emperor himself gave him great commendations, and put him in possession not
only of the Churches, but also of the Episcopal House, and all the
Ecclesiastical Revenues. Thus this grand affair was determined, by the cares
and resolution of Theodosius. As he had very expressly Greg. Naz. ib.
commanded the Officers of his Troops to hinder Sedition without committing any
Violence; all this tumult was appeased with so much order, that, there was but
one single Sword drawn against some of the most zealous Arrians. It was an
extreme joy to the Emperor, to have dispossessed the Heretics, without the
price of any of their blood, of those Churches which they had procured by the
death of so many venerable Persons.

Whilst he thus weakened in the East the Arrians Party, he learnt with pleasure,
that the Empress Justine, Mother of the young Valentinian, vainly endeavored to
establish them at Milan; that the Sea of Sirmium being vacant, she had made a
Journey thither on purpose to install a Bishop of her Sect; but that Saint
Ambrose, whose place it was to preside at this Election, had diverted the
stroke; that Gratian being importuned by the solicitations of this Princess,
had granted her a Church of the Catholics, but that after having known the
consequence of the gift he had made, he restored it to St. Ambrose, in whose
right alone was the disposal of it, and that there was reason to hope, that
this Heresy would lose much of its Credit and Pride.

XXVII. After that* Theodosius had so happily executed what he undertook for
the re-establishment of Religion he carefully applied himself to the affairs of
the Empire. He began by regulations of the Soldiery. He created several
Lieutenant Zoz. l. 4.
Generals, to whom he allowed great Pensions; he augmented the number of the
Officers in Companies, knowing that there is nothing of more force to Armies,
and contributes more to discipline. He made great presents to the Captains of
the Barbarians who had served him, and forgot nothing that might win them to
his service, giving to some employments which fixed them near his Person,
marrying others of them into the richest Families of Court or City, and
disengaging them thus from the Interest of their Country.

This Policy preserved him from the Ambuscades, which Eriulphus and Fravitas,
two of the chief Captains of the Goths, prepared for him. Whether they had been
chosen for Hostages, or had commanded that body of Troops which their Nation
provided, or else had voluntarily enrolled themseves in the Emperor's service,
they were come with a design to take their opportunity, and encourage their men
to a revolt. The Emperor retained them in his Court, and loaded them with
Riches and Honors. Fravitas becoming amorous of a Roman Lady, he made her
espouse him, and Eynap. Legate. Zoz. l. 4.
engaged him so well to the Empire's Party by this marriage, and by his favors,
that he since served with an exact fidelity in all its Wars, and deserved at
length to be advanced to the Consulship under the reign of Arcadius.

XXVIII. This Captain forgetting his former resolutions, and applying himself
by gratitude to the service of Theodosius, endeavored to win over Eriulphus,
and represented to him several times that it was for his Interest and Honor to
give himself up entirely to a Prince, of whom he had received so many Favors,
and might still expect more. But Eriulphus, who had conceived an irreconcilable
hatred against the Emperor, persisted always in his design, and defended
himself upon what he was obliged by Oath. There arose betwixt them upon this
occasion a great controversy, which remained a long time concealed. Fravitas,
hoping that Eriulphus would render himself at length, and judging that it was
not safe to defer it; moreover seeing that he was not in a condition yet to do
any harm, was contented to observe him, in order to break his measures.

But the affair broke out all of a sudden; for one day having been invited to
one of those entertainments, Aurel. Victor. Theod.
more decent than sumptuous, which the Emperor made from time to time for his
Courtiers, the Wine made a discovery of what had passed. They both grew hot,
and mutually reproached one another with perfidiousness. The respect of the
Prince was an obstacle to their further proceeding. But Eriulphus going out to
animate his men, Fravitas pursued him forthwith in order to prevent him, and
having joined him pretty near the Palace, passed his Sword through his body,
and killed him. It was not difficult for him to prove the ill intentions of the
dead, because he knew his accomplices; and he since justified his fidelity
through the whole conduct of his life.

Theodosius was no less careful to regulate the government of the Empire. He
made choice of qualified persons for the Magistrates; and recommended to them
Probity and Justice; he made Laws, and made them to be observed. He resolved to
abolish Paganism, as much as Prudence would permit him, not by persecutions,
but by deprivations of favors, excluding those from Dignities, who made
profession thereof; and punishing severely what they attempted against
Religion, and the State.

XXIX. The Historian Zozimus takes an occasion from hence to cry down his
Government, accusing him of having minded his pleasures more than the
necessities of the people; of having kept a Table of too much delicacy and
magnificence, and too great a number of Officers to serve him; of suffering
himself to be governed by his Favorites ^oz. l. 4.
in the distribution of Charges; of having sold the Offices, and raised new
Subsidies to maintain his indiscreet diversions and liberalities, which had
been without doubt worthy of blame.

But besides the suspicion one ought to have of an Historian that is visibly
interessed, who supports what he affirms by no particular action, it would be
unjust to prefer the testimony of one single man, before that of many
Ecclesiastical and Pagan Authors, who have praised the Continence, Frugality
and Moderation of this Emperor, although the one had no reason to conceal his
faults, and the others were not used to flatter him. His inclination for Peace,
his zeal for the Christian Religion, the deference he had for the Bishops, and
the necessity wherein he undoubtedly found himself to raise some Imposts in the
beginning of his Reign in order to carry on the War against the Barbarians,
might serve as a foundation for what this Author has observed. But it is time
to resume the course of the History.

XXX. The Arrians had been shook by the loss which they had sustained of their
Churches, but they were not yet pulled down. Demophilus remained about
Constantinople, and those of his Sect acknowledged him still for Bishop of that
Imperial City, and went to confer with him, and to confirm themselves in their
error. Some of them, who imputed the whole cause of their disgrace to the
hatred which Gregory of Nazianzum bore to them, were resolved to get rid of
him. They gained a young Man of a seditious and undertaking temper, who agreed
to murder him in his Episcopal house. It was not hard to get near him at a time
when People came in multitudes to congratulate him upon the happy success of
the affairs of Religion. This Murderer having mixed himself in a crowd of
Citizens, was introduced with them into the Chamber of this Prelat, where his
indisposition and weariness retained him in Bed. The Company rejoiced with him
for the new acquisition of the Churches, and after a thousand testimonies of
affection and respect, retired, praising God aloud for having given them so
wise and virtuous a Pastor.

XXXI. The Assassin remained alone, and being terrified of a sudden with the
image of that Crime he was upon the point to execute, and pressed with the
remorse of his Conscience, he cast himself at the feet of Gregory to implore
his mercy. Fear had put him to such a stand, that he continued in that posture
without saying a single word. The Saint being surprised at so unexpected a
sight, leaned on one side to raise him up, and asked him several times who he
was, and what he desired of him: but having received for answer nothing but a
few inarticulate words, and abrupt cries and sighs, he was moved to compassion,
and began to cry with him. His Domestics run at the noise, and being unable to
oblige this Wretch Greg. Niz. ^^^m. de (...) ^u^.
to go from thence, carried him by force into the Antichamber, where being come
to himself a little, he confessed the design he had, lifting up his hands to
Heaven, and showing all the marks of a profound grief. They brought him before
the Archbishop, to whom one of them came to tell him in a Consternation, Learn,
my Lord, the danger you have incurred. This young Man, whom you behold, is an
Assassin, who came with an intention to murder you. God has moved him, he has
confessed his Crime, and the Tears which he sheds before you, is an Argument of
his hearty Repentance. Gregory made the Murderer approach, and embracing him
with much tenderness, God preserve you, my Son, said he to him; since he has
saved my life to day, it is but just that I should save yours also. All the
satisfaction I demand of you is, that you would renounce your heresy, and think
upon your salvation. This Action was admired by his very Enemies. He would
never make use of his credit with the Emperor against them, but for what
related to the Church in general.

XXXII. Although he had hindered the search after Theodosius knowing the malice of
these Heretics, resolved to curb them with new Ordinances. He made an Edict
which forbid all his Subjects to give any Retreat to the Heretics, in order to
the celebration of their Mysteries; nor to suffer them to hold their Assemblies
in public, Leg. 6. de h^ret. Cod. Theod.
lest their permission to exercise their false Religion, should cause them to
persist obstinately therein. He annulled all Edicts of a contrary nature* which
might have been obtained by surprise. He ordained that through his whole Empire,
according to the Faith of the holy Council of Nice, there should be
acknowledged one indivisible substance in the Trinity; that they should abhor
the Photinians, Arrians, Eunomians, and such like Monsters, whose Names ought
not even to be known; that they should abandon all the Churches, and put them
immediately into the hands of the Catholic Bishops; and that if they made the
least difficulty of obeying, they should* be expelled the Cities, and treated
as Rebels. This Edict was published at Constantinople upon the 10th day of
January, and Theodor. l. l. 5. c. 22*
Sapor had Orders to go and see it performed in the Provinces.

XXXIII. Theodosius labored thus to tame the Pride of the Enemies of Religion,
when by an unlookt for Revolution he saw at his Feet one of the most formidable
Enemies of the Empire. Athanaric King of the Ostrogoths sent to obtain his
protection, and a retreat into his Dominions. He was a Prince of a fierce
temper, brought up in Arms from his Infancy, who had been often chafed out of
his Territories, and had immediately subdued others. He had joined himself with
Procopius, in order to divest Valens of his Crown. He sustained against him a
terrible War for three years, and*obliged him to purchase a Peace. When they
came to conclude and sign the Treaty, he refused to pass the Danube, saying,
That he had made an Oath never to set foot upon the Roman Ground, till Ammian.
l. 27.
he had conquered it. Notwithstanding all that was represented to him
concerning the Grandeur and Majesty of the Empire, he would have no interview,
unlefs the Emperor treated him as an Equal, and came as far as he upon a Bridge
of Boats* which was to be made upon the River for that purpose.

Valens, whom other pressing Affairs called another way, underwent this hard
condition; but he lost no occasion after that to be revenged upon Athanaric,
assisting those who were at War with him, and refusing him all manner of
Relief. The inundation of the Huns being come, this King, who was one of the
first oppressed, yet would not have recourse to the Emperor in this extremity
with the rest, whether he persisted in his design to have no Correspondence
with the Emperor, or that he assured himself of being refused. He betook
himself to the quarters of the Sarmats and Taifals, where he fixed himself with
a Party of his Subjects by force of Arms. He remained there peaceably without
being willing to enter into the Wars of his Nation, because he was not as yet
well settled in the Country, and could not agree with King Fritigern, who
commanded the Visigoths, and the confederate Barbarians*

XXXIV. He had learnt with joy the death of Valens; and the Reputation of
Theodosius had begun to render him less incensed against the Romans, when of a
sudden he fell into a misfortune, which he could not recover. After the defeat
of Valens, the Barbarians, who were no longer to be retained under any fear,
lived without order, and without discipline. As it was a difficult matter to
rule under the same Laws this heap of so many different People, Fritigern on
one side assembled a part of his Goths; Alatheus and Safrax on the other
rallied their Grotungues, and uniting their Affections and Interests, after
having made a prodigious Booty, they detached themselves from the multitude,
and marched toward the West. Vitalian, who had been sent to command in
Illyrium, had not the courage to fight them. They posted themselves between the
Rhine and the Danube, and after having forced all that opposed their passage,
they advanced toward the Rhine, and made Incursions as far as Gaul.

Zoz. ibid.
Gratian was disturbed at it; and to remove from him such dangerous Enemies, he
offered to them some Lands in Pannonia, and the Upper Mysia, if they would
retire there. They took it some time into consideration, and judging that from
thence they might make a greater Progress upon one or t*other Empire, they
accepted the Condition. They passed the Danube with a design to establish
themselves in Pannonia, then to enter into Epirus, and to make themselves
Masters of Greece. In this thought they collected vast Provisions, and to leave
behind them no Prince that might afford them any suspicion, they fell upon
Athanaric, because he refused to join them, and caused a jealousy upon the
account of their ancient enmities. They won part of his Subjects, terrified the
rest, and chased the King himself out of his Dominions.

XXXV. This Prince reduced to this extremity had recourse to Theodosius, whose
generosity was not unknown to him. He sent to him immediately one of his
Captains to desire his Protection, and to tell him, That although he had not
deserved this Favor, he had been informed that to be unhappy sufficed to obtain
a favorable reception from him; that it would not be less honorable for him
to have assisted the Goths upon occasion, than to have conquered them; that it
concerned those who were Masters of the World, not to suffer the Prerogatives
of Royalty to be infringed; that those who had chased him from his Dominions,
had other designs than that of oppressing such a King as he; that he had
rejected the counsels of those stirring spirits, to whom he was become odious,
by this only consideration, that he might be an Obstacle to their Pretensions,
and so he was become unfortunate, because time had made him wise; that indeed,
through Pride, or Prevention, he had been formerly averse to the Empire, but that
he could not be so, when he saw it governed by an Emper^r as just as he is
powerful; that he had entertained the boldness of pretending to be equal to
others, but would think it glorious to live as his Subject in any corner of his
Territories, if he would be pleased to receive him.

XXXVI. Theodosius favorably received the Request of Athanaric; and as well to
satisfy himself, as to attract other Princes by the good entertainment he
should make to this, he sent him word, That he sympathized with his Misfortune;
that he accounted as a great happiness the opportunity he had to protect him;
that the Empire, as long as he was Master of it, should be always open to such
Kings as he, who desired to live in his friendship; that whilst he could
restore him to his Kingdom, he prayed him to repair to Constantinople, and to
take no other Court for his Retreat; that he should be honored there, as much
a^ he could be in his own; and that he would endeavor by all manner of
delightful Treatments to comfort him, and make him forget that he was out of
^his own Dominions. He sent to receive him upon the Frontier, with Orders to
all Governors in his way to give him the same Respect upon such occasions; that
they were accustomed to give Emperors.

Athanaric, surprised at all these Civilities, was persuaded to go to Court
with most part of the Officers, who had attended him in his disgrace. The
Honors which he received in every place, seemed but little agreeable to his
present Fortune; but he did not cease to be sensibly touched thereat. Zo^. l. 4.
Theodosius prepared for him a magnificent entrance into Constantinople; and
although he was but just recovered of an Indisposition, which had almost reduced
him to extremity, he went himself a good distance from the City to meet him,
and received him with an extraordinary goodness and generosity. He lodged him
in his own Palace, and ordered his Domestics to serve him with so much Order
Jornanl.
and Grandeur, that the King cried out several times in a profound Admiration,
That the Emperor was a God upon Earth, and that no mortal Man, if he had but a
grain of Reason left, durst set upon him.

XXXVII. He was not less amazed, when ^e went to view the most considerable
places of Constantinople, where Theodosius himself conducted him in the midst
of all his Court. This City, by its Grandeur, by its Situation, and by its
Riches, deserved to be the Imperial Seat. Constantine had built it about 70
years before, and had fixed himself there, whether it was in order to retain
more conveniently from thence the barbarous Nations, who disturbed the Peace of
the East; or to leave behind him an eternal Monument of his greatness; or else
to give Rome a Jealousy, with which City he was not very well pleased, as well
by reason of the Liberty the Senate preserved there, as upon the account of the
Idolatry which reigned there still, therefore he called it New Rome. As it is
an usual thing to mix something of Mystery in the original of Cities and
States, to render them the more illustrious, it was believed that this Emperor
had undertaken so great a design, by a secret order from Heaven. They
published, that as he laid the foundations of a City near the ancient Ilium, an
Eagle carried away the Workmens line, and let Zonar. Niceph. l. 3. c. 4.
it fall near Byzantium, to mark out the place h^ was to pitch upon; and that
since, measuring the Circuit ^e intended for the Walls, he had been visibly
conducted by an Angel; together with many other such like Prodigies.

Be it as it will, Constantine having finished this City, which he loved as his
own work, spared nothing for its ornament and grandeur. He built therein a
Capital, a Cirque, an Amphitheater, Squares, Piazza's, and other public
Edifices, in imitation of those at Rome. He took from the noblest Cities of the
East what was most valuable and curious for the embelishment of this. He
ordered the Remains of the entire works of the Kings of Egypt to be brought
thither; above all the Obelisk of Thebes, which was not conveyed without
abundance of difficulty. He composed a Senate after that of Rome. He drew from
all parts of the World, Men excellent in Sciences and Arts, for whom he had
erected Colleges and particular Houses in diverse quarters, and assigned them
considerable Pensions. He appointed Funds for the subsistence of the Citizens,
and the maintenance of the Buildings. He founded Churches and Academies, and
perfected the design he had to make a City equal, and even superior to the
ancient Rome.

The other Emperors had not been less careful toward the beautifying of
Constantinople. Constantius, besides the famous Temple of St. Sophia, in which
he had enclosed the Basilick of Peace, and set up likewise terms which
expressed his Name, and Porches enriched with Pillars, and Figures of Marble.
Vatens, from the Ruins of Calcedon, had made Baths, and an Aqueduct, where all
the Springs of the Mountains round about being collected, after having composed
a kind of a River, dispersed themselves through the City, or into private Houses,
or into public Ponds or Fountains, which furnished water in abundance for all
parts. The Civil Magistrates, to please the Emperors, had applied themselves to
keep the Citizens in order, and the public Structures in their beauty; and the
ver^ People, being thus maintained in their Privileges, and enriched by
Commerce, did not a little contribute, by reason of its neatness, and their
frequent rejoicings, toward the giving an Air of grandeur and politeness to
this Imperial City.

Athanaric admired all these things. He could not sufficiently behold the Port
filled with Vessels from all the Nations of the World, and that affluence of
People retained by the convenience of the abode, or drawn thither by the
relation the Provinces have to the Court. The Captains of the Goths, who
followed him, and were only accustomed to the course stateliness of their
Barbarian Court, conceived a great Idea of the Empire, and especially of the
Emperor, who made them observe all that was curious with an extreme Themist.
Orat. 6.
Civility, and exposed to them his very designs of augmenting and adorning the
City, which he performed some years after with a magnificence, which surpassed
that of his Predecessors.

XXXVIII. Athanaric began to lose the remembrance of his misfortunes, and there
was reason to hope that he might embrace the Christian Religion, which he had
heretofore cruelly persecuted. But as in an advanced Age his Passions were yet
lively, the grief which his misfortune had occasioned him having already
weakened him, the joy of seeing himself so honorably treated seized upon him,
and made such an impression upon his vitals, that he fell sick, and dyed 15
days after his arrival at Constantinople. The Emperor, who had rendered him all
the offices of a good Friend, was much afflicted at his death; because he loved
him, and was in hopes to have made use of him one day to reduce the whole
Nation to a firm and constant alliance with the Empire. He caused him Ammian.
l. 27. Zoz. l. 4.
to be magnificently in^erred, according to the ancient Ceremonies of the
Pagans, and erected upon his Grave so rich and stately a Monument that the
Barbarians and Romans were equally astonished at it.

XXXIX. This goodness of Theodosius had a greater influence than he could
expect upon the minds of the Goths. For besides that Athanaric, before he died,
called about his Bed all the Captains that had attended him, and had
recommended to them the obligations they were under to preserve an inviolable
Fidelity to the Emperor during the whole course of their Lives, and to publish
in their own Country, when they should return thither, all the Favors which
they had received; they were themselves extremely affected with the Civilities
of the Romans. Theodosius offered to them very honorable Posts in his Armies;
but they excused themselves, saying, That they would be never the less united
to him, and that they went to serve him with more advantage in their own
Country; which they executed afterward, by guarding the passages of the
Danube, and hindering the Romans from being assaulted on their side. Thus the
Sweetness of Princes oftentimes produces greater Effects than their Power, and
the People, who are won by kindness, are usually more firm in their Duty, than
those who are conquered by Arms.

XL. After so happy a Success, Theodosius seeing that the Laws he had made in
favor of Religion, had stopped the disorders, but not reunited men's spirits,
resolved to call together an Universal Council, after the example of
Constantine the Great, whose Piety he made a Glory in following. From his
coming to the Empire, he had entertained Theod. l. 5. c. 8.
this thought, because he judged that it was the most secure, and ready means to
determine with sweetness, as he desired, the Ecclesiastical differences. But
for the execution of it, he had staid till it war fixed in Peace, and to render
this Assembly more authentic, he had projected to hold it in the Capital of
his Empire. He would be there himself, in order to dispose all Parties to an
agreement, and to maintain by his Authority what should be decided by the
consent of the Fathers. As soon as he put the Catholics in possession of the
Churches of Constantinople, he thought that the Council might assemble there,
with less trouble, and more dignity. He wrote then to all the Bishops of the
East, to invite them to come to this Imperial City, in order to confirm the
Faith of Nice, to establish a Bishop therein, and to constitute necessary Laws
toward the strengthening of the Peace of the Church, and the Reunion of his
Subjects upon the points of Religion.

XLI. Of all the Heretics he called to the Council none but the Macedonians,
because they were Socrat l. 5. c. 8. Greg. Naz. Orat. 44.
regular in their manners, distinct from the Arians; and although they composed a
body, and communion apart, yet they were looked upon as Friends to the
Catholics, and as men indifferently disposed to return into the bosom of the
Church. These reasons had made the Emperor believe, that it was no hard matter
to reduce them. They came to the number of Thirty six, the most part Bishops of
the Hellespont, the chief of which were Eleusius Bishop of Cizycus, and Marcian
Bishop of Lampsacus. This Prince exhorted them himself to acknowledge their
fault, and represented to them that it was time to return to the Faith, and
Communion of the Church; that they were engaged to it in the deputation they
had formerly sent to Pope Liberius; and that a little time before, they made no
scruple of communicating with the Socrat. ib. Sozom. l. 7. ^. 7.
Catholics. But they obstinately replied, that they had rather be reconciled and
united with the Arrians, than the Orthodox Men. This answer obliged the Emperor
to chase them away, as unworthy of the condescension he had had for them.

XLII. All orders were given for the subsistence, and lodging of the Bishops;
and Theodosius was no less magnificent in relation to this Council, that
Constantine had been to that of Nice. The Bishops came from all parts of the
East in haste, and arrived at Constantinople to the number of a Hundred and
fifty, in the time that had been prescribed them. As the last Reigns had been
times of Persecution, there were many of these Prelates who had composed
excellent Works against the Heretics, or had suffered Exile and Torments for
the Defense of the Faith. Never had the Church seen more Saints, and Confessors
assembled. They were come with Joy once more to give their Votes for the truth,
under an Emperor who had as much zeal to establish Religion, as others had to
confound it.

But there were also many, who, during the late Reign, were entered into
Bishoprics, or had Greg. Naz. Carm. de vi* ta sua. Idem. car. de Episc.
maintained themselves therein by the favor of the Governors of Provinces, and
Generals of Armies Even some of them, who having heretofore been placed in the
room of Holy Bishops, who had been persecuted from their Sees, remained
peaceable Possessors after their Death. These, ruling their Faith by their
Ambition, and their Interest, were conformable to the time; and as they had
been Heretics under Valens, they became Catholics under Theodosius. They came
to the Council to observe the course of things, and to occasion troubles, if
they could do it with security.

XLIII. Meletius Bishop of Antioch was to preside over this Assembly. The
Emperor had a passionate desire to see him, as well upon the account of the
reputation of Sanctity, which this Prelate had got throughout the East, as also
because he had appeared to him in a Vision, presenting to him the Purple in one
hand, and the Crown in the other. Theodosius had always honored him from that
time, even before he knew him; and had often sent him considerable Sums, to
assist the Poor of his Diocese, and to finish the Church which he caused to be
built in honor of St. Babylas, beyond the River Orontes. As soon as the Bishops
were arrived, they went all together to salute the Emperor; who being willing
to try, if he could distinguish Meletius from amongst the rest, forbid that he
should be shown to him. He had fixed in his imagination so strong an Idea of
his Face, that as soon as he perceived him, he observed him of himself, and
affirmed him to be the same he had seen in a Vision. He advanced toward him
with an impatience full of respect, and tenderness. He embraced him in a
particular manner, and kissed his eyes, his head, his breast, and above all his
hand, which had crowned him beforehand, and rendered to him those honors, which
no body was jealous of, because every one esteemed him worthy of them. Then he
behaved himself with much civility to the other Bishops, Theodor. l. 5. c. 6.
and entreated them as his Fathers to endeavor with all their power to answer
the end, for which they were assembled.

XLIV. The opening of the Council being made with much solemnity, they agreed
upon beginning with what related to the Church of Constantinople. Although this
affair was not the most important, notwithstanding it appeared the most
pressing, because Theodosius was much concerned therein, and that it was
convenient to supply with a Person of great merit, a See, whose Rights and
Dignity were presumed to be augmented. Maximus had not desisted from his
pretension: but his Ordination was so contrary to the Laws and Ecclesiastical
Forms, that the Council had declared that he was not Bishop, and could not
exercise the Functions thereof. Those, who had protected him, were blamed, and
those whom he Sozom. l. 4. c. 9.
had ordained were degraded, and judged unworthy of holding any rank amongst the
Clergy.

Gregory of Nazianzum had been chosen by the Suffrages of the People, and the
Authority of the Emperor; he was without a See; that of Constantinople was
vacant. He had been charged with the care of this Church, and went under the
Title of it. Thus this Election (...) have passed for legitimate. But Gregory,
who lived without Ambition, would attempt nothing contrary to Greg. Naz. Orat.
27.
Disciplines, did not think himself engaged to a charge which he had not
accepted. He alleged that a Prelate without a Title could not take possession
of a vacant Church, unless authorized by a Council; and that the irregular
conduct which had been held in reference to him, gave occasion for ambitious
Ptelates to seize upon the vacant Sees, for the People to establish them in a
tumultuous manner, and for Metropolitans to dispossess them out of humane
considerations.

XLV. It was not hard to determine upon two Subjects, whereof one was for being
maintained in a Dignity which he deserved not, and the other demanded nothing
but a renunciation, notwithstanding his right and worthiness of it. The
Emperor, who was acquainted with the great qualities of Gregory, desired him
for his Bishop. Meletius, who had a tender affection for him, was come
particularly to instal him. All the Fathers agreed upon it; and Gregory was the
only person that scrupled to consent to his Election: He cast himself at the
feet of Theodosius to entreat him to divert the blow: but this Prince
represented to him, That it was just to give the conduct of this Church to him,
who had formed it with so much diligence, That the love of Peace and Solitude
ought not to dispense him from labor, since he was called to it; That this
approbation of the Council, was a visible Testimony of the Will of God; That
being Bishop of this Imperial City, he might contribute to the re-establishment
of Faith in the whole Empire; And that finding himself placed in the midst of
the East and West, he might become as it were a Mediator, and perhaps unite
together those two halfs of the world, which were unhappily divided upon the
Subject of the Church of Antioch.

Meletius represented to him, the same things in the name of all the Assembly,
and obliged him by his reasons and his counsels to undergo the Yoke which was
imposed upon him, and to sacrifice his repose to the Interests and Necessities
of the Church. Thus all conspired to do Violence to his Modesty. He was placed
upon the Episcopal Throne, where the People and the Clergy had carried him some
time before, and where he would not since take his place. Nothing Greg. Naz:
Carm. de vita sua.
was wanting to the Solemnity of this Action. Meletius performed the Ceremony,
the Emperor assisted there, all the People run in crowds to see it, and several
Prelates, amongst whom was Gregory of Nyssa, made very eloquent discourses upon
that subject.

XLVI. After they had thus regulated the affairs of that Church, they came to
treat about the points of Faith. As the greatest part of the new Heresies had
been condemned in the Council of Nice, the Decrees thereupon were ordered
Ruffin.
to be read, and were confirmed. Then was produced the confession of Faith,
which Pope Damasus had formerly sent to Antioch, and by his example they
condemned the Error of Apollinarius, who destroyed the truth of the Mystery of
the Incarnation. After which they proceeded against the Macedonians, who denied
the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, and refused of late to communicate with the
Catholics. For this effect, as the Creed of Nice, had annexed to that of the
Apostles, by way of explication, what had been defined concerning the Divinity
of the word; so the Creed of Constantinople added to that of Nice, What
regarded the Person of the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of Life, who was to
be equally adored and glori^^^ with the Father and the Son.

XLVII* From the Doctrine of Faith they pas^ed to the Rules of Discipline. The
enterprise of seven Bishops of Egypt, who were come to ordain Maximus at
Constantinople, gave occasion for ^he renewing of that Canon, that the
ordination of ^he Bishops of each Province, should be performed by those of the
same Province, or by those of the Council. Nice Can. 4, 5, 6.
Neighborhood, who should be called for that pur^ose: and because it happened in
the time of the Persecution, that some Prelates had passed into foreign
Provinces for the affairs of the Church, which might cause a disturbance; they
regulated the jurisdiction of every Metropolitan, and attributed the dicision
of the affairs of Provinces to Provincial Councils. To honor the Imperial City,
and to please the Emperor, it was declared that the Bishop of Constantinople,
should hold the rank and prerogatives of honor next to that of Rome, because
Constantinople was the new or second Rome. At length they decided many things
concerning the juridical form of accusations against Sozom. l. 7. c. 9.
Bishops, and they endeavored to re-establish order in the Church.

XLVIII. The Fathers of the Council after having thus decreed the points of
Faith and Discipline, which they had esteemed necessary, reduced them into
Articles, and presented them to Theodosius. They wrote to him at the same time
a synodal Letter, by which they immediately gave thanks to God, for having
placed him upon the Throne in order to the settling the peace of the Church,
and the establishment of Religion They showed him afterward, that having been
assembled by his Orders, they had with one accord prescribed certain
Ecclesiastical Rules, whether to condemn Heresies, or to correct the abuses of
the time; and entreated him to confirm by his Authority what they had done, and
to join hi suffrage to theirs, in sealing with his Imperia^ Seal the dicision
of the Council. They ende^ with Prayers, and wished that his Reign might be
founded upon Peace, and Justice; that he might endure a long Series of
Generations, an that at length he might determine by the joys ^f a Celestial
Kingdom... The Council was wise in its behavior thus: for besides the necessity
of the Emperors consent to make its Ordinances observed, it had a mind to
extract from him a Letter of confirmation, as a public engagement of his
Faith, to the end he might thereby be kept more firm to the right party, and
might deprive the Heretics of all hopes of being able to seduce him.

XLIX. Albeit the Bishops who composed this Assembly, were very different as to
their manners, and inclinations, they had agreed to all the points proposed,
and all went to end in a peaceable manner, when an unexpected accident produced
disorder, and division. It was the death of Meletius, one of the two Bishops of
Antioch, who had been chief, and as it were the Soul of the Council. The whole
Eastern Church bewailed his loss. Theodosius, who loved him as his Father, and
honored him as if he had held the Empire of him, would have his Funeral made in
resemblance Greg. Naz. Orat. in fun. Mel.
of a Triumph. He assisted therein himself, and gave public Testimonies of his
affliction, and his Piety. The Body of this holy man was deposited in the
Church of the Apostles, where the Psalms were sung by several Quires in diverse
Languages, and where the People running in multitudes* carried an infinite
number of Wax-tapers and Flamboys, and brought back as a precious Treasure,
some Linen which had touched his Face.

The most eloquent Prelate of the Assembly made Funeral Harangues in his Honor,
and represented Philost. l. 5* c. 4.
the Virtues he had practiced, and the Persecutions he had suffered for the
Faith. After they had finished all the duty of Piety, Theodosius ordered those
precious Relics to be conveyed to Antioch, to be conducted through the most
public Sozom. l. 7. c. 10.
ways, and to be received in all the Cities, although it was not the Custom of the
Romans. All Constantinople went out of the Gates, and never did the number of
the Inhabitants appear greater. There was running from all parts upon the Road
to accompany this body in singing Psalms, till they had brought him to Antioch,
and placed him near the Shrine of St. Babylas the Martyr, one o^ the most
celebrated Archbishops of that City.

L. In the mean time Theodosius answered to the Council; and to confirm what
had been there Idem. l. 7. c. 9.
decreed, he published an Edict, by which he ordained, that the Faith of Nice
should be generally received, and approved of in the whole extent of his
Empire, and that all the Churches should be restored into the hands of the
Catholics, who confessed one God in three Persons, equal in Honor and Power.
To avoid the professions of an Equivocal Faith, he declared that those alone
should be esteemed Catholics, who should be united in Communion with certain
Prelates whom he specifyed in each Province, and whose virtue he was acquainted
with, either by the correspondence he held with them, or by the Reputation
which they had long enjoyed of governing their Churches with Piety.

LI. There was some reason to hope, that this Council supported by the
Authority of the Prince, would have great effects in reference to Religion, and
that the Schism of Antioch, which divided the East from the West, would have
been determined by the death of Meletius, who was the innocent cause thereof:
but some Factious persons obstinately persisting in giving him a Successor, a
disorder broke out; and the Eastern People themselves were disunited, and grew
hot upon this occasion.

This difference had begun under the Empire of Constantine the great, who upon
calumnies invented by the Arians, had chased from Antioch Eustathius Chrystost.
Hom. in St. Eust.
Patriarch of that City, and a great defender of the Divinity of Jesus Christ.
The Arians being possessed of his See, and having put in his place five or six
Bishops of their Sect successively, the Catholics were oppressed. Some of them
submitted to violence; others continued firm in the Faith under the conduct of
Paulinus, and called themselves Eustatians. Meletius enjoying since the
Patriarchship by the Credit of the Arians, who took him to be of their
Communion, and having forthwith openly declared against them, he saw himself
upon a sudden abandoned of both Parties. The Heretics who had been chiefly
instrumental in his being chosen, were mad at his ^ange; the Catholics praised
his zeal, but aproved not of his Election.

As he had notwithstanding, besides an eminent Piety, a great Sweetness, and an
admirable Talent to make himself beloved, he attracted in a little time much
people to his communion. Some of them disengaged themselves from Paulinus to
come to him. Several, that had groaned for 30 years Theod. l. 5. c. 227.
under the Arian Tyranny, run so much the more willingly to him, as he had been
under the same weakness with them, and that he received them with much
condescension and Charity. The persecution which he suffered a few days after,
did but augment the veneration which was had for him, and the flock which he
had begun to assemble, increased, and formed it self, during his banishment.
Although the Catholics of this City were all united in doctrine, they were
separated in communion, and assembled in two different places; the one in a
Church which the Arians had left Paulinus, by reason of the respect they had to
his Age, and for the consideration that he was contrary to Meletius; the others
in ^ Church of the Suburbs, which they called the Palee, or the ancient Church.

This Schism scandalized all the East. Lucifer Bishop of Cagliari in Sardinia,
returning out of exile from Thebais, passed through Antioch, and undertook to
accommodate this difference: but having found the Eustathians resolved not to
communicate with a Bishop established by the Heretics, and besides being but
too much inclined of his own hard and inflexible nature to pardon nothing in
matter of Religion, he ordained Paulinus by his own private Authority. He
thought that the party of Meletius, which seemed more disposed for Peace, would
easily be reunited to the Eustathians, when they should observe a Bishop at
their head, who deserved to be so, and who never had any correspondence with
the enemies of the Church. But he was deceived; for the Friends of Meletius
being offended at the injury that was offered to him, and that they had not
condescended to consult them, protested that they would have none but him for
their Past^r, and that he could not be deposed by a single Bishop, out of his
Jurisdiction, and without being heard. They solicited him to come in haste,
and obliged themselves to him more strictly than before.

As soon as this Prelate was come from Armenia, where he had been a long time
in Exile, they endeavored to make him sit in the same Throne with Paulinus,
and even pretended that the greatest number being for him, he made as it were
the Socr. l. 5. c. 5. Ruffin.
Body of the Church; and that it was for other Communions, who were but Members
and parts thereof, to reunite themselves to it. As for him, as he desired
nothing but Peace, he was contented to re-enter into his Church of the Suburbs.
He went to visit Paulinus, and prayed him to consent, that they might keep in
common the Sheep, which the Master of the Flock had confided with them, Theod.
l. 5. ^. 3.
and that they might all be assembled in one Fold. He proposed, in order to take
away all subject of division, That the Holy Gospel might be put upon the
Episcopal Seat; that they might sit one on the one side, and the other on the
other side of it; and that he who survived his Colleague, should remain sole and
peaceabl^ Possessor. Paulinus refused the Condition, and would have no society
with a Man whom the Ari^^s had constituted Bishop.

In the mean time this dissension had disturbed the whole Church. Paulinus, who
was an Italian by birth, had more opportunities to prepossess the Roman Church,
and all the West in his favor; and Pope Damasus, who knew him for a Man
irreproachable both in his Manners, and his Faith, had embraced his part. All
the East on the other ^ide was affected to Meletius, as to a Prelate that
yielded not to the other in virtue, and who besides had been thrice banished
for the defense of the Faith. There was mixed a little compassion with the
esteem which was had for him, when ^t was known that he underwent the
persecution of the Heretics, and that of the Catholics with the same
patience, and that without using his Privileges or Credit, he demanded a
Peace, and could not obtain it. But for all they found mistakes in their
Elections, they did not cease to honor their persons; and it was agreed on
both sides, that Meletius had been worthy of the Sea of Antioch, if he had not
been advanced thereto by the Arians, and that Paulinus had merited to have been
ordained Bishop, if it had been of another Church than that of Antioch.

The Arians having at last been chased out of that City by virtue of the Edict
of Theodosius* Meletius was put in possession of all their Churches in
preference to Paulinus. But they agreed, that when one died, no body should
succeed in his room, and that all the Churches should remain to the Survivor.
Some Historians add, that this Agreement was signed by six persons of the
Clergy Socrat. l. 5. c. 5. Zoz. l. 7. c. 3.
that were the most capable to succeed them who were made to swear that they
would elect no one to that Bishopric, nor accept of it them selves, as long as
one of the two Patriarchs should live.

LII. After all these Precautions, one might have believed that the death of
Meletius would have determined their division, so much the rather, because this
holy Man in dying had conjured the Bishops to give him no Successor, and to
leave Paulinus in sole possession of the Church. But as they came to speak of
this Affair, their minds were divided, according as they were disposed to Greg.
Naz.
Peace or Discord. The most part of the ancient Prelates represented to the
Assembly, that to elect a new Patriarch, was to perpetuate the Schism^ that the
Survivor had always led a life without reproach; that he was of an Age not
possible to continue long; and that it was not only Charity to let him die in
Peace, but also a piece of Justice to perform that Contract which had been made
to him.

But the young Men sustained on the other side, that it was not fitting for the
Succession of an Episcopacy to be interrupted in so holy a Man as Meletius;
that Paulinus was the Creature of Damasus; that he had been ordained by a
Bishop of the West, who had neither the Privilege nor Commission to do it, and
that so the Eastern Church could not acknowledge him without injuring itself.

Gregory, who then presided over the Council, and who had not accepted of the Sea of Constantinople, but in the prospect of appeasing the troubles of the
Church, was sensibly touched at this Controversy, whose dangerous Consequences
he foresaw. When it was his turn to speak, he strongly opposed those who
offered at a new Election, and showed to them that this Proposition was not
only contrary to Peace, but also to Honor and Justice; That they ought to have
more regard to the public Advantage, than to particular Pretensions; That the
Episcopacy was one, and that they ought not to make so great a distinction
between the Bishops of the East, and those of the West; That if they had so
great a passion to ordain a Patriarch of Antioch, the death of Paulinus,
consumed with years and labors, would soon afford them an occasion; and that
so they would lose nothing by Greg. Naz. carm. de vita su^*
suffering him to remain alone in his See, since they ^ight enjoy the right of
giving him a Successor after his death, and satisfy their Consciences in
^estoring Peace to the Church.

As wise as this Advice was, all the young Bishops rejected it, and alleged no
other Reasons, than that they had had no share in the past agreement Greg. Naz.
ib.
between the Bishops of Antioch; and that since Jesus Christ was pleased to
appear in the East, it was just that the East should be preferred before the
West. They drew after them a Party of the Ancients, who were afraid of exciting
a greater Schism by their resistance. They vigorously entreated Gregory; but
having found him inflexible, they looked upon him as a Partisan of the Western
People, and could no longer dispense with him. A proceeding so unreasonable
very much displeased Gregory, who being unwilling to consent to their
Injustice, and despairing of reducing them to Reason, went out of the Synod,
and the Episcopal house where they were assembled, and resolved to make a
renunciation of his Bishopric, since he could not do all the good he wished
therein.

LIII. Theodosius being informed of this disorde^ desired nothing so much as to
put a stop to it. H^ exhorted both one and the other to unite for the common
Interest of Religion. He approved the Sentiment of Gregory. But the Conspiracy
of the rest became so general, that he thought it was no just to deprive them
of the liberty of Votes, an^ that it was impossible to reduce so great a Party
All hopes were now at an end, unless the Bishop of Egypt and Macedon, who were
expected ever^ day, brought a calm. The Emperor had not presently called them
to the Council; the first, because they favored Maximus; the second, because
they were Dependants of the Weste^ Church. But as to the Affair of Antioch, ^
thought that they might both serve to maintain the Rights of Paulinus; those of
Egypt, because the Council of Alexandria had approved his ordination; those of
Macedon, because he was tied to the Communion of Pope Damasus: But when they
arrived, they considered only how to annul the Election of the Archbishop of
Constantinople.

LIVE. Timotheus, Patriarch of Alexandria, protested that it was not lawful,
since he had not intervened therein. Those, whom he had brought with him, being
vexed that they had not stayed to consult them, joined with him. Although every
one in Greg. Naz. Carm. de vita sua.
particular made a profession of honoring Gregory, and that there was no
determined person whom they would advance in his room, yet they did not cease
to fall upon him, in hatred to those who had elected him. Nevertheless, to
cover their passion Idem de Episcop.
with some appearance of Justice, they alleged, that against the Canons he had
passed from the Bishopric of Sasime to that of Nazianzum, and from this last
to that of Constantinople. Although an ill Custom had at that time sufficiently
authorized these frequent Translations against the ancient Hieronym. de Scrip.
Eccl.
Laws, yet this reproach did not belong to Gregory, whatsoever some
Ecclesiastical Authors have written. For two Metropolitans having at the same
Rusfin. l. 2. c. 9. Secrat. l. 5. c. 7.
time pretended to the Bishopric of Sa^ime, he had yielded his Right for the
advantage of Peace, and had never performed the office; and his Father having
since called him to Nazianzum for his assistance in the government of that Greg
Naz. epist. 42. and 46.
Church, he labored therein as Coadjutor, not as Titular. Thus it was no
difficult matter to justify himself thereupon, and to defend his promotion.

LV. The Bishops, who had elected him, and were dissatisfied upon it, would
most willingly have deserted him; but decency required them to support what
they had done. Gregory, being a little concerned that he should be the sport of
the passions of Men who accused him, or took his part as the fancy prevailed,
made use of this opportunity to execute the design which he had Gr^g. Naz.
Carm. de vita sua.
long since entertained of retiring. He entered into the Council, and said to
the Bishops, That he begged of them to desist in what related to him, and to
consider nothing but the peace and union of the Church; That since he was the
cause of the Tempest, he would willingly, like another Jonas, be cast into the
Sea; That he had r^ceived the Bishopric against his inclination, and that he
resigned it with joy, as a Commission which had been entrusted with him; As
also that his Age, and his Infirmities made him desire, after so many
agitations, an interval of solitude and repose, in order to dispose him to die
well. He bid them farewell, conjuring them, That since he had taken away the
principal subject of their division, to reunite themselves in all the rest; and
to give him a Successor that should be zealous for the good of the Church, and
the defense of the Faith.

This discourse surprised the Bishops, but it was not displeasing to them. Some
had the satisfaction of seeing him fall of himself, who had been made without
them; others were glad of being delivered from the trouble of maintaining an
action they repented of. The resignation of the Archbishop was received, and he
went out of the Assembly without any one's importuning him Greg. carm* (...)
vita sua.
to stay. Some holy Prelates stopped their ears, that they might not hear his
resignation, and departed along with him.

LVI. There remained nothing more, than to make the Emperor agree to his
design. He went to find him, and after having begged of him to establish Peace
in the Council, and to retain by his Authority those whom the fear of God did
not retain, he petitioned him for his permission to retire. Theodosius, who was
not used to be entreated for such Favors, was surprised at his Request, and
endeavored by strong Considerations to stop him; he would even interpose
himself to maintain him in his Dignity. But the Archbishop represented to him,
that it was not for so just and pious an Emperor as he, to prefer the Interests
of a private Man to those of the whole Church; and that as for him, he thought
himself obliged to make this sacrifice of his See, at a time when his old Age
and Infirmities left him scarce any strength to assist his Flock, otherwise
than by his Prayers and Wishes.

LVII. After having procured the Emperor's consent, he assembled the People in
his Cathedral, and pronounced, in presence of all the Fathers of the Council,
that last and celebrated Sermon, where he rendered an account of his
Administration, Greg. Naz. Orat. 32.
and his Conduct. He represented the state of the Church of Constantinople, how
the Faith had been revived in his time, how it was increased, what he had done
and suffered upon that subject. He explained the Doctrine which he had
preached, and trusting to his innocence, after the example of Samuel and St.
Paul, he took his Auditors for Witnesses of his disinteressedness, and the care
he had taken, after having declared the Gospel to them, to be enclosed within
himself, and to preserve the purity of his Priesthood. He exposed in a few
words the principal causes of his Retirement, which were the Contests he saw
raised in the Church, and the importunate Reproaches which were made him of
treating the Heretics with too much Civility, and of keeping nothing in his
Retinue, his Table, or his Person, Idem Orat. 32. and 49.
that testified the grandeur of his Rank: which they called ill supporting of
his Dignity, and condemning too openly the excess and secular stateliness of
others.

In a word, after having exhorted the People to retain the Faith which he had
taught them, the Heretics to be converted, the Courtiers to be reclaimed, the
Bishops to reunite and quit their Sees like him, if they might thereby
contribute toward a Peace; after having wished for his Successor a worthy Man,
who without wanting Charity and Condescension, might have the Courage to
procure Enemies for the sake of Justice: he took leave of each of his Churches,
and particularly of his dear Anastasy, then of all the Societies and Orders of
the City. He begged of them to remember him, and his labors, for which he
demanded no other recompense, than the permission of retiring. Instead of the
usual Applauses, there was heard nothing but Lamentations and Groans during
this discourse: every one retired to his house drowned in tears; and the
Archbishop being moved to compassion, but notwithstanding inflexible in his
resolution, went to enjoy the pleasures of that solitude which he had always
tenderly loved.

LVIII. Theodosius, who looked upon the choice of a new Archbishop of
Constantinople, as one of the most considerable affairs of the Empire, went the
next day to the Council, and complained of those disputes, and continual
dissentions, whereby Sozom. l. 7. c. 7.
the Catholics underwent a scandal, and from whence the Heretics reaped great
advantages. He testified to the Bishops his displeasure, to see Gregory obliged
to quit the Sea of his Imperial City, whereto it had been even necessary to
call him, if he had been established therein, especially after the services he
had rendered to this Church, and the dangers he had incurred in restoring
Religion thereto. He told them, That notwithstanding his unwillingness to grant
him his Conge, at a time when the Church had so much need of learned,
peaceable, and holy Prelates, he had consented at his instant solicitations for
the advantage of Peace: but that he requested of them to seek out a man, that
might worthily supply his room, and to agree so well upon this choice, that
there might be no longer a division amongst them.

LIX. He ordered them to make each a memorial of those whom they esteemed
capable of this Id^m. c. ^.
charge, and to present him all those names in a single sheet, to the end that
he might elect one from amongst all the rest. The Bishops being satisfied with
the obtaining of their design, and resolved to pacify Thoodosius, who appeared
to them discontented at their past conduct, cast their eyes upon diverse
Subjects of their Acquaintance. As they were employed in this inquisition,
Nectarius, born at Tarsus in Cilicia, of an ancient Family of Senators, who had
exercised the charge of Governor Theod. l. 5. c. 8. Socrat. l. 5. c. 8.
of Constantinople, being about to return into his own Country, went b^ accident
to see Diodorus his Bishop, to know i^ he had any thing to command him before
his departure. They discoursed upon several matters: and as Diodorus's mind was
full of this nomination, wherewith he was perhaps perplexed, he often
considered Nectarius; and finding sweetness in his conversation, and something
of Majesty and Veneration in his Behavior, and in his Face, he resolved to
propose him.

Nevertheless without discovering himself to him, he prayed him to accompany
him to a Bishop, to whom he presented him with a mighty character. Afterward
he recommended Nectarius to him in secret, and was very urgent with him to give
him his Vote, and to write his name with the rest. This Prelat, who was
probably commissioned to prepare the sheet, and carry it to The^dosius, laughed
at the request of Diodorus: notwithstanding he put Nectarius in the number of
Pretenders, although he saw nothing in him of more recommendation, than his old
age, and agreeable aspect.

LX. The Emperor, having demanded a few days after the memorial of the
Bishops, examined it attentively; and after having viewed and reviewed the
names of those who were proposed to succeed Gregory, he stopped at that of
Nectarius, who was the least expected. He nominated him to the Archbishopric
of Constantinople; whether it was that he knew him better than the rest,
because he belonged to his Court, or else that he thought him the sit
person to maintain a peace in the present conjuncture. For excepting his sweet
and regulating temper, he had neither talents great enough to afford
protection, nor virtues sufficiently eminent to be an example to those who
would not imitate him. Nectarius, whom Diodorus had entreated to defer his
journey till then, had advice of this news, and could not believe it. The
greatest part of the Fathers of the Council were astonished at this choice, and
demanded of one another, who this Nectarius was? from whence he came? and what
was his profession? But when they understood that he had not led a life pure
enough to deserve to be thus raised on a sudden to the Priesthood, and moreover
that he was not yet baptized, they imagined that the Emperor had been
surprised, and that chance alone, as it often happens in these encounters, had
presided over this nomination.

LXI. They humbly remonstrated then to Theodosius, that with all the respect
and deference they had for his will and pleasure, they could not hinder
themselves from observing in Nectarius essential and canonical defects; that
indeed his age, and the different employments he had enjoyed under Emperors,
had given him great experience of the world, but that he had never passed
through any degree of Clerkship, and that not having received Baptism, he was
not in a condition to be a Bishop. Although there was nothing more just than
this remonstaance, the Emperor had remarked so many Passions and Cabals in
those, who offered it, that he thought since they had chased away the other
Archbishop, they had a mind to exclude this also, in order to put one of their
own party in the place. He persisted in his opinion, and the Bishops submitted
without opposition.

LXII. Thus Nectarius was elected by the Authority of the Prince, who found
himself engaged to his election by the consent of the people, who admired his
speech and obliging temper; and by the Votes of the Synod, who were afraid of
displeasing Theodosius. He was baptized; and as he was yet invested with his
robe of Neophyte, he was made Bishop, without appearing any otherwise disposed
for the Bishopric, than by not pretending to it. As he had scarce any
acquaintance with Ecclesi^stical affairs, they left him Cyriacus Bishop of
Adana in Cilicia, Evagrius of Pontus, whom Gregory of Nyssa had made Deacon,
and some other Clergymen, the one to instruct him in the Episcopal office, the
others to secure him from the surprises of Heretics. His life, after his
ordination was exemplary, and his Faith always Orthodox: but he had so much
easiness and indulgence for all the World, and so great an indifference for
Discipline, that the Arians had remarkably prevailed over him, if the Emperor,
to repair the fault he had committed, had not repressed them, and taken upon
himself the vigilance and force, that was wanting to this Archbishop.

LXIII. This affair being thus determined, they began to think upon the
conclusion of the Council. Those who had not assisted at the first Sessions,
signed what had been decided therein against the Heresies, and against the
abuses, which had been condemned. Nectarius was observed in the number of those
chief Bishops, who were, as it were, the centers of the Communion in their
Provinces. Theodosius on his side renewed his Edicts in favor of Religion; and
to close up the Council by some ceremony of note, he made to be transported to
Constantinople the body of Paul, Sozom. l. 7. c. 10.
who had been heretofore Bishop thereof, and whom the Arians had inhumanely
destroyed at Cucusa, a little City of Armenia, where he had been banished by
Constantius. All the Fathers went to meet these venerable Relics, a good way
beyond Calcedon, and conducted them, as it were in triumph, into the City. The
Emperor commanded them to be laid in a Church, which Mac^donius had built,
after he had possessed himself of the Sea of this Saint. By this means the very
Persecuter contributed to the glory of the Martyr; and Theodosius made appear
by the honor which he rendered to the memory of those Prelates, who died in
defense of the Faith, how little he esteemed those who fought against it during
their life.

Thus concluded toward the end of July this Council, which the East
acknowledged for ecumenical, and which the Pope St. Gregory since put in the
number of the four, which he revered as the four Gospels. Particular passions
and personal interests disturbed the course of this Assembly; but the truth was
nevertheless established therein against the error of the Macedonians. Thus
God reunited for the confirmation of the Faith, the minds of men, which he
abandons when he pleases, to their praepossessions and their own notions, and
gathers from the contests and disorders, which oftentimes arise in Religion,
the effects which his Providence has decreed to gather from thence.

LXIV. The Bishops being separated to go each to his particular Church.
Theodosius departed Zoz. l. 4.
in order to go and join his Army, which Promotius one of his Generals had
Orders to rendezvous at the entrance of Mysia; the Huns, Syrians, and
Carpodacks mixed together, had made an irruption on this side, and had cast so
great a terror in all the Neigbouring Provinces, that all the People of the
Country had abandoned their harvests, and were retired in disorder to remote
Cities. The Emperor encouraged them by his presence; and after having made a
review of his Army, marched directly to the Enemies, and gave battle a few days
after. Historians report no other circumstances, than that he gained a
celebrated Victory, and defeated this Army of Barbarians, whereof the greatest
part were killed, and the rest obliged to retire into their own Country* from
whence they durst not appear any more. After this defeat, the Troops thought
themselves invincible under Theodosius; and the People being persuaded, that
they could not hereafter disturb them with security, resumed the care and
management Zoz. ibid.
of their Land. Then the past losses were repaired, and the Empire enjoyed the
fruits of the just and glorious Government of Theodosius.

LXV. It was about this time, that the King of Persia resolved to send a solemn
Embassy to him, Oros. Hist.
in order to desire his Friendship, and to conclude a firm alliance with him.
These two Nations almost always armed one against the other, either for the
regulation of borders, or upon ancient pretentions, and unexpected differences,
which often arise between States, that are equally powerful, and Neighboring,
and had for a long time entertained a War, which was interrupted but by some
intervals of Peace, and but some truces of a few years. Constantius had often
attempted to pass the Tygris or Euphrates, and to extend his Frontiers on that
side: but he had rarely succeeded; and if he had carried from time to time some
advantages by his Generals, he was always beaten when personal there. But the
Ammian. l. 25.
misfortune fell only upon the Emperor and his Troops; and whether it was that
the Persians had a mind to defend their Cities alone, or else knew not how to
reap the advantage of their Victory, they did not gain an inch of ground upon
the Empire.

Julian continued the war: but having been killed in battle, and the Army which
he had engaged in the Enemies Country, sinding it self upon the point of being
destroyed either by Arms, or Famine, the Officers assembled to elect a Captain,
that might be able to disengage them from the extremity they were in, and cast
their eyes upon Jovian, whom they chose Emperor by the consent of the whole
Army. This Prince, who found himself obliged to repair the fault, which his
Predecessors had committed, sought all opportunities of fighting, and even
carried some advantages over the Enemies in some encounters. But Sap^r King of
Persia, who knew that the Romans were reduced to eat their Horses, did not care
to come to handy blows with them, but had a mind to let them be consumed by
Famine. Notwithstanding, although he saw them in this necessity, and might have
suffered not one to escape, he feared the despair of so many brave men, and
considered that what he should acquire by treaty, would be more permanent and
secure, than what he should obtain by force of Arms. He sent first then to make
to them proposals of Peace, as a kind of a favor.

This moderation, which he showed, did not cease to be very severe: for besides
that he kept them four days negotiating, at a time when they Ammian. lib. 25.
endured an extreme hunger, he imposed upon them ignominious conditions, which
the extremity they were in forced them to accept of. The terms were these, That
the Emperor should yield to the Persians five Provinces upon the Tygris, with
diverse Castles; That he should restore to them the Cities of Nisibis and
Singara; and particularly, that he should engage himself to furnish Arsaces
King of Armenia with no assistance against the Persians, notwithstanding he was
one of the most faithful Allies of the Empire. Jovian was constrained to sign
these Articles; and although he was urged, when out of danger, to infringe this
agreement, which necessity alone had obliged him to make, and that the
inhabitants of Nisihis had offered him to defend themselves, and to stop, as
they had done several times, the whole power of the King of Persia, he would
not consent to any proposal of Rupture, nor violate the Faith, which the
misfortune of the time had compelled him to give. Hostages were sent on both
sides, and a Peace concluded between the two Crowns for Thirty years.

This Treaty was since a subject of division. The Persians swelled with this
happy success* thought they might undertake all things, and ^he Ammian. l. 27.
Romans sought but for an occasion to counter vail the losses they had
undergone. As Armenia lay between the two Empires, it might afford a
considerable balance to affairs: So it was disputed on both sides who should
become Master thereof. Sapor, after he had kept himself sometime in Peace,
resolved to possess himself of this Kingdom. He solicited the Nobility to
submit to him; he forced the People by continual incursions into the Heart of
their Country; and having drawn by his Caresses and Testimonies of Friendship,
the King Arsaces to an interview, he seized upon him, and put him to death in
the Citadel of Agaban.

Para, Son of Arsaces, fearing the same entertainment, went to throw himself by
the counsel of the Queen his Mother, into the Arms of the Romans. Valens, the
Successor of Jovian, received him, and sent him to Neocesarea, where he had
the usage and education of a King. Sometime after he commanded Terentius, one
of his Lieutenants, to carry this Prince back into Armenia, and to put him in
possession of his Dominions, which required his presence. Although the Emperor had
been very cautious, and had commanded Terentius to lead no Troops, and not to
assist at the Coronation of the King; Sapor notwithstanding complained that
Armenia was relieved, and that they were wanting in one of the chief Articles
of the last Treaty. He entered with an Army into this Kingdom; and being unable
to seize upon the Person of the King, who had saved himself in the Mountains,
where he remained concealed for five months, he ravaged the Country, and after
a very tedious Seige took the Fort of Artogerass, where the Queen Mother was
enclosed with the Treasures of the late King.

Valens, who saw the inevitable loss of Armenia, if a speedy remedy did not
interfere, sent orders to Count Arintheus to march toward that side with the
Army which he commanded, and to Ammian. l* 27.
relieve the Armenians, if they still persisted to attack them. Sapor, who knew
how to be humble end haughty according to the time, stopped as soon as he heard
of the approach of the Imperial Army. He applied himself to gain the mind of
King Para, by promising to him an inviolable Alliance and Protection, and
engaged him by the encouragement of some Courtiers whom he had won, to rid
himself of two Ministers, who had been very faithful and serviceable to him. In
the mean time he sent Ambas^adors to the Court of Constantinople, to represent
there, that the Emperor had no manner of right to assist the King of Armenia;
and that if he continued to join with him, and to relieve him with his Armies,
it was an Infraction, which the King of Persia would be obliged to revenge.

Valens made no great esteem of this Embassy, and his Answer was nothing more
than this, That he did not concern himself with the Controversies of the
Persians and Armenians; that it was lawful for Sovereigns, to send Armies upon
their Dominions, according as they judged it convenient for the good of their
Affairs; that he made no League in prejudice of the Treaties; but that he had
more right to protect the King of Armenia, than Sapor had to oppress him; and
that if the one was against the Faith of a Treaty, the other was contrary to
Justice, and all the Rights of Nations. Upon which he sent back the Ambassadors.

Sapor took this answer for an open Rupture, levied Troops, and made great
Preparations of War for the Spring. The Emperor on his side sent against him
Count Trajan, and Vadcmaire King of the Germans, with orders to observe the
Persians, and to commit no act of Hostility against them, till the utmost
extremity. Ammian. l. 29.


These two Generals marched with the Legions toward the frontier, taking
always advantageous Posts for the Insantry, which made all the strength of
their Army. There they kept themselves close, and even gave way on purpose,
when they saw the enemy approach, lest they should be accused of being the
first in the infringement of the Treaty. But at length, the Persians being come
on to force them, in the consideration that they fled through cowardice, and
not prudence, there was a necessity of coming to a close engagement. The fight
was severe, and Sapor was constrained to retire to Ctesiphonte, after he had
lost the Battle, and demanded a Truce himself, which was immediately accorded
to him.

In the mean time, those who had an eye upon the affairs of Armenia, wrote to
the Emperor, that it was convenient to send thither another King; that all was
in disorder; that Para misused his Subjects; and that he would oblige them by
his pride to throw themselves into the arms of the King of Persia: which would
be of great consequence in relation to the Empire. Valens having sent to desire
his company, under pretense of conferring with him upon the present affairs,
left him at Tarsus in Cilicia, without saying any thing to him; and gave him a
good number of Officers, in appearance to serve him, but in reality to guard
him. This young Prince being come to a sense of his imprisonment, and under a
suspicion for his life, fled away one morning with so much haste, ^har for all
he was pursued by the shortest ways, he gained his own Dominions* without
falling into the snares which were laid for him in several places. He was
received of his people with much ^^y; and dissembling all the subjects he had
to complain of the Emperor, he continued in that fidelity he had sworn to the
Empire.

But those who commanded in Armenia and the adjacent Provinces, fearing lest he
should give up his Kingdom to the Persians, wrote against him to the Court, and
accused him of holding private intelligence with the Enemy; of having put to
death two of his Ministers, that were affectionate to his service, and the
Interests of the Empire; and above all, of meddling with enchantments and
Magic. Several testified that he had a secret to transform Men, or to consume
them by incurable languors: Those who pursued him, to excuse their ill success,
affirmed that he had bewitched their eyes. Valens, who was credulous and
mistrustful, and apprehended nothing so much as to perish by Enchantments, gave
secret Orders, that they should either by force or artifice deliver him from so
dangerous a man: which was put in execution not long after at a Feast, where
this young Prince was inhumanely murdered.

Sapor, being amazed at the loss of the last Battle, and still more at the
death of the King of Armenia, with whom he was in hopes to have concerted
infallible measures against the Romans, had recourse to negotiation. He sent
Arsaces, one of Ammian. l. 30.
the chief Lords of his Court, to propose to the Emperor a friendly
composition; and with their joint consent to ruin Armenia, which was without a
King, and had been the single cause of their divisions, and their wars. Valens
rejected the proposition, and replied, That he kept up to the ancient Treaties,
and would innovate nothing.

After several shifts and turnings they came to menaces, and a little time
after they prepared on both sides for War. Valens levied forces in the Country
of the Scythians, and resolved to enter into Persia with three Bodies of an
Army at the beginning of the Spring. Sapor solicited his Allies for
assistance, and assembled a great Army. He even prevented the Romans, and threw
himself upon some neighboring Provinces, which they had newly won. The revolt
of the Goths happening about that time, it was convenient to suffer all things
from the Persians, and to make Peace with them upon conditions little
honorable, but necessary.

LXVI. Sapor enjoyed the advantages which he had reaped from the juncture of
affairs; and as he had been brought up in War from his youth, he was always
meditating upon new attempts; and his ambition in an advanced age was not
diminished. But when he came to know that Theodosius was Emperor, and had heard
of his great qualities, and the mighty actions he had performed, he dispatched
a famous Embassy to him; and whether he was touched at the reputation of this
Prince, or was afraid of losing under him what he had gained under his
Predecessors, he instructed his Ambassadors to tell him from him, That he
congratulated his promotion to the Empire; That after having been at War with
four Emperors, whom he could boast of vanquishing in several encounters, he
was extremely glad to find one, with whom he might live in a perfect
intelligence; That he would do him a favor in granting him his friendship, and
in permitting him peaceably to pass the remainder of his days in his alliance.
He offered even to terminate the ancient contests of the two Nations, and to
regulate their pretensions upon Armenia and Iberia, by a reasonable composition.

LXVII. Theodosius, who knew how necessary a Peace was for the Empire, and how
expensive and incommodious Wars are to the People, even when they are glorious
to the Kings that have undertaken them, understood these overtures of Peace
with joy, and answered to the Ambassadors, That he thanked their King for the
offers he made to him, and that he might assure himself of his friendship; That
since he had been called to the Empire, ^e had not only labored to put an end
to the Wars which he had found, but had avoided the opportunities of raising
new ones; That his Predecessors had unquest ionably some reasons to break with
the Persians; but as for him, he would always answer to the intentions of
Princes, who had a mind to live in a fair correspondence with him; and that
their Master entertaining this resolution could not choose a more sincere
Friend, nor a more faithful All^. The Emperor had received these Ambassadors
with an extraordinary magnificence; and after he had retained them some time in
his Court, in order to decide with them the principal affairs of the two
Empires, he sent them back loaded with rich Presents, and full of admiration at
his Grandeur and Civility.

LXVIII. About this time arrived at Constantinople some Priests deputed from
the Council of Aquileia, who came to condemn two Bishops of Illyrium, convicted
of Arianism, They desired audience of the Emperor, and pre^ented him with
Letters from this Assembly, whereof Ambrose of Milan, and Valerian of Aquileia,
were the Chief. These Prelates, after having rendered thanks to Theodor. l. 5.
c. 9.
Theodosius, for delivering the Eastern Church from the oppression of the
Arians, complained to him of the design which had been taken at Constantinople,
of electing a Successor to Meletius; which they looked upon as a persecution
made to Paulinus, who had been always of their Communion. They entreated him,
in order to regulate those controversies, to convocate a Council of the whole
Catholic Church to meet at Alexandria, and to confirm it by his Imperial
Authority. Theodosius, who had no greater desire than that of seeing
Ecclesia^tical differences at an end, would willingly have complied with their
demands; but because he would do nothing without advice, and was afraid of
assembling Spirits that were already upon the ferment, and hard to reunite, he
wrote to the Bishops of the East, and prayed them to return to Constantinople
at the beginning of the ensuing Summer, in order to deliberate there upon the
proposition of the Western People.

LXIX. A little while after the Emperor received other Letters, by which the
Bishops of the West, after having represented to him a new the necessity of an
universal Council, to condemn the Heresy of Apollinaris, to make a
determination with whom it was necessary to communicate, to examine the
Election of Flavian, and to appease all the troubles of the Church, entreated
him to convocate this Assembly, and to agree that it might be held not at
Alexandria, but at Rome. The Emperor Gratian approved of it, and joined with
the Bishops therein. The^dosius, who knew the delicacy of the Eastern People,
who were spurred on by a false emulation against the rest, and jealous of
certain Privileges which they vainly attributed to themselves, foresaw that
they would not easily consent to go to Rome. He was satisfied, that they would
never suffer any reflections upon what they had done at Constantinople, and by
that means division would increase instead of lessening. He was not himself too
much inclined to procure a new Council, where they proposed to give some
blemish to that which he had held the year before. Wherefore he was not very
fond of answering either to Gratian, or the Bishops, till such time as he had
informed himself of the intentions of those whom he had sent for.

LXX. In the mean time Maximus began his Intreig^es again. Chased from
Constantinople, and repulsed by Theodosius, he was retired to Alex^^dria, near
the Patriarch, who had imprudently favored him. There, meditating upon ways
still to disturb the Church, he threatened this good old man to turn even him
out of his See, if he did not make an end of settling him in that of Gregory of
Nazianzum. Possibly he might have succeeded in it, if the Governor of Egypt,
knowing his busy and dangerous Spirit, had not commanded him to depart the
City. He was forced to live in the Country, where he kept in Peace for some
time, even in spite of himself. But at the first noise of the Convocation of a
general Council to Rome, he went immediately away, and arrived in Italy, to
praepossess those who were not yet informed of his scandalous Life, and his
^ntrusion to the Bishopric. He went to find the Emperor Gratian, and being
acquainted with his zeal for the Catholic Religion, he presented him with a
Book, which he pretended to have composed against the Arians.

After that he addressed himself to the Bishops, and said, That after so many
ill Treatments he had received in the East, he was come at last into a place
where Justice was observed, and where persecuted Prelates had always found
their Asylum; That his Ordination was Canonical, done by several Bishops,
authorized by the Patriarch of Alexandria, performed indeed in a private house,
but at a time when the Arians were unhappily possessed of all the Churches; and
that they had notwithstanding maintained Gregory, and had just elected
Nectarius to his prejudice. He showed them his Letters of Communion with Peter
of Alexandria, and was wanting in nothing that might move them to compassion
for him, and stir them up against the Eastern People, with whom he knew they
had Reasons to be dissatisfied.

By this artificial Discourse he revived the Passions of several, who were
already prepossessed against the Eastern Church; and the wisdom of St. Ambro^e
was not proof against the dissimulation of this Hypocrite. These Prelates
received him into their Communion as a worthy Man, who was persecuted in the
East, and who was entitled, according to the Canons, to demand the Bishopric
of Constantinople. Nevertheless, as they were not sufficiently informed of the
matter, they referred the decision of it to the Council, which was to be
suddenly assembled from all parts of the world, and contented themselves with
writing to Theodosius, to entreat him to have regard to the interests of
Maximus, as much as the peace of the Church would permit it.

LXXI. Whilst these things passed in the West, Append. God. Theod. page 105.
the Eastern Bishops being called a second time by the Emperor, arrived at
Constantinople: The most part of those who were present there the year before
came again, and those who could not go out of their Provinces, gave their
Consents by writing, and Power to act in their Names. There was none but
Gregory of Nazianzum, who had no share therein, and who excused himself upon
the little effect that was for the most part reaped from those tumultuous
Assemblies, and upon his Infirmities which would not permit him to undertake
this Journey.

As soon as these Prelates were arrived, Theodosius communicated to them the
Proposal of the Italian Bishops, and desired their advice upon the general
Synod, which they had a mind to have held at Rome. They made answer, That they
did not refuse to contribute toward a confirmation of the Faith, and the
reunion of the Church; but they prayed him to consider, that there was no such
urgent occasion to oblige them to go so far; That whilst the West rejoiced in a
profound Peace, the East had been agitated with cruel Tempests; and that after
these Persecutions, the Churches stood in need of the presence of their
Pastors; That besides they had not the consent of their Brothers, but for the
Council of Constantinople, and that there was not sufficient time to consult
them upon the subject of that of Rome.

They made the same Reply to those who had invited them to this Council. They
added a profession of Faith, whereby they acknowledged the Trinity, and the
Incarnation; and after having rendered them an account of the election of
Nectarius, and that of Flavian, they desired them to approve thereof, and to
abandon their particular Affections for the common Interest of the Church. They
also deputed three Bishops of their Body to those of Italy, to testify their
desires to see them, and to assure them of their inclinations for Union, and
their zeal for the Faith. The Emperor observing under these demonstrations of
Friendship and Religion, abundance of coldness and indifference in their minds,
received their Excuses, and thought it convenient to hinder an Assembly that
would be composed of two Parties already formed, and which in all appearance
would produce nothing but disturbances, like those he had seen at
Constantinople with so much displeasure. Whereupon he sent word to the Emperor
Gratian, and to the Bishops of Italy, That he had made serious reflections upon
the demand which had been proposed for a general Council at Rome, and that the
Prelates of his Empire, whom he had consulted thereupon, had alleged to him
the difficulty of the Journey, in an advanced season, and the small likelihood
there was, that they might be able to leave their Churches, in order to be
present at an Assembly which was not of that necessity after the Council of
Constantinople; That he could not resist these Allegations, but he prayed them
to be persuaded that he would contribute toward Peace with the utmost of his
power, and would dispose all those thereto, that were Dependants upon him.

LXXII. In the mean time the Goths of Athanaric's Retinue, were arrived in
their ^own Country. As they had not been chased away for any subject of
particular hatred, they were received without any difficulty. The Fidelity
which they had preserved to their Prince to the very last, appeared commendable
to the very Barbarians; and Fritigern, to whom it imported to esteem so good an
example, willingly retained them near his person, and favored them upon every
occasion.

These did not cease to declare the mighty things they had seen at
Constantinople, and above all to praise the magnificence and courtesy of
Theodosius. They entertained the King and People with the Civilities and
Endearments which he ha^ showed Athanaric, and the Honors he had re^dred to
him after his death. They exposed the Presents he had made to them: they
repeated the obliging words he had said to them, and by ve^tue of relating the
great qualities of the Empero^ they reduced their whole Nation, as much
posse^sed against him as it was, to fear him and estee^ him.

LXXIII. Fritigern, who saw himself advance^ in years, who was afraid of
Revolutions, and besides knew how to prize and acknowledge virtue resolved to
seek the alliance and protection of ^ Prince, that was represented to him so
puissa^ and so generous. He proposed his design to the Army. The Captains and
Soldiers consente^ thereto; the one being affected with the goo^ entertainment
of their Companions, the other^ encouraged by the hopes of serving a liberal
and gracious Emperor. The King solicited the Grotungues, who had been
associated with him during several years, to pursue the same intention; bu^
they refused it, whether it was that they were urged to go and join the body of
their Nation^ from which they were divided; or else that they were in hopes
their Cavalry might still be able to make some irruptions upon the lands of the
Empire, and carry off some considerable booty.

Fritigern then made choice of the chief Cap^ains of his Army, and sent them to
Theodosius in ^rder to desire his friendship, and to entreat him ^o entertain
for him and all his People the same ^oodness which he had discovered for
Athanaric, and those of his Retinue. He promised to be in^iolably fixed to the
interests of the Empire, and ^o do it as much service, if it lay in his power,
as ^e had prejudice heretofore, under an Emperor ^ss wise and generous than he.

Theodosius received this Deputation with all the honor and testimonies of
friendship imaginable. ^e promised to treat the Goths as his Allies, and ^o
love them as his Subjects. Although they had pro^osed to him no Condition, he
made them very ^dvantageous ones, giving Orders for the provi^ing them with
Necessaries in abundance, and as^igning Zoz. l. 4. Oros.
to them Lands in certain Provinces of the Empire. The Goths from this time were
always ^erviceable to the Emperor. There was a matter ^f twenty thousand who
served in diverse places amongst his Troops; the rest confined themselves ^o the
banks of the Danube, to obstruct the incur^ions of other Barbarians into the
Country of the Romans.

LXXIV. About this time the Bishops of Italy ^enewed their instances with
Gratian, upon the ^onvocation of a general Council, which they pre^ended to
hold at Rome: but this Prince referred them to Theodosius, to discharge himself
of this ^are, that he might not enter into the Disputes ^etween the Eastern and
Western Bishops. They wrote to Theodosius then upon this Subject. They ^dded
thereto Complaints against the Elections of Flavian and Nectarius. They even
disapproved of that of Gregory of Nazianzum, and declared themselves in favor
of Maximus, desiring that his Cause might be decided at Rome, as those of
Athanasius, Peter of Alexandria, and many other Prelates of the East, who had
recourse to the judgment of the Roman Church. The Emperor, to put an end to
this affair, and to remove all subject of division, wrote to them smartly, That
their Reasons were not sufficient to assemble an universal Council* That the
Elections of Nectarius and Flavian havin^ been made in the East, they ought not
to be judged out of places where all the Parties were present; That the Bishops
of the East had some reason to be offended ^ their unreasonable demands; That
as for Maximus, ^ admired that such enlightened Prelates had been so credulous
in relation to a notorious Impostor, whom he wa^ resolved to punish, if he was
impudent enough to come near Constantinople.

Thus Theodosius was careful of the affairs of the State, together with those
of the Church, and deserved the favor of God in so many wonderful Successes,
which made his Reign worthy of admiration and praise.

The CONTENTS of the THIRD BOOK.
I. STate of the Eastern Empire. II. State of the West. III. Virtues and
Defects of the Emperor Gratian. IV. Revolt of Maximus. V. He draws in the
Pagans. VI. He intices the Troops over. VII. He passes the Sea, and renders
himself Master of Gaul. VIII. Gratian is abandoned of the Army, and the People.
IX. Death of Gratian. X. Maximus sends Ambassadors to Theodosius. XI. The
Empress Justine sends St. Ambrose to Maximus. XII. St. Ambrose stops Maximus on
the other side of the Alps. XIII. Theodosius associates his Son Arcadius to the
Empire. XIV. Education of Arcadius. XV. Qualities of Arsenius, Tutor of
Arcadius. XVI. Conduct of Theodosius in reference to the Education of his Son.
XVII. Conduct of Arsenius in Relation to Arcadius. XVIII. Reflections of
Arsenius, upon his Condition, and his Retreat. XIX. Theodosius assembles the
Heads of the different Sects. XX. An easy Method to determine Ecclesiastical
Differences. XXI. Theodosius disappoints the Heretics. XXII. Theodosius
commands each Sect to give its Profession of Faith in Writing. XXIII.
Theodosius tears the Forms of the Heretics. XXIV. Confusion of the Heretics.
XXV. Edicts of the Emperor against the Heretics. XXVI. Clemency of Theodosius.
XXVII. Wise remonstrance of Amphilochus. XXVIII. The Pagans attempt to rise in
the West. XXIX. Humor of Symmachus; his request for the XXX. Consequence of
the request of Symmachus. St. Ambrose writes to Valentinian to oppose it. XXXI.
Answer to the request of Symmacus by St. Ambrose. XXXII. The Pagans lose their
cause. XXXIII. New efforts of the Heretics. XXXIV. Edict of the Emperor
against the Heretics. XXXV. The Jews prohited from keeping Christian Slaves.
XXXVI. Birth of Honori^s. XXXVII. Treaty of the three Emperors. XXXVIII.
Cruelties of Maximus. XXXIX. St. Martin begs the pardon of two Criminals. XL.
Maximus ende^vours to gain St. Martin, and makes him eat at his Table. XLI.
Errors of Priscillian, and his followers. XLII. An Ecclesiastical cause carried
to a Sec^lar Tribunal. XLIII. Prudent remonstrance of St. Martin. XLIV.
Condemnation of Priscillian; consequence of his death. XLV. Ordinance of
Theodosius concerning Ecclesiastical judgments. XLVI. Sacrificing to Idols
prohibited. XLVII. Reformation of manners. XLVIII. Deliverance of Prisoners at
the Feast of Easter. XLIX. Death of the Princess Pulcheria. L. Death of the
Empress Flaccilla; her Virtues. LI. Aversion of the Empress Justine for St.
Ambrose. LII. Edict against the Catholics. Constancy of Benevolus. LIII. St.
Ambrose is provoked to a Dispute before the Emperor. LIVE. St. Ambrose refuses
to come to a conference in the Palace. LV. Orders to deliver the Churches of
the Catholics to the Arians. LVI. The People shut themselves up in the
Cathedral. St. Ambrose refuses to abandon i^. LVII. Negotiation to have a
Church in the Suburbs. LVIII. Vain Attempts of the Empress to reduce St.
Ambrose. LIX. Deputation of Lords to the Emperor. LX. The Persecution ceases.
LXI. Pretense of Maximus to enter into Italy. LXII. Irruption of the
Gro^ungues; their Attempts to pass the Danube. LXIII. Vigilance, and Dexterity
of Promotius. LXIV. Defeat of the Grotungues. LXV. Theodosius arrives at the
Camp; gives Liberty to all the Prisoners. LXVI. The Grotungues enrolled in the
Service of the Emperor. LXVII. Rash Action of Gerontius. LXVIII. The Grotungues
slain. LXIX. Theodosius cites Gerontius to appear; orders him to be taken up,
LXX. Theodosius writes to Maximus, and to the Empress ^uf^ine upon the subject
of St. Ambrose. LXXI. Second Emhassy of St. Ambrose to Maximus. LXXII. A^dience
given to St. Ambrose. Maximus perplexed. LXXIII. St. Ambrose discovers the
Intentions of Maximus. He is not believed. LXXIV. Entrance of Maximus into
Italy. Flight of Valentinian and Justine. LXXV. Policy of Maximus. LXXVI.
Valentinian and Justine arrive at Thessalonica. Wise remonstrance of
Theodosius. LXXVII. Theodosius concludes upon War. Marries the Princess Galla.
LXXVIII. New Impost. Sedition of Antioch. LXXIX. Resolution taken against the
City of Antioch. LXXX. Desolation of the Inhabitants of Antioch. LXXXI. Descent
of the Solitaries into Antioch. LXXXII. Journey of Flavian Archbishop of
Antioch. LXXXIII. Discourse of the Archbishop to Theodosius. LXXXIV. Theodosius
pardons those of Antioch. LXXXV. Malice of the Historian Zozimus. LXXXVI. The
Widow Olympias refuses to marry Elpidius, the Emperors Kinsman. LXXXVII.
Persecution made to the Widow Olympias. LXXXVIII. Olympias restored to her
Possessions. LXXXIX. Theodosius disposes himself to a War against Maximus. XC.
Theodosius renews his Edicts against the Heretics. XCI. Maximus prepar^s for
War. XCII. Treason discovered in the Army of Theodosius. XCIII. Valentinian and
his Mother embark themselves. XCIV. Theodosius surprises Maximus in Pannonia.
XCV. Passage of the Save. Victory of Theodosius. XCVI. Theodosius marches
against Marcellin, and wins a second Battle. XCVII. Death of Maximus, and
Andragatius. XCVIII. Moderation and Clemency of Theodosius. XCIX. False Reports
dispersed by the Arians. C. Sedition of the Arians. CI. Ordinance of Theodosius
against an Eastern Bishop. CII. Remonstrance of St. Ambrose to the Emperor
Theodosius. CIII. St. Ambrose publicly reprehends the Emperor in a Sermon.
CIV. Theodosius repeals the Ordinance. CV. Description of the Altar of Victory.
CVI. The several States of this Altar under the Emperors. CVII. The Deputies of
the Senate petition the Emperor for this Altar; Theodosius denies it. CVIII.
Theodosius goes to Rome to receive the Honor of Triumph. CIX. The Regulation
which Theodosius made in Rome. CX. Symmachus pronounces a Panegyric in Honor of
Theodosius. He is in disgrace, and recalled a little while after. CXI. Diverse
Regulations. CXII. News of the Ruin of the Alexandrian Temples. CXIII.
Conversion of several Pagans. The use which (...) made of the Golden Idols.
CXIV. Departure of Theodosius. Death of the Empress Justine.

THE HISTORY OF THEODOSIUS the Great. BOOK III.
I. THeodosius reigned peaceably in the East. His people lived in quiet and
abundance, and his Adversaries were become his Friends. Whilst the whole World
revered his greatness, or were afraid of his power, he applied himself to
regulate his Dominion, and to re-establish in its purity that Religion, which
his Predecessors had oppressed; and he regarded the Peace which he enjoyed, as
a Reward for that he gave the Church.

II. The Empire of the Weft had been no less successful, if the weakness, or
negligence of the Emperors had not afforded occasions for revolts, and Civil
Wars. The young Valentinian who had Ambros. Orat. in
for his division Italy, Africa and Illyrium, was not yet of a capable Age to
govern, and the Empress his Mother abused his name, and his Authority. fun.
Valen.
She was an Arian, and thought it a good piece of service to her Son, to render
him so too. The cares of her Regency extended no further than to the obtaining
of a Bishop of her own Party, or to the depriving the Catholics of a Church.
She distributed her favors to those, who obliged her with a compliance to her
passions, and she could not imagine that the State could have other Enemies,
than those who opposed her error. All things were to be feared under an infant
Emperor, in whom were imprinted ill apprehensions of things, and under a
Heretic Empress, who was more sedulous for the advancement of her Sect, than
sor the peace and security of the Empire.

Ammian. l. 31.
III. Gratian, who reigned on this side the Alps, was in the flower of his Age,
formidable to his Enemies, over whom he had obtained several victories. He had
a great fund of justice, and natural goodness, which might have gained him the
affection of the People: but he abandoned himself to the interessed counsels of
his Ministers, Aur. Victor. in Gratian
and had no manner of application to business. He was of a sweet temper, polite,
modest, complaisant. He was a Scholar; and whether he was to speak in public,
or write in Verse and Prose, it was easy to judge that he had improved by the
instructions of Ausonius, and that Ausonius had sound in him an excellent
Genius. As for his inclinations, they were all generous, and disposed to good.
He enjoyed in the heat of his youth Auson. in Panegyr.
the chastity and temperance of an old man. He was not only sincere, but also
liberal to his Friends. He loved to grant favors, and sought even to prevent
desires. Never was Prince more active, or more vigilant in war: he was always
at the head of his Troops, and marched the first to the Enemy. After the fight*
he took care of the wounded Soldiers, whom he went to comfort in their Tents:
he looked after all their necessities himself, and oftentimes dressed their
wounds with his own hands.

Ruffin. Ambros. August. etc.
All Ecclesiastical Authors commend his Piety toward God, and his most ardent
zeal for the purity of Faith. So many great qualities, joined to an admirable
grace in all his actions, and to the beauty of his Face, seemed as an earnest
of his happiness. But he had so great an aversion for labor, and such an
extreme passion for huntting, and other corporal exercises, that he consumed
whole days in lancing the Javelin and shooting Victor. in Great. Ammia^. l. 31.
beasts in a Park. His Governors entertained him in this idleness instead of
exposing to him the inconveniences of it; and whilst this young Prince made an
employment of a Recreation, and reposed all his glory in an unprofitable
dexterity, they were Masters of affairs, and applied themselves to their
particular Interests.

Victor. in Great. Ammian. l. 31. Sulp. Sever. l. 2. c. 62.
IV. Things were in this condition, when Maximus General of the Roman Army in
England, made himself to be proclaimed Emperor. Besides that his Ambition had
disposed him of a long time to attempt all things to Reign, and that descending
from the house of Helena, the Mother of Constantine the great, he looked upon
the Empire, as his propriety, he could not dispense with Gratian's preferring
Theodosius before him. Nettled against one, and jealous of the other, he
immediately won the chief Officers of Socrat. l. 5. c. 11.
the Army. He drew the most part of the English Lords to his side, and
afterward made use of all the favorable conjunctures to introduce rebellion
into Gaul and Italy.

Gratian had attempted to ruin the Religion of the Pagans, which his Father,
through Policy, had always spared. He had already weakened it Symm. l. 5* E^. 11.
considerably, by retrenching the Revenues which the Priests enjoyed, and the
Sums which the State had been obliged to furnish toward the maintenance of
Sacrifices. He had invested the Prefect of Rome with power to examine all
controversies relating to Idolatry. He would not even accept ^oz. l. 4.
of a title, which ^avoured of superstition, refusing the name and habit of
Chief Priest, which his Predecessors, for reasons of State, had retained till
then. So generous a zeal incensed the Pagans, and especially some Roman
Senators, who were the Chief.

V. Maximus finding them disposed to favor his revolt, made them hope that he
would restore to their Gods the Honor which they were just deprived of, and
that he would re*establish their Altars, their Priests, and their Sacrifices.
Although he was a Christian, he appeared to them so much inclined to restore the
Adoration of their Idols, that they respected him as their Deliverer, and began
to extol him highly, as if Gratian had been the Tyrant, and Maximus ^he lawful
Prince. Thus the one betrayed the Emperor by a prepossession of Religion, the
other betrayed his Religion by a violent passion of becoming Emperor.

VI. He debauched the Army as easily as he had enticed the Senate. Gratian had
not ma^aged the Officers of the Roman Trrops as he ought to have done. He
frequently preferred Alain Soldiers before them, and other Barbarians, whom he
honored with his Confidence and Favors; and whether he found them fitter for
his diversions, or was in hopes thereby to attract to his Service all their
Nation, he kept them about his Person, and even took pleasure in dressing
himself after Zoz. l. 4.
their Mode. This conduct made him odious to the Legions, who had ^erved him
with so much advantage; and to obtain the affection of Strangers, he lost
himself in the opinion of his own Soldiers. Maximus made use of this
oppor^unity: He underhand solicited those Troops, who were already but too
sensible of the contempt which was entertained of them. Some add, that he sent
them advice of his secret correspondence with P atat. in Panegyr.
Theodosius, and that he acted in concert with him.

One Empire did not suffice the ambition of this Rebel. He thought that after
having ruined Gratian, he might easily compass the end of Valentinian, and his
Mother Justine: The age of one, the infirmity of the other, and the hatred of
all good men, which they had procured by persecuting the Catholics, made him
hope to render himself Master of the two Empires, to become formidable at least
to Theodosius, and to enjoy without disturbance the advantage of his crimes.

VII. Upon this expectation he put himself to Sea, and came to descend with his
Army toward the Mouth of the Rhine. The Troops Zoz. l. 4.
which were in Quarters about Germany, acknowledged him immediately for their
Emperor, and all the Garrisons received him. Gratian, astonished at this
Revolution, assembled that part of the Army, which he had retained near him,
and advanced toward the Rebels, with a resolution to give them Battle. The two
Armies were about five days in sight of each other, without Maximus's coming to
a decisive Battle. Then the Legions dissatisfied with Gratian appeared
disordered. All the Moorish Horse detached it self to go and join the Rebels;
the body of the Army followed their example; the People, who love Novelty, and
are always of the strongest side, declared themselves presently after, and
Maximus was absolute in Gaul, as soon as he arrived there.

VIII. Gratian, upon the first noise of this Revolt, had called the Huns and
Alains to his Relief; but they did not come in time. There remained only near
his Person a few Troops, whose Fidelity was suspected to him. Thus, being
abandoned of his own men, refused of the Cities he passed by, scarce any one to
defend him, nor even to accompany Zo^. l. 4.
him, he wandered in his own proper Empire. At length he fled toward the Alps,
attended by Three Hundred Horse, which he had assembled with much ado, in order
to assist him in his Flight: but he found all the Passages guarded by those he
had reason to mistrust. He went back again, uncertain of the way he was to take
to save himself. As he arrived at Lions, he had advice Socrat. l. 5. c. 11.
Sozom. l. 7. c. 13.
from several places, that the Empress his Wife was coming to seek him, in order
to accompany him in his adversity.

IX. This Prince forgetting for a time the danger he was in, more affected with
the misfortunes of this Princess, than his own, recalled in his mind all his
Love, and passed the Rhine with a design to meet her. As soon as he was upon
the Shore, he discerned a Litter encompassed with Guards. He hastened to it:
but he saw come out, instead of his Wife, Count Andragatius General of the
Horse, whom Maximus had dispatched after him in haste. This Traitor having
surpriz ed him in his Snares, seized him, and most inhumanely murdered him, the
Four and twentieth of September, in the Eight and twentieth Year of his Ammian*
l. 27.
Age, and the Sixteenth of his Empire.

Such was the Destiny of this Emperor. He ^uffered Death with Constancy; and
all the concern he had upon him was for the absence of St. Ambrose, who might
have disposed him to a holy Death. The Church, which he had always defended,
Ambros. in Orat. de obitu Gr.
bemoaned his loss; and those, who reign after him, may draw from him this
instruction, that it concerns their Reputation, Peace, and even Safety, to
govern by themselves those States, wherewith they are charged.

X. Maximus puffed up with so many Successes, was ready to pass into Italy, and
surprise Valentinian, a young Prince without Experience, and without Force. But
besides that, it was necessary to give some Orders in the Provinces newly
subdued, he judged it convenient, before he passed the Alps, to sound the
intentions of Theodosius. He sent Ambassadors to him, with Instructions to
offer him his Friendship, if he would associate him to the Empire, or to
declare War against Zoz. l. 4.
him, if he refused it. Theodosius being sensibly touched at the Death of
Gratian his Friend, and Benefactor, had already resolved to revenge it; but as
he had reserved himself but a small number of Troops, since the general Peace
throughout the East, he was afraid lest Valentinian should be oppressed, before
he was in a condition to defend him. He dissembled his design, and replied to
the Ambassadors, that he accepted the Offers of Maximus; that he did not oppose
what the Army had done for him; and since he possessed the place of Gratian, he
looked upon him as his Successor to the Empire. The necessity of things Zoz.
ibid.
obliged him thus to treat him as a Colleague, till he was in a posture to
declare himself his Enemy.

XI. But whilst he entered into Negotiation with him, the Empress Justine
imagined every moment, that Maximus was coming to thunder upon Italy. She had
neither Army to oppose him, nor expectation of Succor from her Allies. She
resolved then to send Ambassadors to him, in order to prevail on him by her
Submissions, and to stop him on to other side of the Alps. But she found no one
in her Court, who could, or would undertake so difficult a Negotiation:
insomuch that she was constrained to have recourse to St. Ambrose. She
suspended for a time the Hatred which she had conceived against him, and
conjured him on the part of the Emperor, her Son, to undertake this Embassy.
The holy Bishop willingly accepted of this Employment, and went away in haste,
being resolved to sacrifice his Repose, and his very Life for his Prince and
Country. He found Maximus in a state of enterprizing all things. His Conquests,
instead of satisfying his Ambition, had incensed him. To be Master of Gaul,
Spain, and England, he accounted of small importance, if he did not reign in
Italy: He came from spilling the blood of one Emperor, he went to chase the
other from his Empire.

XII. But this Prelat spoke to him with so much force, and performed so well by
his eloquence and address, that he made him abandon the resolution he had taken
to pass the Alps. His Arms fell out of his hands, and whether the respect and
veneration he conceived for this great man, had suggested to him some great
moderation, or that he perceived his Passions to relent by his affecting free
discourses, or else that God, who is the Master of Kings, and lets loose
Tyrants in his anger, and retains them when he pleases, had prescribed his
bounds to this; did, without knowing why, what St. Ambrose desired of him.
Contrary to all appearance he stopped at Gaul, established at Treves the seat of
his new Dominion, and took the Title of Augustus with the consent of the two
Emperors. He repented afterward of having lost so favorable an opportunity,
and Ambros. E^. 33.
complained often that the Archbishop of Milan had enchanted him.

XIII. About this time Theodosius observing his Son Arcadius to grow up,
resolved to declare him Augustus, although he was but Seven or Eight Years Socrat.
l. 5. c. 10. Sozom. l. 7. c. 12.
old. The Ceremony was performed in a Palace called the Tribunal, designed for
the Coronation of the Emperors, in presence of all the Lords of the Court, and
several Bishops. Every one testified by his Acclamations, the joy he had to see
this Young Prince invested with the Imperial Habits, and wished that he might
possess the Virtues of his Father, as he had received his Dignity.

XIV. Theodosius was extremely satisfied with having made a new Emperor out of
his Family* and with the public Approbation. But he was more intent upon his
Education than his Establishment, and thought it was of little importance to
leave him ample Territories, if he did not leave him Wisdom to govern them. He
had a long time sought for the wisest and learned man of the Empire, to
entrust him with this Infant, who was one day to be the Master of so many
People. He had sent to the Emperor Gratian concerning it* and Gratian had
entreated Pope Damasus to make himself a choice of so much moment, and to
dispatch him to Constantinople, whom he should esteem worthy of this
Employment. This Pope, who was well versed in good literature, had an exemplary
Piety, and an excellent Judgment, cast his Eyes upon Arsenius Deacon of the
Roman Church, whose Virtue and Learning he was acquainted with.

XV. He was a man of a very noble Family, absolute in the Greek and Latin
Tongues, in Human Sciences, and the Study of the Holy Scriptures. As worthy as
he was of the greatest Stations, and the chief Dignities of the Church, he
never had any other prospect than that of his Salvation. Although his inclination
had ever disposed him to a retirement, and that he was very austere in relation
to himself, yet he did not fly from an honest Society, and was troublesome to no
body. Damasus proposed him as a wise man, who lived in the Court without being
corrupted, and who would give not only good instructions to the Prince; but
also good Examples to the Courtiers.

XVI. The Emperor received Arsenius as a Treasure sent from Heaven itself, and
prayed him to be careful of the Education of Arcadius, to look upon him as his
own Son, to take over him all the Authority of a Father, and to make of him by
his instructions a wise and pious Emperor. He recommended to this Young Prince,
Docility, Obedience, and Respect, and repeated to him several times these
words: Remember, my Son, that you will Apud. Metaphrast. 8 Maii. Sur* 19. Julii.
be more obliged to your Tutor, than to my self. You have from me your Birth
and an Empire; you will learn of him Wisdom, and the Fear of God, and from
henceforth he will more justly claim the Title of Father, than I. He was
wanting in nothing, that might conduce to authorize the Master, and render the
Pupil more respectful* for happening one day to enter into the Chamber of the
Prince in order to assist at his Lecture, and having found him seated, and
Arsenius standing before him, he complained of both.

Arsenius would excuse himself upon the honor he thought himself obliged to
^ender to an Emperor; and upon the Respect which the Purple, wherewith he was
invested, imprinted in him. But Theodosius without hearkening to his excuses,
commanded him to sit down, and his Son to stand, and be uncovered during
Lecture* and to take away all subject of Decorum, he ordered the Prince to lay
aside all the marks of his Dignity, when he went to his Study; adding that he
should hold him unworthy of the Empire, if he did not know how to render to
every one his due, and with his Learning did not observe Acknowledgment and
Piety.

XVII. Arseni^s applied himself not only to teach his Pupil good Literature,
but also to educate him in the Faith, and in the Exercise of Christian Virtues.
He studied his inclinations, and maintained them, or redressed them as they
were good or bad. This young Prince was of a lively, open-hearted Temper, of an
easy and agreea^le Humor, his Sentiments all noble and generous, and had a Soul
naturally inclined to Religion and Justice. But he was averse to Labor,
inconstant in his Friendships* ready and susceptible of all ^orts of
Impre^^ions, and more disposed to credit those who flattered him in his
defects, than those who endeavored to reclaim him.

Arseniu^ foreseeing the fa^al consequences, that might proceed to an Emperor
from these vicious Habits, after having attempted in vain to reform them by
address, resolved to repress them by a discreet severity. He reproved him
several times, he complained to the Emperor his Father of his ungovernable
Temper; he joined at length chastisement to his complaints and reprimands.
Arcadius took the correction for an injury, and had a mind to rid himself of
his Tutor. He communicated his design to one of his Of^icers, in whom he
reposed much confidence, and commanded him to deliver him from a troublesome
man, wh^ misused him. This Officer promised him to execute his Orders, for fear
he should charge some body else with them, and went secretly to advertize
Arsenius, that he might provide for his own security.

XVIII. Although Arsenius saw well, that it was nothing but a Childish passion,
which might have no consequence, yet making Reflections upon the unhappiness of
Princes, who love almost as soon as they are born, those who delude them, and
esteem those for Enemies who correct them, he seriously considered about
leaving an Employment, wherein he hazarded his Life if he persisted in his
constancy, and his Safety, if he took a soft, and remiss conduct. Heaven
determined him almost at the same time to a profession more quiet and more
holy* For as he asked God in the fervency of his Prayer, what method he should
take to save himself, it is reported that he Ruffin. l. 3.
heard a Voice, which answered to him, Arsenius, avoid men, it is the means to
secure thee.

A few days after he went out of Constantinople disguised, and took Sanctuary
in the Deserts of Egypt, where he passed above Fifty years among the Solitaries
of Scete, without holding any correspondence with the world, living only upon
Roots, scarce affording some few moments of sleep to the infirmity of Nature,
employing days and nights in Prayer and Lamentation in his Cell, and fixing
himself with an entire application of mind to his Salvation, till he arrived at
the Age of Fourscore and fifteen years.

The Emperor received with a very sensible displeasure, the news of Arsenius's
retirement, without knowing the occasion of it. He made him to be searched for
through the whole extent of the Empire, but God had a mind to conceal him from
the world, after he had drawn him from thence, in order to make of him a
perfect model of a penitent and solitary Life. Arcadius did not know the loss
he had sustained; but the People felt the effects of it, when confirmed in his
Passions, governed by his Women and his Eunuchs, preferring and destroying his
Favorites himself, he gave occasion for those Revolutions, which began to ruin
the Roman Empire without recovery.

XIX. Theodosius, after he had established his Son, applied himself to regulate
the Affairs of the Church, which were no less considerable to him, than those
of his Family. To satisfy his Zeal, and to leave no cause of Division in the
East, when he should be in a condition to march against Maximus; he attempted
on a sudden to confound all the Heresies, and to reunite all minds in the same
Belief. In order to which, he summoned to Constantinople the Heads of the
different Sects, to give an account of their Faith, and their motives of
separation from the Catholics. They all repaired Socrat. l. 5. 6. 10. Sozom.
l. 7. ^. 12.
thither, some to endeavor a re-establishment in those Bishoprics which they
had formerly usurped, the rest to sustain their opinions in a regular dispute.

The Emperor discovered his design to the Archbishop of Constantiuople, and
consulted him upon those measures he should esteem most proper for the Reunion
of Religions. This Prelate, who had grown old at Court without any acquaintance
with the holy Scriptures, or Ecclesiastical Rules, and moreover very little
instructed in the state of the Questions and Controversies of the time, found
himself in an extreme perplexity. He was afraid of Disputes and Confer^^ces,
and knowing his own small Capacity, he had recourse to Agelas Bishop of the
Novatians. This Prelate sent him back to Sisinnus, who was as yet but a Reader
in their Church, and did not cease to be very intelligent in all kind of
Learning, well versed in the reading of Church Authors* This man advised him to
obstruct disputes and contests in the Synod, saying, that they provoked men's
minds, instead of persuading them; that the desire of conquest, or the shame of
being overcome, carried the wisest to dangerous extremities; and that by this
method Charity was almost always injured, and Truth never brought to light.

XX. After which he proposed a compendious way to terminate those differences,
without entering into long disputes of Learning. It was to take for the Judges
of the present controversies the ancient Doctors of the Church, who had
explained the Mi^teries of the Christian Religion; adding that if the Heretics
insisted upon the testimonies of the ancient Fathers, it was easy to convict
them, and if they refused to submit thereto, they would render themselves
odious to the People.

N^^tari^s made good use of this advice, and came forthwith to confer with the
Emperor about it. This Prince found that it was the most concise and easy
expedient to succeed in his design; and rejoicing that he was disentangled from
all those fruitless subtilties, which he did not understand, and that he could
reduce to one single point so easy to prove, all the questions which divided
the Church, he managed the affair with abundance of Prudence. One day when the
Bishops were assembled, he entered into the Synod, spoke to them with much
Sweetness and Gravity; and after having exhorted them to Peace, and a research
after Truth, he questioned them concerning their opinions of the holy Doctors,
who had treated of the Faith, and Doctrine of Jesus Christ before the last
Here^^es; they answered, without Haesitation* that they acknowledged them for
their Masters, and had a profound Veneration for them. Then Theodosius, Either
condemn those, said he to them, whom you just now praised, or confess what they
have written concerning the Divinity of Jesus Christ.

XXI. He spoke these words in so firm and absolute a tone, that the most
obstinate remained without reply, confounded that they had betrayed themselves
by acknowledging the Authority of the Ancients. The Emperor, who saw them in
disorder, urged them to make choice of one or the other party: but as error is
never at union with it self, there was a division amongst them. The
Demi-Arians, who thought to be able to explain the Fathers in their favor,
consented to a perseverance in the Doctrine of Antiquity; the rest, who could
not save themselves but by dispute, demanded to come to a discussion of the
points contested: They grew warm insensibly one against another, as far as to
upbraid each other with their opinions, either as contrary to the Testimony of
the ancient Church, or as unwarrantable in Reason.

XXII. The Emperor taking the advantage of the disturbance they were in,
declared to them that he would himself take care to unite them, and commanding
every Sect to give him its Profession of Faith in writing, he went out of the
Assembly. The most qualified amongst them were charged with the preparation of
these Forms, which they concerted all together with an extreme exactness,
weighing all the words and syllables, and seeking all the softest methods to
reconcile the Emperor to them, without doing prejudice at the ^ame time to
their opinions.

Theodosius having sent for them a few days after they came to the Palace.
Demophilus, who had, been chased from the Sea of Constantinople, declared by
writing that the Son of God was but a creature; that he was not begotten of his
Father, but had been created out of nothing; Eunomius Native of Cappadocia, a
man of a busy and seditious Spirit, who had been Bishop of Cyzicum, and whom
even those of his own party could not endure, brought his Profession of Faith,
as impious as the other, but conceived in terms more magnificent and respectful
in reference to Jesus Christ. Eleusius, Chief of the Macedonians, presented his
at the same time, wherein he enlarged himself upon the G^eatness and Dignity of
the Son of God, but rejecting the term of consubstantial, and still adding some
Blasphemies against the Holy Ghost. He was a wavering man, and of little
solidity, who had ^epented twice of his error, and relapsed into it as often,
and at last died in Schism. The Patriarch Nectarius, and Agelas a Novatian
Bishop gave also their Confession of Faith, in which they defended ^he Doctrine
of the Nicean Council, and main^ained the consubstantiality of the word.

XXIII. The Emperor took these Forms with ^uch civility, and retired into his
Closet. He Socrat. ^* (...) c. 10.
^erused them, and after having made his Prayer ^ draw the blessings of Heaven
upon the Action e was going to do, he re-entred into the Hall ^here were the
Arian Bishops: There, tearing in ^eir presence their Confessions of Faith, and
pre^rving none but that of the Catholics, he decla^d to them, That he was
resolved to suffer no other eligion in the whole extent of his Dominions, than
that ^ich acknowledged the Son of God to be Consubstantial to his Father; That
it was time for them to reunite, and to receive the wholesome Doctrine of the
ancient Church; That he would use all his Authority for the glory of God, from
whom he held it; and that regarding them as his Adversaries, who should be
those of Jesus Christ, he should know well how to make himself obeyed in a
Point, wherein was concerned the safety and repose of his Subjects. After which
he dismissed them, without staying for their Answer.

XXIV. The Majesty of the Prince, their division, their surprise, the
approaching ruin of their Sects, the shame of having so ill defended their
Causes, caused trouble and confusion in their minds. They withdrew from Court,
and soon observing themselves to be abandoned of the greatest part of their
Followers, they at length assembled together the remainders of their Parties,
and were reduced to tell them for all their comfort, That the number of the
Elect was small; that the truth was usually persecuted upon earth; and that
their Faith would be so much the more agreeable to God, as Men had more
Authority to oppress it: which they had not been careful to declare, when they
oppressed the Church themselves by force and violence.

Cod. Theod. l. 11. and 12. de Haeret.
XXV. To accomplish the destruction of these Heresies, the Emperor immediately
sent out an Ordinance, whereby he prohibited Heretics to assemble together, to
instruct the People either in City or Country, to be possessed of any building
that should have any manner of likeness to a Church, in a word to say or do any
thing in private or public, that was contrary to the Catholic Religion;
permitting all the good Men of his Empire to unite themselves in order to the
chasing from civil society all those who should dare to contradict this
Ordinance. He likewise enjoined all Officers and Magistrates to oblige the
Arians to confine themselves within their Cities and Provinces, lest by a too
free communication with the People, they should disperse abroad their venomous
Principles. And to be assured of the execution of his Edicts, he ordered the
Magistrates of those Cities, wherein the Arians should hold any Congregation,
to be most severely punished, and the houses, wherein they should be caught,
confiscated.

XXVI. There was need of an Authority like his, to repress a Sect so
rebellious, so extensive, and so imperious. But notwithstanding all his vigor,
he still retained much goodness. He terrified the Sozom l. 7. c. 12.
Heretics, without ordaining any Punishments for them. He kept them in
obedience, without exacting forced Conversions; and leaving to God the
affecting their hearts by his grace, he contented himself to humble them, by
the little esteem he made of them, or to attract them by the favors which he
showed to all those who returned to his communion, and never came to
threatenings, till he had practiced all the ways of sweetness.

This candid Behavior oftentimes disturbed the Catholics, who, by an
inconsiderate zeal, were always for extirpating their Enemies. It gave occasion
for a wise Remonstrance, which was made to him by Amphilochus Bishop of
Iconium. Theodosius had resolved, as we have said, to abolish the multitude of
Religions; and in order to gain the heads of Parties, or at least not to
frighten them, he had several Conferences with them, and invited them by very
pressing Considerations to hearken to a reunion. The Conducts he had with them,
and the Civilities which he showed them, gave a disturbance to several holy
Bishops, who did not pierce into his designs. They were afraid of his being
surprised by those artificial Men, who knew how to disguise their malice, and
did not want Intrigues and Cabals in Court. They were also afflicted at his
refusal to renew his Edicts against the Arians.

XXVII. As they found themselves obliged to go in a Body to wait upon this
Prince, in order to the performing of their Duties to him, and to his Son
Arcadius, lately created Emperor; Amphilochus a Prelate venerable for his Age,
the purity of his Faith, and the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, otherwise
very simple, and unpolished, followed the rest to the Palace. As soon as he
came into the Hall of Audience, and appeared before Theodosius, Sozom. l. 7* c.
^. Theod. l. 5. c. 16. Niceph. l. 12. c. 9.
he made him his Compliment with a very profound respect; and approaching
afterward to Arcadius, who was seated by his side, God preserve thee, my Son,
said he to him, smiling faintly, and stroaking him upon the head. All the
Company blushed, and the Emperor touched at this despising Behavior, and those
injurious Caresses which he made to his Son, made a sign to the Guards to take
away the indiscreet old Man. Then the holy Bishop turning himself, said to him
in a free and serious manner, You are offended, Sir, when your Son is not as
much honored as your self. Don't you imagine that the heavenly Father is as
tenderly sensible of the injury which is done to him, by those who refuse to
adore his Son, and who blaspheme against him? The Emperor admired this rustical
wisdom, which was of more account than all the prudence of the children of this
world. He asked pardon of this Prelate, and after he had returned him thanks
for his instruction, he gave him an assurance that he would make the best use
thereof.

XXVIII. Whilst the Heretics deplored their ruin in the East, the Pagans,
under the conduct of Symmachus the Senator, endeavored to raise themselves at
Rome. The Conjunctures were favorable. Maximus amused them in this design, and
Valentinian was afraid of incensing Maximus. They wanted nothing but an
opportunity to demand the re-establishment of their Religion, it was not long
before they found one.

There happened this year a great scarcity of Provisions throughout all Italy, as
well by reason of the Winds and Droughts, as the little foresight of the
Magistrates. Rome found itself reduced to all the extremities of Famine. Bread
was sold there at an excessive Rate, and was only to be had by measure; the
People were constrained to live D. Ambros. E^. 31. l. 5. Symmach. l. 2. ep. 7.
D. Ambros. Offic. l. 2. ^. 7.
upon Acorns and Roots; necessity increased every day. They were obliged to
discharge this great City of part of its Inhabitants, and chased away the
poorer sort, as if it had been lawful to add Exile to Poverty; and to consider
those as Strangers, who were in the greatest want of Relief.

XXIX. Symmachus at that time held the first Rank in the Senate. His Quality,
his Eloquence, his Employments, and the reputation of his Probity, rendered him
very considerable to the Emperors. But whether it was out of a strong
prepossession for the worship of false Gods, or out of a vain desire to support
a decaying Religion, and to govern in the Party, he became not only troublesome
in occasions, but also unfaithful to his Masters. He honored them more or
less, according as they spared, or oppressed the Idols. All the Edicts against
the Pagans appeared to him Sacriledges; and all the public Calamities passed
in his mind for vengeances of incensed Heaven.

This Man always ready for new Intrigues of Complaint, or to present Petitions
for the service of his Gods, supposing that the Famine, and the other
misfortunes of the Empire, were divine Punishments, made up an eloquent
Request, which he sent to the Emperor Valentinian. He entreated him, in the
quality of Prefect of the City, and in the Name of all the Senate, to
re-establish the Religion of Rome; to have regard to custom, and to the
antiquity of a reasonable belief; to leave to this People accustomed to their
liberty, the use of their Consciences at least; to re-establish the Symmach.
relat: ad Imp.
Altar of Victory, that Goddess, who had never forsook the Romans in their
military Expeditions; to retain the name of her, if he did not fear her power,
and to be willing at least to dissemble, after the example of some of his
Predecessors, what he had resolved not to permit.

He introduced Rom* all bathed in tears, who redemanded of her Emperors that
Worship wherein she had grown old, under which she had subdued all the World.
He remonstrated as he went along, that it was too late to correct her; That if
he was unwilling to acknowledge her Gods, he should leave them at least in
repose; That it was credible, that all breathing the same Air, and being
covered with the same Heaven, they adored in the bottom the same thing; That
there were diverse Philosophies, and that it was of no importance by what method
they obtained the truth, provided they arrived there.

He added, That it was strange that magnificent Princes should reform what
covetous Princes had established; That the Royal Treasury, instead of being
filled with the Spoils of the Enemy, was enlarged by the retrenched Pensions of
the Priests and Vestals, who made Vows for the Prosperity of the Empire; That
the Famine, and other public Misfortunes, proceeded neither from the
influences of the Stars, nor the rigor of Winters, nor the droughts of Summers,
but from the wrath of God, who took away Necessaries from all those People who
deprived their Ministers thereof.

He concluded by the Examples of the last Emperors; and exhorted Valentinian to
leave Men the liberty which his Father of happy memory had permitted, and to
consider that Gratian his Brother had followed the counsels of others, and did
not know of his disobliging the Senate, when he attempted that change in
Religion. He pressed the Council to determine suddenly thereupon, as if he had
had measures to take upon the Answer which was to be received, as well to
terrify the Court, as to give them no opportunity of consulting Theodosius.

They well foresaw that this Emperor would not be favorable to them, for they
knew that Zoz. l. 4*
he had sent Cynegius, Praefectus Praetorio, into Egypt, with orders to shut up
the Temples, to abolish Sacrifices, to prohibit the Pagans the exercise of
their Religion, not only in Alexandria, but likewise throughout the East; which
this Officer had begun to execute with much Authority, without committing at
the same time any violence.

XXX. The request of Symmachus, mixed with respect and boldness, presently
astonished the young Valentinian. He feared all things, and had still before
his eyes the bloody image of Gratian assassinated by his own proper friends.
The Empress, who governed, considered her security, more than her Religion; and
the reason of State was going to determine her against Justice and Piety. St.
Ambrose had information of it, and opposing his lively and generous
exhortations to the bold entreaties of the Gentiles, he wrote forthwith to
Valentinian, and represented to him; That there was but one God, whom Emperors
were obliged to obey, as well as the least of their Subjects; That it was to
renounce his Faith, to consent to a profane worship; That the revenues of the
Pagan Priests having been confiscated, it would not be to restore them Ambros.
Ep. 30. ad Val.
their own, but to give them his; That they had much reason to complain of some
retrenched privileges, they, who had neither spared the Churches, nor the very
blood of Christians; That it was just to have regard to the demands of persons
of quality and merit, but that in affairs of Religion he ought to consider God
alone; That their zeal to support falsehood was an example, which ought to
encourage him to perfect the truth; That to reserve to himself the liberty of
committing no Sacrilege, was not to enterprise upon the Liberty of Rome; That
it was matter of astonishment, that men of parts should demand of a Christian
Prince the re-establishment of Idols.

It was about two years since the Pagans had presented a like Request in the
name of all* the Senate; but it was afterward discovered, that it was nothing
but a Cabal of some Senators, who abused the name of their Society, whereof the
greatest part disapproved of this action, and put into the hands of Pope
Damasus an act of protestation against the Request. St. Ambrose did not cease
to allege this example, to lessen the fear he might conceive of the Senate. He
made him at length apprehend the vigor and zeal of the Bishops, and said to
him with his usual liberty, What will you reply to a Bishop, who shall tell
you, the Church has nothing to do with your presents, since you make them to
the Pagan Gods? Go, and dispose of Ambr. Ep. 30.
your offerings elsewhere, you that raise up the Altars of Idols. Jesus Christ
is not concerned to receive your homage, since you render as much to his
adversaries. Has not he expressed to you in his Gospel, that one cannot serve
two Masters? The Christian Virgins have no privileges, and you afford them to
the Vestals. And do you think that the Priests pray for you, who prefer the
prayers of Gentiles before theirs? will you cast your self upon your minority
for an excuse? Every age is perfect for Jesus Christ, and the very Infants have
confessed him.

XXXI. In fine, he conjured him to decide nothing thereupon, without knowing
the opinion of the great Theodosius, who ought to be instead of a Father to
him, and whom he had been used to consult in affairs of importance. In the mean
time he asked Valentinian for a copy of this writing, and a few days after he
composed an answer for him full of strong and judicious reflections. He
protests immediately that in the necessity Ambros. Ep. 31.
wherein he finds himself of taking his precautions, and to illustrate this
affair he searched the solidity of reasoning, leaving Symmachus all the glory
Pagan wits to dazzle the mind by colors as false as their Idols, and to say
great things, being unable to express what is true. He makes Rome speak, and
declare with much grace and gravity, That she has subdued the World by the
valor of her VVarriors, and not hy the adoration of her Gods; That she does
not blush at her alteration, since she corects herself; That she does not
ground the goodness of her Religion upon years, but upon manners; That she had
rather hear the will of God by the word of God, than by the intrails of
murdered animals. That no body can speak better of God, than God himself; and
that those men, who were not sufficiently enlightened to know themselves, could
never arrive at the knowledge of their Creator.

Afterward he mocks at the Request of Symmachus, and represents that there is
this difference between the Gentiles and the Christians, that the one entreat
the Emperors to restore Peace to their Gods, and the others beg of Jesus Christ
to grant Peace to the Emperors; That the one could not dispense with the least
retrenchment of their revenues without complaint, and the others deprive
themselves of their possessions, and resign their lives with satisfaction; That
the Vestals wanted Privileges and Pensions, as if they were incapable of being
chaste for nothing; whereas the Christian Virgins content themselves with a
course Vail, which hides their Face, and renouncing for ever their Riches as
well as their Pleasures, they find all the reward of Virtue in Virtue it self.

Then he remonstrated, that they were much to blame for attributing all the
misfortunes of the State, to the retrenchment of the pensions of the Priests
and Vestals; That if their Gods revenge rhemselves upon the whole Empire, for
the injury which was done to some particulars, they are unjust, and the
vengeance is worse than the crime; That it is a long time since their Temples
were deprived of all their privileges, and hitherto they have not minded to
send down revenge; That nothing had been done for their pacification, and yet
the Fields were covered with an abundant Harvest, and that the Plenty was
universal. In a word, he laughed at the precipitation which they testified for
the Altar of Victory, which was but a name and a success of battles; and he
exhorts Valentinian to consider in this occasion what he owed his Faith, and
the remembrance of his Brother.

XXXII. This affair having being examined in tha Emperors Council, although this
Court managed it self rather by considerations of policy, than by rulys of
piety, it submitted to the reasons which St. Ambrose had alleged. The respect
which they had for Theodosius, whose sentiments they were not ignorant of,
prevailed over the fear which they conceived of the Tyrant Maximus, and it was
judged better to afflict a small number of Senators, than to offend all the
good men of the Empire. Insomuch that Symmachus carried away nothing but the
glory of having exercised his Eloquence, and well enough defended his bad
cause: which gave occasion for a Poet of that time to say, That Victory must be
a Goddess very blind, or very ungrateful, since she had abandoned her Defender
to assist her Enemy.

XXXIII. If the single name of Theodosius stopped in the West the bold
pretensions of Idolaters, his authority completed in the East the ruin of the
Arian Sect, whose fierce and seditious humor he had feared. Gregory of
Nazianzum, who then lived in solitude, did not cease to hold correspondence at
Constantinople; and although he had made a resignation of the Archbishopric of
this City, he preserved still the tenderness of a Father for that Church, which
he had as it were raised from the dead. He was advertised by some of his
Friends, that these Heretics had Houses of retreat in Constantinople, where
they secretly dispersed their errors, and where they hoped by their intrigues
to be able to elude the rigor of the Prince's Edicts. He learnt at the same
time, that those of the Sect of Apollinaris had the confidence to make a public
Profession of their Doctrine, and openly to hold Assemblies, and that if order
was not suddenly taken, all that had been hitherto done would be of no
importance.

XXXIV. This holy man wrote to the Archbishop Greg. Naz. ad Nectar.
Nectarius concerning it, with all the respect he owed to his Dignity, but with
all the Zeal he had for Religion, and revived the dormant Piety of this
Prelate, whose intentions were good, but who was neither resolute enough, nor
sufficiently active. The Emperor having been Cod. Theod. l. 13. de Haer.
informed of this disorder, resolved to put an effectual remedy thereto, and
ordered the publication of a solemn Edict, whereby he commanded an exact
research after all those, who either taught or professed errors; that
suspicious houses should be examined, and that without having regard to
quality, or the protection of any one, those infamous Persons should be driven
from the City, and from the Society of good men; so that living without
correspondence they might be injurious to no body, but themselves.

Cod. Theod. l. ^. de contra^. Emp.
XXXV. He regulated almost at the same time another disorder, which had
reference to Religion. The Jews having lost all hopes of raising themselves,
after the vain endeavors of the Emperor Julian to re-establish them, and being
unable any longer to exercise their usual cruelties against the Christians,
attempted to seduce some of them at least. To which end they bought Slaves that
were baptized; and whether by persuasions, menaces, or force, they obliged them
to renounce the Faith of Jesus Christ, and to embrace their Superstitions.
Theodosius broke this commerce, and made an Ordinance, by which he prohibited
their having any Christian Slave or Servant, preserving thus the unsteady Faith
of the infirm from all the snares, which domestic and foreign enemies laid for
it.

XXXVI. Thus he reformed in time of Peace the disorders of the Empire, when
God, to recompense him for the cares he took of his Church, gave him a second
Son, who was named Honorius. Socrat. l. 5. c. 12. Sozom. l. 7. c. 14.
All the Court was extremely joyful at the Birth of this Prince; and Theodosius
observing the number of his Children to increase, and enjoying the sincere
affection of the People, acknowledged that Piety was the true cause of the
repose of States, and the Prosperity of Families.

XXXVII. About this time Maximus had Ambassadors at Constantinople; and although
he was peaceable possessor of those Provinces, which he had usurped, he still
kept up his Negotiation with Theodosius. He had a mind to conclude a Treaty
with him, in order to make appear that he was not only associated to the
Empire, but also allied with the Emperors. The affair succeeded according to
his wish. Theodosius made Valentinian enter therein, and the Alliance was
accomplished between these three Princes. Their prospects were of a different
nature. The Empress Justine, who absolutely governed her Son, engaged him to
demand a Peace, to the end that being delivered from all fear, she might
restore dejected Arianism, and humble the inflexible Spirit of St. Ambrose, who
thwarted all her designs. Maximus, who watched but an occasion to throw himself
into Italy, intended nothing but to honor himself by a Treaty, which he was
resolved to infringe at the first opportunity. Theodosius, who feared the
oppression of Valentinian, and was himself threatened with the irruption of the
Grotungues* consented to all things. Thus it was probable a war would soon
break out, since one was only retained by fear; the other lost nothing of his
fierceness, or immoderate ambition; and that the last still maintained in his
heart the desire of a just revenge.

XXXVIII. In the mean time each governed his Dominions according to his temper.
Maximus, after having rendered himself Master of the Empire, whether he thought
his Reign not secure without the destruction of the principal Friends of
Gratian, or else wanted the confiscation of their Estates, in order to satisfy
those Troops, who had not betrayed their Prince for nothing, put to death Sulp.
Seb: Dial. 3.
Merobaudes, a man illustrious for his Prudence, for his Integrity, and for
several Consulships. He banished the Count Balion, one of the greatest Captains
of his time, with orders to the Guards who conducted him, to burn him alive in
the place of his Exile; which obliged him to kill Pacat. in Panegyr.
himself upon the way. He seized upon Count Narses, and Leucadius one of the
most famous D. Ambr. Epist. 27.
Magistrates of Gaul; and making a crime of State of the fidelity they had
preserved to their Emperor, he destined them to the last punishment.

XXXIX. St. Martin Bishop of Tours, departed in haste in order to obtain their
pardon. He cast himself at the feet of Maximus, and prayed him not to spill
innocent blood; but he received only an ambiguous answer. He redoubled his
instances, and threatening him with the judgments of God, Sulpit. Sev. de vita
S. Martini.
he entreated him, as if he had been commanded; but still no positive assurance
could be drawn from him. Yet Maximus had some difficulty to refuse his demands,
and lost before this Prelate his natural haughtine^^ and brutality He called
him oftentimes into his Closet, and heard him speak of heavenly things. He
suffered his remonstrances, with his free and generous actions. He prayed him
to eat at his Table; and when the Saint refused it, saying, that he would not
participate of the Table of a man, who had dispossessed an Emperor of his Life
and Empire; he answered to him, That the Army had raised him to the Throne
against his will; that he had maintained himself therein by his Arms; that God
himself seemed to have established him by so many wonderful successes; and that
if any one had lost his Life, it had been the misfortune of war, and not his
fault.

XL. The Passion of obtaining this Bishop, so renowned for his Virtues, and his
Miracles, the desire of sweetning the refusal which he had made him by outward
Caresses, and especially the thoughts of winning, by appearances of Piety,
those good Men whom he had scared by his Perfidiousness, obliged him to seek
with so much haste the communication of the Saint, which he at length procured
after long solicitations: but whatsoever Veneration he made appear for his
Person, he had no regard to his Remonstrances, nor to his Prayers in the affair
of Priscillian Bishop of Avila, and some of his Followers.

XLI. These Heretics, Spaniards by Nation, joined to the Errors of Sabellius,
and the ravings of the Manicheans, all the impurities of Gnostics, in their
nocturnal Ass^^blies with diverse Women, whom they had ^uced. They covered all
their Infamies with some appearances of humility, an affected negligence in
their habits, and a surprising austerity of life. As this corruption, which an
Egyptian had lately sowed in Spain, dispersed itself there, some Bishops
opposed it: but their zeal not being accompanied with charity, they persecuted
those whom they might perhaps have brought over by moderate Proceedings. They
were cited before Councils. The Emperor Gratian had granted an Order to chase
them from the Cities and Churches where they were, and even from all the
Dominions of the Empire. But they found means to get themselves established
again; and by Presents, or Intrigues, they won the Ministers of the Emperor,
and chased their Adversaries at their turn.

XLII. These having learnt that Maximus was Gaul, attended him there, went to
find him at Treves, and presented to him a bloody Petition against Priscillian
and his companions. They were all referred to a Council, which was to be held
at Bourdeaux. Priscillian fearing to be deposed there, would not answer and
appealed to the Tribunal of the new Emperor. The Catholic Prelates, by a
shameful compliance, demurred to this Appeal, and this Cause Ecclesiastical in
every Point became a Civil Cause. The Accused was brought to Court, and the
Accusers followed him, being resolved to destroy him, without putting
themselves to the trouble of converting him.

XLIII. St. Martin, who was then at Treves, knowing that particular Passions
had a greater share in this matter, than the love of Truth, remonstrated to
them several times, That their Conduct was scandalous; That they lost the merit
of their Zeal by their obstinate Accusations; That they subverted the whole
Order of Ecclesiastical Judgments; That it was not a fitting thing to defend
the Cause of God by humane Passions, nor becoming for Bishops to pursue to
death any Criminal whatsoever.

They, to whom this instruction was directed, were incensed at it, instead of
making an advantage thereof. They were enraged to that degree, as to accuse him
of being the Protector of the Heretics, and a Heretic himself. But the Saint
laughed at this Calumny, and continued to pray the Emperor to let those
miserable persons live, representing to him, That he ought to stand to the
Sentence of the Council, which chased them from their Sees; and that it was a
thing unheard of, for a secular Prince, such a one as he, to judge
Ecclesiastical Causes. Maximus being affected with his Reasons, promised to
save their Lives; but they provoked him in such a manner, that he referred the
business of Priscillian to Evodius the Praetor, and made him condemn him to be
beheaded.

XLIV. This execution was the ground of several disorders: for the punishment
of this Arch-Heretick did but corroborate his Heresy. Those of his Sect made a
most stately Funeral for him, and honored him as a Martyr; and those, who
caused him to be condemned, abusing their own credit, and the favor of the
Court, persecuted Men of worth at their pleasure. To fast, and love retirement,
Sulpit. Sev. de vita S. Martini.
was sufficient to make a Man suspected to them; it was a Crime to be wiser, and
more reformed, than they. They, who had disobliged them, were presently
Priscillianists, particularly when they might be Victims agreeable to the anger
of the Prince, or might increase his Treasury with their Spoils; for they
deprived of life and Pacat. in Panegyr.
possessions according to their fancy, and preserved the friendship of the
Tyrant by Reproaches, Cruelties, and other Actions, resembling his.

XLV. Whilst Maximus enterprized upon the Rights of the Church in the West,
Theodosius reestablished them at Constantinople. For some Bishops having
brought an Ecclesiastical Cause before a secular Tribunal, and persons, whom
their Age and Characters rendered venerable, having been cited and examined, he
was much displeased when he heard of it. He made an Edict immediately, whereby
he prohibited all his Judges ordinary or extraordinary to undertake those
Causes which related to Religion; willing, that the Bishops, or other persons
consecrated to God, should have their particular Judges, their Laws and their
Formalities of Justice apart, and that Ecclesiastical matters should be
referred to the Heads of those Diocesses wherein they should happen.

XLVI. He forbid the Pagans almost at the same time to sacrifice to their Gods,
and to search Futurity in the entrails of slain Beasts, as well to August. ep.
48. Ambros in Orat. fun. Theod.
stop the insolence of some, who might have prevailed by their Correspondences
in Italy, as to take from them the occasions of vain hopes by superstitious
Presages and Observations, which had oftentimes caused Troubles and Seditions
in the Empire.

XLVII. He applied himself also to a reformation of Manners, and repressed the
liberty of certain Cod. Theod. l. 10.
singing Women and Players upon Instruments, who went from house to house, and
by immodest Songs, and soft, effeminate Airs, corrupted the minds of Youth.

Hier. ep. 10. ad Fur.
XLVIII. After he had thus restored Order and Discipline in his Dominions by
severe Ordinances, he illustrated his Indulgence and his Piety by an Act of
Clemency and Pardon. The Emperors Append. Cod. Theod.
had been used to deliver Prisoners every year toward Easter, in order to
preserve some Criminals upon that day, wherein was accomplished the Mystery of
the salvation of Mankind. Constantine Ambr. op. 33.
the Great had put the same in practice, his Children had followed his example,
and the young Valentinian had made a Law of this custom. But the Piety of
Theodosius went further; for he published an Ordinance, whereby he commanded
the Prisons to be set open, and the Criminals to be released, to the end that
partaking of the holiness and joy of the sacred Mysteries, instead of
Complaints and Lamentations, they might send up to Heaven the cries of Praises
and Thanksgivings, and that every one in this day of rejoicing might address in
peace his Vows and Prayers to God, without being interrupted by compassion or
heaviness.

Chrysostom. hom. 6. ad pop. Antioch.
He added those words which a Pagan Emperor once said, and which St. Chrysostom
esteemed so worthy of a Christian Emperor: Would to God I was capable of
opening the Tombs, as well at Prisons, and to revive the dead, as I do the
living, by pardoning their Crimes.

But lest a too great clemency should give occasion for the commission of all
kind of wickedness, the Emperors made some exceptions in matters that tended to
great consequences, and which deserved not to be comprehended in this Pardon.

S. Greg. Nyss. in fun. Pulch.
XLIX. These diligent, and so important Cares which Theodosius took to regulate
the Empire, were interrupted by his affliction for the death of the Princess
Pulcheria his daughter. Although she was but in the first years of Infancy, he
was very sensibly concerned at her loss. He ordered her Obsequies to be very
magnificent, and Gregory of N^ssa, who was then at Constantinople, pronounced
the funeral discourse. Scarce had he begun to comfort himself for this first
misfortune, but there arrived another which rendered him inconsolable; for the
Empress Flaccilla his Wife died suddenly in a Village of Thrace, where she was
gone to take the Waters.

L. This Princess was born in Spain, of the ancient Family of the Aelians, from
whence the Emperor Adrian was descended: but she was become more illustrious by
her virtues, than her birth. Her chief employments were Prayer, and the care of
the Poor. She went to visit them, served them herself, and was proud of
descending to the lowest Ministries of Christian Charity. She Theodor. l. 5. c.
1^.
took care of all the Sick in Hospitals and Prisons, and as horrible as their
distempers were, she provided for them with her own hands. They would
oftentimes remonstrate to her, that there was a devotion more conformable to
her dignity, and that it was neither necessary, nor even becoming for her to
condescend to those last offices of Piety, which she might entrust with some of
her domestics. But she answered, That she left to the Emperor the care of
distributing his Treasures, and to render the Church important services, by
making the Theod. ib.
whole majesty of the Empire serve to the glory of Religion: That as for her,
it was a sufficient honor to her to offer to God her little cares, and the
humble service of her hands; and that she could not testify her acknowledgment
to him, but by descending from the Throne wherein he had placed her, to serve
him in the person of his Poor.

This humility did but augment the esteem which the Emperor had for her, and
gave her every day more influence upon the spirit of this Prince. She made use
thereof to no other advantage, than to give him profitable advice, in speaking
to him of the Divine Law, wherein she was perfectly acquainted, and inspiring
him with that zeal for Religion wherewith she was inflamed. She often set
before his eyes what he had been, for fear he should abuse what he was.
Exciting thus his acknowledgment, by the recital of those Favors which he had
received from God; and supporting his Piety, which the perplexity of business,
and the exaltation wherein he found himself, might have weakened. She was more
desirous to see him holy, than she was joyful to observe him Master of the
World. Although she had great parts, she would never know more in matter of
Religion, than was necessary for her salvation. She detested the impiety of the
Arians almost as much as that of Idolaters, and frequently said, That, there
was but little difference between those who adored Sozom. l. 7. c. 5.
Gods that had no existence, and those who would not acknowledge Jesus Christ
to be one. So would she never entertain any Commerce with them, avoiding the
snares which they laid several times for her curiosity, and taking no other
rule of her Faith, than the decisions of the Nicean Council. She even averted
the Emperor from the design, Sozom. l. 7. c. 6.
which had been suggested to him of going to hear Eunomius, who preached at
Calcedon over against Constantinople, and whom the Arians made pass for the
finest genius, and most eloquent Theologian of his Age. By this means she
hindered these Heretics from giving ill impressions to this Prince, and the
honor he should have done to them, was of no service to increase the
reputation of their Orator, or to authorize their Assemblies. Theodosius lost
this dangerous curiosity, and even chased from his Palace some of his
domestics, who had a secret correspondence with Eunomius.

All these virtues of the Empress made her loss to be lamented. As soon as the
news of her death was dispersed, all the City was in mourning, the Poor melted
into tears, the People run in multitudes to the place where she was dead.
Theodosius made her Body to be transported to Constantinople; and in the
oppression he was, he could find no consolation but in rendering to this
Princess all the honors which were justly her due. She left two living
Children, and found again in Heaven two more, whom God had taken to himself a
little after they were born. Gregory of Nyssa made her Greg. Nyss. Orat. fun.
Flaccill.
funeral Elogy in presence of the Emperor, where he calls her the Pillar of the
Church, the Treasure of the Poor, and the Sanctuary of the miserable.

LI. It was about this time that the Empress Justine incensed against St.
Ambrose, thought she might discover her resentment. The death of Gratian, the
distance of Theodosius, the Treaty concluded with Maximus, gave her the freedom
of acting in the whole extent of her power. The Catholic Bishop elected at
Sirmium in spite of her, the Church which she had obtained by surprise in
Milan, and which she had been obliged to restore, her Arianism reduced to her
own Officers, and all her enterprises against Religion crossed, immediately
returned into her mind. She resolved to destroy this Archbishop, who ruined all
her measures.

LII. She made an Edict in the name of Valentinian her Son, whereby ^he
permitted to the Arians the public exercise of their Religion, and declared
all those who should dare to oppose it, Authors of Sedition, Disturbers of the
Peace of the Church, guilty of High Treason, and worthy of Death. She called
Benevolus first Secretary of State, and commanded him to draw up this Edict;
but he excused himself, choosing rather to lose his station, than to authorize
an Ordinance that was against his Faith. The Empress pressed him to afford her
that satisfaction, and promised to raise Soz. l. 7. ^. 13. Gaudent in praefat.
Sermon.
him to higher Posts: but this Man, who esteemed himself more honored with the
Title of Catholic, than with all the Dignities of the Empire, replied to her
generously, I must not buy your Honors at this price, Madam; resume that which
I possess, and leave me my Conscience, and my Religion. At these words, he cast
at the Feet of this Princess the Girdle, which was the mark of his Dignity, and
retired to Bresse, where he passed the rest of his days in the exercise of
Christian virtues.

LIII. It was no hard matter to find an Officer to supply his room, and the
Edict was immediately signed. But the Arians were at a loss for a Church, and
had to do with an Archbishop, who was resolved not to yield them one. Justine
had elected Bishop one Auxentius, a Scythian by Nation, expelled his Country
for his Crimes, who had but an indifferent spirit, yet occasioned much noise.
She was of opinion, that he should provoke St. ^. Ambros. Ora^. in Aux.
Ambrose to a public dispute in the Palace, hoping to discredit him, if he
refused it; or if he accepted of it, to declare him vanquished by Judges
peculiar to her Interest, and so to drive him from his Cathedral. The Tribune
Dalmatius had Orders to go and make the Proposal to the Archbishop, and to mark
the day which the Emperor had taken for this Conference, to the end that he
might repair to the Palace with the Judges he should have chosen on his side.

LIVE. The Saint being surprised at this Proposition, after he had consulted
some Bishops that were near him, wrote to the Emperor, That the Proposal which
was made to him, was contrary to the Rights of the Church, the Custom of
preceding Ages, and the Laws of the great, Valentinian his Father; That it was
not just for Laics, or Gentiles, to be Judges of Ambros. ep. 32.
the Controversies of Faith; That in matter of Religion, Emperors were to be
judged by Bishops, and not Bishops by Emperors; That he might dispose of his
Life, but that he could not oblige him to dishonor his Priesthood; That he
would answer Auxentius in a Council; That he would treat of the sacred
Mysteries in the Church, but that he could not come to the Palace for that end,
nor acknowledge for a Judge of Faith a Prince as yet very young, who was not a
Cathec^mene. He prayed him to pardon his liberty, which was neither against the
Respect, nor the Obedience which he owed him; and to excuse him, if he did not
come himself to wait upon him with an Answer, because the Bishops and the
People retained him, and that to abandon his Church in this occasion, was to
deliver it up.

LV. The Empress being unable to engage the Saint to a Dispute, resolved to get
him carried off. She corrupted, by Promises and Silver, a Man who waited for
him several days in a house adjoining to the Church, with a Chariot always
ready to seize upon him, and bear him full speed out of the City. But the
Enterprise was discovered. There remained nothing more but to oppress this
Prelate, whom they could not surprise. For this effect, Justine commanded all
the Catholic Priests to leave their Churches. Auxentius had Orders at the same
time to take with him as many Soldiers as he would, and put himself in
possession of them.

LVI. The noise being then dispersed about the City, that Soldiers were sent to
seize upon the Churches, and to kill the Archbishop, if he made any difficulty
of resigning them into their hands, the People run from all Parts, and enclosed
themselves within the Cathedral, being resolved to defend both Church and
Pastor to the last drop S. August. Confess. l. 9. c. 7. Ambr. in Auxent.
of their blood. St. Ambrose comforted the People by his constancy; by
assurances of God's protection; by very edifying discourses of Piety; and by
singing of Psalms which he had instituted, such as was practiced in the East.

They had passed some days and nights in this condition, when the Tribunes
invested the Church with their Soldiers, and summoned the Archbishop by virtue
of the last Edict to resign it to them, offering him, as an act of mercy, the
liberty of retiring with those who had a mind to follow him. The holy Prelate
answered to them, That they might oppress him in his Church, but that he would
never leave it voluntarily; That if they came to question his Revenues, or even
the Funds of the Church, he would dispense with that violence; but as for the
inheritance of Jesus Christ, he would preserve it to the expense of his own
Life; That indeed he had for Arms nothing but Lamentations, Tears, and Prayer;
but that if he could not resist, however he would not fly; That he saw well how
far the power of the Emperor might extend, but that he knew also how far the
patience and constancy of a Bishop, who little esteemed the loss of his Life,
provided he retained for God that fidelity which he owed to him, ought to
extend also.

LVII. Then the wisest Ministers remonstrated That he had very reasonable
Proposals to make to him; That the Emperor D. Ambr. ep. 33. ad Marcell. Soror.
left him his Cathedral, and was contented to have a Church in the Suburbs,
which was called the Portian Basilick; That since the Prince was pleased to
relax on his side, it was convenient, for the advantage of Peace, that he
relaxed also; That furthermore, he counseled him as a Friend to satisfy the
Court, and even to do it speedily. The People prevented the Reply, and
unanimously cried, pursuant to the intentions of their Pastor, That there was
no Composition to be had thereupon; That the Catholics should be left the
Churches which belonged to them. The Governor then despaired of succeeding, and
went his way, to give his Master an account of the unhappy effect of his
Negotiation.

LVIII. It was then that the malice, shame and anger of the Empress was
manifested. She commanded all the Officers of the Guards to march with their
Companies, and render themselves Masters of the Portian Church. They went there
to execute their Orders; the People run in Arms to oppose them. It was the
morning of Palm Sunday; and St. Ambrose, after having preached, was going to
begin Mass, when he received information of it. He did not cease to celebrate
the Sacred Mysteries; and having learnt in the time of the Offering, that an
Arian Priest was fallen into the hands of the Citizens, and run the hazard of
being torn in pieces, he sent his Priests and his Deacons to save his life.
Then dissolving into tears, he begged of God to grant his People peace, and
offered him his own life several times, for the safety of those who persecuted
them.

In the mean time all the City was in a terrible Ambr. ib.
confusion. There was nothing to be seen but Soldiers and Citizens armed, the
one for the Prince, the other for Religion. The Magistrates to appease this
tumult, filled the Prisons with a great number of Tradesmen, and condemned to
heavy punishments those who seemed to be most warm. But these corrections,
instead of putting a stop to this disordered populace, did nothing but incense
it. There went some Counts, some Captains of the Guards, and Gothic Officers
to St. Ambrose, in order to advise him not to retain the People, and to put an
end to this disturbance, since the Emperor demanded of him nothing more, than a
Church of the Suburbs, and that it was fit he should be Master in his own
Empire. The Holy Archbishop answered to them, That the Emperor had no right
upon the house of God; That he was ready to give up to him the small
possessions he had left; That as for the Church, it was a crime for a Bishop to
resign it, and a sacrilege for a Priest to seize upon it; Ambr. ib.
That for the rest, he was so far from exciting the People, that he restrained
them, and exhorted them to defend themselves but with tears and prayer; but
that if they had been once in a fury, it appertained to God alone to pacify
them. These Officers had nothing to reply to him, and retired much improved by
his conduct. The Archbishop went to visit a Church called the Ancient Basilick;
and after having comforted the Inhabitants of that Quarter, he retired to his
own house, and would never permit himself to be attended or guarded.

In the mean time, the Empress resolved to go the next day with the Emperor to
take possession her self of the Ancient Basilick. She sent some Soldiers there
to seize upon it, and to set up the Imperial Canopy therein. They came in haste
to inform the holy Prelate that this Church was lost, and that they heard the
miserable cries of those who were within, who implored his assistance, and that
it would be convenient for him to go in person to oppose this Usurpation. But
he replied, That God would look after it; That as for him, he would not oppose
force to force, nor turn the Temple of the Lord into a Field of Battle. He
resolved notwithstanding to make use of spiritual Arms, and that Authority
which his Ministry allowed him.

In effect, being entered into his Cathedral, where an infinite number of People
attended him, he solemnly excommunicated all the Soldiers that had the
Insolence to seize upon the Churches. They, who had invested the Cathedral,
having received notice of it, went in by couples, protesting that they entered
not as Enemies, but as Brothers; and that they came to pray, and not to fight.
St. Ambrose received them, and began his Sermon upon the Book of Job, which had
been just read before.

In the mean time they, who had possessed themselves of the ancient Basilick,
were scarce got in, but struck with an inward remorse, they deputed some of
their Officers to the Emperor, to tell him, That they had executed his Orders;
That they attended him at the Church, in order to serve him there according to
their Charge, if he communicated with the Catholics; but that if he was of the
Arian Party, their Consciences obliged them to go and find the Bishop Ambrose.
This unexpected Blow alarmed the Palace; it was necessary to take down the
Canopy, and to renounce the Enterprise.

LIX. The Emperor was still much more surprised, when the chief Officers of the
Empire, and the principal Lords of the Court came in a Body most humbly to
entreat him, in the Name of the whole Army, to go to Church in those days
consecrated to the Passion of Jesus Christ, to the end that the People being a
witness of his Piety, and the purity of his Faith, might be secured from all
their fears. This deputation vexed him so much, that he answered to them
angrily, I see well that I am here but the shadow of an Emperor, and that ye
are. Men, who would deliver me up to your Bishop every time he shall give
Orders for it. In the anger he was in, he sent upon the spot one of his
Secretaries to St. Ambrose, to ask him, If he was resolved to resist
obstinately the Orders of his Master? And if he pretended to usurp the Empire
as a Tyrant, to the end that he might prepare War against him? The Saint
answered to it wisely, That he had sustained the Rights of the Church, without
deviating from the Respect which was owing to the Emperor; That he reverenced
his Power, but that he envied it not; That he had nothing further to do, than
to ask Maximus, If Ambrose was the Tyrant of the Emperor Valentinian? That
Bishops were never known to be Tyrants, but it had often happened that they had
suffered the Persecutions of Tyrants. Calligonus the Eunuch, Great Chamberlain,
had a mind to make a Droll of it; and, to please his Master, he sent to tell
the Archbishop, That he should cease to be disobedient and rebellious, if not,
he would come himself to behead him in his own house. The Archbishop made
answer to him, That he would receive the Blow without being amazed; That they
should have both wherewithal to be content, the one to suffer what Bishops have
Ambr. ep. 33. ad Marcell.
been used to suffer for the sake of God, the other to do what Eunuchs
ordinarily do for the pleasure of Men.

LX. At length the Persecution ceased, when it appeared most warm. Valentinian
began to be sensible, That his Authority was abused. The City in disorder, the
Court displeased, the Army resolved to live in the Communion of the Archbishop,
the visible Protection of Heaven upon the Catholics, the dangerous
Consequences which might proceed from the Passion of Justine, if he persisted
in following her. All these Reasons obliged him to restore things to their
first posture, and to recall the Soldiers who had invested the Churches. At
this happy news of Peace, the whole City was transported with joy. The People
left their Arms. Every one ran to Church, not to guard it again, but to render
thanks therein. Some went to kiss the Altars they had defended, others sung
Psalms and spiritual Songs. They congratulated one another for their constancy,
and casting themselves at the feet of their Archbishop, made for him a sort of
Religious Triumph by their Acclamations, and their Prayers for his Prosperity.
The Archbishop being affected with a Joy altogether spiritual and modest,
referred to God all those Praises which were given to him; and by his lively,
moving Exhortations, encouraged his People to lead a life conformable to the
Faith which they had so courageously defended.

The Empress alone remained obdurate, and employed the blackest and most
execrable methods to destroy the Saint, demonstrating thereby how far extend
the Passions of a powerful, incensed Woman, jealous of her Authority and
Religion. But Fear put a stop to her Fury, and the necessity Paulin. in vit.
Ambr.
of things obliged her suddenly to have recourse to that very Prelate whom she
had so cruelly persecuted.

LXI. Maximus, who secretly prepared to pass into Italy, and sought but for a
Pretense to justify Theodor. l. 5. 6. 14.
his Irruption, wrote a Letter to Valentinian, to exhort him to persevere in the
Catholic Religion, and to cease the Persecution of St. Ambrose, and of those
who persisted at Milan in the Party o^ Truth. He made him even apprehend, that
he would declare himself the Protector of this Archbishop. He dispatched O^ders
at the same time to his Ambassadors at Constantinople, to complain there of the
Empress Justine, and to make it plausible, that he approached Italy in order to
secure Religion.

LXII. Theodosius, who could not be pleased with the violent Proceedings of
Justine, and saw well that Maximus, under this Pretense, went to seize upon the
Dominions of Valentinian, had a mind to advance himself toward the Alps, to
retain both one and the other in their duty. But Thrace was threatened with a new
deluge of Barbarians, insomuch that he durst not be at a distance from it. The
Grotungues, a cruel and disturbing People, had left the heart of Scythia, with
a design to enter by fair means, or otherwise, into the Lands of the Empire.
They were in prodigious number, all armed, and well inured to War. Alatheus and
Safrax, Captains of their Nation, who had assisted at the defeat of Valens, had
engaged them to this Enterprise, and their King Odetheus conducted them to it,
as to an easy Conquest. Passage was granted to them in some places; they took
themselves that liberty in others. After having compelled all that made
resistance, and collected all that would join with them, they arrived upon the
Banks of the Danube, and demanded permission to pass the River. Whatsoever
Protestations they made to live in Peace, the Example of the Goths was too
fresh, and Theodosius had not the same facility as Valens.

Claud. de I. Consul. Honor.
LXIII. When they saw themselves repulsed, they resolved to pass in spite of
the Romans. They had made in a few days 3000 Barks, and attempted the Passage
in diverse places. Promotus, who commanded the Army of Thrace, and had extended
his quarters along the River, stopped them everywhere with great loss o^ their
side. But since he had Orders to spare the Troops, and besides feared Zoz. l. 4
the surprises or efforts of this multitude, he joined dexterity to force. He
found in his A^my some Soldiers of an experienced fidelity, who understood the
language of these Barbarians, and sent them into their Camp, in order to
discover their designs, and to advertise him thereof. These seigning themselves
to be Deserters and Malcontents, got to be presented to the King and chief
Commanders, and offered to deliver to them the Army and General of the Romans:
but they demanded such an excessive Recompense, that the Barbarians protested
they had not where withal to requite so great a Service. After several
Proposals made on both sides, they agreed at last upon a considerable Sum, part
whereof was to be paid beforehand, and the other was secure for the day after
the execution. They took the hour of embarking; concerted the Signal which was
to be given; marked out the place of passage, and prepared all things for the
following night.

LXIV. It was resolved, that their best Troops should pass first to assault the
Romans, whom they supposed to find asleep; that they should be supported by the
rest of the Army, and that the Women and Children should come after without
difficulty or danger in the Barks, which were intended for them. Promotus being
informed of the design of the Gortungues, and of the order they were to
observe, provided all things on his side. He linked together, three and three,
the lightest of his Boats, and extending them about the space of twenty
Furlongs all along the River, he formed, as it were, a Chain, in order to
obstruct the Descent upon the Shore. He designed the bigger Vessels to keep the
River, and to fall impetuously upon the Enemies in the time of their passage.
The Troops were disposed conformably to his Projections. The Moon made no
appearance, and the night, to the satisfaction of both Parties, was very
obscure. Odetheus embarked in silence with the choicest of his Men, and thought
of nothing less than a discovery. But scarce were they arrived at the reach of
the Tract, toward the Bank of the River, but they were charged by the Roman
Troops, who guarded the Shore. Then they began to know they were betrayed, and
remained in suspense, not daring to advance, and being unable to draw back.

As they were in this disorder, the Romans, who ascended the great Vessels,
abandoning themselves to the current of the water, rowed with all the ^orce of
their Oars, came to take them in the flank, and shocked them so rudely, that
overthrowing one upon another with their Barks, they drowned the most
considerable part of them Those who remained went to strike against the Chain
of Boats, and were either knocked on the head, or made Prisoners. After the
defeat of the most brave, it was no hard matter to compass the end of the rest,
whom the death of their King, and their Companions had put into a
Consternation, and were still in the disorder of the Engagement. Although they
surrendered at discretion, the heated Soldier had put all to the Sword, but that
Promotus made the slaughter cease, and even hindered them from pillaging the
Camp, to the end that the Emperor, who was suddenly to come to the Army, might
himself be a Witness of this Victory, and might know the consequence of it by
the quantity of Spoils, and by the number of the dead and Prisoners.

LXV. Never was Naval Fight more fatal to the Enemies of the Empire. The River
was covered with the wreck of so many broken Barks, and overthrown Vessels.
There was to be seen heaps of Barbarian Bodies, which the Waves had cast upon
the Banks on both sides. Their very Arms were of such a make, that
notwithstanding Zoz. ^. 4.
they ^ere weighty enough, they did not cease to reascend upon the water.
Theodosius came time enough to have his share of this Spectacle. He presently
gave his Prisoners liberty, who, finding themselves without a head, and in
despair of reaching their own Country again, gave themselves voluntarily to
him, and were afterward serviceable to him in his Wars. He ordered the Spoils
to be divided amongst the Soldiers; and after he had commended the Prudence and
Valor of Promotus, he entrusted him with the design he had to declare War
against Maximus, and designed him for the command of the Army.

LXVI. Of all these Grotungues, who took part in his Troops, he picked out the
most courageous, and best made; and to secure them more firmly to his service,
he made a Promise to them of double Pay, presented each of them with a golden
Collar, and assigned them quarters in Scythia the less, about the City of
Tomes. As they had been accustomed to live without much Discipline, they over
run the Country licentiously, and were even incommodious to the City.
Gerontius, who was the Governor, prohibited them entrance therein, and
threatened them to come out with all his Garrison, and put them all to the Sword;
but they despised his Threats. Then this daring and impatient Man assembled his
Officers and most ancient Soldiers, and exposed to them the design he had to
set upon these strangers; but they refused all to follow him, some by Prudence,
others by Cowardice.

LXVII. When he saw himself to be thus deserted, he took his Armies, gets on
Horseback, attended by some of his own Men, and went to defy this multitude.
The Barbarians laughed at his temerity, and were contented to detach some of
theirs against him. Gerontius run upon the first that advanced with Sword in
hand. There arose betwixt them an obstinate Combat, and after having mutually
returned several useless Blows, as they came to close, one of the Romans having
run to disengage his Captain, discharged so terrible a stroke upon the
Grotongue, that he took off his shoulder, and threw him from his Horse stark
dead. The Barbarians admired at the force of this Man, and were in a
consternation at the Blow he had made. Gerontius, after he had got rid of one,
attacked the rest, and those of his Retinue fought with the same vigor as
himself: But what Exploits soever they performed, they could not long resist a
great number; and their Presumption had been punished, if some Officers of the
Garrison, who were upon the walls of the City, and saw their Commander in
danger, had not speedily repaired to his assistance.

LXVIII. These having stirred up the rest by their Example, they no more
regarded in the Enterprise of the Governor the violence and passion of a
private Man, but the glory of the Roman Name, and the common interest of their
Nation. Inhabitants and Soldiers went out together, and so courageously
assaulted these Barbarians, that there remained but a very small number, who
had taken Sanctuary in a Church.

Gerontius thought he had preserved Scythia that day, and made haste to give
the Emperor advice of the Action he had performed, as if he had obtained a
Victory, for which he was to expect Commandations and Rewards; but Theodosius
was extremely displeased thereat. Besides the loss he had sustained of so many
brave Soldiers, whom he had won by his Presents and Civilities, he was still
afraid lest the rest of the Barbarians who were in his Pay, should be
discouraged from the service of the Empire, or should revenge the death of
their Companions, when they found an opportunity of doing it.

LXIX. As he was upon the Point to undertake a considerable War, and that
nothing was so dangerous as to weaken the Army of the Empire, and to alienate
the minds of the Allies, Gerontius was sent for to Court, in order to give an
account of his Conduct. He alleged, That the Grotongues had lived disorderly
in Scythia; That after having ruined the Country, they had a mind to render
themselves Masters of the City of Tomes; That he had often menaced them, and at
last had been constrained to use them as Enemies and Rebels. Notwithstanding he
was accused of not only assaulting without order, Troops, over which he had no
Authority, but also of having reaped the advantage of their Spoils, and
particularly the Gifts which the Emperor had made them.

Upon this Accusation Theodosius having ordered his confinement, commanded a
severe examination of this Affair; and although in the end Gerontius justified
himself, and he was glad not to lose a Man of courage, capable of the first
employment of War, yet he did not cease to retain him in Prison, and to
threaten him with death, as well to teach other Governors moderation, as to
satisfy a barbarous Nation, who had complained, of the violence of this Man.

LXX. For all Theodosius thought to have sheltered the Empire from the Insults
of Maximus, yet to take away that Pretense of Religion which he made use of, he
dispatched Couriers to him, to assure him, That he was no less offended than
himself at Valentinian's persecution of the Archbishop of Milan, and all the
Catholics; That he would employ his Credit with the young Emperor, to confirm
him in the Faith of his Ancestors, and that he hoped to have success therein.
He wrote likewise to the Empress Justine to remonstrate to her, That she should
be cautious of the danger to which she exposed the Dominions of her Son, if she
continued to disturb the Peace of the Church; That although the designs of
Maximus were unjust, the motive appeared good; and that it would be a difficult
matter to maintain against him a War, which the People would believe to be
undertaken for the defense of Religion. These Remonstrances would undoubtedly
have produced all the effect which Theodosius expected from them; but they came
too late, and the Affair had already changed its Face.

LXXI. It was heard at the same time, that Maximus made great preparations of
War, and that he was upon the point of passing the Alps. Justine; and the
Emperor her Son cast their eyes upon St. Ambrose, and prayed him to forget what
was passed, and to undertake ^ second Embassy toward Maximus. The happy
success of the former, made them hope well from this. The design was to
discover the intentions of this Prince, to divert him from his Enterprise, to
maintain the Truce, and to make, if it was necessary, an overture of some new
Treaty of Peace, in order to amuse him, and to afford Valentinian an
opportunity of providing for his defense, and Theodosius to assist him. The
pretense of the Embassy was, to require the Body of Gratian, in order to render
him the last Honors.

The Archbishop preferring the public Interest, and the Service of the Emperor
before his own Repose, without reflecting upon the Inju^ies which had been done
to him, or those he ^^ght receive from Maximus, who was dissatisfied with him,
arrived in a few days at Treves. The day after his coming, he repaired to the
Palace to demand Audience. An Eunuch* Gaul by Nation, great Chamberlain of the
Emperor, was sent to ask him if he had his Credential Letters, and to tell him,
D. Ambr. ^p. 27.
That he could not be heard but in full Council. He replied, That it was not
the custom to use a Bishop after that manner; That he had very particular
things to tell the Prince, and that he demanded a private Audience. The Eunuch
re-entred, and whether he did speak again to his Master, or was already
acquainted with his intentions, he returned to him with the same Answer as
before.

LXXII. The Archbishop was obliged to retire. He came again the next day, and
was introduced into the Council. As soon as he was entered, Maximus rising from
his Throne, bent his body toward him as it were to kiss him. The Saint stopped;
and when they made signs to him on all sides to advance, and the Emperor
himself invited him, he answered to him, That he did not believe he would kiss
a Man to whom he had denied a private Audience, and a Seat conformable to the
Rank which he held in the Church, and to the Dignity of the Prince who sent
him. Maximus threw himself upon Complaints, and reproached him with his former
Embassy, and those fine words which had seduced him from passing at that time
into Italy. But the holy Prelate replied to him generously, That he had taken
care of the Interests of a Pupil Prince; That he was proud of it, as of an
Action worthy of a Bishop; but that he had not blocked up the Alps from any
one; That he had opposed neither Armies, Trenches, Rocks, nor yet false
Assurances. After having justified his own conduct, he justified that of
Valentinian, who ^ad disbanded the Huns and Alains, for fear of giving him
suspi^^^n, who had always received his Ambassadors with honor, and had sent
back his Brother to him, whom he might have put to death by way of Reprizals.
In a word, he expo^ed to him his Commission, and demanded of him from his
Master the confirmation of the passed Treaties, and the Body of the Emperor
Gratian, whose murder he had without doubt commanded, ^ince he refused him
burial. Maximus being pressed with the remorse of his Conscience, and the
^easons of the Archbishop, had nothing to answer him, but that he was willing
to treat with Valentinian, and referred him to another Audience. Some days
after having learnt that he refused to communicate with him, and with the
Prelates of his Court, who were of the Schism of Itacus, he made use of this
pretense to command him to depart his Dominions.

LXXIII. St. Ambrose immediately dispatched a Courier to Valentinian, to give
him an account of the ill success of his Embassy, and to advise him not to
confide in the golden words of the Tyrant, who under appearances of Peace,
concealed a formed design of making War. Valentinian, who had as yet no manner
of experience, judged of this Embassy by the event, and sent Domitius, one of
his chief Ministers, to renew the Negotiation, and to accommodate, by his
ingenuity, what he thought the Archbishop had spoiled by his indiscreet zeal,
or small capacity. Maximus received this new Ambassador with all possible
civility, accepted all his Proposals, and dexterously engaged him to conduct
some of his Troops to Valentinian, to assist him against the Barbarians that
disturbed Pannonia. This Minister, glorious of the Honors which he had
received, and the service he thought to have rendered, took the Road of the
Alps, leaving, as it were in triumph, the half of an adversary Army, under the
name of auxiliary Troops.

LXXIV. Maximus followed him so close, that he entered into Italy almost as soon
as he with his whole Army, and marched directly to Aquileia, where he thought
to surprise Valentinian. The Consternation was so great, that no one put
himself into a condition to resist him. Valentinian, who took him for his Ally,
observing him to come as an Enemy, considered nothing but his safety. He
retired immediately toward the Adriatic Sea, where he embarked with the
Empress his Mother, and sailed toward Thessalonica, in order to go and implore
the assistance of Theodosius. Maximus, Pacat. in Panegyr. Theod.
displeased that he had missed of the Emperor's person, dispersed himself like a
furious Torrent* ruining Placentia, Modena, Rhegio, and Bologna, to all intents
and purposes, and laying waste all the Cities he found in his passage upon the
right and left. There was no Cruelty, Pillage, Violence, Infamy or Sacrilege,
but what was exercised by his Troops. Part of the Citizens were put to the
Sword: those, whom that had spared, languishe^ in a miserable Captivity. There
was none but Milan, that was preserved from these public miseries; and
whatsoever hatred was had for the Archbishop of this City, they suffered him to
preach in peace Repentance to his People, so venerable is Holiness even to
Tyrants.

LXXV. Then Maximus seeing that all things submitted to his Fortune, stopped, and
commanded the Officers of his Army to make the Troops live in order, to the end
that he might win the affection of those People, whose weakness he had a sense
of. The first thing he did, was to send Ambassadors to Constantinople, to
prevent Theodosius, and to remonstrate to him, That he was not entered into
Italy with a design to usurp the Empire, but to confirm the Catholic Religion
therein, which was going fairly to be ruined. He wrote the same thing to Pope
Siricius, and sent him word, That his desire was absolutely to preserve the
purity of Faith, without suffering any single Heresy. To gain the Gentiles, he
restored the Sacrifices which Gratian had abolished, and gave them Ambr. ep. 29.
permission to set up again the Altar of Victory in the Capitol. He likewise
kept fair with the Jews, by suffering the rebuilding of their Synagogues at
Rome. Thus this politic Usurper fitted his Conscience to his designs and
interests.

LXXVI. In the mean time Valentinian, after having incurred several dangers
upon the Sea, arrived upon the Eastern Coasts: from thence he sent one of his
Domestics to Theodosius, to advise him of his flight, and the irruption of
Maximus, and to entreat him to undertake the protection of a wandering Prince,
who had the honor to be his Colleague, his Friend, and his Ally. Theodosius was
very sensibly touched at the unhappy state to which this young Prince was
reduced, and immediately gave all necessary Orders for War. After which he set
out with part of his Court, and advanced as far as Thessalonica, where he found
this fugitive Emperor, and the Princess Galla, whom the Empress Justine had
brought along with her. He treated this afflicted Family with all the civility
Aug. l. 5. de civ. Dei. e. 26.
and tenderness which he owed to the house of the great Valentinian.

After he had comforted them, he spoke to them as a Father, and a most
Christian Emperor, and Suidas verbo Valentinianus.
told this young Prince, That to remedy his misfortune, it was necessary for
him to take away the Cause; That the War he had declared to Jesus Christ, had
occasioned that of Maximus; That if he had not God on his side, all the Forces
of the Empire would be of no other service, than to render his loss the more
observeable; That he ought to confide more in the justice of his Cause, than in
the number and valor of his Soldiers; That Victory had always followed the
great Valentinian his Father, because he had confessed the Faith, and God
protected him; That his Uncle Valens on the other side, after he had supported
an Error, persecuted the Bishops, and massacred the Saints, had been defeated,
and burnt rather through his Impiety, than his Enemies Foroe or Art; That he
should make his peace with God, and resume the Faith he had deserted, if he had
a mind that the Succors, which were prepared for him, should have all the
success which might be expected from them.

LXXVII. This Remonstrance affected the mind of this young Emperor, whom his
Misfortunes had already made to return to himself, and fixed him inviolably to
the belief of the Catholic Church. Justine, to whom this Admonition was
addressed more than to her Son, dissembled her displeasure, and making an
appearance of renouncing her Heresy, encouraged Theodosius to War by her Tears
and Prayers. This Emperor was determined upon it; and to give her an assured
pledge Zoz. l. 4.
of his protection, he married a little while after; the P^^^cess Galla, her
daughter

As he had resolved to take the Field at the beginning of the Spring with a
powerful Army, he was obliged to impose a new Tribute to supply the charges of
the War, whether it was that the People found it excessive, or that the
Officers, who had a Commission to levy it, exacted it with too much Rigor;
several Cities murmured at it, but the Inhabitants of Antioch passed from
murmuring to Sedition. They despised the Orders Zoz. l. 4. Theodoret. l. 5. c.
19.
which they had received from the Emperor; and pulling down his Statues, with
those of the Empress Flaccilla, his first Wife, they dragged them through all
the streets of the City. An Action so unworthy was accompanied with the most
bitter and outrageous words that Fury could inspire them with. Some Historians
report, that the night Sozom l. 7. c. 24.
before was seen a horrible Spectre, which rising above the City, and clashing
the Air with a most dreadful noise, seemed to excite their minds to Sedition.

As soon as the Emperor understood this News, his displeasure was so much the
greater, as it was Aurel. vict. in Theod.
just. Besides, that he was of a hasty and sensible nature, the ingratitude of
this People whom he Chrysostom. hom. 20. ad Pop. Antioch.
had always favored, and the dangerous effects which this example might produce
in the beginning of a War, incensed him still more. But that which had the most
lively influence upon him, was the injury which had been done to the memory of
the Empress Flaccilla, who had been dead about two years since in the
reputation of Sanctity, and whose name he held in singular veneration.

LXXIX. To punish so great an Affront, he resolved immediately to confiscate
all the Goods of the Citizens of Antioch; to burn down all its Houses, with all
those that inhabited them; to demolish it to the very Foundations; to transport
Zoz. l. 4. Chrysostom. hom. 17. ad Pop. Antioch.
elsewhere every stone of the place, and afterward to plow up the ground
whereon it stood, to the end that there might remain no sign of this Royal
City, which was the Capitol of the whole East. Although it was convenient to
chastise the insolence of this People, yet there was excess in the anger of the
Prince, who involved in the same condemnation the innocent and the guilty. So
he came not to that extremity; he contented himself to send to Antioch two
Commissioners, Elehecus General of his Armies, and Cesarius Praefectus
Praetorio, in order to the discovering of the Authors and Accomplices of the
Sedition, and to the making of an exemplary punishment thereof.

LXXX. In the mean time this City was in an extreme affliction; Remorse, Fear
and Despair had succeeded Fury. Several of its Inhabitants, Chrysostom. in b^^^il
ad Pop. Antioch.
afflighted at their Crime, and the threatenings of the Emperor, forsook their
Houses, which they thought designed for pillage. They who remained, had always
the apprehension of death before their eyes, and expected nothing but the hour
of their punishment. They had no other refuge than the Church, no other
consolation than that which they received from the eloquent exhortations of St.
Chrysostom, nor other hopes than what Flavian their Archbishop afforded them,
who had undertaken to go and find the Emperor, and to intercede for them.

The Commissioners found things in this posture at their arrival. They forbid
immediately all the Citizens the Theater, and Circus, and prohibited them the
public Baths. They deprived the City of the title of Metropolis of Syria, and
of the East, and conferred it upon Laodicea; beginning thus to chastise a
People so addicted to shows, and so Chrysostom. hom. 17. ad pop. Antioch.
jealous of their glory, by the retrenchment of their Pleasures and Privileges.
Which done, they made an exact enquiry after the Mutineers, and filled the
Prisons with the guilty, and even those who were but suspected. They
confiscated Chrysostom. hom. 13. ad pop. Ant.
the goods of the greatest part of those Persons of Quality, who had committed
or been accessory to the crime. Every one was in fear for his Nei^hbors, or for
himself* and the very Judges could not see without pity so great a desolation.
Notwithstanding they executed the orders of the Prince, and kept armed Soldiers
about the Palace and the Prisons, left their despair should again excite a new
Sedition.

LXXXI. It was then the Solitaries, who lived in the Neighborhood of Antioch,
descended from their Mountains in order to afford some comfort Id hom. 17. ad
pop. Ant. Theod. l. 5. c. 19.
to this afflicted City. They suggested to some a disengagement from the world,
and the contempt of death; they assured others of the protection of God, and
the mercy of the Prince: they p^otested to all, that they were come to obtain
their pardon, or to suffer with them.

After they had remained whole days at the entrance of the Palace, to solicit
the Judges, they lay down all night at the Prison gates, ready to give up their
Lives and Liberties for the safety of their Brethren. Sometimes they embraced
the knees of the Magistrates, sometimes they spoke to them with authority from
God.

One amongst them, by name Macedonius, a plain man, and without any experience
of the world, but of eminent piety, meeting two of the Judges in the midst of
the City, commanded them to alight from Horseback. These Officers, who saw
nothing in his Habit, or Person, that might afford him any authority, grew
angry immediately against him: but when they had learnt what was the Sanctity
of this Solitary man, they quitted their Horses, embraced him, and asked him
pardon. Then this old man, filled with a divine Wisdom, raising his voice, said
to them, Go, my Friends, and make this remonstrance to the Emperor from me. You
are an Emperor, but still you are a man. You command Men, that are the Images
of God. Fear the Anger of the Creator, if you destroy the creature. You are so
offended at the overthrowing of your Images, shall God be less when you have
thrown down his? Yours are insensible, his are alive and rational* Your Statues
of Brass are already mended and repaired; but when you shall destroy men, how
will you be able to redress your fault? Will you revive them, when they are
once dead? These words, enlivened with Zeal and Charity, made an impression
upon the minds of these Officers, and the Emperor himself was affected at them,
when they were reported to him: So that instead of the threatenings which he had
made to the Inhabitants of Antioch, he justified himself; and discovering the
cause of his anger, If I had been wanting, said he, they ought not to have
carried their displeasure to a Princess, whose virtue deserves nothing but
commendations. They, who should have felt themselves offended, ought to have
directed all their anger against me.

The other Solitaries were not less courageous. They went to find the
Magistrates, and begged of them to pronounce a favorable judgment, and to
absolve the Criminals. As they could receive no other answer, than that they
were not Masters of We have a Prince who loves God, who is faithful, and who
lives in Piety. Don't imbrue your Sword in blood. As great as the insolence of
this City has been, it does not exceed the mercy of the Emperor. In a word,
they entered the Palace, just as they were going to pronounce the sentence of
Condemnation against those who had been convicted of the Crime. They conjured
the Judges to grant them some few days of delay, and to expect new orders from
the Court. They offered themselves to go and find the Prince, and to appease
him by their Tears and Prayers, and were so prevalent as to obtain what they
demanded.

The Commissioners the Emperor had sent, being touched with the generous
sentiments of these Solitaries, prayed them to give their remonstrances in
writing, and promised to carry them themselves to their Master; which they
performed a few days after. The affair being in this posture, these admirable
men immediately returned to their Caves and Cells, and the same Charity which
induced them to leave them, shut them up close again.

LXXXII. About this time Flavian, Archbishop of this afflicted City, who had
parted from Chrysostom. Hom. 20. ad pop. Antioc*
thence toward the beginning of Lent, and who had considered neither the rigor
of the Season, the inconveniences of the Journey, nor his own Oldage; arrived
at Constantinople. He went to the Palace, where the Prince was, and stopped at a
pretty distance from him, as if retained b^ Fear, Shame, and Trouble. He
remained there without speaking, and kept his eyes fixed upon the ground as
full of Sorrow and Confusion, as if he had been culpable, and begged a pardon
for himself.

Some also add, that he made the Children of the Emperors Music sing the
doleful Psalms, which Sozom. l. 7. Hist. Eccles. c. 13.
the Church of Antioch made use of in her public Prayers to express her
affliction; and that these sad and languishing Airs softened the Soul of the
Prince, and moved him so effectually to compassion, that he steeped the Cup he
had in his hands with his own tears. But besides the little probability of this
circumstance, St. Chrysostom, who has written all the particulars of this
History, would not have failed to have been informed of it, and to have
inserted it in his Relation.

Be it as it will, this Archbishop insensibly prepared the mind of Theodosius,
and endeavored to affect him by his Sighs and Tears before he undertook to
persuade him by his reasons. The Emperor drew near to him, and said to him with
a great deal of moderation, That he had great reasons Chrysostom. hom. 20. ad pop.
Antioch.
of complaint against the Citizens of Antioch; That he had preferred their City
before all the rest of his Empire; That after the favors and kindness he had
conferred upon them, he could not expect so rude a treatment; That he was not
sensible, he had done them an Injustice; if he had been unhappy enough to have
committed one, they might have fallen out with himself, rather than with dead
Persons, who had not been wanting in their respect, He stopped at these words,
and the Archbishop, after he had wiped away his tears, at last broke silence.

LXXXIII. He began his discourse by a sincere acknowledgment of the crime,
which those of Antioch had committed, confessing that there was no punishment
sufficient to atone it. After having aggravated their ingratitude, by comparing
it with the extreme goodness of the Emperor, he represented to him that the
greater the injury was, the more glorious would be the favor, which he should
afford those Criminals. He proposed to him the example of Constantine, who
being pressed by his Courtiers to revenge himself upon some factious men, who
had disfigured one of his Statues by force of Stones, did nothing but pass his
hand over his face, and answered to them smiling, that he did not feel himself
hurt. He set before his eyes his own Clemency, and made him remember one of his
Laws, by which, after he had given orders for the opening of Prisons, and
pardoning Offenders in the time of the Solemnity of Easter, he adds this
remarkable expression: Would to God I could even revive the dead too.

He made appear to him, that in this occasion there was not only concerned the
Preservation of Antioch, but even the Honor of the Christian Religion. The
Jews, said he, the Pagans, the Barbarians themselves, amongst whom the noise of
this accident is dispersed, have all their eyes upon you, and expect the
sentence you are going to pronounce. If you pardon the culpable, they will
glorify the Christian's God, in praising you, and will say one to another, That
this Religion is a powerful one; which gives a Bridle to the wrath of Emperors,
and retains Sovereigns in a Moderation of mind, which we our selves do not
enjoy; and the God of the Christians is great, since he ^xalts man above
nature, and makes them overcome the violence of their Passions.

After this reflection, to take from the mind of the Prince the politic
considerations of an ill example, if he left so great a crime unpunished, he
represented to him, that he did not pardon through softness of temper, or
incapacity to revenge himself, but through Goodness and Religion; and that the
City of Antioch was more chastised by its terrors and remorse, than if it had
been destroyed by sword or fire. In a word, he protested to him that he would
return no more to Antioch, till it had regained the favor of the Emperor, and
concluded his discourse in mixing Respect and Entreaties with the Threatenings
of the Judgment of God.

LXXXIV. Theodosius was unable to resist the force of this discourse. He had
much ado to retain his tears, and dissembling his emotion as much as possibly
he could, he said these few words to the Patriarch: If Jesus Christ
notwithstanding his Godhead has been willing to pardon those men that crucified
him, ought I to make a scruple of pardoning my Subjects, that have offended me^
that am but a Mortal man as well as they, and Servant of the same master? Then
Flavian prostrated himself, and wished him all the prosperity that he deserved
by the action he had done; and when this Prelate showed some desire to pass the
Feast of Easter at Constantinople, Go my Father, said Theodosius, embracing
him, and defer not a moment the consolation which your People will receive by
your return, and by the assurances you will give them of the Pardon, which I
grant. I know that they continue still in grief, and fear. Go, and carry to
them for the Feast of Easter the disannlling of their crime. Beseech God to
send a blessing upon my Arms, and be assured that after this war, I will go my
self and comfort the City of Antioch. After that he dismissed this holy Old
man, and even sent Couriers to him, after he had passed the Sea, to exhort him
anew to make all imaginable haste.

LXXXV. One may observe through the whole Relation that I have made, the malice
of the Zoz. l. 4:
Historian Zozimus, who endeavors to excuse the violence of the Antiochians, in
rejecting the fault of their Rebellion upon the severity of the Government. He
says nothing of the Journey of Flavian, attributing all the success of this
Negotiation to the Sophister Libanius against the belief of History, and the
testimony of contemporary Authors, and particularly St. Chrysostom, who Chrysostom.
^om. 17. ad pop. Antiosh.
publicly reproached Philosophers with excess of weakness in this occasion.
From whence one may conjecture, that those two discourses, which Bar. Ann.
Eccl. 1. 4.
we find still amongst the works of this Caviller upon the subject of Statues,
were either composed after his death, or else if he did them himself, it was
nothing but an after-blow by way of Declamation.

The affair of Antioch being thus happily concluded, the return of its
Archbishop was a kind of a triumph. The public place was strowed with flowers;
illuminations were seen every where; they covered all the way he was to pass
with odoriferous Herbs; and every one touched with the Emperor's mercy, made
wishes and prayers for him, and for prosperity to his Arms.

LXXXVI. About this time Theodosius, at the solicitation of one of his
Kinsmen, was urgent with the Widow* Olympias to marry. She was the Daughter of
Count Seleucus, and Granddaughter of Ablavius, High Steward of the Empire Greg.
Naz. Ep. 57.
under Constantine. She had been married to a young Lord named Nebrides. Several
Bishops had been assisting at her Wedding, and St. Gregory of Nazianzum, who
upon some occasion could not be there, had sent her some Verses in form of an
Epithalamium. She was a Widow at the end of twenty months, and pretended to
nothing more than to apply herself to God alone. Elpidius, a Spaniard by
Nation, and Cousin to the Emperor, had an extreme desire to marry her; for
besides her illustrious Birth, she likewise possessed Pallad. in Dial. de vita
Chrysostom.
extraordinary Riches. For all he had pursued all kind of methods to make
himself beloved, he could not succeed in his undertaking. He had recourse to
the Emperor, and begged the assistance of his credit with Olympias. Theodosius
being very sensible to all that related to his Family, and moreover being
persuaded that his Protection and the Honor of his Alliance, would affect this
young Widow, proposed this Marriage to her; but he could not prevail. She
answered with a great deal of modesty and generosity all together: That she
Pallad. ib.
would always receive with a very profound respect whatsoever the Emperor would
do her the honor to propose to her; but she begged of him to permit her to live
without engagement: That if Heaven had been pleased with her marriage state, it
would not have deprived her of her Husband; and that since God had broken her
Bonds, she was resolved to give herself to no one but him, and to live only in
order to please him, and to serve him.

LXXXVII. Theodosius did not think it a reasonable thing to reduce her by
Authority to accept of the party, which he proposed to her. But as it is the
misfortune of Sovereigns to be subject not only to their own Passions, but also
to those of other men, he suffered himself to be prepossessed against her. The
Relations, which had been won, complained that becoming Mistress of her Estate,
before the Age required by the Laws, she had scattered it away in indiscreet
Alms and Presents by the advice of some interessed Ecclesiastics, who governed
her. Upon this complaint, the Emperor ordained that the Governor of
Constantinople should have the care and administration of the Possessions of
Olympias, till she had attained the age of Thirty years. Elpidius made this
order to b^ executed with extreme rigor. They took away from this virtuous Lady
the entire disposition of her Revenues. She was not permitted even the liberty
of having any communication with the Bishops, nor to enter in the Church, to
the end that feeling all the inconveniences of Poverty and Slavery, and
enjoying no sort of comfort, she might be obliged to consent to the Marriage,
which she had refused. But she could not be moved by a usage so unjust and
violent. She suffered it not only with patience, but even with joy; and after
having rendered thanks to God for it, she wrote to the Emperor in these terms.
You have acted, Sir, in relation to your most humble Servant, not only as an
Emperor, but also as a Bishop; since you have freed me from the care of my
temporal concerns, and the fear of Pallad. ib.
not making a sufficiently good use thereof. Behold me discharged of a great
burden. The favor would be entire, if you would order them to be distributed to
the poor, and to the Church. It is a long time since I was afraid, lest Vanity
should make me lose the Fruits of my Alms, and the Perplexity of temporal
Riches should make me negligent of spiritual ones.

LXXXVIII. She remained in this condition, till the war against Maximus was
happily concluded. Then Theodosius perceiving that he had been surprised, and
pitying the misfortunes she had so resolutely undergone, restored her to her
possessions, and left her to her freedom, She exercised afterward the
employment of Deaconess in the Church of Constantinople, affording great
examples of Modesty, discretion, piety, and a perfect renunciation of all the
cares and pleasures of this World.

LXXXIX. As soon as the Spring was come, Theodosius who still kept in suspense
the Ambassadors of Maximus, declared that he was going to make war against him,
and departed from Constantinople, Themist. Orat. 6.
where he left his Son Arcadius under the conduct of Tatian, a wise, faithful,
and intelligent man, whom he had expressly sent for from Aquileia to make him
Praefectus Praetorio; and of Themestius the Philosopher, whom he gave him for
his Tutor. His Ambassadors had by his order renewed the Treaties of Peace with
all the Neighboring Princes of the Empire. He took into his pay the best
Soldiers amongst the Goths, Huns, Scythians, and Alains, as well to reinforce
his Army, as to weaken the Barbarians, who might be suspected to him.
Arbogastes had brought him a considerable body of French and Saxons. Generals
of great Reputation and Experience who were to command under him, and make
discipline to be observed amongst so many different Troops. In a world, he had
provided all things that might make succeed an enterprise so important to his
own glory, and to the safety of the Empire.

But his chief care had been to procure the blessings of God upon his Army, and
to dispose himself for victory by his Piety. He gave orders for solemn
devotions, and sent to entreat the most famous Solitaries of Egypt to recommend
to God in August. de civ. Dei. l. 5. c. 26.
their Prayers the success of this war, and to li^t up their hands to heaven,
whilst he fought. Above all he consulted the holy Abbot John, who gave him
assurances of the Victory he was to obtain. This admirable man, who was as it
were the Oracle of his Age, foretold him the principal events of his Reign, his
Wars, his Victories, the very Evagr. vit. S. P. P. c. 1.
Irruptions of the Barbarians, which he observed to the least circumstances.

XC. It was not sufficient in the Emperors opinion to implore the assistance of
Heaven by Entreaties and Prayers, he endeavored it also by his Actions. For
before he went out of Thessalonica, he renewed his ancient Edicts, and ordained
new ones against the Heretics, forbidding them to hold Assemblies, to make
Ordinations, to give, or take the name of Bishops; enjoining the Magistrates
Leg 14* 15, and 16. de Haeret. Cod. Theod.
to hinder these profane Religions, which seemed to have conspired against the
true one, from celebrating their sacrilegious mysteries in public or in
private. And because the Arians had supposed, or interpreted some of his former
Edicts in their favor, he declared by an express Law, that all they could
expound to their advantage should be held false, and contrary to his intention.
Thus he endeavored to engage God to protect him, by undertaking with so much
Zeal the protection of his Church, and went to join his Troops encouraged with
a holy confidence.

XCI. Maximus on his side observing that no positive answer was given to his
Ambassadors, had put himself into a condition not only to defend himself, but
to attack if it was necessary. To assure himself of the Gauls in his absence,
he had left there his Son Victor under the conduct of N^^tius and Quentin his
Generals. Part of the German People, whom he had reduced to pay him great
contributions, was run to his assistance, and he had reason to be satisfied
with the number and valor of his Soldiers. He divided his Forces immediately
into three bodies. He sent Count Andragatius with orders to fortify the Julian
Alps, and to guard all the narrow Passes. He commanded his Brother Marcellin to
seize upon all the Avenues of the Drove, with a party of the auxiliary Troops*
and himself with the Roman Legions advanced toward Pannonia, and stopped upon
the Save. After he had thus made himself Master of the Mountains and Rivers, he
thought he had shut up all the passages to Italy, and posted himself in such a
manner, that he could in a little time join his Brother, whenever he should
judge it convenient.

XCII. Theodosius was scarce got out of Constantinople, but he was advised that
some Treason was contriving in his Army, where Maximus had already won some
Officers, and that is was necessary to put a sudden stop to an Enemy, that was
more accustomed to bribery, than fighting. This notice was given him by men
that appeared to be very well informed, and the former conduct of Maximus made
it but too probable. The Emperor then advanced in haste toward his Army, and
made a very strict enquiry after the Agents of Maximus, and those who had held
any correspondence with them.

The noise was soon dispersed, that there was a treason which would suddenly be
discovered, and the Traitors judged well that they should not escape the
chastisement which they had deserved, if so be they did not hastily retire.
They secretly concerted the time and place of their flight, and Zoz. ibid.
leaving the Camp in little Troops, they joined again at night, and fled toward
the Woods and Marshes of Macedonia, with a design to hide themselves.
Theodosius being advertised in the morning that a Battalion of Barbarians had
deserted, was glad to be rid of those disloyal Soldiers; but fearing lest they
should draw after them the Troops of their Country, and difturb in his absence
the repose of this Province, he detached some Squadrons, who pursued them,
killed the greatest part of them before they had gained the Marshes, and
constrained the rest to betake themselves to the Woods and Mountains.

XCIII. Theodosius being delivered from this dis^uiet, made Valentinian embark
with the Empress Justine, and made them to be conducted to Rome in safety,
whether it was that Italy had required Zoz. ibid.
them again, or that he imagined their presence would encourage those People,
who were still affected to them, and could not dispense with the Tyranny of
Maximus. After that he made very severe Regulations concerning the Discipline
of his Troops, and obliged all his Officers to see them performed, to the end,
that People might judge of the justice of his Cause, by the moderation of his
Soldiers; and see the difference there was between an Emperors Army, and that
of a Tyrant.

These Orders were so exactly observed, that there was no manner of confusion
or tumult amongst Pacat. in Panegyr.
so many Nations that were accustomed to live without rule, and without
constraint. Neither City nor Country was inconvenienc'd by their passage, and
there being a want of Provisions for some days, there was not one Soldier but
those rather to endure hunger with patience, than commit any disorder that
might be displeasing to the Emperor.

XCIV. All things being thus regulated, Theodosius marched by great Journies,
and thought that P^ilostorg. Oros. l. 7.
the good success of this Expedition partly depended upon the diligence of his
march. Theodosius commanded the Cavalry, Timasius was at the head of the
Legions, Arbogastes and Ricomer conducted the greatest part of the auxiliary
Barbarians, and the Emperor had an eye over all. He divided his Army, like
Maximus, into three Bodies, to conceal from him the course he was to take, and
especially to cause the less disturbance in the Countries he passed through,
and to keep his Men more easily in order.

As he advanced in this posture toward Pannonia, he had advice that Maximus
made a halt, and that he had encamped his Army about Seisseg.
Siscia. It was a City that was considerable neither for its Greatness, nor its
Fortifications, but for its advantageous Situation. It was upon the Banks of
the Save, which dividing it self in two Branches, forms an Isle over against
this place, serves as a double Bulwark to it, and renders it almost
inaccessible. The Tyrant Magnentius had formerly possessed himself thereof, as
of a very important Post, in the War he made against the Emperor Constantius.

Theodosius got all his Troops together on a sudden, and made so much haste,
that he was encamped between the Drove and the Save, before the Enemies could
hinder him, and cut off the Communication of their two Armies. Then judging
that Maximus would hold himself close, and that it would be a hard matter to
draw ^m to a general Fight, resolved to pass the Save at what price foever, and
to go and force him in his Post. He proposed his design to his Generals, who
immediately found the execution hazardous. Notwithstanding the presence of the
Emperor, who encouraged his Troops, the Valor and Prudence of the Officers, the
Cheerfulness and Courage of the Soldiers, who thought the Enemy durst not hold
the Field, made them believe that nothing was impossible to them.

The Emperor made good use of the heat and confidence which he observed in his
Troops, and marching at their head with an extraordinary diligence, he appeared
hard by Siscia, and was immediately as ready to pass the River, as the Enemies
to defend it. He cast a terror into their whole Camp, and at the same time made
the passage of the River to be attempted in several places. Maximus, who by a
strange blindness had believed Theodosius to have been still at a good
distance, was presently surprised. He endeavored to encourage his Legions,
made them advance according to occasions, and supposed that if they could
sustain these first efforts, it would be easy for him afterward to keep them
in good heart. In the mean time Theodosius, who was advanced upon the Bank to
observe the posture of the Enemies, knowing by their motions, and their
confusion, that they were disordered, would most willingly have gone to charge
them, without giving them leisure to recover themselves; but the Save was very
deep, and Maximus sent new Troops continually to reinforce those who were
already upon the Shore. Then seeing the fatal moment that might terminate this
War, and fearing to let slip an occasion of conquering, which perhaps Fortune
would not offer any more, he made Fords to be searched for, and prepared Bridges
with an incredible diligence.

XCV. As he was in this inquietude, Arbogastes brought to him some Officers of
his Nation, who offered to pass the River. The Emperor commended their
resolution, made them hope for great rewards, and assured them that he would be
a Witness of their Valor, and would support them Pacat. in Panegyr.
himself with all the bravest Men of his Army. These Officers went to join their
Squadrons, whom they encouraged more by their example, than their words.
Arbogastes put himself at the head of them, and throwing themselves all
together in the River, all dusty and fatigued as they were with a long march,
they attempted a great many Tracts, and passed on Horseback by swimming in the
sight of the Emperor, who supported them in person.

The Enemies amazed at so bold a resolution, retired in disorder, and gave the
Alarm to all the rest of the Army. Whilst Arbogastes, after he had gained the
shore, cut all in pieces that he met, the other Troops which Theodosius sent
over immediately, fell upon the Enemies on another side, and made a terrible
slaughter. Many hurled themselves voluntarily into the River. Several were trod
under the Horses feet. The Country was covered with the dead; the Ditches of
Siscia were filled with the bodies of those, that fled thither for Sanctuary.
Maximus, after having several times attempted in vain to rally his Troops,
applied himself to his own safety, and retired as well as he could toward
Aquileia, where he pretended to gather up the fragments of his Army, whilst his
Brother Marcellin should defend the entrance of Italy.

XCVI. Theodosius, after having performed a Thanksgiving to God for his
Victory, and rewarded upon the Field those who had distinguished themselves in
this occasion, turned upon the right forthwith, and marched toward Marcellin
with so much diligence, that he gave him not time enough to gain the narrow
Passes of the Alps, nor even to understand the Defeat of his Brother. As soon
as he was come near Pettan*
Paetovium, a little City upon the Drove, where Marcellin was encamped, he
resolved to give him battle the same day; but it was late, and the Troops were
weary: which obliged him to refer it to the morrow. Every one prepared himself
in the night; and at break of day the Emperor gave orders to assault the Enemy,
who appeared already to be agreed upon a defense. The Fight began with much
vehemence on both sides. On the one, the desire of conquering, the glory of
having already overcome, and the pleasure of serving a Prince, who acknowledged
the services which were rendered to him; on the other, the hope of plundering
all Italy, and the fear of being punished, stirred up the Combatants. But
Marcellin had soon the Fate of his Brother. After this first resistance, some
of his Troops were put to the rout; the rest threw down their Colors, and
demanded Quarter.

XCVII. Theodosius observing this war to be almost concluded, immediately
detached Arbogastes with a body of Horse to go into Gaul, and seize upon young
Victor, to whom Maximus had given the Title of Caesar. After which he pursued
those that fled with an incredible eagerness. Andragatius, who had been sent to
guard the Alps, had orders upon the first noise of Valentinian's embarking, to
put himself to Sea with all the Vessels he could get together, and to take him
upon his way. But he waited in vain upon the Coasts of Ionia for Valentinian,
who had already crossed the Sea, and he abandoned the Passes of the Mountains
to Theodosius.

Pacat. in Panegyr.
This Prince found there no opposition. The City of Hemona, and the rest, which
he found in his way, received him with the testimonies of an extraordinary joy,
and furnished his victorious Army with all the refreshments it had occasion
for. At last he arrived near Aquileia, and besieged that place. Maximus, who
after several turnings and windings, had enclosed himself therein instead of
retiring into Gaul, was sensible then that he could not possibly avoid a
misfortune, which he should have foreseen, and recollected with himself what
St. Martin had before told him, viz. that he should miserably perish in Italy,
if he attempted to pass therein. He had a mind to make some resistance: but his
Soldiers seeing his loss inevitable, opened the gates to the besiegers, and
altogether siezing on his Person, pulled him from his Throne, where he was
distributing money to some Moorish Cavaliers, who had attended him; and after
having deprived him of all the Ornaments of his Dignity put him into the hands
of the Conqueror.

Theodosius did not abuse his Victory. He seemed more concerned at the
misfortune of this Tyrant, than incensed at his Crimes. He reproached him with
his perfidiousness in a behavior, that argued more of compassion than of
anger; and reflecting upon the justice of God's decisions, and the inconstancy
of humane greatness, he was going to crown his victory by an act of Christian
Generosity, in pardoning his Prisoner. But as he turned his head to conceal
that emotion of Pity which appeared upon his face, the Soldiers snatched him
from his mercy, and having drawn him out of his Tent, made him to be beheaded
in sight of the whole Army. Andragatius being advised a little while after of
this news, and despairing of Theodosius's pardon for the murderer of Gratian,
chose rather to throw himself headlong into the Sea, than to fall into his
hands.

XCVIII. A Success so happy and so expeditions, which regained the Empire of
the West, and secured that of the East to Theodosius and his Children, was
published through the whole World. But the goodness and moderation of the
Conqueror made his triumph more illustrious, than the obtaining of two battles,
and the absolute destruction of the Tyrant. For he contented himself with the
death of two or three persons unworthy of pardon, Oro^. l. ^ c. 35.
and received all the rest of the party, not as a Conqueror, but a Father. There
was neither confiscating of goods nor losing of employments, nor spilling of
blood. Every one had the liberty of returning to his house; and under a Prince
of so much humanity, no body was sensible of having been overcome. He even
allowed great Pensions to the Wife of Maximus, whose Daughters Ambros. Ep. 29.
ad Theod. Aug. l. 5. de civ. Dei. c. 25.
he caused to be educated with abundance of care, and forgot nothing that might
comfort them for their misfortune, or entertain them according to their
condition. He would have granted the same favor to Victor their Brother, if
(against his intention) Arbogastes, to assure himself of Gaul, and to take away
from thence all subject of Rebellion, had not put him to death. That which was
most great and heroic in this expedition, was not the subduing the whole Empire
of the West; it was the restoring of it. As soon as he was Master thereof he
re*established in it the young Valentinian, adding new Provinces to those which
had been usurped, and reserving to himself for a compensation of his Labors,
nothing but the Glory of a disinteressed Protection.

XCIX. The fame of this Victory astonished the Arians of Constantinople, who
had not expected it, nor even wished for it. Touched at the rigorous Decrees
which had been declared against them, they maliciously dispersed false reports
in the City, and determined this war according to their desires, even before it
was begun. They assured that Theodosius had lost the ^attle, that he had much
ado to escape, and th^^ he fled before Socrat. l. 5. c. 13. Sozom l. 7. c. 14.
Maximus. They rendered this plausible falsehood by the circumstances which they
added, even so far as to compute the number of the wounded and dead on both
sides. One would have said, that they had been the Spectators of what was not
yet come to pass. Those very men, that had at first spread abroad these false
reports, gathered them up afterward as reall^ true, being persuaded by new
particulars which were related to them, and believed the loss of the Emperor to
be infallible; because they desired it. As there are always uneasy Spirits, who
by a natural levity, or for particular Interests, are weary of the present
Government; so many People noised abroad this news, that no body questioned it,
or durst contradict it.

C. The Arians made use of this occasion to revenge themselves for the
deprivation of their Churches. They went out of their houses, like so many
Furies, with Torches in their hands; and carrying every where tumult and
disorder, they went to burn the Palace of the Patriarch Nectarius. They had
proceeded to greater excesses, but the news of Theodosius's Victory being
arrived at the same time, the fear of Punishment stopped the course of this
Sedition, which the hopes of impunity had excited. These Heretics went to cast
themselves at the feet of Arcadius, and entreated him with so much importunity
to intercede for them with his Father, that being affected with their Prayers,
with the repentance they showed of their crime, and the assurancs they gave of
being more submissive, and moderate for the future, he engaged himself to ask
for their pardon. Theodosius, who desired nothing so much as to accustom his
Son to Clemency, and to encourage him to make such Petitions to him,
immediately granted his Request.

After some residence which the Emperor made at Aquileia, to refresh himself
after the fatigues of war, and to give necessary orders for the security and
peace of the Empire, he passed to Milan, where he published an Edict, by which
he annulled Leg. 7. d* infirmand. his quae sub Tyran.
all the Ordinances of Maximus, requiring that the memory thereof might be
entirely abolished. It was about this time that some Bishops complained of the
judgment he had given, and stirred up against him the Zeal of St. Ambrose.

CI. It was the custom of the Eastern Churches to honor every year the memory
of the holy Martyrs, to assemble together upon the day of their Festivals, and
to make Processions, in singing Psalms and Hymns. The first day of August some
Paulin. in vit. Ambr.
Solitaries, who were met together to celebrate the Feast of the holy Maccabees,
went in procession through the Country, followed by some devout persons of
their Neighborhood. They passed through a Village named Callicin, where the
Jews had a Synagogue, and the Valentinian Heretics a Temple. Whether this
singing of Psalms was troublesome to them, or they took this ceremony for an
Insult upon their Religions, they all went out, fell upon the Christians, and
hindered them from passing further, after having abused them. The noise of this
violence was soon dispersed: the Solitaries made complaints; the people were
moved thereat, and the Bishop, transported with zeal, excited so well both the
one and the other to revenge the injury, that was done to God and his Martyrs,
that they went to burn the Synagogue of the Jews, and the Temple of the
Heretics. The Emperor having been informed of the business by the Count of
the East, ordered the Temple and the Synagogue to be rebuilt at the expense of
the Bishop, and those who had burnt them, to be punished.

CII. The Oriental Bishops found the Decree too rough, advised St. Ambrose of
it, and conjured him to employ all his credit toward the repealing thereof.
This holy Archbishop was then at Aquileia, to assist at the election of a
Successor to Valerian Bishop of that City, who was lately deceased. Being
unable then to go and find Theodosius, he wrote a Letter to him full of that
generosity, wherewith he was accustomed to preach truth and justice to
Emperors. He represented to Ambr. Ep. 29.
him, That if he did not hearken to the Prayers of Bishops, God would not
attend to those, which Bishops made for him; That there was this difference
between good and bad Princes, the one would have their Subjects free, the
others would dispense with none but Slaves; That as for him, he chose rather to
pass for importunate, than for weak and unserviceable, when the glory of God,
and the safety of the Emperor were concerned; That indeed he acknowledged him
for a pious Prince, and one that feared God; but that the most pious oftentimes
let themselves be prejudiced by an indiscreet Zeal, and a false Idea of
Justice; That he was indebted to his Majesty for an infinite number of favors,
and that it would be a cruel ingratitude to suffer his Benefactor to be wanting
by an unworthy complaisance.

After that he made him see the consequences of this affair; That he reduced a
Bishop to disobey him* or to betray his Ministry; and that he went to make
either a Transgressor, or a Martyr, which would be unbecoming of such a Reign,
as his; That the Enemies of the Church would triumph in those structures built
with the Spoils of Christians, and the Patrimony of Jesus Christ; That to make
him repeal his Ordinance of rebuilding the Synagogues, it sufficed to tell him,
that Julian would have done it, and that the Fire of Heaven might fall to day,
as it did then; That the Palace of the Patriarch of Constantinople was lately
burnt, and that a vast number of Churches reduced to ashes, smo^kt still
without any appearance of revenge; That there was no application but to erect
profane Temples; That Maximus some days before he was forsaken of God, had made
a like Deeree. Then he prayed him to take his freedom for a testimony of his
respect, and to believe that it was a great proof of the zeal and tenderness he
had for him, to dare even to anger him for his fafety. He exhorted him at
length to change his opinion, and not to be ashamed to correct himself, and
made him apprehend that he endeavored to reform him in private, lest he should
be obliged to speak to him publicly in the Church.

CIII. This Letter, of so much force and urgency, had not all the success which
might have been expected from it, and Theodosius still deferred to give a
favorable answer: which occasioned the Archbishop, upon his return to Milan,
to speak to him before all the People pursuant to his threatenings. For one day
when the Emperor was at Church to assist at the Sermon, the Saint made choice
of a Text suita^le to the Subject he was to Paulin. in vit. Ambr.
treat of; and after having enlarged himself upon the advantage one ought to
make of corrections, as the Auditors were in their greatest attention, he fell
upon the affair of the burnt Synagogue. He directed his discourse to the
Emperor, and made God himself speak in these terms: It is from me thou have the
Diadem. I have made thee Emperor of a simple private man, as thou wast. I have
delivered to thee the Army of thine Enemy. I have made pass into thy Party
those Troops, which he had raised against thee. I have put his very Person into
thy hands. I have given thee Children, who shall reign after their Father. I
have afforded thee an easy Triumph, and by an Ordinance thou have just now
made, thou go to resign thy Victory to my Enemies.

CIV. These reproaches so sensibly touched Theodosius, that he drew near the
Archbishop, as he descended from the Pulpit, and said to him, as it were in a
complaining tone, you have spoken against us to purpose, my Father. The Saint
replied to him, that his intention had been to speak for him, and that he would
have the same zeal, whenever his safety should be concerned. Then the Emperor
confessed, that the Order which he had given out against the Bishop was too
severe, and that it was fitting to repeal it. Some Lords, who were present,
alleged, to make their Court, that the Solitaries ought at least to be
persecuted, who had been the Authors of this commotion. I speak at present to
the Emperor, (replied to them the holy Prelate) and I know how to apply my self
to you, when it shall be convenient. They durst not make any further answer to
a man, whose constancy they were acquainted with. Thus ^e obtained the
revocation of the Decree, and after he had twice received assurances thereof
from the Emperors own mouth, he went to offer to God the Holy Sacrifice.

In the time Theodosius was at Milan, all the considerable Bodies of the Empire
sent Deputies to him, in order to testify the joy which they conceived for his
Victory. The Senate of Rome was of the first in performing this duty.
Symmachus, by his credit and intrigues, obtained the nomination of Deputies
that were Pagans, like himself, and recommended to request in the name of the
Senate, the preservation of the Altar of Victory, which Maximus had
re-established.

CV. This Altar since the Reign of Constantine the Great, had been an original
of Contests. It was erected in a Chapel, which was built at the entrance of
the Senate. Here was to be seen a Herodian. Prudent. l. 2. in Symm.
Golden Statue, which represented Victory under the figure of a young Damosel,
who had wings, and bore in her hands a Crown of Laurel. The Pagans, after
having lost the greatest part of the Temples consecrated to their Gods, whose
very names were become insupportable to the Emperors, had fixed all the hopes
of their Religion in a Symmach. relat. ad Imp.
Goddess, whose name was so agreeable. They swore upon her Altar; they offered
Sacrifices to her, and they made this fragment of Superstition and Idolatry
pass for the Religion of the whole Senate. It was very uneasy to the
Christians, who were at D. Ambros. contra Symmach.
the Palace, to observe before their Eyes the exercise of a worship contrary to
theirs; to smell in the very Senate, the odor of Sacrifices; and to hear the
vows they made to a profane Divinity.

CVI. The Emperors erected or pulled down this Altar, according as they were
moved by principles of Policy, or Piety. Constantine had dispensed with it out
of Prudence, judging his condescension necessary in the alteration of Religion
and Empire. Constance his Son destroyed it by a motion of Religion. The Tyrant
Mag^entius restored it to oblige some Pagan Senators, Ambr. ep. 31. Symmach. in
relat ad ^al.
whom he had a mind to draw to his Party. Constantius pulled it down out of
Ostentation, being desirous to let the Romans entertain a good opinion of his
Faith, when he had deprived them of the Pope Liberius. Julian, by the
inclination he had for Idolatry, and his hatred to the Christians, commanded
the re-establishment thereof. Jovian, and the great Valentinian left it in the
State, wherein they had found it, suffering a liberty of Faith. Gratian
destroyed the Altar with all its dependences, and thought to have overthown it
for ever. But Maximus, whether it was Socrat. l. 4. c. 1. Sozom. l. 6. c. 6.
to have nothing common with a Prince whom he had put to death, or to gain the
affection of the Pagans against him, whom he designed to chase from his
Dominions, permitted them to rebuild what they would.

CVII. Thus the fortune of this Goddess was observed to change under each
Emperor. The Deputies of the Senate being then arrived at Milan, rejoiced with
Theodosius for the prosperity of his Arms; and after having performed all their
compliments, they secretly negotiated with his Ministers the affair of their
Religion. They had reason to hope for Success. The fear of leaving a party of
Malcontents in Rome, the humor one is in to grant favors after a Victory,
the little consequence it was of to dissemble a thing done, seemed to determine
Theodosius to afford them the Altar they demanded. But St. Ambrose, who had so
vigorously opposed Symmachus some years before, likewise opposed these
Deputies, and remonstrated so well to the Emperor, that he ought not to abandon
the Interests of God through considerations of policy, and false jealousies,
that this Prince chose rather to disoblige these Magistrates, than to be
wanting in his Duty to the Church, and so denied their requests.

CVIII. Theodosius, after having passed all the Winter, and part of the Spring
at Milan, departed from thence to go to R^^^ in order to receive the honor of
Triumph. (...) made his entrance therein in the month of June, with all the
splendour that the great Actions he had done, deserved. Soz. l. 7. c. 14.
The greatest Ornament of this Triumph was the modesty of him, that triumphed.
He would have Valentinian, who was come to him after the defeat of Maximus, to
share with him the glory of this day; and made him ascend into his Chariot with
the Prince Honorius, whom he had sent for from Claud. them 3. Consul. Honor.
Constantinople. He had carried before him the Spoils and Representations of
the conquered Provinces. Then he came himself encompassed with all the Lords of
his Court richly clothed. His Chariot was drawn by Elephants, which the King
of Persia had lately sent him. The Senate, the Nobility, and all the People
followed with acclamations, and applauses extraordinary. Although the solemnity of
this entrance was very magnificent, there was nothing regarded but the
Conqueror, for whom it was made. He spoke to the People upon the Tribunal in
the Forum, and to the Senate in the Capitol with abundance of grace and
majesty, and received very favorably the Speeches which where directed to him
by all the Bodies, especially the Panegyric, which Pacatus the Gaulish Orator
pronounced before him with the applause of the Senate, and all the Orders of
the City.

CIX. During the residence which Theodosius ^acat. ib.
made at Rome, he gained by his civility and freedom the hearts of those People,
who were still spurred on to maintain a remnant of their ancient Liberty. He
went to see the public works; he rendered Visits to particulars, and walked
without Guards and Solemnity, rather as a Senator, than Emperor. Above all, he
employed his care to abolish the remainders of that Idolatry, which his August.
de Civ. Dei l. 5. c. 26. Prud. adv.
Ornaments, all the Temples which they had left in the Capitol, and broke in
pieces all the Idols, which had been adored there. He preserved notwithstanding
those Statues, which had been composed Symm. l. 1. Hier. ep. 7.
by excellent Workmen, and drawing them from places where they served for a
profane Worship, he ordered them to be set up in Galleries, or in public places
as an Ornament to the City.

CX. These things were done with so much applause, that the Emperor saw nothing
so affecting Socrat. l. 5. c. 14.
in his Triumph, as the Joy which appeared in this occasion. Every one seconded
his Zeal, and went to praise God, and bless Theodosius in those Temples, which
had been so long profaned. There was none but Symmachus, who procured his
displeasure by troublesome supplications and remonstrances in favor of his
Idols. This man, who had entertained a strict confederacy with Maximus, and had
pronounced a Speech in his honor, full of flatteries, unworthy of a person of
his Reputation and Quality, was afraid lest Theodosius should resent it. Being
accused by some of High Treason, and pressed with the remorses of his
Conscience, he fled into a Church for Sanctuary, not thinking the protection of
his Gods powerful enough to save him, after all the services he had done them.

But observing that Theodosius made no great esteem of this accusation, he took
courage; and to repair the fault which he had committed, he composed a
Panegyric in honor of this Prince, which he recited in his presence in the
Senate. But as Spirits strongly prejudiced always return to the subject of
their prepossession, this man, toward Symmach. l. 1. Ep. 31.
the end of his discourse, cunningly fell upon Religion, and the Altar of
Victory. Theodosius was offended at this obstinate solicitation; and after
having thanked him for his praises, he commanded him to retire, and to present
himself no more before him. He recalled him a little while after from his
exile, and showed him the same friendship as before; being willing to obtain by
sweetness that qualified man, whom he thought to have sufficiently corrected by
this disgrace.

Leg. 18. de Haer. God. Theod.
CXI. He was not contented to compass the single ruin of Idolatry, he was also
for chasing away all the Heretics that were to be found in this City; and
particularly he ordered the Prefect Alb^n to suffer no Manichean there. He had
likewise many conferences with Pope Siritius, after which he reformed several
abuses he had intimation of. Prud. adv. Symm. l. 1.
He set out very severe Edicts against Magicians, and against those who
attempted to afford them a retreat, and to withdraw them from Justice. He
purged the City of several kinds of irregularities, ordering places of
debauchery to be demolished, and repressing the insolence of Thieves, who drew
the Citizens into their Snares, and particularly Strangers, whom they robbed,
or oftentimes kept them enclosed in subterraneous places. Thus this Prince was
in continual motion for Justice and Piety; and was of opinion, that no
Christian Emperor ought to reside some time in a place, without leaving therein
more Safety, Religion and Continence, than he found.

CXII. Theodosius received about the same time the news of the demolishing of
the famous Temple Ruffin. l. c. 22.
of Serapis in Alexandria, whch he had ordained to punish the Pagans for a
Sedition they had caused. There was in Alexandria an old ruinated Temple, which
the Emperor Constantius had formerly bestowed upon the Arians. The number of
the Catholics increasing every day, the Patriarch Theophilus prayed the Emperor
to grant him this forsaken Church. He obtained it, visited it, and had a mind
to make some reparations therein. As they were digging they found dark Caves,
more fit to conceal crimes, than to celebrate the Ceremonies of Religion. The
Gentiles, who were unwilling to have the Shame of their Mysteries discovered,
or those hidden places raked up, where they found parts of humane bodies
dissevered, which had served for their wicked Sacrifices, hindered the Workmen
from proceeding. The Christians insisted upon it; the thing came to an open
Sedition. Notwithstanding the Christians were in greatest number, yet as they
were more moderate than the others, they were beaten in some encounters. There
were even some of them that were taken and barbarously massacred, because they
would not oblige themselves to sacrifice to Idols.

The Magistrates went several times to the Temple of Serapis, where the
seditious had entrenched themselves, and endeavored to make them return to
their Duty: but being unable to force them, or to reduce them by reason, and
threatenings, they gave the Emperor information of it, who answered them, That
the Martyrs which they had made were rather to be praised than pitied; but to
avoid such disorders for the future, it was necessary to cut off the cause,
that is to say, to destroy the Temples* This Letter being read publicly, the
Christians testified their joy by extraordinary cries; the affrighted Gentiles
hid themselves, or betook themselves to flight. They began to execute the
Sentence by demolishing the Temple of Serapis, and by the overthrowing that
famous Idol, which King Sesostris had got made. They divided it in several
pieces, and dragged it along the streets.

CXIII. They gave the same entertainment to all the other Pagan Divinities.
Their Weakness appeared, the Delusions and Tricks of the Priests were
discovered, and several were converted to Jesus Christ. Theodosius learning
this happy News, lifted up his Hands to Heaven, and cried out, I give thee
thanks, O God, in that thou have destroyed the Errors of that superstitious
City, without obliging me to spill the blood of my Subjects. He wrote
immediately to the Patriarch, to rejoice with him for the favor which God had
shown to his Church, and sent him an order to collect all the Idols of Gold or
Silver which had been pulled down, and to distribute the value of them to the
poor of his Diocese; adding that he should make appear to the Gentiles, that
the Zeal of Christians was not mixed with any sort of Avarice, and that he
should give them an example of a pure and disinteressed Religion. They sold
every piece of those precious Statues. They made Vessels of Charity of other
Metals, which had been of service to Superstition. Theophilus reserved only an
Idol, which he set up in the public place, to the end that Posterity might one
day laugh at the Gentiles, by seeing the remains of their ridiculous Worship;
which seemed to them more injurious than all the rest. This Patri^rch built a
Church in honor of St. John Baptist in ^he place of the Temple of Serapis. all
the Bihops of Egypt followed this example, and a little after this Province so
tied to its Superstitions, had (...) deliverance.

CXIV. Theodosius more satisfied with the hap^y success of Religion, than his
Triumphs, depart^d Sozom. l. (...) c. 14.
from Rome the first day of September, in order to ^eturn to Milan, and from
thence to Constantinople. He restored the Empire to Valentinian, and im^rinted
Ambr. Ep. and Orat. de obit. Theod.
so well in his mind the Catholic Religi^n, by his repeated instructions, that
this young ^rince who was naturally disposed to do well, be^ame the defender of
the Faith, and put himself Ambr. in fun. Valent.
^ntirely under the discipline of St. Ambrose, whom ^e honored as his Father to
his death.

The Empress Justine, who had taken so much ^are to inspire into him that
Heresy, with which ^he was infected, had not the satisfaction to behold his
triumph and re-establishment. God permitted her to dye before the
accomplishment of ^he war. She was the daughter of Justus, Gover^or of La
March under the Emperor Constantius. She had espoused in her first Nuptials
the Tyrant Socrat l. (...) c. 26.
Magnentius, who after he had lost the battle of Mursa in Pannonia, became the
murderer of himself, to avoid the punishment, which his Rebellion had deserved.
The Great Valent^ian became ^morous of her, and married her after the death of
the Empress Severa his first Wife. She was a Princess fierce, imperious, fixed
^o her own sense, and possessed with all the im^i^^ies of the Arians. The
influence she had over the spirit of her Husband, and the Authority she ^ad
taken over her Son, had occasioned great troubles in the Church and if God had
not opposed to her a Bishop, a^ Sulp. Sever. Dialog. 2. c. 6.
unshaken as St. Ambrose was* the Arians had becom^ masters in Milan; and it had
been experience^ what an abused Princess can do, that joins to the infirmity of
her Sex, the violence of her passion.

The CONTENTS of the Fourth BOOK.
I. SEdition at Thessalonica. II. Anger of Theodosius appeased by St. Ambrose,
and rekindled by Ruffin. III. Temper of Theodosius. IV. Chastisement of the
Seditious of Thessalonica. V. Remonstrance of St. Ambrose to Theodosius. VI.
Repentance of Theodosius. VII. St. Ambrose excommunicates Theodosius. VIII.
Ruffin endeavors to comfort Theodosius. IX. Ruffin negotiates an Absolution for
Theodosius. X. Theodosius presents himself at the door of the Church. XI.
Theodosius does Penance publicly, and is absolved. XII. Theodosius places
himself amongst the Laity. XIII. Heresy of Jovinian; Theodosius takes upon him
to destroy it. XIV. Theodosius reforms diverse Abuses. XV. Order of the Church
for Penance. XVI. Disorder in the Church of Constantinople. XVII. State and
Functions of Deaconesses* Regulation of their Age and Testaments. XVIII. Death
of the Empress Galla. XIX. Theodosius returns into the East. XX. Theodosius
chases a Troop of Barbarians out of Macedonia. XXI. Theodosius arrives at
Constantinople. His Piety. XXII. Original, Manners, and Fortune of Ruffin.
XXIII. Jealousy against Ruffin. XXIV. Quarrel of Promotus and Ruffin. Anger of
Theodosius. XXV. Ruffin abuses Favor, destroys his Enemies. XXVI. New
Revolutions in the West. XXVII. Edict of Theodosius against Relapsers. XXVIII.
Valentinian orders a Comedian Woman at Rome to be carried off. XXIX. Intrigues
of Flavian. XXX. Revolt of Arbogastes. His Employments, his Manners. XXXI.
Valentinian desires to be baptized by St. Ambrose. XXXII. Jealousy of
Valentinian* Insolence of Arbogastes. XXXIII. Valentinian begs the succor of
Theodosius; he writes to St. Ambrose. XXXIV. Death of Valentinian; his great
qualities. XXXV. Eugenius is made Emperor. XXXVI. Theodosius learns the death
of Valentinian. St. Ambrose makes his Encomium at Milan. XXXVII. Eugenius makes
an Alliance with the People of the Rhine. XXXVIII. Eugenius sends Ambassadors
to Theodosius. XXXIX. Eugenius grants the Pagans the restoration of their
Temples. XL. Conduct of St. Ambrose in relation to Eugenius. XLI. Constancy of
Eugenius. Edicts of Theodosius. XLII. Theodosius prepares for War. XLIII. He
consults the Abbot John. XLIV. He lessens the Taxes. XLV. He regulates the
Soldiery. XLVI. Edict of Theodosius for pardoning Injuries. XLVII. Order of
Theodosius's Army. XLVIII. Army of Eugenius: different Prospects of the
Leaders; their Cares. XLIX. Theodosius forces the passage of the Alps. L.
Battle of Theodosius against Arbogastes. LI. Defeat of the Goths. Piety of
Theodosius. Death of Bacurius. LII. Retreat, and considerable loss of
Theodosius. LIII. Hopes of Eugenius. Theodosius holds a Council of War. LIVE.
Theodosius concludes upon fighting. Miraculous Apparition. LV. Second*Battel of
Theodosius. LVI. Confidence of Arbogastes. LVII. Resolution of Theodosius.
LVIII. Arbetion resigns himself to Theodosius. LIX. The Victory uncertain. LX.
Miraculous Wind. Victory of Theodosius. LXI. Death of Eugenius and Arbogastes.
LXII. Clemency of Theodosius. LXIII. Affection of St. Ambrose for Theodosius.
LXIV. Interview of St. Ambrose and Theodosius. LXV. Predictions of the Victory
of Theodosius. LXVI. Ambition of Ruffin. LXVII. Confecration of the Apostles
Church at Calcedon. Solemnity of the Baptism of Ruffin. LXVIII. Synod hold at
Constantinople. LXIX. Theodosius abolisheth Idolatry. LXX. Theodosius disposes
himself to death; abstains from the Communion for a time. LXXI. The Children of
Theodosius arrive at Milan. LXXII. Theodosius exhorts the Pagan Senators to be
converted. LXXIII. Testament of Theodosius. LXXIV. Theodosius shares the Empire
between his two Sons. LXXV. Stilicon is declared Tutor of Honorius. LXXVI.
Theodosius orders himself to be carried to the Circus. LXXVII. Death of
Theodosius. LXXVIII. St. Ambrose makes the Encomium of Theodosius in presence
of Honorius. LXXIX. The Body of Theodosius is transported to Constantinople.
LXXX. Character of Theodosius.

THE HISTORY OF THEODOSIUS the Great. BOOK IV.
THE Empire, since the defeat of Maximus, had enjoyed a profound Peace, and
Theodosius re-established at leisure the Affairs of the West, before he
repassed to Constantinople, when he received the news of the Sedition happened at
Thessalonica. The occasion of it had been inconsiderable; but the consequences
were so great, that they make one of the principal parts of this History.

I. Botheric Governor of Illyrium, and Lieutenant General of the Emperor's
Armies, had received Orders to continue in his Government with the Sozom. l. 7.
5. 15.
Troops which were left him, to retain the People in their Duty, or to oppose
the Barbarians, if they attempted to make any irruption upon the Lands of the
Empire on that side. He resided at Thessalonica, a very rich and populous City,
Capital not only of Macedonia, but also of several adjacent Provinces. From
thence he observed and regulated all things with a great deal of prudence and
justice, whilst the Emperor was employed in War Theod. l. 5* c. 17.
against Maximus. As soon as he had received advi^e of the Victory which
Theodosius had won, he ordered public Rejoycings in all the Cities of his
Government. The Inhabitants of Thessalonica being affected for the glory of
their Prince, and naturally disposed to all kinds of Spectacles, signalized
themselves in this occasion. They celebrated, during several days, public
Sports with an extraordinary magnificence.

A Coachman of Botheric got herein a mighty reputation, and appeared so
dexterous and expert Sozom.
in managing Horses, and conducting Chariots in the Circus, that the People
could not sufficiently observe and commend him. He enjoyed this popular Favor
but a little time, for having been accused and convicted of some infamous
deba^cheries, Botheric, a wise and austere Man, commended him to be seized, and
confined him to a close Prison in order to correct him, and to retain all his
People in modesty by this example of Severity and Justice. As they still
prepared Horse-courses at Thessalonica, the People possessed with the address
and dexterity of this Man, judging that he alone was capable of honoring this
Festival, resolved to demand his Liberty. They who had undertaken to obtain it,
being unable to affect the humor of the Governor by their humble Petitions, the
People run in crowds to the Palace, and made new Solicitations: But Botheric
would not relax in an Affair, wherein was concerned not only the Discipline of
his Family, but also the Authority of his Charge; for which they seemed not to
have a sufficient respect. Then the most seditious of them began to murmur; and
taking this refusal for an injustice done to them, they demanded the liberty of
the Prisoner, not only as a Favor, but as a Necessity. All the City was
insensibly in motion. Some made to the Prison-gates, in order to force them
open; others drove away by force of stones the Magistrates, who endeavored to
oppose them; and as there is nothing whereof the Rabble is not capable, when
they are once hot, they broke open the gates of the Palace, dispersed the
Guards who were there, and killed Botheric himself, who came before them to
endeavor to appease them.

II. The Emperor having information of this disturbance, was so extremely
incensed at it, that he resolved to destroy that City, and condemned upon the
spot part of its Inhabitants to death. St. Ambrose, who was acquainted with the
humor of this Prince, and interessed himself for his real glory, Paui^. in ^it.
Ambr.
was afraid lest he should abandon himself to his first motions, or to the
inconsiderate counfels of some Lords of his Court. He inspired him so
seasonably with sentiments of sweetness and piety, that he made him revoke the
Sentence he had pronounced in the first heat of his displeasure. Several other
Prelates joined their Prayers to those of Aug. de civ. Dei. l. 5. c. 25.
the Archbishop, and they obtained of the Emperor the preservation of the Lives
of all those guilty People.

But his chief Officers, and particularly Ruffin great Master of the Palace,
who had a great power over his temper, took their opportunities to remonstrate
to him, That it was necessary at last to repress the Liberty of People, which
increased every day through the hopes of Impunity; That he h^d but too much
pardoned already, since there remained no further respect for his Laws, nor
security for his most faithful Servants; That he would find himself exposed to
the Insolence of his Subjects, if he suffered his Authority to be w^^kne^* by
conniving at their Rebellions; That it was matter of amazement, for an Emperor,
who knew so well how to subdue his Enemies, to be unable to chastise a few
Rebels; That Bishops were always obliged to preach up Clemency, but that it was
the business of Princes to ma^e use of it according to the necessity of their
Affairs, because an Empire is not to be governed as a Diocese, the Church and
State having different Rules and Maxims; That there was, in a word, as well
excess in the pardoning of Crimes, as in the punishment thereof, and that it
was time to put a stop to the disorders wherewith the State was threatened, by
rigorously chastising that which was lately come to pass.

Then they recalled in his mind the overthrowing of the Statues of the Empress
in Antioch, the Palace of the Patriarch burnt by the Arians at Constantinople,
and the Synagogue of Calli^in, destroyed by the indiscreet zeal of certain
Solitaries. They made him foresee a thousand dangerous consequences, and
rekindled his displeasure by these new Remonstrances to such a height, that he
forgot his word, and resolved to abandon Thessalonica to the fury of the
Soldiers. He went out of Milan, on purpose to avoid the Admonitions of the
Bishops, and complained in his Council of those who took care to inform St.
Ambrose of all the Resolutions which were there concluded on.

III. Theodosius was of a hot and passionate temper, and easily permitted
himself to be transported to anger against those who had offended him; but
after this first emotion, whereof he was not always Master, he returned of a
sudden to himself, and Aurel. vict. in Theod.
provided they did not turn the goodness of his nature by evil counsels, he
pardoned so much the more readily, as his transport had been violent. Ambros in
sun. Theod.
He took it well of those who corrected him i^ these occasions; and whether he
was ashamed of yielding to his Passion, or that he desired to repair his fault,
or else believed that the anger of Princes was severe enough to support, he
oftentimes pardoned Criminals, through the single Reasons of having reproved them
too roughly. But he had, as the most part of good Princes, a dangerous
confidence in those whom he supposed to be his Friends, and who gave life to
his Passions, and concealed their own under appearances of the public good.
Thus he let himself be sometimes surprised; and although his intentions were to
do well, he was capable of committing things that were faulty.

IV. The Resolution then being taken of making an example of severity upon this
City, the Affair was proposed in Council, where it was unanimously agreed, That
Troops should be sent to Ambr. ep. 28.
Thessalonica, and all those seditious People put to the Sword. The deliberation
was held secret. They dispatched Orders necessary for the execution, and in the
Crime, which was going to be committed, they feared nothing but St. Ambrose's
coming to be informed of it. The Officers, who were charged Ruffin. l. 2. c. 18.
with this bloody Commission, acquitted themselves with all the Policy and
Cruelty which had been recommended to them. They amused, by certain
preparations of courses, and public sports, this People, who ought rather to
have expected Punishment, than Sights; and having drawn a very great number of
them to the Circus, they gave the Signal which had been agreed upon amongst
them.

Then were seen to run from all sides Soldiers, who betook themselves, with
Arms in their hands, to the Streets, Houses, and especially the Circus, where
the People were assembled. There they Sozom. l. 7. c. 24.
put all to the Sword, without any distinction of Age, Sex and Quality. The
first that was met with, was the first sacrificed. The innocent perished with
the guilty, even strangers, who had no share in the Crime, were involved in the
same punishment; and the Soldiers hot in murder, sought no longer to chastise a
Crime, but to satisfy their brutal Fury.

It was in this occasion that one of the richest Merchants of the City,
observing his Family ready to undergo the fatal Massacre, cast himself at the
feet of these Murderers, in vain endeavored to move them, by his tears and his
entreaties, and conjured them to take his possessions and his own life, for
that of two Children, who were equally dear to him. Then, as if they had been
touched with some pity, they replied to him, That the number of the dead
inserted in their Commission, was not yet completed; That they could dispose
but of a single Pardon, and bid him choose, with haste, which of the two he
would have preserved. But this miserable Father being reduced to the sad
necessity of delivering one for the safety of the other, and not determining
soon enough upon this choice pursuant to the humor of these Barbarians, they
could no longer bear with Paulin. in vit. S. Ambr.
this suspension, and inhumanely butchered the two Brothers. The City was
abandoned to the Sword for the space of three hours, and there perished, to the
number of 7000 persons.

Theodoret. l. 5. c. 17.
Although one might have believed, that Theodosius of his own motion had not
commanded this unlimited Revenge; notwithstanding as Princes ought to answer
for whatsoever is done in their name, and for the excesses which are committed
in the execution of their Orders, every one cast the blame upon him. The noise
thereof was dispersed through the whole East. The News came to Milan, where
several Bishops were arrived to assist at the Council, which was to be held
against Jovinian, and his Partisans. These Prelates abhorred an Action so
barbarous, and highly condemned the Author.

Ambros. Epist. 28.
V. St. Ambrose having learnt that this Prince had a design to come to him,
immediately composed a Letter to him to let him know the greatness of his
Crime, and to exhort him to Repentance. He excuses himself for not having the
honor to meet him. He declares to him with respect, That although he retains in
his heart all the acknowledgment he ought to have for the testimonies of his
Affection, and the Favors he had received from him, yet he no longer feels the
same joy he had formerly conceived at his arrival; That he chooses rather to let
him remain in peace, and give him opportunity of making reflections upon his
Conduct, than to importune him by his overhasty Corrections; That he
acknowledges him for a great Prince, one that fears God, zealous for the Faith;
full of good intentions, but hasty of his own nature, and susceptible of the
impressions which are given him, whether it be in relation to Pardon, or
Revenge.

After having thus drawn the character of the Emperor to the Emperor himself,
he comes to the affair of Thessalonica, and represents to him* That it is a
manner of punishment unheard of; That his Crime is so much the greater, as the
greatness of it had been shown to him before he undertook it; That the
assembled Bishops had been grieved thereat, and judged it necessary for him to
be reconciled with God, before he ought to be partaker of the Sacred Mysteries;
That he should lament and expiate his Sin by tears and penance, and not ^e
ashamed of following David's example, who was a great King, from whom Jesus
Christ was descended according to the flesh, and who was guilty of the death
but of a single Innocent; That he did not tell him these things to confound
him, but to excite him by this example to acknowledge his Fault, and to humble
himself before God; That every man, as great as he may be, is subject to
failings; That he advises him, and conjures him, as a Friend, and that he
exhorts him, and admonishes him, as a Bishop, to repair his Fault; That it
would be a deplorable thing for a Prince who had afforded such great examples
of Piety and Clemency to remain obdurate, and after having pardoned so many
Criminals, to make a scruple of repenting, for having caused the ruin of so
many innocent persons; That whatsoever great Qualities he had to reign, and
what Battles soever he had won, he had been more esteemed for his Piety, than
his Victories; but that he had lost by one single Action, all the Glory which
he had acquired by so many others.

He declared to him afterward, That the acknowledgment, the esteem and respect
he retains for him in his heart, will not hinder him from pursuing the Orders
of the Church, and from refusing to offer in his presence the Divine Sacrifice,
till he had satisfied God; That moreover he wrote this to him with his own
hand, to the end that he might reflect upon it in his own person; That he
should rather choose to win the Favors of his Emperor by an honest Complaisance,
than to disturb him by several Admonitions; but when the Cause of God is
concerned, he is obliged to sacrifice his Inclination to his Duty.

In a word, he exhorts him to accuse and condemn his Sin himself, and concludes
by these words full of the renderness of a Father: Would to God, my Lord, that
I had rather believed my own Instinct, than the experience I have had of your
Goodness* But when I imagined to my self, that I have so often seen you pardon,
and return from your displeasure, I confided too much in your custom; you have
been possessed, and I have not provented what I ought to have feared, and what
I was scarce able to foresee. God knows the affection I entertain for you, and
with what fervency I entreat of him your salvation. If you are persuaded of the
reality of what I say, pursue the counsel which I give you, if not, excuse my
zeal, and take it not amiss that I will rather act what is pleasing to God, than
you.

VI. The Emperor having received this Letter, was touched at so free, and so
prudent a Remonstrance. The clouds of Prejudice being dispersed, he looked upon
the Action he had done, stripped of the pretenses and reasonings of Politics.
His Soul pressed with the remorse of his Crime, was seized with a religious
fear of the judgments of God, and the censures of the Church. In this condition
being scarce able to support himself, and expecting no solid consolation but
from the holy Archbishop, whose counsels he had not reverenced enough, and
whose inflexible zeal he had experienced, he departed on a sudden for Milan.

VII. As soon as he was arrived there, his thoughts were wholly taken up about
giving some testimonies of his Piety, in order to take away the evil
impressions which he had afforded of himself. To that end he would go to the
Cathedral to assist at the public Prayers, and to partake of the holy
Mysteries. The Archbishop was informed of it, and leaving the Quire of the
Church where he was, went beyond the Porch to attend him. As soon as he saw him
appear, he advanced some steps toward him, and said to him with that Authority
which the character and sanctity of his life allowed him:

Theod. l. 5* c. 17.
It is to be believed, O Emperor, that you do not yet comprehend the enormity
of your Crime, since you dare present your self here. Perhaps that possessed of
the greatness of your Dignity, you hide your Infirmities to your self, and that
your Pride intoxicates your Reason. Consider that you are of a frail nature,
that you were drawn out of a little dust, as other men, and that you will
return to dust as well as they. Let not your self be dazzled with the splendour
of that Purple which covers an infirm and mortal Body. Those whom you command
are of the same nature with your self, and you serve with them the same God,
who is the Master of Subjects and Sovereigns. How then do you attempt to enter
into his Temple? Will you dare to extend your hands yet stained with the
innocent Blood you have spilt, to take the Sacred Body of Jesus Christ? Will
you dare to receive his adorable Blood in that mouth, which in the excess of
your Anger has caused so many Murders? Retire then, and don't add a new Crime
to that which you have already committed: receive rather with submission the
Sentence I pronounce upon earth, and which Jesus Christ approves in Heaven
against your Sin, since it is in order to your salvation.

Theodosius being sensibly affected at this discourse, remained some time with
dejected eyes in silence: after which he replied to the Archbishop, That he
acknowledged his Crime, but that he hoped God would have regard to his
infirmity; and as he alleged the example of David, who had committed a
Homicide and an Adultery both together, the Archbishop answered to him, You
have imitated him in his Sin, imitate him also in his Repertance. Then this
Prince, who was perfectly instructed in the Maxims of Religion, and the
Authority of the Church, instead of being offended at this resistance, looked
upon it as a wholesome remedy for an evil, the consequences of which he had not
till then discerned. He retired into his Palace with tears in his eyes, and
continued eight entire months remote from the Sacred Mysteries, living as a
Penitent, and scarce perceiving that he was Emperor.

VIII. In the mean time the Feast of the Nativity Theodor. l. 5. c. 17.
of our Lord being come, Theodosius pierced with a lively grief, arose earlier
than he was used to do; and as he could have no share in the solemnity of this
day, he disposed himself to spend it in a profound sadness. Ruffin, great
Master of the Palace, whom he honored with his friendship, and his confidence,
being entered into his Chamber, found him in this heaviness, and asked him the
occasion. Having known it, he endeavored to comfort him, by cunningly
insinuating to him, That he ought to exalt himself above certain Fears, which
were concealed under the name of Religion; That one should act as Master, when
one had obtained to be so; That it was dangerous to be subjected to the
Censures of Men, who had never governed States; That notwithstanding if he
enjoyed that delicacy of Constience, he might satisfy his Piety without falling
into a depression; That the evil was not so great as it was made to be; That,
after all, he had reason to punish Criminals, and none to undergo ^o cruel as
Affliction. Thus this Favorite, after he had disposed his Master to commit a
great Fault, ^ttempted also by his Flatteries to weaken his Re^entance.

Theodosius, so far from accepting these Consola^ions, appeared more concerned
than he was before; and after he had remained some time without being able to
answer, Cease, Ruffin, said he to him with indignation, cease to laugh at my
Affliction; ^ am a ^etter Judge of my Condition, than you. Have ^ not reason to
be sorrowful, when I consider that the ^e^nest of my Subjects have the liberty
to day of offering their Prayers at the feet of the Altars, and that I am the
^ingle person to whom is prohibited not only the entrance of ^he Church, but
also that of Heaven, according to that ^xpression of the Gospel, Whatsoever ye
shall bind on Earth, shall be likewise bound in Heaven.

IX. Ruffin seeing no probability of dispossessing ^he mind of this Prince of
that religious ^eat, which St. Ambrose had imprinted therein by his
Remonstrances, offered to go and find this Preate, and to oblige him by his
entreaties to take off he Sentence of Excommunication. Theodosius an^wered to
him, That he had to do with an inflexible Man, who had no regard to the rank or
power of Em^rors, when the Laws and Discipline of the Church were ^ncerned;
That he acknowledged the Archbishop's Sen^nce to ^e just; and that it were
better to finish the expiation of his Crime, than vainly to demand the favor of
an overhasty Absolution.

The ordinary practice of the Church, not t^ receive Penitents publicly till
toward Easter* an^ to keep wilful Murderers several years in Penance induced
the Emperor to believe that this attem^ would be fruitless. Notwithstanding
Ruffin wa^ so instant with him to shake off his Concern, an^ gave him such fair
hopes* that this Prince permi^ ted him to go to the Archbishop, and resolved ^
follow himself a little after. Ruffin acquitted hi^ self of his Commission with
much dexterity; (...) St. Ambrose observing that he made a Negotiati^ of State
of an Ecclesiastical reconciliation, repli^ to him with his usual freedom, That
he, who w^ the first Author of the Crime, was not fit to be t^ Mediator of the
Absolution; and that for all the lit^ tle shame and fear he retained of the
judgments ^ God, he ought not to think of the affair of Thessaloni^ but to
bewail the evil counsels which he had given to ^ Master. Ruffin was not
discouraged at these R^ proaches: he employed the most affecting impor tunities
and Prayers, and forgot nothing the might have influence upon the spirit of the
Arc^ bishop. When he saw that he could obtain ^^ thing, he gave him notice that
the Emperor wou^ soon be at the Church. The Saint answered (...) him, without
any surprise, That he would attend h^ at the door in order to forbid him
entrance; That if ^ came as a Christian Emperor, he would not violate t^ Laws
of his Religion; That if, he would become Tyra^ he might add the death of a
Bishop to that of so many ^^ nocents whom he had already caused to be slain.

X. Ruffin having heard this Answer, gave immediate information to Theodosius,
that the business ^ad not succeeded according to his expectation, and that he
prayed him not to come. The Em^eror was already pretty far advanced, when he
^eceived this advice. He stopped, and after having ^aused awhile, he went on, and
resolved to endure he confusion which he thought he had deserved. ^he
Archbishop was in a Hall near the Church, ^here he usually gave his Audiences,
when they ^ame to inform him that the Emperor was at the ^oor. He advanced
toward him, and said to him, that he did not perform the action of a Christian
Empe^or, if he attempted to force the Church; Tnat it was ^ rebel against God
himself, and to trample under foot he Divine Laws, to pretend to assist at the
Sacred Mysteries, before he had done Penance for his Sin. Theodosius replied to
him with abundance of sub^ission, That his intention was not to enter by force
unto the House of God, nor to violate the Ordinances of ^he Church: but that he
came to conjure him to break his ^etters, and to open him the Gate of Salvation
in the Name of Jesus Christ, who has opened that of his Mercy to those Sinners
who repent sincerely. St. Am^rose asked him what Penance he had done, and what
Remedies he had employed toward the Cure of so dangerous a Wound? I come to
you as ^o the Physician, replied the Emperor, it is you that ^re to ordain what
I ought to do.

XI. Then the holy Archbishop represented to ^im the misfortune of a Prince who
did not reguate his Passions, and who exposed himself to pro^ounce unjust
Decrees, and to shed innocent blood, and ordered him to make a Law that might
serve as a curb to his displeasure, and to that of his Successors. This Law
directed, That if the Emp^*rors, Theod. ib. Soz. l. 7. c. 25.
against their Custom, were obliged to make use o^ an extreme Severity toward
any one, after having p^^ nounced the Sentence of Death, they should defer the
Theod. ib.
execution thereof an entire month, to the end that the^^ Passions being
relented, they might reflect upon their judge ments, and distinguish, without
prejudice, the innoce^ from the guilty. Whether this Ordinance was th^^
composed, or that it had been published eigh years before, as some Historians
have remarked Theodosius gave Orders for it to be writ dow^ immediately, signed
it, and promised to o^*serve it.

That being done, he was absolved, and havi^^ been admitted into the Church, he
prostrated him self, and began his Prayers by those words of King, such a
Sinner and Penitent as himself, ^^ Soul is fixed even unto the ground; Lord,
give (...) according to thy Word. He remained in this postur^ beating his
Breast from time to time, lifting up h^ voice toward Heaven, to ask for
Pardon, and la menting his Sin in the sight of all the People who were touched
at it, and wept along with hi^ when he was going to the Offering, he arose, a^
vanced toward the Altar, where he offered h^ Gifts as he was used to do, and
went to place him self in the Quire amongst the Priests near the Blister.

XII. The Archbishop having perceived him and desiring to abolish a Custom,
which the com plaisance of Bishops, and the remisness of Discipline had
introduced, sent to ask him what he e^ pected Sozom. l. 7. c. 24.
there; and when it was told him from t^ Emperor, that he waited for the time of
being admitted to the communion of the Sacred Mysteries, he sent him word by
one of his Deacons, That he was amazed to see him thus in the Sanctuary, That
the Purple made him Emperor, and not Priest, and that he had no place in the
Church but as the other People. The Emperor answered, That it was no design
against the Order of the Church, nor an Affectation to distinguish himself from
all the rest; but that he had thought the Custom was the same at Milan, as at
Constantinople, where he placed himself in the Quire; and after having thanked
the Archbishop for being so kind as to inform him of his Duty, he went out of
the Balister, and took his place amongst the People.

This Lesson remained so strongly fixed in his mind, that at his return to
Constantinople, being in the Cathedral Church upon a great Holyday, he went out
of the Qui^e, after he had made his Offering. And when the Patriarch Nectarius
sent to desire him to re-enter, and to resume the place that was designed for
his Majesty, Alas! said he sighing, I have been a long time finding out the
distinction between a Bishop, and an Emperor! I am encompassed with People that
flatter me; I have found b^t one Man that has set me in the right way, and has
told me the truth, and I know but one true Bishop in the Theodor.
world, which is Ambrose. From this time the Emperor kept without the Balister,
a little above the People, but below the Priests, such influence had the
correction of a zealous and unblameable Prelate upon a Prince, who had some
care of his salvation. All the Church was edified by the docility and faith of
this Emperor. The holy Fathers in their Writings, have consecrated the memory
Aug. de ^iv. (...) l. 5. c. 26.
of his Piety: and by this example they have admonished all Sovereigns to
regulate their Authority by Justice and not by their Passions; to distinguish
good from evil councils; and to be Ambros. in fun. Theod. Paul. etc.
more ashamed of the sins they commit, than of the penance they ought to do for
them.

XIII. Theodosius after having submitted himself to the Laws of the Church,
employed his Authority to make them observed, and repressed the insolence of
Jovinian, and his Disciples, who^ the Council of Milan had condemned. Jovinian
had been a Religious in a Monastery of the Suburbs of Milan, which St. Ambrose
entertained by his cares in an exact regularity. This giddy-heade^ and sensual
man was soon weary of leading an austere and penitent life. He forsook it, and
drew after him certain infirm Spirits, which he had infected with a contagious
doctrine. He had some design to re-enter into this holy Society; but i^ was
judged that his repentance was not sincere* and that his conversation would be
dangerous, insomuch that they refused to receive him. H^ was so netled at this
denial, that he taught publicly, That fasting, and other exercises of
penitence Hieronym. contra Jov. ^. 2.
were of no importance; That Virginity had no advantage over Marriage; That
they, who are baptized, cannot be dejected by temptations* That there was but
one reward for all the happy, and several other Maxims, which tended to the
remisness of manners, and the decay of discipline. Besides the badness of his
cause, it was ill sustained, August de Har^s. c. 82.
because he had neither politeness nor eloquence in his Writings: but as it
flattered the sensual inclinations of men, it was easy to persuade. Thus by
debasing the glory of Virginity, he seduced several Roman Virgins; and by
virtue of declaiming against Celibacy, he disposed good men to dissolution.

Some holy and learned persons wrote against his doctrine and his life, which
was very conformable to his opinions; and even reproached him Ambr. de Virgin.
Hiero. l. 2. con. Jov. August de bono conjug.
with his delicacies, his luxury, and his incontinence very smartly. The Pope
Siricius, after having condemned this Arch-Heretick, sent his Legates to Milan,
to call a Synod there, and to extinguish these new errors in the very place,
where they were brought forth. This Synod, which began to assemble when the
news of the affair of Thessalonica arrived, had judged Jovinian and his
Companions, conformably to the Sentence of Rome; there remained nothing further
to do, but to execute it. Theedosius took it upon himself; and by a Rescript
dated at Verona the second day of September, he chased from Rome those
irregular men, who still retained the name and habit of their first Profession,
and banished them into remote Leg. 1. de anach. cod. Theod.
deserts, where they must have lived in a forced continence, if the Magistrates
had been more exact in executing the order which they had received.

XIV. The zeal of this Prince did not terminate here; for having learnt that
this Heresy had introduced strange disorders in Rome, he set out very severe
Ordinances against several sorts of impurities; and very expressly commanded the
Lieutenant of the City to put a stop to this corruption, Aurel. vict. in Theod.
Ambr. ep. 66.
by Punishments proportioned to the Crimes, in order to restore amongst the
Romans that decency of manners, to which Constantine the Great had formerly
begun to reduce them. It was about this time that he prohibited, under very
severe penalties, the marriage of Cousin-germans, renewing the ancient Edicts,
which an unbridled Liberty had made absolutely void. He still established
several Laws, which related to the quiet of the State, and the government of
the Church* The Regulation which he made upon the subject of Deaconesses,
deserves to be related here with all its circumstances, as well because the
occasion he had to do it at that time made a mighty noi^e, as because Princes
may draw from thence some instruction for their conduct.

XV. The Church of Rome has always exacted from Penetints an open or particular
Confession of their Sins, as a necessary Humiliation* and an evident mark of
grief and repentance. Ministers appointed for the direction of consciences,
heard the accusations which every one offered against himself, and ordained
penalties and satisfactions proportioned to the Sins, which were exposed to
them. The Bishop alone held this Tribunal of Penance, as long as Christians
lived in the ^ervour and purity of the Rules of the Gospel. But Sozom. l. 7. c.
16.
their number being increased, and discipline being slackned as soon as the
Persecutions had ceased, Sins became so frequent, and the Bishops found
themselves charged with so many cares, that it was necessary to establish in
every Church a Penetentiary Priest. This received the Confessions of Penitents,
prescribed them the time and manner Socrat. l. 5. c. 19.
of satisfaction: and after having tried them according to their necessities, by
practices of Penance, he presented them to the Bishop to be reconciled.

XVI. This Office, that had been long since established at Constantinople, was
suppressed by the Patriarch Sozom. ib.
Nectarius, upon the occasion of a disorder happened in his Church. A young
Widow of Quality, who in all probability, through a devotion of but little
substance, had raised herself to the degree of Deaconess, made a confession of
all her past life to a Penitentiary, who imposed on her, as an expiation of her
faults, extraordinary Fasts and Prayers. As she was obliged to be a long time
at Church in order to acquit her self of the satisfactions which had been
prescribed her, She had an opportunity of seeing and conversing often with a
young Deacon, in whom she had reposed too much confidence. These entertainments
very serious at the beginning, degenerated on both sides into no very decent
familiarities, and this spiritual correspondence became at length a criminal
passion. This Widow being pressed at last with a remorse of Conscience, went to
declare ^er Sin, and imprudently named him who had ^educed her.

The Penitentiary had a mind to examine the truth of the fact; The Patriarch
was advised of ^t; the Deacon was deposed. The care which was taken to conceal
the subject of this deposition, made every one more curious to inform himself
of it. They presently discovered the crime, which some persons had already
suspected; the noise was dispersed throughout the City. The People casting the
fault of one Ecclesiastic upon the whole Clergy, were upon the point of making
an insurrection. The Patriarch Nectarius, in order to put a stop to this
commotion, and to take away for the future all occasion of such like scandals,
suppressed the Office of Penitentiary in his Church, by the advice of one of
his Priests named Eudemon. Whether he did abolish this Charge, or only
interrupted for a time the practice of public Penance, he made a considerable
breach in ^iscipline.

XVII. Be it as it will, Theodosius being concerned at the disorder which had
happened at Constantinople, and willing to take from the Pagans all occasion of
crying down the manners of the Church, set forth an Ordinance, whereby he
regulated the Age and Testaments of Deaconesses. They were Ladies of a
remarkable piety, who employed themselves in all that regarded the ease,
instruction, or discipline of persons of their Sex. They distributed the
charities of the faithful, Clem. l. 3. and 8. Constable. Epip. Haeres. 79. Bona
rer. Litur. c. 25. Paul Epist. ^d Romans 16.
taught the Principles of Faith, and the ceremonies of Baptism, took upon them
all the cares that were agreeable to modesty and decency, in immersions,
unctions, burials; and although their employment was not an order in the
Hierarchy, yet it was an ancient and considerable Ministry.

There were two sorts of abuses crept in amongst them. Some, in their youth,
through an impatient desire to distinguish themselves by their devotion, cut
off their hair, and introduced themselves into the Church: from hence proceeded
oftentimes scandal; always danger. Others, by an indiscreet liberality, were
spurred on to give their possessions to the Churches and Hospitals, and often
ruined their families to satisfy the avariece of the Clergy.

Theodosius, to redress these abuses, ordained that no Widow should be received
into the rank of Deaconess, who was not sixty years old, pursuant to the
Precept of St. Paul; and prohibited those who were received to give away, under
Leg. 27. de Episc. Cod. Theod.
pretenses of Religion, their Gold, Silver, and Jewels, leaving them the entire
disposition of the revenues of their lands; but not permitting them to scatter
them away, or to alienate their grounds to the prejudice of their Children or
Relations, nor to leave them by Will to the Clergy, to the Poor, or to the
Churches.

The first part of his Ordinance was generally approved of; but it was
remonstrated to him, That it was not just to obstruct the good intentions of
dying Widows, and to stop one of the chief Springs of Charity; That it was to
encroach upon the Liberty of the Church, and even the Privileges of the Poor,
to exclude them from the Patrimonies and Alms of the Faithful; and that
Religion was already but too much weakened, and Charity grown too cold, without
confining them still by Laws injurious to both. The Emperor, who was never
ashamed to recant, when it was evidenced to him that he was under a mistake,
received this Remonstrance so well, that two months after he published at
Verona a revocation of this Law. He commanded it to be taken out of all
Registers, to the end that no Pleader might allege it, and no Magistrate make
use thereof in Judgments.

XVIII. Whilst he was thus taken up at Milan, he received the News of the death
of the Empress Galla his second Wife, who had remained at Constantinople. He
was very sensibly concerned at the loss of this Princess, whom he had
passionately loved, and whom he had enjoyed but a little time amongst the
troubles of War, and the cares of the re-establishment of the Empire. He had
withdrawn her from the Errors wherein the Empress Justine had engaged he^^in
her Infancy, and had made her partake not ^nly of his Throne, but also of his
Piety. She ^yed in the flower of her Age, and left but one Daughter named
Placidia, who was afterward so famous for her Beauty, for her Wit, for the
extraordinary Adventures which happened to her, and the Testimonies she gave of
her Faith, and of her Zeal for Religion.

Her Obsequies were very magnificent. Arcadius a little while after caused a
Pillar to be erected in the great place of Constantinople near the Church,
whereon he ordered to be fixed the Statue of Theodosius in silver, with
Inscriptions and Representations of his last Victories, with an intention that
this work might be an eternal Monument both of the glory of the Father, and the
piety of the Son.

XIX. At last Theodosius resolved upon returning into the East, and upon going
to enjoy himself amongst his own People the satisfactions of that Peace which
he had established through the whole Empire. He had passed near three years in
Italy, and had employed them in setting those Provinces in order, and
instructing the young Valentinian, whom he loved as his own Son. Observing the
credit that Symmachus enjoyed in the Senate, he had honored him with the
dignity of Consul, and had forgot nothing which might oblige that factious Man,
who gave motion to Affairs, and was at the head of a Party. He had made at the
same time very severe Edicts against the Adoration of false Gods, showing by
this conduct that he did no injury to the merit of those persons whose Religion
he condemned. After that he departed, leaving the Western Empire in peace, and
the Emperor well instructed in the Art of reigning.

XX. He had already made part of his Army march, in order to chastise, as they
passed, some Barbarians who were got together to disturb the repose of the
People. They had been drawn into the Macedonia by some of those Deserters of
whom we have spoken, who were retired there, and had preserved themselves from
the punishment which their Treason had merited. It was at first rather a Troop
of Robbers, than a regulated Militia: but the number of them being increased by
the defeat of Maximus's Army, they Zoz. l. 4.
observed some order, and made an irruption into Thessaly and Macedon. Their
licentiousness augmented by the little resistance which they found, and in a
little time they ravaged the whole Country. As soon as they had learnt that the
Emperor was returning with his Army, they retired into Forests that were
encompassed with Lakes, and came out no more in a Body: they contented
themselves to make incursions during night, and bid themselves with their Booty
as soon as day appeared. One would have said, that they were rather Specter
than Men, and every one complained of their robbing, without being able to
force them in their Retreat.

Theodosius being arrived at Thessalonica; detached a Party of his Infantry to
advance toward the Marshes, under the conduct of Tima^ius, and advanced
himself a little after: He gave Orders for the Enemy to be searched for; and
when they were tedious in coming to relate the News, he went out of his Camp
without any noise, attended by five Officers well mounted, in order to go and
observe those places where they might lie concealed. He happily discovered what
he had a mind to know; for being entered into a little Country House, to refresh
himself after a long course, he there perceived a Man, whose wild aspect, and
confused behavior, gave him some suspicion. Zoz. l. 4
He secretly enquired who he was, and from whence he came: but being unable to
learn any thing in particular of this unknown, he commanded his People to seize
upon him. He would examine him himself; but he could obtain no answer, neither
by threats, nor civility, till such time as being pressed by the torments they
made him undergo, he confessed that he was the Spy of the Barbarians; that he
was used to run over the Country all day, to give them notice of the Booty they
might sei^e on in the night, particularly that he had orders to inform them of
the passage of the Emperor, and the march of his Army. Then he declared the
Number, the Forces, and the Retreat of these Barbarians.

The Emperor departed immediately to go and Zoz. l. 4.
join his Camp, marched the next day with certain Troops, and made this body of
Barbarians to be so vigorously attacked, that in spite of the difficulty of
places, and the resistance which they made* he forced them in their Marshes.
There was a great number of them killed; some were taken, and punished for
examples; the rest were pursued from morning to night. Timasius seeing the
Soldiers fatigued, prayed the Emperor to take a little rest, and to afford
some to those who attended him. They sounded a retreat, they encamped in an
adjacent plain; every one was permitted to rejoice, as after a victory; and in
the confidence they were, they were not extremely mindful of the guard and
discipline of the Camp.

In the mean time the Barbarians being rallied, and having advice by some of
their own men, who had saved themselves from the Camp, of the condition the
Troops were in, came by favor of the night, and made a great ravage, before
they were discerned. At length, they who were least sleepy having alarmed all
sides, every one put himself in a posture of defense. They run to the Tent of
the Emperor, who was risen at the first noise he had heard. There was a fight
in the very Camp, whose success had been uncertain, if this Prince had not
encouraged his men by his own example; and if Promotus, one of his Lieutenant
Generals, who was not far off, had not happily arrived with some S^^^drons of
Horse, which completed the Enemy's flight.

Theodosius had resolved to go in person to pursue them, in order to deliver
his people from the inconveniences they received from them. But Promotus
represented to him, That they were not Enemies worthy to stop a great Emperor;
That he should reserve himself for considerable expeditions, and leave to one
of his Lieutenants the care of terminating an affair, where there was some
fatigue to undergo, and no reputation to acquire. He took upon himself this
commission, and discharged it so faithfully, that he shut up those Barbarians
in their Forests, and made so great a slaughter of them, that there was not a
single man escaped.

The Emperor in the mean time continued his journey. All the people went to
meet him with an extraordinary affection, and every entrance that he made into
Cities was a Triumph. He arrived at Constantinople the ninth day of November,
more glorious by the marks of love which he received of his Subjects, than by
the victories he had obtained over his Enemies. His Son Arcadius came to
receive him, and all the Bodies of the Empire testified to him with an
emulation the joy which they entertained for his happy return.

XXI. His first applications were to return thanks to God for all the
prosperities of his Reign, to visit the magnificent Church he had built in
honor of St. John Baptist, and to get conveyed thither from a Town near
Calcedon the relics of the same Saint, with abundance of Solemnity. He
informed himself of the posture of the Church affairs; and having learnt that
Eunomius had held assemblies in the City, and published some of his errors, he
made him to be expelled Constantinople. He ordered likewise the expulsion of
all Heretics out of the neighboring Cities, in order to take away Leg. 20. de
Haeret. Cod. Theod.
from them all opportunities of enlarging their Sects, and corrupting the People
by their infectious conversation.

After having thus regulated what concerned Religion, he applied himself to
know the necessities of the State, and to ease the Provinces which had been
burdened; being willing to remit in Peace, those tributes which the sole
necessity of War had obliged him to impose. Above all, he put a stop to some
Cabals which had been formed in his Court, as well by the intrigues of Ruffin,
as by the jealousies which had been conceived against this Favorite.

XXII. Ruffin was a Gaul, of the Province of Aquitain, of a mean condition, but
of an elevated Spirit, easy, insinuating, polite, fit to divert a Prince, and
even capable to serve him. He came to the Court of Constantinople: He procured
there friends and protectors; he was known to Theodosius, he pleased him. He
managed so well these beginnings of fortune, that he came in a little time to
considerable employments. The Emperor gave him the charge of Great Master of
his Palace, made him enter into all his Councils, honored him with his
friendship, and his confidence; and in a word, made him Consul with Zoz ib.
Ambros. Epist. 53. Claud. l. 1. con. Ruffin.
his Son Arcadius.

This Man maintained himself as he was advan^ed, rather by his ingenuity than
by his virtue; His ambition increased with his fortune. He ought to enrich
himself by the spoils of those whom he oppressed by his Calumnies. To have ^n
extraordinary merit, and to be able to dispute with him the rank he held, was
sufficient to be his ^nemy. Nevertheless as he feared to lose the afection of
the Prince, if he did not preserve his ^steem, he appeared modest and
disinterested. He covered his evil counsels with pretexts of Ju^^ice, or
Policy, and knew so well how to im^^ove his good qualities, and conceal his bad
ones, that the Emperor, as discerning, and jealous as ^e was of his Authority,
was very often deceived, and governed, without perceiving it.

XXIII. The principal Lords of the Court could ^t observe the elevation of this
Favorite without envy. Timasius and Promotus, who came from ^ommanding the
Army, and rendering important ^ervices, had pretended to be preferred before him
^^ occasions. Tatian, who had governed all the ^ast, in the absence of
Theodosius, could not sub^it to see above him a new Minister, who had nothing
to recommend him, but the good fortune ^f pleasing the Prince. Proculus, the
Son of Ta^an, Governor of Constantinople, a young man, old and daring, opposed
Ruffin upon every occa^on. They conspired together against him, and ^esolved to
ruin him. Ruffin being informed of That the favors which he continually
received from hi^ Majesty, made him odious to all the Court ^ That, what care
soever he took to stop, by hi^ moderation, the murmurings of his Rivals, ther^
arose every day factions and cabals against him That he should infallibly
succomb, if the han^ which raised him, did not support him; Tha^ he confessed
his little merit, and that he (...) otherwise esteemed himself than by the
goodne^ his Majesty entertained for him, and the acknowledgment he should
always retain thereof.

XXIV. After having engaged the Emperor t^ protect him* he was not only
cautious of surprize^ but also took care to destroy his enemies. The^ hatreds,
which had been hitherto concealed* began to break out a little after; for being
in Council with Promotus, there happened diverse conte^ Zoz. l. 4.
between them. The Emperor going out, the^ disputes were renewed; both one and
t'oth^ would maintain his advice; they grew hot insens^bly. Ruf^in being come
to offensive words, Pr^motus fell into a passion, and gave him a box ^ the ear.
The noise of this action was soon di^persed throughout the Palace. Every one
judg^ thereof according to the engagement he had to e^ther, but the Emperor, to
whom Ruffin went i^mediately to offer his complaints, was extream^ displeased.
He protested openly, That he was w^^y of enduring those divisions and
intrigues, and those ^ were the Authors of them: That he would teach the how to
live in peace, and to consider the persons wh^ he affected; and that if those
jealousies which w^ entertained against Ruffin, did not cease, he would exalt
him so much above his Rivals, that they should be obliged to honor him, and
perhaps to obey him.

XXV. This Prince, who spoke as a Master, and who knew how to make himself
feared when it was necessary, pronounced these words with so much heat, that no
body durst mutter any longer.

He chased Promotus from his Court, and gave Ruffin almost at the same time the
charge of Prae^ectus Praetorio. The new dignity of this favorite, and the
protection of the Emperor, whereof he was assured, afforded him a more easy
opportunity of revenging himself upon his Enemies. Pro^otus did not long
survive this disgrace; for having received orders to go and join the Army, and
to march against the Bastarnes, who pillaged Thrace, he was slain in an
Ambuscade by a Party of these Barbarians: many accused Ruffin of this treachery.

The death of Proculus was no less fatal. This Minister made him to be accused
of several crimes, corrupted the Judges which had been appointed Zoz. l. 4.
him, obliged them under hand to condemn him to death, and so ordered his
matters that the pardon, Ambros. ^^.
which Theodosius sent him, did not arrive till after ^he Execution, he got over
Tatian in domestic concerns; and Timafius, had been no less unhappy, ^f he had
not re-procured the friendship of this Favorite, and rendered himself the
accomplice of his crimes. Such was the conduct of Ruffin, who ^espassed upon
the goodness and confidence of his Master, and who five years after, being no
longer ^etained by the fear of Theodosius, and living under weak and
unqualified Emperors, was one of the principal causes of the desolation of the
Empire, ^y his unlimited Pride and Ambition.

XXVI. Things were in this posture at the Court of Constantinople, when the
news of the treason of Arbogastes, and the death of, Valentinia^ arrived.
Whatsoever cares Theodosius had taken to leave this Prince a peaceable and well
governe^ Ambr. in orat. fun. de obitu Val.
Empire, scarce was he returned into the East, bu^ there arose new Cabals in
Gaul. The Pagan Senators once more made a solemn deputation, ^ request the
re-establishment of their Temples, an^ the free exercise of their Religion. The
aff^ was examined in Council, and notwithstandi^ all the advices tended to the
granting of their desires, Valentinian opposed it, and sent away the Deputies
of the Senate with a refusal, that le^ them no further expectation.

XXVII. Several, who had turned Christi^ by policy, sought at that time how to
renoun^ Leg. 4. de Apost. cod. T^eod.
their Religion without punishment. Theodosi^ had endeavored to remedy this
disorder while he was in the West: for having learnt that sever^ Persons of
Quality, to agree with the time, a^ to arrive at employments, had quitted the
wors^ of the Gods, and received Baptism, he judg^ that those could not be fixed
in the Faith, wh^ had engaged themselves therein by such weak (...) humane
motives. To deprive them of the Libert^ of changing their Religion, he set out
a ve^ severe Law against Apostates. He declared the^ incapable of testifying
publicly, unqualified ^ succeed, unworthy to be received into the socie^ of
good men, dispossessed of the right of Vot^ bereft of all Stations, Nobility or
Dignity, wit^ out ever being able to pretend to be re-establishe^ commanding
that they who had profaned the ^ cred Mysterys, should be looked upon not only
as men of unsettled Principles, but also as ruined Persons, and that they should
be abandoned of men, Leg. 5. ib.
since they had forsaken God.

XXVIII. Those, who found themselves tied to a belief, which they had embraced
but for a time, applied themselves to think upon making an Emperor, under whom
they might desert their Religion without being deprived of their Dignities.
Ambros. Or^t. ^un. de obit. Val.
At the same time Valentinian having been advised, that there was at Rome a
Comedian Woman of an excellent beauty, who debauched all the Youth, ^e
commanded her to be taken out of the City, and brought to Court: He that was
commissioned ^o execute this order, was easily corrupted with Money, and
returned without discharging his ^rust. The Prince immediately dispatched men
of more fidelity, who carried off this Curtezan, and conducted her as far as
Gaul, where he was. He ^etained her there some time; but he would not see her,
for fear of falling into an irregularity, for which he corrected others. Those,
whom he deprived of an occasion of debauchery, and to whom he gave an example
of continence, were exasperated at both, and entered into a League against him,
because he crossed their Passions, and they could not upbraid him with the same.

XXIX. Flavian Praefectus Praetorio, a man of capacity and great experience in
affairs, but much addicted to Pagan Superstitions, entertained underhand Soz.
^. ^^*
these Cabals. He was to be feared as well by the credit he had obtained, and
the studied predictions which he published amongst the men of the Party, as b^
the secret connexions he had with Count Arbogastes, who being accustomed to
play the Master in Gaul, took measures to preserve, in spite of the jealousies
of the Emperor, the Authority he had got.

XXX. This Arbogastes was a French Captain^ who had enrolled himself very young
in the servio^ Paulin. in vit. Ambr.
of the Romans. He followed Gratian in his German Wars, and acquired therein
much reputation* After the death of this Prince, he refused to acknowledge Zoz.
l. 4. Suidas. ver. Arb.
Maximus, and in the general revolt almost of the Officers of the Army, he kept
fir^ for the Party of Valentinian. He arrived at all the employments which his
fidelity deserved, joined to the great opinion which was entertained of his
courage and his conduct. He won the affection of the Soldiers, who of their own
accord investe^ him with the command of the Army, without the Court's daring to
oppose it. After the defeat of Maximus where he was the principal cause, he was
sent into Gaul, to possess himself thereof, and to Paulin. in vit^ Ambr.
command there. He re-established the affairs of the Empire in that Country, and
obtained several Battles against the Barbarians, and even against those of his
own Nation, whom he constrained to sue for Peace.

These great Services rendered him so fierce, and so absolute, that he took of
himself the entire administration of the Wars of the Empire. The Army blindly
pursued his Wills: for besides that he was valiant, successful in all his
undertakings, and very expert in the Art of War, he was an Enemy to Luxury,
received no gratuity from the Emperor, but to have the satisfaction of obliging
the Soldiers with it, dividing amongst them all the Spoils after his Victories,
reserving to himself only the glory of having conquered, and led a life so
frugal, so modest, and so active, that one would have said he was but the
Companion of those whose General he was.

Theodosius, who was sensible of his great qualities, and who had designed to
have taken him along with him, judged it more convenient to leave him in the
West, as a Man of known fidelity, who by his credit and his example might
retain the Court of Valentinian in its duty, and be assistant with his counsels
to this young Emperor, who had very good intentions, but not experience enough
in business. Arbogastes imagined then that his great Services could not be
sufficiently acknowledged, and became so much the more insolent, as he esteemed
himself more necessary. He disposed of the employments of the Army; he
regulated the Troops, and gave them new forms of Discipline: he made War or
Peace, according to his fancy, despising or reforming the Orders of the
Emperor, and enduring no other bounds of his power, than those of his Pride and
his Ambition.

Valentinian being come into Gaul, he could not suffer Arbogastes to command
there as Sovereign* he attempted to humble him without proceeding to his ruin,
and, if it was possible, his displeasure. To that end he gave out important
Orders without his participation; he was oftentimes of an opinion contrary to
his; sometimes he rejected his counsels, or preferred those of other Ministers,
hoping thereby to accustom insensibly to a dependence a Man, who would have
been very agreeable to him, if he had not affected to be his equal. Arbogastes,
who did not love to be contradicted, and would not lose an inch of that
Authority which he had been suffered to take, secretly confederated himself
with all the Malcontents, and resolved to undertake all things, if he was
pushed. In the mean time he secured the Officers of the Army, and opposed
himself to the Will of the Emperor, when he did not fall into his opinion.

About the same time it was reported that an Army of Barbarians advanced
toward the Frontiers of Italy. Valentinian, who was then at Vienne in Gaul,
disposed himself to pass the Alps, and to march against the Enemy at the head
of his Troops. But before he engaged himself in this War, he would look to his
salvation, by receiving Baptism; and to his repose, by disgracing Arbogastes,
and taking from him the command of the Army.

Ambr. ep. 34. a^ Theod.
XXXI. As for Baptism, although there were in Gaul Bishops of a remarkable Piety,
he desired to receive it from the hand of St. Ambrose, whom he called his
Father and his Master. As he was going to send one of his Officers to him, he
learnt that the holy Prelat was coming to find him, for which he testified an
extreme joy. Upon the first Ambr orat. (...) f^n. Valen*
noise of the Enemy's march, the Governors and Magistrates of those Cities,
which lay most exposed, had addressed themselves to this Archbishop, and
entreated him to go and remonstrate to the Emperor the danger wherein Italy
was, if it was not speedily relieved. He had accepted the deputation, judging
it necessary for the repose and safety of his Country. He prepared himself to
depart the next day, when News was received at Milan, that the Prince hastened
his Journey, that his Road was marked, that his Equipage was already well
advanced, and that Orders were given out on all sides for the entertainment of
the Court, and the quartering of the Soldiers. The Archbishop, who out of
charity was never wanting in things that were necessary, and out of modesty
never undertook superfluous ones, supposed himself then to be discharged of his
Commission, and waited for the Emperor at Milan, when the Emperor attended him
at Vienne.

XXXII. In the mean time Valentinian every day more jealous of his Authority,
and more offended at the insupportable arrogance of Arbogastes, attempted Zoz.
l. 4.
to ruin him. He took his opportunity; and as he was one day upon his Throne,
seeing him approach, and regarding him with indignation, he presented him with
a Billet, wherein he ordered him to leave his Court, and to lay down the
command of his Armies. Arbogastes took the Note in his hand. After having
perused it, he tore it in his presence, and turning insolently toward him,
Socrat. l. 5.
As you did not give me this Command, said he to him, you shall not dispossess
me of it. Valentinian consulting nothing but his Courage and Resentment, seized
upon the Sword of one of his Guards to kill Arbogastes. But the Guard retained
him, and he was obliged to say every where, That this Prince being vexed that
he could not do what he would, had a design to kill himself. Arbogastes after
that, well foresaw that there was no more security for him, and that it was
necessary to complete the Crime for fear of being prevented. Under a pretense
that some powerful Men had resolved to destroy him, Sozom. l. 7. c. 22.
he assembled his Friends; he gained the Eunuchs of his Chamber, and placed
Soldiers, who were at his disposal, even about the Palace.

XXXIII. The Emperor sent his Orders to the Camp; they made no account of them:
he spoke Sulpit. Alex. apud Greg. Thuron. Philostorg. l. 11.
himself to the chief Officers; they durst not obey him: and finding himself
almost abandoned on a sudden, and shut up in his own Palace, he dispatched
immediately one of his Secretaries to Theodosius, to request of him some
relief. He even deliberated some time whether he should once more seek refuge
in the Court of Constantinople* but he imagined that St. Ambrose could deliver
him from the unhappy state he was in. He wrote to him forthwith, to entreat him
to come with expedition to baptize him, and to terminate his defferences with
Arbogastes by some accommodation. The Saint, who had a great Ascendant over
them Am^r. orat. in fun. Valent.
both, departed without stay, being resolved to reconcile them, to answer for
the sincerity of their intentions, to give himself for an hostage to both, or
to stick close to the Emperor, and defend him by his wishes and prayers, if
Arbogastes should be inflexible.

XXXIV. He had already crossed the Alps, when Zoz. l. 4. Philostrog. l. 11.
he learnt with an incredible grief the death of Valentinian. Historians have
differently reported concerning the tragical end of this Emperor. Some relate,
that diverting himself after dinner upon the banks of the Rhine, Arbogastes
surprised him, and slew him. Others have supposed, that after he had caused him
to be strangled by Assassins, he made him to be hanged to a Tree with his own
Socrat. l. 5. c. 24. Sozom. l. 7. c. 20.
Handkerchief, in order to make it credible that he had killed himself. That
which bears most probability is, that he was betrayed by the Eunuchs of the
Palace, at the solicitation of Arbogastes, and that he was found strangled in
his Bed, upon Saturday night the 15th of May, being Whitsun-Eve. St. Ambrose
returned to Milan, continuing Epiph. lr de Men's. and pond. Idat.
to lament the misfortune of this Prince, whom he had tenderly loved, and whose
extraordinary merit he was acquainted with.

For scarce had he attained the age of five and twenty years, but he enjoyed
already all the qualities which might make a great Emperor. His Stature, his
Air, his Vigor, his Dexterity in all Sozom. l. 7. c. 22. Ambr. in fun. Valent.
kind of Exercises, and a certain natural grace which accompanied all his
Actions, easily distinguished him from all his Courtiers. He had a lively and
penetrating wit, and his opinions in Council were so just and weighty, that as
young as he was, one would have said that he was consummate in business. He was
chaste, liberal, obliging, constant in adversity, and moderate in good fortune.
Ambr. ib.
Although he found his Exchequer exhausted by the misfortune of Civil Wars, he
would never charge the People, and replied to those who advised him to create
new Taxes, That it was better to consider how to suppress the old ones.

Some Persons of Quality were accused of entertaining some design to deprive
him of the Empire. He made so little account of these Accusations, which are
for the most part very nice, that no Body under his Reign feared either Envy,
or Calumnies. He had so much consideration for his Sisters, that he deferred
his Marriage, for fear the love he should have for his Wife, might diminish
that he had for them; and when he felt Ambr. ib.
himself assaulted by Murderers, he expressed nothing more than this, What will
become of my poor Sisters? This tenderness however was not of capaeity to
corrupt his judgment. These Princesses had the enjoyment of some ground, which
the Empress Justine their Mother had left them, under another Title than that
of the propriety. Those whom she had deprived of it, pretended to re-enter in
their Rights, and confiding in the justice of the Emperor, referred the
arbitration of this difference to himself. He sent back the Cause to the
ordinary Judges; but in private he engaged the Princesses to restore generously
the Land which was in dispute.

Never was Prince more easie-tempered, and more ready to correct his faults. It
was immediately observed that he indulged himself too much with Sights, and all
the diversions of the Circus. He abstained from thence, and scarce permitted
those public Sports at the solemn Birthdays of Emperors, and the great
rejoycings of the Empire; some laid to his charge, that the passion he had for
hunting diverted him from the care of business: he presently killed all the
Beasts which he had nourished in his Park, and applied himself entirely to the
government of the State by himself. His Rivals had no more to say upon his
conduct, but that he sometimes advanced the hour of his repast out of
intemperance. He made use of this advice, and became so abstemious, that he
fasted very often, and eat but little, even in those magnificent Entertainments
which he provided for his Courtiers.

He lost no opportunity of demonstrating his piety toward God, and his Zeal
for the true Religion, whether against Heretics or Pagans. He pursued in every
thing the advice and instructions of St. Ambrose, honoring and loving him with
as much fervency as he had formerly persecuted and abhorred him. Wherein he
showed, that his past faults proceeded from the impressions which were given
him, and not from his own nature. He reigned about Seventeen years, and was
worthy Ambr. ep. 34. Ruffin. l. 2. c. 31. Soz. l. 7. c. 22.
of a more happy life and death.

Those, who were guilty of his death, spread abroad that he had killed himself,
and that being vexed at the resistance which was made to his unjust and
extravagant passions and designs, he had rather chose to cease to live, than to
be Emperor, and not Master of his actions. They let his body be taken up, and
would do nothing that might procure them the public hatred.

XXXV. In the mean time it was necessary to look after the Empire. Arbogastes,
by an affected moderation, refused this honor which no body had disputed with
him: and whether he did not really love stateliness, and was contented to
govern the Empire without being Emperor; or whether he feared to pass openly
for the Murderer of Valentinian, if he came to succeed him; or else thought the
Romans would not voluntarily obey a Frenchman, nor the Christians a Pagan; he
cast his eyes upon one of his friends named Eugenius, and resolved to invest
him with the name and title of a dignity, whereof he would reserve to himself
the whole power.

Eugenius was a man of a low birth, who after having professed Rhetoric with
some reputation, forsook the Schools, and fixed himself to the attendance of
the Court. Ricomer, General of the Armies of Gratian, had received him into his
family as Secretary, and going for Constantinople, had recommended him to
Arbogastes, as a man of parts and understanding, who might be serviceable to
Zoz. l. 4*
him. Arbogastes then pitched upon him as one of his creatures, who being unable
to pretend to the Throne, or to maintain himself therein without his
assistance, would be absolutely his, by acknowledgment and necessity.

Flavian, in the name of the Pagans, consented to this election, because he
hoped that under so infirm an Emperor, he should have a greater Sozom. l. 7.
c. 22.
share in the government; and that besides he knew Eugenius, notwithstanding his
being a Christian, had a great inclination for Paganism. They had much ado to
persuade this fearful man, who loved his repose, to accept of the Empire: but
the one promised him so much assistance, the others foretold him so much
success, that he at length took the Purple and the Diadem, and suffered himself
to be Proclaimed Emperor.

XXXVI. The news of the death of Valentinian extremely surprised the Court of
Constantinople. Ambr. Ep. 34.
Theodosius was very sensibly concerned at it. He wrote immediately to the
afflicted Princesses, Letters of consolation upon the loss of their Brother,
and prayed St. Ambrose to take care of his Burial, and Funeral Rites. This
Prelate, who had already prepared a Stately Monument of Porphyry, made it to be
erected as soon as he had received orders, and solemnly performed the obsequies
of this Pious Emperor, whose Funeral Elogy he made himself. He spoke of him as
of a perfect believer, although he was but Cathe^umen. He assured that Ambros.
orat* in fun. Valent.
he had not been wanting to Baptism, although Baptism was wanting to him: That his
Faith and good well had purified him, and that one ought to impute to him a
grace, which he had zealously desired, and instantly demanded, and to which he
was disposed by a courageous confession of his Faith, in openly refusing the
Pagans the re-establishment of their Altars. He declared notwithstanding that
he would not pass one day without remembering him in his Sermons and Offerings,
nor one night without praying for him.

All the People being touched with the virtue and misfortunes of this Prince,
renewed the affection and esteem which they had entertained for him. The
Princesses, to whom the Archbishop directed part of his discourse, disolved
into tears. They had spent above two months in lamenting and praying in a
Chapel, where had been deposited the body of their Brother. They could not be
hindered from entering often, and they always came out almost dead. They would
assist at his Funeral, and afterward forsook the World, where they found
nothing more agreeable, to go and bewail all the residue of their lives the
loss they had sustained, and to seek in God alone those comforts which they
could not expect from men.

XXXVII. Whilst these funeral duties were performed to the memory of
Valentinian, Eugenius assisted with the Counsels of Arbogastes and Flavian,
considered how to confirm himself in his new dignity. He advanced on a sudden
toward the Rhine with his Army, and made such advantageous Sulp. Alex. apud
Greg. Theodor. l. 2. hestor.
Proposals to the Kings of the French and Germans, that they signed a Treaty of
Peace, and renewed their ancient alliances with the Empire. Arbogastes
reconciled himself with those Princes, whom he had treated with too much
haughtiness in the past wars.

Paulin. in vit. Ambr
It is reported, that in an entertainment which he made for them, they asked
him if he was acquainted with the Bishop Ambrose, and having learnt that he had
had the honor to be in the number of his Friends, and to eat often at his
Table, they cried out, that it was no wonder if he had obtained so many
Victories, since he was beloved of a man, that could even stop the course of
the Sun, if he would. This alliance with two Nations so inured to war, retained
all the other Barbarians, and fixed the Empire in safety.

XXXVIII. Then Eugenius sent Ambassadors to Theodosius, to know if he would
acknowledge him for Colleague. Ruffin the Athenian chief of the Embassy, had
orders to make no mention of Arbogastes. He was contented to send some Priests,
in order to justify him of the murder he was charged with. Theodosius quietly
gave audience to the proposal of the Ambassador, and when he saw no Letter from
Arbogastes, and that they even affected to speak nothing of him, he complained
of him, and accused him of the death of Valentinian. Then the Priests took up
the discourse, and would evidence to him that he was innocent of the fact; but
their premeditated speeches did but increase the suspicions, which were already
conceived of his Treason.

Although this Emperor had reason to repulse the Deputies of a Murderer, and a
Tyrant; yet he spoke to them with abundance of Moderation. He retained them
some time, that he might deliberate at leisure concerning the Party he was to
take. After which judging that they designed to amuse him by Propositions of
Peace, and that their was neither honor, nor safety in treating with Traitors,
he sent back these Ambassadors loaded with magnificent Presents, without giving
them any positive answer.

XXXIX. In the mean time, Eugenius after having regulated the affairs of the
State, consented ^o ruin those of Religion. It was agreed upon ^n his Council,
that Flavian and Arbogastes should demand the re establishment of Sacrifices,
and ^he Altar of Victory; and that after some difficulty they should obtain
what they desired, so that the Pagans might be satisfied, and the Chri^tians
not offended. Then they presented their Request. Eugenius immediately pretended
to be ^nwilling to attempt any thing against the ^aws of his Predecessors, and
his own pro^er conscience; but at length he consented to all ^hey would have
him; protesting nevertheless that ^t was to his friends, and not to their Gods,
that ^e allowed this favor; and that if he permitted them to revive this
Altar, and to re-establish these Sacrifices, it was not in respect to their
Idols, which he laughed at, but to gratify persons of merit, to whom he could
refuse nothing. He thought to have found a plausible medium, and Paulin. i^
vit. Ambr*
spared by these vain distinctions, a Religion, to which he was not very firm,
and which notwithstanding it was not suitable for him to abandon.

XL* St. Ambrose having learnt a little after that he was coming in haste to
Milan, would not attend him there, not through any fear that he conceived of
his power, but for the horror he had of his Sacriledges. He went to Bologne, in
order to assist at the Translation of the Relics of St. Agricole the Martyr,
to which he had been entreated to come. He advanced as far as Faenza, where he
soj^urned for some days. From thence he descended into Hetruri^, to satisfy
the urgent des^^s of the (...) of Florence, who had a mind to hear him preach,
and edify by his doctrine. The holy Archbishop was not ignorant of the
designs of Eugenius, and what would be the effect of the deliberations of his
Council. Eugenius on his side did not question but that the Archbishop would
have the courage to oppose his impiety, or at least to upbraid him with it.
Theresore as soon as he was Master of the Empire, he wrote to him very obliging
Letters, to seek his friendship, with a design to take advantage of it in the
end. The Saint made him no precise answer, for fear of authorizing his
usurpation by civilities, which might be ill interpreted. He did not cease,
notwithstanding to write to him in favor of some unhappy persons, who had had
recourse to him; demonstrating by this prudent conduct, that he could not
flatter against his honor and his conscience; and that he did not refuse to
honor and entreat those, whom the Providence of God had invested with a
Sovereign Power.

But as soon as he had advice that this Emperor was arrived at Milan, he wrote
a Letter to him full of zeal and piety, wherein, without meddling with his
election, or the affairs of the State, whi^ he lest to Theodosius to
disentangle, he said to him, amongst other things; It is the fear of God, which
I take as much as I can for the rule of my actions, the has oblige^ me to go
out of Milan. I have been accust^med, Sir, to have regard to none but Jesus
Christ and to make more account of his grace, than of the favo^^ of Men. None
ought to be offended that I prefer t^ glory of God before his. In this
confidence I take the liberty of telling the Grandees of the World what I
think. I have not flattered the other Emperors, neither will ^ flatter you. I
apprehend that you have granted the Pagan^ what your Predecessors had
constantly refused them. Although the power of Emperors is great, consider that
God is still greater; that he sees the bottom of your A^ud Paulin. in vita Ambr.
heart, and pierces into the inmost recesses of your conscience. You cannot
suffer your self to be abused, and yet you would hide from God, under humane
decorums, the injury you do him. Have you made no reflection upon it? Should not
you have more constancy to refuse the Gentiles a Sacrilege, than they had to
demand it? Bestow upon them as many other favors as you please, I am not
jealous of their fortune. I don't play the censurer of your bounties, but I am
the interpreter of your Faith. Can you have the courage to present your
offerings to Jesus Christ? Few persons will stop at appearances; every one will
judge of your intentions. You will be accountable for all the Sacriledges which
are done, and it is not your fault that all the world does not commit them. If
you are Emperor, show it by the submission you owe to God and his Church. At
last, after having testified that he entertains for him all the respect that is
due to persons of his rank, he adds these words: But, Sir, as it is just that I
honor you, it is also just that you honor him, whom you would have b^lieved
to be the Author of your Empire.

XLI. Eugenius, so far from being affected with this Letter, flattered himself
with the great hopes which Flavian inspire^ him with, in relation to his Gods,
of an infallible protection. He even disposed himself to War, upon the
prediction of a celebrated Victory, which was to conquer him an Empire, and
destroy the Christian Religion. Theodosius was more concerned to hear that Rome
had opened the Temples of the Gods, and that those Sacrifices which he had so
happily put down, s^oaked on all sides, than to see her under Leg. 12. de Page
cod. T^eod.
the power of an Usurper.

He set forth a new Edict through the whole East* whereby he prohibited all his
Subjects to sacrifice Victims, to consult the entrails of Beasts, to offer
Incense to insensible figures, and to do any other exercise of Idolatry, under
the penalty of being treated as guilty of High Treason; declaring those places,
where should be offered Incense to the Gods, to be confiscated; and condemning
to a considerable Fine those Magistrates, who did not exactly pursue the
execution of this Ordinance.

Leg. 21. de Haret. cod. Theod.
He made yet another Law against Heretics, and forbid them to make
Ordinations, and to hold Assemblies, condemning the Clerks and Bishops of each
Sect, that should act contrary to this Ordinance, to the Mulct of ten Livres of
Gold for the first time. By these actions he drew upon him the assistance of
Heaven, whilst Engeniw trusted in the force of Men.

XLII. After which he applied himself entirely to the p^eparations of the War.
He declared his Son Honorius Emperor, and resolved to leave him at
Constantinople with Arcadius, to the end that their presence might keep up the
tranquillity of the East, whilst he went in person to withstand his enemies.
Troops were levied in the Provinces Ricomer, one of the most ancient Generals,
was to Zo^. l. 4.
have had the command of them, but he died before the expediti^n. Russin had
orders to continue near the young Princes, to assist them with his Counsels.
All the General Officers were named, and departed in order to render themselves
at the head of those Bodies which they commanded.

Sozom. l. 7. c. 22.
XLIII. Theodosius was yet at Constantinople, and prepared himself to War by
his Fasts, his Prayers, and frequent visitings of the Churches. He had sent to
the solitary John, who formerly foretold him the defeat of Maximus, ^^ consult
him upon the event of this War. The holy Man replied, That this Enterprise
should be more difficult than the former; That the Battle should be a bloody
one; That Evagr. vit. SS.PP c. 1. Theodores. l. 5. c. 24.
Theodosius should in the end obtain a famous Victory, but that he should dye a
little after in the midst of his Glory, and his Triumphs. The Emperor had
received this news, the first with a great deal of joy, the other with
abundance of courage.

XLIV. Instead of imposing new Taxes to supply the charges of this War, as he
had done heretofore, he suppressed entirely those which Tatian Aug. de civ. De^
l. 5. c. 26. Leg. 23. cod. Theod. de annon. and trib. Leg. 12. co^ Theod. de
pon proj^rit.
great Master of the Palace had imposed two years before. Thus his Provinces had
the joy to see themselves eased, whilst those of the Usurper were oppressed by
new and excessive Impositions. He likewise ordered that all the Possessions of
the banished Persons which had been confiscated, and reunited to the Imperial
Patrimony during the Magistracy of the same Tatian, should be restored without
any opposition either to the culpable who had been deprived, or to their
nearest Relations.

XLV. After that, being afraid lest the disorders of the Soldie^y should bring
upon him the hatred of the People, and the vengeance of God, he resolved to
repress the licentiousness of the ^eg. 3. cod. Theod. de Salgam. Leg. 18, 19,
20. de eron. mili* annon. cod. Theod. Leg. 4. m^^a^or. co^. Theod.
the Soldiers to exact nothing of their Hosts, not to ask the price of that sort
of Bread which was provided for them* nor to take any other Lodgings than what
should be appointed for them by the Harbingers; enjoining all the Officers to
punish very severely t^ose who should make the least exaction, or the smallest
violence, and particularly recommended to them the care of the rep^se and
substance of the poor Families of the Country, as if it was their own Propriety.

XLVI. He was not contented with having given such great testimonies of justi^e
and goodness, he would still do an heroical Act of Christian Generosity, and
pardon every Injury, as he had pardoned some years before the sedition of the
People of Antioch. He made a Rescript to be prepared Leg. 1. S^quis maledi^.
Imp^r. cod. Theod.
in these terms: If any one, against all the Laws of shame and modesty, has
attempted to desame our Name, by any Action, or by any Slander, and has been
transported so far as to cry down our Government, and our Conduct; We are
pleased to remit him from the punishment di^ected by the Laws, or from any evil
treatment: for if it is by an indiscreet Levity that he has spoken against us,
we ought to despise him; if it is by Folly, we ought to pity him; if it is by
an evil will, we are very willing to pardon him.

XLVII. After these actions of Clemency and Piety, Theodosius departed from
Constantinople. At ^^z^m. l. 7. c. (...).
seven miles from thence he made some stay, in order to make his Prayer in a
Church, which he had built in honor of St. John Baptist. After which ^e
continued his Journey till he had joined his Troops, and advanced toward the
Alps. Ti^asius commanded the Roman Legions which had fought with so much glory
in the East against the Barbarians, and in the West against Maximus. Stilic^n,
a Vandal Prince, who had married the Princess Serena the Emperor's Niece,
conducted the Troops which had been drawn out of the Frontiers since the last
Treaties. Gainas was at the head of the Goths, who had enrolled themselves in
the service of the Empire after the death of King Athanaric. After them marched
Saules and Alaric with a Body of Barbarians that came from the Banks of the
Danube to assist in this War. They were followed Ruffin* l. 1. c. 10.
by some Companies of old Iberian Soldiers, commanded by Bacurius, Captain of
their Nation, as zealous for the defense of the Christian Religion, Claud.
(...) bell* Gildo^.
as for the service of the Emperor. Gildon, Governor of Afric^ had had Orders to
bring a powerful Relief; but he remained armed, without taking any Party,
expecting upon whom would fall the lot of Arms, and considering rather how to
revolt himself, than to chastise the revolt of Theodor. l. 5. c. 24. Prudent.
adv. Symma^h. l. 1.
Eugenius. Theodosius encouraged his Army by his presence; and making the great
Standard of the Cross to be carried before him, he hoped, with the assistance
of Heaven, to terminate successfully this War, wherein was concerned not only
the Empire, but also Religion.

XLVIII. Eugenius on his side had assembled a puis^ant Army, composed of
Legions, which had served under Valentinian; of a numerous Militia, which
Flavian had got together in Italy, exciting the Pagans to go to the assistance
of their Gods; and of an infinite number of Germans and French, whom Arbogastes
their Country^an had engaged to his Party. These three Heads had different
Prospects. Eugenius looked after Peace, and thought to be able to reign
undisturbed after the gaining of a Battle. Arbogastes desired nothing but
occasions of acquiring glory, and signalizing himself in Fights. Flavian aimed
at the re-establishment of the worship of the Gods, and to render himself
considerable, in becoming the chief of a Party. They agreed notwithstanding in
this Point, that it was necessary to conquer Theodosius, and to abolish the
Christian Religion. Eugenius, according Philos^org.
to some Historians, had already renounced it, being vexed at the retreat and
liberty of St. Ambrose, and still more at the resolution of the Priests of
Milan, who by order of this Archbishop had treated him as a sacrilegious
Person, and would never be persuaded to receive his offerings. Then they left
the City, and threatn^ to exterminate Paulin. in (...) Ambr.
the Ecclesiastics, and to make of all the Churches in Milan Stables for their
Horses after the defeat of Theodosius.

Arbogastes, who was charged with all the cares of this War, advanced with the
whole Army; and for fear of weakening it, by making a division thereof, as
Maximus had done, he marched toward the Alps with all the Forces of the West,
being resolved to attend Theodosius, and to block up against him the entrance
of Italy. He placed Troops in the Passes of the Julian Alps, the guard of which
was committed to Flavian: he ordered Forts to be erected upon the Ascents, and
encamped in a great Plain along the River Frigiaus, which takes its rise in
these Mountains. Flavian on his side sacrificed Victims, produced new Oracles,
and made the Statues of Hercules and those of Jupiter the Thunderer, to be
carried amongst the Ensigns at the head of the Army. They left Eugenius nothing
but the Title of Emperor, and the care of enlivening the Troops by his
Harangues. August. de civ. Dei. l. 5. c. 26.


XLIX. In the mean time Theodosius arrived toward the Alps, went to observe
the Enemy* and fell so briskly upon those who guarded the Passages, that Terror
and Disorder being introduced amongst them, he made himself Master of their
Trenches, and after some resistance carried those Forts, which Arbogastes had
supposed not only impregnable, Zoz. l. 4. Sozom. l. 7. c. 24.
but even inaccessible. Flavian, who had promised to stop the Enemy's Army, or
to destroy it in the streights of those Mountains, seeing Ruffin. l. 1. c. 33.
himself forced, chose rather to dye fighting, than to survive his misfortune,
and to undergo the shame of having given false hopes, and been deceived in his
Predictions. Theodosius passed immediately with his whole Army through the Road
he had opened to himself, and went to present himself in Battel*array before
the Enemies.

In coming down the Alps toward Aquileia, one discovers a great Plain, capable
of containing several Armies, cu^ off on one side by the River Frigidus, and
bounded on the other by Mountains, which are as it were second Rampires that
Nature seems to have made for the security of Italy. It was there Arbogastes
attended Theodosius to give him Battle. He learnt, without surprise, that the
Passages were forced, and encouraged his Troops, whom so resolute an Action had
a little disordered. He extended in the Plain that Army of Barbarians which he
had brought from Gaul, leaving Eugenius upon the Ascents with the Roman Legions
to support Zoz. l. 4
them. After having given his Orders throughout, Sozom. l. 7. c. 24. Victor.
Socrat. l. 5. c. 24. Oros. l. 7. c. 35.
conquering, the importance of a Victory, and the Rewards they were to hope for,
he put himself at the head of some French Batallions, to whom he had given the
Vanguard, and expected the Enemy's motion.

L. Theodosius lost no time, and to keep the same order of Battle, he made all
his foreign Troops descend into the Plain, with an incredible diligence, and
reserved himself with the Body of Roman Zoz. l. 4.
Soldiers upon the adjoining Hills. Whatsoever Ardor was observed in the two
Armies, they gave themselves time to be put in order, and to take their
advantages, till Theodosius gave the Signal to march. Gainas was the first at
the charge with the Goths he commanded. Arbogastes opposed to them some French
Troops, who received them with a great deal of courage and resolution. The
Fight grew hot: The two Parties, assisted with the Bodies which were detached
to support them, a long time disputed the Victory; but at length the Goths were
upon the turn, and seeing themselves weakened by the loss of their chief
Officers, and their most valiant Soldiers, and being overwhelmed by the number
of Troops which fell upon them continually, they began to yield back, and
falling one upon another, put the whole Army in disorder.

LI. Arbogastes taking advantage of the confusion they were in, pursued them
with some Squadrons of Reserve, and made a horrible slaughter. Ten thousand
Goths were killed upon the place; the rest were almost rendered incapable of
fighting, and all this multitude of Barbarians was going to be entirely
defeated. Theodosius, who from an Eminence discovered the Rout of his Men, and
saw his loss inevitable, if Eugenius came to fall upon him with his Roman
Legions, had recourse to God in this extremity, and lifting up his hands to
Heaven, he made this Prayer, Thou know, O my God, that I have undertaken
this War in the Name of thy Ruffin. l. 2. c. 33.
Son Jesus Christ: If my intentions are not so pure as I thought they were, let
me perish: If thou approvest the justice of my Cause, and the confidence I
repose in thee, assist me, and don't permit the Gentiles to say, Where is the
God of the Christians?

He had no sooner finished these words, but he descends into the Plain with the
Romans, whom he excited by his Piety and his Courage, and advances to snatch
from the Enemies a Victory which they thought secure. In the mean time Bacurius
gave marks of an extraordinary Fidelity and Valor; for after having rallied
those that fled, and put himself at their head with his Iberians, he sustained
all the burden of the Fight, keeping off all the Darts of the Enemy, who
charged him on all Ruffin. ib.
sides, and putting a stop to their Fury, till such time as Theodosius was
arrived.

LII. Then the fight began afresh. Both parties used their efforts to overcome;
the one flushed with their former success, the others encouraged by the
presence of the Emperor. They attacked, they opposed without fearing danger,
without drawing back of either side. But what attempt soever Theodosius could
make, he could never gain any advantage over Arbogastes, who maintained himself
by his valor, by his conduct, and by the number and courage of his Troops. At
last the night put an end to the Battle, and each was obliged to retire to his
Camp. The loss was not considerable on the side of Eugenius; and Theodosius
lost several Officers, and particularly the brave Bacurius, who, after having
several times dispersed the Enemies, and bore through their Squadrons with
Sword in hand, fatigued with the labor of Zoz. l. 4. Ruffin. l. 2. c. 33.
the days work, weakened by the wounds he had received, came at last to fall, in
the sight of the Emperor, upon a heap of Barbarians, whom he had slain with his
own hand.

LIII. The two Emperors passed the night in a very different manner. Eugenius
made fires to be kindled through his Camp, distributed rewards to those who had
distinguished themselves by some glittering action, and thought that he had won
an absolute Victory. He did not so much as doubt, but that Theodosius had saved
himself by favor of the night with the residue of his Troops. Theodosius on his
side having regained his Camp upon the Mountain, called together the chief
Officers of his Army, and held a Council of war. Theodor. l. 5. c. 24.
Timasius and Stilicon were of opinion to yield to the time* and to provide
immediately for the security of a Retreat. They represented, That after the
loss which had been sustained, it was necessary to think alone of
re-establishing himself; That it was enough to have been conquered; That it was
wisdom to take care of being entirely defeated; That it was to sacrifice the
remainders of the Army, to expose it to the hazard of a second Battle; and that
it would be a piece of rashness to pretend with a small number of disheartened
Soldiers, to force an Enemy who confided in their multitude and valor; and who
had lately obtained so considerable an advantage; That it were better to
enclose himself in the strong places of the Empire, in order to assemble new
Troops during the Winter, and to take the Field in the beginning of the Spring,
and renew the War with equal Forces.

The Emperor rejected their Counsel, and looking upon them with some
indignation, God forbid, said he to them, that the Cross of Jesus Christ, which
appears in my Colors, should fly before the Statues of Hercules and Jupiter,
which are born amongst the Ensigns of the Enemy! These words spoken with an
holy confidence, inspired his Captains with that resolution he desired. He gave
necessary orders for the morrow, and retired into a Chapel near the place
where he was encamped, in order to pass the rest of the night in Prayer.

LIVE. It is reported that having fallen asleep toward morning, he saw in a
Dream two Cavaliers Ib. c. 42.
mounted upon two White Horses, who encouraged him to fight, and passed their
word for the success of the battle, assuring him that they were John the
Evangelist and Philip, Apostles of Jesus Christ, sent from God to march before
his Ensigns, and to show his Soldiers the way, that would direct them to a
Victory. Whether this Dream was only the effect of the imagination of this
Prince, still hot with the last engagement, and a new desire of conquering with
the assistance of Heaven; or whether it was a sensible testimony of the
protection of God upon him* he related, when he awaked, what he had seen, and
went out of the Chapel attended by part of his Officers, in order to go and
range his Army in battle. At the same time was presented to him a Soldier, who
had the same night seen such another Vision. He examined him, made him several
times repeat all the circumstances of this Dream, and taking Ibid.
from thence an occasion to encourage his Army he said to his Captains, That
they could no longer doubt of the success of a battle after this new
declaration; That he had resolved upon it against their opinions, but that it
was by a secret order from God, who sent them invisible Captains for their
Conduct; That all the force of mankind was not to be feared, since Heaven would
undertake for them; That they should courageously fight under such puissant
Auspices; and that they should regard their Protectors, and not compute their
Adversaries.

This news being dispersed through the whole Army, revived the courage of the
Soldiers; and as there is no stronger confidence, than that which is grounded
upon Religion, they demanded nothing but a battle* They imagined that they saw
all the Heaven armed for their defense, and expected, not a doubtful fight, but
an assured Victory. Theodosius took advantage of this ardor, and made them
forthwith descend into the Plain.

LV. Just as he had made an end of distributing Sozom. l. 7. c. 24.
his orders, he received Letters from some Officers of the Enemy's Army, which
was posted upon the Mountains, who promised to come over to his party, if he
would afford them the same honors and the same rank which they held under
Eugenius. The Emperor having borrowed a Tablebook of one that was near him,
marked the employments Oros. l. 7. c. 35.
which he destined for them, if they discharged their promises; after which he
marched directly to the Enemy, guarding himself with the sign of the Cross,
which was the signal of Battle.

LVI. In the mean time Arbogastes disposed himself to receive it; and wondering
from whence could proceed that assurance to men that had been overcome, and who
had but few Troops remaining; he detached Squadrons continually to seize upon
the advanced Posts, and ordered his Army so, that he might extend it in the
Plain, to hem in the Enemy. Eugenius from the top of a little hill, where he
had erected his Pavillion, harrangued his Soldiers, and remonstrated to them,
That they had but this fatigue to undergo; That it was an easy matter to break
that body of despairing men, who rather came with a design to dye, than to
fight; That they should see the residue of that Army which they defeated the
preceding day, give ground at the first onset, if they would charge it
courageously, and complete a Victory, which was already far advanced. He
promised to all rewards, and gave orders to the Officers to take Theodosius,
and to bring him alive to him, oppressed with Irons.

Theod. ib.
LVII. As the Armies were in sight, Theodosius observed that his Vanguard, at
the prospect of so great a multitude of Enemies, marched a little Ambr oras. in
fun. Theod.
too heavily; and fearing left Arbogastes should take advantage of this
slowness, he descended from his Horse, advanced alone toward the first Ranks,
and crying out with a holy confidence, Where is the God of Theodosius? he put
new Life into his Troops, and led them on himself to the engagement.

There was immediately discharged on both sides a shower of Darts and Arrows,
which eclipsed the Air. They fell in pell-mell a little after. The example of
the Prince, and the hope of the assistance of Heaven excited the one; anger and
indignation pushed on the others to make extraordinary efforts. The heat was
alike in both Parties, and there was as yet no considerable advantage. Things
were in this posture in the right Wing where Theodosius fought, when they came
to advise him that his auxiliary Troops, which composed the left Wing, were
vigorously attacked by Arbogastes, and that they would be in confusion, if they
were not supported.

LVIII. Theodosius took Horse without delay, and run, accompanied with some of
his men, toward these Barbarians, in order to put himself at their Head, and
to encourage them by his presence. But he discerned a body of the Enemies
Horse, who being advanced through the streights Oros. l. 7. c. 35.
of the Mountains, were come into the Plain, and seemed to design to fall upon
his Army behind. He stopped, and put himself into a condition of defending
himself with those few that attended him. The Count Arbetion, who commanded
these Adversary Squadrons, was ready to charge upon Paul. Diac. hist.
Theodosius, and had infallibly overwhelmed him before he could possibly be
relieved: but whether the fierce and majestic aspect of this Prince inspired
him with Respect and Veneration for his Person; or whether he was come with a
design to follow the best Party, he threw down his Arms, and disposed himself
with his Troops near the Emperor, with an intent to stand by him, and to obey
him.

LIX. Theodosius seeing himself not only delivered from an important danger,
but likewise reinforced with a considerable relief, turned toward his Left
Wing, which he encouraged by his presence. But what effort soever he made in
this bloody and ob^tinate fight, where the valor was so great in both Parties,
and the number so unequal; the courage and prudence of Arbogastes, the vigor
and perse^erance of his Troops, the helps he found in the ^ultitude of his
Soldiers, had unquestionably ru^ed the Army of Theodosius. It insensibly
decayed, and was going to be, if not conquered, at least ^tigued by the
tediousness of the Fight, when Heaven declared itself for this Emperor, by a
^iracle which the very Pagans could not dis^mble.

LX. There arose from the top of the Alps* an ^petuous Wind, between East and
North, Claud. in Paneg. Con. Honor. Oros. ib. Aug. de civ. Dei. l. 26. Ruffin.
Socrat. Theodor. Sozom.
which blowing on a sudden upon the Squadrons ^f Engenius, put them into a
strange disorder. They ^ere shook, notwithstanding their utmost endea^ors to
remain firm. Their Shields were snatched, s it were, out of their Hands. The
Arrows which they drew, either lost their force in the ^ir, or returned against
themselves. The Darts, which they let fly against them, being driven back ^y
rapid Whirlwinds, fell upon their own breasts ^ith deep and mortal wounds.
Clouds of dust, which the Storm had raised, beat against the faces ^f the
Soldiers, and deprived them of the use of ^e sight, and even respiration. Thus
they conti^ed as it were immovable, and tied by an inisible power, without
being able either to attack, ^ defend themselves, being exposed to the Darts nd
Javelins, which were directed against them ^om all parts.

Then the Troops of Theodosius acknowledgi^^ the assistance of Heaven, which
fought so manifestly for them, break through the Enemy with Swor^ in hand, and
make a horrible slaughter of the^ Barbarians, who the day before had got so
much advantage. Arbogastes, after having vainly ^^ployed his utmost capacity
against Heaven an^ Theod. ib.
Earth, saw no safety for himself but in flight. T^ Captains of the Western
Legions asked for Quater, and implored the mercy of the Conqueror ^ whom God
had made them subject, and Theodosius saw himself the second time a subduer of
^ Tyrant, and absolute Master of the two ^^pires.

He made the slaughter cease immediately. H^ afforded all the Officers the
grace which they implored, and gave them Orders, for a proof of their Fidelity,
to bring E^geni^^ to him. The chie^ amongst them departed without delay ^o
execu^ this Order. They found upon an Ascent this Tyrant, who confiding in the
first Successes of the Battle, and not having been able to discern the defeat
of his Troops amongst the Storms and D^ which covered them, expected every
moment t^ News of an entire Victory. He perceived the Men, who came toward him
full speed; ^ beginning to triumph within himself, he aske^ them, as soon as he
could be understood, I^ the brought Theodosius to him, as he had commanded the
All the return which they made, was to carry hi^ off himself, to dispossess him
of his Imperi^ Robes, and to draw him along to the fest of the Conqueror.

LXI. Theodosius regarding him with an Air ^ Contempt, mixed notwithstanding
with some Pity, reproached him with the Murder of Valenti^i^n, the Usurpation
of the Empire, the Disorders ^f a Civil War, and particularly the overturning
^f Religion, and the Honors rendered to the Sta^ues of Herc^les and Jupiter:
and as this miserable ^an, without other justification, cowardly begged ^is
Life, the Emperor turning himself, abandoned ^im to the Soldiers; who cut off
his Head in the Socrat. Sozom.
^d year of his Reign, upon the 6th day of Septem^er. The unfortunate
Arbogastes, after having ^andred two days through the Mountains, deserted ^f God
and Man, and despairing of being able to ^scape those who sought after him to
lead him to ^heodosius, took his punishment upon himself, and Claud. in 3.
Consul.
^irected two Swords one after another through his ^ody.

LXII. The Emperor being satisfied with the ^eath of these two C^iminals,
pardoned all the ^est who were of their Party. Never was Prince ^ore moderate
in his Victories. He never in^ulted over the Conquered, and often pitied them.
^is fiercen^ss usually ceased with the War. He ^new how to pardon, but scarce
how to punish; and forgetting that he had Enemies, as soon as he and overcome,
he was even generous to those who ^ad born Arms against him.

He was informed that the Children of Eugenius and Flavian had taken Sanctuary
in the Churches ^f Aquileia: he sent a Tribune immediately with ^n Order to
save their Lives. He took care to ^ave them educated in the Christian Religion.
He ^eft Possessions and Employments for them, and ^sed them as if they had been
of his own Fa^ily.

After having given Orders for the preservation of his Enemies, he made large
Compensations to the Troops, and distributed amongst them all the August. l. 5.
de civ. Dei. c. 26.
Booty; and as he made those Statues of Jupiter to be taken away, which the
Pagans had fixed upon the Mountains, having heard some Soldiers to say
pleasantly, That they would be glad to be thunder-str^^ August. ib.
with those Thunderbolts of Gold, he bestowed the^ immediately upon them. But
as this Victory wa^ rather God's than his own, his principal care wa^ to make a
solemn Thanksgiving throughout h^ whole Empire to be rendered to him. He
di^patched P^ulin. in vita Ambr.
Couriers to Constantinople, to advise the young Princes, whom he had left
there, of t^ happy success of his Arms. He wrote particular^ to St. Ambrose
concerning it, to entreat him ^ thank God for his Victory.

LXIII. This holy Archbishop had returned t^ Milan, as soon as Eugenius and
Arbogastes were d^parted thence; and what Terror soever they ha^ dispersed in
Italy, he had always hoped that G^ would favor the good Party, and undertake t^
protection of Theodosius. When he understoo^ that this Prince had gained the
Battle, and had ^ceived his Orders, he offered in his Name the holy Sacrifice,
putting his Letter upon the Altar, an^ representing it to God as an earnest of
the Fai^ of this pious Emperor. After he had perform^ this Duty, he sent one of
his Deacons to him wi^ Letters, by which, after having expressed his j^ for the
prosperity of his Arms, he represented to hi^ That he ought to give God the
whole glory thereof; T^ his Piety had contributed more to it, than his Valor; ^
that his Victory was still incomplete, if he did not p^don those who were
involved in the misfortune, rather the the Crimes of the Tyrants. A little
while after he departed himself from Milan, in order to go and wait upon the
Emperor at Aquileia.

LXIV. Their interview was full of joy and tenderness. The Archbishop
prostrated himself before this Prince, whom his Piety, and the visible
protection of God upon him, had rendered more venerable than his Victories, or
his Crowns, and ^ray'd, That God would load him with all the prosperities of
Heaven, as he had loaded him with all those of the Earth. The Emperor on his
side cast himself at the feet of the Archbishop, imputing to his Prayers the
Favors which he had received from God, and entreating him to pray for his
Salvation, ^s he had done for his Success. Then they enter^ained themselves
about the means of restoring Religion to the state wherein it was before the
War, and separated no more.

LXV. In the mean time the Couriers which had been dispatched to
Constantinople, arrived there; and the noise of the defeat of Eugenius being
soon dispersed into all the Provinces of the Empire, ^hey made public
Rejoycings upon it. Some Hi^torians report, that this News had been already
declared by extraordinary ways; and that at the very moment Theodosius forced
the passage of the Alps, a Demon whom they adjured, in the Church of St. John
Baptist, which this Prince had built, ^ry'd out in a wretched manner, Must I
then be ^vercome, and my Army put to the Rout? The Prediction Sozom. l. ^. c.
24.
of the holy Abbot John was yet more ^bservable: Evagrius and his Companions,
who at that time visited the Monasteries of Thebais, ^tay'd some time with this
wonderful Solitary; and as they took their leaves of him, after having received
his Instructions, and admired his Sanctity, Evagr. l. 1. c. 1* Pallad. in
Lausiac. c. 4.
he said to them in blessing them, Go in peace, m^ dear Children, and know that
they hear this day in Alexandria, that the Emperor Theodosius has defeated the
Tyrant Eugenius: But this Prince will not long enjoy the advantage of his
Victory, and God will ere long withdraw him from this world The truth of the^^
Predictions was observed in the times wherein this holy Man had marked them.

The young Emperors forgot nothing that might conduce to make this Victory the
more illustrious* They made great Presents to the People, gave them stately
Shows, and particularly rendered thanks to God with a magnificence, which their
presence and that of the chief Bishops of the East rendered very solemn.

LXVI. Ruffin, who absolutely governed the Empire in the absence of Theodosius,
had called those Prelates to Constantinople for an Ecclesiastical Ceremony.
This Minister a long time disguised his Vanity and his Ambition under the
appearances of an affected Modesty; and whether it was to give the Emperor, who
loved him, a good op^nion of himself, or to make the Courtiers less suspicious,
who envied his Fortune, he became every day more powerful, without seeming to
have more Pride. He softly looked after the means to enrich himself; and although
he was naturally disposed to Figure and Noise, his Avarice retained his Pride.
But when he saw himself assured of the favor of his Master, and loaded with the
Riches he had received of him, or which he had himself unjustly got, he
abandoned himself to his own nature, and became insolent, when he thought he
might continue so without danger. He made himself a great number of Creatures,
marched with a Retinue that was unbecoming a private Man, and built Houses of
more splendour than the Emperor's Palaces.

LXVII. One of his chief cares had been to build near one of the Suburbs of
Calcedon, called Sozom. l. 8. c. 17.
The Suburb of Oak, a House of Pleasure, so vast, that one would have taken it
for a City; and so rich in precious Ornaments and Furniture, that it was scarce
credible that a private Man could be able to supply those exceeding charges. On
one side arose a great Church in honor of the Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul;
on the other appeared in perspective upon a neighboring Eminence a Monastery,
which was to serve for a supply to the want of the Clergy of this Church. As
soon as these Buildings were completed, Ruffin resolved to be baptized, and to
celebrate at the same time with all imaginable Pomp, the Consecration of this
new Church.

The Emperors had rendered this kind of Ceremony very formal, in calling to it a
great number of Bishops, and afterward converting these Assemblies Eusebius. l.
4. de vi^a Con^t. c. 4^. Socrat.
of Decency and Piety, into certain Councils and Canonical Assemblies.
Constantine the Great had taken that method for the Dedication of the Temple of
the holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem, and his Son Constantius had followed his
Example in the Consecration, which he made of the golden Temple at Antioch.

Ruffin proposed to himself these great examples, and mixing with a little
Religion a great deal of Theod. l. (...) c. 3^.
ostentation and stateliness, he called the Bishops from all parts of the East,
especially those who held the chief Sees. He likewise entreated, by repeated
Letters, the most famous Solitaries of Socrat. l. 2. c 5. Pallad. in Laus. c. 4.
Egypt, to leave their Solitude in order to come and assist at this illustrious
Ceremony. The rank which he held in the Empire, whereof he had the chief
direction under the Prince Arcadius, induced a great number of Bishops to
depart upon the first advice they received, who brought along with them the
most holy Persons of their Provinces. The Assembly was very numerous. There was
therein three Patriarchs, Nectarius of Constantinople, Theophilus of
Alexandria, and Flavian of Antioch* Gregory Bishop of Nissa, Amphilochus of
Iconium, Paul of Heraclea, Dioscorus of Helenopolis, and several other famous
Prelates were of the first that arrived there. The Principal of the Nobility
and Clergy wirh an infinite number of People resorted thither, some to honor
this Festival, others to court this Favorite, many to satisfy their curiosity.

This ceremony was performed in the month of September. The Church was hung
with admirable Tapestry; the Altar shined with Gold and precious Stones. The
Consecration was done with all the Order and Magnificence imaginable. After the
Offices were over, they proceeded with the same Pomp to the Baptism of Ruffin.
The Patriarch Nectarius administered it to him, and the famous Evagrius of
Pontus, who had been persuaded to come from Egypt with the Solitary Ammonius,
Pallad. ib.
received from the Font this regenerated man, who di^ not long preserve his
innocence. Thus concluded that Solemnity, which had been one of the holiest and
most magnificent of the Eastern Church, if it had not been attended with a
profane luxury, and if this Minister by his actions, and his injustice, had not
been of a humor to regain upon the People those excessive Sums, which he seemed
to have employed for God in this occasion.

LXVII. The Bishops repassed the Sea along with him, and reassembled at
Constantinople the 28th day of September, to decide the difference between
Agapius and Gabadius concerning the Pretensions which both had to the
Bishopric of Bostres. It was in this Synod, that it was decreed that a Bishop
Zonar. Theod. Balsam.
was not to be deposed by one alone, nor by two of his Brethren; but that for a
deposition in formis, there required a general Assembly of all the Bishops of
the Province. Theophilus of Alexandria had opened this advice, and he was the
first that infringed this Rule, in deposing by his own Authority Dioscorus
Bishop of Helenopolis.

These Prelates who were then at Constantinople, took part in the public Joy,
and after having celebrated in presence of Arcadius and all his Court, the
sacred mysteries in a Thanksgiving for the Victory, which the Emperor had
obtained upon the Tyrants, they retired into their respective Diocesses, to
acquaint their People with the wondrous works of God, and the Protection which
he had given the Empire.

LXIX. In the mean time Theodosius by the counsels of St. Ambrose applied
himself to abolish the superstitions of Paganism, prohibiting, under very
severe penalties, the exercise of all profane Religions; and declaring that if
he had conquered by Ambr. in fun. Theod.
the assistance of God, he had likewise only conquered for his glory. He
nominated Consuls, the two Sons of Anycus Probus, formerly Praefectus Praetorio
under the Great Valentinian, and so illustrious not only in the Roman Empire,
but also in foreign Kingdoms, that two of the wisest and Paulin. in vit. Ambr.
Claud. de consul. Olib. and Prob.
most powerful Lords of Persia came into Italy to see, as two miracles of the
World, at Milan St. Ambrose, famous amongst the Bishops, and at Roma, Anicus
Probus, illustrious amongst the Roman Senators. This man had brought up his
Sons in the purity of the Faith, and all the exercises of Christian Piety, and
Theodosius, who in the choice of Magistrates, had regard to the merit of
Persons, and to the honor of Religion, passed over the ordinary Rules, and put
the whole Consulship into this virtuous Family.

LXX. After having settled the most pressing affairs, whether he found himself
in a decaying State, or had made serious reflections upon the Ambr. in fun.
Theod.
Prophecy of the holy Abbot John, instead of his triumphs, he disposed himself
for death. Howsoever just the war had been, which he had undertaken against the
Enemies of God and the State, nevertheless as there had been a great deal of
blood spilt, this Prince was willing to abstain some time Number. c. 31. Basil. ad
Amphiloch. c. 13. Can. P^enit. 11.
from the reception of the Eucharist, judging himself unworthy, according to the
Genius of the Law of Moses, and some Penitential Canons, to partake of these
mysteries of Peace, till such time as he had purified his heart and hands, and
had effaced by his repentance those gross impressions, which even lawful angers
and revenges give to the greatest Souls.

He departed from Aquileia with these inclinations, and came to Milan in order
to a more quiet application to his conscience under the direction of St.
Ambrose, who was gone a day before him, and to receive there more commodiously
his Sons Arcadius and Honorius, whom he had sent for from Constantinople.
Scarce was he arrived there, but he found himself weaker, and more indisposed
Socrat. Sozom.
than he was before. Yet he did not relax any thing of his usual cares,
assisting at all his Councils, hearing himself the complaints of the People,
signing the acts of grace which he had afforded his Enemies, laboring to
re-establish that order, which Eugenius had disturbed throughout the West, and
believing himself obliged to act after this manner to the utmost extremity, and
to sacrifice still the small remains of life to the good and repose of his
Empire.

LXXI. The young Emperors found him in this condition, when they arrived at
Milan; and Paulin. in vit. Ambr.
the joy of seeing their Father again was soon moderated, by the affliction
which they had to see him assaulted by a moral Dropsy. Theodosius would receive
them in the Church, where he had caused himself to be conveyed in order to
partake of the Sacrament, which a nicety of conscience and a profound respect
had made him defer the reception of till then. There he embraced them tenderly,
and after having returned thanks to God for the comfort which he gave him by
reviewing these two Princes, he took them by the hand, and presented them to
St. Ambrose, conjuring him before the Altars, to take the conduct of their
consciences, to maintain in their minds those Principles of Religion and
Equity, which he had endeavored Ambr. in fun. Theod.
to inspire him with, and to be as a Father to them after his death.

LXXII. At his coming out of the Church, he was obliged to take his Bed, and
the Fever being increased, he applied himself to give his last Orders Zoz. l. 4.
to the Affairs of the Church, the Empire, and his Family. He assembled in his
Chamber the Deputies of the Senate, and the Lords of his Court, who were yet
Pagans, and remonstrated to them, That he retained in dying but the single
regret of seeing them still Idolaters; That he wondered how such wise and
understanding Men should not apprehend their Error, or should rather choose to
follow Custom, than Truth; That the defeat of Eugenius was a convincing proof
of the vanity of their Oracles, and the impotency Oros. l. 7. c. 36.
of their Gods; That these Gods had been Men of impure and irregular Lives, and
that it was unreasonable to adore them, since their Power was not to be feared,
nor their Actions worthy of imitation; That they should permit themselves to be
influenced by the force of Truth, by the example of the first Magistrates of
the Empire, and also by the last affections of their dying Emperor, who for
some time interrupted the thoughts of his Salvation, to put them in mind of
theirs; That indeed his great desire had been to extirpate, during his Reign,
all false Religions, and to make all his Subjects faithful Servants of Jesus
Christ; That God had not esteemed him worthy of this Favor, but that he hoped
his Children would be more successful than he, and would complete what he had
begun.

LXXIII. After having dismissed the Senators, he made his last Will, wherein he
ordered, That Ambros. in fun. Theod.
the People should be discharged of the augmentations of Tribute, which the
necessity of past Affairs had occasioned the imposing; desiring that his
Subjects might enjoy the advantage of that Victory to which they had
contributed by their Prayers, or their Labors; and recommending to his
Successors the easing of the Provinces, without enlarging their Treasury with
the substance of the Poor, and Claudian. in Cons. Honor.
scattering it away in vain and superfluous Expenses. This Order, after his
death, was punctually executed.

He joined to this Act of Goodness, an Act of Generosity and Mercy. He had
granted a general Pardon to all the Rebels who were returned to their
Obedience. He meant that they should be re-established in their Estates and
Dignities, and should resume in the Court the same Rank which they held therein
before their Rebellion. But as he had not time to execute all his intentions,
he was afraid lest after his death the new Emperors, by the evil counsel of
their Friends, should stop the course of those Reconciliations which remained
to come. He confirmed then by a Law, which he caused to be inserted in his
Will, the Amnesty which he had already published, establishing his Ambr. in
fun. Theod.
hopes in the mercy of God, upon that he himself showed his Enemies. He enjoined
his Children religiously to observe this Order, and left them Examples and
Commands deserving of a Christian Emperor.

LXXIV. He divided the Empire between those two Princes, giving the East to
Arcadius, and to Honorius the West. He recommended to them, above all things, a
Piety toward God, and a zeal for Religion. He made them recollect what he had
often said to them, That they should distinguish themselves from their
Subjects, more by Wisdom and Virtue, Ambros. in fun. Theod.
than by Greatness and Authority, That it was a great piece of Indiscretion to
pretend to give Laws to the whole World, if one is ignorant how to prescribe
them to himself; That one did not deserve to command Men, if one had not learnt
to obey God; That they ought to found the felicity of their Reigns, not upon
the prudence of their Councels, nor upon the force of their Arms, but upon
their fidelity to God, and the care which they should take of his Church; That
this was the original of Victories, of Peace, and of all the Prosperity of
Sovereigns. Then turning himself toward St. Ambrose who was present, These,
said he, are the Truths which you have learnt me, and which I my self have
experienced; it is your part to make them pass in my Family, and to instruct,
according to your custom, these young Emperors whom I leave to you. The holy
Archbishop made answer to him, That he would be mindful of their Salvation* and
hoped that God would give to the Children that tractable heart and easy
temper, which he had given to the Father.

LXXV. After that, Theodosius declared Stilicon Tutor of his Son Honorius, and
Lieutenant General of the Armies of the two Empires, and recommended to him
likewise his two Children. He thought himself obliged to testify this
confidence to a Man, who had very faithfully served him in the most important
Affairs of his Reign, and who had the honor to marry the Princess Serena his
Niece. Stilicon was a great Soldier, and an excellent Statesman; wise in the
counsel, bold in the execution, expert in managing the minds of People; fit to
discover happy moments, and to Claudian.
make use of them* whether in Treaties or Battles; dexterous in finding out the
Interests of the Grandees of the Empire, and piercing into the designs of
Foreign Nations; beloved of the Troops, capable of supporting the burden of
Affairs* of forming a young Emperor in the exercises of Peace and War, and
diverting troubles by his Wisdom, or putting a stop to them by his Courage and
his Valor.

These great Qualities rendered him worthy of the choice which Theodosius had
made of him, till being engaged by the jealousies of Ruffin, and his own
ambition, ^lushed with his credit and the success of several Battles, reducing
all public Affairs to his own private designs and interests, rekindling
himself the Wars which he had extinguished, and recalling those Enemies which
he had chased away, in order to make use of them upon occasion, he was weary of
being nothing but the Tutor, the Father-in-law, the Favorite, and even the
Master of the Emperor, and attempted to put the Empire in his own Family.

LXXVI. Since the Emperor's arrival at Milan, this City had disposed itself to
prepare a stately Triumph for him, and to celebrate by all kind of Rejoycings a
Victory, which had made him absolute Master of the two Empires. His
indisposition had retarded the public Sports, which made the chief part of
this Festival. But at length, after having settled his Affairs, he found himself
much eased; and whether he was unwilling that the City should make in vain so
considerable an Expense, or whether he had a design to comfor* the People, by
showing himself once more in public, he gave notice to the Magistrates, that
he would be at the Circus on the morrow to receive the honor which they
intended for him. He Soz^m* l. 7. c. ult.
made himself to be carried there in the morning* and assisted some time at a
course of Horses; after which he retired, more filled with the apprehensions of
Death, than the Idea's of his Triumph.

LXXVII. Scarce was he arrived at the Palace, but he found himself worse than
before. He commanded his Son Honorius to go and hold his place in the Circus.
As for him, he passed the rest of the day in conversing with St. Ambrose about
the vanity of humane Grandeurs, and giving his Son Arcadius those counsels
which he thought to be most important for his Conduct, and for that of his
Empire. The same night his distemper being considerably increased, he was
sensible of the diminution Prosper* Marcellin. Socrat. l. 5. c. 25.
of his strength, and some hours after he quietly departed this life upon the
17th day of January, in the year 395, being the 16th of his Empire, and the
50th of his Age.

This death was lamented by all the People of the Empire, and even the most
barbarous Nations. Zoz. l. 5.
Arcadius returned immediately to Constantinople, in order to prevent those
Confusions which might happen upon such Revolutions. Ruffin being at that time
Praefectus Pratorio, accompanied him thither, vexed with envy and jealousy
against Stilicon, whom they had raised above him, and revolving already in his
mind the design of abusing the weakness of his Master, of destroying all that
was an obstacle to his power, of embroiling the Empires and Emperors by his
secret Intelligences with the Huns, the Goths, and the Alains, and to tender
himself Sovereign, or at least independent both on his Masters and his Enemies.

LXXVIII. Honorius remained near the Body of his Father, to render him the last
devoirs of Christian Piety. He assisted at the stately Funeral which was made
for him at Milan sorty days after his death. St. Ambrose preached his Funeral
Sermon, wherein he represented to his Auditors, That they had lost an Emperor,
but that God ha^ing withdrawn him into his eternal Mansions, one might say
Ambros. in fun. Theod.
that he had only changed his Empire; That his Piety was still alive; That he
had by the constancy of his Faith abolished all the Superstitions of the
Gentiles; That having no more to give his Sons, whom he had made Emperors, his
only prospect in dying, was to leave his Subjects in peace and abundance, by
remitting the injuries which they had done him, or the Taxes which had been
imposed upon them; That his last Appointments ^ad been Rules of Charity and
Mercy, and that they were rather Laws than Articles of a Will.

Then he declares, That he will ever preserve in his heart all the tenderness
which he had conceived for this Prince, who in his Wars had always trusted to
the ^ssistance of Heaven, and had never presumed upon his own Forces; who had
more esteemed those who reproved him, than those who flattered him; and who,
when almost at extremity, was more in pain for the state wherein he left the
Church, than that wherein his Family would be after his death.

He could not hinder himself particularly from commending his Clemency: That it
is a great and extraordinary happiness, said he, to find a Prince pi^us and
faithful, who being carried by his power to revenge himself upon his Enemies,
is retained by his goodness! Theodosius, of august memory, thought to have
received a Favor, when he was entreated to pardon an Offense, which had been
committed against him. The more Passion he had discovered, the more he was
inclined to grant the Pardon which was demanded of him. The heat of his
displeasure was a prejudication that he would pardon. Instead of fearing their
anger in other Princes, contrariwise they wished it in him. We have seen Men
convicted by him of their Crime, terrified and repulsed by the Reproaches which
he made them, obtain their pardon of a sudden. He was for conquering, and not
punishing. He made himself Arbitrator of Equity, and not Judge of Rigor. He
never refused to pardon those who acknowledged their fault. As for those who
hid something from him, which they retained in the bottom of their Conscience,
he told them, that he left the decision thereof to God. This expression of his
was of more terror to them than the punishment, because they saw this Emperor
so moderate and easy, that he chose rather to win Men to his service by
Religion, than fear.

At last the holy Archbishop directs himself to the young Emperor, who was
attentive to him, and who melted into tears. He commends him for his Affection
and his Piety, and the sensible Concern he was under for being unable to
conduct himself* the Body of his Father to Constantinople. He comforts him, by
representing to him the Honors which would be rendered to the memory of this
Prince in all the Cities of the Empire; and after having given him a lively
Idea of the glory which the great Theodosius enjoyed, he encourages him to
imitate his Virtues, and to make an advantage of his Example.

LXXIX. The Body of this Emperor was conveyed the same year to Constantinople,
and whether in Italy, which he had delivered from Tyrants; or in the East,
which he had governed with abundance of wisdom and goodness, he had Honors
performed to him, which rather resembled. Triu^phs, than Funeral Solemnities.
Arcadius his eldest Son received him upon the 8th of November, and caused him
to be laid with a magnificence worthy of so great an Emperor, into the
Sepulcher of Constantine.

LXXX. The Ecclesiastical Authors, and the Pagans themselves agree, that he was
a most accomplished August. Ambros. Socrat. Sozom. Themist. Symmach. Aurel.
Victor, etc.
Prince. Those who had consulted Histories, or seen the Pictures of the ancient
Emperors, found that he resembled Trajan, from whom he drew his Original. He
was like him, of a tall Stature, had a handsome Head, his Aspect great and
noble, the turn and features of his Face were regular, and all his Body well
proportioned.

As for the qualities of the Soul, he possessed all the perfections of that
Emperor* and had none of his defects. He was, like him, gracious, just,
magnificent, merciful, and always ready to assist the unfortunate. He
communicated himself to his Courtiers, and was only distinguished from them by
the Purple wherewith he was invested. His Civility for the Grandees of his
Court, and his Esteem for Persons of Merit and Virtue, obtained him the
friendship of both. He loved free and sincere Minds, and admired all those who
excelled in Letters, or in the noble Arts, provided he observed in them neither
Affectation nor Malice. All who deserved to partake of his Bounties, felt the
effects thereof. He made great Presents, and made them with greatness. He took
pleasure in divulging to the least Offices which he had received from private
Men in his first Fortune, and spared nothing to testify his Acknowledgment to
them. Ambition did not make him attempt to conquer the Provinces of his
Neighbors, but he knew how to punish them who usurped his own, or those of his
Colleagues. Thus did he procure himself no Enemies during his Reign, but he
vanquished those who became so. He was well enough versed in Learning, and made
use thereof out affectation. The reading of Historys was not useless to him,
and he applied himself to form his manners upon the Virtues of great Princes,
who had preceded him. He detested often in public the pride, the cruelty, the
ambition and tyranny of Cinna, Marius, Sylla, and their followers, in order to
impose upon himself a happy necessity of pursuing a conduct opposed to that,
which he condemned; above all he was a declared Enemy of Traitors, and
ungrateful men.

One may tax him with being carried fometimes to Passion, but it must be a
great occasion, besides that he was soon appeased. His access was agreeable and
easy; and what is extraordinary amongst Great Men, his Prosperities and his
Victories, instead of puffing him up, or corrupting him, did but render him the
more gentle, and obliging. He took care to furnish those Provinces, which the
war had ruined, with Provisions in abundance, and he restored out of his own
money considerable Sums, which the Tyrants had extorted from private men. In
War, he always marched at the head of his Armies, exposing himself to danger,
and sharing all fatigues with the meanest Soldiers.

He was chaste, and by severe Laws he abolished those customs that were contrary
to decency and modesty. Although he was of a constitution nice enough, yet he
maintained his health by a moderate exercise, and diet. It was nevertheless one
of his satisfactions to entertain his Friends at Table, and to improve
Friendship by all kind of decent rejoycings. In these particular Feasts, where
he consulted rather neatness and politeness, than luxury and profusion, he
enjoyed the pleasures of society, and revealed himself with a reasonable
familiarity, which afforded confidence, without lessening the respect which was
owing to him. His principal diversions were conversation and walking, when he
had a mind to recreate himself after the cares of business.

Never did Prince live so well in his Family. He honored his Uncle as his
Father. After the death of his Brother, he was as careful of his Children, as
of his own. He advanced to Employ, ments those, who stuck to his Service, and
served as a Father to all his Relations. Thus after he had regulated in the day
the affairs of the Empire, and given Laws to the whole World, he shut himself
up with joy in his Family, where by his cares, his affections, and his
goodness, he made appear to his own People that he was as good a Friend, as
good a Relation, as good a Master, as good a Husband, and as good a Father, as
he was a Wise and Powerful Emperor.

This is the Character, which is left us of the Great Theodosius, by Pagan
Authors who were his Contemporaries, although prejudiced against him for the
interests of their Religion. The Philosopher Themist* Orat. 5. Symm. l. 2. Ep.
3.
Themistius, and Symmachus himself, that great Defender of Paganism,
acknowledge sincerely, that the Virtues of this Prince exceed all the Praises
which have been conferred upon him. There is none but the Historian Zozimus,
who by premeditated falsehoods seeks to discredit those Christian Emperors, who
have destroyed the worship of Idols. He disguises the truth according to his
Caprice and his Passion, and endeavors to make vices of all the Virtues of
this Emperor. He calls his liberalities profusions, his moderation laziness,
his friendly barquets dissolutions, and that agreeable and sweet life he led in
peace, a soft and voluptuous one. He is notwithstanding obliged by force of
truth to confess, that in time of war there Zoz. l. 4.
was an extraordinary change of manners in him; that he forgot on a sudden his
amusements and his pleasures, to take the cares and virtues that were necessary
to the safety of the Empire; and that of an infirm and sensual Emperor, there
was formed a valiant and laborious Prince, by a kind of prodigy.

Not but that Theodosius had his failings. His transports of anger, his
easiness to believe those in whom he reposed some confidence, and his
engagement in favor of those whom he had chosen for his principal friends, are
stains that would a little obscure the life of this Emperor, if they were not
confounded in an infinite number of glittering actions, or effaced by a severe
repentance.

The Holy Fathers who knew him best, could not be tired with commending his
Piety. St. Ambrose, and St. Austin have left Encomiums of him in several places
of the^r writings, and St. Paulin being retired to Nole made an Eloquent and
Learned Hierom. Ep. 13.
Apology in favor of this Prince, which St. Jerome calls an excellent
Panegyric, whose loss cannot be sufficiently Lamented.

FINIS.

