THE One necessary thing to be sought Briefly touched, In a fourfold DIALOGUE,
Upon some of the great and most concerning Truths of practical Religion.

PSALM. XIX. Verse. 11. Moreover by them is thy Servant warned, and in keeping of
them there is great reward.



Printed in the Year 1679.

READER.
SInce Religion is a serious Business, which we must live; and know by its
power and efficacy on the soul, or be wholly strangers thereto; and that there
is a Spiritual taste and savor of Divine truth, and a living Holiness, no less
demonstrable than that there are living men on the earth; yea that here is the
sure way to come to a solid assurance, and Establishment in the truth; when
such shaking times now are. If any man will do his will, he shall know the
Doctrine, whether it be of God. Joh. 7: v. 17. So now is the season for its
trial, amidst these manifold temptations, which are here, That the lives of
Christians might thus be a more Visible transcript of the Truth and Doctrine of
Christ, they profess; but whilst never more advantage was of means, and such
voluminous enlargements to extend the Theory of practical Divinity, how sad an
enstrangement may be seen by many, if not most who live under the light of the
Gospel, to the most concerning and weighty truths thereof. If this poor essay
might be of use to any such, by a blessing from him, who can serve himself of
meanest things, this one desire I would leave with the Reader, to give the
truth a serious entertainment, and let him give the Author what he please. It Is
by way of Dialogue, without mentioning of Dialoguists, as is usual under
borrowed names, to avoid any unnecessar multiplying of words, that might be
occasioned this way.

THE ERRATA,
Which have escaped the Printer through inadvertancy, may be amended thus by
the Judicious Reader.
PAge 4. line 32 read Tit. 3: 2. Jam. 2: 12. p. 8. l. 6. r. lessons. p. 10. l.
32. r. Ps. 42. 10. p. 15. l. 19. r. Jam. 4: 1. p. 20: l. r. r. Ephesians. 6: 11. l.
27. r. Monarchs. p. 23. l. 31. r. left. p. 24. l. 9. r. duties. l. 18. r. Col.
3: 1. p. 25. l. 26. r. Matthew. 7: 22. p. 35. l. 31. r. implicitly. p. 37. l, 25.
r. to be carried. p. 47. l. 1. r. 16: 11. p. 51. l. 31. r. mighty. p. 59. l. 6.
r. bribe.

I. DIALOGVE.
QUEST. I.
SInce we have this access to converse a little together, I should gladly know
how to gain such an hour, for some solid fruit and advantage in the
improvemeut thereof.

ANSWER. It is a rare unusual question, in these times, which ye now make,
though nothing more highly rational and necessar, and such as gives occasion to
some sad reflections, that may be too obvious on such a subject. 1. Of the
small account most seem to have of time, and of the present hours going by,
who yet cannot Possibly be sure of the next, nor bring again one minute past,
time being such a tide, that flows but once, and must be either taken, or
lost for ever, 2. How very sad the ordinary discourse in society and visites
most make to other, is such, that if one should keep silent, and overtake with
a pen, what too frequently passes in these Communications, and but read it
over again, they could not but both wonder and be ashamed at so strange and
deformed an image of themselves. 3. That when such mutual converse and society
together puts often a price in men's hand, for some gainful improvement hereof, and
to make an interest for the Lord, with that Christian prudence and sobriety, in
giving others an occasion, more than to appear themselves; yet how rare is it
almost to know Christians to be truly such by their walk, except in the duties
of Worship, as if their interest were not more to live Religion, than to
Profess it; and that so solemn and great a business is now before all to die;
and know what an eternity means, with so mavelous a change we must admit in
another world, whither this present hour we hasten, yea how few can be seen in
their traveling garb with their loins trimmed, and their lamps burning; but
rather as such who minded a settling here.

QUEST. II.
Though this be to the furthest convincing and clear; yet is it not to affright
men with the austerity of Religion, as if it did warrant no c^^erful and
comforting converse together, and to divert thus in any suitable recreations,
that may be most satisfying and delightful?

ANSW. I should be very tender to split on any such rock, nor do in the least
debate the warrantable use of recreations, and necessar unbending of men's
Spirits this way, with sobriety; but I hope ye will Confess, 1. That a serious
frame, and the savor of spiritual things kept on the soul, leads more in to a
true delight, and desirable enjoying of any outward enjoyments, than the
furthest liberty, that many take otherwise. 2. That a due restraint thus is not
easy, or to keep within these bounds of Christian Liberty, which is found in
the close to bring a sting merewith more imbittering, than the former pleasure
^eemed sweet, 3. That there needs also a guard against such unwarrantable and
profane games of Lottery, as the Cards and Di^e; where the hook may be as
evident as the bait, and with that advantage given to the Devil this way, as it
is not easy for such to play alone, without having him a partner, both in the
game and gain; and no wonder, when he finds such upon his own ground, and at a
work, where is so visible a contempt and sporting at the Providence of God, and
taking his name in vain; such a daring to adventure on an immediate decision by
lot, which should alone in things of greatest weight be made use of by prayer.

QU. III.
You know, that besides any such diversions for pleasure, how most have their
ordinary business and affairs to take them up in converse and fellowship
together, and discourse thereon, as their several employments lies, and here is
a concerning duty.

ANSW. I am far from questioning, what thus may be either needful, or
expedient; yea I know one may follow with advantage the work of a Christian in
that way of his outward calling, more than in the furthest abstractedness from
the world, and all humane society; And that the more a Christian, the more also
is he a man, and at the greater advantage thus for being active and dexterous
in his outward concerns, but you know the time is short, and these frequent
intercommunings most have about things of the world are often more from a too
eager scent after the same, than upon grounds either of necessity, or
convenience, as though there their maine work lay; and what is for eternity,
were but something on the by, to be followed.

QU. IV.
Since we are thus fallen on such a subject, I should desire to know, if there
be cause to offend, or question that freedom, which is so usual ^^^ ordinary
converse together, f^^ speaking their thoughts at large, and to pass their
judgment on others at a distance, as they see cause, or have either prejudice,
or respects to them: For to me it seems the most common subject of discourse,
almost in all societies?

ANSW. The Occasion you have for such a proposal, is too manifest, and a
disease so spreading, as seems to despise all remedies, but may be the more
strange, that it is sure, this is not with most, from want of light anent duty,
or how deep a wound they may thus give themselves more than others: But oh is
this freedom you speak of 1. To abound in love toward all men 1. These. 3: 12.
and by a tender condescending deport to be all things to all, for the Gospel's
sake? 2. Is this to enforce respect and an awful regard to the truth, from such
as never knew the inward power thereof on their soul, so as they might see that
a serious Christian is the truly best friend and neighbor; yea thus to be as
a common good and blessing to mankind; one of whom brings more credit in to the
Doctrine of Christ than an hundred Professors? 3. Is this to answer so
pressing a call, Col. 3. 12, put on therefore, as the Elect of God, holy and
beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long
suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another. If any man have a
quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do you? And is not
such tenderness in our walk toward others, an indispensible part of our
Sanctification, whilst this freedom you speak of, is too often a giving vent to
some hid bitterness and enmity within against such, who may be the Object of
the Love of God in Christ, as all the sanctified are? But this seems to be a
peculiar Poison and Plague of the present age. 4. Can you find it easy, yea
possible to have such usual freedom you speak of, consistent with these
express Commands of the great Lawgiver; to love our enemies Math. 5: 44. not to
be overcome of evil, but to overcome evil with good Romans 12: 21. to speak evil
of none in a designed blotting of their name, Tit. 3: 7. Jam. 2: 11. or smite
them with the tongue Jer. 20: 10? Sure if these be the revealed Counsel of God,
and a part of that holy and spotless Rule of our Duty, should not the same
distance be kept here, as with other scandalous sins? 5. Whatever may be of a
necessar call sometimes to witness against others at a distance, when the truth
is concerned, and the advantage of some then present, and for their being
guarded against any contagious evil or snare, as also upon a serious resentment
of any injury done to the Lord; yea for a just and necessar clearing
themselves, from the reproach of such, who through them might thus seek to
thrust at the credit of the Gospel; yet is there not even here a special regard
to be had to that end, that it may be for edification Romans 15: 2? And that no
bitterness or animosity on some other account be the great incitement thereto,
for then such do serve their own lust and passion. It was a choice word of one,
I am (sais he) restrained to speak my judgment of such, by whom I have been
injured, lest my light be bribed to serve that most dreadful lust of revenge; O
revenge which is so visible a transforming into the very image of the Devil, by
which he has gained his greatest triumphs over many. 6. Is this an answering
to that excellent rule given by our Master, to do to others what we would have
them doing to us, Matthew. 7: 12? Than which (besides the Authority of the
Command) nothing is more beautiful, and becoming an immortal soul, nothing more
answering to reason than thus to argue, how should I expect or wish that
measure from others, if my heart does not serve to give the same to them? 7.
And does not such a freedom you speak of, bear a blacker die, the more personal
respects may be thus pretended, when some hid prejudice lies at the root, since
thus it is a more dreadful dissimulation before God, and the wound made deeper,
by being under a show and cover of love, like Joabs designed embracement of
Amasa, for that very end that he might smite him at the fifth rib?

QU. V.
What, is there no warrantable judging then of others, and condemning such
from whom we injuriously suffer, when this is not against the truth?

ANSW: My Friend, you know there is but one Judge and Lawgiver, whose it is to
kill and make a live. Jam. 4: ver. 12. Though each has allowed to him a
judgment of discretion; but there is, I confess, a choice and sure way for one
to judge another, Oh that it were more known amongst men, to judge them by
their walk and practice; so as by tenderness and sobriety to condemn the
imbittered passion of others by silence and compassion, thus to rebuke a hasty
and brawling temper; yea to take revenge (O a blessed revenge) on such as hate
them by seeking in truth their good. And is it not thus the Holy Ghost has
showed how with the greatest advantage a Christian can oppose himself to his
adversaries, and bear witness against them. 2 Cor. 6: ver. 6. By pureness, by
knowledge, by long - suffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love
unfeigned, by the Word of Truth, by the power of God, by the armor of
righteousness on the right hand and on the left.

QU. VI.
Such is the authority and beauty of Truth, even when it is most grieving and
contrair to the flesh, as puts me to a new enquiry on this subject; what should
most help to that sweet, and desirable converse with others in a sad and
distempered time, so as love and concord may lose no ground, and thus to
answer what Christian Prudence calls for in such a case?

ANSW. This, I confess, were a choice and desirable project worthy and
becoming a Christian to follow in the greatest earnest, when so many low
designs are this day on foot; not only to adorn the Gospel, but for their own
inward peace and tranquillity; for which I may adventure to offer these few
things, which I am sure cannot be practically understood, what ever the times
or place be wherein our lot is cast, and not help to a sweet facility in such a
duty. 1. To guard against Credulity, or a being hasty to conceive an injury and
laying too great a weight on sudden conjectures and suspicion, which tends both
to darken and disquiet the mind; none ever yet gained by indulgence hereto, but
how often have their after thoughts enforced an upbraiding of themselves with
weakness and folly? 2. How sweet and easy might this become to us in learning
that lesson more from our blessed Master of Meekness, Matthew. 11: ver. 29. Which
is one of the rare graces of the Spirit, and no softness of nature, so blessed
a cure and relief to the most tart and froward temper has such advantage with
it to convince the World, and conciliat men's respects to the truth of holiness,
who look but at a distance by so lovely and gaining an appearance? And why is
such a cover put on an imbittered and passionat disposition, that it is their
natural complexion? it may be true, but it is sure, it is black nature
unsubdued to the grace of God; whilst many naturally passionat and choleric
have through grace got that conquest over themselves, as few with whom they
have conversed could discern any such thing, even upon most remarkable
provocations. 3. To know, and be under some weight of this, as a special
opportunity for the Lord, the loss whereof should be a loss indeed, when there
is such a call, to requite evil with good, both in doing and speaking, and your
reward shall be great Luke 6: v. 35. And are not a Christians opportunities a
part of his riches and treasure? I know this will seem a strange contradiction
to many, but a subdued Christian by the grace of God, is a strange and
mavelous thing. 4. Let us know more what it is to be humble, and then
forbearance and tender condescendence in our walk with others will natively
follow. O blessed humility, that shines most in its disappearing, and lays
the Christian more truly near his hope, yea nearer to heaven, when it lays
his face on the dust, than when his head has seemed to be among the stars. O
what sweet and desirable society should this make amongst Christians, which
teaches effectually to pass by injuries, and not seek their own glory, or to
dare a despising of others; which by keeping the Spirit low fitts them for
nearer converse with God, and a being led in the way of his Counsels, and
whilst pride swells, and causes a fever in the soul, this brings so sweet and
sensible a cool thereto; Yea is one of the two great lossons, that Christ has
put by themselves Matthew. 11: v. 29. and thus ensured a rest and tranquillity of
soul, whatever be the changes of their outward Lot. 5. Let us also for this end
get sight much kept of that great example set before us for our conformity
thereto, 1. Pet. 2: 23. who being reviled, reviled not again, but committed
himself to him that judges righteously, and it is sure we then frustrat our
relief in the last part of these words, if the first be not seriously taken
alongs therewith. 6. We have this excellent mean also expressly commanded us, to
seek peace with all men and follow after it Ps. 34: v. 14 Heb. 12: 14. Yea even
with such, from whom we may have sustained greatest injury; nor can it answer
this to give it entertainment, when it comes; but to go forth and meet the
same, yea to seek it when it is a missing, and though it flee, to follow it. O!
what a lovely appearance does this put upon Christians, and gives them a
greatet Victory, than to overcome a City, when thus grace in its vigorous
exercise in one, meets with the prevailing corruption of another: and by
yielding overcomes; by a humble condescendence subjects the proud, so as to
enforce their falling before that more excellent Spirit, with a discerneable aw
and authority over them, for greater is he, who is in them, than he who is in
the world, 1 John 4? v 4. 7. Let us be tender in taking offense no less, than
in giving, in a hasty judging of persons, or actions at a distance, when we
cannot so certainly know, what circumstances may concur in such a case, and
sure each may know, how many things have begot jealousy and bitterness of
Spirit, which upon more clear and convincing trial have not had the least
ground, whilst thus the great Adversary of the Church geteth advantage. 8. To
be slow to speak, which has its peculiar beauty and advantage at all times is
of singular use here, when under any stir or perturbation of Spirit, thus to
get a restraint over themselves, till the water be more clear, and the mudd
fallen to the ground. O what a choice mean were this to prevent the frequent
discomposure many fall in, to be under some serious and severe resolution, not
to speak for some time, when they are provoked, and how sweet and quieting
should this be upon after thoughts? 9. A being much at home by self -
reflection, and having our eyes turned inward, should much help to blunt the
keenness of that edge, which is too often against others, and put Christians on
another scent, how to restort such with the Spirit of meekness, who may be over
taken with a fault, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted, Gal. 6:
verse. 1. Here must be no cover, for any coolness, or indifferency in the
matters of truth, but it is sure, there is a sweet concord there, in the Zeal
of God with the Spirit of meekness, and no jarre, but what our corruption
makes. O blessed they who can go the furthest length of ceding in their own
things, and bear personal Reflections, but may not, nor dare quite any thing
upon their Masters interest. I am much persuaded one great let of such a
discerneable with holding of the influences of God, and which obstructeth
prayer at this day, is much there, that the Spirit of Love and Tenderness is
not more entertained amongst Christians.

QU. VII.
If these truths you speak of were more practically known, what another luster
and appearance should Christian Society and Converse then have; and the times
we are now fallen in seem to need examples more than precepts this way; but
oh! for what use can some be to promote any interest for God, who are in so
mean and low a capacity?

ANS. Why do ye thus speak? For it is sure, none can want some trial in this
present case, to give a convincing example to others of the Truth and Power of
Godliness; nor is there any Lot and Condition so low and obscure, where these
advantages does not wait them for some honorable service to the Lord in their
day. 1. To adorn the Doctrine of the Gospel, by a Christianly Prudent and
tender walk, in showing forth the power and virtues of him, that has called
them, and thus by commending holiness, to gain respect to the truth; even from
the conscience of such as hate it. How remarkeably has this made a very mean
and obscure Person otherwise, shine with greatest brightness in the place and
corner he lived in? 2. And does not times of deepest distress, in a low and
afflicted state afford most special Opportunities for some eminent fruit and
service to Jesus Christ? by abasement rather than abounding? Yea what? is not
the Affliction and Poverty of the meanest a talent to improve for the Lord, and
paying rent to him by Patience and Christian enduring with Cheerfulness, that
it is for his sake, no less than the greatest enlargement of others? 3. As no
service to such a Master shall ever be lost, or want of having more given in to
such, who are faithful in their little, has not thus also the meanest
Christian some call from the Company he may be cast in, when Atheism is at
such a height, and a generation of mockers almost every where abounding, to
confess Jesus Christ, and his Truth before men, by some grave and convincing
witness thereto, as well, as when he is called before Rulers? since to such an
occasional call, that Scripture has a respect likewise, as well as to a more
solemn and public appearance, Matthew. 10: 32. he that confesses me before
men, him will I confess before my Father and his Angels; Oh! What it is to know
Psalm. 42: 4. it was as a sword in my bones, when they said unto me continually,
where is thy God? 4. Can a Christians lot be too low; for following so great a
service to the Public interest of the Church, by prayer and wrestling in
secret, when there is no witness from without, but he who sees in secret, will
not let this want an open reward, and if not here, yet at the appearing of
Jesus Christ?

QU. VIII.
But should not thus such whose credit with men cannot bear them out with much
weight become but a matter of sport and derision to these they converse with,
in a time when serious Religion is looked on as the greatest of foolishness;
yea should it not restrain ones Casting of Pearls before Swine, lest they
turn again, and tear them Mat. 7: 6.

ANS. You know that Christian Wisdom is profitable to direct in such a duty as
occasion offers; and that rule of expediency should be much weighed, what
advantage present circumstances may offer or deny, for edification; but I must
say, carnal prudence takes often too much advantage here; and in no time has
that Truth wanted a convincing seal of the Lords choosing the foolish things
of the world to confound the wise, and things that are defpised, yea things
that are not has he chosen, to bring to naught things that are, that no flesh
should glory in his presence 1 Cor. 1: 27, 28. And it is sure, you cannot but
know. 1. That there is some aw and authority, which attend the truth of
holiness, even in a very mean Person on the conscience of men, who may be
otherwise haters thereof: Yea to enforce some greater evidence of their
respects. 2, And does not serious Piety and Practical Prudence mutually
strengthen other, so as the more a Christian, the more he is thus at an
advantage to know his duty, and be sagaciously discerning therein. 3. But how
amazing is such a reproach cast at this day upon Piety, of weakness and and
foolishness (not but that Christians in truth, may be found in many things
imprudent, which is, because they are not more Christians) whilst the native
result of serious godliness is so evident, to have a watching eye over ones
Spirit, to the Moderation of Passions, and a sweet calm and composure of mind,
amidst the many snares and temptations here: their heart thus lying near to
their working hand, as Solomon shows Eccles. 10: 2. a wise man's heart is at
his right hand, but a fools is at his left,

DIALOGUE II.
THe late communing we had at our former meeting together, (which I hope may
not want some fruit) puts me to follow this advantage of our present converse
upon a further account, for clearing some of the most weighty concerns of
Christianity; and notto lose time, the first proposal I make is this?

QUEST. I.
How it is demonstrably clear, that there are two contrary States, to which the
whole race of mankind belongs; a state of nature, and that which we must be
entered into by grace; yea, that the new birth and that mavelous change by
conversion makes a Christian to differ from the rest of men, not in degree, but
in the kind and nature, no less than the state of man here is above the beasts.

ANSWER. It is not strange, though so great a truth should be mavelous to our
thoughts, upon any serious converse therewith, but such clearest evidence has
the certainty of this from the Scripture, and lies so closs with the whole
thereof, as I am sure, they must quite the Bible, and this together; whilst
these are so undeniable, even to our sense. 1. That one Christian cannot beget
another; and how far this new life by grace is above nature, or the possibility
of second causes, which no arguments, or persuasives of eloquence by moral
influence conld ever effectuat, but is the immediate work of the Spirit, and
forming of a new Creation by the Word of the Gospel, in the naked simplicity
thereof. 2. How clear is the truth of this mavelous state of grace by so
visible a reality of the effects and operations thereof; as to change an
impoisoned nature, and take off that imbred aversion to spiritual things; the
ingrafting of the Word by a second impression of the Law written upon the heart
and inward parts, whereby it is transformed into the same image; yea such
convincing effects, as a living Christian may be as discerneable, as one being
a living man, by signs and marks peculiar to his kind. 3. Is it not known with
the furthest evidence, the truth of a vital scent and air with serious
godliness, which no fair show in the flesh, or any profession can possibly
counterfeit; no more than the greatest Artists could paint the sweet swell of
the violet and rose, or make a dead picture to breath and move. 4. You may see
the reality of this state, whose native tendency is to move upward to its
original, as naturally as the sparks go upward, in love, desire, and a
feeling intercourse then with him; yea with such a supernatural instinct, which
is no less mavelous and evident, than that of the young child moving toward
the breasts. 5. It is such a state, where you may see the most discerning of
men in a natural condition know not, nor can understand what belongs thereto,
or what these felt-enjoyments of God and his workings on the soul are, or their
being brought near to his reconciled face in Christ, and laid under these
warming beams; no more than the beasts of the field know what belongs to the
state of man, which is so high in its kind above them. 6. Such a state also, as
needs the continued breathings and influences of the Spirit of life, to keep it
in any vigorous exercise, no less than the parched ground has need of the
rain, without which it is dried and languisheth; yea such as you know has its
food, delights and griefs peculiar to its own nature, with which strangers
cannot intermedle.

QU. II.
But since it is too evident that the most of men and so many of notable gifts
and endowments know nothing what belongs to that state you speak of, or what is
further than the condition they are in by nature: Oh! is that natural state, so
very dreadful and affrighting as you seem to understand or that none possibly
can be saved herein, whilst not so gross and corrupt as others?

ANSW. You know what account the Scripture has given of this, and how exact a
pourtraiture is there of such a state in its true shape and colors; and if men
will but credit their own eyes, let them but first look in on themselves, and
then abroad upon the World, and I am sure such must see, that the face does not
more answer to its own resemblance in the glass, than this deplorable state of
nature, without renovation by grace does answer that mavelous and clear
discovery of the Holy Ghost in the written Word, thereof; and oh! is it not an
amazing, and horride sight, when such is the state of nature, as 1. Neither can
nor will receive the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2: ver. 14. But what
ever use these seem to have of reason, in the things of a man both natural and
civil, yea in the theory of religious things; yet neither knows, nor can
savor what spiritual truths are in themselves, and their own nature. 2. Where
you see so strange an enmity and imbred alienation from the life of God, with a
continued bias and tendency against Holiness, Gal. 4: ver. 29. Where no
private quarrel, or personal interest gives rise thereto: Yea thus how no
enmity is more deep and fixed against the Gospel, than that which follows a
polished and refined nature. 3. It is not only the Saints, who have each an
unregenerat part within, but a natural conscience is enforced to witness how
sin is attended with shame, and a making themselves vile thereby, yea such, as
none can put on their clothes in the morning, but may have an account of the
fallen state of man. 4. From whence are these wars and fightings without, and
these impetuous boilings of envy, wrath and revenge within? Are they not from
the lusts of the flesh, Jam. 4: ver. 16. Yea such eager graspings after that
bait of carnal pleasure, even whilst they know the imbittering sting which
inseparably follows thereon? 5. And what do these strange conflicts, and
contrary tides, with which men are so often hurried and rent in pieces, as with
wild horses, betwixt their judgment and will, which once were in a sweet
league, such as even heathens were conforced to see and confess, that if the
mind of flagitious men were laid open, it should be seen how they are cruciated
and punished by their own sins, and as the body is rent and torn by torture,
so is the mind, by cruelty, envy, lusts, and passion, with these inordinate
desires and perturbations within? Oh! what do those mean, if you will but come
near to consider this so sad and amazing a sight: Are they not a visible
transcript of black nature, whereinto man is fallen? 6. And what a horride
thing must that be, that should be capable of such contempt of the Holiness of
God, and so insensible of its own vileness and pollution, yea such as renders
men under the greatest advantage of all accomplishments of gifts whether moral
or natural; yea the greatest of men, who are strangers to a renewed state, to
be the vilest and basest part of the creation? And O what a dreadful sight will
such once be to the Saints and Angels, when the sinfulness of sin, and the
shame of their nakedness shall be then showed forth?

QU. III.
Though I am enforced to assent to such clear and undeniable evidences of that
deplorable state men are in by nature, whilst though it cannot be hid yet how
little is it considered, or laid to heart? But oh! is there so indispensible a
necessity of Holiness and to know the inward power thereof on the soul and of a
new life begot in us by regeneration as none can be possibly saved and secured
from everlasting wrath without this whilst there is such abounding light in
these times. yea a visible adherence, and assent to the Doctrine of Christ by
many who may be strangers to this?

ANSW. I shall but offer some grounds to clear the absolute and peremptor
necessity of this you seem to question, and then leave you to judge
thereanent, when you have once brought them near your thoughts. 1. Though our
right and claim to an eternal glory must alone be by the righteousnese of
Christ, and is not founded on Holiness, yet it is as true, we have none without
it, for without this has the God of truth by his Word and faithfulness
ensured, that none shall see his face. Hebr. 12: ver. 14. nor without the new
birth, that it is possible to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Joh. 3: ver.
3. 2. It is sure, without this, men's hope of the glory which is to come can
lean upon no other ground, but that the Holy God must cease to be faithful and
true, and rescind his everlasting decrees and purpose, for complying with their
sins, Ephesians. 1: ver. 4. Who has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the
World, that we should be holy and unblameable before him in love. 3. If there
can be no reconciling of Heaven and Hell, then without this can none enter into
that blessed state where is the perfect enjoyment of God; since there is an
amazing inconsistence with the nature of the things themselves, how such could
possibly dwell there, who were never made meet to he partakers of that
inheritance of the Saints in light by a new nature, Coloss. 1: ver. 12. 4. And
what a strange contradiction to reason is this, for to think they are
approaching to glory, if it be not in the way to grace, or that such can love
that in another World, which they now so visibly hate, or can thus own any true
desire or hope of that blessed state, who have such a natural and imbred
aversion to the begun enjoying of it here, in the life and work of
Sanctification. 5. It is sure that our eternal life in glory must be begun in
that new life, which is by grace formed here in the soul; nor can such ever
possibly expect to enter that Kingdom which is above, where the Kingdom of
God in some measure is not known within here, which consists in righteousness,
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14: ver. 17. Though it is sure also,
that grace, and grace alone must sum and close all our accounts, yea that the
whole of practical Godliness must resolve there, I live, yet not I, but Christ
lives in me, and the life I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the
Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me, Galat. 2: ver. 20.

QU. IV.
I confess it is not easy, except men turn resolutely Atheists, to debate this
Truth, but oh! what should it mean, that so few can be seen in earnest in such
a throng of professed Christians, with that excellent study of Holiness, who
yet come the furthest length in an assent thereto, and what might most help for
this end?

ANSW. It is irresistible grace which alone can make this effectual. But I
shall offer some few enforcing motives for so great and necessar a study, with
this one desire, that you might but in earnest think thereon, when alone. 1.
That it is more excellent and desirable to exercise grace, than to enjoy
comfort, when the more sharp and searching conflicts this meets with for trial,
the more fruit and gain is going to the fore here and for ever; Yea are not the
most remarkable assaults and trials of a Christians life some of his greatest
opportunities for sowing to the Spirit, Ga. 6: ver 8. and being faithful to
their measure and talent, Matthew. 25: ver. 15. Yea such, wherein our blessed
Head, in the truth of his grace in them, and mavelous power thereof, has so
conspicuous a triumph in each of his people, which should be accounted a gain
to such, beyond the saddest loss they can sustain otherwise. 2. That not the
least act, or exercise of Holiness, and whatsoever has been done for the Lord
can be lost, but shall be had in remembrance, and abide for ever, in its
eternal reward; yea nothing of the Christians work in doing, or enduring, their
secret wrestlings against sin, the resisting of temptations, mortification, and
patience for the name of Christ, when most hid from the eyes of men, shall be
forgot by him who sees in secret, to meet them once and for ever, with their
Masters acceptance, well done, etc. Matthew. 25: ver. 21. in the fullness of joy,
and their being rewarded before the Angels and all the Redeemed. O who would
not run, though all the way should be through thickets of briars and thorns,
who have such a joy and hope set before them? And that here is no doubtful or
conjectural thing, go to the Scripture and see what is so expressly showed, 2
Cor. 4: ver. 17. For our light affliction which is but for a moment (whereby
the Christians Sanctification is both tried and exercised) works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 1 Pet. 1: 7. That the trial of your
faith being much more precious, than the Gold that perishes, though it be
tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and glory, and honor, at the
appearance of Jesus Christ: and Rev. 14: ver. 13. And I heard a voice from
Heaven, saying unto me, Blessed are the dead, who die in the Lord, from hence
forth: Yea says the Spirit, for they rest from their labor; and their works
do follow them; They go not before, since it is the blood of Christ which only
can do this, and make sure the Christians entry into that blessed Land: But
they shall assuredly follow, and abide for ever before the Lord. 3. And is not
Sanctification the highest excellency that humane nature is capable of, and no
less mavelous than our redemption by Christ from eternal wrath, in having the
soul thus subdued by grace, and to be made partakers of the Divine Nature? O
how great and astonishing a thing is it, that the seed and principles of
Holiness in the Christian soul should be preserved amidst such continual
assaults of corruption within, and these temptations that are without, as a
spark of fire in the midst of waters, which impetuously run to quench the same;
yea that such a party, as the Devil, the world and the flesh, by which the most
of mank ind is so visibly enslaved, and kept in chains, yet thus m ade to fall
in their greatest strength, before the truth of Holiness, in the meanest of the
Saints, though nothing here for them to boast in of themselves, but in the
power of Christ thus resting upon them, 2 Cor. 12: ver. 9? That day, O blessed
day! is approaching, when this Scripture shall be fully understood, which I
have some ti mes thought on, as a truth of greatest weight, 2 Thessalonians. 1: 10.
When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them
that believe: Which is not only to be admired by them, but in them: for what he
has wrought and perfected in them, as well as done for them. 4. Is it not
known and tried, that without Holiness in its lively exercise, all assayes for
inward peace or tranquillity of mind, and that composure of the affections,
which is both so comforting and beautifying of a Christian, will be in vain?
and oh! what does remain, if this be not understood, what a present and
sensible relief is here in Love, Humility, Meekness, Patience and Hope, to the
saddest distempers of the mind? Psalm. 1 19: ver. 165. great peace have they
that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them. That whilst Satan is at the
furthest at work to faint and crush the Christian in his journey homeward: yet
can he only reach a bruising of their heel, who are thus secured by the whole
armor of God, from a thrust at their vital parts, Ephesians. 6: ver, 14. and
therefore it is remarkable, that there is no piece of armor there given for
the back, but only to such as withstand and resist, nor to those who fly. 5.
Is not the fruits of Holiness that peculiar Revenue, which Jesus Christ calls
from his followers here, to adorn the Doctrine of the Gospel, and show his
grace toward them has not been in vain? And are not these such fruits which
can only be brought forth in the season thereof, a season that is short, and
for all eternity will not recurre again? 6. It is sure, nothing is so lovely to
ravish the soul with the glory and excellency thereof as this, were it
spiritually discerned; to see and admire that infinite purity, righteousness,
truth and love shining in the great pattern Christ himself, and what a
mavelous luster the reflection hereof has, even on his followers here on the
earth, in some begun conformity to his glorious image, whilst not one glance
thereof in truth, (what ever be of a false show) is to be found in the whole
world besides. Oh were it believed, how much of Heaven might be enjoyed here by
a greater length in the study of Holiness, and what inexpressible joy, peace
and serenity of Spirit does assuredly wait thereon; what sweet facility and
delight is thus reached in the Christians work, when their motion lies from the
inward principles of a new life, yea that it is sure, the meanest this day is
by grace called up to a higher state, than that of the greatest Monachs of the
earth, and if there were no greater interest and preferment to be looked after
than what the world can bestow on any, we could not easily know what were
desirable here in being men.

QU. V.
Since these truths are to the furthest convincing and clear, and that it is
sure, this is the great business I have to follow in the few days I am to be
upon the earth, to be assured of an eternal blessedness; I would in earnest
know, what are the most clear and undeniable marks from the Scripture, of a
being in Christ, and the certainty of conversion, that I lean not my peace
here on some false ground, when it is so amazing at what rate many now own
themselves to be Christians; for if I be deceived thereanent, and go with the
multitude; Oh then I am deceived indeed, which eternity cannot recover again,
through want of the serious trial of this within time?

ANSW. It is a great business you are upon, and assuredly the highest work of a
Christians life now to live for God, and to know they shall for ever be with
him in glory: Oh! how rare are those in this age, who are on this trial, and to
work out their Salvation in fear and trembling: Whilst such a throng is about
the things of this life, as almost no time can be found for the one necessar
thing. It is sure, to have an evidence of our being in the state of grace, is
of more worth than all the trouble can be in acquiring it, and if such die in a
mistake here, they are then undone for ever; But, it is strange, what means
such halting and uncertainty in this matter, when it is so clear. 1. That there
is a certainty attainable of ones state and being in Christ, as can make it
easy to adventure into eternity with that assurance, for me to die is gain,
Phil. 1. 21. and that Psalm. 73: 24. He will guide me by his counsel, and
afterward receive me to glory: Which I am sure, were it more understood, the
greatest trial of a Christian then should be more how to bear his joy, than his
griefs, even under the sorest pressure of affliction; yea the greatest acts of
patience and self denial would be to be willing and submissive to stay for some
time here. 2. It is sure, the Scripture leaves none to a doubtful or uncertain
enquiry anent this; but has so clear and distinct a sound, as none needs say,
Who shall go up to Heaven, that we may know, whether we shall dwell there for
ever, for the Word is near, Romans 10: ver. 8. Deuteronomy. 30. ver. 12. and these
things are written that our joy may be full, 1 John 1: ver. 4. and that these
who believe, may know they have eternal life, 1 John 5: ver. 13. 3. Though the
work of trial anent a Christians state be of greatest weight, yet lies it not
in any long circuit, or many words, but it is such as from some few clear,
plain and infallible marks, which are founded upon clearest evidence from the
Scripture, may be with the furthest certainty determined. 4. It is to the touch
stone, but not to the balance a Christian must here come for trial, that it be
true in the kind, even whilst the degree and measure may be very small to their
eyes. 5. But it is needful to know that the lowest degree of grace is above
flesh and blood, so as none can come to Jesus Christ, without a drawing power
from himself, and such a pull at the heart, as must bring the grip with it. But
to come a little more near to your proposal. Do you in truth question, if you
have ever yet past the new birth, and be in the state of grace, and where you
shall dwell for ever? You may then bring it to a speedy close upon these clear
and undeniable grounds. 1. That the Scriptures bring down before our eyes that
greatest depth of election, so as it can be no more sure such shall be saved,
who are predestinat to life, were it possible to see their names write in that
secret roll of the eternal counsel of God, than it is sure such are elected,
and shall undoubtedly be saved, who have come to Jesus Christ in the
acceptance of his offer in the Gospel; for thus must we first make our
effectual calling sure, and then we assuredly know our election. 2 Pet. 1: 10.
2. There can be no debate here, that where conversion is, the work of the
Spirit must be then known in convincing men of sin. Ioh. 16: 9. since the great
healer can be no Physician to the whole, but to the sick. Matthew. 9: 12. such,
who have been in some measure Pricked to the heart with such a sight of a
natural state, the sinfulness of sin, the Spiritual extent of the law in some
such measure and degree, as is needful to make room for Jesus Christ, who had
never a weight on them before; that as the needle in the compass is in a
continued agitation, and cannot fix unril it be at the right point and settle
there, then, O then is there no possible quiet, until they have found a rest in
Jesus Christ Matthew. 11 29. 3. If any be in Christ, he is a new Creature 2 Cor.
5: 17. which is the new man that all must put on, who were ever savingly
called, and thus know what it is to have that witness within of the sanctifying
work of the Spirit, which is always a sure, though not always alike clear
evidence of a new state and being in Christ Romans 8: 1. Yea it is sure, the new
birth must be once past here. Joh. 3: 3. else you are lost for eternity, and
now judge what comforting evidence you have got of this, if you were to look
death at this present hour in the face. 4. Is any thing more plain and express,
than this is from the Scripture, that to such as are saved, the truth of the
Gospel, and of a crucified Christ is the power and the wisdom of God? 1 Cor.
1: 24. and have you this witness to bear from undoubted experience, that you
have got such a sight of the drawing power and beauty of Jesus Christ in the
offer of the Gospel, that passes natural understanding as has determined your
consent to the furthest to embrace so invaluable a bargain, though it should be
at the rate to sell all to make such a purchass. Matthew. 13: 46? 5. It is
express and clear from the Scripture, that with a converted state there also is
known a Spiritual light and discerning of the things that are freely given us
of God 1 Cor. 2: 12. which they never knew before; yea, that there is no middle
state betwixt these two, of being translated out of the darkness of nature into
that mavelous light of the Gospel, which then shines in upon the soul, when
once that blessed day of conversion has begun to dawn. 1 Pet. 2: 9. And now
can you upon surest trial put to your seal that God is true herein? 6. Has
the Scripture left this either doubtful or dark in the least, that to such as
believe, Jesus Christ is precious? 1 Pet. 2: verf. 7. he has got their love,
has gained their heart and consent to be hence forth no more their own, but
Christ's. 1 Cor. 6: 19. and here to take up their rest never to part, which must
not want some trial, if the world, or if tribulation or distress will part them
with his love. Now bring this near your thoughts what you know of such a mark.
7. Is it not clear, that with a converted state the war is begun that will
never cease here, betwixt the flesh and the Spirit Gal. 5: 17. and as the
regenerat part is at an advantage, the more vigorous is its opposition then
against the flesh; yea against such secret and Spiritual evils that may ly most
near, from their natural temper and constitution, as their right eye. or right
hand. Matthew. 5: 29. 8. Is it not with a renewed state by grace this also must
be known, what the Spiritual way of service to God in the deauties of Worship
is, in the newness of the Spirit, and not in the oldness of the Letter. Romans 7:
6. yea to know in some measure the Spirit of Prayer, which so sensibly helps
the infirmities of the Saints. Romans 8: 26. and what have you thus found to
answer so plain an evidence and mark as this, of your state and being in
Christ? 9. Is there any thing dark or difficult here, that if you be risen with
Christ, this will natively result from the same to seek the things that are
above? Col. 3: 7. that where your treasure is, you will know then in some
measure to have your heart and desire following, Matthew. 6: 21. And some
comforting converse with the thoughts of that glory which is to come, yea a
rejoicing in the hope there of when you shall breath in that sweeter air of the
higher Paradise, where love, joy, and oneness of heart with your blessed head,
and the whole triumphant Church there shall then never admit the smallest
interruption for all eternity. Now are not these few marks on such clear and
undeniable Scripture grounds, as it is strange what should make this a dark
business to any, who would not make it their choice to hold fast deceit, or go
down with a lie in their right hand to the grave, though the comforting and
clear evidence, thereof be not the same at all times, nor in the same measure
and degree alike to all.

QU. VI.
Since there is no questioning the Truth and evidence of such marks, where the
Scriptures are so clear, I would desire to know also, what length is that which
some may come in a temporary work, and a being an almost Christian, which is
not saving; since this is my greatest interest within time, and knows not how
soon the night comes?

A. You have that sure and unerring record of the Scripture to go to, where
you may clearly see. 1. What a length there is in a form of knowledge Romans 2:
v. 20. and a form of Godliness without power. 2. Tim 3: v. 5. Yea that this
may be in a high measure; and was not Judas one of the twelve? 2. It is there
you may see, they have begun in the Spirit who have ended in the flesh. Gal. 3:
3. and what length such came who received the seed of the word, and had some
discerneable growth a Little, yea forth with sprung up. Matthew. 13: verse. 5, 6.
Part of which was chocked with these thorns of the cares of the world, and
others did quickly wither and go back, when persecution arose, having no
solid root. A Scripture which should be much thought on, and deeply laid to
heart by all who would not be deceived about a heaven and blessedness for ever.
3. You may see there likewise what length the foolish Virgins came. Matthew. 25:
8, 9. Who wanted not a lamp and Visible Profession before others, as might gain
a name and testimony in their day, and yet shut out for ever. 4. The Scripture
will let you see also what eminent gifts, even Spiritual may be reached by a
common work of the Spirit, where conversion was never known, Lord have we not
Prophesied in thy name Mat. 22: 7. Yea that extraordinary inspiration is no
infalible evidence of Sanctification. As in that strange instance of Balaam. 5.
That some may cry unto God, and make mention of his name, but not in truth, you
may read Esai. 48: 1. 6. That there is a glorying in appearance, and not in
heart, you may see 2 Cor. 5: 12. Nor is it strange to see this at such a
height, as with Jehuto invite the world to see their zeal for the Lord, and to
enquire at others, if their heart be right, whilst his own was most false, and
unstraight. The world is no stranger to this what length of a Profession has
been to mask a private interest with such a show and appearance: But let us
consider these also. 1. That nothing is here either to wound or affright the
least of the Saints, who are in earnest how to be saved, since Truth in the
inward parts is that great thing which the Holy God regards and takes pleasure
in and a few grains of this weigh down many talents of outward performances;
Let the Righteous still hold on in his way, and he that has clean hands wax
stronger and stronger. Job. 17: 9. 2. It is a length that none can come whose
heart is not in some measure sincere before the Lord, to have their salvation
through Christ ly so near, as to be under some fears and tremblings left they
be deceived there in, so as they dare make a humble reference to the God of
truth. search me and try, wherein there may be any deceit or falsehood, and lead
me in a right way. Ps. 139: 23. 24. For when thus their heart condemn them
not, they may have confidence then before God. 1 Ioh. 3: 21. 3. What ever has
been the furthest length of men's deceiving the world and themselves at once
anent their Religion, yet can it not put the least blot on the spotless way of
the Lord, and nothing does the Scripture more dreadfully threaten, than any
such false show; yea, it is there you may see this in it is true Colors and how
horride it is. And the more it does approach to Religion (which is so pure and
undefiled) the more hateful and loathsome it is, so as even such as comply
therewith in themselves, yet are enforced to loath it in others.

QU. VII.
Though I am constrained to assent and subject to the Truth in what you have
spoke, since there is no flieing before it, yet may it not be safe to admit
some delay a little, whilst men are in health, and strength of their years, yea
have so much often to throng them from their necessar concerns in the world, and
lay this over until age and sickness may give more freedom, for being in such
earnest about salvation, whilst it is not a laying the same aside, without some
settled resolution to follow it in a fit time?

A. Do but take so much time now as to reason thus with your self, and then
judge, whether it can be safely deferred, which. 1. Is the one necessar thing;
and is not an eternity of such weight, that if there were many ages ensured to
us, much more a few days, which are wholly uncertain, here were enough to keep
us in some continued throng. It is sure, either heaven and a glory there for
ever, and the truth of a hell and everlasting torment must be to such but a
dream, and a conjectural thing, else there could be no possible quiet without
a knowing where they must dwell for ever. 2. Can this be deferred whilst we see
time makes such swift dispatch, and that it is sure, while we now live and
breath, we are a dying and has it in some degrees begun, and advanced every
hour of our life? and Oh! should dying men keep at a distance from the thoughts
of death, who so often may hear it sound; and the bell ringing for others? 3. Can
this admit a delay to such, were it but for some few days or hours, who cannot
possibly be secured, when they ly down at night, but their breath may be
stopped by a sudden surprise of death ere they awake; yea thus sleeps at an
adventure of being ere the next day in an irrecoverably lost state? 4. Can
there be a delay here by such, who knows not only the night is coming, when
none can work, but are so uncertain, if the first touch of sickness and
approach of death be not a lethargy, wherein they can neither know, nor reflect
on their own case, which I have known remarkably to have befallen some, who
used to make such an account, they would take Religion to heart, when once they
were dying? 5. Is it not needful such have the work of their day put by in the
season thereof, without a daring to lay it over; when to be sick and die is so
great and solemn a work by it self? 6. Was it not then too late for the
foolish Virgins, to arise and bestirre themselves, when they had lost their
season of the Gospel, or to make ready upon a midnight cry, when they had slept
the time of their work and duty, and is not this put upon record by the Holy
Ghost, for all after ages; that they may be ready with their loins girded,
and their lamps burning, who know that death certainly is before them, and
knows not but that it come as a thief in the night? 7. Could they have an
hours quiet, if their eyes were once opened to see that horrible pit they ly
into of a Natural State, and what they are estranged from, of that blessed
state of a Christian? But Oh! How little is this either understood or believed?

QU. VIII.
I confess I must either shut my eyes, or admit the certainty of these things;
to press a present seriousness in making sure work for heaven: But what you
touched last of men's not understanding the state they are in, puts me to a new
enquiry, if ihis can be meant of such as live under the light of the Gospel,
yea converse with the same truths that others do, for what can the most
discerning Christian see further in Scripture Truths, than such as exerce their
reason and judgment about them as well as they: and what are these things that
they have got a sight of, which those who are in the State of Nature, are
wholly strangers unto?

ANS. You know that it is no words can tell, what a thing day light is to them
that never knew it, which can only be known by its own evidence; nor is it
possible to give an account in another way of a spiritnal discerning the things
of God, which not in degree but kind is as far above the light of nature and
reason, as that of the sun is above a Candle. O what another thing is a
spiritual acquaintance with the things themselves held forth in the Scripture,
than any notions or knowledge of the Doctrine thereof, which may enable to talk
or dispute, whilst the power and efficacy thereof was never known on the soul:
yea nor the writing of the Law upon the heart; and to learn the truth as it is
in Jesus. Ephesians 4: 21. but for answer to your proposal, I shall tell you in a
few words what such are admitted to see, yea are persuaded of the undoubted
certainty thereof, whilst others neither know nor see what they see, but are
wholly strangers thereto. 1. The excellency and loveliness of their beloved
Master, so as to them there is but one Christ in Heaven and in earth, whose
room none can fill but himself, yea can give that answer to such as enquire,
he is altogether lovely; that is their beloved, with whom none, none may offer
to come in competition. Cant. 5: 16. 2. They see and know a reconci^ed God in
Christ with that assured evidence, as some times no cloud is betwixt Heaven and
their soul, with that sensible intimation of Pardon and acceptance, as they are
at the furthest sure, they see, feel and enjoy, what is not possible to
express to others. 3. It is not that mavelous light only breaks then in, at
their first entry into a spiritual state, but there is a sight sometimes a
Christian has of Scripture Truths, and breaking up of some further discovery
there to their soul, that if they would give all the world, they cannot have at
other times. 4. Such know assuredly the truth of a new nature, which is so
wonderful, and wholly a supernatural thing, wherewith natural reason can have
no acquaintance, nor is it strange how much others are in the dark to this, who
know so little of their own soul what it means, except by the power and
operations thereof. 5. Do you ask what such know or discern in the things of
God to which most are strangers? they see the Glory and beauty of holiness, the
truth of Spiritual things, which is the hidden things of God in a mystery. 1
Cor. 2: 7. yea thus are taken in to see these great things, not in a notion
thereof, but in their Spiritual Nature, as they are sealed with power and
efficacy on their soul? 6. It is given to such to know also, (which the Spirit
only can reveal and teach,) what a sweet accord there is in these Depths of
providence betwixt the Christians cross and their comfort, their being cast
down, yet not destroyed, to be sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, yea in having
nothing, yet to possess all things. and are not these such things that could
never possibly have entered into men's thoughts, if they were not made known from
a higher airth? It is true, the furthest that any of the Saints know here is
but in part, yea many a dark and sad overclouding are such often under. O if the
most discerning of natural men could know what such are with that certainty
persuaded of, as they are of their own being.

QU. IX.
These are great things you speak of, but since I have such cause to know,
what influence and power the things of this earth have, which lies so near our
external senses: could I be as fully persuaded of the certainty of these
supernatural truths, and enjoyments of a spiritual life, to be sure and
undoubted realities, as what I touch and feel; I think then I had got the
world much under my feet, yea in another manner should look on the strange
madness and distraction of most this day, whose continued work is how to grasp
after a shadow; whilst they have no heart or desire for what is the Christians
choice. I press this the more, since it is sure, one cannot be thoroughly
persuaded of the truth of spiritual things as greatest realities, and that
there is a state and life of Grace here, but they must be to the furthest sure
of that Life of Glory, which is to come.

ANS. It is strange, how such as look but at a distance, are not dazeled more
with amazement at the report of these great things of Religion, and what
Christians have in hope before them; but not to lose time, let me beseech your
bringing these near your thoughts, when you are alone. 1 That it is an Argument
of Power, not of words, which can fully quiet the soul of a Christian anent
this. 2. You may but judge what a sad part that of the Saints were, if in this
life their hope were only, or what could possibly be comforting to most in such
a day, whose griefs are in earnest, if the Truth and Comforts of a spiritual
life should be a doubtful thing to them. 3, What gain or interest could any
snch possibly have to design a false Witness and Testimony, yea, with such
assured confidence, from experience, if they were not at the furthest certainty
thereof; yea thus to converse so much in the Duties of Godliness, where you see
they cannot be but a toil to the flesh, if the peace of God, and Joy and
Comforts of the Spirit were but a naked show? For this were to render
themselves both desperately wicked and miserable at once, without any profit. Or
what think you would make the affectionat parents press so much seriousness in
following the Lord on their Children, and thus put them on so sad a bargane,
whom they so dearly Love, if they knew it not to be their true interest here
and for ever? 4. You know the Doctrine of the Gospel is a Doctrine of Holiness,
whither the whole of that blessed contrivance does most natively resolve. And
is not the truth hereof write forth in such visible realities before your eyes,
as it may be no less manifest in its Examples than Precepts? I hope there is no
debating here. 5. It is sure, the discoveries of the word do not direct men to
things a far off, but to such as brings the great things of the Gospel near,
even in to their heart, so as to handle and feel by experience the truth
thereof; and you know the consolation of the Spirit is not by words, but by
things, giving into the soul a spiritual and sensible experience of the reality
thereof, and of the Love of Jesus Christ let forth to them. 6. And are not
these mavelous effects and operations of the Spirit of God, in subduing the
soul by grace, so as to embrace an afflicted lot and tribulation for the
Gospel, to take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, yea to dip their hands in
the blood of a beloved sin, and find delight thus in doing violence to the
flesh, such as may show that it is sure, Christians must know and enjoy, what
they and most of the world are strangers to? And is it not above nature, or the
furthest of humane reach to learn to be meek, humble, lowly, Patient in
suffering, and self denying? 7. Such have lost a spiritual taste, or never had
it, who knows nothing of that incomparable sweetness, which is in secret
converse with God; that thus there is not a claim only to that glorious state
which is above, but the first fruits and earnest so real, as will change the
very countenance after some special times of near fellowship with Jesus Christ,
so as in the greatest composure, they can say, I surely feel, I enjoy, and am
sure, for the truth thereof. 8. What frequent transports Joy and delight have
been in Christians extremest sufferings for the truth, yea some times after a
dark and dismal cloud over their soul? And why do not men enquire what should
his mean, or how such a thing were possible, if they had not got a sight, that
could look them out of pain and trouble? Let me but further add, how strange,
(but yet I hope no rare or unusual sight) is that of the outward man decaying
or mouldering down to the grave, when the inward man is more discerneably
strong and vigorous, than in times of greatest health?

QU. X.
I make not this question here, to debate, but to be further confirmed in the
certainty of the truth, which is the greatest joy men can have on the earth,
but I must confess, the greatness of these things is such, as may put the most
Established to a stand; yea is it a small'business to be under such a call to
embrace and accept of Jesus Christ in the offer of the Gospel, and in him of a
crown of Glory that fades not away, and is there not cause of fear for such as
I am, to adventure here, which is so high, and far above what I can possibly
think of?

A. This must be matter of astonishment and wondering for all eternity, and it
were well, if such an exercise were more begun here, to enquire and wonder at
what we know of the great truths of the Gospel; but it is sure, it were the
highest of pride, not humility to hold back where the Holy God calls; or for a
perishing man not to throw out his arms and swime to a rock, when it is before
his eyes, and is not the Gospel such a contrivancc, as the whole of the Saints
since the beginning could not possibly have a wish beyond the same, to show
forth that mavelous condescendence, freedom and plainness which is there,
yea where none can be afrighted away who with desire did ever follow to this
blessed airth. But since this is of such concern, not for a Christians Peace
and Personal Encouragement only, but to bear witness to the blessed way of the
Lord, and show how desperate an Opposition theirs must be, whose hearts are not
melted and gained by such inexpressible tenderness and condescendence of the
Gospel; let me speak these few words. 1. You know that such this is, as none
can come wrong, if they come but in truth upon such an errand, as the felt need
of Jesus Christ: and therefore is the Scripture so express here. Joh. 6: 37.
and whosoever comes to me, I will in no wise cast out, sais he who is faithful
and true, yea such, as the whole of the Scripture does remarkeably show, See
Rev. 22: 17. and whosoever will, let him come and take of the waters of Life.
2. Such is his way, on whom the alone weight of his peoples interest and
salvation leanes, as he both forms the desire of the souls of his people, and
satisfies the same; nor can there be in truth a hungring and desire after him,
but their Enjoyment is thus begun. Matthew. 5: verse. 6. 3. What can be more
condescending, than his way is to the lowest, whose soul does but in a serious
look follow, when it is in truth, when there is almost no more can be reached.
Esai. 45: 22. if thus the heart be but laid open to seek a relief in him, yea
to look as a far off to that, even to which they fear to approach. 4. And is
not such his way, that the greatest thing he most expressy requires in the
saddest case of felt and discovered guilt, is to flee in but for shelter to him
from that dreadful pursuit of an awakned conscience? yea how mavelous is this
that as their face is toward the Gofpel, there is the most sensible inlet to
contrition and brokenness of heart, and serious exercise of repentance. which
as a sweet and native result follows thereon? O! what is given for the
furthest clearing hereof in the Scripture? See Zach. 12: 10. Act. 5: 31. 5.
Such is his way, as he has come under bond and promise by his faithfulness to
make forthcoming to his people, which is only of grace, he has promised to
give what he requires, yea to work their works in them, as well as for them,
Esai. 26: 12. 6. Such is his condescendence, that his peoples security should
lean on nothing in themselves, not on their own apprehending but being
apprehended. Phil. 3: 12. Yea that when any of his people, broken under the
sense of guilt have no Argument to make use of; or confidence to adventure, he
finds them one in himself. Hos. 13: 9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self,
but in me is thy help. 7. Such is his way, where there is no exception of
persons, but the poor made most dearly welcome, and brought near in his offer;
when the proud, were they the greatest Monarchs in the earth, he knows a far
off. 8. This is he, and such is his blessed way, as the severity of the Law
must serve for that very end, to commend Jesus Christ and lead in to him, and
the felt weight of sin bring a begun cure and relief therewith in the felt need
of a Savior. Matthew. 11: v. 28. 9. Such is his blessed way, as yet did never
break a bruised reed nor quench a smoking flax, Esai. 42: v. 3. Nor put such
back, whose fear to adventure made them to stand a far off, with the poor
Publican. Luke 18: 13. Yea of whom, all who ever knew him must bear him this
witness, he is tender and compassionat in his sharpest reproofs; and when he
wounds sorest, then is it that he does most earnestly remember with the
sounding of his bowels toward them. Jer. 31: 20. 10. Such is he, and his way
toward his Church here upon the earth, as he has given some peculiar Lines in
his Word, of his tender regard to such, even beyond others, who are most
destitute of outward help Psalm. 146: v. 7, 8, 9. Psalm. 40: last. And comes so
low to take in those that are most rejected of others, and may have least
notice or regard at the time, and therefore, when he was himself on the earth,
he was called a friend of Publicans and sinners, Matthew. 11: 19. 11. Such is his
way, whose peace and acceptance has so often met his people, as a blessed
surprisal, when they knew least how to adventure, and then given them a most
unexpected welcome, when they have been under the greatest fears Psalm. 18: 4:
and 116: 3, 4. Luke 15: 20. 12. Such is his way and mavelous condescendence,
where mercy gets a preference to sacrifice. Matthew. 9: v. 13. Where the widows
mite gives more in a little, than these of a great estate with much, being in
singleness of heart thus given for the Lord. Luke 21: 3. Yea where one half of
the Christians work is in a right and serious aim therein, and is accepted
according to that a man has, and not according to what he has not. 2 Cor. 8:
12. I shall but further add on so great a subject, that such is his way toward
his people, as he not only calls, but causes their soul to approach to him, by
an inward touch of his power thereon; yea this most discerneably, when nothing
else has been left but to pray, and roll over their `case on his blessed hand.

QU. XI.
These are great things you speak of, and it is sure, must be to such as ever
knew what a wounded soul is* under the tender hand of this blessed healer; but
for that you have last mentioned of such a call and access for Christians to
pray; yea that assuredly the prayers of such on earth go up to Heaven, and are
heard and accepted* there, so as at all times, and under every weight and
pressure, we may come and present our requests to the Glorious God, who lives
and sees. This, I must say, seems to me one of the most mavelous things in
practical Religion, yea has put me to a stand, how men who are so much taken,
as in a transport, with some singular experiment in nature, yet have such
ordinary thoughts of this, if they be persuaded of its truth.

ANS. This is mavelous indeed, though the way of most seem to bring under
debate, if prayer be any thing more than some empty form or a piece of
invention, rather than so great and serious a business; but I hope you know, 1.
That none ever was called to take this on trust, or implicity credit the
Testimony of others, but there is a solemn appeal here to every ones personal
trial, for the truthand certainty hereof. 2. That it is with the first being of
Christians, and when once a spiritual life is formed in the soul, how prayer
then is as their natural work, like the tendency and breathing of the child
after the breasts. 3. And is it not clear that such have got a new
acquaintance, and must know another society than men, to make their retirements
sweet and desirable; yea that continued haunt and resort to this blessed
airth, shows the truth of commerce and trading with another world, is known to
such with the greatest of certainty? 4. Do but judge what could be possibly
comforting to a Christian, when the lower springs of their encouragments are so
visibly shut up, if this spring and passage were not open and tried in their
surest experience. Is it easy to rejoice, and be comforted, when all things
without do most remarkeably frown, or to bear cheerfully out in such a day,
when they may be pressed above measure, if there were not such an airth the
world knows not of? and how it is the Christians midnight songs under the
cross, have been often sweeter than in any times of their outward prosperity;
does it not witness, that its no naked form or show could ever answer to this?
5. And when you see such discerneable advantage some of the followers of God in
their day have beyond others, yea sometimes beyond themselves, in a vigorous
and tender Christian walk; could this be but further followed: How easy were it
to find, that those are they, who are most in the work and exercise of prayer,
which has so closs an intercourse with the vitals of Christianity; nor can
ever one instance be given of ones flourishing and being fruitful in the way of
God, and not much under the ground in this exercise, which is most an internal
thing, where the loudest cry to Heaven makes often the least noise.

QU. XII.
These I confess, are clear, but what would most help to make this duty both
comforting and easy, whilst there is such difficulty to many, how to express
themselves thisway, and others find it a sore weariness to the flesh, yea less
easy to be thus alone, and take some time for secret prayer, than to wait on
public duties, or join with others in such a work?

ANSW. I hope you know. 1. That as our tie to the public duties of worship is
great and indispensible, to improve fellowship with others in the exercises of
Godliness, yet most of a Christian and his work, is that which is least seen,
and lies hid from the view of others; yea the most weighty duties of
Christianity are the more retired and secret duties thereof, so that a true
measure of a Christian, must not be from what he is in public, and converse
with others, but what he is alone, where he lies open to his witness, who
searches the heart. 2. Such can only blame themselves, and are sadly estranged
from the truth of Godliness, if they know nothing else, but to be alone in
their retirements, who are then called to an immediate fellowship with God in
Christ, and to know the truth thereof on trial. 3. You know a natural motion is
easy and without constraint, and were this once understood, how prayer is a
soul-work, and to carrred forth from inward principles of a new nature then
what was a sore toil here, becomes their sweetest delight; for to pray, is not
an expressing to the Lord what should be ones desires, but a present breathing
of the soul in desires after him: when the pleasure of Religion is so known
with the power and life thereof. 4. The more weight and burden of the
Christians case on himself, is a tried help for more facility and life in the
work of prayer. O what sweet and refreshing hours have some sad and pressing
burdens often helped Christians to, which they should not have known otherwise?
5. The more frequency and continuance causes true delight and freedom in this
exercise, as the wearing out and neglect of this duty will quickly wear such
out of any delight there, yea to make them disrelish any other part of Religion.

QU. XIII.
But is it not sore to continue in prayer, when there is no visible return;
yea, that after most sensible and felt access in this duty, there seems often a
thicker darkness to follow?

ANSW. It is not strange, though this be a trial indeed; yea sometimes in a
more than ordinary way searching, which put the faith of so great and
established a man to this stand, as to cry out Ps. 69: 3. I am weary with my
crying, my throat is dry, while I wait for my God. But let us consider
therewith. 1. That through the whole of the Scripture, it is so clear to be the
Lords usual way to confirm before he try, yea to follow the greatest
confirmations of his peoples faith, with some remarkeably sharp trials. 2. The
waiting Christian could yet never say, a return came too late, but in the most
fit and opportune season, even when it has been longest deferred. How strange
would these seem, yet most sweetly accord. Luke 18: 7, 8. though he bear long,
yet will he avenge speedily? 3. Is it a small thing to be answered with
strength in your soul; and for being helped to wait, until the outgate more
fully break up, since a divine power may be no less marvellously seen in the
Christians support, than in the most astonishing delivery? 4. Is not a subdued
Spirit, with a humble resignation to the Lord under a long deferred hope, a
higher mercy, when truly considered, than the thing it self which we most
follow? And are these losers, where thus more is given, than what they either
sought or hoped for. 5. Is not this the surest way to make haste by onwaiting,
and the choicest mean to gain time, and bring a Christian and his desire
soonest together? Which was the witness of a most experienced Christian, I have
with much longing sought such a thing from the Lord, yet got no return, but
when once I was helped through grace to give him his will, and to be resigned
wholly thereto, then was it he gave me my will also in what I had sought? 6.
The more prayer and wrestling has come betwixt the Christians trial and
outgate, is it not found the more comforting and sweet, when it has come? that
whilst hope deferred makes the heart sick, yet how great an interest does it
pay in for the furthest loss and pain in onwaiting, when as a Tree of life, it
has at last blossomed after many a winter storm? 7. His thoughts are not as
ours, and his way not as ours. Esai. 55: verse. 9. We see not at present nor can
fathom the depths of divine providence, and how needful it is to have the
heart brought low, that not only patience might have its perfect work, Jam. 1:
4. but a Christians being more fitted for the desired mercy. 8. But what do you
expect, which is not of free and mavelous grace? For to continue in prayer is
an expressly commanded duty, though no sensible fruit, or income should follow,
yea can bring no price in its hand, to obtain what we seek. And should these
quarrel with onwaiting, who have all this kept in their sight, I am not worthy
of the least of the mercies thou have showed to thy servant. Genesis 32: 10? 9.
Could we ever know the use making and comfort of these great Promises to
onwaiters, such as, Esai. 30: ver. 18. and 40: v. 31. Psalm. 25: verse. 3. If
grace were not thus kept in exercise.

DIALOGUE III.
QUEST. I.
SInce we should find our delight most, where our true interest and greatest
concerns ly; the late occasion we had to converse together on so necessar, and
weighty a subject, does press me to follow the same yet further, and to gain
such an hour, when so many are unprofitably lost; and now let me seriously ask,
may there not be a safe owning of some more laxe conception of practical
Religion, than what you have hitherto spoke seems to allow, since it seems
very sad and affrighting to look on so great a part of those, who own the
Doctrine of the Church, if there be not some greater latitude for Christians,
both in their principles and practsce, yea whilst this wants not a great
patrociny in the present time?

ANSWER. It is not strange, where the truth is not received in love, that men
kindle a light to themselves, and walk in the sparks thereof, but I hope you
debate not the Scripture, where the safe way of being eternally saved can only
be known; yea, that it is sure, could we make this way more large and br^ad,
there were no conceiveable interest or gain to conceal the same, which were so
pleasing to most in these times. But since there is one way, and here alone
must all the redeemed of the Lord get safe to that blessed land which is above,
I hope ye dare own no other conception thereof, than is there expressly showed.
1. That it is such, where there is no possible latitude for shifting off Fear,
Tenderness and Diligence in our Christian walk, and thus to make sure for
eternal life. 2. That this is the strait and narrow way, where the multitude is
not to be found, even of such as are under the outward call of the Gospel; and
it is sure, another way will never be found to the second coming of Christ.
Luke 13: v. 24? 3. Such, as there can be no following the Lord there with a hid
reserve, or regarding iniquity in the heart. Psalm. 66: 18. or a cleaving to any
private interest, so as to keep it up deliberatly, and not adventure the same
for Jesus Christ, were it as their right eye, or right hand. Matthew. 5: 29? 4.
There is no possible conception of Religion men can have from the Scripture to
take off that indispensible necessity of the new birth, and writing of the Law
upon the heart by the Spirit of God, yea thus to know Religion as an internal
thing, which must first begin at the heart, before it come to the practice.
Joh. 3: 3. 5. It is beyond debate also, that men must bring not their work
only, but their thoughts and the principles of their motion to that Test of the
Law, which is Holy and Spiritual. Matthew. 5: 28. and that what be done, it be
from integrity and uprightness of heart. But it is strange, what is there to
enforce any to this, when such is the way of the Lord, that if there could be a
latitude for a change, I am sure, none ever who knew it on trial, could have a
wish or desire beyond what it is, nor is it possible for any to know the
spirituality and power of Religion, and not know that sweetness and facility,
that is thus in following thereof.

QU. II.
I cannot debate such clear and evident truths, though it may be matter of
astonishment to see, what essays are by many, to oppose not only the power and
spirituality of Religion in its practice, but in its principles also. But what
do you mean by the delights and sweetness thereof, you have now spoke? Is it
not from what is in hope, and in another world, but not here in the present
enjoyment; since you know what prejudice is every where against this way, yea
nothing seems more sad and afflicting than the Christians life within time, so
as it is not conceiveable often what can be comforting in their lot?

ANSW. This question, though strange and amazing in it self, yet is not for
such as look but at a distance on the truth of Godliness, that lies so hid and
deep upon the soul, and to whom a Christians life is indeed a mystery, but I
judge it be not easy even for such to shift off, or get hid from their eyes the
truth of these things, which so clearly show the alone sweet and desirable lot
within time, must be that of a serious Christian, what ever the world be to
him; with which. 1. The greatest Princes, the rich, and those that have lived
most in the pleasures of this life, would be glade to die and join interests
then. 2. Is such, as has made it sweet and easy, yea on deliberat choice to
many, to quite their greatest interest and Comforts within time; which flesh
and blood could never have parted with, if the exchange had not been known to
be much more gainful. 3. How desirable is that lot, where the Christian can
follow his interest, by being abased as well as abounding, and by every thing
that does occur, may know how to be furthered thus in his way; yea rise by
that which would most seem to bear him down, and lay him in the dust; yea thus
to gain by greatest losses. 4. Such is the Christians lot, that as his duty and
Comfort can never part, or the Testimony of his Conscience anent integrity and
straightness cease to be matter of his rejoicing, so a serious subjecting and
resignation to the Lord, will never cease to be his reward also in the close.
5. How sad and afflicting this lot may often seem, it is here also their Joy is
sown by weeping, where that Seed was never yet lost Psalm. 126: 5? 6. Would you
truly know the sweetness of a Christian lot? O do but come near and try, what
Joy and Satisfaction is to be found in the cottage of such as knows the truth
of living near God, and under the lively hope of the Glory which is to be
revealed, more than in the most stately and magnifick dwellings of others; what
the mornings and evenings of many such are, their hid and retired walks, yea
their Comforts sometimes in the night season; how sweet to tell the hours, as
they are going by, which they know are bringing them more near to the eternity
of Joy, and putting over some part of their appointed griefs here; with what
refreshment these can look up to the Heavens, to the Sun, Moon and Stars, and
triumph in the works of his hand, who has formed the same, whilst they know
what a mavelous change ere long shall be in their state, when they shall be
above these, yea shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. Matthew.
13: v. 43. Has not such, and they only the most desirable part even here, yea
can truly feast upon their browu bread, with a satisfaction, beyond what ever
the voluptuous man knew, who knows not that true peace and serenity of mind in
Jesus Christ, which guardes the heart from that dreadful sting that follows on
the pleasures of sin? It is such can truly say (which was the word of one of
the Ancients) O quam suave est carere hisce suavitatibus, how sweet to him was
it to want these carnal delights, wherein others were wallowing; whilst their
all is in Jesus Christ. But if you say, why is not this more discerneable
amongst Christians? is not the cause here, that a living and vigorous Christian
is become so rare a sight at this day? 7. It is these, who with Joy can
converse with the thoughts of approaching death, whilst the sting and terror
thereof is taken away. 8. It is these, who in the serious observing of
providence both to themselves and others needs look no where, where they may
not see what should tend to a further strengthening of them in the way of
truth, and that the God whom they serve, assuredly is what he has declared
himself to be. 9. It is these, who with greatest quiet dare commit their
interest to him, as knowing in whom they have believed, and what ever
confluence of manifold temptations may sometime meet in their lot, yet knows
they shall not be tempted above measure, but are still under his tender and
watchful care, who even while he smites with one hand, does uphold with the
other. 10. Such is their lot; as that which would seem the greatest pain in
the Study of Godliness, which is by Mortification, to do violence to the flesh
and lusts thereof, leads in also the greatest pleasures and delights.

QU. III.
I must confess, it is strange what prejudice most have at serious Godliness
which they never knew upon trial: But what you me ane in this last instance of
that interest Mortification to the flesh has, in the Comforts and Enjoyments
of the Christians life, is such I cannot easily comprehend.

ANSW. This can alone be known upon trial. Yet do but seriously consider these
1. That the Scripture has so exprefly conjoined them together. Matthew. 11: 29.
take my yoke on you, and learn of me etc. and you shall find rest to your
soul, which would seem a strange way to so desirable an enjoyment. 2 You know
this also to be attested by the Saints in all ages, and with the greatest
certainty of trial, what inexpressible sweetness and delight they have known
and experienced in a suffering lot for Christ, and in such things, which in
themselves were most imbittering and grievous to the flesh. 3. None yet ever
knew the Truth and Power of Religion, and not this also, that by a natural
result, what ever tends to an abatement of the power of sin, in resisting
thereto, how sore and grieving soever it would seem at first, leads into the
greatest Delights and Comfort in the close. 4. It is here the Christians
promised reward to wrestling against corruption, and a Body of Death, is in
some degree given in, so as to know upon their own soul the Truth of that
Peace, which is in a closs walking by this blessed rule of the Scripture. Gal.
6: 16. 5. And what a sweet Jubilee has often followed in their soul, on
resisting and getting victory over some predomlnant evil, beyond what ever was
known, in the furthest yielding and indulgenee to the flesh? 6. Is not the most
truly Comforting use and enjoyment of the world found, by having the heart
much subdued thereto, and thus kept off that dreadful rock of Love to the
World, and eager desires after the same, whereon so many thousands have at last
made shipwreck?

QU. IIII.
What are there not allowed desires after the world; and that it is truly
warrantable for men to seek a further increase to their estate, and some larger
interest this way?

ANSW. Since this is an unquestionable Talent men have for their Masters use,
and are accountable for, it puts it beyond question, that there is both a
warrantable following and enjoying thereof, with Christian Sobriety; but these
also would be deeply pondered herewith. 1. That Love to the world and things
thereof, is so expressly a Scripture sign of a reprobat state. 1 John 2: 15.
and that no covetous shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven 1 Cor. 6: 10. which
was so convincing in the primitive times, as Covetousness upon any visible
evidence was then a public scandal of the Church. 2. How such is the
deceitfulness of riches, as is showed by our blessed Lord himself. Mat. 13 v.
22. that as briars and thorns this native tendency is to choke the Word of the
Gospel, and make it unfruitful, even whilst it seems to have come forward some
length. And if any cannot bear this, who may be in saddest hazard to split on
such a rock, let them but go in and try the Scripture thereanent; and not think
strange, that we neither may nor dare conceal the truth herein, without
applying it to men's Conscience.

QU. V.
What suitable improvement is that which is necessarily called for, of the
measure and talent which men have of things of the world, as might most tend to
a solid peace and quiet of mind before the Lord herein, and to guard against
such dreadful and evident hazard of eternal perishing, or spliting on that
rock, on which the Holy Ghost has set so signal a Beacon, by most express and
multiplied warnings from the Scripture?

ANSW. It is a great proposal you now make, to which in a few words, and with
some seriousness I shall make this answer. 1. To consider what use ye would
choose to make, or wish to have made of your interest in the world, if ye were
at this hour to die, so as with peace on such an account to enter into
eternity. 2. That this i;'not left arbitrary to any their trading with such a
Talent, and be concerned how to consecrat the gain thereof to the Lord; but it
is a High Piece of Justice, and no less necessity to show mercy to those who
are truly distressed, than to pay our Debts, since the great Lawgiver has not
left this indifferent more than the other, as is clear. Luke 16: 10, 11, 12. 3.
You would consider that riches is given to men as Stewards, and not
Proprietors, Matthew. 25: v. 14. I mean so as to reckon they may do herein at
their own pleasure; and is unfaithfulness here a small weight to ly on the
Conscience, and have no other account of their Masters goods to give, but that
they applied them to their own use only? 4. Do but lay to heart, that such is
this great Duty, in a faithful answering to ones Talent and measure of the
things of the world, in a tender respect to the Condition and Necessity of the
Saints, as in the Day of the Lord it is most noticed, and that which will be
brought in Judgment against the reprobate, yea on which that dreadful Sentence
there passes, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire etc. Matthew. 25:
verse. 41. 5. To be faithful thus in answering to that Talent is clear, that it
is to give and lay out your self this way, where you can expect no return, or
Compensation, otherwise it is but a self interest you follow, and not a giving
to the Lord, nor is it a casting thy bread on the waters, Eccles. 11: 1. 6. To
be faithfulhere is something else than that occasional outgiving to the
necessities of any, on some present and pressing Object, since the Scripture,
is so express, that here should be some proportion to every ones Measure and
Estate, which ought to be seriously considered and laid aside, for which see
that appointment Deuteronomy. 14: 22. and 16: 12. and how there it is held forth on
moral and immutable grounds. 1 Cor. 16: ^. that every one should, as his
measure can admit, be concerned in the improvement thereof. 7. This is not to
entertain only some pressing call for this end, when it comes their way, but
to search out the cause of the distressed. Job. 29: v. 16. Eccles. 11: 2. for
thus the liberal man devises liberal things, etc. even in seeking Objects,
that so excellent a grace may not want its exercise, each according to his
Talent, where it may be truly said, thev receive more than they give: Which
was a choice word of one, what ever I give, that I have, whilst the withholding
of that which is.thus required, has visiblv tended to poverty in many signal
instances. 8. To be faithful here* is to have a serious respect to the end;
that it be to a Disciple in the name of a Disciple, with a due regard to their
present distress, and not by partiality, on some private interest and respects
that may rise thereto, else they have cause to fear, that both Principal and
Interest is lost, nor can they put this debt on the Lord, where such a sad
bvass is with it. Matthew. 10: v. 42? 9. To be faithful here is to follow this
closly, so as not to be seen of men, else such have their reward, where this is
an influencing motive, yea not to let the left hand know what the right hand
does. Matthew 6: 3. Here the giver should shut his eyes when he opens his hand,
with desire that it may never be known, until the dav of the Lord, that great
day of retribution, when that which has been done in secret shall be rewarded
openly. Mat. 6: v. 4? 10. Here also is to be understood to give without
grudging, cheerfully, as the true way to lay up treasure to themselves, knowing
that the Lord loves a cheerful giver. 2 Cor. 9: 7. 11. To be faithful here, is
to be given to Hospitality* with a tender regard forentertaining of strangers,
for in such habit Angels have been entertained. Heb. 13: v. 2. 12. The bounds
and limits of our actings here must not ouly be the household of faith, but a
Tenderness, Condescendence and Readiness to help and relieve any distressed,
even the Worst of men, as they have opportunity, which is so expressly required
1 These. 3: ver. 12. to abound in love toward all men, so as to do good, to be
useful, and exerce Tenderness toward all, which should be found a more
effectual mean to gain credit to the Gospel, than what is the way of many, who
have a name and repute of Religion in this age.

QU. VI.
What you have now spoke anent those, who have a large interest in the world,
and in what terms they have it, is undeniable, I confess, from the Scripture;
but this concerns a few, in respect of such as are of a Low and mean
Condition in the World, and what can these have to compense the want of such a
Talent and make their lot desirable or sweet?

ANSW. I hope you will not bring these things under question, which may
convincingly answer this. 1. That a serious Christian could yet never be so
Low, but he has much more than he wants, though he should be put to such a
reckoning with Job. I have now neither Children, Friends, Honor, or Estate in
the world to call mine own: but I know and am sure that my Redeemer lives. Job.
19: v. 25. and do you think that a man's lot, or the comfortable enjoyment
thereof consists in the abundance of the things he possesses Luke 12: 15. 2.
Have the poor and despised cause to quarrel with their lot, if they be in truth
partakers of the Grace of God, when it is so clear, there can be no substantial
good in riches or honor, which the Lord has cast out of the Counsel of his
Love toward those, on whom he has set his heart from eternity? 3. Yea has he
not designed the most of the Elect to a poor, Low and afflicted Condition here?
For you see your calling Brethren, how not many wise, not many noble etc.
according to the flesh has he chosen, 1 Cor. 1: 26, 27. 4. Has not such a
peculiar income in the way of the Promise, which these who are full, and abound
most in the world cannot understand, and is not owned in the Scripture to be
under such a necessity to live by faith, which made the Apostle give such a
strange account, 2 Cor. 12; 9, 10. I take pleasure in my infirmities, in
distress, inpersecutions, etc. that the power of Christ may rest on me. O what
strong and vigorous acts of faith and love have often followed the Christians low
and mean state in the World, whereto such as were at ease have been wholly
strangers. 5. Have such cause to quarrel with a low and despised lot, who the
less they have here, whilst they have a sure evident for Heaven, knows they
have the more before them? And whilst others may reckon what they have by year
and property, can make another account what is their interest for all eternity,
and not grudge the hireling's wages, who know they are Sons, and to abide in
the house for ever, Joh. 8: 35. 6. Would such, were it put to their choice,
have their good things in this life, or do they expect to find a Heaven out of
Heaven, and is not that lot with greatest advantage suited to each of his
Saints, that is most for promoting their eternal interest, and to make them
meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. Col. 1: ver.
12. 7. It is not by the bulk you can judge on the Christians condition here in
the World, a little gold is of more value than a great heap of some other
metals, and a little that the righteous has is more than* the riches of many
wicked, Psalm. 37: ver. 16. For there lies the blessing; and what a difference
is there betwixt such, whose heart is gone up after his treasure, that is laid
up for him in Heaven; and those, who mind earthly things and have their heart
in their belly, Phil. 3: ver. 19?

QU. VII.
Such have a sweet and comforting part, whether the World smile or frown, who
know there is an eternity of joy before them: But you see how many are not more
low in their outward state, than dreadfully wicked and loose, without thc least
serious weight of Religion on their soul.

ANS. This may show, that no affliction, or the saddest lot here can of it self
lead into Jesus Christ, without the efficacious and irresistible power of
grace; but as to their part, who^ are so visibly active to their own ruin, I
must say, there seems not a more sad and astonishing sight, than such are, 1.
Who thus follow the world with a weeping eye, and have their heart cleave so
fast to it, which will scarce bestow one flattering smile on them, and knows
not what gain they^might make of their present Affliction and strait. 2. Who
thus seek the living among the dead, and their relief from the airth from
whence they see they cannot have it, who have such greatest things laid in
their offer, to make them here and for ever blessed. 3. That the very report of
the gain of Godliness should not press them once to be this length, to know
upon trial, what might be the certainty thereof, and if such an advantage can
be truly reached here, as to make the poor man's life more Sweet and Comforting
under all the toil of his hand, than if he had the greatest estate of the
earth. 4, It may seem strange, what these can possibly reckon upon their
Condition in being men, as desirable above that of the beasts of the field,
who have so little either in hand, or hope to be comforting; to know only a
sensual life with so small and almost indiscerneable advantage to satisfy the
senses. It is true, many such entertain a hope of a blessedness to come, whilst
they are wholly strangers to a life of grace here: But Oh! It is at such a
rate, that the Scripture of God must be false, if theirs be true. 5 How amazing
also is it, to see for what these perish, and lose their immortal soul, which
is in it self a higher interest, than the glory and riches of all the
Monarchies in the Earth, yea of more value, than the Sun and Moon? Yet as if
this were but some triffle, how easily do such hazard the same for the smallest
gain; yea it may be said, are content to serve Satan withont the wages of
visible pleasure and satisfaction which others have in the world. 6 Yea how
strange is it, how many such, whose trade and employment lies most at sea, who
thus have such peculiar enforcing Arguments, to be serious about Religion, yet
are so visibly loose in their walk, and strangers to a Christian life.

QU. VIII.
It is sure, there are such of that employment, and I hope not a few, whose
being convincingly serious in the things of God, with a Christian walk, to the
credit of the Gospel, is beyond question. But since what you have spoke as to
many of these, is too visibly manifest, what are these pressing Motives and
Arguguments that such, whose calling lies most on the Sea, have more than
others to take Religion deeply to heart?

ANSW. You may judge what a pressing call such have to be in greatest earnest
about their eternal state. 1. Who are through most of their time so near a
bordering with eternity, in deaths often; and their life hanging so frequently
in suspense before their eyes. 2. Such, who cannot but have their conscience
often struck with the sense of a Godhead, by seeing his mavelous power showed
forth in the Depths, so as it may be said, they live and converse amongst
wonders, to see that great Body of the Sea, how it is with such advantage made
passable for Transport and Commerce; the regular course of its ebbbings and
flowings, with the singular use and subserviency of the tides; how it is shut
up also with gates and bars, and has its appointed bounds, without which
there could be no reason how a bank of sand could restrain the great Oceans
breaking forth. O! what a book is thus spread open for sea - faring men to
read, and bring near their thoughts with wondering, to Fear and Worship him,
whose voice is so known on the wighty waters; who turns the most impetuous
storm into a calm at his pleasure, which is so far above all hnmane reach,
and causes the swelling of an enraged sea in a moment to know his command and
be still 3. What ought such to be, who have not only been often surprised with
preventing mercy, when they were not aware from dashing on some shelve or rock,
or falling in on a bank of sand, and thus brought out of greatest hazard, even
before they were put in fear: But have often likewise been rescued from the very
Jaws of present Death, in that manner, when no visible or ordinary means could
ever have answered thereto. Oh! Can such deliverance be so easily forgot, and
what were then their thoughts of entering into endless eternity, and meeting
grim death with such a surprise? was it not then a matter of earnest to pray?
Or would you then have dared to break forth into an Oath? yea what a blessed
state were you then made to reckon those in, who had been formerly serious
about Religion, and how soon may such a surprisal meet you again? 4. What ought
such to be, and are accountable for, who knows how many thousands have been
swallowed up in these devouring Depths, and hears of such ordinary shipwracks,
whilst they are yet preserved? Oh! Does not this mavelous longsuffering and
tenderness of the Lord have some serious voice? Has it yet never tended to
melt your heart with sorrow and contrition, for so sad a return you have
hitherto given to such forbearance. 5. What solemn and express engagements are
many, if not most of such under, and accountable for, which their lips have
uttered, when trouble was upon them, and when they were at the very brink of
perishing, that if some extraordinary cast of providence had been deferred but
a very few moments longer, they had been lost? Now set me seriously ask, what
did you really intend? Was it to deal deceitfully with the most High, and be
no more serious in the thoughts of this when ye were once at land? If it be so,
how can you dare to pray and plead with the Holy Lord in a new Strait: Oh! let
me beseech you, lay this to heart, and that to make use of your present calmes
at sea, for making sure your eternal interest, would help to make a sweet calm
within on your soul when a storm arises. 6. Let me but add this what advantage
such have, who have so clear an emblem of their life and condition here so
frequently before them, how thus they are under saill, and moving to that port
where once the anckor must be cast down never to be weighed again: yea how
there can be no safe reckoning to get safe to that blessed, O blessed and
desirable port of glory, without knowing how their course lies, which from the
Scripture is more infallibly clear, than they can be by any Carte or Compass?
Let me but further add, how strange it is to see some of these, so far from
under the aw and dread of God; that they are not more concerned to put to sea,
and work on the Sabbath, without any convincing necessity, than on any other
day?

QU. IX.
What, is there such a necessity for strict observance of the Sabbath, as
there is no warrantable liberty, both for recreation, and men's ordinary
business, after the public worship is once past?

ANS. I hope you will not dare to debate, 1. That the Christian Sabbath has by
the holy Ghost that impress and authority put upon it, of being the Lords day,
a day which is set a part and consecrat to him, on a higher account, than the
first creation, wherein God manifested in our nature did rest from all his
works, for the Redemption of his Church; and from the new Creation; and saw
that all which he had done was very good; that day never to be forgot, wherein
the Redemption of his Church being perfected, he had a full acquitance for the
whole debt of his elect Church; that day also, on which his most usual and
solemn appearance to his Disciples after his Resurrection, was; and shall we
deny such a tribute of our observance thereof, on so great an account: and to
him, who has given us our time, and is Lord of the Sabbath? 2. Since it is the
alone prerogative of God to make a day holy, and that the first day of the week
is that piece of our time, which is only set apart for him under the New
Testament, should not such a solemn and consecrat time be applied to
spiritual duties? and is the highest of sacrilege to turn that which is holy
to civil or common actions, when they are no works of necessity or mercy, for
then is such a day no more holy but common. 3. You know how deep the
profanation thereof has been often found to draw on men's conscience, so as it
is rare to see a flagitious person under any remorse, when brought to a
scaffold, but has been then enforced to cry out of the breach of the Sabbath,
and how their guilt herein did stare them in the face, as a provoking cause of
what had thus befallen them 4. Should not these dreadful marks of the holy
judgment of God, which have been thus put both on persons and places, have an
aw and dread on men's consciences; yea such instances, with these signal and
convincing circumstances, as all might see, who looked but at a Distance
thereon, the stroke pointing as with a finger, at the provoking cause? 5. Do we
hope for an everlasting Sabbath in heaven, whilst here a few hours in
spiritual converse with God, and the souls resting and solacing it self in
him, is so burdensome a work; yea, whilst it is sure, the greatest of delights
and pleasure known upon the earth are these which are Spiritual, to such as
ever knew what it is to be Christians?

DIALOGUE. IV.
QUEST. I.
SInce we have had this occasion to touch a little some of the great and
weighty concerns of practical religion, I must yet press you with some few
proposals, anent the present time we are fallen in, when such sad appearances
and a faint almost every where now is, so as many are like to give over, as men
astonished, and lose both their heart and hand at once in the matter of duty.

ANSWER. We are indeed fallen in trying times. But consider also 1. What great
confirmations have been given in to the truth ere our night grew so dark, and
have now lost sight of them all. 2. What kept the saints from sinking an
hundred years past, when to be burnt at the stake for the truth was one of the
most usual lessons of Christianity; and to quite all for Jesus Christ? Yea,
whence was it, that their strength and resolution grew, as the tide grew strong
against them? 3. Look through the whole of the Scripture, and on the Churches
condition under the New Testament, and I am sure, nothing can be more clear
than this, that the greatest triumph that ever Jesus Christ has had in his
followers, was not in calm and prosperous times from without, but when they
were at the lowest.

QU. II.
But how is it in such times of abounding light, as these now are, that these
great confirmations of the truth, which were then given in by the Saints, are
now so rare, yea much unkuown to most of this generation?

ANS. The way of the Lord is still the same, and in all times his word does
good to them that walk uprightly. But it may be clear. 1. How such degrees of
peace, comfort and assurance of the truth has still kept some proportion to
some more remarkable time and measure of the Saints sufferings, the spirit of
God and of glory then resting upon them. 1 Pet. 4: 14. 2. Then was the life of
faith, a following of the Lord fully, with a large venturing on hand in another
manner known amongst his followers, than it seems to be at this day; and Oh!
How rare a practice is it now to believe, when there are almost no sensible
grounds to be comforting? 3 Though former ages had not that measure of light
which is now, yet it may be seen how the aw and authority thereof was in
another manner on the conscience of Christians, and their work to live
religion, when there was no visible inducement to profess the same, but for the
truths sake; but they endured, as seeing him who is invisible, and did live and
feed on the very marrow and substance of Religion in another manner, than
seems by the most of Professors now to be understood.

QU. III.
What might be the most effectual mean for recovery, and to be led in the way
of the promise of the Lords returning with these wonted signs of his presence,
when it seems to be so dark and dismal an hour now on the Church?

ANS I hope with some assurance I may offer these. 1. That such as love the
truth would with greatest seriousness watch against the present public, and
prevailing evils of the times, to have their garments kept from the smallest
touch and defilements thereof; I mean such evils, after which the multitude
most runs, where the countenance and favorable aspect of great men seems most
to follow, and is a most remarkable contagion in the time; for it is here the
smallest accession will draw deeper on the conscience, and have a more
difficult recovery than other personal infirmities, and a severe withstanding
thereto lead in to most sensible enjoyments of the Spirit of God. 2. Let us
enquire where the Testimony of the present day to the truth does most ly, which
may be more peculiar to some of the Reformed Churches of Christ than others;
for in a closs adherence thereto we may assuredly hope for the outletting of
the spirit of God, from his own promise, of having a special respect thereto.
Rev. 3: 10. and 12: 11; and herein should the truth ma^e you free. It has been
the blessed disposal of the Lord, that this great interest of Christ in his
being King and head over his Church, and the alone Lawgiver thereto, and that
his Kingdom is not only within on the souls of the Elect, but over his Church,
as a visible Politic body distinct from all the Kingdoms of the earth, is
that great truth, which the Church of Scotland has now in these late times had
most peculiarly assigned to witness for Yea this great truth we may see not
there alone, but else where most visibly opposed, and I hope will be owned, as
the common cause of all the Reformed Churches, to whom thls crown and supremacy
of their glorious head should be dearer, than all their interests within time.
Great is that peace and joy will be found in a closs adherence thereto, a more
large outpowring of the spirit might be hoped for to follow this Testimony,
when it is now called for in the season thereof. 3. What a hopfull presage were
it of the Lords return in this day, if both private Christians, and Ministers
of the Gospel were found more pressed to bring into themselves their deep
accession and share in the provoking cause of this great wrath now gone forth,
and their being content to be abased and ly in the dust, that the unspotted
righteousness of God might shine forth? we might then assuredly hope for some
more visible signs of his presence, and a more joint uniting in knowing both
the cause and cure of our greatest distempers. 4. What a blessed assay should
this be to the Churches healing, if a greater onness amongst the godly in these
times, were with more desire and intenseness followed; who have this with such
expresness left by our great Master, not only for the credit of the gospel,
and promoting the interest thereof, but as a seal of our love and obedience to
him? Oh! that so few are found with that suitable weight on their spirits to be
concerned in this, as though this great duty of mutual freedom, could not be
managed with that humble ceding, and prudent tenderness to others, as might
tend to a further cementing in love; yea to go together in others hand without
any jarre. Let the things of God have a preference to our own things, and our
Masters interest be dearer to us, than our selves; and Christians will not then
long be at so sad a distance with others; both in their judgments and
affections, but that blessed strife should most appear, how to strive together,
and not against other for the interest of Christ. Yea with this I must add,
that which Christians should much study, and so natively resolves in mutual
love and condescendence one to another, is humility, which when corruption
causes the mind to swell, will quickly help it to fall; and how sad is it,
that such a name is not with greatest abhorrence entertained, as that of a
party, o^ keeping in there with; what? is Christ divided? or is there any other
head and leader than he? who is Paul? or who is Appollos? Or have we another
interest, if we hope through grace to be accepted of him at his second Coming,
but his truth to contend for, which without any personal quarrel or
bitterness, we should with Levi know neither Father nor Brother? But oh! What
we lose often in the very manner of our deport and following of duty, when there
may be a serious aim on both sides at one and the same scope, which calls much
for a being alone, in a near fellowship with God, to meet together with more
advantage.

QU. IV.
But you see under what reproach the way of the Lord is at this day, and how
much the Credit of the truth suffers by sore and subtle reflections that are
cast thereon.

ANS. 1. What? does this shake any, or render the truth doubtful, if ever they
knew the power and certainty thereof on their soul? for it is sure, religion
will never lose weight with those who know it in earnest, under the greatest
cloud of detraction and contempt. 2. What can the furthest essays of such
reach, who dare not avowedly deny the Scripture, but are enforced to own that
which breaks all their designs, since it is enough, the Testimony of God in
his word is sure? nor can the Sun cease to shine, what ever thick vapors may
darken the air a little to us. 3. Do but ask the greatest Reproacher of
godliness, what his thoughts are, when death is looking him in the face, if he
will put this in his Testament, or adventure to seal such a witness with his
dying breath. O, is it not then, that the mockers are enforced to confess they
now find religion to be a matter of earnest which before they scoffed at.

QU. V.
But it seems strange, what quiet and confidence many such, who are visible
haters of the truth, and of the power of Religion, own in their way?

ANSW. Friend, this is one of the sad mistakes most are in, but let me beseech
you, come a little more near, and then see and judge what true peace and quiet
such have, what ever present shun-shine they may be under from the World. 1.
Who are so often at work, how to bridle their conscience to frame diversions, and
find out some false grounds of peace, whilst the truth of God upon any near
approach is so visible a terror to them, 2. Why do these hate a searching
ministry so much, though the word name none? Is it not because the light
torments them, and they cannot stand before it? and are such to be envied by
any? 3. How is the sense of guilt, and of their former way so affrighting upona
surprising strait, or a near approach to death? or would you wish to die with
such, on whose very countenance may be often read, (let them conceal never so
much,) these dreadful presages and fear of a judgment to come? 4. And is not
wickedness a visible punishment to it self, which with such a sting and fear is
haunted, as it may be seen, when they seek most to outdare their conscience,
they find it stronger than they, and whilst no ground of fear or trouble is
from without, yet a dreadful sound is in their ear, of what is to come? 5. Why
are these under such dread to be alone, and thus in any measure serious with
their soul, to look but over their own case, and is this a desirable peace or
quiet? 6. And whence is it that so many, who have most derided holiness in
their day, are pressed to enquire and call for some serious Minister of Christ;
yea to desire such most, whom they hated before, when death once is dealing
with them?

QU. VI.
But whilst the times we are now fallen in are so remarkeably sad and
afflicting, what can the righteous do, or would most help against the
imbittering troubles and griefs of a Christian life?

ANSW. Let us consider 1. How much of the Scripture is peculiarly writ for the
afflicted, and such as have no visible help or comfort. 2. That the very nature
of affliction and trouble is so far changed in its being sanctifiedly
exercising, as in stead of poison to be made medicinal. 3. Are not the
Christians saddest hours on as swift a course, as their time; and each hour and
day putting by some part of its appointed measure? Yea though some thousands of
crosses should be allotted you, they will come to one at last, 4. A few hours
under the pain of a wounded Spirit, and the terrors of the wrath of God, would
make such to reckon a freedom from this, (though with the sorest of outward
affliction) were a sweet calm and deliverance. 5. Is not a sanctified cross,
without any bounds set to the measure thereof, one of the most express
Scripture signs of the love of God to his own, the want whereof might indeed
be the Christians sorest trial, lest his share be with the World, and such were
Bastards, not Sons? 6. If you can read the most dark and saddest providence
with that Commentar of the Scripture thereon, you will then know how the Saints
afflictions stand for blessings; Matthew. 5: ver. 10, 11. and diverse temptations
to be a solid ground of joy and comfort, Jam. 1: ver. 2. 7. Consider but in
the saddest affliction, how much sadder this might have been, and that they are
not thus a scandal to the generation of the righteous. 8; What if a^l our life
had been a continued tract of grief, bitterness and trouble, and but rarely the
least of outward comforts dropped in, and so much only given as to keep from
sinking? Oh! durst such quarrel, who knew of an eternity of joy in the close?
9. It was a right way the Lord led his people in, when he led them through a
labyrinth of sore troubles in the wilderness, Psalm. 107: ver. 7. and is there
showed as an emblem of the journeying state of the Church and each of the
Saints here. 10. One sight of that glorious Land which is above, with the first
moment of the afflicted Christians entry there, will compense to the furthest a
life time of sorrows and grief. 11. Is it not here the faith and patience of
the Saints must shine forth, the trial whereof is a more invaluable thing, than
all the treasures of the earth. 12. The season of enduring, you know, is but
short, which for all eternity will never meet the Christian again; and Oh!
would you lose even the least of such an opportunity, not in the trial of your
faith and patience only, but of your love to Jesus Christ, that tribulation and
distress was not able to separat betwixt him and you? Romans 8: ver. 39. And your
tried love under sorest outward pressures may be reported in Heaven and
recorded there. I shall but add, how sweet must that be to a Christian, when
he can say, Let my beloved come and eat of his pleasant fruits, Cant. 4. ver.
16. which to them had most pain and wrestlings in bringing forth.

QU. VII.
What are these pleasant fruits, which can be found under the cross, and the
many imbittering griefs and troubles of a Christians life?

ANSW. It is sure, no season has been more remarkable for sowing to the
Spirit and bringing forth much fruit for the Lord, than a time of the cross,
and most searching trials that way; and these have been known to such as were
suteably exercised thereby; the gain and pleasure whereof has made the
remembrance of their saddest hours sweet. 1. When contrition and tenderness,
and soft walking before the Lord has followed thereon; for such are his
delight, in whom he takes greatest pleasure, Esai. 58: 15. 2. Humility, and the
Christians geting his Spirit kept low, is such a fruit, as may make their
reckoning sweet on any other loss; the way to know how to abound, is to know
how to be abased. Phil. 4: 12. and this is one of the peculiar ends of
afflicting Providence, to hide pride for men. Job. 33. 17. Oblessed they who
are no less concerned to hide it from themselves. 3. Is it not a pleasant
fruit, where, by the cross Jesus Christ is more endeared to his people, and
thus precious unto them; their soul cleaving to him in desire and love, even
when their soul cleaves to the dust by a humbling rod? O what a rent and
tribute is this, which in the Christians saddest hours only can be paid into
their blessed Master? 4. A through resignation and surrender to the Lord and
his disposal, is a rare and choice improvement of the Cross. Yea it is then
found, a Christian to be nearest his mercy, and his burden most sensibly grow
light; and that this makes a speedy ripening for times of refreshment from the
presence of the Lord. 5. This great fruit is then to be sought after, by
believing in hope, when it is against hope, which is one of the highest pieces
of service for giving Glory to God, that a Christian here can be called to, and
thus for putting to their seal, that God is true. 6. It is at the lowest
Christians have the most remarkable advantage, by patient enduring for being
more than conquerours through him that has loved them. Romans 8: v. 37. yea that
thus the power of Christ resting upon them, may have in such a greater triumph,
and over a more formidable party, than ever Alexander or Caesar could boast of
in all their conquests.

QU. VIII.
Whilst it may be strange, how small a proportion the practice of most in
these times seem to have to their light, and men's usual converse with religion
more about the uppermost boughs, than to ly near the great and weighty things
thereof; what might most help to put some deeper impression and weight of a
Christians work on him, and provoke to seriousness, by having some greatest
truths most frequently kept in sight?

ANSW. You know, it is not the most mavelous things of Religion, nor if one
should rise from the dead could deeeply work upon the heart without the Spirit
of God. But I must tell you what was the desire of a Judicious Father to a
hopless son, when he was a dying, that he would but once a day take half an
hour alone by himself, which upon trial and some deep reflection, afterward
that young man had, what this desire might mean, was blessed to be a mean of
his recovery: Oh! If most who are professed Christians were but once this
length, that beside some retirement to prayer, they could but for a few moments
be alone once a day to consider these truths, which I shall here instance. 1.
What were desirable and comforting in the state of man, if it looked not
higher than things seen, or his present abode in the world? 2. How swistly are
the enjoyments of the earth, and delights of the flesh gone and perished in the
present use thereof? 3. O what should this be to think seriously on, that the
Gospel is an undoubted reality, and so far has the Holy God been mindful of
man and magnisied him, yea even beyond fallen Angels, that Jesus Christ should
have come down to the world to make a purchass of such to himself, and save
them from the wrath that is to come? 4. That the import of the Gospel is no
less than an eternity of Glory, even to the meanest of the Saints; and what a
blessed strait were this for a Christian; how to divide his wondering betwixt
that which is now past, in the great work of Redemption, and that which is to
come, in the full manifestation of Glory. 5. Let us think more frequently on
this also, that the poorest now on the earth has an immortal soul, that is of
a more excellent nature, and more inestimable value, than these visible
Heavens, the Sun, Moon, and Stars; yea such, as no less than the blood of the
Son of God revealed in our Nature could ransom from wrath, and yet we put so
small a price thereon. 5. That it is sure, so great and solemn a business as
Death is before us, and we must know shortly what it means, and to enter into
another world. O what will this once be, and should it not now deeply concern
each, that death come not on all at once, by more frequent and serious converse
therewith? 6. Let us but now bring near our thoughts what thoughts we shall
have of the world, when our eyes are shuting upon it, never to enjoy this any
more? And what thoughts that mavelous change must cause on men's spirits, when
once entered into endless eternity? 7. How mavelous is this, that may cause
our hearts to fail with wondering on some near converse therewith, that not
only there is such a hope as to be for ever in Heaven, but that our nature
should be so far advanced, even above the Nature of Angels, in that
unconceiveable Union with the divine Nature conjoined for ever, in our blessed
head and Redeemer. 8. And what should this be to think on, that our Bodies,
when laid in the dust, shall not only be assuredly raised, but made like to the
glorious Body of Christ, Phil. 3: 21?




