Imprimatur,

Joh. Covel, Procanc. Joh. Copleston. Joh. Spencer. Humf. Gower.

March 27. 1689.
A SERMON Preached before the UNIVERSITY of CAMBRIDGE, IN Kings-College Chapel;
On the 25th of March, 1689. Being the Anniversary for Commemoration of KING
HENRY VI. The FOUNDER.

By WILLIAM FLEETWOOD, M. A. Fellow of Kings-College.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes Printer to the University; for William Graves
Bookseller there. 1689.

II. Corinth. Chapter 9. V. 12. For the Administration of this Service not only
supplieth the Want of the Saints, but is abundant also by many Thanksgivings
unto God.
AFTER St. Paul had been exhorting the Corinthians to a Liberal and speedy
Contribution to the poor Saints at Jerusalem, from abundance of Topics general
and particular; such as the Excellence of the Nature of the Work it self, the
Example of the Macedonians, and the Expectation that Church had; the
Reasonableness of this that as they had abounded in every thing, so they should
also abound in this Grace; from the Forwardness of others, from the Example of
Christ, who for their sakes became Poor, that they through his Poverty might be
made Rich, from the expediency and profitableness of Perfecting a Good Work
they had already begun, and from their own Forwardness which had made it in a
manner superfluous for him to write to them, which take up the 8 and 9th Chapter of
this Ep. he enforces it by this at last, that this their Charity would cause
Thanksgivings to God, Verse 11th. and in the Text with an Addition -- for the
Administration of, etc.

By the Administration of this Service we must understand, the Distribution of
Alms, the Liberality of Communicating, the Exercising Acts of Charity; Alms
being a part of the Spiritual Service under the Gospel, and called in Ritual
and Pontific terms, an Odor of a sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable
well-pleasing to God, Philipp. 4. 18. and so in Heb. 13. 16. To do good, and to
communicate forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased; and its
Commendation here is, that it not only supplies the Want of the Saints, but it
is an Obligation and Incitement to theirs and others Gratitude to God; it
occasions Prayers and Thanksgivings, and the Name of God is thereby glorified.
As therefore the Text will not justly allow, so I think the Occasion of this
Assembling will require no more at my Hands, than the Treating of these two
Heads in the first place, and of applying them to our present purpose in the
second.

To supply the Necessities of such as are in want, is a Work of such
acknowledged Excellence in its own Nature, carries such Sweetness and
Complacence with it in its Practice; is so agreeable to all Mankind, and of
such Pleasing odor before God, that 'twere a kind of Injury to any here, to
suppose them so entirely lost to all the Principles of good Nature, of improved
Reason, and revealed Religion, as to think they wanted Conviction, or indeed
Persuasion in this Case. It is to be just to the Text, that I insist a little
on these Heads.

First then, It is a Work of great Excellence in its own Nature, it is
perfecting Human Nature, and advancing it as far as it can go; in nothing do we
more resemble and draw near the Godhead than in that largeness of Heart, and
Generous disposition of Soul, from whence the works of Charity proceed: and
what is expressed in St. Luke by -- Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father
also is merciful; is in St. Matthew -- Be ye therefore perfect, even as your
Father which is in Heaven is perfect. It Is honoring our Maker. It Is, in a
manner, and by his Permission, Mending the Works of God, and Bettering the
Creation: For He in his all wise Disposal of Affairs, has ordered Matters so,
that there should seem to be a great many Defects in Nature, a great deal of
Partiality in the Distribution of the things of this World, and inequality in
the Gifts of Fortune; and has submitted all the World to the dominion of what
we call Chance and Accidents. And this not through any impotence of Power,
defect of Foresight or goodwill to Man; but most especially for the Exercise of
the wisdom and the virtue of his Creatures. And therefore he that best repairs
these Breaches, supplies these Defects, makes up these Inequalities, and best
provides against these evil and unhappy Accidents; improves the Human Nature
most, and best deserves of it, does the most excellent and beneficial Work,
acts the most reasonably, and most conformably to the Divine Will, he best
accomplishes the Works of God and the Designs of Providence. It is hard to
conceive an attempt more Noble, or a work more Excellent than what the Heathens
called the Conquering Fortune, and giving to Man a New Fate, but we must say
than the Rescuing Human Nature from that Contempt and Misery, into which our
Sins first threw it, and under which they keep it still in bondage; which is
done (and never better done than) by the Exercise of Charity. 'Twas Sin that
first debased our Kind, and first subjected it to Pains and Sicknesses,
Infirmities and Wants, and all the Sorrows and Distresses, under which we see
and feel it labors, and to whatever makes us the Objects of one another Pity
and Compassion. And God by his usual methods (full of astonishing Love and
Kindness) has dealt so graciously both for and with us, that we may (like
Himself) work good from evil; and by a rare Reverse of Providence, has both
enjoined and enabled us, to make these sad effects of Sin, occasions of new
Righteousness, and of Destroying sin it self; and in our own, and one another
Miseries, has given us, as it were, so many Opportunities of exercising
greater Graces, of practicing more Virtues, of raising the Soul to a Nobler
pirch, and aspiring to a better Immortality, than otherwise, for any thing we
know, we could or should have had. He therefore that is practicing Beneficence,
feeding the Hungry, clothing the Naked, visiting the Sick and in Prison,
relieving the Distressed, and doing Good, is at the same time Rising as it were
from Adams Fall, vindicating Human Nature, asserting his Original, exalting and
ennobling of his Soul, and in a manner Triumphing, already, over Sin, and
Death, and Hell.

Yet after all, this Work of Love, is not more excellent in its Nature, than
(to our Comfort) it is Secondly, both sweet and pleasant in its Practice: And
in good Truth, it is very Happy for us that it is so, considering it is so
frequently, so earnestly, so inexcusably enjoined and made our constant Duty.
Our Souls are so united to our Bodies, so closely tacked and fastened to their
Matter, and clogged with their Corruption, that tho they can make shift to
discern the reasonableness and necessity of performing their duty, yet they are
difficultly moved to practice, unless some sensible impression of delight,
accompanying the duty, be made appear, and they be not only fed with future
hopes and expectations. Proportionable therefore to this Necessity and strict
injunction of this Duty, has God in his goodness made the pleasure and delight
that constantly attends it. There is that sweetness and complacency in doing
good to those that want, that even the bare desires and wishes of it, when it
is beyond our power to do it, give us a good degree of peace and quiet and
content within; and we can satisfy our scruples with the sincerity of our
designs and purposes: but if we bring those purposes to good effect, there is
then such a spring of joy and contentation rising in the soul, the spirits
overflow so pleasingly, and the heart swells with such sweet gayety and pride,
that it is hard to find a name for the delightful passion, and we can sooner
feel than can express what it is we mean. And though these ecstasies abate in
time, and languish by degrees, yet the delights of doing good, pursue a man as
long as the remembrance of it lasts. It is impossible to call to mind a man's
good deeds, or view the objects of his charity, without abundance of content
and solid satisfaction. I make no doubt, but the devout and humble soul returns
God frequent thanks for his exciting and assisting grace, but I doubt very much
whether it is possible in humane Nature, not to reflect Honor and Pleasure on
ones self withal; they do so naturally flow, so unavoidably result from the
remembrance of those Acts of Charity and kind Beneficence. And Seneca had never
more reason, then when describing this Virtue, he said it was Actio benevola
tribuens gaudium, capiensque tribuendo.

Thirdly, It Is agreeable to all Mankind -- We are frequently forced when we
would recommend a Virtue to our audience, to tell them, it is approved and
practiced by all the Wise, and Good, and sober Persons of the World, which tho
it is not so, yet it may look like begging of the question, because we are
already prepossessed in favor of that Virtue, and consequently may be thought
to call and judge those Persons Wise, and Good, and Sober, barely from the
practice of it. But when a man can safely say that all the World approves a
thing, that high and low, rich and poor, young and old, good and bad agree to
it, and have been always of the Opinion; when they who cannot practice it,
still wish they could, and they who do not, are ashamed, and make what show
they can, as if they did; when no man's confidence or wit has ever carried him
so far, as to dispute its Excellence, or praise its Opposite, a man must be
forsaken quite of sense, and reason, and good manners, he must do strange
violence to all the powers of his Soul, whom the reverence that is due to the
so general judgment of the world, cannot impress upon, or move to the belief
and practice of this Noble Duty upon all occasions.

Fourthly, It Is acceptable in the sight of God; it must needs be so, he would
not otherwise have charged it on us with such earnestness, commanded it so
positively, and called upon us for performance so incessantly, and threatened
its neglect so terribly, throughout the Scriptures. It must needs be
acceptable, because we are thereby kind to Him himself, in relieving his
Friends; for such is his goodness, that he has made the cause of those that
want, his Own, and reckons up the good we do to them, done to himself, and will
accordingly reward it. It must needs be acceptable, because we thereby exercise
an act of faith and confidence in his truth and goodness, we give him something
sure and in possession, for the reversion of rewards, we know at present little
of; we give because He bids, and trust because He says that He is faithful.
And the Scriptures place a great deal of the merit of Abraham's faith, in
obeying when he was called to leave his Country and his Fathers house, and
going out although he knew not whither he went; that is in ready confidence and in
implicit faith: it must needs be acceptable because we thereby honor him in
obeying his commands, are just in owning him the Lord and true Proprietor of
all we have, and paying this acknowledgement, and by showing our selves
grateful, and in some measure worthy of his mercies. And to conclude, in a
great many other ways, not needful to recount at present.

But if the works of Charity are thus excellent and sweet, thus acceptable both
to God and man, when exercised on those that only want, they are yet more
excellent and sweet, and more agreeable, when exercised on those that want, and
that deserve them at the same time. It is a great improvement of the Argument,
when the administration of this service supplieth the want of the Saints. Not
but that to stand in need of Charity, is strictly speaking, to deserve it, and
is the first and most immediate cause and motive both of Giving and Receiving:
so that he that asks and receives upon presumption of his Want, and yet wants
not, is at the best but a Deceiver and a Cheat; and he that gives without
Presumption of that Want, may be munificent or liberal, good natured, vain, or
whatever else he pleases, but not Charitable. But when both Want and Merit
meet, the Practice of this Grace is much more satisfactory to ones Self, and
more agreeable to God and Man. It is a Complicated act of Goodness then, it is
approving and rewarding Virtue, encouraging Religion, Industry and Honesty, and
whatever else may be the merits of the Receiver, as well as pitying and
relieving his Distress. Let us try (said One of old with admirable reason) how
to make our Benefits most lasting and most serviceable, and such as may never
turn to Evil, and that will be by carefully and wisely choosing where to place
them most deservedly; I will never give Money to a Man qui adulterae numerabit,
I wont be so far accessory to his lewd acts or purposes, I will if I can
reclaim him, but if not, I don't intend to encourage or promote his Wickedness;
with a great deal more to good purpose, and agreeable to the voice of right
Reason, which advise us to associate Prudence with Beneficence, and whilst we
are succouring Human Nature, to discountenance Vice and Immorality withal, to
encourage Virtue and Religion, and serve the Interests of the Commonwealth. And
to tie this Duty closer, it is now become an Obligation of Revealed as well as
Natural Religion, and we must, as we have opportunity do good to all Men, but
especially to those that are of the household of Faith. And amongst other Duties
summed up in Romans 12. one is Distributing to the Necessities of the Saints; and
St. Paul makes a journey on purpose to Jerusalem, to minister to the Saints,
and raises the Character of the Macedonians, from their making Contributions
to, and that of the House of Stephanas, from addicting themselves to the
Ministry of the Saints. And tho in all those places, by the Saints we are to
understand Believers, Christians in general, false as well as true, yet we must
understand withal, that they were honored with that Name, from the Sanctity of
their Profession, their holy Doctrine, and their presumed holy Practice, as
well as in Contradistinction, to the unbelieving Jews, and the profane
unhallowed Gentiles. So that as a Man must take all due care in the Choice of
fit and proper Objects of his Charity, and see that they be good and truly
Saints if possible, yet he must not abstain from doing Good, purely upon the
account of his Uncertainty, whether his Works will be bestowed deservedly or
no. A Man must not frequently make the Suspense of his Mind, a ground for
withholding his Hand: The Pretense will always last, and without great Care,
will prove a Snare to Virtue; 'twill put him upon little Tricks and
disingenuous Shifts of pleading causelessly against men's Merits: 'twill make him
argue nicely and ill-naturedly, and subtly distinguish the Poor out of
Relief, and himself out of Charity, and engage him by degrees into Hardness of
Heart, and an inhuman Temper. Let every One but do his Best, and guide himself
by the most probable Appearances and outward Shows (of which he only can be
judge) and leave the Issue and Event to God -- To God, who has made it a Duty
to be Charitable, but has not withal given us a Spirit of Discernment, to
sever Hypocrites from the sincere and honest Christians; and there fore cannot
reasonably be thought to require this great Exactness at our Hands; and is much
too just and kind, not to reward our good Intentions for the sake of another
undiscoverable Malignity. It is therefore good and necessary, it shows our Hope
and Confidence, our Faith and our Obedience, that we sow our Seed at
peradventure, but it is better that it fall on Good ground; it is good that we
intend it well, but it is better those Intentions find their good Effects. It
is a great Commendation of Charity, that it supplies the Necessities of such as
want, but it is a greater yet, when it supplies the Necessities of Saints, and
truly Good Christians.

But Secondly, It is abundant also by many Thanksgivings toward God. Whiles by
the Experiment of this Administration (as St. Paul says in the following Verse.)
they glorify God -- First, for their professed Subjection to the Gospel of
Christ. Secondly, for their liberal Distribution to them and to all Men. And
Thirdly, by their Prayers for you.

If there wanted Arguments to advance the Praise and Honor of this most
excellent and useful Grace of Charity, one might, without being too minute,
and forcing things unreasonably, deduce a very certain, and well grounded one
from hence, that the works of Charity are here made the Marks of our professed
Subjection to the Gospel of Christ: That tho there are other ways of appearing
Christians, such as being baptized into the Churches Faith, frequenting its
Assemblies, Partaking of its Sacraments, and Submitting to its Discipline; yet
that the clearest Tokens, the certainest Indications, the openest and most
avowed Profession of our Christianity, is the Practice of Good Works, in
Pursuance of its Holy Doctrine and Commands.

But since there is no great need of this, I have only to observe at present,
First, that their Charity administered occasion of Glorifying God, and
Honourring the Christian Religion; Secondly, that they who were, and were to
be, Relieved, were Grateful to God by Returning him Thanks for the Liberality
of their Benefactors; and Thirdly, Grateful to their Benefactors by Praying to
God for them.

First, It occasioned the Glorifying God and Honoring Christianity. For as it
is in Human Intercourses where when one Man by Counsel or Persuasion of another
performs some brave and generous Action, part of the Praise and Glory where
it is known, will both deservedly and unavoidably result upon the Encourager and
Setter on; so is it in the case of Charity 'twixt God and Men. It must needs be
that with Considering People, the Merit and the Glory of those Benefits, must
fall especially on God, who first inspired those Principles into the Souls of
Men, from whence those gracious Acts proceeded.

But farther their Works of Charity were Occasions of Honoring Christianity,
of preferring that particular Economy to both the Gentile and the Jewish
Dispensation. Let Men contend never so long, so warmly, and so wisely about the
Preference of the several Theologies, about the Excellency of their Doctrines,
and the Properness of their Natures, to exalt the Understandings, to refine the
Powers and Faculties of the Mind, and raise the Souls of Men to a Nobler pitch,
and closer Union with the Godhead: Yet after all, that Doctrine that is fitted
best for the general Welfare of Mankind, and best consults its public Benefit
and Interest in this World (not excluding that of another) will certainly
prevail and carry it above the rest, when once it is truly scanned and
understood. So that had the Christian Dogmata been as suitable to the Wisdom of
the World, and as agreeable to its way of reasoning as its practic Precepts
were to the Convenience and Benefit of Human Life, it had not stood in need of
Miracles, it had obtained that by its own Reasonableness and natural Force,
which it did by Supernatural and Divine Assistance; it was so calculated for
the general Good, consulted so the Weal and Comfort of the World. Nay it
disposed the Minds of Men so sweetly to the Practice of Humanity, Compassion,
Charity, Beneficence, and in a Word to all Good Nature, that even where
Miracles were wanting, both obstinate and sullen Jews, and vicious hardened
Gentiles, were by them often charmed into Conversion, and always into
Admiration of those generous Doctrines: And even in spite of all the
indigestible Difficulties of the Christian Creed, they could not choose but
love the Christian Practice, So that Doing good and multiplying Acts of
Charity, was the most natural and ready way of heaping Honors on their
Institution, of Conciliating the Esteem and Favor of the World, of Winning
Proselytes, and Gaining upon those that were without, and of Securing and
Confirming those that were already in.

Secondly, Those that were relieved were grateful to God, by returning Him
Thanks for the Liberality of their Benefactors. They glorify God, says St.
Paul, for your liberal Distributions to them and to all Men.

However it is, that God impresses on the Minds of Men, and moves them to good
Works of Charity, whether by stirring and impregnating those Seeds of natural
Pity he has sown in all our Hearts, or moving us by Hopes or Fears, by
Promises or Threats, Rewards or Punishments, or by some special Act of
quickening and exciting Grace, some sudden sweet Illapses from above, or some
illuminating Vision and Divine Monition, or whether Men are moved themselves,
by the Vanity of their own Hearts, by the Decency and Comeliness of those
Works, by the Ambition of Fame, and the Reputation of being called Benefactors,
by the delights of Praise whilst Living, and the Desires of Glory when they are
Dead, or from what other Motive certain or unknown, those who receive the
Benefits are most undoubtedly obliged to make their due Acknowledgments to God,
by their Returns of Praise and Thanksgiving. For let the Cause and Motives, and
the Instruments be what they will, yet the kind Fruits and good Effects will
certainly require, and certainly deserve it at their Hands. The Goods are
equally the Gifts of God, and the Dispensers of them equally his Stewards (with
respect to the Receivers) as if they had had immediate charge there to bestow
them. And God must not lose his Praise, though the Givers do; tho they too
should be Loosers only in the day of Recompense. We must not do as some Men
do, who see no farther than the Hand that reaches, and only mind the next
immediate Cause that ministers to their Relief, like some (but few) absurd
Idolaters of old, that Deified the visible and flowing Streams, but never
thought upon the hidden Springs from whence they came; they entertain with joy
and thankfulness to Men, the Pleasures and the Benefits that they receive, but
never think of looking up to God, the Fountain and Original of all their
Happiness. But 'twas not so with those of whom St. Paul treats, they made the
kind Benevolence of their Benefactors an occasion of Praising God, and
Honoring his most Holy Name, and by seeing and by feeling Men's good Works,
they learnt (as all of us should do) to glorify their Father in Heaven.

Thirdly and lastly, They were grateful to their Benefactors by praying to God
for them. It cannot fairly be denied, but that there is a strong propension in
us all, to self-sufficiency and independence one upon another. No man can say,
but he had rather want no help, than be obliged to others for it; but since
this cannot be, the next thing we have to do, is to contrive, how to be even
and on the square again with our Obligers, and the nearer we come to it, the
freer we think our selves, and certainly are more contented and at ease: but
since the state of affairs in this life, will not admit of equal gratitude in
kind, or indeed in any tolerable proportion, God in his goodness has prepared
for the poor, the comfort and relief of Prayer, and has annexed such promises
to the due performance of that work, as may quickly equal the most considerable
advantages they can receive from any of their Benefactors; and has made it
their Religious duty as well as their Natural desite, to pay their debts and
obligations, and has commanded them to solicit him by earnest Prayers and by
incessant Cries to shower down favors on their Benefactors heads; and as there
is an unaccountable venom in their bitter cries and curses, so have their
Prayers a marvellously penetrating power and force. And of this the World has
been in every age, so well assured, that there have not wanted men of all
conditions and degrees, Sons of Peace, and Conquering Heroes, high and mighty
Princes, Clergy, Laity, learned and ignorant, that have exchanged their Gold
and Silver, Lands, Jewels, rich Donations, ample Settlements, stately
Structures, Colleges and Hospitals, for the bare purchase of these Prayers, and
thought it no ill bargain: That have looked upon their following Victories and
Triumphs, the prosperous and successful Issues of their undertakings, as so
many returns and answers of these Prayers, so many Blessings forced from
Heaven, by the sweet violence of their importunate addresses to the throne of
grace. So that praying for Benefactors has not been more esteemed a duty on
the Receivers side, than it has proved a motive and encouragement to Giving.
And it may be it is better to stop here, than proceed to tell the
extravagancies to which the excessive confidence that men reposed in these kind
of Prayers and Services, transported many a good, but indiscreetly zealous
Soul. And since there is now no danger from the examples, let us rather choose
to cover, than excuse or condemn, the faults (shall I say) or rather the
mistakes of our Forefathers.

And now, having done what right I could be well allowed to do the Text, I am
come in the second place to apply what I can to our present purpose.

And first, if St. Paul so earnestly exhorts to, and commends a Piece of
private, casual, temporary, transient Charity; how much is due, what might be
said of such a public, so deliberately designed, and such a Lasting one (an
Everlasting one I hope) as I stand here the Grateful Subject of? A private Man
may cast his Bread upon the Waters in hopes to find it after many days, and
give a Portion to seven and also to eight, because he knows not what Evil
shall be upon the Earth. And if notwithstanding this Design, and these
self-interested Principles, the Work is excellent and acceptable both to God
and Man; it must needs be infinitely more so, when a Prince becomes the Donor,
under whose Consideration, none of those Hopes or Fears can reasonably be
thought to fall. And if the Relieving private and some few Persons, want not
its Praise and Glory, they must both of them rise as the Merit does, where the
Public is obliged, and all may put in equal Claim and Title to the
Benefaction, that will be content with his way of Education. The Story is well
known to Us be sure, but he that would record the Virtuous Qualities and Fair
Endowments of our Glorious Founder, to those that are without, or to Posterity,
could not by any means forget that most Remarkable and Noble Instance of his
large and comprehensive Soul, in generously Rejecting one of our first
Governors, for his too partial Fondness to his Native Country, and
endeavoring to appropriate all the Royal Bounty to it only; considering with
Himself, that though a Private Man might do the same with Reason enough and
Justice too, yet that a Prince should both in this and every thing besides,
approve Himself a Father of the Public.

Secondly, A formed premeditated and deliberate work of Charity has certainly
the advantage of a casual accidental One; this may be wrested only by the
importunity of some that want, compliance with the custom of the place, forced
by the example of the company, and shame of being singular, or expressed from men
by the lamentable moans and presence of some piteous object: and men are often
seen upon removal of those objects, and the going down of those mechanic
springs of tenderness to harden and return again to their ill-natured tempers,
and frequently repent them of the good they did, wishing themselves again
possessors of their riches. But he that acts deliberately, that forms his
designs beforehand, without any present artificial motives, and certainly
intends them for a lasting benefit to all posterity, must be presumed in reason
and in justice to build upon the best and surest grounds, to proceed upon the
noblest and most perfect Principles. It cannot indeed be said, that this
Foundation was the Design of many Years before, for the King Himself was then
but Twenty three at the most, an Age most commonly of little Thinking with
Great Men, or at best, of little else, than how to pass away that Spring of
Life in Gaiety and Pleasure. But yet it was his Earliest Undertaking and
Design, and had for some considerable time been the whole Employment of his
Thoughts, and his Heart was so intent upon the Matter, that he had little Rest,
till he had brought it to a hopeful Prospect, and to some Degrees of its
Perfection. It was no sudden accidental Thing that moved HIm; it was not the
Effect of his Relenting Thoughts, after the shedding some Innocent Blood, by
the Rage of his own Hands, or by the hasty Execution of some furious Order; for
he was Meek and Merciful, Sparing of Blood, and tender to his Ruin: of such a
Gentle and Forgiving Disposition, that when a rude and impious Soldier struck
him knowingly in prison, He afterward upon the Throne, rebuked him only with a
piece of Scripture, told him, he should not strike the Lords Anointed. Nor was
it an Effect of his Repentance upon the Cooling of his Youthful Blood, nor of
the Injunction of his Confessor, for some Extravagances common to that Age. For
what was said of virtuous Gratian, may be said of Him with equal Truth, not
Vesta's Altar, Pontifex his Bed, nor Flamen's Pillow was more pure and holy
than his Chamber. No Honorable Wife, no Noble Virgin, Private Maid, or
Consecrated Spouse of Christ called at his Hands for Satisfaction to their
injured Honor. He was of such white Innocence, and such unsullied Sanctity in
that behalf, that He could not bear those Liberties and Freedoms, that since
make up the very Innocence and Modesty of Courts.

This Virtue was in Truth so much his own, and so peculiarly engrossed up by
Him, that He seems to have carried her to Heaven along with Him; and not to
have left Succeeding Kings the very Virtue of Hypocrisy, no not so much as the
Grace to dissemble any kind of liking to that Purity. Nor was it an Atonement
for some loud Oppression, Violence, Injustice, or some Sacrilege. It is (said
One of old) the last Defense of Wicked Kings to take away from Some, to give to
Others, and deprecate the Envy and the Odium of their present Rapines by some
large Works of Bounty to Posterity. But 'twas not so with Him; for tho his
Reign were long and troublesome, and its Years might have been named and
numbered from some remarkable Calamity befalling His Person or His Government,
His Affairs perpetually embroiled by the prevailing Faction of his powerful
Rival and Competitor for Sovereignty, and by the Passions of his own Imperious
and Intriguing Queen, by the Rude works of War abroad, and by the Miseries of a
worse at Home, and consequently a great deal of Injustice must be done, yet no
Man ever had the hardiness to charge the King with any Evil; and that not for
Good manners or Respect, but for the Truth and Justice sake. And it is so little
likely He would cement our Buildings with the Blood or Tears of the Oppressed,
that when He was in want of Money to expedite his Intentions, and was shown the
way, by Seizing to that use the Estates of some that had forfeited them by
Treason, He generously rejected their Advice, and could not bear the Thoughts,
that any One in after Times should curse our Walls, and call with bitterness
and anguish of their Souls for their Forefathers Patrimony.

It is not without Design (I own) that I have chosen to recommend Our Founder
and Foundation from these Topics. For they who are conversant in the Histories
both of our own, and other Nations (and I am sensible where I am) know very
well, that Blood, and Lust, and Violence, have laid the Bottoms of more Abbeys,
Monasteries, Nunneries, more Chantries, Priories, more Hospitals and other
Charitable Houses, than any other three much better Principles, And tho the
good Effects may have atton'd for their bad Causes, the goodly Children
answered for the ungracious Parents; yet no one (sure) can be so partial to the
Fruits, as not to wish they had sprung from a more Creditable Stock. And I
cannot but think We have some Advantage in having so Merciful, so Chaste and
Righteous a King our Founder, and moved by no other Principles than those of
Honoring God, and Benefiting Mankind.

Thirdly, The Excellence and Merit of the Bounty we are Sharers of, rise yet
much higher, than that commended by St. Paul, by its Advantage of Duration and
Continuance. That was a temporary transient Act, but This has all the Eternity
that human Things admit of. That called for new Supplies within a while, This
only wants, that Men would have the Fear of God before their Eyes, and would
withhold their hands from Sacrilege and Robbery. Farther, That but supplied the
bare Necessities, This both the Ease and the Conveniences of Life. That made
Life tolerable, This might make it eligible; it were not for the Honor of
these kind of Works to say they went much farther: to say they furnished us
with a luxurious Table, an overflowing Bowl, or ministered to our Excess in any
kind. It Is enough that they indulge to somewhat more than is required by
parsimonious uncorrupted Nature, by sober well considering Reason, and by the
Austerities of Christian Discipline.

The last and greatest Advantage, that arises to Us from this sort of Bounty,
is, that it supplies the Necessities of the Mind and Soul, it gives us
opportunities of Improving the powers and faculties of the One, and consulting
the true and everlasting Interest of the Other. We are here at perfect Ease and
Liberty, free from all other Cares and Troubles than what we seek, or draw
upon, or plunge into, our Selves: entirely vacant to the pursuits of Wisdom,
and the Practice of Religion: have all the Helps, and all the Encouragements
that We can want or wish for. Here We consult with dead Authorities, and living
ones; may understand the rules of Wisdom by the Examples, and learn the
Precepts from the apparent Practice of every Grace and Virtue. Here We have
Opportunities of Frequent Sacraments, and more than Daily Prayers; a kind of
Force and most agreeable Necessity of being Good, or of appearing so, or being
singular in Evil, of proof against the Injunctions of our Governors, the force
of Custom, and the influence of good Examples, and consequently Sin without
Excuse. In a Word, if we would measure our Felicities by the Judgment and
Opinion of the World without, by our own Longings and Desires after this state
of Life, before we have attained it, or by the Torments and Vexations that
attend the Remembrance of having left a while, or lost, or ill improved it, we
must conclude that we have Opportunities of being Learned, Honest, Sober, Good
and Happy Persons; and that it is in our power, by cooperating with the good
Grace of God, to fulfill the Words of the Text in their most Literal sense, and
show that the Administration of this Service supplies the Necessities of the
Saints, such as are truly so.

It remains in the second place, that it be abundant also in many Thanksgivings
unto God, and that in the former Method. First, by Ordering matters so, that
the Distributions of our Benefactors may be an Occasion of glorifying God and
our Religion. Secondly, that We thank God for our Benefactors, and Thirdly and
lastly, that We pray for them.

First, We must order matters so, that by the Distributions of our Founders,
the Name of God and Christ be glorified. We live not indeed amidst the Jews or
Gentiles now, and consequently cannot either profit them by our Good, or
scandalize them by our Bad examples, or glorify God by their Conversion. But
it may be we live amidst as Sullen and Perverse, and as Ill-natured a
Generation, as either of the former. For notwithstanding what I said of the
Judgment and Opinion of the World in general about our Happiness, yet there
want not Some, that are weak and apt to be offended at, Others rejoicing in,
our Failings, and watching curiously for our Miscarriages; some causelessly
complaining of our Way of Education, some of our want of Zeal and True
Devotion, (one may guess what they mean;) some of our sheltering Ignorance and
harboring Idleness, some of our Uselessness and Insignificancy to the
Commonwealth; most of them meaning all the while we are too Rich and Happy, and
calling for a Reformation to the Pristine Purity, because they think 'twill
bring the Pristine Poverty along with it. So that we have need to walk with all
the Care and Circumspection in the World; redeeming the Time (for indeed the
Days are evil) losing no Opportunities, but improving our Talents to all
Advantages on all Occasions; both fearing God, and regarding Man, approving our
Selves to our Selves, and providing things Honest in the sight of Others.
Letting our Light shine before Men, adorning our Profession, and Living up to
the Rules of our Institution; and by these Means, when Men shall see us thus
Industrious in our Way, thus happily employed in Praising and in Practicing the
Rules of Wisdom, Virtue and Religion our Selves, in countenancing and teaching
Others, in cultivating, watering and improving all those Generous and Noble
Plants they send us hither, and returning them Fair and Flourishing in all that
is Good and Excellent, when they shall find the benefit and comfort of those
sweet Living Streams that overflow from this Immortal Spring, they will be
tempted sure to change their Minds, discharge their Hearts of their Malignity,
glorify God and Christ, and bless the Bounty and the Hand that ministered to so
much Good.

Secondly, We must be Thankful to God for our Benefactors. For tho the
glorifying God, both in our Bodies and Spirits which are Gods, and reflecting
Honor on his Holy Name, by a Religious Sober Usage of their Benefits, be both
the Best and Truest way of Thanking him; yet it is not of it self sufficient, We
must express our Gratitude in ways befitting reasonable and honorable
Creatures, agreeable to God and useful to the World; such as Rejoicing,
Praising and Thanksgiving, such as may also edify the Hearers and the Standers
by, and may excite them to the Imitation of those Virtues and Excellencies they
hear and see extolled in Others. And tho I did, in reckoning up the Benefits we
receive, lay down so many Grounds of our Thanksgiving, and have already
mentioned some peculiar Virtues of our Royal Patron, yet I should scarce acquit
my self of what I owe to my Society, unless I offer in its Name, peculiar
Thanks and Praise, Honor and Glory to the Eternal Inexhausted Spring of
Bounty, for all the Advantages we in particular receive: and sure I should but
ill become This Place, answer but ill the Purpose of this Day, if I should
suffer Works of such Magnificence to lie in common Heaps of Charity, and be
content with General Commendations, passing the Good King Henry over together
with the Crowd and Multitude of Founders. His Honors should no more be common,
undistinguished ones, than were his Merits; his Praises should at least equal
his Private Virtues, if they may not rise up to his Royal State and his
Magnificence. And tho each of them singly were a Task, and when conspired and
met in one, might rather cause one to despair of being Just, than fear the
falling into servile Adulation or Extravagance; yet not to pay down something
were intolerable, and to imitate the Iniquity of bad Debtors that choose to be
unjust to all their Creditors, for fear of being so to some. And as for Fame, I
count a Parsimony of it here were next to Sin; it can be never better spent, it
never can be better lost, and no Good Man but will say as Mamertinus did to
Julian -- Mallem eloquentiae Laudem, quam Pietatem officiumque meum desiderari.

In compliance therefore with the Text, I thank the Immortal God for that
Munificence, by which Two Royal Great Societies were Founded and Endowed: which
notwithstanding all the Depredations they have undergone, do yet subsist in
Pair and Honorable manner, and are, if not the Envy, yet at least Part of the
Praise and Glory of their Neighbors; for making a King, a Young and Mighty
King, the Instrument of so much Good; for Inspiring into his Soul such
Christian and such Generous Purposes; instead of all those vain, ambitious
towering Imaginations, those wicked, wanton and luxurious Thoughts, that fill
the Heads and Hearts of Common Princes; for giving us a Founder, whose Bounty
makes Us not more happy Men, than his Example would, if followed, happy
Christians: for the Advantage of all those excellent Graces, and illustrious
Virtues that adorned his Life, and shone so eminently in Him: for his early
Zeal and Piety, his ardent and unparalled Devotion toward God: for his
innocent and uncorrupted Youth; for his Sanctity, Sobriety, and Temperance in
every kind; for his great Love to Learning, and greater yet to good Morality,
and true Religion: for the firm and steady Virtues of his Manhood: for his Care
of all his Life; and that incredible Watchfulness over all his Thoughts, and
Words and Works; insomuch that in Twelve Years time, his Confessor found no
occasion to enjoin Him any Sort of Penance: For his ready Resignation to the
Will of God in all Conditions; for his admirable Patience under all the Sorrows
and Distresses, the Dangers and the Difficulties, the Exiles, and
Imprisonments, with which his Life was exercised for One and Fifty years: and
lastly for his Holy End and Sufferings, being found at his Devotions, R. 3d.
by that Inhumane Prince that stabbed him to the Heart, and lost expiring out
his Soul amidst his Prayers.

These are the Virtues I can thank God for, without a Blush or secret Check,
for fluttering or enlarging. Rare, and unseen in Kings, and read by private Men
with wonder and confusion: so that I doubt if most of us were left to judge of
them by the faint Pursuits and feeble Imitations we have made, there would be
great temptations to conclude against their Truth and Possibility. These are
the Virtues, better far befit the Fame and Memory of Christian Kings, than
those of Glorious Heroes, and Triumphant Conquerors, Enlargers of their
Empires, and Terrors of their Generations. For the true English of those
Pompous Titles is, that they have been the Plagues of the Earth, and mighty
Murderers of Mankind, that they have made Millions of wretched Widows, Orphans
and Relations; have turned fair Kingdoms into fields of Blood and Horror, and
overrun the World with barbarous Wast and Desolation. And tho these Bears and
Tigers, Wolves and Foxes, are in some manner Necessary and Useful in the
World, and make a glorious Bustle whilst they live, and we are pleased with the
Relations of their Acts when dead; (better when dead:) Yet no Man in his wits,
that can consider, and might choose his State himself, but would prefer the
Palms of innocent and suffering Kings, to all the Laurels and ensanguin'd
Wreaths of those Renowned Nimrods. These are the Virtues we can thank God for,
because they are so useful, and so edifying to the World; so safe to recommend
to all Mankind, but especially so proper for our private Imitation; so suited
to our way of Living, that one would think the Godly King had lived on purpose
for our Use and Service, and that our Statutes had been copied from his
Practice, with some design to shame us into Duty, or make us inexcusable, if we
could otherwise abuse such Bounty, neglect such Virtue, and refuse to write
after so fair and goodly an Original.

And this is all the Incense I will offer to our Glorious Founder. For tho I
should extract the Quintessence of all the flattering Acclamations of the
slavish Senate down from Augustus to Augustulus; the noblest Flights, and most
exalted Strains of the Panegyrists from Pliny to this Day; the Dedications, the
Devices, Mottoes, and Inscriptions of our neighboring Kingdom to their
vainglorious Monarch, or from the servile and degenerate Spirit of Address at
home; and could refine upon them all, and raise Him up a Monument of Praise, as
Fair and Beautiful, and Just withal, as This I praise Him in, yet (...), if
there be any sense or understanding of our Mortal State; if they Above, receive
Accession of Beatitude from any thing we say or do below -- I know his Innocent
and Righteous Soul, will take more joy, be better pleased, if what I have said,
can either move my self, or any here, to the Improvement of one Grace, the
Exercise of one Virtue, or to the Amendment of one evil Practice.

Lastly, We must pray to God for our Benefactors. I know very well whither the
Application of this Part of the Text, would have naturally led me, if I had
lived, when this great Anniversary was first designed, or a hundred Years after
it. It was their way to share the time allotted to these Exercises, betwixt the
venting trifling and insipid Praises of their Subjects; and they were forced
most commonly, for want of Truth, to feign their Virtues first, like those of
Heroes in Romances, and then praise them: and betwixt the offering Prayers for
rest and quiet of the Souls of the Departed, and other such Expressions, as
ignorant good Nature, vexed and tormented with uncertainties, and hopes and
fears, and tender scruples, first suggested, and afterward improved to
dangerous and dreadful Superstition: And the Choice of this most Solemn
Dedication Day, was to have directed me, to whom in Heaven I was to have made
my most particular Address. But God be thanked, that Task is spared, those Days
are gone, and now past prospect of Return; the Text means no such thing as
Praying for the Dead. The Good King Henry is, if any one, at Rest, and wants no
Prayers. The ever Glorious, ever Blessed Virgin, wants nor requires no Service
of that nature at our Hands. It Is God alone that asks, and that deserves that
Noble Sacrifice, and to Him only let us offer it, as is most due, with all
humility of Soul; and beg of Him, that We, according to the Example of this
Righteous Prince, may pass our Lives here in his Faith and Fear, and may with
Him and all Good Souls, be made Partakers of a Glorious Resurrection in the
Life to come, through the Merits and Intercession of our adored Redeemer Jesus
Christ, To whom with the Holy Ghost be ascribed all Honor, Praise, and Glory,
now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

