Mr. FLEETWOOD's SERMON BEFORE THE LORD MAYOR, etc. DECEMBER xi. 1692.

Fleet Mayor.
Martis xiijo Die Decemb' 1692. Annoque Regis and Reginae, Will. and Mariae,
Angl. etc. Quarto.
THIS Court does desire Mr. Fleetwood to Print his SERMON, Preached at the
Guild Hall Chapel, on Sunday last, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this
City.

GOODFELLOW.

A SERMON PREACHED at GUILD HALL Chapel, DECEMBER the xi. 1692. BEFORE THE
RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAYOR, AND Court of Aldermen.

By W. FLEETWOOD, Chaplain in Ordinary to their MAJESTY'S.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Newborough, at the Golden Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1693.

ECCLES. vi. 11, 12. Seeing there be many things that increase Vanity, what is
Man the better?

For who knows what is good for Man in this Life, all the Days of his vain
Life which he spends as a Shadow? for who can tell a Man what shall be after
him, under the Sun?


THE great End and Design of King Solomon in this Book, is, to show wherein
consists the true and lasting Happiness of Mankind; which he in short comprizes
in the Fearing God and Keeping his Commandments. But knowing the World was old,
and had been long in full Possession of another sort of Notions and Conceits of
Happiness than what he came to teach, he found it necessary, first to undeceive
it of its Errors, correct its wide Mistakes, and root up its ill founded
Prejudices, and Prepossessions in this Matter. And to this end, the Preacher
(as he calls himself) well knowing 'twas as hard a Task to unlearn an old
Mistake, as to take up a Lesson of new Truth, spends half his Sermon, in
discovering to the World the Emptiness and Vanity of those four great Ends in
which the Generality of Mankind had concurred to place their chief Felicity,
namely in Wisdom, Pleasures, Honors, or in Riches; on each of which he argues
from particular Mischiefs and Dissatisfactions, and irresistibly concludes,
That each of them was Vanity and Vexation of Spirit.

He was the fittest Man to pass this decretory Sentence and decisive Judgment,
that ever yet was born into this World, of humane Parents. For though there have
been Princes of as dissolute a Soul, and as unbounded Luxury as Solomon;
although there have been Princes that have raised their Slaves and Bondmen to
Dignities and Wealth, that far surpassed the Glory and the Riches of the Kings
of Israel and of Judab both together; yet none of them were ever fitted equally
with Solomon, to give a true Account and Character of either Pleasure, Wealth
or Honors, because they wanted Wisdom with the rest, and consequently neither
understood the Use and Worth, nor yet the Vanity and Emptiness of those
Enjoyments. When we see a Man overrun with Pleasures, or behave himself with
Insolence in Honor, or employ his Wealth to evil Purposes, we presently
conclude the Fault is in his Judgment; and, That the things themselves, and in
their own Natures, are such as Men of Wisdom and Understanding, may both place
and find therein abundance of true and solid Happiness. But Solomon's
Experience and the Sentence that he passes on them, is sufficient (one would
think) to silence all Suggestions of that Nature. He was the richest and most
glorious King that ever ruled in Israel, and made his Wealth and Power
subservient to his Pleasures. And to all this the most consummate Knowledge
that a humane Heart and Head is capable of bearing, was bestowed upon him;
bestowed upon him at the first, and in an Instant too; not acquired by Art and
Industry, nor labored out by long Experience; which kind of Wisdom is commonly
bought with a great deal of time, and a great many Miscarriages and sad
Mistakes. And of a King wise as the Oracles of God, and wise before he entered
on his Wealth and Power, and Pleasures (which never Man besides him was,) if he
pronounce this Judgment, both from the perfect Knowledge and the full Enjoyment
of them all, That they are Vanity and Vexation of Spirit, there is enough,
without recurring to the Infallibility of Scriptures, to be certain of the
Conclusion; for what he says elsewhere, is very applicable here; What can the
Man do that comes after the King, but that which has been already done? The
King has tried and done all, and that with greater Assistances and more
Advantages, than any Man besides has done; and yet declares, That all is
Vanity and Vexation of Spirit; and what can any Man do after him, but try the
same, and make the same Conclusion too, if he be wise; or rather make the same
Conclusion, without the Trial, and be content to be wise at Solomon's Expense.

The Text is the Sum and Conclusion of all Vanities, the Epilogue of all these
false Felicities. Seeing there be many things that increase Vanity, what is Man
the better?

It may be some One might object, What though a Man do not find his Account in
Wisdom, it may be, the pursuits of it are painful without Benefit, exceeding
hard to get at all, and yet of very little use when gotten; and it may be that
Conclusion is very true, That in much Wisdom is much Grief, and he that
increases Knowledge increases Sorrow. Yet there are other things in which a
Man may seek and find his Happiness in this Life, such as it may be, Pleasure,
Honors or Possessions, and that if One should fail a Man, Another may be sure
to make him good amends, for his Mistakes in Judgment, or his Labor lost in
Practice. Solomon therefore (aware of this besure) concludes them all, upon
Experiment, under the same condemning Sentence, tells his Hearers, That certain
Happiness was not to be found in any thing of this Life: That it was never the
better for Men, that there were many things and different Objects in this World
to place their Happiness upon, since all those many things and different
Objects carried their many and their differing Vanities along with them; and
multiplied Vexations to their Pursuers and Possessours. What is it better for a
Man to have more Occasions to employ his Care and Industry upon, since he
thereby has but the more Defeats? What is it better for a Man to have Diversity
of Objects to fix his Hopes upon, and raise him more and greater Expectations,
since he thereby has only more and greater Disappointments?

This Verse is capable of, and has had other Meanings put upon it; but this
seems both the best and properest, and connects it with what went before and
what follows -- For, who knows what is good for Man in this Life. Though
there be many things, never so many things (which yet may be ranked under those
four Heads) yet what is Man the better as to the attaining true Felicity in
them, since they are all of them vain, and have no true Felicity belonging to
them? but if they had, Man were as far from getting it as ever, since he is
ignorant wherein it does consist, and what it is, would make him happy in this
Life. Who knows what is good for Man in this Life? The most exalted
Understanding in the World, the clearest Foresight and the strongest Reason,
with the most mature Judgment is commonly as much mistaken in its Choice of
what is good for Man in this Life, as he that commits it to the chance of a
pair of Dice, or the Arbitration of some thoughtless Child: And that, because
of the Uncertainty of future Events which humane Wisdom cannot possibly
foresee, and the Instability of things present, which humane Power cannot
possibly fix and fasten. And since it is not worth the Name of Happiness, that
is exposed to so much Chance, and of such short and such uncertain Duration, it
is impossible for Man to know and choose what is good for him in this Life, and
where to find his true Happiness; For who can tell a Man what shall be after
him? Who is there knows, what time to come will bring forth; whether to
Morrow's Event will not spoil to Day's Happiness and quite unravel the best
knit Plots, and frustrate the most probable Designs that can be?

The Words in general thus explained, will afford us three Propositions to
consider,

I. That though there are many things, and great Diversity of Objects for Men
to busy themselves about, and seek their Happiness and Satisfactions in; yet
it is never the better for them, because they all increase Vanity, they are all
of them vain, and it is in vain to think of finding our true Happiness in any,
or in all of them.

II. That though these several things would really much conduce to the bettering
Men's Conditions, and procuring to them Happiness, yet it were never the better
for them, they would be never the nearer Happiness, because no Man knows what
is truly good for him in this Life, and most convenient to the attaining of
that End.

III. That though a Man should be so fortunate, as to light upon what was good
for him at present, yet he would have no great reason to exult, because his
Good may be short-lived, and change its nature in a little time; For who can
tell what shall be after him? Of these in their Order. And First, That the
Diversity and Multitude of Objects are all of them vain, they all increase
Vanity. And this cannot better be demonstrated, than by considering in short
the Vanity of those four Heads of Wisdom, Pleasure, Riches and Honors; to
which the World in general is devoted, in which they think to find their
Happiness, and to which all other things are easily reduced. And,

I. Of Wisdom, I have gotten (says Solomon, C. I. V. 16.) more Wisdom than all
they who have been before me in Jerusalem; yea, my heart had greater Experience
of Wisdom and Knowledge; but, in the very next Verse he says -- I perceived
that this also was Vexation of Spirit; for in much Wisdom is much Grief, and he
that increases Knowledge increases Sorrow. Not to speak much of the
Difficulties of acquiring Wisdom here, and getting but a tolerable Share of
Knowledge; how many Years are spent in providing the Memory with Words and
Images; how many in applying Words to things; how many more in fitting them to
understand Coherences, and making them attend to Consequences and Connections?
and when the Mind is thus prepared with necessary previous Elements, what work
is there, to dispose it to see the Convenience and Necessity of its pursuing
Wisdom? how much of Life is over-slipt, before it thinks there is any need of
farther Understanding, and before it can be brought to set about that Business
in good earnest? and when it is convinced and resolute, what Pains, what
Trouble and Perplexities are there in laying down one single Prejudice and
Prepossession? what Labyrinths and Intricacies do we wander in, when we would
solve some new or old Effects of Nature? how deep and dark are her Recesses?
how hidden and obscure are all her Causes and her Operations? how subtle and
entangling are the Nets of Error? how hard it is to separate it from Truth; and
how involved is Truth it self in Controversies and Disputes? what a World of
staggering Probabilities on both sides? and if a Man be settled with some fair
Appearances, and specious Amusements to Day, he is perhaps awakened by some
sharper and severer Truths to Morrow, and the next Day's Thoughts put him again
into a State of new Distraction and Irresolution. To name no more, How hard is
it to fix on any point, and to pursue it closely to the end? what infinite
Labors and almost insuperable Difficulties, does our inquisitive and curious
Itch of new Varieties put us upon; so that we pass our Lives away in our
Diversions and Excursions after collateral things, and lose the very Sight and
Scent of our main Purpose and Design? not to dwell, I say, long on these and on
a Thousand, and Ten Thousand other Difficulties that attend the Acquisition of
Wisdom, and the getting a little more than ordinary Understanding. Not to
enlarge too far upon the Troubles of possessing Wisdom; its most insatiable and
voracious Appetite; its never being filled with any Addition to it. Thirst
after Knowledge is like that of Riches, and increases with it. It is, (as one
has well expressed it) like Drink to a Man in a Fever, which inflames the
Appetite to a more impetuous craving; which is a very painful and uneasy State,
and shows the Vanity and unsatisfying Emptiness of Knowledge, and brings
Abundance of Vexation with it. Not to insist on the rest of the Disquiets that
attend it. The unreasonable Fears it infuses into the Soul, by scaring it with
fantastic and imaginary Dangers, which may come to pass; and perhaps would, if
this World were governed according to the Rules of humane Wisdom, and an
uniterrupted Train of reasonable Causes. The vast Desires it fills us with, as
well from the Consideration of the Capacity and Comprehensiveness of the Soul,
as from the good Opinion it cherishes in Men of their Abilities: The Jealousies
it subjects Men to, from the same Reason, of making them self-conceited, and
imagining sufficient Honors and Respects are not paid them; with other Doubts,
Impatiencies, and restless Emulations, which are, if not the necessary, yet the
usual Fruits of Wisdom in Possession: Besides the souring and corrupting all
that Gayety of Heart, and cheerful Temper Men would otherwise be of; there
being nothing more observed to make Men peevish, fretful and morose, impatient
of Opposition, and imperious in Conversation, than a retired and studious Life,
and a close, severe way of Thinking, and Examining Matters.

Not to insist, at last, upon the danger there is of parting with this
Knowledge Men have had in their possession, in a very little time, by the
Treachery of an unfaithful Memory, by the Accident of some strong Disease, by
the Dryness and Defects of Old Age; or, lastly, by the Stroke of Death, after
which, there is no more Remembrance of the Wise Man, than of the Fool; seeing
that which now is, in the Days to come shall be forgotten. Not to insist at
large on all these, the painfulness of getting, the trouble of possessing, and
the fear of losing Wisdom, all which do most abundantly argue its Vanity, we
may suppose a Man, inspired as Solomon, with Natural Wisdom, and fully assured
of keeping it till Death; yet it would not much contribute to his being happy
in this Life.

There is no Man, let him place his Happiness in what he will, but either wants
an Accession of some new Thing he desires, or the Removal of some old
Inconvenience, or else a firm Continuance of the State he is already in; all
which depending mostly on the Wills of other Men, or on Accidents in Nature,
which are varying every Day, uncertain, unsecure to be relied upon, not
possible to be foreseen, or, if foreseen, to be prevented. It is not the
Wisdom of this World that can make or keep Men happy.

What if the wisest Man on Earth, wants, to complete his Happiness, a new
Accession of Estate, or an Inheritor to what he has, or Virtue, Wisdom and
Sobriety in that Inheritor; which way shall Wisdom and Understanding make
provision of these things? Since, as Solomon tells us, Prove. 9. 11. That Bread
is not to the Wise, nor yet Riches to Men of Understanding, nor yet Favor to
Men of Skill; but Time and Chance happens to them all. But if he should have
an Estate, and want an Heir, he would, it may be, do like Solomon, Chapter 18. Hate
all his Labor which he had taken under the Sun, because he was to leave it to
a Stranger after him. But if it were a Son, Who knows whether he shall be a
wise Man, or a Fool? Yet he shall have Rule over all my Labor, wherein I have
labored, and shown my self wise under the Sun: And, surely, this is also
Vanity. And let no Man think it is unworthy of a wise Man, or below him, to
desire, or set his Heart upon such things as these; or want them, to complete
his Happiness: For Solomon's Experience, and a very little Insight into Humane
Nature, will assure him it is otherwise.

What if the wisest Man living want to remove some Bar and Hindrance to his
Happiness, (for it is with wise Men sometimes, as it was with proud Haman; who,
though he was the Second Person of an Hundred Twenty Seven Provinces, and
received the Bows and Adorations of all the Princes in the East; yet was not
quiet for the Stiffness of Mordecai, one inconsiderable Jew,) they want some
little matter or other in their way to be removed, that troubles all their
Peace and Quiet: And their Wisdom commonly is as little able to help them out,
as Folly it self would be; whether the Bar be put by natural Accidents, or by
the Obstinacy and Opposition of some Reasonable Agents.

For the first, Of Accidents: It Is acknowledged, that no Wisdom is a Match for
Chance: But for the latter, Opposition of Men; one might think that Wisdom
might deal well enough with that; but the contrary is commonly seen: For, What
if a Man know both the Tempers, and the several Interests of Men, and
understand the whole Art of Business, and the Management of practical Affairs,
since it happens very frequently, that the Passions and Inclinations of Men do
apparently prevail against their true Interest; so that, to deal with them in
the way of Reason, is, to lose ones Labor on one hand; and sometimes Interest
prevails against the strongest Inclinations, and the Bent of all their
Passions: So that to deal with them in the way of Nature, is to lose ones
Labor on the other side: And sometimes some unreasonable Pet, some trifling
Jealousy, and some ill-grounded Error, prevails against Men's Interest and
Inclinations, and frequently their Judgments too. So that if a Man's Happiness
depend upon his being able to deal with others, (as it often does,) it is, at
least, an even, Lay, that the superior Wisdom shall not be successful: And if
he chance to light upon one that is as wise as himself, there is some Reason
seen why he does not gain his Point, but no great Comfort in the Consideration.

But if, in the Third Place, a Man's Happiness require a Continuance in the
State he is already in, it is not all the Wisdom of the World that can secure
it to him. What Wisdom is it that secures Men from setting their Affections on
the perishing Things of this Life? Where is the Philosophy that can hinder a
Man from loving his Estate, or his Friends, immoderately? What Art or
Understanding calls Men off from doting on their Children, from liking even
every thing they say or do, from finding Wit in all their Words, and Grace and
Comeliness in every Action? So that, when Death deprives them of their Friends,
their Favorites, or their Children, their Sorrows are then multiplied,
according to their foolish Fancies; and they have then a number of most solid,
true, substantial Torments and Regrets, equal to that of their imaginary and
conceited Pleasures; and in this Case, they lose much more than ever they truly
had: For, wretched is the After-Game that wise Men play, as well as Fools, on
these Occasions: And there is no greater Mistake, than to think, that the
Wisdom of this World (of which I have all along been speaking) is a
Preservative against the Mischiefs of unreasonable and unruly Sorrows. For,
Whether it be, that wise Men think they know the value of their Losses better
than the rest; or whether their Senses are refined by Speculation, and they
become thereby more susceptible of these sad Impressions; or from what other
Reason, they are commonly more stricken with those Accidents than other Men,
and more impatient and untoward under them. So that, upon a serious
Recollection, it is an hard thing to find the Advantage of Worldly Wisdom, above
the Plainness and Simplicity of common Men: It contributes as little to Men's
Happiness; it is altogether Vanity and Vexation of Spirit.

And if it be thus with Wisdom, (as might be proved from endless Instances,)
which is, without Contradiction, and without Comparison, infinitely superior to
either Pleasure, Honors, or Riches, there will be less need of enlarging much
on any of them, or proving them improper for the procuring or preserving Men's
Happiness. But because the World is in possession of other Opinions of these
things; and more Men live by Example, than by Rules of Reason; and are more
sensible of Pleasures, and the rest, than capable of being Wise; a Word or two
of each of them.

2dly, Therefore of Pleasures: It is certain, That the Happiness of this Life
is that (and no other than that) which Men esteem their Hapiness; so that Men
are never the more or less happy for placing their Content and Pleasure in
things solid, or light, ridiculous or grave, superficial or substantial;
because it is the Opinion Men have of things, and not the things themselves
that make Men happy. He that is worth 100000 l. yet thinks it is too little for
his Purposes and Ends, is not happier than he that is Master of an 100 l. and
thinks it is enough for him. He that has all the World, besides the particular
thing he wants, is still unhappy, if he place his Happiness in what he wants.
So that it is false and foolish too, to deny the Happiness of this Life, to
consist in Pleasure, if by Pleasure we would only mean a State of being
pleased, a Rest and Acquiescence of the Mind in the Condition Men are in. And
Epicurus, fairly understood, was in the right, before the Oracles of God
declared the contrary; if they too did not rather only change the Particulars,
in which Men ought to seek and Place their Pleasures and their Happiness, and
determined them to things certain, constant, solid, and more durable, than the
Light of natural Reason could discover to them. And therefore, when King
Solomon declaims against Pleasures; and says, they are Vanity and Vexation of
Spirit, he means especially Men's criminal Delights, their wicked and unlawful
Pleasures, and those polluted Joys that ruin both the Soul and Body, and which
by way of Eminency, have gotten the Name of Pleasure fixed peculiar to them. But
when he speaks of the Vanity of other innocent Diversions and Delights, it is
then with Respect to their Shortness and Uncertainty; their Emptiness and
dissatisfying Nature; the disproportionable Returns they make to Men's Desires,
the Pains they are at to compass them, the Disquiets and Impatiencies of
waiting for them, and the speedy Flights they take from them; So that it is hard
to say, or name the Point of Time, in which they exist. And as little can be
said in Behalf of Honors or of Riches. They are indeed, both of them exceeding
useful and exceeding necessary to the World, but they are much more serviceable
to Others than to their own Masters: they are commonly the last People they
make happy, if at all: What serves the Pomp and Honor of a Coronet, the
Veneration of a Mitre, and the Terror of a Judge to them themselves? they are
serviceable to the keeping Dignity and Decency in the Commonwealth, to the
preserving Unity and Order in the Church, and to the Security of Men's Lives
and Families, and Reputations and Estates; but all the Benefit their Masters
find in them, is from the Reflection of those Honors from the meanest and most
miserable People: And if their Servants and Dependants are not happy or
respected, it is manifest they think themselves dishonored and abused; and
consequently their Happiness which is placed in these things, is exceedingly
precarious, and in every Man's Power to interrupt and spoil. And besides, the
Happiness of being Honorable, or very Rich, is much abated by the Restraint
that is laid upon Men of owning or confessing it. For whatever other Men, or
whatever a Man thinks of himself yet it is not come to that pass yet, that Men
dare publicly boast themselves happy for either Honors or Riches. They rather
choose to pass some sober, mortifying Sentence on those States, and deprecate
the Mischiefs that do commonly attend them.

Now though Men understand them pretty well, yet it is some kind of Trouble to
conceal their Happiness, and not to tell, in what their Vanity and Folly do
most abound. Not to enumerate the Dangers and Misfortunes these two States
subject Men to, of being insolent, oppressive, vain, luxurious, thoughtless,
and Abundance of other Mischiefs that conspire against Men's Happiness in these
Conditions; few are the Instances whom Wealth and Honors have made happier
than they were before, and many of those whom those two States have betrayed
and ruined. But,

II. Although these several things would really much conduce to the bettering
Men's Conditions, and procuring to them Happiness, yet Man would be but little
better for them, because no Man knows what is truly good for him in this Life,
and most convenient to the attaining of that End. Though all of them should in
their own Natures, and in the Opinion of the World, be very good, and fitted to
make their Masters happy, yet the Circumstances of Men's Affairs are so
different and intricate, and the Tempers of Men so humoursom and uncertain, and
the Accidents of Fortune so strange and many, that, it may be, that which would
make Ten Thousand People happy shall contribute to one Man's Misery: That which
would make a Man happy this Day, shall to Morrow perhaps undo him. Nay, That in
which Men have been happy many Years, is that which will at last turn to their
greatest Grief and Misery. So short is our Foresight, and so vain and weak all
our Endeavors, either to wish for, to pursue, or to preserve what is truly
good for us in this Life.

What will thou give me, (said Abraham to God,) seeing I am Childless? When God
had hardly made an end of promising to be his Shield, and his exceeding great
Reward: As if it had hardly been in God's Power to make him happy any other
Way, than by giving him an Heir, instead of Eliezer of Damascus. But when the
Day of Trial and Temptation came, and this so longed for Heir was to be
sacrificed and killed by him himself, there is no doubt but the Torment of that
Thought did far exceed all the Delights that he had ever taken in that Son; and
he was so far from thinking a Son would make him happy, that he found it was
the only thing that could reduce him to the extremest Misery a Mortal Man is
capable of.

What could be more honorable for Jephthah, than from a wretched and despised
Outlawry, to be entreated by the Elders of his People to return, and take the
Rule of Israel into his Hands? What Vows and Prayers could seem more proper and
convenient, both for Israel and himself, than Vows and Prayers for victory? Who
is there, that, in those his Circumstances, can (even in Fancy) think that any
thing was half so necessary to complete his Happiness, as Conquest over Ammon?
And who but would have thought that grateful Offer which he made to God, before
his going out to fight, might have been a kind of Tie and Obligation to have
both gotten and secured him Happiness? Yet all was contrary: He had better have
continued a despised Exile, or perished by the Sword of Ammon; for the Sun that
rose upon his Victory, and saw not an happier Man in all the Host of Israel,
nor a more glorious and triumphant Conqueror elsewhere, yet shut not in at
Even, a more deplorable and wretched Creature.

One Man fancies, That if he had but an Estate, he were completely happy; he
would use it with great Temperance himself, and do abundance of Good to others.
He finds himself disposed to do a great many hospitable and generous things;
but wants Supplies agreeing to the Largeness of his Heart: He finds his Bowels
Yearn at Objects of Compassion, and would relieve them if he could: He only
seeks for Riches, to oblige Mankind, and conciliate the Favor of God, and be
entirely happy. But if, by Accident or Industry, he does grow rich, his Heart
and Purposes are commonly changed with his Condition, or his Desires grow even
with his Substance, and he is still as unable to do the good he desired to do,
as before; the Poor are still as poor and empty as they were, though his Bowels
still yearn on, and the Man persuades himself he longs to be doing good, but,
to his great Discomfort, wants Ability. This is the best of the Case, That a
Man with his Riches does no harm although he does no good; but it seldom rests
here, he is either tempted to forget God, and sacrifice to his own Draggs, or
falls by degrees into a State of Luxury and all Excess, and makes the things
that should have been for his Good, an Occasion of his falling; and is to his
cost convinced, That it is better to continue Poor, with good Desires, than Rich
without them; or with them, when they come alone; and that he was not made to
be happy by Riches, but was mistaken in the Means of compassing his End.

Another Man believes a Place of Honor and Authority, would make up all his
Wants, and complete his Happiness, and thinks withal, he should be capacitated
to do a great deal of Service to his Country in it; he should right the
wronged, and relieve the oppressed, and do Justice to the Poor and Needy, with
Abundance of other notable good Turns: But when he is in Honor and Authority,
he grows it may be proud and Insolent, regards not right or wrong so much as
Favor and Convenience, uses his Interest and Power to private Ends and evil
Purposes; and is, instead of being happier in that higher Station, but more
involved in Troubles, and perplexed in Mind: And when he turns him to his
inside, sees he was not made for Honors and great Places, and that his
clambring upwards brought him not to Happiness, but to the Danger of a great
Fall, and an uneasy Seat in the mean while.

Another thinks, his Good might be procured, by Oratory and the Power of
Eloquence, and spends his Lamps and Nights, in reading the Works of the great
Masters of that Faculty, and turning over Cicero and Demosthenes; but had
better spend an Hour or two in reading of their Lives and Ends. To see to what
unworthy Purposes those mighty Parts were often abused, what soul and wicked
Acts, those Streams of Eloquence were to wash away: what Emulations, Strifes,
Contentions and Debates they were perpetually engaged in, and how fatal it was
to both, to speak beyond Comparison.

The best Tongues have the most Causes, but they have commonly the worst too;
and if they get greater Estates, they get the more ill Will and Odium with
them. And it is hardly possible for them to thrive exceedingly, but to the Wrong
of some and the Undoing of others. And who can think of being happy at the
Expense of Truth and Justice, with any Comfort? Besides, That an eloquent
Tongue and fluent is an Allurement to talking much and holding up a
Controversy, which engages Men (in Opposition) to say a great many unkind
Things, and a great many foolish and a great many false, and if true, yet a
great many vain and unnecessary things: It puts Men on the Rack, and often
sharpens the Wit to a degree of Keenness, that ends, without great Care, in
Spitefulness and Ill Nature; and, rather than want an Answer, or the making an
handsome Period up, the Men of Wit and Fluence either choose, or happen, to lose
a fast Friend, to disoblige a great Man, and create a powerful Enmity. It Is
like a sharp and double-edg'd Knife; for one piece of Service it does its
Master, it cuts his Fingers twice: And is so far from being fitted to make Men
happy, that, as hardly One in a Thousand attains to it, so it is hardly fit for
One of an Hundred Thousand.

Another Man has a brave Heart, and strong Sinews, and fancies he is fitted for
the Camp, and is designed for Happiness by Victories and Triumphs: But these
are commonly the Dreams of Men at Ease, and the gay Results of Wine and good
Company. He thinks not on the Toils and Hardships of that Life he meets withal
upon Experience; the Straits of inconvenient Lodging, unwholsom Diet, and
inclement Seasons; the perilous Attempts, the Insolence of Superiors, and
Inferiors Mutinies; the spiteful Emulations, the base and infamous Detractions;
the wicked Notions of Religion, Morals, and true Honor; with the ridiculous
Punctilio's of false: The severe revengeful Prosecutions of their idle
Quarrels, the frequent Perjuries, the raging Blasphemies, the horrible
Enormities, Injustices, Rapes, and Bestial Villainies, that commonly attend
that Way of living. And yet even this, and all the rest of the particular
Conditions I have mentioned; and a great many more I have omitted, are, in the
Opinion of the World, fitted to make Men happy, with the Happiness of this
Life; and most of them, it may be, in their own Natures, would in some wise
conduce to it, if it were not for our Blindness in seeking, our Ignorance in
using, and our Folly in abusing them. But,

III. Though a Man should be so fortunate as to light upon what was good for
him at present, yet he would have no great Reason to exsult, because his Good
may be short-lived, and change its Nature in a little time. For who can tell a
Man what shall be after him?

This Head, does in some Measure fall in with the Other; and therefore, the
less will serve to show its Truth: And there is no Need of proving this by
Arguments or Deductions of Reason; there is only Need that Men should open
their Eyes and Ears, and attend to the Instances that meet them every Day, of
private and of public Persons, Families and Kingdoms, of Friends and Enemies,
of Strangers and Acquaintances; how varying and uncertain all the Conditions of
humane Life are; how little any Man can promise to himself or any else, the
Continuance of the State he is already in; what sudden Turns of Fortune thrust
Men out of their Felicity, which they imagined would have lasted them their
Lives long; how many little unforeseen, unthought of Accidents disturb and
quite unsettle the most fixed and steady Course of Happiness? How one unlucky
lowering Day rises and interrupts the Peace and Joy of our whole Lives, and
makes them set in Sorrow and Despair. Boast not, (says Solomon) of to Morrow,
for thou can not tell what a Day may bring forth, Prove. 27. 1.

Aemilius Paulus was the greatest and the happiest Roman in his time, for many
Years; he had four Sons of great Hopes, and thinking two of them enough to
propagate his Name, he gave the other two to be adopted into the bravest and
the noblest Families of Rome. And having conquered Perseus and his Kingdoms,
(the Foil of four preceding Generals) he brought the King and all his Children
Captives, to grace his Triumph and victorious Entry into Rome. But mark, how
Fate with them, and with us the Providence of God, disposes of Events. The King
designed for Misery, had all his Children then about him, the greatest Comfort
that his bad Estate could then bear, and the triumphant Victor lost his eldest
Son a few Days before his glorious Entry, and his youngest three Days after.
And though all Men thought before, that Perseus was the greatest and the
saddest Instance of the Uncertainty of humane Happiness, yet then the Scene was
changed, and all the Pity fell upon the Old and Miserable Conqueror.

There is no body, scarce, whose Knowledge, or whose Reading does not furnish
him with Instances enough, and too many, of this nature, to confirm him in the
Opinion, That the Happiness of this Life is of a very short and uncertain
Continuance; and that no Man can have Reason to exult, or be secure in his
present State, whilst liable to so many lamentable Accidents, and surrounded
with such Hazards.

Since then (to conclude) all these things are so; since all is Vanity, and
Vexation of Spirit; since there is no true Happiness to be found in any of
those things, in which Men chiefly place it, What must become of us? Are we
brought into this World to be perpetually deluded with the Hopes of being
happy; yet nothing in it for to build those Hopes upon? Must we wander up and
down, like poor bewildred Strangers, in quest of what we are never likely to
obtain? Nature has planted in us all, we find, Hopes and Desires of being
happy, but we are left, it seems, to seek it where we can; and to feel it our,
like hood-winked People, in perpetual Maze and Winding.

And is there then no Answer to these Questions in the Text?

Yes, there is: And be that put these Questions, gives himself a full and
satisfying Answer to them all; but it is so far from my Text, that I must but
just repeat it; for it is the very last Sentence in the Book: Hear the
Conclusion of the whole Matter: Fear God, and keep his Commandments; for God
shall bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret thing whether it be
good, or whether it be evil.

If you desire to know what is good for Man in this Life, I will tell you: Fear
God, and keep his Commandments: That is good for Man in this Life: All the Days
of his vain Life, which he spends as a Shadow. Though there be many things
that increase Vanity, yet there is something he may fasten on, that has no
Vanity, nor carries any manner of Vexation with it; and that is, Fearing God,
and keeping his Commandments.

Time and Chance make mighty Work and Alteration in every other State, but have
no Power to interrupt and spoil the Peace and Happiness of this.

And, as the Ignorance and great Uncertainty of what may happen, argues the
Vanity of all these other States, and is a great Discouragement to the pursuing
them so warmly, and so zealously; (For who can tell a Man what shall be after
him?) so the Certainty of what will follow the Neglect or the Performance of
this our Duty of fearing God, and keeping his Commandments, is as great an
Encouragement on the other hand, to the doing it: And that is, the Certainty of
Judgment; For God shall bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good or evil.

So that now we know what shall be after us. And knowing what is good for Man
in this Life, is also good for him in another, we have our Answer to the
Questions in the Text: And since we are convinced of the Vanity of all things
else, let us, at last, attend to this divine Conclusion of the whole Matter,
and fear God, and keep his Commandments.

FINIS.

