Veneris 6. Novembris, 1691.Ordered,
THAT the Thanks of this House be given to Mr. Fleetwood, for his Sermon
preached before this House Yesterday, and that he be desired to Print the same:
And that Mr. Mountague and Mr. Hobby do acquaint him therewith.

Paul Jodrell, Cler. Dom. Com.

A SERMON Preached before the HONORABLE House of Commons, AT St. MARGARET
WESTMINSTER, on Thursday, the 5th of November, 1691.

BY WILLIAM FLEETWOOD, Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bassett, and Tho. Dring; at the George, and at the
Harrow in Fleetstreet. 1691.

A SERMON UPON
S. John, Chapter xvi. part of the 2d and 3d Verses. Yea, the time comes, that
whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service; and these things
will they do unto you, because they have not known the Father, nor Me.


THIS day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears; For either we are met to no
purpose, or (which is worse) to a very bad one, to mock and play with God; or
we are met to Celebrate with Praise and Thanksgiving the Deliverance of our
Church and Nation, from one of the most Execrable Attempts, that ever was
inspired into the Heart of Man by our great Enemy the Devil, or brought to
light by the good Providence of God; an Attempt of such unusual Cruelty and
Horror, that nothing but the distance of Time, and a cold Indifference for
things past and gone, could let us think thereon without such Indignation and
such Fury, as were not fit for Christian Hearts to harbor; an Attempt, that
nothing but the English Mercy could have forgiven: No Laws, no Nation but our
own, but would have pursued the Authors and Abettors of such Cursed Principles,
with such severe Vengeance, as would have fully and effectually secured
themselves from any Second Fears, or Second Dangers from that side; an Attempt,
of which I shall say but a very poor and low thing, when I shall have said, No
Age, No History, no Country in the World can parallel it. If I would raise
this Attempt as high as Justice will permit me, and aggravate the thing
according to the Truth, I must say, it was such an Attempt, as the Jesuits
themselves are ashamed of, and begin, though somewhat faintly, to extenuate and
deny; and then I neither can, nor need to say more: For if those men, whom God,
for the Sins of Mankind, has permitted to compass the World, to overturn
Kingdoms, to disturb the Peace and Society of Men, to destroy Morality, to
corrupt and stifle Christianity; to settle wickedness by Principles, and
establish Sin by a Law; if such I say, once come to extenuate or deny an
Attempt, inspired by men of their own Order (and one of them at least
Beatified) and to have been acted by their own Disciples, there must needs be
so much Hell and Horror in the composition of the fact, that no good Man can
well express it or conceive it: and yet, to come to my Text, It was done by
men, that thought they thereby did God service.

Our Lord being about to leave this World, and to go unto the Father, thought
good to prepare his Disciples for that sad parting, by telling them beforehand
what he himself must shortly undergo, by the Rage and Fury of the wicked
Priests and Governors, with the Necessity and Benefits of those Sufferings; and
afterward what they themselves must look for, if they would take up his Cross,
and be his Disciples. Remember the word that I have said unto you, the Servant
is not greater than his Lord, if they have persecuted Me, they will also
persecute You: and afterward sums up the whole, in these words, they shall put
you out of the Synagogue, that is, they shall excommunicate you; yea, the time
comes, that whosoever kills you, will think he does God service, (...),
says S. Chrysostom on the place, a mighty religious matter, and a thing that
will please God: An Expiatory Offering as the Original may import, and a
Sacrifice that will atone for Sins: And these things they will do unto you,
because they have not known the Father nor me. So that we see our Savior
assigns the Jewish ignorance of God and of himself, to be the Cause and Reason
of all the Evils and Barbarities himself and his Disciples were to meet withal:
These things will they do unto you, because they know not the Father, nor Me.

To know, or not to know, the Father, and Christ, is taken in a great many
different Senses in the Holy Scriptures, too many, and of too little use, at
present, to recount: Those only that are pertinent to the design in hand, and
our Savior's words, must be such Senses and Acceptations, as would influence
the Jews, to the Cruelties and Persecutions foretold in this place. The Jews
could not be said, not to know God, in such a sense as to deny his Being; for
never People knew him better, never was God so present to a Nation, as to
theirs; The Lord thy God has chosen thee (says Moses in Deuteronomy. 7. 6.) to be a
special people to himself, above all people that are upon the face of the
Earth, there was such frequent and familiar commerce betwixt God and them, by
Voices, Visions, by Angels and inspired Prophets, and by other ways, that
'twould be the improperest way of speaking in the World, to say of the Jews,
they knew not God, with respect to his Essence, or their acknowledging a Deity:
Nor could it be said, with any color of Truth, in our Savior's time, that the
Jews knew not God, in the sense it is often used in Scripture, to reproach the
World with forsaking the only True God, and serving other Gods: for the Jews
were never freer from Idolatry, than in our Savior's days; nay, and had been
for many years before; and that good humor has continued since for almost
Seventeen Hundred Years; and amidst all their great Impieties, their wide and
wonderful Dispersions, and their deplorable Calamities, they have still
retained the Worship of One and the True God, with greater Simplicity, than
abundance of the Christian World for many Ages, to its great shame. Not to know
God, therefore in this place, must in all reason signify, not so to know him,
as to conceive right Notions of him, or form a Judgment, suitable to the
excellent extensive Goodness of the Divine Nature; and not to know the Father,
is, not to attend to, or comprehend sufficiently the Dispensation and Economy
of God the Father, in saving them and all Mankind, by sending his Son Christ
Jesus into the World; and not to know the Son, is, not to receive and believe
on him that was thus sent, for their deliverance. These Heads I shall insist on
in the first place; and in the second, try to show, how such Barbarities and
cruel Usages as are here foretold may proceed from the aforesaid Heads; and
lastly, apply my self to the business of the Day.

First then, the Jews may properly be said, not to know God, as not conceiving
aright of his extensive Goodness toward all the World. They were certainly a
People of the most gross capacity, most sensual apprehension, fleshiest heart,
and slowest understanding in the World; and God in compliance to this Stupid
temper, dealt with them accordingly, wrought Miracles continually amongst them,
and gave them almost every day some sensible token on other of his favorable
presence; and if he slackned but his Arm never so little a while, he was fain
to be at the expense of some new Miracle, or some great Judgment, even to
convince them of his Goodness, or his Power again. The whole 78th Psalm, which
is an Epitome of their History, may confirm the truth of what I have said. Now
God by this material, as it were, and sensible familar way of treating and
conversing with them, came to be thought, in time, their Local God, their
proper and peculiar Deity, and was called and accounted by themselves, as well
as by the Nations round them, the God of the Jews, the God of Abraham, and
Their God, in a hundred places, and Our God, in as many or more, not only in
contradistinction to the Gods of the Heathen; or that he favored them
infinitely above all the Nations of the Earth, besides: For the first was very
reasonable, and the second very true, but by way of exclusion to all the World
besides, and as though he had no care of, or regard to any other part of
Mankind, and only exercised his Vengeance on their Enemies, now and then, as he
or they saw fit. Now this was a Narrow Notion of God's Providence, and far
unworthy the Immense Benignity of the Divine Nature, which loves and governs
all the World, though not, (we think) with equal, yet with great Care and
Tenderness, and Wisdom; proportioning his favors, not to peoples merits, but
their necessities, and to his own metcies. Now tho this Jewish Selfishness and
Humor of appropriating God's Goodness to themselves, may seem of it self to be
of little Consequence or Moment, yet I believe it will appear, that the fruits
of it, were not only the being obstinate and proud themselves, but the
scorning, and the hating all mankind besides: for so light and unballasted is
the mind of man, that even a gust of favor from an Earthly Prince, drives him
away and tosses him he knows not whither, and makes him proud and
insupportable, and sets him on despising, and, it may be, trampling on the
World about him: and though the reason be not the same, yet the effects are
much alike in the case of God's favors: The Insolence of Spiritual pride is
extravagant and insufferable, and an overweening conceit of being extremely
high in God's love and favor, and one of his peculiar Saints and Creatures, is
the most dangerous Rock a Soul can dash against; and has ofttimes proved more
fatal, than some downright Vice, it is the Parent of intolerable Arrogance,
stand by thy self, come not near to me for I am holier than thou, Is. lxv. 5.
It is the Mother of Scorn and ill Nature God I thank thee that I am not as
other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers or even as this publican, Luke
xviii. 11. and the passage from this Spirit of Pride and Contempt, to that of
Hatred and Violence is short and easy, the Line that divides them almost
imperceptible.

Again, God had prohibited their Commerce in a great degree, with any of the
Nations round, which they obeying became, in some time, churlish, illnatured
and untractable, (for nothing polishes and evens so the roughness of Men's
morose Tempers, as Traficking and Conversation) and not attending or observing,
that the reason of Gods prohibition was from the proneness of their Hearts to
Idolatry, and falling so easily into the Worship of the People they Conversed
withal, they thought it was only because those Gentiles were Profane, hated of
God, and an Abomination in his sight, which though it were true of all their
evil Practices, and sinful Customs, yet it was by no means true of their
Persons; but of all things in the World ill Nature is the worst distinguisher,
it will not separate sin from sinners, nor abstract the person from his faults;
God had declared his hatred and abhorrence of a great many particular Crimes,
and is Wise, and Just, and Merciful enough to love and pity an Offender, even
whilst he hates and punishes the Offense: but impotent malicious Man, can do
nothing of all this, yet thinks himself obliged to hate and persecute to death,
those whose Offenses God declares against: but sure the reason is as weak as
the Malice is strong. For what if God should hate a Man, how does it follow I
must hate him too, unless commanded? It is true God is the best example I can
follow, but his Judgments are unfearchable and his ways past finding out, and
he has always Reasons, but yet not always such as may justify my imitation.
But as unreasonable, and undue a Consequence as this appears, yet it is a very
easy and a very frequent slip; and all Men think they have a right, as well as
the Jews, to say with David, Do not I hate them that rise up against thee, yea
I hate them right sore, as though they were mine enemies. Which though it be
reasonable and necessary to apply to the wickedness and evil practices of Men
dishonouring and defaming God and his Worship, yet the Complement would go too
far, from Civility to God, to cruelty and hatred of our Neighbor. Farther, as
God continually was pouring down his Benefits and Favors on the Jews whilst
they continued firm and constant in his Service: so he pursued their light
Apostacies, their Startings and Revolts, with Punishments as close and
constant: and the Nature of Man which is much more Querulous than Grateful,
more sensible of one Evil than of an hundred Benefits, and always prone to
conclude on the worse side, prompted the Jews to look on God, as on an angry
and vindictive being, and one that seemed delighted in Justice, rather than
Forgiving; and seeing he required Obedience with such exactness, and punished
their Offenses with such rigor, they easily imagined they must be as Zealous in
his Service, and as Jealous of his Honor, as possibly they could, and
consequently must revenge all such Affronts and Indignities done to his mighty
Name and holy Majesty, with all severity; and though this may be good to a very
great degree, yet there is danger it may pass into an ill extreme, and
ignorant and impotent Man knows no Mean, but finding that to be in some measure
his Duty, which is partly his natural inclination, he runs with all his might,
and never thinks of stopping, and that is the Reason that a great deal of Zeal
degenerates very easily into Anger and Cruelty; it is only adding Fuel to a
little and a gentle Flame kindled before, such as is Zeal, and twill in time, a
little time, become a spreading and consuming Fire.

I am very sensible that these productions and effects, may seem at first, too
mighty for the causes assigned, but to one that well and thoroughly considers
humane Nature, with all its Folly, Malice and Imperfection, I am afraid they
will appear too adequate and just. A little Spring sends out a mighty Stream,
and a small Seed grows up into a tall and shady Cedar. A mean, and at first,
unheeded Principle, becomes in time the bottom and foundation of a mavelous
Superstructure, and brings forth Fruits and Consequences not easily foreseen at
first, nor easily prevented or avoided afterward. Let any Man but call to
mind, What a little matter it was at first, that biassed him to incline to such
a Cause or Party, and how that inclination, carried him to wishing well, and
that to Affection, and Affection to Siding with it, and that to Zeal, and Zeal
to the promoting and advancing it, and that to opposing all its hindrances, and
Opposition to Vexation, and that to Ill Will, and Ill Will to Mischief, and
that to Hatred, and thence to Violence and Outrage, and Cruelty, and
Persecution. Let a Man, I say, but trace his own Heart at such a rate as this,
and he will find a little inconsiderable Cause, sufficient to produce the most
astonishing Effects. And of all Causes, none so fruitful and productive as
those that border on Religion, and call in God into their Interests and Party:
no mistakes so fatal and so desperate in their Consequences, as those that are
built on misapplied Scripture, false Conceptions of Gods Nature, with unworthy
and dishonorable thoughts of any of his Attributes. For as I intimated before
Man thinks himself naturally obliged (and is undoubtedly so, where he can with
Reason) to imitate and draw as near to his God as possibly he may: and
therefore will, as near as can be, conform his inward and his outward
behavior, to the Notions and Conceptions he has of Gods Nature. Some Barbarous
Gentiles of old, conceived God to be an angry Sanguinary Being, and the
Consequence was, they were inhumane in their Manners, and Worshipped him with
horrid Rites, and humane Sacrifices: and others Gentle and benign, because they
thought their Deity was Merciful and Good. And therefore it is of mighty use and
benefit in all respects, that Men should be taught to conceive nothing of God,
but what is Just and Honorable, Merciful and Good. And he may very properly be
said not to know God, that conceives any hard unworthy thing of him.

Secondly, The Jews are said Not to know the Father, because they did, or
rather would, not know and understand the Dispensation and Economy of God the
Father, designing to save the World by sending his Son Christ Jesus into it,
they were so strongly persuaded that their Law was to last for ever, that they
could not entertain so much as a thought of its Abolishment. The Passover was
to be kept a feast to the Lord throughtout their generations. You shall observe
this thing says Moses, for an Ordinance to thee and to thy Sons for ever.
Exodus xii. 13. 17. and 24. verses, and chap. xix. 9. and so for the offering of
a sweet savor; One Ordinance shall be both for you of the Congregation, and
also for the stranger that so journeth with you, an Ordinance for ever in your
generations. Numb. xv. 15. The same of the heave Offering by an Ordinance for
ever. Numb. xviii. 8. And so for the continuance of the Priesthood in the House
of Levy. The Lord thy God has chosen him out of all thy tribes, to stand to
minister in the name of the Lord, him and his sons for ever. Deuteronomy. xviii. v.
And of the Temple, I have hallowed this house which thou have built, to put my
name there for ever, and mine eyes and my heart shall be there perpetually
says God himself to Solomon. 1 Kings ix. 3. 2 Chronicles. vi. 6, 7. and 16. with
abundance of other places, that they thought promised an eternity to their
Constitution. And being of a gross Understanding, and taking all things
literally, they could never be brought to think of parting with their Legal
Dispensation. Their Fathers had received it from God himself who engraved their
Tables with his own Hands, at first, and afterward had Dictated to Moses, and
delivered his Commands, and Executed his Decrees by the frequent Ministry of
Angels, and this must needs enhance the price and value of the Law. Moreover,
they had before their Eyes so many noble instances, so many great and
extraordinary examples of Patriarchs, and Prophets, Kings and valiant Heroes,
that had been born and bred up in this Way, and pleased God, and were his
Favorites, and the Sons of his Grace, by walking steadily therein, that 'twas
not easy to imagine such a Law could now at last displease him so as to
renounce and to abrogate it: and besides, themselves had sucked its Precepts
with their Mothers Milk, had been initiated into its Rites with pain and blood,
and therefore could not lightly give it over, and the Law and the Prophets were
full of cautions and severe threatenings, against such as should violate it
themselves, or attempt to persuade others, and all this will naturally beget in
Men a very strong tenacity of Opinions, and an obstinate Resolution to mantain
them against all Opposers: And three or four Consequences of rough unruly
Nature will, without great care, and the Grace of God, bring them to a
revengeful and exterminating Temper. Had not our Savior done such mighty Works
amongst them as never had been done by Moses or Elias, or any other of the
Prophets, and such as could be wrought by no mortal Power, but carried with
them evident tokens of an Almighty Hand, and fulfilled their Prophecies so
exactly, the Jews had been not only excuseable, but highly commendable in
rejecting him. But this is not at present so much my business, as it is to
show, that even honest and zealous Men that did not believe the Doctrines of
our Lord, might, as St. Paul himself did, degenerate into Hatred, Cruelty, and
Persecution, both of Him and his Disciples: not to extenuate their Guilt, so
much as to show the Force and Power of Human Nature, biased by such natural
and accidental Prejudices. And as to the Chief Priests and Rulers, to whom our
Lord immediately refers, as to their not knowing the Son, and therefore
persecuting him to death and all his Followers; the Account is this: They were
now in full and peaceable Possession of a Religion made up of glorious
Outsides, and external Shows, pompous Sacrifice, and glittering Ceremonies,
with which the trifling World is ravished and surpised, the Hearts of the
Worshippers exalted with vain Pride, and the Beholders dazzled and amazed. And
here was Jesus, and they knew not who, came to disturb them in their way of
Worship, preaching up grave and serious Matters, talking of wonderful, unheard
of and unpracticed Morals, discoursing of Judgment, Righteousness, of Faith and
Charity, and other weighty Doctrines and Commands, together with an unavoidable
necessity of Repentance from dead Works. And this was a mighty Change and
grievous to Flesh and Blood. To give up Shows and Ceremonies, of which Nature
is very fond, for the Simplicity and Plainness of serving God in Spirit and in
Truth, with which Men are soon tired, to exchange some easy Corporal Gestures,
and Artificial Motions, for the sober Exercises of the Mind by Prayer and
Contemplation, and the painfulness of close Attention: To give up the easy
Commutation and Attonements of Sins and Trespasses, by the Lives and Sacrifice
of brute Beasts, for the bitter Sorrows of Repentance, and the most solid and
expensive Sacrifice of Prayers, and Tears, and Satisfaction, seemed to the
Scribes and Pharisees, and Sadduces and Priests, a very hard Exchange, and an
intolerable Bargain: and therefore it is no wonder that Men so sensually
affected and tied to the things of this World, should oppose themselves with so
much Might and Vigor to the Preachers of such Mortifying Spiritual Doctrines:
And that rather than be disturbed in their Pursuits, than lose what they liked
and loved, and accept of what they could not endure to think on, they should
conspire the death of our Lord the Author, and his Disciples the Promoters of
them. Again, these Priests, these Scribes and Doctors of the Law, had corrupted
the Jewish Religion to a prodigious height: they had darkened all the Prophecies
of the Messiah's coming in such meek and lowly manner as he came: the Sadduces,
a mighty and prevailing Sect, denied the Resurrection of the Dead, the
Existence of Angels and Spirits, and yet were good Jews still, and some of them
came to be High Priests; and all of them by their vain and wicked Traditions,
ungracious Comments, and ungodly Glosses, had had almost killed Morality at the
Root. And our Savior boldly reprehending this ungodly Practice, and laying
open before all the People their enormous Villainies herein, so stirred their
Indignation, that they resolved upon his Death. The Reputation of Sincerity and
Honesty is a tender Point, and like the Eye, will not endure the least touch:
Tell a Man he is Vicious, and he will laugh; say he is a Sot, and Lewd, and an
unkind Relation, and he will forget it quickly; but tell him he is a Villain and a
Knave, a Cheat and Impostor, and you fill his Heart with Rage and Rancour, and
treasure up Wrath against an Opportunity to destroy your self. What? tell the
High Priest, the infallible High Priest, the prophesying High Priest, the
Successor of Aaron and of Moses too at this time, the Man to whom were
committed the Oracles of God, tell him, that in Cathedra, with his Conclave,
nay with his Sanhedrim, that he had grossly erred in interpreting Scriptures, in
darkning Prophecies, in corrupting Morality, and cheating the People, is not to
tempt a Danger at a distance, but boldly enter on Destruction, when you have to
deal with Men that neither will, nor think they can amend. Lastly, These Men
were in present Possession of the highest Honors, and Places, ('it is no doubt)
of interest and advantage. And our Savior's Doctrine seeming to overthrow
their whole Economy, and put an end to all the Ceremonious part of Moses his
Law, and all the Civil Power as much as depended thereon, it is not to be
wondered at if they grew jealous and afraid of the rooting and spreading of
Christ's Doctrine, and took the most effectual Means, in human Policy, to rid
themselves of the threatening Danger, by putting him to death: For as naturally
as Men abhor from shedding of Blood, so, or more naturally do they love their
Honors and their Interest; and if these cannot be secured without that, they
seldom or never stick or startle at it.

And now having shown, as the time would let me, in what senses the Jews might
be said not to have known God, not to have known the Father nor the Son, and
how those kinds of Ignorance came to produce such barbarous Fruits, and bloody
usage of our Savior and his Followers, and done what right I could to the
Text. I am come in the Third and last place to apply it to the Business of this
Day. But oh! how far from the design of Christ in speaking these Words, from
the Intention of the blessed Spirit dictating, and from the charitable Saints
that left them to us in his Gospel. Who in the World that has ever heard or
read the Conflicts, Torments, painful Agonies, and Deaths of all the Apostles
but St. John, would not have hoped the Prophecy in my Text had received its
full and last Completion in their Martyrdoms? But who at least would not have
hoped 300 Years had been sufficient time, and that the Jews and Gentiles only
should have been its barbarous Executioners and Fulfillers? Had not our Savior
been allknowing God himself, one would have ventured to say he could not
possibly foresee that Christians should in tract of time become the most exact
and literal Accomplishers of this his Prophecy that ever should be in the
World, and that to none but Christians? The time comes that whosoever kills
you will think he does God Service; and this will they do because they have not
known the Father nor me: That Is the Text. What an absurd Comment would this be
-- The time comes when my Religion shall prevail over the Jews and Gentiles
Rage and Persecution, and most of the World shall have given their Names to me,
and become Christians, then whosoever kills you Christians, will think he
does God and me his Christ Service; and this will they do, because they, and
they alone are infallibly certain they know the Father and me, and are resolved
that no Body shall dare to know the Father and me, in any other way, or mode,
or form of speaking but their own. And yet as absurd as this Comment seems, and
truly is, yet it is just in every Syllable; for it is not I that made it, but
the practice of the Christian World for some hundreds of Years past, and the
present Age has refined upon the absurdity in great measure, and writ the
wicked Nonsense in Characters so large, that he that runs may read. Who was it
butchered most inhumanly the Albigenses, and the Poor of Lions, with such
Barbarity, that tho the Relations come from Monks, yet they would move a Heart
of Stone? who was it totally extinguished Protestantism in all Moravia,
Silesia, and Bohemia? Who was it barbarously dispersed its Flocks, and more
than barbarously used its Ministers, and laid its Temples waste and desolate in
Hungary? Who was it massacred the Hugonots in France in 1572. and have taken
effectual care of later days, that we shall never more reproach their Cruelty
by leaving there no more to massacre? Who were the Kindlers of those fierce
devouring Flames in Our Queen Mary's days, that consumed so many living human
Sacrifices, and who were Author's of the Irish Massacre? Christians! What were
the Wretches that were treated thus but Christians? And wherefore, but that
they thought they did God Service in so using them? If we should yet proceed to
enquire upon what Grounds and Reasons Christians go when they pursue each other
to death, and find it is, because some know the Father and the Son in one, and
others in another way; and the Stronger will impose his way of knowing on the
Weaker, or else he shall not know at all; a considering Man must stand amazed,
and have a very mean Opinion both of Human Reason and the Christian
Institution: And yet the Case is neither better nor worse than so. One knows
the Father and the Son in Pomp and Ceremonious Ostentation of External Worship;
and another in Plainness and Simplicity: One serves him by the means of Images
and gorgeous Representations; another Worships him in Spirit and in Truth: One
takes his necessary Doctrins from Tradition's Mouth; another from the Oracles
of God alone: One forms his Notions of a Church, from what his Fancy tells him
were convenient it should be; another takes it as he plainly finds it, and is
content with the Wisdom of God, which often seems but Foolishness to Man: One
interesses Saints and Angels in his behalf to God the Father, together with the
Mediation of the Son; another thinks that God the Son is sufficient of himself,
being as powerful as willing to save to the utmost all that call upon him; one
will have all the Sacrament in both kinds, as it is certain Christ distributed
it, and his Disciples, and the Church after them for many Ages: Another gives
but half, but says it is the whole to all Intents and Purposes, arguing with
subtilty and much distinction in a matter wholly of Institution and Revelation.
One takes that Sacrament, and believes it is a Mystery, and certainly made what
our Lord designed, and what the Words effect with Prayer: Another takes it, and
believes that God has made himself, which yet destroys the very Notion and
Nature of a God, by confounding the greatest Proof we have of such a Being, as
neither had nor can have a beginning: And that when he is thus made anew, Man
takes him in his Mouth, and swallows down into his Stomach the Son of Man, of
Thirty three Years of Age, and the Eternal Son of God, by whom he made, by whom
he redeemed the World, with abundance of other plain distinct Doctrines as any
in the World; yet calls it, after that, a Mystery. And what is the event of all
this contrariety? Why, that they who know the Father and the Son one way,
should not endure that any one should know them in another way, and live. It Is
in vain to tell them, that you guide your self by the Light of Nature, and make
the best use you can of your Reason, and call in the Aids of Learning and an
honest Mind, and submit to whatever appears to be plainly revealed: This will
not do; you must believe, or dissemble, or die; if you have not Faith or
Knavery, you must have Patience and Courage, to attend to the last Reasons of
Fire, and Sword, and Halters. Sure it is impossible that Christ our gracious,
merciful, adorable Redeemer, should leave the Bosom of the Father, where he
Reigned in everlasting Love and Unity, to come and sow the Seeds of Strife and
Discord upon Earth! That he should take upon him Humane Nature, to divest it
for ever after of the Bowels of Compassion! That he should descend to instruct
the World in new-unheard-of Lessons of Barbarity! That he should design to
abrogate the Sacrifice of Beasts, and spare their Lives, to substitute the
Lives of Men, and satiate his incensed Father, with the horrid Steams of Humane
Blood, and let his own be shed, to teach us how to pour out one another's on
the Ground like Water! He should not have been born of such a sweet and gentle
Maid; nor sucked the Breasts of any humane Female; he found the World in better
Order, and ruled by milder Principles: And if these things be so, he will give
us leave, as there is reason, to say with respect to the Concerns of this Life,
good had it been for Men he never had been born. But God forbid things should
be so! Heaven is not farther distant fom the lowest Hell, the Purity of GOD
Himself from the Pollutions of the vilest Sinner, than bloody Principles and
Practices are from Christ's Religion. Of all the Constitutions and religious
Dispensations, and Oeconomies, that ever were contrived by Men, or revealed by
God, there is none so little able to support the deadly weight of Inhumanity,
as the Christian is. The very Incarnation of our Savior preaches up Love and
Goodness, in the loudest tone, and most affecting and surprising manner in the
World. The Angels sang not only Glory be to God on high, but Peace on Earth,
and Good will toward Men; and that not only in respect of God, but of one
another. Never was Life more full of Sweetness and Humanity! His Doctrine was
all Peace, and his Practice one continued Act of going about, and doing Good
Love was his old, his new, his first, his middle, and his last Command; Love
was his living Exercise, and Love his dying Legacy. It was the Badge and
Cognizance of those that truly followed him, By this shall all Men know that ye
are my Disciples, if ye love one another. And to be sure he did not mean Men
should distinguish so exactly as they do, the Love of their Neighbors Souls,
from that of their Bodies. It had been wretched trifling, and unworthy of our
Lord, or any good Man, to have so frequently pressed the Duty of loving one
another, if he intended only loving of their Souls. By this shall all Men know
that ye are my Disciples, if you love one another's Souls, though ye torment
their Bodies days and years, by Tortures, Racks, and Engines, by burning,
strangling, blowing up, or any other exquisite ingenious way of murchering
them: This, I say, had been unfit for Christ, or any good and sober Person to
intend; and only worthy of the villainous Subtilty and tender Nicety of the
Fathers of the Inquisition, who whilst the Eye Balls of the Sufferers in that
sanctified Hell, are rolling in Death, and startling from their Orbs, and their
Souls expiring amidst the Torments, stand kindly by, and with wondrous Charity
beseech the Executioners, by the tender Mercies of God, and by the Bowels of
our Lord, to take great heed they shed not a drop of Christian Blood. As if the
tender Mercies of our God, and the Bowels of our Lord, were not an Adjuration
strong enough to move Compassion for the Body as well as the Soul, and for
other ways of killing as well as shedding Blood. No, if the Spirit of Christ
and his Religion be to be discovered in the Gospel and the sacred Writings of
the Apostles, let Men pretend never so much to know the Father and the Son, yet
if their Principles and Practices tend to Blood and Cruelty, and let them be
never so firmly persuaded in their Minds that they do God Service, we may as
certainly conclude they do not know the Father nor the Son, as we may there are
such Persons in the Godhead.

If then for the Credit of Nature, for the Honor of Humane Reason, and for the
Truth and Sanctity of Christ's Religion, we must acquit them of all Blood and
Barbarism, where must we lay, on what must we discharge the Horrors of this
Day? To what must we attribute those perpetual Plots and dark Contrivances, to
trouble the Felicities, and rob the Nation of the precious Life of our immortal
Maiden Queen; who, though her Reign were long as it was glorious, yet might
have almost marked and counted every year, by some attempt of some ungodly
Messenger from Rome, or Factor for their Partisans? It were endless, and
useless too, to dwell on the particular Disturbances, and strong Concussions,
that this Nation in especial sort, has felt from that ambitious, restless, and
blood-thirsty Party. My design is rather to repeat in short the Grounds from
whence they all proceed. 1. The Decrees of General Councils. 2. The Bulls of
Popes against whole Nations, or particular Persons. 3. The private Doctors
Writings and Authority. And, 4. The Encouragement the Attempters find, if they
succeed, in this World, if they miscarry in the next.

Whether the Councils I intend, and that are so frequently cited for this
purpose, do decree the extirpation of Heresy, in so absolute terms as to lay a
Necessity on Princes and Governors to perform, is a Dispute I need not engage
in; it is enough, and even too much in Conscience, if they have left the matter
in such loose uncertain terms, that they whose Interest, misguided Zeal, or
sanguinary Tempers, shall incline them to such Attempts, may find their Excuse,
and take their Sanctuary in those terms. The Government of Tunis, Tripoly, of
Salee, and Argiers, are far from making any Laws expressly to command their
Subjects, the exercise of Piracies and Robberies; yet they are practiced every
day, and an honest Man would go near to die, that should reproach them with it;
and yet no Man can clear them of the Injustices and Violence. And that some
Councils have gone farther than this, is agreed upon by all our own Writers,
and taken amiss by a great many of our Adversaries if questioned, and denied
with a very ill Grace by any of them. And if Councils, which have obtained
amongst them the greatest Veneration, and which, if well and rightly menaged,
would deserve, and find it too from us, and all the sober World besides, if
they shall but seem to countenance, much more command, such cruel and unnatural
things; the greater their Authority is, the greater will the Mischiefs be, the
worse the Consequences; and who shall deliver their Souls from them?

Secondly, That Popes, to gratify their Spleen, Ambition, or Revenge, have, by
their Bulls, excited Princes to exterminate their Subjects, and Subjects to
rebel and rise against their Kings; and thereby caused horrible Devastations,
inhumane Massacres, and overflowed the World with Seas of Christian Blood, is
so plain and manifest, that it is as often confessed with glorying in the Power,
as denied with abhorrence of the Fact. And it is but turning to the Chronicles
of any Nation in the World, to find the exorbitant Power, and ill-got Credit of
these Sovereign H. Priests, have been the Causes of as many Evils, public and
private, as any thing in the World besides.

A third Occasion or Ground of these Disturbances and barbarous Practices, is
the Writings and Authority of the Doctors in Request. A Professor of Lovain
wrote a Book of late, on purpose to prove, that abundantly more had written in
defense and maintenance of the Deposing Doctrine, than against; afraid, one
would think, we should be mistaken, and think it possible for the true Roman
Catholics to be good Subjects. But there is an Order of Men, so famous for
these sort of Writings and accursed Labors, and for the Guidance of Men's
Consciences, and consequently Governing the World, that seem in such peculiar
manner to have appropriated the Power and Principles of Blood and Mischief to
themselves, that 'twere a kind of Trespass and Affront to their Wit, their
Policy, their Pride, Ambition, their Malice, and Revenge, to attribute any of
our public Evils, to any other primary Cause, and first Original. It cannot be
that a Prophet perish out of Jerusalem, said Christ: It cannot be that any
mighty Mischief, any Masterpiece of Wickedness, should be done without that
Order, says all the Christian World. I came not to send Peace, but a Sword,
said our Lord, that is, by accident, and sore against his Will; but these Men
give us such a Scheme of Christianity, as makes the Sword seem natural,
designed, and necessary. Be wise as Serpents, said our Lord, and innocent as
Doves; but these Men have refined on Wisdom, and the Cunning of the World, to
that degree, that they seem to have understood our Savior, as exhorting to the
imitation of the Old Serpent, and the Red Dragon, bending their Studies wholly
to the Confusion of the World. My Kingdom is not of this World, said Christ.
All Kingdoms of the Earth, say they, are Christ's; and in his Name will we tread
them under, that rise up against us. To be short, whilst these Men's Writings
are in vogue, and the Consciences of Men committed to their Guidance, the
Christian World must never look for Peace; and if God, in pity to the World,
prevent not the growth of their abominable Doctrines and Designs, when the Son
of Man comes, he shall neither find Morality nor Faith on Earth. The last
Foundation of our Dangers, and Disturbances, that I will mention, is the
Encouragement the bold Attempters meet withal, if they succeed, in this Life;
if miscarry, in another. Riches and Honors are such powerful Motives and
Temptations, that sometimes the reputed Wise and Brave, and Generous Souls, are
vanquished by them: But when they meet with needy and ambitious ones, they find
them ready and prepared beforehand for the Wickedness; or if these are not for
the turn, there are others of a dark and clouded Soul, eat up with desperate
melancholy Thought, and overwhelmed with Zeal and Sadness; which Tempers
molded artificially, by ravishing descriptions of the Joys of Heaven, and
worked into a lively Hope, nay Certainty, of once possessing them, are fit for
all the Impressions in the World, and stick at nothing for the gaining them.
And then, if Poisoning, Stabbing, or cutting of Throats, be represented
meritorious of Heaven, they will quickly find, or make an Opportunity, although
the way lead to the paths of certain Death, with Torments. And that these
courses have been taken amongst a hundred other Witnesses, the dark Contrivance
of this Day, shall rise in Judgment and attest.

These are, I think, the chief, though not the only Arguments that have all
along influenced the Sons of Violence to our destruction more or less, and
always will, till God give them the grace to renounce the wicked Principles
they builded upon, and instruct them truly in the knowledge of Himself, and of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. For without this mighty Operation of God's
Spirit on their Understanding and their Wills, to think that they who never
failed of being cruel where they could with safety, who never spared a Nation
or a Country yet, will now, or any time grow merciful and kind, is to hope the
Ethiopian may change his Skin, and the Leopard his Spots, and they do good who
are accustomed to do evil.

Let us then (to conclude) be just to the Memory of this Day, and keep it from
the Fate of obsolete and antiquated things: It was of late endeavored to be
laughed and frowned out of Countenance and Credit; and had not God in his All
wise Disposal of Affairs, marked it a new with a peculiar and most signal
Providence, and made it memorable once again, by bringing on it, to our Shoars
our brave and generous Prince, to save us from the same (though now more open
and more manly) Enemies; this Day had, doubtless, by the imperious Sway of
some, the vile and criminal Compliance of others, and by the Acquiescence and
the cold Indifference of the rest, been wholly razed from out our Calendar, and
in a little time denied as confidently by them all, as it has been of latter
days by some. But if such matters of fact, so public and notoriously attested,
are to be disbelieved, and discredited so soon, that the Ashes of our
Forefathers, the designed Sacrifices of this Day, are scarcely cold in their
Graves; what Faith shall be given to these Men's Histories of past, or present,
or of times to come? Let us then be just to the Mercies of God doubled this day
upon our Heads, and gratefully remember these Deliverances past, and study to
walk worthily for the time to come; that we tempt him not by Infidelity,
Unthankfulness, or Wickedness, to deliver us over into the Will of our
Adversaries. Let us be just to our Religion, and that Knowledge of the Father
and the Son, to which we have already attained, by the Light and Understanding
of the Gospel. Let us have the Principles of Blood and Mischief in all the
abhorrence and abomination in the World, as becomes those that profess the
Gospel of Christ. Let us hinder them from taking effect, by all the lawful and
the honest means allowed us: Let us say of them and their Religion (as far as
it is not Christian) what dying Jacob said of his two Sons, Simeon and Levi:
Instruments of Cruelty are in their Habitations; O my Soul, come not thou into
their Secret, unto their Assembly, mine Honor, be not thou united For in their
Anger they slay Men; and in their Self-will dig down Walls: Cursed be their
Anger, for it is fierce, and their Wrath, for it is cruel. But let us withal
put in practice all those Lessons of Peace, and Love, and Gentleness, of Mercy,
and Compassion, and Forgiveness, that our Religion urges and obliges to: Let us
heap Coals of Fire and fervent Charity upon their Heads; and let them see and
know we are not more reformed from the Corruptions of their Doctrines, and
their Superstitious Practices, than from their Doctrines of ill Nature, and
their Practices of Cruelty and Blood. We shall in vain pretend to distinguish
our selves by Name and Party, if we change not Nature and Condition: we must
not think to exclaim on their Uncharitableness and Cruelty, to exercise our
own. Tumults, and Rage, and Fierceness, and Destruction, are as innocent and
Christian in Romish Hands and Hearts, as they are in Protestants; and it may be
so much the more, by how much the less we pretend to them: and wretched are we
if we condemn in them what we approve, and what allow of in our selves. If then
we would convince the World and them, that we know the Father and the Son as we
ought to know, we must pursue the things that make for Love, and Peace, and
Unity. Which the God of Peace grant we may all of us do, for the Sake of him
who came to Preach it to us: To whom, with the Blessed Spirit, be all Honor
and Glory, Might and Dominion, now and for ever.

FINIS.

