A DISCOURSE OF GOVERNMENT With relation to MILITIA'S.

Edinburgh; Printed in the Year MDCXCVIII.

A DISCOURSE OF GOVERNMENT With relation to MILITIA'S.
THERE is not perhaps in humane Affairs any thing so unaccountable as the
Indignity and Cruelty with which the far greater part of Mankind suffer
themselves to be used under pretense of Government. For some Men falsely
persuading themselves that bad Governments are advantageous to them, as most
conducing to gratify their Ambition, Avarice and Luxury, set themselves with
the utmost art and violence to procure their Establishment: and by such Men
almost the whole World has been trampled under foot, and subjected to Tyranny,
for want of understanding by what means and methods they were enslaved. For tho
Mankind take great care and pains to instruct themselves in other Arts and
Sciences, yet very few apply themselves to consider the nature of Government,
an Enquiry so useful and necessary both to Magistrate and People. Nay, in most
Countries the Arts of State being altogether directed either to enslave the
People, or to keep them under slavery; it is become almost every where a Crime
to reason about Matters of Government. But if Men would bestow a small part of
the Time and Application which they throw away upon curious but useless
Studies, or endless Gaming, in perusing those excellent Rules and Examples of
Government which the Ancients have left us, they would soon be enabled to
discover all such Abuses and Corruptions as tend to the Ruin of Public
Societies. It Is therefore very strange that they should think Study and
Knowledge necessary in every thing they go about, except in the noblest and most
useful of all Applications, The Art of Government.

Now if any Man in compassion to the Miseries of a People should endeavor to
disabuse them in any thing relating to Government, he will certainly incur the
Displeasure, and perhaps be pursued by the Rage of those, who think they find
their Account in the oppression of the World; but will hardly succeed in his
Endeavors to undeceive the Multitude. For the generality of all Ranks of Men
are cheated by Words and Names; and provided the ancient Terms and outward
Forms of any Government be retained, let the nature of it be never so much
altered, they continue to dream that they shall still enjoy their former
Liberty, and are not to be awakned till it prove too late. Of this there are
many remarkable Examples in History; but that particular Instance which I have
chosen to insist on, as most suitable to my purpose, is, the Alteration of
Government which happened in most Countries of Europe about the year 1500. And
it is worth observation, that tho this Change was fatal to their Liberty, yet it
was not introduced by the Contrivance of ill-designing Men; nor were the
mischievous Consequences perceived, unless perhaps by a few wise Men, who, if
they saw it, wanted Power to prevent it.

Two hundred years being already passed since this Alteration began, Europe has
felt the Effects of it by sad Experience; and the true Causes of the Change are
now become more visible.

To lay open this matter in its full Extent, it will be necessary to look
farther back, and examine the Original and Constitution of those Governments
that were established in Europe about the year 400, and continued till this
Alteration.

When the Goths, Vandals, and other warlike Nations, had at different Times,
and under different Leaders, overrun the Western Parts of the Roman Empire,
they introduced the following Form of Government into all the Nations they
subdued. The General of the Army became King of the Conquered Country; and the
Conquest being absolute, he divided the Lands amongst the great Officers of his
Army, afterward called Barons; who again parcelled out their several
Territories in smaller Portions to the inferior Soldiers that had followed
them in the Wars, and who then became their Vassals, enjoying those Lands for
Military Service. The King reserved to himself some Demeasnes for the
maintenance of his Court and Attendance. When this was done, there was no
longer any Standing Army kept on foot, but every man went to live upon his own
Lands; and when the Defense of the Country required an Army, the King summoned
the Barons to his Standard, who came attended with their Vassals. Thus were the
Armies of Europe composed for about eleven hundred years; and this Constitution
of Government put the Sword into the hands of the Subject, because the Vassals
depended more immediately on the Barons than on the King, which effectually
secured the freedom of those Governments. For the Barons could not make use of
their Power to destroy those limited Monarchies, without destroying their own
Grandeur; nor could the King invade their Privileges, having no other Forces
than the Vassals of his own Demeasnes to rely upon for his support in such an
Attempt.

I lay no great stress on any other Limitations of those Monarchies; nor do I
think any so essential to the Liberties of the People, as that which placed the
Sword in the hands of the Subject. And since in our time most Princes of Europe
are in possession of the Sword, by Standing Mercenary Forces kept up in time of
Peace, absolutely depending upon them, I say that all such Governments are
changed from Monarchies to Tyrannies. Nor can the Power of granting or refusing
Money, tho vested in the Subject, be a sufficient security for Liberty, where a
Standing Mercenary Army is kept up in time of Peace: For he that is armed, is
always Master of the Purse of him that is unarmed. And not only that Government
is tyrannical, which is tyrannically exercised; but all Governments are
tyrannical, which have not in their Constitution a sufficient Security against
the Arbitrary Power of the Prince.

I do not deny that these limited Monarchies during the greatness of the
Barons, had some Defects: I know few Governments free from them. But after all,
there was a Balance that kept those Governments steady, and an effectual
Provision against the Encroachments of the Crown. I do less pretend that the
present Governments can be restored to the Constitution before mentioned. The
following Discourse will show the impossibility of it. My design in the first
place is, to explain the Nature of the past and present Governments of Europe,
and to disabuse those who think them the same, because they are called by the
same Names; and who ignorantly clamor against such as would preserve that
Liberty which is yet left.

In order to this, and for a further and clearer Illustration of the Matter, I
shall deduce from their Original, the Causes, Occasions, and the Complication
of those many unforeseen Accidents; which falling out much about the same time,
produced so great a Change. And it will at first sight seem very strange, when
I shall name the Restoration of Learning, the Invention of Printing, of the
Needle and of Gunpowder, as the chief of them; things in themselves so
excellent, and which, the last only excepted, might have proved of infinite
Advantage to the World, if their remote Influence upon Government had been
obviated by suitable Remedies. Such odd Consequences, and of such a different
Nature, accompany extraordinary Inventions of any kind.

Constantinople being taken by Mahomet the Second, in the Year 1453, many
Learned Greeks fled over into Italy; where the favorable reception they found
from the Popes, Princes, and Republics of that Country, soon introduced
amongst the better sort of Men, the study of the Greek Tongue, and of the
Ancient Authors in that Language. About the same time likewise some Learned Men
began to restore the Purity of the Latin Tongue. But that which most
contributed to the Advancement of all kind of Learning, and especially the
study of the Ancients, was the Art of Printing; which was brought to a great
degree of Perfection a few Years after. By this means their Books became
common, and their Arts generally understood and admired. But as Mankind from a
natural propension to Pleasure, is always ready to choose out of every thing
what may most gratify that vicious Appetite; so the Arts which the Italians
first applied themselves to improve, were principally those that had been
subservient to the Luxury of the Ancients in the most corrupt Ages, of which
they had many Monuments still remaining. Italy was presently filled with
Architects, Painters and Sculptors; and a prodigious Expense was made in
Buildings, Pictures and Statues. Thus the Italians began to come off from their
frugal and military way of living, and addicted themselves to the pursuit of
refined and expensive Pleasures, as much as the Wars of those Times would
permit. This Infection spread it self by degrees into the Neighboring Nations.
But these things alone had not been sufficient to work so great a Change in
Government, if a preceding Invention, brought into common use about that time,
had not produced more new and extraordinary Effects than any had ever done
before; which probably may have many Consequences yet unforeseen, and a farther
Influence upon the Manners of Men, as long as the World lasts: I mean, the
Invention of the Needle, by the help of which Navigation was greatly improved;
a Passage opened by Sea to the East Indies, and a new World discovered. By this
means the Luxury of Asia and America was added to that of the Ancients; and all
Ages, and all Countries concurred to sink Europe into an Abyss of Pleasures;
which were rendered the more expensive by a perpetual Change of the Fashions in
Clothes, Equipage and Furniture of Houses.

These things brought a total Alteration in the way of living, upon which all
Government depends. It Is true, Knowledge being mightily increased, and a great
Curiosuy and Nicety in every thing introduced, Men imagined themselves to be
gainers in all Points, by changing from their frugal and military way of
living, which I must confess had some mixture of Rudeness and Ignorance in it,
tho not inseparable from it. But at the same time they did not consider the
unspeakable Evils that are altogether inseparable from an expensive way of
living.

To touch upon all these, tho slightly, would carry me too far from my Subject:
I shall therefore content my self to apply what has been said, to the immediate
Design of this Discourse.

The far greater share of all those Expenses fell upon the Barons; for they
were the Persons most able to make them, and their Dignity seemed to challenge
whatever might distinguish them from other Men. This plunged them on a sudden
into so great Debts, that if they did not sell, or otherwise alienate their
Lands, they found themselves at least obliged to turn the Military Service
their Vassals owed them, into Money; partly by way of Rent, and partly by way
of Lease, or Fine, for payment of their Creditors. And by this means the Vassal
having his Lands no longer at so easy a Rate as before, could no more be
obliged to Military Service, and so became a Tenant. Thus the Armies, which in
preceding times had been always composed of such Men as these, ceased of
course, and the Sword fell out of the hands of the Barons. But there being
always a necessity to provide for the Defense of every Country, Princes were
afterward allowed to raise Armies of Volunteers and Mercenaries. And great
Sums were given by Diets and Parliaments for their Maintenance, to be levied
upon the People grown rich by Trade, and dispirited for want of Military
Exercise. Such Forces were at first only raised for present Exigencies, and
continued no longer on foot than the Occasions lasted. But Princes soon found
Pretenses to make them perpetual, the chief of which was the garisoning
Frontier Towns and Fortresses; the Methods of War being altered to the tedious
and chargeable way of Sieges, principally by the Invention of Gunpowder. The
Officers and Soldiers of these Mercenary Armies depending for their
Subsistence and Preferment, as immediately upon the Prince, as the former
Militia's did upon the Barons, the Power of the Sword was transferred from the
Subject to the King, and War grew a constant Trade to live by. Nay, many of the
Barons themselves being reduced to Poverty by their expensive way of living,
took Commands in those Mercenary Troops; and being still continued Hereditary
Members of Diets, and other Assemblies of State, after the loss of their
Vassals, whom they formerly represented, they were now the readiest of all
others to load the People with heavy Taxes, which were employed to increase the
Prince's Military Power, by Guards, Armies, and Citadels, beyond Bounds or
Remedy.

Some Princes with much impatience pressed on to Arbitrary Power before things
were ripe, as the Kings of France and Charles Duke of Burgundy. Philip de
Commines says of the latter, That having made a Truce with the King of France
he called an Assembly of the Estates of his Country, and remonstrated to them
the prejudice he had sustained by not having Standing Troops as that King had;
that if five hundred Men had been in garrison upon their Frontier, the King of
France would never have undertaken that War; and having represented the
Mischiefs that were ready to fall upon them for want of such a Force, he
earnestly pressed them to grant such a Sum as would maintain eight hundred
Lances. At length they gave him a hundred and twenty thousand Crowns more than
his ordinary Revenue, (from which Tax Burgundy was exempted) But his Subjects
were for many reasons under great Apprehensions of falling into the subjection
to which they saw the Kingdom of France already reduced by means of such
Troops. And truly their Apprehensions were not ill-grounded; for when he had
got together five or six hundred Men at Arms, he presently had a mind to more,
and with them disturbed the peace of all his Neighbors: He augmented the tax
from one hundred and twenty to five hundred thousand Crowns, and increased the
Numbers of those Men at Arms, by whom his Subjects were greatly oppressed.
Francis de Beaucaire Bishop of Metz in his History of France speaking of the
same Affair, says, That the foresaid States could not be induced to maintain
Mercenary Forces, being sensible of the Difficulties into which the Commonalty
of France had brought themselves by the like Concession; that Princes might
increase their Forces at pleasure, and sometimes (even when they had obtained
Money) pay them ill, to the vexation and destruction of the poor People; and
likewise that Kings and Princes not contented with their ancient Patrimony,
were always ready under this pretext to break in upon the Properties of all
Men, and to raise what Money they pleased. That nevertheless they gave him a
hundred and twenty thousand Crowns yearly, which he soon increased to five
hundred thousand: But that Burgundy (which was the ancient Dominion of that
Family) retained its ancient Liberty, and could by no means be obliged to pay
any part of this new Tax. It Is true, Philip de Commines subjoins to the
forecited passage, that be believes standing Forces may be well employed under
a wise King or Prince; but that if he be not so, or leaves his Children young,
the use that he or their Governors make of them, is not always profitable
either for the King or his Subjects. If this Addition be his own, and not
rather an Insertion added by the President of the Parliament of Paris, who
published, and, as the foresaid Francis de Beaucaire says he was credibly
informed, corrupted his Memoirs; yet Experience shows him to be mistaken: For
the Example of his Master Lewis the 11th, whom upon many occasions he calls a
Wise Prince, and those of most Princes under whom standing Forces were first
allowed, demonstrates, that they are more dangerous under a wise Prince than
any other: And Reason tells us, that if they are the only proper Instruments to
introduce Arbitrary Power, as shall be made plain, a cunning and able Prince,
who by the World is called a Wise one, is more capable of using them to that
end than a weak Prince, or Governors during a Minority; and that a wise Prince
having once procured them to be established, they will maintain themselves
under any.

I am not ignorant that before this Change, Subsidies were often given by
Diets, States and Parliaments, and some raised by the Edicts of Princes for
maintaining Wars; but these were small, and no way sufficient to subsist such
numerous Armies as those of the Barons Militia. There were likewise Mercenary
Troops sometimes entertained by Princes who aimed at Arbitrary Power, and by
some Commonwealths in time of War for their own defense; but these were only
Strangers, or in very small numbers, and held no proportion with those vast
Armies of Mercenaries which this change has fixed upon Europe to her affliction
and ruin.

What I have said hitherto has been always with regard to one or other, and
often to most Countries in Europe. What follows will have a more particular
regard to Britain; where, tho the Power of the Barons be ceased, yet no
mercenary Troops are yet established. The Reason of which is, that England had
before this great Alteration lost all her Conquests in France, the Town of
Calais only excepted; and that also was taken by the French, before the Change
was thoroughly made. So that the Kings of England had no Pretense to keep up
Standing Forces, either to defend Conquests abroad, or to garrison a Frontier
toward France, since the Sea was now become the only Frontier between those
two Countries.

Neither could the Frontier toward Scotland afford any color to those Princes
for raising such Forces, since the Kings of Scotland had none; and that
Scotland was not able to give Money for the subsisting any considerable number.
It Is true, the Example of France, with which Country Scotland had constant
correspondence, and some French Counselors about Mary of Guise, Queen Dowager
and Regent of Scotland, induced her to propose a Tax for the subsisting of
Mercenary Soldiers to be employed for the defense of the Frontier of Scotland;
and to ease, as was pretended, the Barons of that trouble. But in that
honorable and wise Remonstrance, which was made by 300 of the lesser Barons
(as much dissatisfied with the Lords, who by their silence betrayed the public
Liberty, as with the Regent her self) she was told; That their Forefathers had
defended themselves and their Fortunes against the English, when that Nation
was much more powerful than they were at that time, and had made frequent
incursions into their Country: That they themselves had not so far degenerated
from their Ancestors, to refuse, when occasion required, to hazard their Lives
and Fortunes in the Service of their Country: That as to the hiring of
Mercenary Soldiers, it was a thing of great danger to put the Liberty of
Scotland into the hands of Men, who are of no Fortunes, nor have any hopes but
in the public Calamity; who for Money would attempt any thing; whose excessive
Avarice opportunity would inflame to a desire of all manner of Innovations, and
whose Faith would follow the Wheel of Fortune. That tho these Men should be
more mindful of the Duty they owe to their Country, than of their own
particular Interest, was it to be supposed, that Mercenaries would sight more
bravely for the defense of other Men's Fortunes, than the Possessors would do
for themselves or their own; or that a little Money should excite their ignoble
Minds to a higher pitch of Honor than that with which the Barons are inspired,
when they fight for the preservation of their Fortunes, Wives and Children,
Religion and Liberty: That most Men did suspect and apprehend, that this new
way of making War, might be not only useless, but dangerous to the Nation;
since the English, if they should imitate the Example, might, without any great
trouble to their People, raise far greater Sums for the maintenance of
Mercenary Soldiers, than Scotland could; and by this means not only spoil and
lay open the Frontier, but penetrate into the Bowels of the Kingdom: And that
it was in the Militia of the Barons their Ancestors had placed their chief
Trust, for the defense of themselves against a greater Power.

By these powerful Reasons being made sensible of her Error, the Queen desisted
from her Demands. Her Daughter Queen Mary, who, as the great Historian says,
looked upon the moderate Government of a limited Kingdom, to be disgraceful to
Monarchs, and upon the slavery of the People, as the freedom of Kings, resolved
to have Guards about her Person; but could not fall upon a way to compass them:
for she could find no Pretext, unless it were the empty show of Magnificence
which belongs to a Court, and the Example of Foreign Princes; for the former
Kings had always trusted themselves to the Faith of the Barons. At length upon
a false and ridiculous pretense, of an Intention in a certain Nobleman to seize
her Person, she assumed them; but they were soon abolished. Nor had her Son
King James any other Guards whilst he was King of Scotland only, than forty
Gentlemen: And that King declares in the Act of Parliament, by which they are
established, that he will not burden his People by any Tax or Imposition for
their Maintenance.

Henry the Seventh, King of England, seems to have perceived sooner, and
understood better the Alteration beforementioned, than any Prince of his time,
and obtained several Laws to favor and facilitate it. But his Successors were
altogether improper to second him: For Henry the Eighth was an unthinking
Prince. The Reigns of Edward the Sixth, and Queen Mary, were short; and Queen
Elizabeth loved her People too well to attempt it. King James, who succeeded
her, was a stranger in England, and of no Interest abroad. King Charles I. did
indeed endeavor to make himself Absolute, tho somewhat preposterously; for he
attempted to seize the Purse, before he was Master of the Sword. But very wise
Men have been of Opinion, that if he had been possessed of as numerous Guards
as those which were afterward raised, and constantly kept up by King Charles
the Second, he might easily have succeeded in his Enterprise. For we see that
in those Struggles which the Country Party had with King Charles the Second,
and in those Endeavors they used to bring about that Revolution which was
afterward compassed by a Foreign Power; the chief and insuperable Difficulty
they met with, was from those Guards. And tho King James the Second had
provoked these Nations to the last degree, and made his own Game as hard as
possible, not only by invading our Civil Liberties, but likewise by
endeavoring to change the Established Religion for another which the People
abhorred, whereby he lost their Affections, and even those of a great part of
his Army: Yet notwithstanding all this mismanagement, Britain stood in need of
a Foreign Force to save it; and how dangerous a Remedy that is, the Histories
of all Ages can witness. It Is true, this Circumstance was favorable, that a
Prince who had married the next Heir to these Kingdoms, was at the Head of our
Deliverance: yet did it engage us in a long and expensive War. And now that we
are much impoverished, and England by means of her former Riches and present
Poverty, fallen into all the Corruptions which those great Enemies of Virtue,
Want, and Excess of Riches can produce; that there are such numbers of
Mercenary Forces on foot at home and abroad; that the greatest part of the
Officers have no other way to subsist; that they are commanded by a wise and
active King, who has at his Disposal the formidable Land and Sea Forces of a
Neighboring Nation, the great Rival of our Trade: A King, who by Blood,
Relation, other particular Ties, and common Interest, has the House of Austria,
most of the Princes of Germany, and Potentates of the North, for his Friends
and Allies; who can, whatever Interest he join with, do what he thinks fit in
Europe: I say, if a Mercenary Standing Army be kept up, (the first of that
kind, except those of the Vsarper Cromwell, and the late King James, that
Britain has seen for thirteen hundred Years) I desire to know where the
Security of the British Liberties lies, unless in the good Will and Pleasure of
the King: I desire to know, what real Security can be had against Standing
Armies of Mercenaries, backed by the Corruption of both Nations, the Tendency
of the way of Living, the Genius of the Age, and the Example of the World.

Having shown the difference between the past and present Government of
Britain, how precarious our Liberties are, and how from having the best
security for them we are in hazard of having none at all; it is to be hoped that
those who are for a Standing Army, and losing no occasion of advancing and
extending the Prerogative, from a mistaken Opinion that they establish the
ancient Government of these Nations, will see what sort of Patriots they are.

But we are told, that only Standing Mercenary Forces can defend Britain from
the perpetual Standing Armies of France. However frivolous this Assertion be,
as indeed no good Argument can be brought to support it, either from Reason or
Experience, as shall be proved hereafter; yet allowing it to be good, what
Security can the Nations have, that these Standing Forces shall not at some
time or other be made use of to suppress the Liberties of the People, tho not
in this King's time, to whom we owe their Preservation? For I hope there is no
Man so weak to think, that keeping up the Army for a year, or for any longer
time than the Parliaments of both Nations shall have engaged the public Faith
to make good all Deficiencies of Funds granted for their Maintenance, is not
the keeping them up for ever. It Is a pitiful shift in the Undertakers for a
Standing Army, to say, We are not for a Standing Army; We are only for an Army
from year to year, or till the Militia be made useful. For Britain cannot be in
any hazard from France; at least till that Kingdom, so much exhausted by War
and Persecution, shall have a breathing space to recover. Before that time our
Militias will be in order; and in the mean time the Fleet. Besides, no Prince
ever surrendered so great Countries and so many strong Places, I shall not say,
in order to make a new War; but as these Men will have it, to continue the
same. The French King is old and diseased, and was never willing to hazard much
by any bold Attempt. If he, or the Dauphin, upon his Decease, may be suspected
of any farther Design, it must be upon the Spanish Monarchy, in case of the
death of that King. And if it be objected, that we shall stand in need of an
Army, in such a Conjuncture; I answer, that our Part in that, or in any other
foreign War, will be best managed by Sea, as shall be shown hereafter.

Let us then see if Mercenary Armies be not exactly calculated to enslave a
Nation. Which I think may be easily proved, if we consider that such Troops are
generally composed of Men who make a Trade of War; and having little or no
Patrimony, or spent what they once had, enter into that Employment in hopes of
its Continuance during Life, not at all thinking how to make themselves capable
of any other. By which means heavy and perpetual Taxes must be entailed for
ever upon the People for their Subsistence; and since all their Relations stand
engaged to support their Interest, let all Men judge, if this will not prove a
very united and formidable Party in a Nation.

But the Undertakers must pardon me if I tell them, that no well-constituted
Government ever suffered any such Men in it, whose Interest leads them to
imbroil the State in War, and are a useless and insupportable Burden in time of
Peace. Venice or Holland are neither of them examples to prove the contrary;
for had not their situation been different from that of other Countries, their
Liberty had not continued to this time. And they suffer no Forces to remain
within those inaccessible places, which are the chief seats of their power.
Carthage, that had not those advantages of situation, and yet used Mercenary
Forces, was brought to the brink of ruin by them in a time of Peace; beaten in
three Wars, and at last subdued by the Romans. If ever any Government stood in
need of such a sort of Men, 'twas that of ancient Rome, because they were
engaged in perpetual War. The Argument can never be so strong in any other
Case. But the Romans well knowing such Men and Liberty to be incompatible, and
yet being under a necessity of having Armies constantly on foot, made frequent
Changes of the Men that served in them; who, when they had been some time in
the Army, were permitted to return to their Possessions, Trades, or other
Emploiments. And to show how true a Judgment that wise State made of this
Matter, it is sufficient to observe, that those who subverted that Government;
the greatest that ever was amongst Men, found themselves obliged to continue
the same Soldiers always in constant Pay and Service.

If during the late War we had followed so wise a course as that of Rome, there
had been thrice as many trained Men in the Nations as at present there are; no
difficulties about Recruits, nor debates about keeping up Armies in time of
Peace, because some Men resolve to live by Arms in time of Peace, whether it be
for the good of the Nations or not. And since such was the practice of Rome, I
hope no man will have the confidence to say, that this method was not as
effectual for War as any other. If it be objected, that Rome had perpetual
Wars, and therefore that might be a good practice among them, which would not
be so with us; I confess I cannot see the Consequence; for if Rome had
perpetual Wars, the Romans ought still to have continued the same men in their
Armies, that they might, according to the Notion of these men, render their
Troops more useful. And if we did change our men during a War, we should have
more men that would understand something of it. If any man say, not so much as
if they continued in the Army: I answer, that many of those who continue in the
Army, are afterward swept away by the War, and live not to be of use in time
of Peace; that those who escape the War, being fewer than in the other case,
are soon consumed: and that Mercenary Standing Forces in time of Peace, if not
employed to do mischief, soon become like those of Holland in 72, fit only to
lose forty strong places in forty days.

There is another thing which I would not mention if it were not absolutely
necessary to my present purpose; and that is, the usual Manners of those who
are engaged in Mercenary Armies. I speak now of Officers in other Parts of
Europe, and not of those in our Armies, allowing them to be the best; and if
they will have it so, quite different from all others. I will not apply to them
any part of what I shall say concerning the rest. They themselves best know how
far any thing of that Nature may be applicable to them. I say then, most
Princes of Europe having put themselves upon the foot of keeping up Forces,
rather numerous than well entertained, can give but small Allowance to
Officers, and that likewise is for the most part very ill paid, in order to
render them the more necessitous and depending; and yet they permit them to
live in all that extravagancy which mutual example and emulation prompts them
to. By which means the Officers become insensibly engaged in numberless Frauds,
Oppressions and Cruelties, the Colonels against the Captains, and the Captains
against the inferior Soldiers; and all of them against all persons with whom
they have any kind of business. So that there is hardly any sort of Men who are
less Men of Honor than the Officers of Mercenary Forces: and indeed Honor has
now no other signification amongst them than Courage. Besides, most Men that
enter into those Armies, whether Officers or Soldiers, as if they were obliged
to show themselves new Creatures, and perfectly regenerate, if before they were
modest or sober, immediately turn themselves to all manner of Debauchery and
Wickedness, committing all kind of Injustice and Barbarity against poor and
defenseless People. Now tho the natural Temper of our Men be more just and
honest than that of the French, or of any other People, yet may it not be
feared, that such bad Manners may prove contagious? And if such Manners do not
fit Men to enslave a Nation, Devils only must do it. On the other hand, if it
should happen that the Officers of Standing Armies in Britain should live with
greater Regularity and Modesty than was ever yet seen in that sort of Men, it
might very probably fall out, that being quartered in all Parts of the Country,
some of them might be returned Members of Parliament for diverse of the Electing
Boroughs; and of what Consequence that would be, I leave all Men to judge. So
that whatever be the Conduct of a Mercenary Army, we can never be secure as
long as any such Force is kept up in Britain.

But the Undertakers for a Standing Army will say; Will you turn so many
Gentlemen to starve, who have faithfully served the Government? This Question I
allow to be founded upon some reason. For it ought to be acknowledged in
justice to our Soldiery, that on all occasions, and in all actions, both
Officers and Soldiers have done their part; and therefore I think it may be
reasonable, that all Officers and Soldiers of above forty years, in
consideration of their unfitness to apply themselves at that age to any other
Employment, should be recommended to the bounty of both Parliaments.

I confess I do not see by what Rules of good Policy any Mercenary Forces have
been connived at either in Scotland, England, or Ireland. Sure, it is allowing
the dispensing Power in the most essential Point of the Constitution of
Government in these Nations.

Scotland and England are Nations that were formerly very jealous of Liberty;
of which there are many remarkable Instances in the Histories of these
Countries. And we may hope that the late Revolution having given such a blow to
Arbitary power in these Kingdoms, they will be very careful to preserve their
Rights and Privileges. And sure it is not very suitable to these, that any
Standing Forces be kept up in Britain: or that there should be any Scots,
English, or Irish Regiments maintained in Ireland, or any where abroad; or
Regiments of any Nation at the charge of England. I shall not say how readily
the Regiments that were in the service of Holland, came over against the Duke
of Monmouth: He was a Rebel, and did not succeed. But we all know with what
expedition the Irish Mercenary Forces were brought into Britain to oppose his
present Majesty in that glorious Enterprise for our Deliverance.

The Subjects formerly had a real Security for their Liberty, by having the
Sword in their own hands. That Security, which is the greatest of all others,
is lost; and not only so, but the Sword is put into the hand of the King by his
Power over the Militia. All this is not enough; but we must have in both
Kingdoms Standing Armies of Mercenaries, who for the most part have no other
way to subsist, and consequently are capable to execute any Commands: And yet
every Man must think his Liberties as safe as ever, under pain of being thought
disaffected to the Monarchy. But sure it must not be the ancient limited and
legal Monarchies of Scotland and England, that these Gentlemen mean. It must be
a French Fashion of Monarchy, where the King has power to do what he pleases,
and the People no security for any thing they possess. We have quitted our
ancient Security, and put the Militia into the power of the King. The only
remaining Security we have is, That no Standing Armies were ever yet allowed in
time of Peace, the Parliament of England having so often and so expressly
declared them to be contrary to Law: and that of Scotland having not only
declared them to be a Grievance, but made the keeping them up an Article in the
Forfeiture of the late King James. If a Standing Army be allowed, What
Difference will there be between the Government we shall then live under, and
any kind of Government under a good Prince? Of which there have been some in
the most despotick Tyrannies. If these be limited and not absolute Monarchies,
then, as there are Conditions, so there ought to be Securities on both sides.
The Barons never pretended that their Militia's should be constantly on foot,
and together in Bodies in times of Peace. It Is evident that would have
subverted the Constitution, and made every one of them a petty Tyrant. And it is
as evident, that Standing Forces are the fittest Instruments to make a Tyrant.
Whoever is for making the King's Power too great or too little, is an Enemy to
the Monarchy. But to give him Standing Armies, puts his Power beyond control,
and consequently makes him absolute. If the People had any other real Security
for their Liberty than that there be no Standing Armies in time of Peace, there
might be some color to demand them. But if that only remaining Security be
taken away from the People, we have destroyed these Monarchies.

It Is pretended, we are in hazard of being invaded by a powerful Enemy; shall
we therefore destory our Government? What is it then that we would defend? It
is our Persons, by the ruin of our Government? In what then shall we be
gainers? In saving our Lives by the loss of our Liberties? If our Pleasures and
Luxury make us live like Brutes, it seems we must not pretend to reason any
better than they. I would fain know, if there be any other way of making a
Prince Absolute, than by allowing him a Standing Army: if by it all Princes
have not been made Absolute; if without it, any. Whether our Enemies shall
conquer us is uncertain; but whether Standing Armies will enslave us, neither
Reason nor Experience will suffer us to doubt. It Is therefore evident, that no
pretense of danger from abroad, can be an Argument to keep up Standing Armies,
or any Mercenary Forces.

Let us now consider whether we may not be able to defend our selves by
well-regulated Militia's against any Foreign Force, tho never so formidable:
that these Nations may be free from the fears of Invasion from abroad, as well
as from the danger of Slavery at home.

After the Barons had lost the Military Service of their Vassals, Militia's of
some kind or other were established in most parts of Europe. But the Prince
having every where the power of naming and preferring the Officers of these
Militia's, they could be no Balance in Government as the former were. And he
that will consider what has been said in this Discourse, will easily perceive
that the essential Quality requisite to such a Militia, as might fully answer
the Ends of the former, must be, that the Officers should be named and
preferred, as well as they and the Soldiers paid, by the People that set them
out. So that if Princes look upon the present Militia's as not capable of
defending a Nation against Foreign Armies; the People have little reason to
entrust them with the Defense of their Liberties.

And tho upon the dissolution of that Ancient Militia under the Barons, which
made these Nations so Great and Glorious, by setting up Militia's generally
through Europe, the Sword came not into the hands of the Commons; which was the
only thing could have continued the former Balance of Government, but was
everywhere put into the hands of the King: Nevertheless ambitious Princes, who
aimed at Absolute Power, thinking they could never use it effectually to that
end, unless it were wielded by Mercenaries, and Men that had no other Interest
in the Commonwealth than their Pay, have still endeavored by all means to
discredit Militia's, and render them burdensome to the People, by never
suffering them to be upon any right, or so much as tolerable Foot, and all to
persuade the Necessity of Standing Forces. And indeed they have succeeded too
well in this Design: For the greatest part of the World has been fooled into an
opinion, That a Militia cannot be made serviceable. I shall not say 'twas only
Militia's could conquer the World; and that Princes to have succeeded fully in
the Design beforementioned, must have destroyed all the History and Memory of
Ancient Governments, where the Accounts of so many excellent Models of Militia
are yet extant. I know the Prejudice and Ignorance of the World concerning the
Art of War, as it was practiced by the Ancients; tho what remains of that
Knowledge in their Writings be sufficient to give a mean Opinion of the Modern
Discipline. For this reason I shall examine, by what has passed of late Years
in these Nations, whether Experience have convinced us, that Officers bred in
Foreign Wars, be so far preferable to others who have been under no other
Discipline than that of an ordinary and ill-regulated Militia; and if the
Commonalty of both Kingdoms, at their first entrance upon Service, be not as
capable of a resolute Military Action, as any Standing Forces. This doubt will
be fully resolved, by considering the Actions of the Marquess of Montrose,
which may be compared, all Circumstances considered, with those of Caesar, as
well for the Military Skill, as the bad tendency of them; tho the Marquess had
never served abroad, nor seen any Action, before the six Victories, which, with
Numbers much inferior to those of his Enemies, he obtained in one Year; and the
most considerable of them were chiefly gained by the assistance of the Tenants
and Vassals of the Family of Gordon. The Battle of Naseby will be a farther
illustration of this matter, which is generally thought to have been the
deciding Action of the late Civil War. The Number of Forces was equal on both
sides; nor was there any Advantage in the Ground, or extraordinary Accident
that happened during the Fight, which could be of considerable Importance to
either. In the Army of the Parliament, nine only of the Officers had served
abroad, and most of the Soldiers were Prentices drawn out of London but two
months before. In the King's Army there were above a thousand Officers that had
served in Foreign parts: Yet was that Army routed and broken by those newraised
Prentices; who were observed to be obedient to Command, and brave in Fight; not
only in that Action, but on all Occasions during that active Campagn. The
People of these Nations are not a dastardly Crew, like those born in Misery
under Oppression and Slavery, who must have time to rub off that Fear,
Cowardice and Stupidity which they bring from home. And tho Officers seem to
stand in more need of Experience than private Soldiers; yet in that Battle it
was seen, that the Sobriety and Principle of the Officers on the one side,
prevailed over the Experience of those on the other.

It Is well known that diverse Regiments of our Army lately in Flanders have
never been once in Action, and not one half of them above thrice, nor any of
them five times during the whole War. O, but they have been under Discipline,
and accustomed to obey! And so may men in Militia's. We have had to do with an
Enemy, who, tho abounding in numbers of excellent Officers, yet durst never
fight us without a visible Advantage. Is that Enemy like to invade us, when he
must be unavoidably necessitated to put all to hazard in ten days, or starve?

A good Militia is of such Importance to a Nation, that it is the chief part of
the Constitution of any free Government. For tho as to other things, the
Constitution be never so slight, a good Militia will always preserve the
public Liberty. But in the best Constitution that ever was, as to all other
parts of Government; if the Militia be not upon a right foot, the Liberty of
that people must perish. The Militia of Ancient Rome, the best that ever was in
any Government, made her Mistress of the World: But Standing Armies inslaved
that great. People, and their excellent Militia and Freedom perished together.
The Lacedaemonians continued 800 Years free, and in great Honor, because they
had a good Militia. The Swisses at this day are the freest, happiest, and the
People of all Europe who can best defend themselves, because they have the best
Militia.

I have shown that Liberty in the Monarchical Governments of Europe, subsisted
so long as the Militia of the Barons was on foot: And that on the decay of
their Militia, (which tho it was none of the best, so was it none of the worst)
Standing Forces and Tyranny have been everywhere introduced, unless in Britain
and Ireland; which by reason of their situation, having the Sea for Frontier,
and a powerful Fleet to protect them, could afford no pretense for such Forces.
And tho any Militia, however slightly constituted, be sufficient for that
reason to defend us; yet all Improvements in the Constitution of Militia's,
being further Securities for the Liberty of the People, I think we ought to
endeavor the amendment of them, and till that can take place, to make the
present Militia's useful in the former and ordinary Methods.

That the whole free People of any Nation ought to be exercised to Arms, not
only the Example of our Ancestors, as appears by the Acts of Parliament made in
both Kingdoms to that purpose, and that of the wisest Governments among the
Ancients; but the advantage of choosing out of great numbers, seems clearly to
demonstrate. For in Countries where Husbandry, Trade, Manufactures, and other
mechanical Arts are carried on, even in time of War; the Impediments of men are
so many and so various, that unless the whole People be exercised, no consider
able numbers of men can be drawn out, without disturbing those Employments,
which are the Vitals of the Political Body. Besides, that upon great Defeats,
and under extreme Calamities, from which no Government was ever exempted, every
Nation stands in need of all the People, as the Ancients sometimes did of their
Slaves. And I cannot see, why Arms should be denied to any man who is not a
Slave, since they are the only true Badges of Liberty; and ought never, but in
times of utmost Necessity, to be put into the hands of Mercenaries or Slaves:
neither can I understand, why any man that has Arms, should not be taught the
use of them.

By the Constitution of the present Militia in both Nations, there is but a
small number of the men able to bear Arms exercised; and Men of Quality and
Estate, are allowed to send any wretohed Servant in their place: so that they
themselves are become mean, by being disused to handle Arms; and will not learn
the use of them, because they are ashamed of their Ignorance: by which means
the Militia's being composed only of Servants, these Nations seem altogether
unfit to defend themselves, and Standing Forces to be necessary. Now can it be
supposed that a few Servants will fight for the defense of their Masters
Estates, if their Masters only look on? Or that some inconsiderable
Freeholders, as for the most part those who command the Militia are, should, at
the head of those Servants, expose their Lives for men of more plentiful
Estates, without being assisted by them? No Bodies of Military Men can be of
any force or value, unless many Persons of Quality or Education be among them;
and such men should blush to think of excusing themselves from serving their
Country, at least for some Years, in a military Capacity, if they consider that
every Roman was obliged to spend fifteen Years of his Life in their Armies. Is
it not a shame that any man who possesses an Estate, and is at the same time
healthful and young, should not fit himself by all means for the defense of
that, and his Country, rather than to pay Taxes to maintain a Mercenary, who
tho he may defend him during a War, will be sure to insult and enslave him in
time of Peace. Men must not think that any Country can be in a constant posture
of Defense, without some trouble and charge; but certainly it is better to
undergo this, and to preserve our Liberty with Honor, than to be subjected to
heavy Taxes, and yet have it insolently ravished from us, to our present
Oppression, and the lasting Misery of our Posterity. But it will be said, Where
are the men to be found who shall exercise all this People in so many several
places at once? for the Nobility and Gentry know nothing of the matter; and to
hire so many Soldiers of Fortune, as they call them, will be chargeable, and
may be dangerous, these men being all Mercenaries, and always the same men, in
the same Trusts: Besides that the employing such men would not be suitable to
the Design, of breeding the Men of Quality and Estate to command, as well as
the others to obey.

To obviate these Difficulties; and because the want of a good Model of
Militia, and a right Method for training people in time of Peace, so as they
need not apprehend any War, tho never so sudden, is at this day the bane of the
Liberty of Europe, I shall propose one, accommodated to the invincible
Difficulty of bringing Men of Quality and Estate, or men of any Rank, who have
passed the time of Youth, to the use of Arms; and new, because tho we have many
excellent Models of Militia, delivered to us by ancient Authors, with respect
to the use of them in time of War, yet they give us but little information
concerning the Methods by which they trained their whole People for War in time
of Peace; so that if the Model which I shall propose, have not the Authority of
the Ancients to recommend it, yet perhaps by a severe Discipline, and a right
method of disposing the minds of men, as well as forming their bodies, for
military and virtuous Actions, it may have some resemblance of their excellent
Institutions.

What I would offer is, that four Camps be formed, one in Scotland, and three
in England; into which all the young men of the respective Countries should
enter, on the first day of the two and twentieth Year of their Age; and remain
there the space of two Years, if they be of Fortunes sufficient to maintain
themselves; but if they are not, then to remain a Year only, at the Expense of
the Public. In this Camp they should be taught the use of all sorts of Arms,
with the necessary Evolutions; as also Wrestling, Leaping, Swimming, and the
like Exercises. He whose condition would permit him to buy and maintain a
Horse, should be obliged so to do, and be taught to vault, to ride, and to
manage his own Horse. This Camp should seldom remain above eight days in one
place, but remove from Heath to Heath; not only upon the account of cleanliness
and health, but to teach the Youth to fortify a Camp, to march, and to accustom
them (respect being always had to those of a weak Constitution) to carry as
much in their march as ever any Roman Soldier did; that is to say, Their
Tents, Provision, Arms, Armor, their Vtensils, and the Palizadoes of their
Camp. They should be taught to Forage, and be obliged to use the Countrymen
with all justice in their Bargains, for that and all other things they stand in
need of from them. The Food of every man within the Camp should be the same;
for Bread they should have only Wheat, which they are to be obliged to grind
with Hand-mills; they should have some Salt, and a certain number of Beeves
allowed them at certain times of the Year. Their Drink should be Water,
sometimes tempered with a proportion of Brandy, and at other times with
Vinegar. Their Clothes should be plain, coarse, and of a fashion sitted in
every thing for the Fatigue of a Camp. For all these things those who could,
should pay; and those who could not, should be defrayed by the Public, as has
been said. The Camp should be sometimes divided into two parts, which should
remove from each other many miles, and should break up again at the same time,
in order to meet upon some mountainous, marishy, woody, or in a word, cross
ground; that not only their diligence, patience, and suffering in marches, but
their skill in seizing of Grounds, posting bodies of Horse and Foot, and
advancing toward each other; their choosing a Camp, and drawing out of it in
order to a Battle, might be seen, as well as what Orders of Battle they would
form upon the variety of different Grounds. The Persons of Quality or Estate
should likewise be instructed in Fortification, Gunnery, and all things
belonging to the Duty of an Ingenier: And Forts should be sometimes built by
the whole Camp, where all the Arts of attacking and defending Places should be
practiced. The Youth having been taught to read at Schools, should be obliged
to read at spare hours some excellent Histories, but chiefly those in which
Military Actions are best described; with the Books that have been best written
concerning the Military Art. Speeches exhorting to military and virtuous
Actions, should be often composed, and pronounced publicly by such of the
Youth as were, by Education and natural Talents, qualified for it. There being
none but Military Men allowed within the Camp, and no Churchmen being of that
number, such of the Youth as may be fit to exhort the rest to all Christian and
Moral Duties, chiefly to Humility, Modesty, Charity, and the pardoning of
private Injuries, should be chosen to do it every Sunday, and the rest of that
day spent in reading Books, and in conversation directed to the same end. And
all this under so severe and rigorous Orders, attended with so exact an
execution by Reward and Punishment, that no Officer within the Camp should have
the power of pardoning the one, or withholding the other. The Rewards should be
all honorary, and contrived to suit the Nature of the different good Qualities
and Degrees in which any of the Youth had shown, either his Modesty, Obedience,
Patience in suffering, Temperance, Diligence, Address, Invention, Judgment,
Temper or Valor. The Punishments should be much more rigorous than those
inflicted for the same Crimes by the Law of the Land. And there should be
Punishments for some things, not liable to any by the common Law, immodest and
insolent Words or Actions, Gaming, and the like. No Woman should be suffered to
come within the Camp, and the Crimes of abusing their own Bodies any manner of
way, punished with death. All these things to be judged by their own Councils
of War; and those Councils to have for rule, certain Articles drawn up and
approved by the respective Parliaments. The Officers and Masters, for
instructing and teaching the Youth, in all the exercises abovementioned,
should upon the first establishment of such a Camp, be the most expert men in
those Disciplines; and brought by encouragements from all places of Europe; due
care being taken that they should not infect the youth with foreign Manners.
But afterward they ought to consist of such Men of quality or fortune as
should be chosen for that end, out of those who had formerly past two years in
the Camp, and since that time had improved themselves in the Wars; who upon
their return should be obliged to serve two years in that Station. As for the
numbers of those Officers, or Masters; their several duties; that of the
Camp-Master-General, and of the Commissaries; the times and manner of Exercise,
with diverse other particulars of less consideration, and yet necessary to be
determined, in order to put such a design in execution, for brevity's sake I
omit them, as easy to be resolved. But certainly it were no hard matter, for
men that had passed through such a Discipline as that of the Camp I have
described, to retain it after they should return to their several homes; if the
people of every Town and Village, together with those of the adjacent
Habitations, were obliged to meet 50 times in the Year, on such days as should
be found most convenient; and exercise four hours every time: for all men being
instructed in what they are to do; and the men of quality and estate most
knowing, and expert of all others, the Exercise might be performed in great
perfection. There might also be yearly in the Summer time, a Camp of some
thousands of the nearest Neighbors brought and kept together for a week to do
those Exercises, which cannot be performed in any other place: every Man of a
certain Estate being obliged to keep a Horse fit for the War. By this means it
would be easy upon any occasion, tho never so small (as for example, the
keeping of the Peace, and putting the Laws in execution where force is
necessary) or never so great and sudden (as upon account of Invasions and
Conspiracies) to bring together such numbers of Officers and Soldiers as the
exigence required, according to the practice of ancient Rome; which in this
particular might be imitated by us without difficulty: And if such a Method
were once established, there would be no necessity of keeping up a Militia
formed into Regiments of Foot and Horse in time of Peace. Now if this Militia
should stand in need of any farther improvement (because no Militia's seem
comparable to those exercised in actual War; as that of the Barons by their
constant Feuds; and that of Rome, and some other ancient Commonwealths, by
their perpetual Wars) a certain small number of Forces might be employed in any
foreign Country where there should be action; a fourth part of which might be
changed every year; that all those who had in this manner acquired experience,
might be dispersed among the several Regiments of any Army, that the defense of
these Countries should at any time call for; which would serve to confirm and
give assurance to the rest. Such a Militia would be of no great expense to
these Nations; for the mean clothing and provisions for those who could not
maintain themselves, being given only for one year, would amount to little; and
no other expense would be needful, except for their Arms, a small train of
Artillery for each Camp, and what is to be given for the encouragement of the
first Officers and Masters.

A Militia upon such a foot, would have none of the infinite and insuperable
Difficulties there are, to bring a few Men who live at a great distance from
one another, frequently together to exercise; at which consequently they must
be from home every time several days: of finding such a number of Masters, as
are necessary to train so many thousands of People ignorant of all exercise, in
so many different places, and for the most part at the same time: It would have
none of those innumerable Encumbrances, and unnecessary Expenses, with which a
Militia formed into Regiments of Foot and Horse in time of Peace is attended.
In such a Camp the youth would not only be taught the exercise of a Musket with
a few Evolutions, which is all that men in ordinary Militia's pretend to, and
is the least part of the duty of a Soldier; but besides a great many Exercises
to strengthen and dispose the Body for fight, they would learn to fence, to
ride, and manage a Horse for the War; to forage and live in a Camp; to fortify,
attack, and defend any place; and what is no less necessary, to undergo the
greatest Toils, and to give obedience to the severest Orders. Such a Militia by
sending beyond Seas certain Proportions of it, and relieving them from time to
time, would enable us to assist our Allies more powerfully than by Standing
Armies we could ever do. Such a Camp would take away the great difficulty of
bringing men of all Conditions, who have passed the time of their youth, to
apply themselves to the use and exercise of Arms; and beginning with them
early, when like wax they may be molded into any shape, would dispose them to
place their greatest Honor in the performance of those Exercises, and inspire
them with the Fires of Military Glory, to which that Age is so inclined; which
Impression being made upon their youth, would last as long as life. Such a Camp
would be as great a School of Virtue as of military Discipline: In which the
Youth would learn to stand in need of few things; to be content with that small
allowance which nature requires; to suffer, as well as to act; to be modest, as
well as brave; to be as much ashamed of doing any thing insolent or injurious,
as of turning their back upon an Enemy; they would learn to forgive Injuries
done to themselves, but to embrace with joy the occasions of dying to revenge
those done to their Country: And Virtue imbibed in younger years would cast a
Flavor to the utmost periods of life. In a word they would learn greater and
better things than the Military Art, and more necessary too, if any thing can
be more necessary than the defense of our Country. Such a Militia might not
only defend a People living in an Island, but even such as are placed in the
midst of the most warlike Nations of the World.

Now till such a Militia may be brought to some perfection, our present Militia
is not only sufficient to defend us; but considering the Circumstances of the
French Affairs, especially with relation to Spain, Britain cannot justly
apprehend an Invasion, if the Fleet of England, to which Scotland furnished
during the late War seven or eight thousand Seamen, were in such order as it
ought to be. And it can never be the Interest of these Nations to take any
other share in preserving the Balance of Europe, than what may be performed by
our Fleet. By which means our Money will be spent amongst our selves, our Trade
preserved to support the Charge of the Navy; our Enemies totally driven out of
the Sea, and great numbers of their Forces diverted from opposing the Armies of
our Allies abroad, to the defense of their own Coasts.

If this Method had been taken in the late War, I presume it would have proved,
not only more advantageous to us, but also more serviceable to our Allies than
that which was followed. And it is in vain to say, that at this rate we shall
have no Allies at all: For the weaker Party on the Continent must be contented
to accept our Assistance in the manner we think fit to give it, or inevitably
perish. But if we send any Forces beyond the Seas to join those of our Allies,
they ought to be part of our Militia, as has been said, and not Standing
Forces; otherwise, at the end of every War, the present struggle will recur,
and at one time or other these Nations will be betrayed, and a Standing Army
established: So that nothing can save us from following the Fate of all the
other Kingdoms in Europe, but putting our Trust altogether in our Fleet and
Militia's, and having no other Forces than these. The Sea is the only Empire
which can naturally belong to us. Conquest is not our Interest, much less to
consume our People and Treasure in conquering for others.

To conclude; If we seriously consider the happy Condition of these Nations,
who have lived so long under the Blessings of Liberty, we cannot but be
affected with the most tender Compassion to think that the Scots, who have for
so many Ages, with such Resolution, defended their Liberty against the Picts,
Britans, Romans, Saxons, Danes, Irish, Normans, and English, as well as against
the Violence and Tyranny of so many of their own Princes: That the English, who
whatever Revolutions their Country has been subject to, have still maintained
their Rights and Liberties against all Attempts; who possess a Country, every
where cultivated and improved by the Industry of rich Husbandmen; her Rivers
and Harbors filled with Ships; her Cities, Towns, and Villages, enriched with
Manufactures; where Men of vast Estates live in secure possession of them; and
whose Merchants live in as great splendour as the Nobility of other Nations:
that Scotland which has a Gentry born to excel in Arts and Arms: that England
which has a Commonalty, not only surpassing all those of that degree which the
World can now boast of, but also those of all former Ages, in Courage, Honesty,
good Sense, Industry, and Generosity of Temper; in whose very Looks there are
such visible Marks of a free and liberal Education; which Advantages cannot be
imputed to the Climate, or to any other Cause, but the Freedom of the
Government under which they live: I say, it cannot but make the Hearts of all
honest Men bleed to think, that in their Days the Felicity and Liberties of
such Countries must come to a Period, if the Parliaments do not prevent it, and
his Majesty be not prevailed upon to lay aside the Thoughts of Mercenary
Armies, which if once established, will inevitably produce those fatal
Consequences that have always attended such Forces in the other Kingdoms of
Europe; Violation of Property, Decay of Trade, Oppression of the Country by
heavy Taxes and Quarters, the utmost Misery and Slavery of the poorer sort, the
Ruin of the Nobility by their Expenses in Court and Army, Deceit and Treachery
in all Ranks of Men, occasioned by Want and Necessity. Then shall we see the
Gentry of Scotland, ignorant through want of Education, and cowardly by being
oppressed; then shall we see the once happy Commonalty of England become base
and abject, by being continually exposed to the brutal Insolence of the
Soldiers; the Women debauched by their Lust; ugly and nasty through Poverty,
and the want of things necessary to preserve their natural Beauty. Then shall
we see that great City, the Pride and Glory, not only of our Island, but of the
World, subjected to the excessive Impositions Paris now lies under, and reduced
to a Pedling Trade, serving only to foment the Luxury of a Court. Then will
Britain know what Obligations she has to those who are for Mercenary Armies.

FINIS.

