Clarke, Mayor.

Martis decimo die Novemb^. 1696. Annoque Regni Regis Willielini tertii,
Angliae, etc.. Octovo.

THis Court does desire Mr. Fleetwood to Print his Sermon (...) before the
Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Aldermen (...) this City, at the Guild Hall
Chap^el, on Sunday the First Day of this ^^^ant November.

Goo^^llow.

A SERMON OF THE Education of Children, Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE
THE LORD MAYOR, AND Court of Aldermen, AT GUILD HALL CHAPEL, On SUNDAY, November.
1. 1696.

By WILLIAM FLEETWOOD, Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Newborough, at the Golden-Ball in St. Paul's Church
Yard. 1696.

TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE United Parishes OF S. AUSTIN and S. FAITH.
HAving frequently intended with my self, something of this Nature, for Your
particular Use and Service, to whom, You know, I am more immediately related;
It was the easier to me, to comply with Their Desires who were willing to have
this Discourse published; because I knew I should thereby satisfy in part my
own Intentions and Design of doing You good, in this Instance: and therefore
though it be now Common, yet I desire You earnestly to make it more
particularly Yours, by a close Application of it to Your selves.

I cannot tell how a Minister can promise himself any Success in his Endeavors,
if the Parents will not believe themselves obliged (as certainly they are by
God's Commands) to educate their Children well, and bring them up in the Fear
and Nurture of the Lord; and by their Care at home in private, fit them for
those farther Instructions they are to receive in public, at the appointed
Opportunities. They are to sow the Seeds of Christ's Religion in the Childrens
Minds, and He must wisely cultivate, improve, and nourish them; They are to lay
the first Foundations in their Hearts, and He must build thereon, as God
enables him.

That this might not be a Work of Difficulty, either to Parents or to Children,
nor either of them left at an Uncertainty, the One of Teaching, and the Other
of Learning, what they ought, the Church in Her great Wisdom has collected in
Her Catechism, a short, but full and comprehensive, Summary of whatsoever a
Christian is to believe and practice to his Soul's Health, which all her
Children are to learn, remember, and consider, according to their Age and
Understanding. This is delivered in so clear a Method, in Words and Sense so
easy and intelligible, that it is not above a very mean Capacity; and yet the
Matter is so solid and substantial, that it is fit for the strongest
Understanding; the oldest Christian in the World need know no more, than what
he is to learn there in his Youth, though he will know it better and more
fully, the longer he considers it; so that the Parent, whilst he is instructing
the Children in it, will be himself a gainful Learner; more and more edified,
and grow continually in the Knowledge of his Faith and Duty.

The Neglect of this prescribed Course, has been one great Occasion, I believe,
of that wide Difference there appears of Private Peoples Judgments and Opinions
in Matters of Religion; they have taken in different Principles in their Youth,
and therefore as their Age advanced, have drawn different Conclusions srom
them, the Effects of which have been exceedingly mischievous. I do therefore
advise and desire you all to teach your Children this judicious, sound, and
truly Christian Catechism, that savours nothing of a Party or private Spirit,
but is what they may, and must, depend upon to their Lives end.

When this good Groundwork is well laid, you may with much more Ease, form and
fashion them to Virtue and Religion, by putting them in mind of the Covenant
they have made with God in Baptism, by which they stand obliged to give
themselves entirely up to Christ; to look upon him as their only Lord and
Lawgiver, their Savior and their Judge; to believe whatever he reveals, and
to fulfill whatever he commands. There also you will find the two Tables that
contain their Duty toward God and toward their Neighbor, and both of them
explained with the clearest Brevity that can be found, from whence you are to
take occasion of exciting them to a most diligent Performance of them, as also
to rebuke and punish the Neglect, or the Transgression of them. There also they
will learn the Lord's Prayer, the Prayer that Christ himself, the Son of God,
(who knew the Father's Will, and Man's Necessities the best of all Men living)
taught his Followers to use; and therefore it is such, you may be sure, as is
best fitted for our Purpose, and such as is, both for the Matter and the
Manner, acceptable to God the Father. After this follows a short but full
Account of the two Sacraments, of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper; by which they
learn the Manner how they themselves (and all true Christians ever since our
Savior's Institution of it) were initiated into Christ's Religion, namely by
being baptized in Water, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
according to Christ's Command, explained by the Universal Practice of the
Church; insomuch that they who have at any time denied or refused the Matter
and the Form of this Sacrament, have not been accounted Christians. Here they
see also what is signified by being thus baptized in Water, namely, the dying
unto Sin, and living a*new to Righteousness, i. e. the repenting of, and
forsaking all their past Sins, and living for the time to come, a Righteous and
a Holy Life, which is also the Meaning of becoming a New Man, a New Creature, a
Regenerate Person, and the like, all which is engaged for, by every one at his
Baptism, and is to be remembered, and performed for ever after. Here, lastly,
they will come to see the End of the Institution of the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, the Cause and Purpose of its being ordained, namely, For the continual
Remembrance of the Sacrifice of the Death of Christ, and of the Benefits which
we receive thereby, i. e. to put them constantly in mind, that Christ the Lord
was crucified upon the Cross; that this his Death was an attoning, expiatory
Sacrifice, and accepted by God as such; that for its Sake and Merit his Anger
is appeased, he is now reconcilable to all that will repent them of their
Sins, and forsake them, and obey the Gospel; he will forgive them the Penalty
they had incurred, and will moreover crown them in the World to come with
Everlasting Happiness. The Remembrance of this salutary Death and Sacrifice,
and the great Benefits derived to us from and by it, is the End of this
Sacrament's being instituted by Christ: and therefore to answer the End of this
Institution, they must come to the Sacrament; and when they come, the Bread
broken is to remind them of the Body of Christ, torn and suffering on the
Cross, and the Wine poured out is to remind them of the Blood of Christ that
was there shed; and then they are to call to mind the in^xpressible Benefits of
this Death, the Pardon and Forgive^ess of all the Sins which they repent of and
forsake; the Hope and good Assurance of which Pardon, and Peace, and God's
Favor, is as much the Life, the Strength and Com^rt of the Soul, as Bread and
Wine are the Support and Comfort of the Body.

Upon this Knowledge of the End of the Institution, and of the Benefits that we
receive by Christ's Death, it remains only that the young ones be acquainted
with the Preparation that is necessary to their coming to the Lord's Supper,
which they will find in the Answer to the last Question of the Catechism, which
contains the whole of what they are to do. They are to examine themselves,
whether they repent them truly of their former Sins, whether they steadfastly
purpose to lead a new and better Life for the time to come -- whether they have
a lively Faith in God's Mercy, through Christ, i. e. Whether they verily
believe that God was so exceeding Merciful and Gracious to Mankind, that for
the Sake of Christ's Obedience, Death and Sufferings, he will certainly forgive
the Sins of such as shall repent and leave them, and whether in full persuasion
of this Mercy and these*Gracious Promises, they set about Repentance: Whether
they thankfully remember Christ's Death, i. e. Whether upon the consideration
and remembrance of the mighty and amazing Miseries to which their Sins exposed
them, and from which the Death of Christ alone has freed them, they do not call
to mind this great Deliverance with the greatest Joy and Thankfulness, and
bless and magnify the Name of God who has wrought this wouderful Redemption
for them by the Death of Christ, his dear and only begotten Son. And Lastly,
whether they are in Charity with all Men.

This is the Preparation (and all the Preparation) that is necessary to the
coming to the Lord's Supper. And if People would be content to learn, wherein
this Duty consists, in the shortest, plainest, and the surest Method, they
would go no farher than the Church-Catechism; or if a little farther, it should
be but to the Communion-Service, in which they will be sure to find all that is
needful or convenient for them to know or do, before, and at, and after this
Holy Sacrament.

I have neither Authority nor Intention to discommend or disallow the use of
other Books that treat of these Matters; but you will take it on my Word, I
hope, that the shortest, and the plainest Rules of Direction are still the
best; that wherein soever other Books differ from this, they are not to be
depended on: And that multiplicity of Books is apt to beget Confusion. As far
therefore as you will let my Judgment weigh with you, I recommend it to your
Care, that you let the Church Catechism be the Ground and Foundation of what
your Children are to know of the Christian Religion; and that other good Books
be called in, as Helps to their Devotion only, or to explain the Particulars
contained therein, if they be difficult.

Whilst you are teaching, and your Children learning, all these Things, you
must be sure, of all Things in the World, to go before them with a good
Example; that is, to recommend, impress, and make your Lessons Credible. They
will understand, believe, and practice better, if they see you live as you
teach them to live. Let them know you pray to God constantly with your Family;
that you love and exercise Truth, and Honesty, and Justice in all your
Dealings; let them hear and see you chide your Servants, and Dependents, for
every Lie they tell, and every Fraud and Falsehood they are guilty of: let them
never hear you swear, or curse, or speak any Thing disrespectfully of God, or
Providence, or Holy Scriptures, or any thing of Religion; and they will then
believe you are in earnest, and be more careful of doing as you bid them, and
more fearful of offending. Let them see you go your self to Church upon the
Lord's Day, and as many of the Family as can be spared, with your Convenience,
and there behave themselves as becomes the Servants of God in his own House and
more immediate Presence: And let them never see, even in the after Part of that
good Day, any thing Light Extravagant, or Rude, but something of Respect and
Honor shown to the good Exercises that are over, and to the Day devoted by the
Church of Christ to God's Service. Away with that severe, sullen, morose
Religion, with which some Judaizing and mistaken Christians pass that Day on
one Hand, and that profane, contemptuous, court-like Observation of it on the
other; but let a decent, Christian, and good natured Carriage, temper these
Extremes; that your Children may neither dread the approach of Sunday above
other Days, nor yet long for it, as a Day of Sloth and Idleness.

I hope I may, without Offense, take this Occasion to desire such of the
Separation as are within my Parish, to take all Care they can, that both their
Children and their Servants go along with them to the Places where they serve
God themselves, or to some other certainly, and require an Account of their so
doing, that the Liberty of absenting themselves from their Parish-Churches,
indulged to them by Man's Law, be not turned to the Libertinism of serving God
no where, and Irreligion and Profaneness find those People whom the Church
looses. We must indeed, on all sides, be sollicitous lest he who sowes Division
amongst us, reap the Fruits thereof, and be the greatest Gainer; of this, in
earnest, there was never greater need than now, for Christianity and good
Morality had never more, or greater Enemies; and therefore all our joint
Endeavors will be little enough to oppose the soft Insinuations of their
secret Underminers, and the most impudent and bold Attacks of their avowed and
open Adversaries. I am sorry we can date the mighty Growth and Progress of
these Mischiefs within the Compass of so few Years, when we were hoping still
for better Things. But let this evil State provoke us to a greater Care and
Zeal in the Defense of Virtue and Religion, for the future.

You must all of you help to make this ugly Digression pertinent and useful, by
taking all imaginable Care to breed up a Generation better than the present,
and such as may do these wicked Days all the Disgrace and Shame they can, by a
most firm adherence to the Christian Faith, by a lively Sense of Virtue and
Religion in the Soul, made manifest by a most Virtuous and Religious outward
Practice.

I have done, you see, an unusual Thing, in fixing a Preface to a Sermon, but
it was to make the Sermon more yours than any ones else; and if the Sermon be
better read for the Sake of the Preface, or if the Preface gain its end without
the Sermon, I shall obtain the Point I aim at, and will answer for the
absurdity or newness of the Method. You know I am every way your Debtor in
Religious Matters, and I assure you I am otherwise,

Your Affectionate Humble Servant, W. Fleetwood.

PROVERBS xiii. 24. He that spares the rod hates his son: but he that loves
him, chasteneth him betimes.


THE Education of Children is, and has always been accounted, a thing of such
Importance, that all who have at any time discoursed or written of Government,
have found themselves obliged to dwell particularly on that Subject. Aristotle
thinks it a matter of such moment, that he positively determines it ought not
to be left to the Parents choice; but that the Public (whose especially the
Children are) should be entrusted only with that Charge: and Plato lays down
such severe Rules, that it is a question whether they were ever practicable, or
only fitted to his fansied Commonwealth. And indeed, considering that they are
the Seed of Empires, Kingdoms, Corporations, and Families, and that the Good
and Welfare of them all, depends entirely on them, there cannot be too much
care employed about their bringing up: there are so many hazards from the
sensible and tender dispositions of these nice Plants, from noxious Airs,
inclement Seasons, and their own natural Luxuriancy, that it requires a great
deal of skill to cultivate them as they should, and as they well deserve. And
it is with this prospect (and a larger one besides, the World to come) that the
Spirit of God has inserted so many positive Commands, and so many wise Rules
of training Children up, into the Holy Scriptures. For though One were enough,
when found there, to make it our Duty, yet there are Many to enforce it
farther; and though the Spirit of God inspired a-like the Herdsman's Son, with
Solomon the King's, and made them a*like infallible, in what they should
deliver to the World, yet in compliance (may be) with our Weakness, and the
fond Conceits we have of human Reason and Understanding, it is so contrived,
that there are more Precepts concerning Childrens Education found in Solomon
alone, than all the Scriptures else: that they who take no notice of the
Inspiration, might yet be moved by the Authority of the greatest Wisdom, and
the best Experience, and the thing however done. I am to confine my self to
that of my Text, which is as comprehensive as any: and will,

First, Explain the Terms of it; And,

Secondly, Show the Truth of the Propositions contained therein; And,

Lastly, Make what Application may be seasonable and useful.

And, First, of the Terms. To spare the Rod, in the first Clause, being opposed
to chastening, in the second; by the Rod must needs be meant, not only that
particular Instrument of Punishment, but every thing besides that may prove the
Means of our Correction and Amendment. And so in Job 33. 19. He is chastened
with pain upon his bed. And so in Psalm. 69. 10. I wept, and chastened my soul
with fasting. And so in Isa. 53. 5. The chastisement of our peace was on him;
by which is meant the Miseries, Afflictions, Pains, and Torments that our Lord
endured both in Life and Death for our sakes: and so in a great many other
places. So that by Chastisement is here intended every Instrument of
Correction, every Means of effecting what we intend by chastising. And to spare
the Rod, is, not to use those Means, not to employ those Instruments for the
correcting and amending what we see amiss in Children, which are proper to
their Age, suited to their Dispositions, and proportioned to their Faults;
whether it be Reproof and sharp Admonition, Restraint of Liberty,
Disappointment of their Wills, or corporal Punishment: to do (in a word)
whatever is necessary, convenient, or becoming the Children and the Parents in
their respective circumstances, is to chasten, and to neglect the doing it, is
to spare the Rod. Let us see in the next place, what it is to love and hate
one's Son, which are the rest of the Terms.

By loving and by hating is not here meant the exerting actually those Passions
in the Heart, for then the Text would be untrue: it is by no means likely that
an indulgent Parent sparing of his Child, should actually hate it in his Heart,
or that the punishing it should be the Effect or Sign of natural Love, for the
contrary to this, is mostly true; the Sparing it is the Fruits of natural
Fondness and Affection, and the Correcting it, is not the choice of the Heart,
but the effects of a Necessity imposed by Prudence and Consideration, and Hopes
and Fears of what may come to pass. By loving and by hating therefore is to be
understood, the acting agreeably to the Reason, and not the Blindness of those
Passions; the producing such effects as are in God's Accounts, and wise Men's
too, and in our own when freed from partial Prejudices, the Consequence and
Fruits of Love and Hatred acting regularly; such as are commonly esteemed the
Effects of those two Causes, whether they indeed proceed from them or no: So
that to love and hate ones Children, is to behave ones self so toward them,
that they and others may be convinced we love or hate them, by such Fruits as
reasonably and ordinarily are the Products of those two Passions, whether those
Passions actually possess the Heart or no, of which we can convince none but
our selves.

From the Terms thus explained, it will not be difficult, to show, in the
second Place, the the Truth of the two Propositions, how and in what Sense he
may be said to hate his Son, that spares the Chastisement of him, and how he
loves him who chastises him betimes: For if we are to reckon of Love and
Hatred by the Effects, then it is easy to discern when Parents hate their
Children, namely, when either through Neglect or Fondness they permit them to
enter on at first, or afterward continue in such Courses, as will bring them
to inevitable Ruin; when by their want of Care, Instruction, or Correction,
those Children fall into such Miseries, as the utmost Hatred of their most
professed inveterate Enemies, could neither wish nor make them greater; whatever
Love there may be at the bottom. What signifies the crowning of a Victim with a
Garland, when it is still dressed up to Death? That Mother is as much a
Murtheress who stifles her Child in a Bed of Roses, as she that does it with a
Pillow-bear. The End and Mischief is as great, though the Means and Instrument be
not the same. And where two Causes will produce the same Effect, with equal
Certainty, it is no great Matter which of them it is, nor whether you give it a
hard or gentle Name. It is all one as if a Parent truly hated his Child, if
through his Default, he fall into those Evils, which will naturally work his
Mischief or Undoing; that Fault has the same effect that downright Hatred would
have had. And then for the Will, though he cannot be said to will downright the
Evil of his Children, yet if he will the Means which have a natural tendency to
produce that End, he is understood, in the Accounts of Reason, to will the End,
and to be guilty of the Evil in a great Degree. And so we are said to will a
great many things in Scripture, not that we will them properly, but that we do
those things, from whence the others naturally and necessarily follow. So God
expostulates, in Ezekiel. 18. 31. and 33. 11. Why will ye die, O house of Israel!
Not that the Israelites willed or desired to die, for that is a thing
incredible, if not impossible, in the hardest Sense of that Word, but that they
willed such things, as would unavoidably bring that Death, and most inevitably
ruin them. So in Psalm. 106. 24. Yea they despised that pleasant land. Not that
they despised or rejected the Land of Canaan it felf, but rejecting the only
Means God had appointed to bring them thither, which were Faith and Trust in
him, and Patience and Obedience to his Laws, they are said to despise the Land
it self. So in Pro. 17. 19. He that exalts his gate seeks destruction, i.
e. He that lives above his Fortune and Condition, or that opens wide the
Flood*Gates to Iniquity, seeks Destruction; the meaning is, that such a One
shall find Destruction, he is as One that seeks and makes Inquiry after it, and
he shall surely find it. So that Men are not charged with the Mischiefs only
they intend directly, but with such also as are like to follow whether they
intend them or not, nay, though they should intend the contrary. He who takes the
natural and ready Means to any End, is strongly guilty of the evil Consequence,
although he should not only not design that End and Consequence, but hope and
wish it might not come to pass; because neither Hopes, nor Wishes, nor Designs
can hinder natural or moral Causes from producing natural and moral Effects.
But neither is it only so in acting, but in permitting also; he is said, upon
the same Account and Reason, to be guilty of the Evils that ensue, whose Duty
it was, and in whose Power it was, to have prevented them, but did not: It were
cruel and unjust, to charge a Man with all the Evils he should by Duty prevent,
but could not, for want of Power: And it is not always reasonable, to charge a
Man with the Eviis he could by his Power have prevented, but did not, because
he was not obliged in Duty; because the Signification of Power, in such a Case,
is to be determined by the convenience of Time, and Place, and Person, and a
great many other Circumstances of which a Man is only able to judge himself:
But where Power and Duty meet together, there the Obligation is unquestionable,
and the Neglect of doing what we should and conld is inexcusable. The
Application of these Rules to the Case in Hand, is, I think, as evident as the
Reason of those Rules. It is plain from the Light of Nature, and the use of
Reason, as well as God's Determination in Scripture, that a Parent is obliged
to educate his Children in the best, and most religious Manner possible, to
instruct them in all that is Good, and warn them of all that is Evil; and it is
as plain from the corruption of our Nature, the perverseness of our Wills, and
from lamentable Experience, that unless this Care be taken, Children will
unavoidably be ruined; and therefore he who neglects this Education, which he
might and should look after, is properly enough said to undo his Children; and
as he who should designedly ruin his own Children, would deservedly be said to
hate them, so may he also, who neglects their Education, if such Neglect be the
natural and ready Way to Ruin, though he don't design that Ruin, and though
that Neglect do not proceed from Hatred, yet he is said, and properly enough,
both to undo and hate them,

Now the Evils that proceed from a careless, or from bad Education, from want
of good Instruction, of Reproof, Restraint, or of due Chastisement in any Kind,
are Infinite and Pernicious, they are Numberless, and they are Intolerable. I
believe it were hard to reckon up any considerable Calamity that has befallen a
Kingdom, City, Family, or private Person, but might be justly charged upon this
Head in some Measure.

The Reasoning of Plato is both just and excellent upon the Education of Cyrus
and his Son Cambyses, Darius and his Son Xerxes, and the following Kings of
Persia, and shows the exact and perfect Correspondence betwixt the Ways of
bringing up those Princes, and the Quality and Fortune of their Government and
Kingdoms whilst they lived.

Cyrus having been brought up still in painful and laborious Exercises, and in
a handsome kind of Equality of almost all Things betwixt himself and his
Companions, his Reign was full of Glory and Success, and every thing that is
Good and Laudable. But whilst himself was reaping Palms and Crowns of Victory,
he left the Education of his Son to the Ladies who brought him up in the
luxurious softness of the Medes, where no body durst speak a word of Truth or
Honesty, for fear of wounding his Ears, which were used to nothing but to
compliment and flattery. And hence it came, that the Reign and Government of
this soft Prince was full as Infamous and Unfortunate both to himself and
People as that of his brave Father had been Glorious, Wise, and Happy, unto
both. Darius Hystaspes afterward ascended the Throne, and as his Education had
not been in the Delights of a Court, but Hard, and Rough, in Labors and
Fatigues, so his Reign resembled in a Manner that of Cyrus, both for Glory and
for Conquest: But whilst he and his Compeers were spreading every where the
Persian Honor by their Gallantry and brave Achievements, Xerxes, his Son, was
left in Women's Hands, and from them had just such another Education as Cambyses
had, and reigned accordingly, leaving wherever he came, the shameful Marks of a
prodigious Power put into the Hands of an ambitious Madman.

Darius was indeed a great deal more to blame than Cyrus, because he availed
not himself of so notorious an Example of Miscarriage, nor procured a better
Education for his Son; but that is not the only Use that we may make of these
great Instances, one cannot choose but see, and lament too, that the Fate and
Fortune of great Empires, the Welfare and the Ruin of so many Hundred
Thousands should depend upon the Care and the Neglect of a Parent, upon the
Improvement or the Sottishness of one Body. But this would not touch us so near
we think, if it were not also true in lesser Matters, and as fatal to private
Families. The good or evil Education of Children, does not only affect
themselves, but all the Stock and Kindred more or less; there is hardly any
body so inconsiderable, but some body may be bettered, and some body prejudiced
by him; there is no body stands so single and remote, but if he falls, there is
some one hurt besides himself, directly or indirectly: which as it is a Motive
to induce every Relation to see after the Improvement of Children, as it falls
in their Way, so it is a special Argument to Parents, to attend more heedfully
to the well educating of their Children, because the Welfare and the Prejudice
of so many other People does in a great Measure depend thereon. But supposing
the Evil were single, that neither Commonwealth, nor Family, nor Parent were
endamaged (as they all are) by want of Education, yet the Evils that befall the
Children, are so intolerably many, and pernicious both to Soul and Body, that
those may well be said to hate them, that do not, when they might and should,
prevent them.

Can we see a Man that has wholly renounced to Truth and good Faith, so
entirely possessed with the Spirit of Falsehood, Lying and Deceit, that one
knows not how to believe a Word he says, nor how to trust him with the least
Concern? Can we see a Man so ignorant of God and Goodness, of Religion and his
Duty, and of all Things Spiritual, that one would think he were newly born into
the World, and had not yet attained the Use of Reason, nor indeed the Use of
Speech, and Language; and another so exceeding skilful in those Matters, and of
so sharp a Wit and penetrating Judgment, that he knows very well that there is
no such thing as God and Soul, or any thing but gross substantial Matter,
modified with great variety? Can we hear another talk so loudly, and so
frequently of God, that his Mouth is filled with nothing else, and yet at last
it should be all in his Dishonor and Defiance, in wounding Oaths, in raging
Blasphemies, and dreadful Imprecations, without Temptation, without Pleasure,
without Profit; and at last without his Knowledge and Design? Can we see
another versed in all the Species of Intemperance, practiced in all the Arts of
Luxury and Wantonness, and devoted wholly to excess, a perfect Slave to his
voracious Appetite, and whose heart and Soul is in his Dish? Another so
intoxicated with the Love of Drink, that if 'twere possible to drown himself,
he would, devoting both the Day and Night to that excess, having no other
Business, nor other Pleasure and Diversion than Intemperance, neglecting all
Concerns, forgetting all his Duty both to God and Man, a Reproach to Nature,
Scandal to Religion, Useless to all the ends and purposes of living; and not
only so, but by his bad Example, and the cursed Consequences of those Courses,
ruinous to himself and Family, and a most pernicious Creature to the
Commonwealth. And another so enfeebled by his Lusts, so debilitated both in
Soul and Body, by his exorbitant Indulgence to those brutal Longings, that he
is scarce the Shadow of a Man; dull of Apprehension, weak in Imagination,
failing in Memory, and moap'd in his Understanding. In a word, as impotent of
Mind as Body, and whose Soul is as loose about him as his Limbs.

Can one see, I say, these, and a thousand other Evils and Disorders, with all
their ugly Consequences, reign and rage about the World continually, and know
at the same time they are the natural Consequences of a loose and careless
Education, and might in a great measure, have been prevented by Advice,
Restraint, and punishing betimes; can one see and know this, and doubt at the
same time, whether our Parents hated us or no, who should and could, but would
not save us from them? What could our greatest Enemy have done besides? He
would have taken the same courses; for one that he exercises as he did Job,
with Sorrows and Afflictions, he ruins a thousand by Indulgences; it is the
End he aims at, which is our destruction, and it is no matter by what means he
comes about it. If Eutrapelus's Presents are sure to prove as fatal to a weak
Mind, as a Dagger in a Man's Heart, or a Glass of Poison in his Bowels, what
signify the shows of Love, and the Pretense of Friendship, which prove as
deadly as the Assaults of open Enmity? What signifies it, that the Child is the
Delight of its Parents Eyes, and the Idol of their Hearts; the perpetual Object
of their Thoughts, and the perpetual Theme of their Discourse, that they
discern new Beauties daily in it, secret Charms, and Excellencies
undiscoverable to all the World besides; hear Music in his Voice, and Wit in
every Word, and Grace and Comeliness in every Action. If Care be not taken to
render him as excellent indeed and to himself, and as amiable to others, by
Virtue, Goodness, Sweetness and Humanity, as he is to them by an abused Fancy.
All other Demonstrations are but Demonstrations of their own Fondness to, and
Love of their own self, and end in their own Complacence and Delight. If you
would convince another of your Love, it is he that must feel the effects of it,
in and upon himself, as well as you. It is otherwise like the Charity of good
Words, the wishing of Alms, and Food, and Raiment, with which a Man may be
starved with Cold and Hunger. The Love that terminates in Fondness, and the
little trifling (if no worse) effects of that, can no more properly be called
the Love of ones Children, than the bidding the hungry be filled, the thirsty
be satisfied, and the naked be clothed, without supplying those Necessities,
can be called relieving them. But the Parallel will hold no farther, for he
that relieves not the distressed, does them at least no harm or injury; whereas
the Parent that with all this dotage, takes not care to educate his Children
virtuously and well, does them the greatest injury and mischief in the World;
mispends the only proper time and season of their Improvement, deprives them of
all the Advantages and Opportunities of becoming useful to the Public, a
Support to the Family, a comfortable Relation, and happy People themselves: and
not only so, but exposes them defenseless, destitute and naked to abundance of
Hazards and Temptations; to a contagious Air in the most sensible and tender
Age; to a vicious World, with vicious Inclinations; to combat with those Foes,
with whom our Hearts do naturally conspire; to meet those Dangers we rejoice to
run into; to vanquish those Temptations which we seek and hunt for; to resist
those evils we had rather should prevail than be subdued; to be left, in a
word, to our selves, to the Naughtiness of our own Hearts, and the Dictates of
unruly heedless Nature, to engage with so many Sins, and so many Snares, as are
commonly a match sufficient for the greatest Care, and greatest Watchfulness,
and greatest Prudence, together with the ordinary Supplies of God's Grace, is
to be ruined and undone without peradventure. And if these are not true effects
of Hatred, if these are not the Tokens of the greatest Ill Will, and the most
improved refined Malice, we are yet to learn what those Words mean. And this I
hope is so evident from the sense of the Thing, from the reason of the Words,
and from the experience of the World, that there is little occasion to press
you with the Authority of the Text, and to insist upon it, that it is King
Solomon inspired by God that says, That he that spares the Rod, hates his
Son. It will be somewhat clearer by considering the other Clause in the Text,
and seeing what are the effects of Love, which is early Chastisement. He that
loves his Son, chasteneth him betimes.

I have already made appear, that Love and Hatred, in these cases, can only be
securely judged of by the Effects; not by the Feelings, Motions* and Affections
of the Parents Heart, but by the Fruits and Consequences, of which the Children
must be sensible themselves, and all the World be Judges. For the ground of all
this mischief is, that Parents commonly consult with no body but themselves, to
know if they love their Children, and finding quickly by the Reply their Hearts
make, that they love them, as they love their Eyes; they rest contented with
the Answer, and use them indeed as tenderly: whereas they should enquire of
Strangers and of wise Men, impartial and unprejudiced; they should take their
Informations from Reafon and good Sense, from the Experience of the Aged, and
such as study more particularly this Affair; and they would show them, by the
effects alone, whether they loved or no: the Marks and Tokens of Affection
would be visible in Manners and Instruction, beyond the Power of being
deceived; and if this be too much, let them learn the Truth, from the Pity of
some, and the Reproach of others, and from the common Rumors of the
Neighborhood. Every body but themselves, will tell them, that Love of Children
must appear by its Effects and Fruits, and no other thing can possibly convince
another of that Love, though they themselves are never so persuaded that they
do, and to confirm it could be content to die. But of this enough already, and
also what it is to chasten; it remains that I say a word or two of the proper
Season, and that is betimes, he that loves him chasteneth him betimes* either
betimes with respect to his Age, or with respect to his Faults.

First, with respect to his Age. It is, in every thing, of great Importance,
how we begin, what Grounds we lay, and what Foundation it is we build upon: if
this be not right, the rest is but Time and Pains misspent, and will end in Loss
and Disappointment. It is as a Man that sets out false, every step that he
proceeds, is so much out of his way, and he must return and begin again. And so
it is with the Journeyings of Life; if in our early Youth we set out false,
fall into evil Practices, or be corrupted with pernicious Maxims, it is either
a great chance that we never see our Error at all, but blindly still proceed
at all adventure; or if we do, we find our selves constrained to begin anew,
to return to the place from whence we first fet out, to our intolerable
trouble and vexation. What a deal of human Life is spent, not in weaving a new
web, but in unravelling the old; not in learning new Lessons of Truth and
Virtue, but in unlearning those of Vice and Falsehood; in forgetting of evil
Principles, and laying down old Prejudices; in stripping our selves of our
accustomed Habits, in parting with our old Acquaintances, in forsaking our old
Friends, and in a manner tearing out our Vitals, and rending of our Hearts
asunder: all which might, in great measure, be prevented, by an early Seasoning
in the ways of Goodness. It was in prospect of this, that one of the Ancients
would have Children accustomed to love and praise with delight all virtuous
Actions, and detest all Vices, even before they attained the Use of Reason, he
would have them constantly observe, know them completely, and form in their
Minds perfect Idea's of them; and observing that Children are first of all
affected with the Sense of Pleasure and of Pain, he would have them used,
though never so little and young, to take or think there is no Pleasure but in
Goodness, Virtue, Temperance, Justice, and the like; nor feel or think there is
any great Pain but in those things that are truly evil, Vice and Sin. The thing
is carried certainly too high, and the Lesson too refined and subtle to be put
in practice: but the thing he means is this; that the Preventions and
Prepossessions of Virtue, Goodness, and Religion, should answer at least the
Prejudices of our natural Corruption, and that Propensity and Inclination to
Folly and to Sin, we bring along with us into this World; that the Artificial
Principles of Education, might be of equal poise with our original Corruption,
till the use of our Understanding bear down the Scale on the right side: and if
it be better to prevent, than cure an Evil, to save from Danger, than deliver
out of it, then it is better to begin betimes with chastening of our Children,
to make them wise at our expense, to let them know no Sin but by description;
to hinder them from making an Experiment so very unprofitable at best, and
fatal in the Event, most commonly.

But, Secondly, betimes is also to be understood with respect to the Fault; the
first respecting Age, would, if 'twere possible, prevent the evil, this latter
is to put a speedy stop to it, to hinder it from growing any farther; the first
Advice is, to take all care imaginable, that no corrupt or noxious Weeds should
spring up, in that pure and tender Soil; the second is to root them out
betimes, if once they come; so that to chasten betimes, is to see, that
Punishment do constantly attend the Crime, before it be forgotten, and before
an evil habit be contracted by the frequent repetition of evil Acts.

First, Before it be forgotten; as well that it may not appear to proceed from
a delight in Punishment, or to be the effects of studied and deliberate
Cruelty, as also that the Fault being fresh in Memory, the Justice and
Reasonableness of the Infliction may the better appear, and make the deeper
Impression on the Mind, and raise the greater Aversation and Abhorrence of the
Thing, that Impunity may not breed Security in Sin; and that Children may not
argue as older People often do, that because Sentence is not speedily executed
against an evil Work, therefore their Hearts should be fully set in them, to do
Evil. It Is a false and vicious Way of Arguing, but because it is obvious,
natural, and too too easy, it should be silenced quickly, and convicted of its
Falsehood; that it may not impose on them a second Time.

But, Lastly, and most especially, for fear of evil Habits being contracted,
the Dread of Punishment is the most natural Restraint upon the Mind, it is the
most powerful Motive to Obedience, the very Life of all Laws, and without
which they would be but a dead Letter; and all the Reason in the World they
should be so; for who would obey against his Interest, or who would practice
against his inclination, without fear? and who would fear without Punishment?
according therefore to the Degrees of Impunity, which Men can find or fancy,
will their Obedience to the Laws, or Disobedience prove. And so it is, even in
the smallest Matters that relate to Children, they naturally incline the wrong
Way, and are kept strait by forcible Coercion; the Dread of Punishment is the
Restraint that lies most powerfully upon them, it is the Consideration of that,
that is their Motive to Obedience, and the Discouragement that keeps them from
offending: and he that removes that Bar, lays them exposed and open to every
Danger and Temptation. But nothing does this more effectually, than suffering
them to sin at first without Reproof and Punishment; this strangely lessens the
Guilt and Horror of their Faults within their own Minds, gives them Degrees of
Confidence in Wickedness, and makes them think it no such heinous Matter, and
venture on it frequently and freely, till it at last becomes habitual, and is
rooted firmly in them: and then the Danger is a thousand times the greater, and
the Pains of remedying all these Mischiefs infinitely more. So that allowing
that they must some time or other root these Evils out, free them from the
Bondage and Captivity of their Lusts and Passions, and rid them of all their
bad and foolish Principles, and set them in the Ways of Virtue and Sobriety
again, allowing, I say, that this must needs be done, that they cannot possibly
be Safe or Happy withont it, nay, that they must be miserable here and more
than so hereafter. Allowing of all this, it is demonstrable, that it is not
only a Piece of the greatest Wisdom to set about it betimes, but of the
greatest Mercy and Compassion in the World, even in the Judgment of the
tenderest and most pitying Mother. It Is like putting one to Death, to save a
Hundred by the Terror of the Example, which may be Justice to the Offender, but
is in truth a Kindness to the rest. If one Reproof and Admonition, will prevent
the Occasion of twenty more, each one as sharp and terrible, it would be
Cruelty to spare it. If an early restraint of undue Liberty, will prevent
Licentiousness hereafter, which must be restrained with Chains and Dungeons,
who would not think it a Mercy to be restrained betimes? It is better sure to
break us of our Wills betimes, and to deny us our Satisfactions in small and
trifling Things, before we can have set our Hearts upon them, than to let our
Wills and Inclinations gather Strength, and our Affection settle and grow firm,
(...) and then begin to fall upon us; the one is only as the bending, the other
as the breaking, of an Arm. A little Pain, and Trouble, and Uneasiness will
serve at first to set us right again, when a Continuance in our Evil State, and
a contracted Habit, will require a great deal of Patience, and put us to a
great deal of Torment. A little Care and a little Strength, will serve to keep
a young and tender Graft in uprightness and order, which if permitted to grow
awry for some time, must suffer violence and great distortion, before it will
be strait again. The older we grow in evil Practices and evil Maxims, the
older they grow too, and take the faster hold, and root the deeper in us, and
consequently are removed with greater difficulty. So that allowing, that there
is an absolute Necessity of their being removed at length it is plain and
manifest beyond denial, that it is not only better both for Parent and for
Child, that it be done betimes, but that it is a Piece of Cruelty both in the
one, and to the other, to deferr it, till the vicious Habit is contracted; and
consequently that the Truth of the Proposition in the Text does visibly appear,
that he that loves his Son chastneth him betimes. And having done with that, I
am now to make Application of what has been said, and it shall be to the
Parties here concerned.

First, The Parent.

Secondly, The Children, and to both in short.

First, To the Parent. To show you the necessity there is of bringing up your
Children under an early and severe discipline, the Spirit calls the doing of it
Love, which is a Term so fit and so expressive, that Nature seems to have
appropriated it to Parents in such manner, that they are fond of the Name, even
when they have not the Thing; they would be thought to love even when they
don't, it looks so like their own, and what they should do: and the Neglect of
this he calls hatred, a Term from which all Parents naturally abhor. But that
you might not be deceived, and make your Judgments from the Passions and
Affections of your own Hearts, he describes this Love and Hate by such Effects
as are not usually the Products of those Passions in the Hearts of Parents; but
such as are so in God's Accounts, and wise Men's, and Childrens themselves when
they grow up to Years of Understanding; and therefore that you should not set
the movings of your Hearts, and your own fond Opinions and conceits of
Kindness, against the Reason, Judgment, and Experience of the whole World, and
oftentimes your own: But freeing your selves as much as may be, from the
Partialities of Nature, and your P^arental Prejudices, deal with your own as
freely and as wisely as you would with the Children of a Forreigner and
Stranger, believing there is need of equal Care, and equal Rigor, in treating
with your own as you can visibly discern there is, in treating with another.
This is the only true and lasting Kindness you can do them; all other Tokens of
your Love, but that of good Discipline, will die with you, or may be taken from
them by sundry Chances and Misfortunes. This is the only Treasure and
Possession you can leave them, of which they cannot be deprived by Thieves and
Robbers; out of the Power of Chance, and above the Reach and Malice of the
subtilest and most formidable Enemy. This alone, without any other Accession,
often proves the Foundation of a lasting Happiness; but every thing besides,
without this, signify at least nothing, but are most commonly the Instruments
of greater Mischief, and the Occasions of greater falling. And though it cannot
be done without reluctance and some uneasiness on both Parts, yet it must needs
be done however: It is but like removing Knives and Instruments of Danger out
of their Way, for fear of hurting them, notwithstanding all their cryings and
impatience after them; or like the administering severe Physic, to prevent a
growing Sickness, notwithstanding all their loathings and resistance: Your
Fondness seldom hinders you from this, and yet severe and early Discipline, is
but an equal crossing of their Wills, an exercising of their Patience, and
applying as uneasy Remedies to Evils much more dangerous, and to effect a Good
much more considerable than that of Health it self. It is not easy to
determine how far Childrens Faults are chargeable upon their Parents; there are
too many, and too intricate Circumstances to be considered, before one can
decisively pronounce on such Matters: But neither of them are the safer for
this Uncertainty and Doubt: The Children shall unquestionably suffer for their
own Sins, and the Parents as unquestionably for their Neglect: They have both
of them Guilt enough, and both of them shall have enough of Punishment; the one
for not having done what they should, the other for doing what they should not.
Not that after all the Care, and Discipline, and early Chastisement, the Parent
is secure of the Event, but secure of himself, and his Design: He has done his
Duty, and must leave the issue in the hands of of God; he has taken the
natural, ready, reasonable, and usual, and appointed Means, and if the Strength
of Temptations, and the Violence of the Children's Passions, or the
Perverseness of their Wills, obstruct and hinder these Means from attaining of
their good End, he has freed his Soul; the Parent may be, after that sad and
unfortunate, but has removed his Guilt and Punishment; and, next to the
effecting what we would, is the satisfaction of having done what one should.
And so much for Application to the Parent.

A word or two to the other Party, and I have done; and that, not to persuade
you that Reproof, Restraint, and Punishment are things eligible, or no such
grievous and uneasy States as they are fansied, for they are undoubtedly
uneasy States, and just as bad as you experience them to be; there is no
arguing against sense, or persuading against feeling: but that you would
believe, since they proceed from People of the greatest Love and Tenderness,
and sore against their Inclinations, that they are the most natural and
necessary Means of effecting the greatest Good, and preventing the greatest
Evils in the World, and so designed by those that do inflict them. It is true
what St. Paul observes in another case, Heb. 12. I1. that no chastisement for
the present seems to be joyous, but grievous; nevertheless afterward, it
yields the peaceable fruit of Righteousness unto them which are exercised
thereby. You cannot love Correption and Restraint, but when you shall hereaster
see and feel the Effects of all this careful Discipline, in the Fear of God, in
the Government of your Passions, in Temperance, in Chastity, in Patience under
evils, in bearing Disappointments, in the Joys of Innonence, and the Comforts
of a good Conscience; then you will bless your Parents and Instructors, who by
their Admonitions, seasonable Reproofs, and early Chastisements, delivered you
from the Snares of Sin and Death, from the Plague of a guilty Mind, from an
uneasy Remembrance of what is past, and a fearful looking for of Evils to
come, which you will then desire to have avoided, though with the utmost Pain
and Torment, and curse the Indulgence that prevented it. You will have other
Notions and Opinions of the Love of Parents and Instructors than you now have;
and therefore, in the mean time, let the Reason, Wisdom, and Experience of all
Ages convince you, that the Courses taken, to make you good and happy, are not
only fit and suited to your Age, and Tempers, but necessary and unavoidable,
though for the present they appear so grievous and unacceptable; and therefore
ben't so hasty and impatient under them, nor covet so to be delivered from
them: be not so fond of immature Manhood, only because you think it is a State
of Freedom from the Bondage of your Discipline. That Age has no such Charms in
it as you imagine, and when aspired to so ambitiously, and so unseasonably,
it is only to perfect your Destruction, and complete your Misery the sooner; it
is according to the good or ill Improvement of this your Season of Discipline,
that Manhood shall prove more or less comfortable: the Ground is now a
cultivating, the Seed is now a sowing, that shall spring up to lasting Honor
and Advantage, or to your lasting Shame and Ruin. And therefore though the
Heats of Fancy, the Vigor of your springing Youth, and Fervor of Complexion,
may suggest both strange and forward things, yet trust them not, nor listen to
them. It is but like the Gaiety that springs up from the Fumes of New Wine,
that warm and delight Men for a moment, but soon evaporate, and leave the Heart
in greater Damps and Melancholy. You will quickly find the Mischiefs of
forsaking Discipline, and all those gay Expectances will vanish, and conclude
in lamentable Disappointments; but the trouble is, that then Repentance comes
too late, the Time is irrecoverable, and the Evil is irremediable. And
therefore, to conclude, learn to be wise in this your hour, the Wisdom at
least, of suffering others to be wise and careful for you, in things of which
you have as yet no Knowledge or Experience, and yet so necessary to you, that
thereupon depends the Welfare and Felicity of all your Lives.

FINIS.

