The Dead Saint Speaking. OR, A SERMON PREACHED Upon Occasion of the Death of
that Eminent Man, Mr. MATTHEW NEWCOMEN, Sometimes Minister of the Gospel at
Dedham in Essex: Who dyed at LEYDEN. Wherein is succinctly discoursed (to a
popular Auditory in Dedham) what Instructions are given and sealed to the
Living, by the Death of the righteous Servants of God.

By J. F. Minister of the Gospel.

Prove. 10.7. The memory of the just is blessed.

Psalm. 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

LONDON: Printed by A. M. and R. R. for Edward Giles, Bookseller in St. Andrews
Parish in Norwich. 1679.

TO THE READER.
I Know not how I am induced to prefix a few lines to this Anonymous discourse,
unless from the great kindness I have to the memory of that Reverend person,
whose death gave occasion to it. A person whom I had the happiness to be
acquainted with for the space of about thirty years; during which time, and
since that time, I have had the happiness to be acquainted with very many
learned and pious men. But this I shall say, I never knew any that excelled
him, considering him as a Minister in the Pulpit, a Disputant in the Schools,
and a desirable companion. In the first capacity, his gift in prayer was
incomparable: He was a solid, painful, pathetick and persuasive Preacher. I
have often thought, that if Moral Suasion would have done the work, (though God
blessed him with very many, yet) he would have had many more Converts than he
had. I have known very few his fellows, either in pleading with God on the
behalf of men, or with men on the behalf of God; he had the true abilities and
(...) of a Preacher: He succeeded that great man, Mr. John Rogers of Dedham; of
whom I remember what himself said in his Verses he made upon his Death (whiles
I was a Schoolboy in the Town), Since Peter's days, scarce ever any
Fired so many.


But their gifts were very different. Mr. Rogers was a grave, severe, solid
Divine; his great gift lay in a peculiar gesture, action, and behavior, in the
delivery of what solid matter he had prepared; so as few heard him without
trembling at the Word of God.

This Reverend persons gifts lay almost all ways; and his worst enemies must
say he showed as much Art as Piety in his Sermons and Prayers, and all
Religious Services; he was a most accomplished Scholar and Christian. His
Sermon preached before the Parliament upon November. 5. 1641, His Irenicum;
indeed, whatever of his appeared to the World speak him such a one, as none can
dispute his want of Learning, without bringing their own in question. His
managery of the Argument against the Toleration of the Jews (though never
printed) made him admired by all that heard it. Take him in his ordinary
converse, he was pleasant, facetious, of extraordinary humility, affability,
and courtesy; his whole conversation was both pious and amiable. After he had
undertaken the charge of the Church of God in Dedham, (which was immediately
upon the death of Mr. Rogers) he would listen to no temptation to any other
place, though he had both many and great offers, but there continued till a
legal death deprived them of him, Anno 1662. After this, in a short time, he
was invited to the Pastoral Charge of the Church at Leyden; he was pleased to
entertain several discourses with me (though much his inferior, such was his
great humility) about his going. I was no great incourager of his acceptance of
it; that which prevailed with him, was, that there he should have the public
liberty of his Ministry, which he preferred to any thing besides in this world;
there he finished the remaining part of his course, exceeding acceptable to Dr.
Hoornbeck, and other of the Professors there. He was pleased to maintain a
correspondence with me by Letters; and the last Letter (if I remember right)
which I received from him, if I mistook him not, hinted some thoughts of his
return into England; not finding that satisfaction in all points there to
himself, which he before he went hoped for. But the Lord prevented him, taking
him to himself by a Fever, which prevailed much in that City, and swept away
many in the year 1668, or 1669, (I forgot which). This Sermon was afterward
preached in that which sometimes was his Pulpit in Dedham, by a Reverend and
Learned person. I cannot say I know not the person; but think it not reasonable
to fetch him out of his Covert; who although yet alive, is not willing to
discover himself. I shall only say, that he is a Workman who needs not be
ashamed. Whosoever reads this popular discourse, will easily conclude him a man
of excellent Parts, and great Piety. It had been no great difficulty to him to
have stuffed his Sermon with Quotations out of Authors, or to have dressed it up
with six-footed words, and a lofty style; if he had judged, that that Language
of men puffed up, had been proper for a Country Auditory, (how judicious soever)
or could have judged that folly of Preaching, to have been that foolishness of
Preaching mentioned by the Apostle, by which God has chosen to save elect
souls. I remember Augustine said of Cyprian, he once preached at that rate, to
show he could do it; but never but once, to show he would not. This Reverend
Author (although a very learned man) knew that an Iron key was better to open a
Lock (it is Augustines metaphor) than one of Gold. Thou will, Reader, find
here, what is scriptural, pious, profitable, and that clothed with a decent
language, and such a discovery of Wit and Art as will make thee understand; the
Author, if he had pleased, as to those little things of wit and phrase, could
have outdone what is here, but chose to do no more for ostentation of himself,
that he might the more profit his ordinary Readers Souls. I could have wished
the Author would have himself dressed it up for the Press, but he rather chose
to be studying new Sermons, than trimming up old ones. It is not his, but some
Auditors importunity that has brought it to the light, and I should have
checked my self in helping the least toward it, but for my fondness to have any
thing public that might tell the world, the worth of so worthy a person, so
much my intimate friend; and what England and the Reformed part of the World
lost that day in which Heaven gained this Eminent Servant of God, to whose
Memory it is dedicated. This will tell thee how he being dead, yet speaks.
The Lord give us all an hearing ear, and an heart willing to learn.

Thy faithful Friend in the Work of the Gospel, (...)

HEB. XI. 4. -- By it he being dead, yet speaks.


THIS Chapter is a short Martyrology: An Epitome of the Acts and Monuments of
the Church of Old; wherein by an Apostolical hand, guided by the Divine Spirit,
a true and faithful Record, a good and honorable Report is made of the noble
Acts, Victories, and Triumphs of the faith of the ancient Patriarchs, Prophets
and Martyrs, the Worthies of God, of whom the world was not worthy. Among these
Abel has the Priority, and leads the Van; to the honor of whose faith three
Things are here spoken.

First, The excellency of his sacrifice above his Brothers: By faith Abel
offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain.

Secondly, The justification of his person in the sight of God: By which faith
he obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his Gifts.

Thirdly, The preciousness of his memory, the voice and virtue of his
remembrance after death. By it he being dead, yet speaks.

This last, as being suitable to our occasion, shall be the subject of our
discourse, which must be not according to the merit of the occasion, but
according to the weakness of the Orator, and the short time you thought fit to
allow me for this solemn service.

By it he being dead, yet speaks. At the very first reading of these words
there may seem a paradox in the Text, much greater than in the Pulpit; Behold!
here a person naturally dead, Abel, the second man that was born into the
world, and the first that dyed, having been dead now five thousand years and
upward, he yet speaks. The dead are indeed altogether deaf, they cannot hear,
there is no speaking to them: in vain are prayers and supplications made to
Saints departed. Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not: they are
as deaf to their Petitioners, as Baal to his Priests; but yet they are not
altogether dumb, they may, and they do speak, not formaliter, not vitally and
syllabically, by the instruments of the throat, tongue, teeth and lips (as a
living man does) but effective and eminenter, in effect, comprehensively, as
the man is said to speak with his feet, Prove. 6.13. Formal speech is that which
holds forth somewhat to the ears of others, which is to be known and understood
by them. Now when a visible argumentative signification of such things is made
to us by the dead, then are they said to speak what the living do learn, or may
learn, or ought to learn from the dead, that the dead speak; Being dead, he yet
speaks; the word may be rendered passively, he is yet spoken of; he being
dead, there is an honorable mention made of him.

The active sense seems more probable, but we shall not exclude the passive;
Abel being dead, he yet speaks. What! is this peculiarly attributed to Abel?
Is he the only man that speaks? and are all the rest dumb? No, what is here
spoken of Abel, is common unto others; but it is peculiarly attributed unto
Abel for a double reason.

1. Because Abel was the first dead; it is spoken of Abel as the first, as the
representative of all that follow in the estate and condition of Abel.

2. It is peculiarly attributed to Abel, because it is especially recorded of
him, that after his death he speaks. Genesis 4.10, The voice of thy brothers
blood cries unto me from the ground.

That dead Saints do yet speak, is the general truth from the Text, which is
peculiarly exemplified in the instance of Abel: Abel being dead, yet speaks.
Speaking in the Text, must be understood in a sense of eminency and dignity,
speaking somewhat worthy to be heard and observed. This is not an attribute to
be allowed to every dead person. Alas! what do the ignorant, worldling,
debased, debauched, profane generation of men being dead, speak? They speak,
it may be as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 36.1, The transgression of the wicked
says within my heart, There is no fear of God before his eyes. They speak
folly, vanity, violence, wickedness and forgetfulness of God; nothing else do
they speak worthy to be heard. God indeed sometimes by his remarkable
Providence, and some notorious Judgments, makes them to speak when they are
dead, but as a wrecked Ship upon the Sands or Rocks speak unto the Mariners
that is in a dangerous Sea or Voyage; so Achan being dead, spoke unto the
covetous; Zimry and Cozby speak unto the adulterer; so Herod being dead, speaks
to the proud; so Ananias and Saphira speak to the liars; but of themselves,
freely, directly, and intentionally, they speak nothing, they are silent in the
grave, Psalm. 31.17. They neither speak to the profit of others, nor are they
spoken of to their own honor: This is the honor of the Saints of God, to
speak when they are dead. By faith Abel being dead, yet speaks; By the
precious Graces with which the Saints are enriched; by the holy life they have
expressed; by the good works they have wrought; by the pious examples they have
set before their generation; by the eminent service they have done to God and
his Church; by their sharp trials and temptations; by their bitter Sufferings
and Martyrdoms, wherein they have been more than Conquerors: By these the
Saints, being dead, yet speak: they speak to purpose, for the vindication of
truth, to the shame of wickedness; they speak to the honor of Religion; they
speak to the furtherance of the Gospel; they speak to the conviction,
correction, instruction, edification, and salvation of the living: they speak
to the glory of God. This general truth we shall speak of in the particular
instance of Abel: Abel being dead, yet speaks: he speaks to us, and he
speaks to God.

Abel speaks to us in a fivefold respect, or under a fivefold consideration.
Abel yet speaks. Abel, a man being dead, yet speaks. Abel, a believer, being
dead, yet speaks. Abel, a worshipper of God, being dead, yet speaks. Abel, a
Priest or Teacher, being dead, yet speaks. Abel, a Martyr, being dead, yet
speaks.

1. Abel, a man, being dead, yet speaks; and this is it he speaks, he speaks
death to us all. Oh my Brethren and Sisters, the Sons and Daughters of my
Father Adam; ye are all mortals, mortality is your property; there is a
principle of corruption in you, and death hastneth. Dust thou art, and to dust
thou shall return, said God to Adam, Genesis 3.19. Probatum est, says Abel, being
dead; Gods word is truth, take me for an instance. Abel, vanity is the
signification of it, and that is my name. Every man at his best estate is
altogether vanity, Psalm. 39. Particularly, Abel a man being dead, yet speaks:
He speaks unto the young man, death may overtake thee in thy youth: Abel, he
might be forty, or fifty, or sixty years of age when he dyed; but this was a
young man then; that was a small age in that age of the world, when the age of
man was seven, or eight, or nine hundred years, or upward. Why then, what
assurance can thou have, that thou art far from death, who in the course of
nature have forty or fifty years to live before thee, when Abel is cut off from
the land of the living, who had in the same course of nature as many hundreds
of years of life before him, as thou have half scores?

2. Abel, a man being dead, speaks to the strong: Death may overcome thee in
thy strength. No question but Abel was come to strength of years, and that age
was much stronger than this, when out of the loins of one, the immediate issue
might be an hundredfold and more. What then speaks Abel, being dead? Glory
not, O strong man, in thy strength. Remember thy beauty, thy vigor, thy
maturity, thy marrow and fatness, the courage of thy heart, the stoutness and
straitness of thy body, the dexterity of thine arms and legs, cannot withstand
the assaulting enemy, but must yield up themselves to the force of prevailing
death.

3. Abel, a man being dead, yet speaks; he speaks to the secure and
unprovided; death may surprise thee unawares. Abel in the Field; Abel about the
works of his Calling; Abel conversing with his Brother; Abel, to whom death was
so much a stranger, that he never saw it; who would have thought that Abel went
out into the field to dye? Thus Abel was taken in his calling, Nabal in his
feasting, Belteshazzar in his cups, Herod in his pomp; the rich fool promising
himself ease and merriment, all spoke the same thing.

4. And lastly, Abel, a man, being dead, yet speaks unto all; Death may kill
thee with thine own weapon. A brother is born for adversity; a brother is born
for a help in danger, for a defense and safeguard; Oh, but yet by a brother
does Abel dye. What then speaks Abel, being dead? Why, so frail is thy life,
that thy food, thy physic, thy house, thy horse, thy sword, thy servant, thy
friend, thy brother, yea, thy self may be thy death. Abel, a man, being dead,
yet speaks.

Secondly, Abel a believer, being dead, yet speaks. What speaks he? He speaks,

1. The grace of God to be most free: he has mercy on whom he will have mercy.
It is Grace that makes the difference between one man and another. Abel and
Cain, both Children of one and the same Father, both lying together in one and
the same womb, as twins probably, both partakers of one and the same means,
both commended to God in one and the same prayer: Abel the younger, and Cain
the elder, and yet behold Abel is a believer, and Cain is a murderer; Abel is
loved, and Cain is hated; Abel righteous, and Cain wicked; Abel is justified,
and Cain is condemned; Abel the Child of God, and Cain a Child of the Devil.
What speaks Abel, being dead, but this, That grace makes the difference.

2. Abel a believer, being dead, yet speaks. Righteousness is by faith, not
by works. By faith he obtained witness that he was righteous. Cain had his
works, but he had no faith. Cain sacrificed, but believed not. Cain is
unrighteous. Cain is condemned. Abel has works and faith too. Abel offers
and believes. Abel is righteous, he is justified, God has respect unto Abel.
Justification is by faith.

3. Abel a believer, being dead, yet speaks; That it is a happy advantage to
live under means. Abel believed, Whence has he his faith? from God as the
Author, from God as the principle: But what, without means? No, Abel had the
happy instruction of a Father, and he was taught the law by a holy Mother. The
Patriarchs were Priests and Prophets in their own families. Adam taught his
Children the fear of the Lord. Abel then being dead, yet speaks this in the
language of the New Testament; Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word
of God; blessed are they that hear the joyful sound thereof.

4. Abel a believer, being dead, yet speaks this, That the grace of God does
not privilege from the greatest crosses; of all evils, death is the forest,
death is the most grievous. Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give
for his life, was a truth, though a liar spoke it. Abel, a Saint in grace, and
in favor with God, yet he dyed: he dyed a violent death, by the hand of his
brother. It was not an enemy, then I could have born it, (says David) neither
was it he that hated me, that lifted up his hand against me: but thou, O man,
my brother, mine equal, mine acquaintance: this was the wounding of his heart.
What speaks he? If grace exempts not from death, from such a death, with such
circumstances, much less from lesser evils: God scourges every son whom he
receives.

5. Lastly, Abel a believer being dead, yet speaks; What? The greatest
crosses shall not make void the grace of God. Abel died, he is bel^ved of God
still; Abel dyed, he is righteous Abel still; he speaks this, That God knows
the souls of his Saints in their adversities. God chooses the Saints in the
furnace of affliction: He tells their wanderings, and puts their tears into his
bottle: The supplication of the Saints come before him, their desires and their
groans are not hid from him. Thus Abel a believer, being dead, yet speaks.

Thirdly, Abel a worshipper of God being dead, yet speaks; what speaks he as
a worshipper of God?

1. God is to be worshipped by us: His holy example speaks this, God is to be
worshipped as the Author of our beings, as the Lord of our lives, as the Father
of our spirits, as the God of our mercies, as our King and Lawgiver, the
Mighty, the Almighty Jehovah, our Savior and Redeemer, whose we are, and who
we ought to serve; we are not our own, not our own freemen, not independent
beings, but we are made by the power of God, we are maintained by the
providence of God, we are bought with the blood of God, we were subject to the
Law of God, we are bound by the Covenant of God, and therefore ought to live to
the glory of God.

2. Abel a worshipper of God, being dead, yet speaks, That God that is to be
worshipped, is to be worshipped by faith. By faith he offered a more excellent
sacrifice, by faith he worshipped God. The worship of God in faith, is a
worship of Gods own constitution. God is not to be worshipped by men's
inventions, but by his own appointments. God is to be worshipped, not as we
will, but as he commands.

3. Abel, as a worshipper of God, being dead, yet speaks, That God is to be
worshipped with our best. Abel he brought of the firstlings of his flock, of
the fat thereof, Genesis 4. of the best. The last, or the least, the torn, the
blind, the lame, the weak, the sick, the dregs of our beings, the weakness of
our age, the deadness of our hearts, the coldness of our affections, the
exercise of our bodies; this alone is not to be offered unto God, for he is a
great King: but the kindness of our youth, the ripeness of our age, the
strength of our parts, the zeal of our affections, the intentions of our
hearts, the health of our bodies, our whole hearts, all our souls, and all our
strength; the best improvement we can make of our selves, is an offering
becoming the great God.

4. Abel, a worshipper of God, being dead, yet speaks, That the best
offerings that we make unto God, are not acceptable but through a Mediator. God
testified of Abels gifts, because they were offered by faith through Jesus
Christ. The best we can tender to God, is not worthy of Gods acceptance as
from us, but it must be recommended by the Mediator; and without faith Cains
offering signified nothing; God had no respect to Cain nor to his offering.
Thus Abel as a worshipper of God, being dead, yet speaks.

Fourthly, Abel as a Priest or Teacher, being dead, yet speaks. It Is very
probable, that Abel had a distinct Family, as Cain also had; and each had their
considerable stocks in the world, for they offered to God of their own; and so
Abel in his Family was a priest and teacher. However, suppose Abel were yet
remainining in the Family of his Father Adam, yet he was the eldest but one,
born with Cain (probably) and withal was the person next to Adam that was
taught of God. Abel was a person instructed in the knowledge of Religion, and of
a holy and exemplary life and conversation, and so he must needs be accounted a
very useful Instrument for the hand of God to work by in the hearts of those of
that generation. Abel being dead yet speaks. What does he speak? He speaks
this, That God has no need of the most hopeful and likely Instruments for his
Churches service. Though Abel dye, the Church shall not dye, Religion shall not
dye, no elect soul shall be lost for want of Abel. The purpose of God shall
stand. God is not beholden to means, much less to this means, or that, or
another, though never so likely. It is all one to an Almighty Power to save by
means, or without means; to save by few Instruments, or by many; by weak
Instruments, or by strong. Joseph was an eminent Instrument for the planting,
for the protecting, for the providing for, for the ordering, advancing, and
priviledging of the Family of Jacob, the Church of God in the Land of Egypt;
but Joseph is a mortal man, Joseph must dye; What then? Must the Church of God
fail in Egypt? must Israel perish in the Land of Ham? No certainly; Joseph
spoke to his brethren, I dye; but what then? God shall surely visit you. Genesis
50.24.

Fifthly and lastly, Abel a martyr being dead, yet speaks. What does he
speak? He speaks

1. As God spoke, Genesis 3.15, I will put enmity between her seed and thy seed.
Abel subscribes the enmity between the seed of the woman and the seed of the
Serpent, the Saint and the sinner, the just and the unjust, the righteous and
the unrighteous, the holy and the profane; they are opposite one unto another,
as light unto darkness, as life unto death, as east unto west, as heaven unto
hell. There can be no accommodation, no accord or agreement between them. What
agreement is between Christ and Belial?

2. Abel a martyr being dead yet speaks: What does he speak? even as our
Savior speaks Mat. 10.21, The brother shall deliver up the brother to death,
and the father the child, and the child shall rise up against the parents, and
shall cause them to be put to death. There is no hatred like the hatred of
Religion. This enmity of Religion it offers violence to Nature, it breaks
the strongest obligations; it blots out of a man's mind the memory of the Father
that begat him, and the mother that bare him, and the paps that gave him suck:
It forgets natural relation and affection, and debaseth man into a beast, a
Devil incarnate; Mic. 7.6. there are many instances to the same purpose.

3. Abel a Martyr, being dead, yet speaks; and what speaks he? as Paul, 2 Timothy 3.12, all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution.
Christ and the Cross, Religion and Persecution, Holiness and Afflictions, these
are bound together by a bond that cannot be broken. The Saints of God are
strangers in the world, and must expect to meet with hard things. The Saints of
God are warriers and soldiers under the banner of Jesus Christ, against the
world, and must expect sometimes to meet with blows. The Saints of God are
travelers in a strange Country, they are travelers in a way toward their
home, which is Heaven, and they must expect sometimes to meet with dirty ways
and foul weather.

4. Abel a martyr, being dead, yet speaks: What speaks he? as David, Psalm.
116.15. precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. The death
of his martyred Saints especially is precious. The death of his Saints is
precious. The death of Abel was precious in the sight of God: He takes special
notice of it, Genesis 14.9,10. God presently meets with Cain, and says, Cain,
where is thy brother Abel? What have thou done? God makes inquisition for the
blood of Abel; ay, but says God unto Abel, being dead, Have thou lost thy life
for my sake? Is thy blood shed for thy love unto me? I will avenge thee on
thine enemy with eternal death, and recompense thee with eternal life.

5. Lastly, Abel a Martyr, being dead, yet speaks. What speaks he? as Paul,
Acts 17.31, God has appointed a day in which he will judge the world. Abels
Martyrdom speaks, That the wrongs and injuries done to the righteous, to the
Saints of God in the world, do undoubtedly speak, that there shall be a
judgment-day, which is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God,
seeing it is a righteous thing with God to render tribulation to them that
trouble you. Violence and wrongs, injuries and oppressions, shall not always
triumph as they do. God will one day cause Justice to take the Throne, and to
reign over his enemies. Thus Abel being dead, yet speaks; as a man, as a
believer, as a worshipper of God, as a Teacher, as a Martyr.

Secondly, Abel being dead, yet speaks: He speaks unto God.

1. He speaks to God, first by his prayers and supplications. Abel, a
worshipper of God, no question was a praying Saint, it was part of his worship;
and his prayers yet speak. We believe the communion of Saints, one considerable
part whereof is this, a participiation of one another prayers. All the members
of the Church, the Saints that follow after, they fare the better for those
that went before.

The first age of the Church contributes to all ages following, and every
particular believer contributes to the whole. The prayers of Abel for the
Church of God that was to come, they are yet before the Lord; his eyes are yet
upon them, as they are recorded upon the file in heaven: his ear is yet hearing
them. By his prayers, Abel being dead, yet speaks unto God.

2. Abel being dead, yet speaks unto God by his blood. When he was dead, said
God to Cain, The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the earth. The
Martyrs blood, it cries against Cain for vengeance, which is not yet fully
executed; it cries yet to God for himself, that God would make him reparation
and satisfaction, that God would restore to him the life that Cain took away:
it still cries, and it shall cry until the day of Resurrection. Abels blood yet
cries unto God; not only against Cain, but it cries unto God against all the
generation of the Cainites, against all the persecutors of the Church of God;
for all persecutors following, in respect of Abel, are as Saul, in respect of
Stephen* they are consenting to his death. For had the present generation of
persecutors lived in the days of Abel, they would as well as Cain have imbrued
their hands in the blood of Abel. Tremble at this then, oh ye generation of
persecutors! Abels blood cries unto God from the earth against you. The souls
from under the altar of those that were slain for the testimony of Jesus, cry
unto God perpetually, How long, Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? and what is it that they cry
for unto the Lord, but that which our Savior said? Mat. 23.25. That upon these
persecutors may come all the righteous blood that has been shed, from the
blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood of the last martyr that shall be slain
upon the earth. Abel being dead, he thus speaks unto us, and he thus speaks
unto God.

Take the words now in a passive sense; Abel being dead, is yet spoken of: he
obtained a good report, as it is said ver. 2. He is spoken of by God in holy
Writ, to the intent that he may be spoken of by man. God does make an
honorable mention of Abel, and therein commends him to his Church, that an
honorable mention may be made of him; for wherever this Scripture shall be
read and preached, this also that Abel has done and suffered shall be spoken
of, Abels Faith and Righteousness; Abels good and holy Conversation; Abels
Sufferings and Martyrdom shall be spoken of for an honorable memorial of him.
The memory of the just is blessed, Prove. 10.7, but the name of the wicked shall
rot. We read in the 6th of Genesis of Giants in the earth, mighty men, and men of
Renown; Giants in stature, and Giants in nature; Giants in state, condition,
and quality in the world, and Giants too in wickedness; but there is not one of
their names mentioned in all the Scripture. Abel, and Seth, and Enos, and
Cainan, and Mahaliel, and Jared, and Methusala, and Lamech, and Noah: These
have their names recorded, and perpetuated with honor from the beginning of
the world, to the end thereof, while these Giants in wickedness, both persons
and names are gone down in silence, and buried in the ^and of forgetfulness. We
read the names of many sinners that are mentioned in Holy Writ, but with shame
enough. Of bloody Cain; of hunting Nimrod; of hard-hearted Pharaoh; of a
painted Jezabel; of an incorrigible Ahab; of proud Herod; of an ambitious
Diotrophes: But what are these to a Martyr Abel? To a righteous Noah, A
faithful Abraham, A plain-hearted Jacob, A meek Moses, a zealous Phineas; A
praying Samuel, A patient Job, A penitent Peter? Let men boast and glory, and
brag of their birth, and power, and wit, and authority, and dignity, and
preferment: Let them boast of these: true Religion is the true honor. Abel
being dead, yet speaks; and being dead, he is yet spoken of.

We have now spoken to the Text as it is in it self. Let us now apply it to our
occasion; That dead Saints do yet speak, that is the general truth to which we
have hitherto spoken in the particular instance of Abel: but instances of this
kind and nature are more than one. Let us speak therefore to the general truth
again in another instance; invert only the name, change Abel for Newcomen, and
read the Text of him; he being dead, yet speaks. Being dead, did I say? What,
art thou dead, Oh thou blessed soul! Oh! killing, wounding word! could I bleed
for thee! thou whom God was pleased to separate from thy Mothers womb, and to
call by his Grace, that he might reveal his Grace in thee, that thou might
preach the everlasting Gospel to the world of sinners. Thou that were
commissionated to be Christ's Ambassador, in his name to beseech sinners to be
reconciled to God: Thou a Scribe instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven; that
broughtest out of thy treasury things both new and old: Thou whose natural
gifts and abilities were like Aarons Plate of pure Gold upon thy breast,
whereon holiness to the Lord was engraven. Thou, who ( Isaiah like) had the
Tongue of the learned, and touched with a Coal from Gods Altar, who knew how
to speak a word in season to the weary. Thou that (like Paul) were brought up
at the feet of Gamaliel; and moreover instructed, as he by a light from Heaven.
Thou a glistering, glorious star in the right hand of God. Thou that were the
Angel of God to this his Church. Art thou dead? Thou the desire of thousands!
The dearly beloved and longed for, the joy and crown of thy generation? Thou on
whose face so many eyes were fixed. Thou on whose lips so many ears were
hanged; at whose windows so many Doves have flocked. Thou at whose silence so
many hearts were broken. Thou at whose departure into a foreign Land, so many
tears were shed, and hands wrung: Art thou dead? Thou whose tongue was as
choice silver, whose lips fed many. Thou whose Doctrine fell as the rain. Whose
life shined as the light. Whose zeal provoked others. Whose labors blissed the
Earth. Whose prayers pierced the Heavens. Thou at whose presence the bold
Sinners blushed. At whose thunderings secure consciences were awakened. Thou at
whose searchings the Hypocrite trembled. Thou at whose force the Kingdom of
darkness shaked, and the powers of Hell fell. Thou who have bound up many a
broken heart, with thy tender and skilful hand. Thou who have carried the Lambs
in thy arms: A spiritual Father of so many Children. The happy instrument of
life in so many dead souls. Art thou dead? Oh, could the love-lines of thy
person, the usefulness of thy gifts, the willingness of thy heart to thy
Masters service, the necessity of the Church, the prayers of the Saints, the
love of thy Friends, the desire of thy Relations, could this have prevailed, we
had not said of thee this day, Thou art dead. Verily thou art the trial of our
faith. Thou art the exercise of our patience and contentation. How hardly do we
restrain our reasonings and complainings to the Almighty? What a multitude is
the wicked, ungodly, violent, intemperate, profane, blasphemous generation?
The very curse and pest, and burden of the earth they tread upon; the very
earth groaneth under them; hell gapeth for them; and heaven is darkened by them.
And shall these live, and thou dye! What mercenary hirelings and greedy wolves
are crept into the Church of God, not regarding, nor sparing the flock:
unsavory salt, fitter for the dunghill. Shall these live, and thou dye? What
dark corners require light! What hungry souls are craving for bread! What
desolate Congregations mourn in silence! And is this a time for thee to dye?
But righteous art thou, O Lord, and we will not plead with thee concerning thy
judgments: this is the will of our heavenly Father, and thy will be done. Thou
art gone, oh precious and desired Newcomen: Thy course is finished, thy race is
run, thy work is done: this place that knew thee Twenty years, and upwards,
shall know thee no more: this Pulpit shall sound forth, and these walls shall
echo back thy voice no more. This Congregation shall receive the law at thy
mouth no more; but our eyes shall weep for thee, when we see thee not; and our
tongues shall speak of thee, when we hear thee not. May our feet follow thee,
though we reach thee not? May we go to thee, that can not return to us? But
recollect thy self, oh my passionate soul! whither shall affection carry thee?
Wipe thine eyes from tears, and read on the Text; this second word shall
extenuate the first: He is dead; but being dead, he yet speaks. These be the
last words of David, says the holy Penman of the book of Samuel. And thus
were the last words of Reverend Newcomen. Shall the standers by report, and say
they were? no, for he yet speaks. You remember his dying words, his parting
words, which viva voce, from this place he delivered to this Congregation, and
out of that dear love he had unto this Congregation; and that his dying words
might make the deeper impression, he afterward committed them to perpetual
memory; and this is the name by which he called them, his Vltimum vale: But my
Text shall blot out that: that was not his last farewell; for being dead, he yet
speaks. He speaks,

First, From a Foreign Land to his Native Country: Oh dear England! In thee
my Mother conceived and brought ^e forth. In thee I drew my first breath. In
thee I hung upon my Mothers breasts. In thee I was nourished, and fed, and
clothed, and had all things pertaining unto life. In thee I had a liberal,
ingenious, and religious education. In thee the name of Christ was put upon me.
In thee I saw a glorious light, and heard the sound of the Gospel. In thee it
pleased God to call me effectually by his Grace. In thee, God judging me
faithful, put me into the Ministry. In thee I enjoyed many years of precious
liberty of serving God in the Gospel of his Son. In thee I have begotten many
spiritual children unto God. In thee I enjoyed sweet communion with God and his
Saints. This was thy bounty, and this was thy blessing, and this was it which
endeared thee to me. This is the bond that did constrain my heart to love thee.
This is the foundation of my most enlarged and improved discharged duty to
thee. Now from this unfeigned and invincible love, and from the conscience of
this my bounden duty, I have faithfully served thy welfare and happiness. I
have propounded and set before thee peace; that peace may be within thy walls,
and prosperity within thy Palaces, was the desire of my heart to God, and the
endeavor of my hand. In the day when thou had sinned, I was ashamed for
thee, and bare the burden of thy sins before my God. I wept in secret for thy
pride, and sighed for the abominations that were found in thee, and entreated
for thee. In the day when thou sufferedst, I mourned. When thou were sick, my
clothing was sackcloath, I humbled my soul with fasting, and my prayer was in
thy calamity. When thou rejoicedst, I rejoiced with thee; I went with the
multitude to give thanks, and to keep holy day: I gave thanks for thee in the
great Congregation, and I praised God for thee among much people. Where thou
were ignorant, I endeavored to enlighten thee. Where thou were wandering, I
endeavored to reduce thee. Where thou were offending, I endeavored to reform
thee. My Closet, my Study, my Books, my Pulpit, Public Assemblies, mine own
and other Families, can bear witness for me how I have spent, and been spent,
watched, and prayed, and fasted, and studied, and labored in the word and
doctrine; how I have preached the word in season, and out of season, reproving,
rebuking with long suffering. Now my dear Country, what have I done unto thee?
Wherein have I offended thee? What is my iniquity and my sin? Is my zeal for
Reformation, conscience of pure and undefiled Religion, the forfeiture of my
liberty, that thou have cast me out of thy Vineyard, and turned me out of the
Harvest, that my mouth must be shut up in silence, that I must never speak more
to thee in the name of the Lord? Have I not reason to say, For my love thou
have been my enemy? Thou have requited me evil for good, and hatred for my good
will. Through thy unkindness my gray hairs are brought down with sorrow to the
grave in a strange Land.

More particularly, He being dead, yet speaks:

1. He speaks first to you my Brethren the Ministers of the Gospel, and to my
self. He speaks,

First, Having put your hands to the Plough, look not back. Lay not up your
Talent in a Napkin. Never think of being discharged from the Ministry of the
Gospel, or the service of the Gospel, by God. Has God entrusted you with
gifts? Has God called us to the Ministry? Has he made us Stewards of his
Mysteries? Surely he will find us work, he will give us opportunities to
dispense his Word, he will show us where to sow our seed. No man having lighted
a Candle, puts it under a bushel, but sets it on a Candlestick. The
manifestation of the Spirit is given to profit withal. Therefore the
Providence of God that shut his mouth in one place, opened it in another.

2. He speaks unto us: Natural and acquired abilities are needful
accomplishments for the work of the Ministry. He had in his treasury things
both new and old; the old things of Nature as well as the new things of grace,
and both together made him an able Minister of the New Testament: by this then
he speaks unto us as Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.13, Be thou an example to the
believers in word, in conversation, in spirit, in faith, in charity, in purity.
Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. And 2 Timothy 2.15, Study
to show thy self approved, a workman that needs not to be ashamed. He that
will be a Workman in the Ministry that needs not to be ashamed, must be a
Student: Grace is profitable to our selves, but gifts are not to be expected
immediately by God now as in the Primitive Church, but in the use of means.

3. He speaks unto Ministers; Diligence, painfulness and faithfulness, are
incumbent upon the Ministers of the Gospel. His great example speaks this, of
which this place wherein we are do bear him ample witness. The difficulty of
the service, the concernment of precious souls, the certainty and strictness of
the account that must be given, are strong arguments to provoke to labor in
the Word and Doctrine. Then does he speak to us, as the Apostle Paul to
Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.6, Stir up the gift that is in thee.

4. He speaks yet again unto us Ministers, That the Preachers Doctrine must
be exemplified by the Ministers life. So did his great example speak, he did as
well live as speak the Doctrine that he preached; not like the Pharisees, Mat.
29.23, That said and did not. And then he speaks again, as Paul to Timothy, Be
thou an example to the believers, in word, in spirit, in conversation, in
charity, in faith, in purity. And as Christ to his Apostles, You are the light
of the world: Let your light so shine before men, that others seeing your good
works, may glorify your Father which is in heaven.

5. And lastly, He speaks unto us Ministers, Love, pity, compassion to
precious souls. Earnest, eager desires of their salvation: this is a powerful
Motive and Principle to be laborious in Doctrine, and exemplary in Life: this
was his Motive, herein he excelled. His dear love to this Congregation fixed
him immoveably in this Candlestick, from which no discouragement whatsoever at
home on the one hand, nor no temptation from abroad on the other, could ever
unsettle him, till removed by a power not to be resisted: His labors were the
labor of love: It was love that moved Christ the great Shepherd and Bishop of
Souls, to lay down his life for the sheep; and the same principle of love will
move the under-shepherds to lay out their lives, to spend and be spent, and to
call nothing dear or precious, that may contribute to the saving of a soul.

He speaks again, being dead, unto this Congregation. What speaks he unto
you? He speaks this:

1. While you have the light, walk in the light; while you have the light,
improve it; make use of a faithful Minister, while you hear his voice, and see
his face: he is not a perpetual blessing; he is not always to be with you. The
Prophets do not live for ever; I have, says he to you, spoken to you in the
Name of the Lord: but now you shall see my face, and hear my voice no more. If
God betrust you with a faithful Minister, make use of him while you have him.

2. He being dead, speaks to this Congregation: The impenitency of peoples
hearts, and incorrigibleness of peoples lives, may stop the mouth, may cut off
the life of a faithful Pastor. May I not (beloved) without breach of charity
advise you to enquire whether Dedham's sins did not bereave Dedham of a
faithful Pastor? Is it not the Judgment that God threatened upon the Vineyard
that did not answer his tillage, Isa. 5.6, I will command the Clouds that they
rain no rain upon it? And is it not the judgment God threatened to rebellious
Israel? Ezekiel. 3, Thou shall be dumb, and shall be no more a reprover to them,
for they are a rebellious house. Yet withal he speaks, that God is very loath
to execute such a Judgment upon a disobedient and unbelieving people. How loath
was God to remove your Pastor from you? By degrees he executed it, or at least
not all at once: he stopped his mouth first, that he should not speak, but you
saw his face. Then God removed his person, that you should not see his face,
but he had communion with you by his Letters; but now God has removed him far
away, that there shall be no more seeing of his face, nor hearing of his voice,
nor any communication between him and you in this world.

3. He being dead, yet speaks to this Congregation, Dedham, thy account is
great, see that thou discharge it well; thou art not in an equal state with
other places, but like Capernaum; have been lifted up to Heaven; and he can say
as Paul to the Ephesians, Acts 20.19,20, You know from the first day that I
came among you, after what manner I have been among you, at all seasons:
serving the Lord with all humility of mind, and with many tears and
temptations; and how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have
showed you, and have taught you publicly, and from house to house. Now having
lived under the Ministry of so worthy, so able, and so faithful a Pastor, your
account is great. To whom much is given, of him much shall be required; and he
that knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.

4. He being dead, speaks to this Congregation: Hold out the profession of your
faith with patience and constancy. His example speaks: What faith I have taught
you, I have asserted, I have testified, I have sealed by my Sufferings; see now
that you keep it, that you lose it not, by treachery, or cowardice.

5. He being dead, speaks to this Congregation. Have the Ministry of Gods
faithful servants been effectual for the conversion, edification, salvation of
any soul, let him give God the glory. Thus he speaks again, as Paul to the
Corinthians, We have this treasury in earthen vessels, that the excellency of
the power may be of God, and not of men. It was not his gifts and graces, his
pains and industry that wrought grace in any of the hearts of his people, but
this was the power of God; he was an earthen vessel, but now is broken; and the
word he spoke, was not the word of a mere mortal man, but of the everliving God
that endures for ever, that God may have the glory of his converting mercy.

6. He being dead, yet speaks to this Congregation: Weep not for me, but weep
for your selves. I would not prophecy of evil things: but who can tell but
some dreadful Judgment may be at hand: some dreadful Judgment may hang over the
head of England, and this righteous man may be taken away from the evil to
come. Who knows but God has said to him, Thou shall dye in peace, and shall
not see all the evil that I will bring upon the land of thy Nativity?

7. He speaks unto all, and that he speaks is this: The testimony of a good
conscience, the power of faith, the joy of Gods salvation overcomes the very
King of terrors. So far was this holy man of God from the fear of death, that
in the sight and presence of it, with his dart ready to strike him to the
heart, he begins to sing his heavenly Hellelujah. He died in full assurance,
and great joy, in the sight of Heaven, in the very arms and embraces of the
Lord.

Lastly, He being dead, yet speaks: he speaks unto God. He speaks unto God
by his cries and supplications: his fervent prayers are continually before God;
before that God that hears prayers: His prayers speak to God for the Church
of God in general: His prayers speak to God for this Church in particular; the
Church whereof we are all Members. And more especially his prayers are before
God for this place; the Souls that were his charge. His ardent entire affection
prompted his most earnest cries to Heaven for their salvation.

Thus Abel, being dead, yet speaks. Thus Newcomen, being dead, yet speaks.
Now may God hear the dead that speak: And may we hear the dead that speak? That
when the dead that speak, shall speak again, and hear again, as one day they
shall; we may also hear with them the voice of the Archangel, the sound of the
trumpet, the voice of the Son of God that shall raise them and us from the
dead, and the voice of the Son of God upon the Throne, saying, Well done good
and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. Come ye blessed of
my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the
World.

FINIS.

