THE Follies of France; OR, A True RELATION of the Extravagant Rejoycings that
were made by the French King's Command, in most Cities of France, for the
pretended Death of His Majesty ( WILLIAM, KING of Great Britain) contained in a
Letter, written from a Roman Catholic Citizen of Paris (by way of Holland) to
his Correspondent in London.
Translated from the French Original.

THE present Letter having very fortunately fallen into my hands, I judged it
worthy to be committed to the Press, that all the World might be informed of
those excessive Transports, and other unaccountable Fopperies that were
transacted in France by order of the Court, upon the imaginary Death of King
WILLIAM; and particularly, because the Author seems to be so abundantly assured
of the truth of all these proceedings, being an Eyewitness of them at Paris.

Paris, August the 8th. 1690. SIR,
I Have been very regular and constant in Writing to you, nevertheless I was
obliged to take some time to put my self in a capacity of satisfying your last
demands, that I might send you nothing, but the Truth; and withal, a particular
account of every memorable Circumstance. You Will be no loser by this delay of
mine, since instead of a bare Letter, you receive a kind of an Epistle. However
it is, Sir, you will find an exact relation of what I have either been an
Eyewitness, or informed my self from unquestionable hands upon this occasion.

The defeat of the Irish Army, and the return of King James, was matter of
extraordinary mortification, not only to our Court, but to all France in
general: However this Consternation (Heaven be praised) was not of long
continuance, and our sorrow was immediately converted into joy by reason of the
mighty News which the King commanded to be published from the Twenty seventh to
the Twenty eighth Night of the last Month, by the Cannon of the Bastile, which
was discharged about Three a C^ock in the Morning; and by the Commissioners,
who, at the same time, knocked at the Doors of every Citizen without any
difference, crying aloud with all their force, Arise, get up, and make
Bonefires, the Prince of Orange, and Marshall Schomberg are dead. This solemn
declaration, made by His Majesty's Order, obliged the whole Town to get up, and
pass the remainder of the night, and the following day, in Bonefires, and all
other public testimonies of joy: One could hear nothing but Trumpets, Drums,
Hautboys, Fifes, Flutes and Sackbuts; one could see nothing but Tables
furnished in every Street, where Wine was not spared in the least. The
Religious Fraternities distinguished themselves, and particularly the good
Fathers the Cordeliers, who spent all night long a prodigious quantity of
Petards, and other Fireworks in their Garden; and distributed their Wine about
in abundance. The same was likewise done at the Guild Hall of the City, by the
express Command of the Provost of the Merchants. All the people without
exception, and especially those of higher quality, as they passed in their
Coaches through the City, were stopped on their way, and forced to drink a
Health to King James, and the Prince of Wales, and to cry out aloud, The Prince
of Orange is dead. They burnt the Effigies of the Prince, and his Royal Spouse
the Princess in several places, as they had done before at their Bonefires for
the Battle of Flerus, and the Naval Engagement. They dragged them through the
City, where they made a solemn Procession; and there was neither Man nor Woman,
great nor small among the People, who did not throw Dirt and Stones at them.
Nay, their Indignation was carried higher, they hanged the Prince of Orange in
Effigies in abundance of Places: amongst the rest they led him up and down by
way of Procession, with a Devil who was to carry him to Hell, having before him
a piece of Paper thus inscribed, I have waited for thee these two years. During
these mighty Rejoycings, they broke open the Houses of several of the New
Converts, and particularly a Grocer's in the Fawxburghs of St. Germain; they
affixed to their Gates a Portraiture of the Prince of Orange, crying He Is dead.
They demanded money of others to exempt them from pillaging, and forced 'em to
give it, after having committed a thousand Outrages upon their Persons. In
fine, Sir, I am able to acquaint you, That not the most advantageous Successes
we ever met with, nay not the Birth of an Infant of France, however it was
universally desired, ever found so agreeable an entertainment, which gave
occasion for one of our celebrated Poets to say;

Though Paris such Triumphs and Joy has expressed,
For the Prince that in Ireland was slain:
The news of his death does not half full my breast,
As the fear of his rising again.
You will see, Sir a great deal of pleasant Poetry on this Subject in a certain
remarkable Paper, which I have sent you, composed after the manner of an
Interment, which they have made of the Prince's Body in Ireland; it being a
very curious Piece engraved here in the City, by one of the most eminent
Masters in that Art, and is every where publicly Sold.

With this good News of the Prince of Orange's Death, we have received some
either welcome Passages, as well from Savoy, as Germany. If they happen to
prove true, we shall scarce find Wood enough to furnish out our Bonefires; and
we assuredly hope before the end of the Campaign, to have no more Enemies to
exercise our Valor upon, let their numbers be never so great.

These Revellings and Masquerades continued till the 29th of the last Month in
this City, at Versailles, and St Germain's en lay, where three or four
thousand Persons being assembled together, they made their Supplications to
King James, who arrived there on the 25th to inform them, whether the News of
the death of his Son in Law was certain: And some of the King's Officers
assuring them that nothing was more sure, they made the same rejoicing at St.
Germains as they did in this City; which Examples were copied by those of
Lions, where the Shops was shut up for the space of three days successively, as
well as in several other places, for the greater solemnization of this Festival.

It was not only at Lions, and other principal Cities, that the People
testified so much joy for the Death of the Prince of Orange, our
irreconciliable Enemy: Sedan particularly distinguished it self among the rest;
as one of my Friends, a Gentleman of very good Credit acquainted me, who
happened to be upon the Spot, when this Affair was transacting; and it was not
many days ago.

On Sunday the 30th of July, They caused such Bonefires to be made there, as
they had never seen before upon any occasion. The meanest Person was rated at a
good round Sum to defray the Expense, without reckoning the Burgesses, who
endeavored all they could to outvy one another in the Magnificence of the
Show. They were not forgetful to cause several Representations of the Prince to
be made. His Highness was exposed to several Fires, having a Tobacco pipe in
his Mouth; he was carried to the two Fauxbourgs in a large Frame, and the
Princess his Royal Consort, was after the like manner carried to the House of
the Capouchins; they had both of them Inscriptions before and behind, with
these words in vast legible Characters, The Usurpers. There was never a Person
present, who did not p^a^ forth some horrible Reproaches or other upon both of
them. They began the Festival before the Lodgings of the Governor, with thirty
discharges of Cannon, and three Vollies of the whole Garrison. All the several
Companies marched in Procession to the Dauphin-Fountain, which run with Wine in
abundance, and all those that had a mind to it, drank their Belly full. All the
principal Officers performed wonderful things, and afterward received a
splendid Entertainment from the Governor. There arrived here a Courier with
especial Orders to signify to them the Death of the Prince of Orange.
Immediately after this, the chief Magistrate of the Place, published this
agreeable News through the whole Town with the Harmony of Drums, Violins,
Hautboys and Flutes, crying in a loud and intelligible Voice, Come along
Gentlemen redouble your Joys, That Tyrant the Prince of Orange is dead, the
Usurper is dead, redouble your Bonefires. Then the Artillery was discharged,
and the same instant, five Pieces of Canon began to thunder, which extremely
affrighted the weak and giddy Multitude. This triumph continued all the Night,
till eight in the Morning, at which time all the ingenious Wits of the Town
laid their Heads together, to concert the matter how they should order the
Funeral of the Prince of Orange. A certain Spark, Hamoir by Name, began the
Sport with making the Epitaph, which is such a wretched piece of Stupidity and
Dullness that I would not give my self the trouble to transcribe it for you.
Another Virtuoso, whose Name was Van Veld, a Native of Leiden, made the
Prince's Effigies, which had the Honor afterward to be burnt There was like
wise another Picture of him, to serve at the Interment, at which entertaining
Ceremony, every Body was obliged to assist: They dragged it through the whole
Town to the Torcy, then it was hanged with the Heels upwards for a considerable
space; at last it was thrown into the Garene, which is the receptacle of all
the Filth and Ordure of the City. There was a prodigious Concourse of People
all the while; but he that made himself the most remarkable for his
extraordinary Zeal, was the above mentioned Mons. Hamoir, who carried about a
certain kind of a Kettle, in shape somewhat resembling a Coffin: He had along
with him a company of Mourners; Lepine the Drummer, commonly called the
Cuckold, had a Drying Pan covered over with black Cloth, upon which he beat a
very mournful Tune before the Corpse, that was encompassed with a trusty Guard
of Halberder^. One Jardon, who was Born at Veroye, and had been often at
Mastricht, signaliz^d himself very particularly in this honorable Action, by
abundance of foolish things he both said and did, during the time of this
pretty Representation. The Women too had their share in this Festival my Friend
assuring me, that there were several of them, who to celebrate the Show with
that Devoir and Solemnity (...) was requisite, abandoned themselves to all
manner of Debauchery. The holy Fools of Donchery pursued the Frolic, somewhat
farther than those of Sedan; but the religious Lunaticks of Maizieres, behaved
themselves so, as if they had been actually possessed. If I were acquainted
with the Bravery and Valor of Gossip Poncelet of Rhemes upon this score, I had
not failed to send you a full Information. That which is exceeding remarkable
in regard of the Couriers is this, that they arrived at all these places
exactly at the same time, although they are not equally distant from Paris.

It is high time now to draw toward a Conclusion, and yet I cannot prevail
with my self to do it, without saying something of what happened at Bayeux, in
lower Normandy. About Fifteen days ago; they solemnized the Death of the Prince
of Orange there, with such an extraordinary Zeal, that one durst not contradict
so ill grounded a piece of News, without running the hazard of being stoned.
They ordered several Representations of the Prince to be made there; some of
which were cast into the common Jakes others were Hanged, and some fell into
the pious Hands of the Butchers, who divided them into four Quarters, after the
same manner as they serve the poor Beast, who have ^^sted the Civilities of the
Slaughterhouse In short, there is no sort of brutality to be imagined, which
these well-bred Gentlemen did not commit upon this occasion, amidst the tumult
and hurry of so public a Rejoicing

Neither was there less done at Diepe, that at Bayeux, on the score of this
Solemnity.

The Name of the Prince of Orange, is here become so odious and execrable, that
they cannot endure to see him so much as in a piece of Painting. It is almost
an Age ago, since at a certain House in Diepe, there was set-up the Prince of
Orange's Head for a Sign. The Judge of the Town enjoined the Master of the House
to take down the Sign immediately; the Master at first made some difficulty to
do it, representing to the Judge, that he ought to address himself to the
Proprietor of the House; and that for his part, he being but only a Tenant, the
Expense and Charge was not in Justice to fall upon him. But all these
Remonstrances were to no purpose; he was obliged to obey without any more ado;
and by Order of the Justice, to set up the Prince of Wales, in the place of the
Prince of Orange, who was immediately hurried away to Prison, with beating of
Drums, and other great Triumphing.

I have found all these Passages so very singular and extraordinary, that I was
desirous to communicate them to you, who are my particular good Friend, and
from whom I would willingly conceal nothing. If there should happen hereafter
any thing, that deserves to be transmitted to you, I will not fail to oblige
you with it by the first opportunity. Entertain, I beseech you, Sir, the same
Complaisance for your Friend, if any curious matters should happen in your
parts. However send me nothing which is not exactly true, and therein follow
(...) Example of

your most humble and most obedient Servant. Farewell.

FINIS
Licensed, August 11. 1690.

J. F.

Lond^n: Printed for Timothy Goodwin, at the Maidenhead against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1690.


