For the King, And both Houses of Parliament.
Being a short Declaration of the cruelty inflicted upon some of the servants
of the Lord now called Quakers, by some barbarous and bloody men Inhabitants in
Merionyth shire in North Wales, the 3d Month, 1660. and in part of South Wales.
Which we have some of us come 195 miles in tender love to lay these sufferings
before you, that you may take care that innocent and peaceable people may not
be destroyed in the high way by profane and ungodly men who seek to take away
their lives.

THere being to the number of 14. persons or there abouts peaceably met
together in the fear of the Lord, to wait upon him; one Alban Vaughan with
several others (whom he seemed to encourage thereunto) came in upon them, and
haled them out of the house wherein they met, beating them with swords and
pistols, saying that he would carry them to Carnarvan Castle, being a garrison
26. miles off, though he refused to show any Orders he had thereunto, he, or
any of his company, being known to be neither Magistrates, Officers nor
Soldiers, and when he carried them into the next Village in the way, he caused
them to be put into a pin-fold, blasphemously terming a little dog that
followed them to be the spirit which led them in their way of worship, where they
were kept while he and his companions were drinking and scoffing at them in an
Alehouse hard by, but in the evening (it being the first day) having driven
them two miles further, they let them go.

But not long after, it being the 25th day of the 5th Month, the same rude
party fell upon the same people in their particular habitations, and did lug
them out of their beds, wounding, beating and bruising several of them, and
made them trot before their horses, and so brought them into a Town called
Baala, being 20 miles distant from their said habitations, having beaten and
abused them in the way, so as there was no pity showed to them that were old
and feeble, young and tender, poor and barefoot, for such were they, who never
had been in arms, or otherwise employed against the present Authority. Likewise
in a quarter Sessions at Baala aforesaid, four of the said persecuted people
being required to take the Oath of Allegiance, and they desirous to know the
contents thereof, one of the Magistrates replied in these words, to wit, You
are to swear faithfulness or obedience not to your heavenly King, but to our
earthly King; which saying made them so much amazed, and fearful of engaging
against the Lord that they resolved to suffer, and so were committed to the
Jailer, who immediately coupled them together in fetters, for about 3 days and
3 nights, and then (the Goalers habitation being in another Town 12 welsh miles
distant) he eaused them to go thither in the Irons through a great storm,
insomuch that 2 of those who went along without irons tired by the way, but
they being brought unto the Goalers house, Immediately there were several other
friends brought in unto them, so that they were in all to the number of
thirteen who suffered upon the same account, and these were in, some for the
space of fifteen, some sixteen weeks, in which time the Jailer was so cruel,
not regarding either the poverty of some, or the innocence of all, that he
would not suffer them to have the common Goal to lie in, so as they might have
been at peace, but kept them close prisoners in his own house, where he would
not suffer any to carry them food, or other necessaries they stood in need of,
but so continued in a rage toward them, kicking and abusing them daily, having
taken from them their bibles, inkhorns, knives, moneys, etc. So that the
generality of the sober people did so cry out, that an innocent people and
honest neighbors should be so cruelly dealt withal, yea the Jailer himself
seemed to be so far convinced that they suffered for conscience sake, that he
did often acknowledge it; and in his rage (having not else against them) would
say, That it were as well for them to render their souls to the Devil first as
last, and swear what was required of them, for do it they must; and more to
that effect than can be herein expressed; And notwithstanding (thinking thereby
to enjoy their peace) they compounded with him for their house-room, and he
seeming to be satisfied therewith, yet did he put them to such slavery, that he
caused them to draw timber, like Oxen, and to carry like Horses, till their
shoulders were bruised red and black, they being kept so close that some of
them were glad to have so much liberty to preserve their health, though the
terms were such, though also some refused, judging it to be beyond what they
were called to suffer such cruelty, but rather to seek to stop it;
notwithstanding all which, 3 of them were forced to pay 30 l. Pole money,
though they had never owned nor acted in, any Commission that might render them
liable thereunto, And though at their, releasment they paid the Jailer fully
the agreement, and he seemed to be satisfied, yet has becaused 3 of those who
were formerly fettered in the irons (the 4th being not found) to be apprehended
by the Sheriffs Bailiffs, and brought again to his custody and tyranny, in
which misery they now remain, and does now deal so cruelly with them, that one
of them being a married man, is denied to let his wife come at him, nor hardly
suffer victuals to be brought them, as had dealt with them and others formerly,
Alleging that they must pay for all the meat, drink and houseroom that he and
his companions did devour at the quarter Sessions, though the prisoners did not
partake thereof at all, saving their standing where they were linked together
during the said time, where the drunkards did so rage at them, that some
threatened to pierce them with their swords drawn, others to knock them down
with axes, etc. Also the 10th day of the fourth Month, 3 friends being upon
their Journey having 3 horses, two of which were laden with Family provision,
the same Alban Vaughan, who was formerly mentioned, coming out of an Alehouse
by the way side, did (without any provocation thereunto) violently abuse,
wound, bruise and beat them until his staff was broken, and then fell upon them
with his sword, and so caused them to part with their horses, not suffering
them to ease the dumb creatures of their heavy loads, but forced them to go
before him with greater speed than their bodies were able to bear, for the
space of 3 miles or thereabouts, scarce sheathing his sword in all the way, but
still abusing them, and swearing that he would take away their lives, but being
limited as to that, coming into a Village, he caused them to be put in the
stocks, and having been there while he was satisfying his lusts otherwise, for
their further torment, he brought them back again to their horses, where he
robbed them of one horse, saddle, bridle, riding coat, as also what other
things they had, to wit, moneys, linnens, gloves, books, knives, comb and other
like, and then he let two of them go, but the third he detained for a while
after.

Also 5. of the 13 prisoners heretofore mentioned and 2 others, they being then
out of that which leads into all truth, having acted in a Commission for the
Militia, under former Authority, though they strictly observed their orders in
all their actings, and gave up a full and clear account thereof to the
Commissioners that succeeded them, who are the now Magistrates in that said
County, yet have they been by them imprisoned for the space of 15 weeks
unjustly and without orders, as then and afterward did appear; and though
their bodies had been long imprisoned, they seized upon their cattle, and drove
away thereof with much cruelty and violence to the number of 650 head or
thereabouts, and brought them to the said Town of Baala where the owners of
them were prisoners, which was above 20 miles from some of their habitations,
except such as they destroyed by the way, in the driving, where they sold them
away for what they pleased, and disposed of the moneys according to their own
wills, and for all this they detained the owners still prisoners, until the Act
of Oblivion came forth; and their enmity did so continue, that some of them
hearing of a Messenger that was sent with the said Act to the prisoners, whom
it did so much concern, caused the Messenger to be apprehended, and brought
before one or more of them, who caused him to be searched, and finding the Act
with him, and he affirming it was for the prisoners, they took it from him by
violence, with another book, and him they committed to the common Goal, having
not else against him; And also though upon further consideration they found the
prisoners to be clear, and left the prison door as it were open for them to
take their liberty, yet did they not make any return of, or satisfaction for
their said cattle, though several of the said prisoners were poor Tenants, and
their Families so left without either their goods or relations, but rather the
contrary, some of the said persecutors known, and others greatly supposed so to
incense the Country, that there is about fifteen suits now depending
above-forth, at the County Sessions and elsewhere, for the same moneys that the
aforesaid Catrel were sold away for, none due to either, being there was as
clear an account given for them as may yet further appear, as in any County in
the Nation, so as to outward appearance several families are like to be ruined
thereby; and least the innocent should be exclaimed against with the guilty, it
is to be observed that most of the indulgence that these persecuted people have
found in all their sufferings (which was more then can be well expressed) was
from those who had been sufferers in the times of the late revolutions, as
being the Kings friends, but the enmity and persecution was from those who
acted under all authorities they could, except one or two that were more
moderate then all the rest yea one of their greatest persecutors not long
before did openly declare, that he had never been for the King, nor would he
ever be, but now he and many others of them would sacrifice Lambs for
peace offerings, or cover themselves with seeming zeal in persecuting the
innocent, who did not at all intend to exclaim against any, had they left them
to pass along the way, and to enjoy of their own wherewithal to subsist; but
finding their enmity not only to continue, but rather to increase in some or
other of them daily, so that As in Pennall Towyn, etc.
Priest and people made it their practice to abuse them in the way, put them in
the stocks, and that without any Officer or pretense of order for what they
did, some of them affirming it was because they would not bow unto them, which
they could not do for Conscience sake,) they are constrained to lay it before
you, being they still continue in their wickedness, and rejoice in their
inhumane practice.

The Names of the Sufferers.

Thomas Lewis Samuel Humphrey John Williams Evan Jones Rees Jones Robert Owen
Owen Lewis Owen Humphrey John Humphrey John Williams the younger. John Evan
John David Richard Jones William Jones Thomas Ellis Hugh ap Rees William ap
Rees John Meredith Lewis ap Humphrey Meredith Edwards Henry Thomas, and others.
Jane Owen Widow Joan Humphrey Katherine Williams, and others of that sex.
The 28th. day of the 3d. Month, James Lewis riding peaceably from Tinby
toward his Habitation, in the way was met by one Thomas Davies, a rude
brutish fellow, who regards neither the fear of God or man, yet esteems
himself one of the Kings best subjects, who asked the said James whether he was
a Quaker, to which he made no reply, then said he you dumb dog I Will make you
speak, and began to beat him as hard as he could with a great staff full of
knots, took his hat off his head, and threw it down a hill; James having
lighted of his horse to fetch his hat, he comes to him the second time with the
same words, and beats him again with his staff, then he threw off his hat
again; James having lighted to fetch his hat, he comes to him the third time,
and beat him, and told him he would make him as Jelly, and would beat him as
long as his stick would hold, before he would part with him; At last laid hold
on him, and threatened to kill and Pistol him, but his power was limited, that
he could do no more; He gave him about thirty blows in all, which did very
much bruise his body.

In the 4th. Month of the year 1660 Humphry Williams and John Howel passing
along the Road, met a company of rude people, one of which struck at Humphery
Williams, and missing him struck the horse on his head till he reeled; Then he
went to John Howel, and beat him and shed his blood, and again he came back to
Humphery Williams swearing he would kill him, saying, there was no Law against
it now, the King being come.

In the same month another man meeting with Humphery Williams in the Road, and
demanded of him to speak after the custom of the world, drew out his knife,
swearing if he would not speak, he would kill him; To that purpose came several
times with his knife toward him, but was kept from acting; So riding with him
awhile, still threatening, at last parting said, if ever he met him again, he
would do it.

The 2d. of the 12th. month 1660 John Husband being at his standing in a fair,
at a place called Whit-land in Carmarthenshire, the aforesaid Thomas Davies
came unto him in a brutish bloody manner, and gave him many blows with his
sword, and left not off till he had cut his nose very nigh off his face; Cut
his and several other men's Shoes from the poles with his sword, frighted the
whole fair, insomuch that the people through fear were dispersed, and their
Market hindered; Yet for all this general disturbance, no care taken by the
Magistrates for punishing or preventing such misbehaviours.

The 29th. of the 3d. month 1661 Humphery Williams and John Husband being
Shoomakers, coming to a Town called Carmarthin about their Lawful occasions to
buy Leather, at their first entrance saw a great multitude of people in the
street with Arms and Drums, being led by one Boney Barret, who was drunk before
them, yet having a Halbert on his shoulder, and a Sword by his side, came
furiously unto them as soon as they lighted off their horses, and thought to
strike Humphry Williams with the halbert, but being hindered by one of the
Drummers, he gave him a cuff in his face, then ran furiously at one James Lewis
with his halbert intending to stabb him in the neck, but the spear entered not
according to his bloody will; Then they were delivered to the Marshal, by whom
they were brought before Dankin Gough called Justice; In the mean time, the
said Bonny Barret went to the Smiths to sharpen the spear of his halbert, and
in the said Justice his sight did run at James Lewis and thought to stab him in
the belley, but his hand being on the place, he received the stab through the
bone of his hand, which obstructed a greater danger; Then turning to John
Husband, gave him a blow over the shoulders, and another to Humphery Williams;
The said Justice Commanded them to be brought from Constable to Constable out
of Town, strengthening the rude rabble in their cruelty, though he was
counseled to keep them in better order; Insomuch that the said Bonny Barret
followed them to the place where they had left their horses, and with his sword
struck Humphry Williams over the pate, his hand being on his head, cut off a
piece of his finger.

And this is our desires who loves good Government, that our friends who lie in
Prison for their Innocence and good Conscience, may be set at liberty by you;
Such actions and practices tending to the utter ruin of so many families as
before mentioned may be taken a course withal, and stopped (with the wisdom of
God) which dishonours good government, our desires being to live peaceable in
all godliness and honesty.

THE END.

