A TREATISE OF THE ASTHMA.

Divided into Four Parts.

In the First is given A History of the Fits, and the Symptoms preceding them.

In the Second, The Cacochymia which disposes to the Fit, and the Rarefaction
of the Spirits which produces it, are described.

In the Third, The Accidental Causes of the Fit, and the Symptomatic Asthmas
are observed.

In the Fourth, The Cure of the Asthma Fit, and the Method of Preventing it is
proposed. To which is annexed a Digression about the several Species of Acids
distinguished by their Tastes. And it is observed how far they were thought
Convenient or Injurious in general Practice by the Old Writers, and most
particularly in relation to the Cure of the Asthma.

(...).

Galen. LONDON, Printed for Richard Wilkin, at the King's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. School.

TO THE Learned and Judicious Physician, Dr. PHINEAS FOWKE, AT Wyrly in
Staffordshire.
SIR,
I Have many Reasons for my Dedication of the following Treatise to your self:
The particular Favors you have showed me, have deserved a greater
Acknowledgment, than this small Present I make you, as a Testimony of my
Gratitude; but in this Undertaking I shall Appeal to you, who are well read
both in the Ancient and Modern Authors, as the most Candid and Learned Judge,
concerning their Old Notions, and Practice in the Asthma, which I shall here
prefer, for their usefulness to all the Moderns that have Writ on that Subject.

Sir, I think my self so much obliged to those Learned old Authors you lent me,
from that Large and Curious Collection in your own Study, that I cannot but
here own the Benefit I received by Reading of them, and following their Method
of Practice on my self and others; I hope this will be a sufficient Excuse for
my endeavoring to justify their Notions, and Explaining of them, and for the
Recommendation I shall give of their Medicines.

Sir, I here present you with your own old Authors, dressed up in the present
new Philosophy, for that changes its Fashion in every Age; for it would not now
appear Modish to express themselves in the Aristotelian way, but as to their
sensible Observations, and useful Methods of Practice, they will last for ever,
as being true Descriptions of Natural Things, and confirmed by frequent
Observation and Experiments.

My Design is not in this Dedication to Compliment your Philosophic way of
Living, your Universal Learning, nor Greatness of Mind in retiring from all the
Pleasures, and Impertinent Business of Life, that you might more freely
converse with your Learned Authors; Though these are sufficient Subjects for a
large Encomium, I must confess my self unfit for well performing of it; neither
would your great Humility admit of a just Praise of your Virtues.

I know your Curious Genius requires some Variety of Thoughts to divert it, or
some Philosophic Enquiry to entertain it, for which end I will here propose my
following Observations, by which you will discern the design of this Treatise,
and the good Performance of the Old, and the Faults of the New Writers, in
treating of the Asthma.

First, I shall observe that that is the most useful Notion of the Asthma, from
whence we can take our Indications for Practice, and which is deduced from an
exact and full sensible History of the Disease, its Subject, Causes, and
Symptoms.

I have assigned the immediate Cause of the Asthma, to the Sraitness,
Compression, or Constriction of the Bronchia; and in the continued Asthma, the
Causes must be constant, as Dropsy, Tuberculum, etc. but in the Periodic
Asthma, the Returns must depend on the Defluxion of Humors on the Primae viae,
where the Inflations begin, or on the Lungs and Nerves, if either were formerly
weakened by other Diseases; these Hypochondriac, or Pneumonic, or Nervous
Inflations, depend all on the same Defluxion of Serum; and they all frequently
happen in old Asthmatics at the same time.

This Defluxion of Serum evidently appears in loose Stools, fluxes of Urine,
great Spitting, and the Drowsiness of the Head in the beginning of the Asthma
Fit: This Defluxion depends on the Effervescence of Humors, because there is a
feverish Heat at that time, which rarefies the Serum, and drives it through the
Glands. I think it not probable that the Nerves could contain so much Serum,
but rather that the slimy and flatulent Cacochymia irritates the Heart to
stronger Pulsation, and Excretion of those Humors, as the bilious Contents do
irritate the Guts. For when we find Excrementitious Humors evacuated, we may
rationally suppose that their Vellication produced their Excretion, rather than
any preternatural Faults of Spirits.

The Cacochymia which irritates, we observe by the Windiness and Sliminess of
Humors evacuated.

This Inflation in the Stomach, the Effervescence in the Blood, and Inflation
in the Pneumonic Membranes, comprehend the large Nature of this Disease; and
contrary to these our Practical Notions must aim, by suppressing the
Effervescence, which Cures the Defluxion at the same time; and then the
flatulent and slimy Cacochymia must be Evacuated and Corrected.

If the Asthma be but partially described, and a false Hypothesis built on that
Description, the Practice answering that is very Impertinent, or injurious.

Though the old Notion of the Asthma's being a Defluxion of serous Humors, was
certainly true, because evident to our Senses, by the Evacuation of Serosities;
yet the Explication of that Defluxion, by comparing the Head to a
Cupping-Glass, which draws up Humidities by its Heat, and causes them after to
descend on the Lungs, was notoriously false, and contrary to the Structure of
the solid Parts, and the Circulation of the Fluids.

This fanciful Notion occasioned much impertinent Practice, by Fumes, Errhines,
Apophlegmatisms, Plasters to the Head, and Issues, which have all fallen with
the Hypothesis they rose from. These Old Writers neglected the Effervescence,
and the Nervous Inflations I have mentioned.

The Age succeeding observed a great Viscidity in the Humors of the Lungs, and
to that alone, they impute this Stertorous Wheesing; these endeavored to Cure
this Viscidity and the Tubercula, by prodigious pectoral Antidotes, made for
the Asthma, but still they neglected the Effervescence, and nervous Inflations,
and therefore had no success.

The Later Writers, as Van Helmont, and Dr. Willis, have most particularly
described the nervous Symptoms of the Asthma, and built their Hypothesis on the
supposition, that it is a Convulsion; and that what Cures that will relieve the
Asthma: This false Hypothesis led them into an injurious Practice, by giving
hot Tinctures, acrid Gums, and volatile Salts, and sulphur Medicines.

Some Writers, as Sylvius, and Etmuller, have observed the Hypochondriac
Symptoms in the Stomach, and conclude the Asthma is a Hypochondriacal Flatus,
and wants Digestives.

By these Observations I design to prove, that all our Practical Notions and
Indications ought to be taken from all the sensible Observations in a Disease,
and then we shall avoid the several Errors into which many Learned Hypotheses
lead us* and then our Practice will always be the same, though the general
Philosophy, by which we explain our Notions, alters with the Age.

The old sensible Cacochymias must still be allowed, and the Method of Curing
them by contrary Tastes, because very rational; therefore though the
Circulation of the Blood be lately discovered, and the Circulation of the Serum
through the Lymphatic Vessels, yet these Discoveries have made but little
Alterations in the Practice of Physic, but by that we can bette^ explain the
Motion of Humors, and the Translation of Diseases from one Part to another;
therefore this Discovery has only helped us to solve some Difficulties we knew
not before, and to give Reasons for them: Yet still this is the chief Scope of
our Practice, to Evacuate the Quantity, and Correct the ill Quality of the
Cacochymia's anciently described; and we must use the same Medicines as the old
Writers advise.

The Nervous Juice is still as much unknown as formerly, and therefore its
Affections are inexplicable; and though it still be a Dispute whether the
Motion of the Heart in a Fever be by an Irritation of the fermenting Blood, or
the disordered Spirits, yet it will be the same thing as to Practice; for by
which soever of them the Rarefaction happens in the Asthma, I must level my
Method against the Effervescence, if I will cure the Fit or prevent it.

If I compare our Bodies to a Watch, and the Spirits to the Spring of it,
because on that all its Motions depend, as also on the Spirits in an Animal
Body, as in the Watch: The reason of its going false, may be the fault of the
Wheels, or many other Contrivances; and as it would be absurd, when the Watch
is out of Order, to lay all the faults on the Spring, because on that depends
all its false as well as regular Motion; so it is in our Bodies, though the
Spirits produce all the regular and irregular Motions, yet, as in the Watch,
the irregularity must depend on other Organs ill constituted, so in the Body
the Lungs being oppressed, the regular Respiration becomes a Dyspnaea; if the
Bronchia be constringed, an Asthma; if any extraordinary thing or Fume affect
the Skin of the Eyes, Tears immediately flow, and the Saliva runs upon any
Acrimony which irritates the Palate. The same Motions which are expected in the
Nerves by external Objects, are produced by sharp Acrimony in the Humors,
which, if bilious in the Stomach, excite Vomiting and Purging in the Cholera.
If the Humors ferment in the Veins, they irritate the Heart to a violent
Circulation, which raises the Fever, which lasts only till the Fermentation
ceases; but in those Fevers which depend on the disordered Spirits, they are
but of small continuance. And we must observe that the Animal Spirits rise from
the Blood, and have both their Origin, and good or ill Temper thence; and though
they move the Fluids, yet that external Motion only helps and promotes the
intestine Motion of the Humors (as Beer and Wines are promoted in their
depuration, by being carried on Shipboard.) If the Spirits should circulate
Water through the Veins (and the Hydropical Serum is not much different)
neither Blood nor a true natural Heat would arise in the Water by Ten thousand
Circulations; by which we find we must look back to the old Cacochymias, to
explain the Nature of Humors, and the Diseases, and in the Asthma we must
retain the Flatulencies anciently observed, and the De^luxion of Serum both on
the Guts, the Lungs and Brains.

The Dullness and Drowsiness of the Head, is a sign of a Defluxion through the
Nerves in Hysteric Cases, as well as the Flux of Urine in them; but for
satisfying the Helmontians, I will confess the Hysteric Asthma has no Defluxion
through the Glands of the Lungs, till it is an old Disease; but the Serum in
this only makes its Defluxion through the Glands in the Stomach, and Guts, and
Brain; there is the same Effervescencies, the same Flatulencies, and
consequently the same Cacochymias in these, as in the Spitting Asthma.

If I should describe only the Nature of Spirits in Wine, all Persons would
believe I talked like a Philosopher, but not much to Edify any one, who only
from the Taste of the Wine can best describe its Nature, whether sweet, rough,
or sharp, or bitterish; and when it is vitiated, it is flat, or waterish, sour,
roapy, windy, bitter, fetid, full of Lees, and Ferments; these are all sensible
Vices in Wines, and the same in Animal Humors we call our Cacochymias. And as
the Vintners can Cure all their Wines by particular Tastes, without being
versed in the Mechanic, Chemical, or Microscopical Observations about Wines; so
may Phisicians both understand, and cure Diseases by a rational Use of sensible
Observations, and the old Galenical Practices built on them, may yet stand
unmoved.

It is a very short way of Explaining Diseases, to tell us, that the Spirits,
or Archeus, are either weak, or strong; in a fury, or stupid: This Philosophy
is much admired, though not understood either by Plebeians, or Philosophers, who
ought to admit nothing either in Diseases or Medicines, but sensible
Observations, and those Notions which are immediately deduced from them. These
we can be certain of, and on these the Galenists built their Practice, and
these two sensible Observations will always stand good;

1. That the Asthma is a Defluxion.

2. That all Medicines in the Asthma ought to be inciding without Heat.

The Invention of the Microscope has much discovered the sensible Mechanism of
the solid Parts; but what Indication can I take from the Globuli of the Fluid?
Though they may help me better to Explain, yet I fear I shall not be enabled by
their Discovery easily to cure any Disease.

All the old Notions of the Asthma grounded on sensible Observations, on which
a successful Practice depends, ought still to be retained, and if it be
necessary they may be better explained. So in the Asthma, we observe there is a
Defluxion of Serosities, and for this Vomits and Purgers were successfully used
by the Ancients; therefore the new Writers unjustly explode that sensible
Notion, because ill explained. In this case we must mend the Explication of a
Defluxion, and not search for the Fountain of Rheum in the Head, but in the
Blood, and allow the Nerves to be the Instruments of the Defluxion.

If it were possible for us to discern all the Mechanical Structures of the
solid Parts, and all the Motions and Figures of the Fluid, we might then that
way explain all our Diseases; but since that will always be impossible to our
dull Senses, it is not fair to trouble the Learned with fancied Figures and
Motions, because possible: But by observing the sensible effects of Mechanic
Motions, the Cacochymias, we do as much as is necessary. For from thence we
take our Indications of those Remedies which will restore vitiated Humors to
their natural State.

The Chemists unjustly reject the Galenic Cacochymias, and explain as well as
cure all Diseases by their Mineral Principles, which seems very absurd, since
Minerals are of a very different Nature, and they are produced by different
Digestions and Preparations. Animal Humors are made by particular
Fermentations, Circulations, Secretions, in our Organized Bodies, from a pure
Milk, but Minerals arise from sulphur Fumes, and stony Particles coagulated in
the Earth. And all Chemical Product from them are the Effects of a violent
Fire; so that by the mixtures of Chemical Medicines, we can guess but little at
the diseased State of Animal Humors.

I generally observe, that all pure Chemical Authors know little of Anatomy,
and the Nature of Animal Humors; for Distillation alters the natural or
diseased Constitutions, and therefore we cannot discover either by the Fire:
The Chemists wholly depend on the extolled Virtue of their Medicine; if
prepared from Antimony, or Quicksilver, it is a certain Panacea, given in all
Diseases, without any Method; and the Chemists impute great Knowledge to their
Medicine, in finding out the Disease, and making various Operations, or
corroborating Nature, as Nature requires, all which are more absurd than any
thing in the Galenic Hypothesis, and show the Ignorance of the Chemist in the
nature of Medicines, and method of Practice.

The Empyrical Doctors reject all our Cacochymias; they want general
Philosophy, Anatomy, and Chemistry, and so cannot make any rational Notion of
the Disease, from the Consideration of all its Symptoms; they know therefore
nothing of any rational Method of Practice, but go on in the dull Road of
Vomiting, Purging, the Cortex, Steel, Salivating, Medicinal Waters; whereas the
true Rational Galenist, considers that Notion of the Disease which agrees with
all the Symptoms, and prescribes such Tastes as will cure each Cacochymia; he
considers the Constitution of the Patient, the Complication of Diseases, and
can give a good Reason for altering the common Method, when necessary. He with
his Vegetables more cures safely, than with Minerals; he makes no Preparations,
but what Nature has prepared he gives, in Powder or Decoction, etc. He is
Nature's Servant, and alters his Methods to serve her, and uses the only means
we have to observe her, our Senses and Experience.

I shall make this my last Observation, that the old Writers found out the most
useful Medicines in the Asthma.

There is a natural Instinct, by which all Animals find out their proper Food,
and by the same Method they observe what Medicines are most suitable to their
Diseases.

The Stomach prepares all the Humors for the Veins, and in choosing of the
Food, it naturally desires that which is like to our Humors, to nourish them;
the Tongue is well pleased with those Tastes which agree with the Stomach,
because of the common Membrane which covers both.

In a healthful State, the Tongue and Stomach delight in sweet Tastes, because
the Blood and Saliva have that; but in a diseased State of Humors, those
Tastes are most pleasant, which alter it; as when we are too hot, cool Tastes;
when dry, the Humid; and e contra, Nature teaches us to Cure our selves by
contrary Tastes. And Reason and Experience tell us, that thin Humors require
incrassing viscid Tastes; and the glutinous Humors, inciding Acrids; and the
roughness of the solid Parts, Oily Lenients; and the flux of all Humors,
Styptics. In Fevers we naturally desire Acids; and in ill Digestions, Bitters
are grateful.

It Is of no small moment in curing Diseases, that our Tastes can inform us what
Medicines are agreeable to the Stomach and Humors; and our Smells inform us
what Medicines are suitable to our Animal Spirits. And since the Objects of
these two Senses differ only in the Tenuity of their Substances; for Bitters,
Acerbs, Acrids, affect our Tastes in the form of a Liquor; but a Halitus from
the same Medicines, affects our Smells; and because of this small difference,
from the Virtues of the Tastes mentioned, we may easily guess at the Efficacy
of those particular Smells.

The old Writers observed, that the Cacochymia in the Asthma required
Digestives, because of the Wind and Slime in the Stomach, and for this they
used all the Wormwood Bitters, as Polium, Southernwood, Mugwort, and Wormwood
it self; and all the bitter Gums, as Ammoniacum, Galbanum, etc. and Gentian,
Aristolochia, Briony.

The same Authors observed, that the Medicines in the Asthma must cool, as well
as incide, they therefore used Vinegar, and mixed diverse Bitters and Acrids
with it, to make it more inciding, as Squills, Orris, Nettles; and they
observed by their Tastes, that the Salso-acids, such as Niter, and Sal
Ammoniac, had both an inciding and cooling Quality. They observed the
Flatulencies in the Asthma, and for that used the Carminatives steeped in
Vinegar, and boiled many Aromatics, as Thyme, Hyssop, Calamint in Oxymels.

They used Anticonvulsives, as Castor with Oxymels, and Rue mixed with Niter,
in Diaspoliticum, and Briony ss. in a Cyathus of Vinegar. Neither did they omit
the use of Opiates, but gave a Caution about them.

Sir, I must have begged your Pardon for this long Letter, if I had not now
presented my self as a Patient, who have the Privilege of telling the Injury
received by the Modern Practisers, and of commending the best Doctors for the
Asthma, Hippocrates and Galen, because I have received most Benefit by their
Medicines; and I believe none is more able to defend those Fathers of our
Faculty, and their rational Method of Practice, against Chemists, the
Empirical, and the Mechanical Doctors, than your self. I desire therefore,
under your Patronage, to defend the old Truths and Fundamentals of our Faculty,
A rational Practice, directed by sensible Notions, and confirmed by the
Experience of former Ages.

I am of Opinion, that most of the Diseases incurable by the Modern Practice,
as the Gout, Dropsy, Epilepsy, Leprosy, were oftener cured by the old Methods,
which have been disused, and neglected upon the account of pure Chemical
Medicines, and new Hypotheses, recommended by great Authors; these ought to be
considered, and revised by others, as I have done the Asthma.

I know your great Candor will commend an Ingenious probable Hypothesis, but
that your Zeal for the good of Mankind, cannot but regret the rejecting old
approved and useful Notions, and experienced Medicines, because they will not
agree with a new Doctrine. I hope you will pardon my Faults, and accept this
Performance with your usual Candor, and believe me, that I present it to you,
as a demonstration of my being a sincere Admirer of your Judgment and Learning,
and as an acknowledgment of your kind Respect to,

Litchfield, May 25. School Honored Sir, Your most Obliged Humble Servant, John
Floyer.

TO THE READER.
THE design of the following Treatise will be better understood, by giving a
general Scheme of the several Causes and Species of the Asthma; but since that
is a Depravation of Respiration, I think it necessary to treat first of
Respiration, its natural Causes and Use, and the simple Species of it, when
depraved. I shall first observe that Respiration depends on the Pulse of the
Right Ventricle of the Heart, which naturally stimulates an Animal to the
Reciprocal Motions of Inspiration and Expiration; for the Pulse incessantly
injects Plenty of Blood through the Arteries of the Lungs, and that soon fills
the Blood Vessels, and oppresses the Lungs, which pressure being felt by the
Nervous Parts, and that Sense communicated to the Muscles serving Inspiration,
they, by their Contraction, immediately enlarge the Cavity of the Breast, and
then the Air by its Elasticity presses through the Trachea, and expands the
Bladders of the Lungs. This Expansion of the Bladder does necessarily extend
and stretch the Blood Vessels, which are spread upon the Unequal Superficies of
the Bladders, and that stretching consequently lessens their Cavities, which is
also compressed by the intruding weight of the Air; therefore both by the
Expansion of the Lungs, and the Compression of the Air, the Blood is drove out
of the Pneumonic Vessels, and the free admittance of more Blood is hindered,
during a continuance of a full Inspiration. This obliges the Animal after some
Interval, by a feeling of a new Oppression from the Blood, and injected by the
Pulse, and stopped in its Circulation during Inspiration, to use the Muscles
designed for Expiration, which by their contraction pull down the Ribs and
Sternum, and by forcing in the Belly, force the Diaphragme to go upwards into
the Breast; and the Air which came into the Lungs in a state of Compression, is
blown out intermixed with watery Vapors, and being much rarefied by the heat of
the Blood there, it is not unlike the Artificial Wind produced in an Aeolopile
half filled with Water, and heated by the Fire. This Rarefaction of the Air,
makes its Efflation more easy, in Coughing, Sneezing, Speaking.

If either Inspiration or Expiration be hindered, a Suffocation succeeds, which
is a full stop in the Circulatien of the Blood.

After Expiration the Vessels are shrunk as the Bladders be, and the Reticular
Fibers of the Bladders, by closing them, express the Blood out of the Vessels;
so that both a full Inspiration, and Expiration, force the Blood out of the
Lungs, and during the Interval betwixt them, there is no Circulation through the
Lungs, but a stop is for that short time given: And if we inject any Liquor
through the Lungs of a dead Animal, it passes with difficulty; therefore the
Circulation through the Lungs is more easily performed, whilst the Lungs are in
continual motion of Expansion, and closing.

I shall next observe, That neither Inspiration nor Expiration, are simply
necessary of themselves, but the reciprocal Motion only, whereby the Bladders
of the Lungs are distended, and afterward contracted, is absolutely necessary
for the prolongation of an Animal Life.

If the Air were mixed with the Blood in Inspiration, that would easily appear
by the Airs blowing up the Blood Vessels, as well as the Bladders, when we blow
up the Lungs by a pair of Bellows, but we find no Air to pass into the Blood
Vessels; the Air therefore can only cool the Blood by its contact through the
Membranes, as we feel it cools through the Skin; and for that end, when we are
very hot, we desire to inspire cool Air; and it appears that Inspiration does
not impress any new Matter on the Blood, because the Blood is drove out of the
Lungs by Inspiration.

Neither is Expiration absolutely necessary, because many Fumes expire with the
Air; for those Vapors may be collected in Bartolet's Pneumatolabium; and though
the quantity be considerable, yet if all that is expired in a quarter of an
Hour, were retained in the Blood Vessels, the Animal could not thereby be
killed, so soon as we see it dies, if the Windpipe be but accidentally stopped.
Morever the Animal dies in Mr. Boyle's Vacuum, where there is room enough for
the Expiration of Fumes.

The third Observation I shall give, is, That the true Use of Respiration is
for the preparing the Blood, and fresh Chyle injected into the Lungs, by the
Heart, for a larger Circulation, by dividing it into smaller Parts, and
Globuli, and by procuring them a more perfect mixture.

The Circulation of Blood through the Lungs began after the Birth of the Foetus,
when the Respiration also began, and the first was the occasion of the other.
The joint Original of these Motions show, they were designed for the same end.

If we consider the Blood that is injected from the Right Ventricle of the
Heart, we may observe that it has a mixture of Chyle and Lympha with it; and
that this reciprocal Motion of Respiration may help the mixture of these,
appears, because the shaking of the Lungs, as well as the compression of the
Pulse divides the Globuli of the Blood, which appears always black, before it
has passed the Lungs; but it acquires a floridity afterward, as Blood long
stirred by a Stick does, by the separation of the Globuli.

This change of its black color into a florid, is all the sensible Alteration
the Blood acquires by passing through the Lungs, which is best accounted for by
the separation of the Globuli: For in the Feverish, the Hysterical and Maniac,
the Blood is made, because of its violent Motion, very florid; but in the
Melancholic, where the Globuli are coagulated together, and where the Motion is
languid, the Blood appears black, as in the Veins, where the motion is slow,
but it is florid in the Arteries.

This mixture of Chyle and Blood in the Heart being imperfect, it would not be
fit to be injected into the more solid Parts, and the Viscera, and to pass the
Muscular Fibers, lest it should stick there. Therefore it was necessary, that
this new Mass of Humors should have its first preparatory Circulation through
a Part composed of Bladders and Air Vessels, which would easily yield to its
Circulation. The Chylous Water being ill mixed, often sticks in the Lungs, and
produces its Tubercula, and consequently Consumptions, by evacuating too much
Chylous Matter. By the Blood's sudden Return to the Heart, it is evident, this
short Circulation was only a Preparative for a larger, viz. by well mixing the
new Chyle with the Blood, and by dividing both into Globuli more small, and fit
for Circulation, by the compression of the Pulse, and the smallness of the
Vessels it passes, and most particularly by the Compression of the Air, which
forces the Blood forward in Inspiration, and the Reticular Muscles in
Expiration; so that the most probable use of Respiration is, the preparing the
new Blood and Chyle by a minute division, for the next Circulation through the
Arteries.

I will next consider the several Species of the depravations of our
Respiration, and those Causes which they usually depend on.

I. They depend on the preternatural State of the Blood, and immediately on the
preternatural Pulsation of the Right Ventricle of the Heart. II. On the
Obstruction of the Blood Vessels or Air Vessels; or else their Compression, or
Constriction. III. On the Muscles designed in Respiration, to open and close
the Breast; or else on the preternatural State of the Spirits, moving those
Muscles.
I. If the Blood be copious, fermenting, or much rarefied, the Pulse beats
high, and full, and then the Lungs being much oppressed by Blood, that
stimulates the Muscles by consent, to distend the Breast fully for a large
Inspiration of Air to fill the Lungs, and compress the Blood Vessels, and
promote the Circulation through them; and this is to be called a full, great,
or long Respiration, and is a sign of hot Blood.

When the quantity of Blood is small, or when its heat is moderate, the Pulse
strikes low, the Lungs are not so much stimulated to a large Expansion, and
therefore this Respiration is small; and as the Pulsation of the Heart declines
in Vigor, so does the Respiration decrease in greatness.

If the Pulse beat quick, by the stimulation of hot fermenting Blood, then the
Lungs are soon filled with Blood, and a dense or thick breathing is occasioned
thereby, in which the Interval is short, and the Inspiration and Expiration
follow one another quick.

On the contrary, if the Pulse be slow, and the Blood be crude, the Lungs are
not filled therewith of a long time, and then the Respiration is rare, and the
Interval betwixt Inspiration and Expiration is long.

If the Lungs be much oppressed, and stimulated by the Blood, the Respiration
is performed in a short time, and that we call a quick Breath; but if the Lungs
be not much oppressed, the Respiration is slow, that is, a long time in doing.

Short breathing in English is used for diverse of these Species, for a small
Respiration, for the dense, for the quick; for all who have these may be called
(...).

Since the several Species of simple Respirations mentioned do depend on the
Pulse, I may infer, that Respiration in its natural Constitution does so too;
and as there is a great Analogy betwixt the Pulse and Respiration in their
motion of Systole and Diastole, and the Intervals betwixt them, so they both
agree in their use; for as the Pulse, so does the Respiration help the
Circulation through the Lungs, and the Separation of the Globuli, and the
moulding of them to fit them for a large Circulation through the whole Habit of
the Body.

The Diseases of the Blood alter Respiration, by altering the Pulse, as Fevers,
Inflammations, which make Respiration dense or great, because the Pulse beats
high and quick, and soon fills the Lungs.

II. Respiration is altered by Obstructions of the Blood Vessels in the Lungs,
or else by those of the Air Vessels.

An Inflammation, Tumor, Abscess, and all constant Obstructions of the Blood
Vessels, give a stop to the motion of Blood through the Lungs, and make the
Respiration dense and quick; the same is the Respiration in the Dyspnea from
Tumors of the Belly, and in the Gibbous.

When the Muscles labor much for Inspiration and Expiration, through some
Obstruction, or Compression of the Bronchia, etc. we properly call this a
Difficulty of Breath: But if this difficulty be by the Constriction of the
Bronchia, it is properly the periodic Asthma: And if the Constriction be great,
it is with Wheesing; but if less, the Wheesing is not so evident; the Pulse
being stopped in the Asthma Fit, the Respiration is rare.

The Vesiculae being straightened, or pursed up, the Inspiration is small; the
laboring and straining of the Inspiratory Muscles, makes the Respiration high.

The stop, or constriction, or compression, makes the Respiration slow.

The Muscles of the Breast seem to feel the weight of the Atmosphere, and
labor under its pressure, because the Air cannot be received into the Lungs,
to help the enlarging of the Breast.

This high and slow Respiration differs from the Delirous, because in the
Asthma it is with labor and wheesing, though these Diseases agree in the low
Fever, and coldness of the Extremity.

III. These alterations of Respiration depend on the Muscles and Spirits.

Every Organ, when diseased, hinders the Action in that way or manner it helped
it when well; and therefore if the Muscles produced the Asthma, they must be
Convulsively affected, and then we should observe them to move with twitching,
as in Hysteric Fits, and such stops in Breathing, are always a sign of
Convulsions.

If the Breathing be with trembling, it is a sign of Weakness, as in the Palsy.

If the Breath be suddenly stopped, it is by the Convulsion of the Pneumonic
Muscles, as in an Hysteric Apnea, when either the Muscles of the Belly pull
down the Sternum, or else the Diaphragme convulsed, keeps the Breast dilated
for some time.

The old Writers thought the Animal Spirits diverted by odd Phancies in the
Delirium, and that that hindered the Action of the Pneumonic Muscles; and
therefore a great, and large, and rare Respiration happens, which was judged by
them peculiar to the Delirious; and so in reality it is: For the greatness and
freeness of the Inspiration distinguishes it from the Asthma; but the reason of
the rareness is a stop on the Pulsation of the Heart, by the contraction on it
in Deliriums; but if a high Fever be complicated with Deliriums, the Pulse and
Respiration must be quick, small, and dense, as Galen has well observed in
Deliriums.

An Intermitting Pulse depends on the stop of the Circulation through the
Lungs, because the Left Ventricle of the Heart, by that stop, wants sufficient
Blood, to continue its constant Pulsation, (like a Mill which stands still for
want of Water,) and this is plain in the Asthma, where the Pulse intermits,
because of the Constriction, which stops the Circulation through the Lungs.

It Is observed that the Asthmatic cannot Cough, Sneeze, nor Speak easily,
because a sufficient quantity of Air cannot be drawn into the Lungs to produce
those Actions, and the Expiration is difficult in them, as well as Inspiration.

The Asthmatic cannot move strongly, because it is necessary to hold the Breath
in all strong Motions.

I was surprised to observe our Great Galen's Mistake, about the dense
Respiration in the Asthma, but I perceive he describes only the continued
Asthma; and his Mistake was also occasioned by the Observations he made upon
Hippocrates's Cases of Asthmas complicated with Fevers; for in both the
continued, and Asthma joined with Fevers, he observed (...), so Hippocrates
describes the Daughter of Agisis, (...), whilst her Tuberculum ripened, but
after it broke she was Asthmatic.

Hippocrates plainly describes the Asthma continuing after the Fever was over,
and the Asthma complicated with Epidemical Fevers, and then the Asthmatic have
a dense or a thick Respiration.

If the Asthma be without a putrid Fever, Hippocrates calls it (...), but Galen
mistakes that, and calls it (...), because the Breath goes no farther than to
the top, and not to the bottom of the Lungs: But it is plain, that the high
Breathing is so called from the lifting up the Shoulders, and the Respiratio
Sublimis is a rare, slow, and laborious high Respiration, by which Hippocrates
distinguishes the Asthma, from (...); he mentions the Inflation of the
Hypochondria, and therefore calls the Asthmatic (...).

Pain in the Respiratory Organs makes the Respiration small, because the Breast
cannot be distended as in Pleurisies; it is also dense and quick, because of the
Feverish Pulse.

A Scheme of the several Species of the Asthmas.
THE Asthma is a laborious Respiration, with lifting up the Shoulders, and
Wheesing, from the Compression, Obstruction, or Coarctation of some Branches of
the Bronchia, and some Lobes of the Bladders of the Lungs.

The Asthma is either continued or Periodical.

The continued Asthma depends on the Compression of the Veins, and Bronchia,
and Bladders of the Lungs, or Nerves;

1. By a Dropsy in the Breast. 2. By an Empyema, Inflammatory Tumor, or
Abscess, or large Tuberculum. 3. By a Polypus in the Pneumonic Vessels, or
Coagulation of Blood in the Vessels, or the Varicoseness of the Vessels, or
Plethora, by stop of the Hemorrhoides, and Menses, Issues, or Ulcers, or Itch.
4. By Stones bred in the Trachea. 5. The Lungs may be compressed by Fat, or a
Tumor of the Thymus. 6. By Gibbosity, in which the Lungs are compressed by the
Luxations of the Spina, and the sharpness of the Sternum: In these Hippocrates
observes Tubercula in their Lungs, and that they are (...). 7. By the Adhesion
of the Lungs to the Diaphragme, and Pleura, and Pericardium. 8. By straining
the Lungs by Running, the Membranes or Fibers, which fill the Interstices
betwixt the Lobes of the Bladders, and are designed to help the opening of the
Bladders, may be injured; and then the Bladders remain contracted, by their
reticular Muscles. 9. By the Tumors of the Belly in the Ascites, Tympanites,
Hydrops Vteri; by the Tumors of the Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, Kidneys. 10. By
the Inflation of the Colon, Stomach, the depression of the Diaphragme is
hindered. 11. In Apoplectic Fits, Giddiness, Lethargy, some extravasate Serum
oppresses the Nerves. 12. By a Windy Tumor of the Lungs, as it happens in
Broken Winded Horses.
The Periodic Asthma depends on the Constriction of the Bronchia, and Bladders
of the Lungs, by windy Spirits, and succeeds these Diseases.

1. They succeed Fevers, Quartans, Smallpox, Inflammation of the Lungs,
Intermitting Fevers. 2. A Catarrh. 3. Hysteric Fits. 4. Hypochondriac Fits. 4.
An Ephemera, depending on the six Non-naturals, especially the Air and Changes
of Weather. 6. A flatulent Slimy Cacochymia, which is bred in the Stomach, and
creates Inflations there, and gives an Effervescence in the Blood, and an
Inflation in the Membranes of the Lungs; and this is the true Periodic
flatulent Asthma.
Note, That the Continued Asthmas have frequently Paroxysms, by any great
Motion, or the accident of Diet, or else in the Night; but they are not
regularly Periodic once in ten Days as the other be.

My design in this Treatise is chiefly to describe the Periodic Asthma, to
which I have been long subject, and that has given me many Opportunities of
considering the History of that Disease more nicely than it was possible for
Physicians, who have always an imperfect account of Chronical Cases from their
Patients; and to that I must impute their ill Success in many Chronical
Diseases. I hope this Treatise will excite those Physicians, who are subject to
Chronical Diseases, to observe nicely the History of their Disease, and to
describe all its sensible Phenomenon; to consider all the Ancients successfully
used in those Chronical Distempers, and to give the Public a more exact
Account from their own Experience and Observation of the History of their
Chronical Distempers, which can only, by this means, be fully described; and
never from the Relation of our Patients; and then any Ingenious Physician may
from all the sensible Observations given, easily take his Practical Notions.
And though there be many Hypotheses to explain the sensible Phenomenon, yet the
Method of Practice being grounded on the Contrariety of the Remedies to some
sensible Fault, in the solid or fluid Parts, the Candid and Rational Practisers
cannot disagree in their Cure of Diseases, which in all Ages will be the same.
Though a desire of Novelty alters the Philosophy, and sometimes the Medicines,
to the great Prejudice of Physic, whose useful Observations are thereby
discredited, and experienced Medicines disused.

I shall not treat much of the Continued Asthmas, because they are depending on
other Diseases, both in their Causes and Cures, which are well described by
many Authors; as for Instance, the Dropsy of the Breast: And for that the
common Method of Cure is used, Purging by Pills of Cambogia, and the Pil.
Lunares, and Elaterium, Diuretics, Salts, and with these may be complicated the
Anti-Asthmatics, upon the occasions of Fits; as the Oxymel, and Acetum
Scylliticum, and Laudanum: But my chief Aim in these Symptomatic Asthmas, is
the Curing the Original Disease, without which no Anti-Asthmatic can do any
good.

I have in the following Treatise recommended a Dispensatory-Medicine, Acetum
Scylliticum, which is a bitter Acid; (and that I sometimes make more grateful
by Aromatics, or turning it into a Syrup with Sugar for nice Palates,) this
gave me an occasion of considering the whole Class of Acids, and to propose a
farther Trial of other mixed Acids in the Asthma. The Acid Syrups and Oxymels I
give in the Morning in a Glass of Water in the Summer, and the Aceta chiefly,
if nauseous, at Night, for many Months.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. COntaining a Description of the Symptoms preceding the Fits of the
Flatulent Asthma, and of the Fits themselves, with the several Intervals
betwixt them. Page 6 CHAP. II. Of the Preternatural State of the Chyle, and
Blood, and Serum in the Asthma; and of the Rarefaction of the Animal Spirits,
by an Effervescence in the Humors, which produces the Periodical Fits. 29
CHAP. III. Of the evident Causes of the Asthmatic Fit; as Air, Diet, Exercise,
Passion, etc. and of those Diseases on which the Asthma depends as a Symptom.
63 CHAP. IV. Of the Cure of the Asthma, both in the Fit, and out of it. 1^4 An
Appendix about the Weighing of an Asthmatic after Sanctorius's Manner: Also an
Account of the Dissection of a Broken-Winded Mare. 201
ERRATA.
IN the Ded. page 9. line 3. read irritated. In the Book p. 17. l. 21. r. arvis
Temp. p. 18. l. 24. r. Gilead. p. 52. l. 29. r. cellulas. p. 59. l. 3. r. have
some. p. 99. l. 12. r. bitter. p. 121. l. 23 and 26. f. add r. a. a. p. 145. l.
7. r. iv. p. 146. l. 27. r. Dose. p. 152. l. 8. r. any parts. p. 158. l 2. f.
Dr. Waller r. Etmuller, l. 27. r. Constitution. p. 159. l. 10. r. Peru. p. 166.
l. 14. r. acrid. p. 167. l. 26. dele dis. p. 169. l. 24. r. rectified. p. 170.
l. 15. r. iii. p. 177. l. 20. r. Polygomum. p. 178. l. 14. r. Rhus. p. 179. l.
8. r. to cool. p. 181. l. 20. r. Cyathis, l. 23. f. Arms r. Anus. p. 186. l.
22. r. doubted. p. 187. l. 4. dele io. l. 8. r. iv. p. 188. l. 9. r. Macis ss.
and reservetur. p. 190. l. 27. r. Lumbric. l. 28. f. add r. cum. p. 191. l. 9.
r. ss. l. 10. s. gr. r. drops. l. 13. r. drops, p. 192. l. 3. r. i. l. 9. r.
ii. l. 17. f. ss. r. ss. l. 24. r. x. l. 26. r. ss. p. 193. l. 24. r. Color.
p. 198. l. 11. r. condemns. p. 199. l. 5. r. Ariteus. p. 200. l. ult. r. give
it with two Spoonfuls of hot Vinegar. p. 205. add The best Medicines of the
Ancients, to the foreging Paragraph. p. 210. l. 2. r. Stale. p. 214. l. 13. r.
pursed. p. 220. l. 22. f. Smir. Wine r. Smalledge. p. 222. l. 14. r. Colaturae
lbii. p. 223. l. 12. f. advenae r. renes. p. 224. l. 14. r. take ss. with vi.
of Oxymel.

THE PREFACE TO THE TREATISE OF THE ASTHMA.
SINCE the Cure of the Asthma is observed by all Physicians, who have attempted
the Eradicating of that Chronical Distemper, to be very difficult, and
frequently unsuccessful; I may thence infer, That either the true Nature of
that Disease is not thoroughly understood by them, or they have not yet found
out the Medicines by which the Cure may be effected.

It is my Design in this Treatise, to Enquire more particularly into the Nature
of this Disease; and, according to that Notion I can give of it, to propose
those Methods and Medicines which appear to me most likely to effect its Cure,
or, at least, to palliate it.

I have suffered under the Tyranny of the Asthma at least Thirty Years, and
therefore think my self to be fully informed in the History of that Disease:
And since I have Practiced Physic, I have made many trials for the Relieving
and Preventing of the Fits, and out of Compassion to those Miserable Patients,
I design to relate what I have found useful both to my self and others.

The Method I shall take in this Discourse, is, First to describe the Symptoms
preceding the Fit, and those which attend it, and the different Intervals of
the Periodic Fit: And that this History of the Asthma may be more exact* I will
give the History of my own Asthma, which I shall, for distinction sake, name
the True Flatulent Asthma, and hereafter give my Reason for calcalling it so. I
have for many Years kept a Diary of that Disease, out of which I can give a
more true Account, than if I had now Recollected what has long since passed.

I will afterward give the History of the Asthma, which is commonly called
Hysterical, from the Observations of an Ingenious Lady, who has suffered under
that Disease Twenty Years, and gave me that Account, in Writing an Answer to
many Queries I sent her aabout it.

The Asthma is a long Disease, and it requires a long Observation to give a
true Account of its Symptoms, Changes, and various Causes, which common
Patients cannot nicely observe; and therefore I thought it very necessary in
the First Chapter of this Treatise, to give a full History of the Asthmatic
Fits.

In the next Chapter I will describe the Viscous and Flatulent Cacochymia of
the Chyle, Chylous Lympha, Serum, and that Rarefaction of the Animal Spirits
which give the chief Disposition to the Fits of the true Asthma.

In the Third Chapter I will describe the Accidental Fits of the Asthma's
depending on the Air; and its Changes; and show that they are real Fits of an
Ephemera Fever, such as a slimy flatulent Blood, and windy Spirits, are capable
of. And I will enumerate all the other evident Causes, as Diet, Exercise,
Passions, etc. And I will there observe the several Diseases on which the
Asthma depends, as a Symptom, and give some Remarks for distinguishing the true
Asthma from other Species of the Dyspnea.

In the Fourth Chapter I will propose the several Indications necessary for the
Cure of the Fits, and those which are to be persued for the preventing their
Returns; I will observe what I have found injurious to that Disease, and
describe those Medicines I have found most Beneficial.

I have frequently compared my Observations of my Asthma, with those of my
Patients, and found them much alike: But some variety of Symptoms have appeared
in all I have Discoursed. I have put my Notion of the Disease to some very
intelligent Asthmatics; and they agree with me that there is a slight Fever,
and windy Rarefaction of Humors in the Fit, which I call an Effervescence; and
this will be confirmed by the Medicines I use, which are of that Taste, which
Experience has observed to succeed well in the Cure of the Flatulency of our
Humors, and their Rarefactions, by an Effervescence.

CHAP. I.
Containing a Description of the Symptoms preceding the Fits of the Flatulent
Asthma, and of the Fits themselves, with the several Intervals betwixt them.
IN the Afternoon which precedes the Fit of the Flatulent Asthma (which is
commonly called the Humid, or Spitting Asthma) about two or three hours after
Meat, most Asthmatics are sensible of a great straitness, or fullness about the
Pit of the Stomach, which is then much oppressed with Wind, and an insipid
Ructus rises from it; and this fullness of the Stomach is the first sign of the
ensuing Fit; it appears before any Cough or Straitness happens in the Lungs.
This Fullness at the Stomach seems to me to depend partly on the Windy
Rarefaction of the Digesting Meat contained in its Cavity, and also on the
Inflation of the Nervous Fibers of the Skins of the Stomach.

An Effervescence in the Blood succeeds this Inflation of the Stomach; for
these Asthmatics are obscurely hot in the Night, and cannot bear the heat of
the Bed-Cloths on their Breasts; all hot things disorder them more, as sitting
by the Fire, Wine, Tobacco, all cool Liqours, as Water, relieve the Fullness at
Stomach; the Issues are generally inflamed before the Fits, and very sore and
bleed: There appears a great Dullness and Fullness of the Head, with a slight
Headache, and great Sleepiness toward the Evening before the Fit, and
frequently great Retchings and Yawning many times, and toward Night a great
quantity of pale Water is made, and the same pale Water all that Night, and
also all the first day of the Fit; but though the Water be pale before, and in
the beginnings of the Fits, yet it is as high colored after it, and appears
plainly to have a Feverish Color and Sediment.

After this obscure Effervescence in the Blood, succeeds a Rarefaction of the
Spirits in the Nerves, and Membranes of the Lungs themselves, for they feel
rigid, stiff, or inflated; there is a great Restlesness on the Spirits all the
Day before the Fit; the Head seems filled with Fumes, or Serous Humors, with
some pain; the Limbs appear heavy and unfit for motion, the Breast has the same
weight and heaviness as appears in the Limbs, the Asthmatic seem to suck in
their Breath, and wheeze a little toward Night: This Straitness of Breath
seems to be for want of an easy Inspiration; the Diaphragme cannot Contract it
self to move downwards, and that occasions a laborious Breathing to draw in
Air; the Trachea, or its Bronchia, have their Membranous and Nervous Fibers
Contracted, by which the Wheezing is made in Expiration. The Asthmatic seem to
have a Convulsive Cough before the Fit, and sometimes a little slimy Phlegm is
spit up, but both of them are very inconsiderable. The Lungs in the Humid
Asthma do not always appear to be much oppressed with Phlegm before the Fit,
and at the end of the Fit, the Straitness goes off before any considerable
quantity of Phlegm is spit up, which would not happen if the Straitness
depended on a great quantity of Phlegm.

At first waking, about one or two of the Clock in the Night, the Fit of the
Asthma more evidently begins, the Breath is very slow, but after a little time
more strait, the Diaphragme seems stiff, and tied, or drawn up by the
Mediastinum. It is not without much difficulty moved downwards, but for
enlarging the Breast in Inspiration, the Intercostal Muscles which serve for
the raising of the Ribs, and lifting up the Breast, strive and labor more
vehemently, and the Scapular and Lumbar Muscles, which serve for strong
Inspiration, join all their force, and strain themselves to lift up the Breast
and Shoulders, for the enlarging the Cavity of the Breast, that the Lungs may
have a place sufficient for their Expansion, and the Air may more plentifully
inspire.

The Asthmatic is immediately necessitated to rise out of his Bed, and sit in
an erect Posture, that the weight of the Viscera may pull down the Diaphragme.

The Muscles which serve for Expiration cannot easily perform the Contraction
of the Thorax, being hindered in that by the Stiffness or Inflation of the
Membranes in the Thorax; for though the Asthmatic expire more easily than they
can draw in their Breath, yet the Expiration is very slow and leasurely, and
Wheezing, and the Asthmatic can neither Cough, Sneeze, Spit, or Speak freely;
and in the Asthmatic Fit the Muscular Fibers of the Bronchia and Vesiculae of
the Lungs are Contracted, and that produces the Wheezing Noise, which is most
observable in Expiration: But it is evident to me, that all the Lobes of the
Lungs are not constringed alike. For in the Fit I could never breath tolerably,
if I lay or leaned on the Left side, which made me very sensible that all my
Straitness lay on the Right side of my Lungs, and that inclined or naturally
occasioned me to lie on that side during the Fit; but after the Fit was over, I
always lie easiest on the Left side: I perceive the Right side to be most
affected in my Case, and from the n^eall the Spit does plainly rise when the
Fit goes off.

After the Fit is begun, the Stomach suffers a great Inflation of its Muscular
Membranes, and also a great Rarefaction of its Contents; and this Flatuosity
opposes the descent of the Diaphragme, and straitens the Breath much more. If
the Fits be Extreme, the Asthmatic often Vomits green or yellow Choler: Cold
Liquors best agree with the Stomach; and hot Liqours, whether Vinous or
naturally hot, make the Flatuosity, very Vehement, and Suffocating.

I must observe that the Fit of the Asthma happens often after Purging,
Vomiting, or Fasting, when none or few Contents are in the Stomach, and then
this Flatuosity must be a Nervous affection of the Membranes: But I cannot but
confess, that if any Surfeit or Fullness be in the Stomach, when the Asthma Fit
first seizes, the Danger of it is very great, and the Fit very Violent and
longer, with much more Flatuosities.

The Asthmatick is extremely hot, burning and inclined to Sweat, as in the Fit
of a Fever, and his Pulse is quick, though unequal; and all the Feverish
Symptoms continue during his keeping in Bed, which is not safe in a strong Fit,
nor tolerable to the Asthmatic, who is necessitated to rise into the cool Air;
and after he is risen out of Bed, a loose Stool frequently happens from the
great working in the Belly, occasioned by the Fit: And I have often heard the
Asthmatic complain, that the Fits of Inflation fall lower in their Bellies than
ordinary, and then the Fits go off with less shortness of Breath, and a
breaking Wind downwards, with some Stools.

The Motion of the Muscles of the Heart is altered or stopped by the Fit; for
the Pulse is weak and intermitting, and the Hands and Feet cold, for want of a
free Circulation, and the Face often blackish by the Stagnation of the Blood in
it, and for the same reason the Asthmatic are very much subject to Swooning,
and Palpitation of the Heart, because the Blood Vessels are constringed, as
well as the Bronchia, by the Inflation of the Nerves and Membranes; for the Par
Vagum sends Branches both to the Heart and Lungs, and Orifice of the Stomach,
where the first Nervous effects, or Inflations begin, and that by the same
Nerves is communicated to the Heart and Lungs and Membranes of the Breast.

The Intercostal Nerves are also affected; for that communicates with the Par
Vagum Fibers, by which also the Nerves of the Guts are inflated in the Fit, and
that sends Branches to the Gula, which can scarce swallow in the Fit, but it
makes a Noise like breaking of Wind. From these Nerves come the Inflations in
the Belly and Stomach and the frequent Eructations.

The Lips seem to be drawn into a posture for Sucking, the Eyes seem to start,
and shed Tears involuntarily, which frequently color the Skin near the Eyes
yellow, or blackish, the Face is pale or livid, the Muscles of the whole Body
seem to subside, or lose their Plumpness, for want of the Circulation of Blood
through them, and all Motion of the Limbs is languid.

After some continuance of the Fits the Head often Aches much, and is very
dull, and troubled with dreaming Fancies, and that this depends on the stopping
the Circulation, may be proved, because Combing the Head backward very much
relieves it, by promoting the Circulation that way; the Asthmatic during the
Fit have a great dullness to sleep, but sleep little till the Fit has spent the
Windy Spirits; and in the first day of the Fit they have often broken sleep
sitting in a Chair, leaning on one side, or forward, but cannot lean backwards:
A strait Room, and a fire in it, are extraordinary offensive, as well as any
Dust, or ill Smell during the Fit; and all things heated by the fire, or of a
vinous Nature; and all things which oppress or straiten the Breast, increase
the Suffocation.

If the Fit last but two or three hours after rising out of Bed, the straitness
abates, and some raw Gelly-like Phlegm, like the White of an Egg, or the
Solution of Gum Tragacanth, is spit up, both in the Humid and Old Hysteric
Asthma, and that is streaked with black, like a Feather, or Spiders Web.

When a short Fit happens, it is accompanied only with Wind, and Spitting, with
a feverish quick Pulse, and a disposition to Sweat, and the Water is higher
colored in the Morning, no oppression at the Stomach precedes, nor no pale
Water, and but a little sleepiness over Night: This I call a Spitting Fit; such
as my Asthma was before it settled into Periods. And these Fits depended on
Disorders in Diet, and Accidents of Weather; and appeared to me a Fit of an
Ephemera Fever.

If the Fits continue long, viz. two, three, or four days, the first two days
none or little Phlegm is spit up, but on the third or fourth day it is Cough'd
up somewhat digested, and less viscid, of a white, greenish, or yellow Color;
and in old Asthmatics, sweet in Taste like Blood, or Liquorish, or else a
little putrid, saltish, or acid; and the Spit of the Asthmatic is often
streaked with Blood.

The Fits usually go off in three, four or five Days clearly, so that little
Phlegm is spit afterward, till the next Fit.

The occasion of settled Periodic Fits in my self, were an Intermitting Fever;
of these I kept a Calander for seven Years, that I might better observe their
Intervals, and their respect to the Moon and Weather; and such Physic I used
for them. The Observations I made thence are as follow.

I observed that in the Winter were sixteen Fits, but in the Summer Months I
had twenty Fits; and in the Summer the Fits were more sharp and longer, and
that I spit more digested Phlegm then: In August I always had the severest
Fits. The longer the Fits, the greater the Intervals; the long Fits lasted 3,
4, or 5 days; the shorter the Fits, the shorter were the Intervals.

The short Intervals were 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7 days; the longest Intervals 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, or 15 days. The Winter Months I reckon from September till
March, and from thence to September the Summer Months.

In Rainy Weather or toward Snow, and in the Foggy, I am frequently sensible
of a great straitness at the Stomach, so that such Weather gives an Inclination
to a Fit before either the Rain or Snow fall; but in all that kind of Weather I
sometimes missed a Fit.

The Fits usually returning once in a Fortnight, they frequently happen near
the Change of the Moon; but I could not perceive they kept any certain times
either before or after, but sometimes they happened near an equal distance from
both the Changes; but, I believe, as the several Phases of the Moon alter the
Weather, by that means it produces some Alterations on the Spirits of the
Asthmatic.

Helmont observes the Influence the Moon has on an Asthmatic; Exacerbatur Lunae
stationibus, and aevi tempestatibus, quas ideo praesentit and praesagit. And I
always upon unexpected Fits; found some great Change of Weather to succeed.

Horstius mentions a Young Asthmatic, Qui crescente Luna afficitur
anhelalatione crebra.

A Change from a Frost to a Thaw frequently gave me a Fit, with a Rheumatic
Pain in the Temples.

A change of the Wind into the East often produced a Fit.

In the Intervals of the Fits I unsuccessfully tried these Medicines. I drank
many Pectoral Drinks, as Gill and Hyssop, and sometimes Rue in Diet-Drinks; the
last was good for the Wind, but troubled my Spirits; I used Syrup of Garlic,
Syrup of Sulphur, Tincture of Gum Ammoniacum in Elder-flower Water, Tincture of
Lavender, Spirit of Hartshorn: Broom Beer agreed with me better than Gill, or
its Juice. I tried Myrrh thus, Myrrh ij. Mellis ij. Croci ss. Nucis moschat ss.
Misce. This is an Excellent Pectoral, but hot: I tried Saffron Lozenges thus;
Crucipulv. i. Sacch lbi. I tried Flores Sulphuris, and Flores Benzon* in
Lozenges.

I smoaked Amber with my Tobacco, I used all kind of Balsams, Gilded Bals.
Peruvianum; i. Solut. in lbi. Sir. Bals. Bals. Sulph. Anisat, Succinat,
Terebinthinat, Tinct. Sulph. with Syrup of Ground Ivy. I tried Lime Water;
Infusions of Millepedes, Decoction of Sarsae, Drinks with Horehound lbss. to
six Gallons.

I drank the Spaw Waters to my Injury, the Stipticity of the Steel proved
injurious. I tried Extracted Ecphracticum at Night, and at other times
Vitriolum Martis dissolved in Milk Water; and a very severe Fit discouraged my
farther use of Steel.

I often Vomited, Bled, Purged in the Intervals, but found no Relief by any of
these methods.

None of the preceding Methods would succeed, but increased the severity of my
Fits: At last I Vomited once in a Month, I took six Ounces of the Cortex
infused in Wine, and after that three Ounces of Ammoniacum dissolved in
Oxymels. This method relieved me for three or four months in the Winter, but at
last proved unsuccessful, and the Fits returned as bad as ever. I drank Asses
Milk, which increased my Phlegm, and stopped up my Lungs. Next Summer I drank
the Waters at Bath, where indeed I had no Fit; but they returned severely when
I came Home.

I found I had read most of the Modern Writers, and hitherto had tried their
Methods, and hot Pectorals, and Cephalics in vain; I believed, by my ill
success in their way, that they never understood this Disease; and therefore
turned over some of the Old Writers, Galen, Aegineta, Aetius, etc. where I
found more rational Notions, and was directed by them to the use of that
Medicine which does very much relieve and prevent my Fits, of which I will
hereafter give an account.

I cannot remember the first Occasion of my Asthma, but have been told that it
was a Cold when I first went to School: As my Asthma was not Hereditary from my
Ancestors, so, I thank God, neither of my two Sons are inclined to it, who are
now past the Age in which it seized me. I at first was only troubled with it at
the great Changes of the Year, and preserved my self tolerably in Health for
some Years, by taking Purging Pills frequently: I never had any considerable
Fit in Oxford for Twelve Years that I lived there, which I imputed to the
clearness of that Air, and the spare Diet there* but as often as I came into
Staffordshire, into my Native Air, I was usually visited with a severe Fit or
two: The Air of a Town makes the Fits more severe when they happen, but I do
not think the Asthmatic so much exposed to the Accidents of the Weather in a
City, as in the Country: The Asthma being a Fever Fit, all hot Regimens and hot
Air, such as that of a City, may dispose some lean hot Bodies to Coughs, and
consequently Fits; but I could never observe my Fits to come oftener in London
than in the Country, only I find them more severe in a close Air, as they would
be in a close hot Room, when they happen.

I have met with some Asthmatics, who have been so for fifty Years, as they
informed me, and yet in tolerable Health, without any considerable decay of
their Lungs, or disability to perform their usual Employments, which I often
reflect on to Encourage my Patients, and my self, who yet can Study, Walk,
Ride, and follow my Employment, Eat and Drink and Sleep as well as ever I
could; neither am I yet sensible of any Decay in my Lungs, though I believe all
old Asthmatics have several Tubercula there, and the Glands of the Trachea are
much Relaxed by the frequent Defluxion of a Mucus through them; but the
frequent Expectorations carry off the fullness of Humors, and I have observed
very few to die of the Asthma Fit, but the frequency of that often occasions
Consumptions in lean Habits, and Dropsies, Lethargies, or Inflammations of the
Lungs in fatter Constitutions, which prove fatal.

Enquiries sent to an Ingenious Lady troubled with an Hysteric Asthma, and her
Answers to them.
Quere 1. What was the first occasion of your Hysteric Asthma?
Answer. The Affliction I had by the Loss of my Father threw me into a violent
Fever, which happened in the Spring, I being then 14 Years old; and about that
time Twelvemonth into Fits of the Mother, and those of several sorts, as
Raving, Laughing, and Silent; and in one of these Fits Tobacco being blown on
my face recovered me; but in other Fits this being repeated, I found my Breath
become straight: This difficulty of breathing was much more uneasy to me than
any of the Fits of the Mother. And after this I was troubled sometimes with the
one, and sometimes with the other: But after I was married, which was about 22,
I never had any Fits of the Mother, other than Shortness of Breath: Though the
trouble I have mentioned produced these Fits, yet I cannot but acknowledge I
might have some Disposition to the Asthma from my Father, who was also troubled
with a Shortness of Breath.

Quere 2. What Alteration has happened in the manner of your Fits?
The first Fits I had generally lasted me 36 Hours, but I never had more than
three or four Fits in one Year: But coming from London into the Country, I had
them frequently; and in the beginning of July they seized me violently every
morning at two a Clock, and held me in great Extremity five or six Hours, and
went off generally at Noon; and after that, till the next Fit, I was tolerably
well, but for seven weeks time I never went into Bed till after my Fit was off.
I slept in a Chair leaning on a Table, which I use to this day, and find it the
easiest when my Breath is indisposed; for many times my Wheezing will leave me
in sleeping thus; but if I lean back but a little in a Chair to sleep, or in my
Bed raised with Pillows, I shall Wheeze the more.

Quere 3. What Signs preceded your Fits, as Headache, pale Water; and in what
manner did the Fits hold you, how many days, and what Spit after?
My Straitness or Hardness of Breathing is betwixt the Breast and Pit of my
Stomach; but indeed my Arms, Shoulders, and all my Upper Parts are generally
uneasy. I never Spit in any Fit, or afterward, unless my Fit comes upon
catching Cold, then at the going off I spit white Phlegm, with black streaks
like Feathers; but I am not now so subject to Cold as formerly.

My Head is always well in the Fit, except in the long one I mentioned, when it
was benumbed in the hind Part, and my Eyes dim when the Fit went off. If I be
sleepy on a sudden, a Fit generally follows; I observed no quantity of Water
before the Fits, but always a great quantity of pale Water in the Fit; but it
is high colored as the Fit goes off.

Quere 4. What Medicines have relieved you most, and what did you find
Injurious to you?
At the first, Spirit of Castor in fair Water relieved me, and Hysterical
mixture by Dr. Hewet of Lichfield, in the Year 76. Then Treacle Water;
afterward Prince Rupert's Drops; sometimes Spirit of Hartshorn did well; but
in my long fit I mentioned above, it made me worse, and I fell into a sort of
Convulsion with it, and never took it since. Dr. Hollins gave me all the
Varieties of Hysterical Medicines, Juleps, foetid Pills, and Plasters, but
none of them gave me the least Relief; but I continued out of my Bed for seven
Weeks; at last I took half a Dram of the Jesuits Powder in a Cordial Water, and
that first Dose relieved me, so sensibly, that it seemed to press down the
stoppage of my Breath, and by repeating that Morning and Evening, I perfectly
Recovered, and since I find the same Medicine more beneficial to me than any
other for preventing my Fits. Any thing of Strong Waters or that is hot, or any
Stink much offend me in my Fits.

Quere 5. What Feverishness attends your Fits?
In my long fit I had no Fever; and in that fit Purging disturbed me extremely;
in other fits my Hands are sometimes very hot, and at the going off, my Water
is very high colored, and breaks much. I have had a Fever four Years ago
without any shortness of Breath, but as soon as that left me, the Asthma
returned.

Quere 6. What Accidents of Weather or Diet occasion your Fits?
I have found London Air, and that of Holland, agree best with me, and by going
into a sharp Air I have immediately fallen into shortness of Breath,
particularly in my going from London to Epsom; but upon my return next day to
London I was very well. I have had severe fits in London, none in Holland, but
a little Heaviness, which the Jesuits Powder put off immediately. Eating a
Supper, or any thing in an Afternoon, occasions my fits; but in the beginning
of my fits, Supper agreed well with me.

POSTSCRIPT.
My Fits have often returned, and the Jesuits Bark never failed Relieving me
for ten Years; afterward the Bark sometimes failed me, and then I bled often.

About 15 Years ago Spring and Fall I took Steel for eight Weeks, and Purged
once a Week in that course with Hierapicra; for all Potions were more apt to
bring a fit. After some Years I took Steel without Purging, which made me
worse, so that I then left it off; but when I took it with Purging I was better.

Four Years ago after my Fever, I began to take strong Purgers of Sena and
Buckthorn two days together; once in a Fortnight, and to Vomit with Carduus
once in a Month., which with the often repeating of the Bark kept off my fit Nine
Months together, but still in July and August I have some Return of my fits,
but of no great continuance, and very seldom violent. About six or eight Years
ago I spit in my fits, but since my Purging I spit no more than I did at first,
twenty Years ago.

I have omitted to mention this, that my fits never seize me but in the Night,
and then awake me with a heaviness, and so grow worse and worse immediately. I
am always most easy when I am Laced, and my fit goes frequently off on a
sudden, so as to be perfectly well in half an hours time. I have lately had two
easy fits, which I impute to Purging and Vomiting before they came.

If I may give some Rationale on this Lady's Asthma, I believe the Intermitting
Fever laid the Foundation of it, and the Relics of that by the trouble
mentioned, was turned into the Nerves, and gave her Hysteric Fits; and those
being disturbed by the smoke of Tobacco, which is yet extremely offensive to
her if she smell it: Or else the Disposition from her Father, laid the
Foundation of an Hysteric Asthma, which at present receives no Relief by Steel,
or Hysteric Medicines, but by Vomits, strong Purges, and frequent Repetitions
of the Cortex.

CHAP. II.
Of the Preternatural State of the Chyle, and Blood, and Serum in the Asthma;
and of the Rarefaction of the Animal Spirits, by an Effervescence in the
Humors, which produces the Periodical Fits.
THAT the Preternatural State of the Chyle in the Asthma is a Flatulent
Crudity, appears because all flatulent things, as new Beer, Turnips, Cabbage,
and all Roots which have a Mucilage and Acrimony mixed, very much disagree with
the Asthmatic, by irritating the Spirits, and creating a Windiness in the
Stomach, and they also affect the Nerves.

Frequent Eructations precede the Fits of the Asthma, and a Fullness is commonly
complained of in the Stomach before the Fits.

That the ill state of Chyle supplies the new Matter before the ^it of the
Asthma appears, because the Oppression at the Stomach, and some small
straitness of Breath happens within two or three hours after Dinner; and the
Exacerbation of the fit happens in the Night, about two a Clock, when the Chyle
is most plentiful in the Blood; and no other Humor is so capable of
Fermentation and Flatuosity as the Chyle is: For if the Chyle be not perfectly
digested by a thorough Fermentation, it resembles new Ale unripe, which is very
Windy; and this causes the same Inflation that the other does in the Primaeviae.

The Agitation of the Spirits, and their Expansion of the fermenting Mass,
produces the fermentation and dissolution of the Meat in the Stomach; which
being either deficient, or else stopped in their motion by a viscid Slime, the
Spirits remain Inviscated in the roapy Liquor, and there raise Bubbles, which
we call Wind.

It is commonly observed, that fullness of Diet, and all Debauches, render the
Fits most severe, and a temperate Diet make the Fits more easy. I have heard
some Objections against the Digestion of Meats by a fermentation in the
Stomach, to which I will give the Solutions following.

It Is objected that Fruit and new Wine are easily fermented, but not easily
digested, which they ought to be if Digestion was made by a fermentation.

To this I may answer, that that kind of Diet easily raises Windiness in the
Stomach, and therefore some fermentation happens after eating thereof, which
occasions the Ructus, and Swelling of the Stomach, and it is rather an excess of
fermentation to which that kind of Diet is subject, which produces the Fevers,
Vomitings, and Fluxes to those that use it, than a defect of the Digestion or
Fermentation. And, as we observe, Wines may be under-fermented and crude, or
else over-fermented or acid; so we must acknowledge two contrary faults in
Digestion, the one when the Meat is crude, slimy, windy, acerb; or else when
the Meat is over digested, and becomes acid, bitter, salt, putrid.

It Is further objected, that Bones, Flesh, Fat, and putrid things are easily
digested, and yet difficultly fermented.

To this I may Answer, That Fat is of all things the most difficultly digested,
and as difficultly fermented: I have observed Suet to lie in the Stomach of a
Dog fed with it, twelve hours undigested, and very little altered as I found
when I opened him. Fat Meats often go whole through the Body unaltered; and
Butter is heavy or hard of Digestion to many Stomachs: As to Bones they lie
long in the Stomach before their dissolution; it is their Gelly they are
resolved into by digestion that is fermented in the Stomach, but the hard Parts
go off undissolved in the Foeces.

The New Digester dissolves them into Broth, by Heat, rarifying the Air
included in their Pores, and in their Juices, and the gentle heat of the
Stomach in a lower degree, and a longer time rarifies the Air in the Animal
Juices contained in the Bones, which may occasion the solution of the solid
parts of the Bones, and a full digestion of the Liquors issuing from them.

Putrid things are easily digested, because half fermented, and therefore they
are apt to ferment too much in our Stomachs, and occasion Surfeits.

Flesh Meats are easily made putrid, and that is the highest degree of
Fermentation. The external Heat of the Hen Colliquates the Humors contained in
the Egg when it is hatching; and if the formation of the Foetus miscarries,
nothing is more putrid; which is an evident proof of a Fermentation in Animal
Humors: And if the Digestion of Flesh in the Stomach be observed, the Foetor
and Acid smell from a Carnivorous Stomach may more plainly prove the
dissolution of it, by a putrefactive Fermentation.

The common Objection is, That the Contents of the Stomach, when distilled,
yield no inflammable Spirit, and therefore are not fermented.

To this I may answer, That no Aliments stay long enough in the Stomach to be
perfectly fermented; and till Vegetables are perfectly fermented to a sharp
Acidity, they do not yield their inflammable Spirits; but the Fermentation in
the Stomach is continued but some few hours for the dissolution of the Meat,
which is then carried out into the Guts, where the Choler and salt Lympha being
mixed with the Chylous Mass, a stop may thereby be given to all farther
Putrefaction of it. But that an inflammable Spirit may be distilled from Animal
Humors fully prepared, appears by a remarkable Instance given in the
Collectanea Chymica, in the Anatomy of the Bile, where the Author describes a
volatile Spirit from Choler distilled in B. M. which is inflammable like Spirit
of Wine.

Not only the Chyle and Alimentary Mass in the Stomach and Intestines have
their preternatural State, but the Lympha Lactea (which is a Chylous Humor
separated from the Chyle by the Mucous Glands in the Stomach and Lungs) is too
crude, slimy and flatulent, and thereby less fit to promote the Fermentation of
the Meat in the Stomach. This is evident and visible if a Vomit be given to an
Asthmatic, a great quantity of this frothy, crude, or slimy Mucilage is
evacuated; and this way a great ease is given to the Paroxysms, some Matter of
the Disease being evacuated, which increased the Inflation of the Stomach; and
this viscid Saburra in the Stomach is most observable in old Asthmatics, both
in those that have the Spitting and Hysterical Asthma.

In the Spitting Asthma this slimy Lympha is very evident, and gives the Matter
of the viscid Phlegm usually spit up at the end of the Fit: It at first appears
clear, like a Solution of Gum Tragacanth, but after some days like the viscid
and digested Phlegm in a Cold.

All kinds of viscid gummose Meats or Drinks stop and oppress the Stomach and
Lungs of the Asthmatic, and occasion their Fits, which is by supplying a great
quantity of viscid Chyle and Lympha, which will not easily circulate through
the Lungs of the Asthmatic, which are frequently obstructed by crude Tubercula.
The Serum is made of the Chyle, and therefore must have the same kind of
Flatulency and Sliminess as the Chyle has. In the hot Scorbutical Temperaments
it is deficient and viscid, which occasions either Tubercula or Inflammations in
the Lungs; or else it is too waterish in the Hydropical, or very apt to
Effervescences in the Hysterical and Hypochondriacal. The pale Water in the Fit
is the thinner part of the Serum occasioned by some Constriction of the
Lymphatics. For as in the Fits of the Stone, the Urine is pale, because of the
Constriction of the Lymphatics, through which the remaining Serum ought to be
carried off, upon the Secretion of part of it through the Kidneys; but the Pain
causes that Constriction: And in the Asthma, the Inflations, by stopping the
Circulation of the Serum through the Lymphatics, occasion this great Diabetes
in the Asthma; as will hereafter be more fully explained.

This defect of Digestion and Mucilaginous Slime in the Stomach, are very
obvious, and observed by Writers, and were supposed the immediate cause of the
Asthma; but their ill success with Pectorals and Digestives, occasions my doubt
of that Assertion; especially since I can deduce the Asthma from a more
probable Cause, and show that the mentioned Alterations of the Humors, are
produced by the long continuance of it, and do not produce the Fits of the
Asthma, but only make them worse, or dispose us to them.

All Chronical Causes, as the Gout, Consumptions, etc. produce the same viscid
Saburra, with Windiness in the Stomach, and yet are not usually attended with
Asthmatic Fits, and the Inflammation of the Lungs, the Tubercula in
Consumptions, the great clog of Phlegm in Catarrhs, stuff and oppress the
Lungs, and occasion a Dyspnaea, but do not commonly give Asthma Fits; and
therefore we must seek for some other Cause of them.

The Blood of Asthmatics is very subject to Effervescences; and whatsoever
produces that, occasions the Fits; as great Heats or Cold, violent Motions of
the Body or Mind, any Excess in Eating and Drinking, or Venereal Pleasures; the
Heat of the Bed, the Changes of the Weather to Rain, Snow, or from Frost to a
Thaw; the Alteration of Clothes, the Changes of the Air at Spring and Fall: All
these are causes of the Fever we call an Ephemera, and they also produce the
Fits of the Asthma; from whence I may infer, that the Nature of the Asthma
consists in a slow Effervescence, or Ebullition of our Blood, on which the
several Symptoms of that Disease depend.

The common Ephemera happens in a healthful state of Blood, when it is not
tinctured by any morbid Cacochymia; and that Ebullition is attended with the
common Symptoms of Fevers; as Heat, Pains, quick and high Pulse, Thirst, and
sometimes high-colour'd Water: But in the Asthma, the Effervescence happens in
a mucilaginous state of Humors, and therefore the Heat is sometimes obscure,
the Urine pale, the Pulse quick but oppressed, some Pains in the Head, or
Heaviness attends it; and if the Patient keep his Bed in the beginning of the
Fit, they are very hot, and inclinable to Sweat; and at the latter end of the
Fit, the Urine has evidently a feverish Sediment.

The great Constriction of the Pulmonic Arteries, and the other Blood Vessels,
as well as the Heart it self, in the Fit, stops the Pulse of Asthmatics, and
that depresses the feverish Ebullition, and prevents the Heat, high Pulse, and
high colored Urine at first.

The quick and strong motion of the Heart promotes the Ebullition in Fevers;
and if by Opiates we can stop the violent Pulsation, the Efferverscence
considerably subsides.

That the Nerves may stop the Circulation very much in the Asthma, is evident
by the frequent Circumvolutions they have about the Blood Vessels near the
Lungs. And since the Nerves make an evident constriction on the Bronchia during
the Fit, we may observe by the intermitting Pulse, that they make the same sort
of Ligature upon the Arteries, and thereby check the high Effervescence of the
Asthmatic Fever.

The ferment of this Asthmatic Fever is the flatulent Succus Nutriticus, which
by reason of some Crudity is not fully digested into Blood, but is thence
easily precipitated by the changes of the Air, Diet, or other external
Accidents; or else of it self, like as in other intermitting Fevers, once in 10
Days it separates from the Blood, and by making its Consistence turbid, it
produces in it an obscure Effervescence, by which the several great Symptoms of
the Asthma are produced.

1st. A great quantity of pale Urine is thrown off by that Effervescence.

2dly. A flatulent Lympha is evacuated into the Stomach and Guts, which raises
the Alimentary Mass there into violent Flatulencies, like Wine over stummed.

3dly. The Glands of the Trachea and Vesiculae of the Lungs receive part of the
mucilaginous flatulent nutritious Juice separated from the Blood by the
Effervescence: For the occasion of this Symptom in the Spitting Asthma, is the
Weakness left in those Glands, which they contracted from that Inflammation of
the Lungs, which produces the Spitting Asthma.

4thly. The more spirituous part of this slimy and flatulent nutritious Juice
passes through the Nerves, being forced by the Effervescence, and there,
because of the slimy Vehicle of the flatulent Spirits, difficulty circulates
through the Nerves, but fills them, and causes an Inflation in the Membranes of
the Breast, and Lungs, and Stomach.

The Nerves of the Breast were formerly weakened by some Dyspnaea, occasioned by
Inflammation of the Lungs, or some Hysterical Convulsion, and thereby lost
their Tone, and became too open for the admitting of flatulent, unripe, or
undigested Spirits from the Blood; and this predisposition determines the Flux
of windy Spirits chiefly into the Pulmonic Nerves.

When I have been in a Fit of the Asthma, I have seriously considered all the
Symptoms described, and always believed from my sense and feeling of the
Disease, that the Fit depended on an inward burning Heat which occasioned them,
so that I am fully convinced that the Asthma Fit is a Fit of a Fever.

Carolus Piso affirmed this long since; and S^nnertus could not believe the
Asthma to be without a Fever: He says, Est blanda febris and halituosa, qualis
etiam alios morbos a fervore and motu serosi humoris ortos, ut Arthritidem,
Catarrhos, and hujusmodi fluxiones, alias comitatur.

The Modern Physicians have observed many Intermitting Fevers to lurk under the
Disguise of Chronical Diseases, as Coughs, Cholicks, Head-achs, Fits of the
Mother, and Swooning Fits; and the severish Heat, quick Pulse, and high
colored Water disappears, till the Blood be raised to a higher Digestion, or
Fermentation: The same is often the case of the Asthma; the Effervescence is in
the Blood, decayed by some former Disease, which occasions the Water to be
pale, and the Heat little.

That the Asthma may be a Symptom of an intermitting Fever, is evident by the
Description of some cases of that nature in some Modern Writers: And I remember
an Apothecary who, after drinking largely, was seized with an Intermitting
Fever, with an Inflammation of the Lungs, and every Night a fit of the Asthma
accompanied a fit of the Fever, which after three Weeks was cured by frequent
Bleeding, Vomiting, and at last Purging; but the Asthma long after continued,
returning every Night with large Spitting. He used too little of the Cortex,
and therefore suffered these Returns of the Asthma upon any Disorder, for half
a Year, when the Fever evidently returning on the Change of the Year, seized
his Head with a Delirium and Convulsions, and so killed him.

In this case it appears to me, that the Asthma depended on the Fever whilst
that was evident, and afterward whenever the Relics of that Fever were
agitated by an Accident into an Effervescence, they produced only the Asthma
Fit, without the usual Symptoms of the Fever.

I will give another Instance of a Patient about 50 Years old, who after an
ordinary Intermitting Fever, without any Symptoms of the Asthma, Relapsed after
14 Days into the same Fever, which returned every 12 Hours, and held him
shivering and shaking, with a terrible fit of the Asthma, for about half an
Hour, and that passed off without any considerable Sweat, or Heat, or Spitting:
This Person was subject to a Paralytick shaking, and in the Fever had strong
Convulsive motions: The Cortex would not stop any of the (...), but Riverius
Salt mixture did put off the fits for some time, but neither that nor
Alexipharmics would cure him.

By this Instance I observed, that an Intermitting Fever having its Matter
transferred to the Nerves, produces the complicate Fevers described by the
Ancient Writers; in which many Irregular Returns happen, and those great
Shakings which denominate the Fever, Horrifica, etc. in which they observed
Nervous Symptoms with pale Water.

I was consulted for a Gentleman, who at the latter end of a Tertian, was taken
with Swooning Fits at certain Hours every Night: He grew very cold, short
Breathed, and then swooned, unless he used great quantities of Spirits and
Cordials: This was certainly the Relics of his former Ague, and he was cured
by Salt of Wormwood, and Elixir Proprietatis, given at convenient times. And
the same swooning Fits I knew cured in another by the Cortex. In neither cases
the Fever was discernible, either by Thirst, Heat, or Urine. I have mentioned
these cases, to show that all Fevers are not regular in their Symptoms, and
that the Asthma is one of those Irregulars, both as to any extreme Heat,
Thirst, etc. and also in its Periods, because it returns every tenth Day in the
Periodical fit, or else Spring and Fall, as intermitting Fevers; and it has
this peculiarity of Anomalous Fevers, that its greatest Symptoms appear in the
Nerves, viz. the Inflations, which I shall next describe.

That old distinction of Natural, Vital, and Animal Spirits, must be still
admitted, and approved by all Modern Physicians, and I will give my Explanation
of it, being obliged to admit that there are Animal Spirits which produce the
Inflations of the Membranes in the Asthma fit.

If we consider the Generation of Vegetable Spirits, we may more easily
apprehend the Rise and Constitution of the Animal.

That all Vegetable Spirits are prepared from their Oil and Acid, appears by
their Preparation; for if the Vegetables be fermented, a Spirit may be
distilled from them; but if the Vegetables be distilled after a short
Digestion, an Oil is distilled from the same. Fermentation dissolves the Tartar
of Liquors, and makes it spirituous, by which it affects the Nose strongly.

By Fermentation the Air is mixed or united with the most volatile Particles of
the Oil and Acid, and that gives the Elasticity and briskness of motion to the
Spirits of fermented Liquors; their Inflammability is from their Oil, and their
sharp Pungency from the volatile Tartar: This volatile Oil and Tartar, if they
swim in the Air, they are like the resinous Particles of Smells, affecting our
Noses by their Spirituousness; but if contained in a Bubble of Water, they may
be called the Spirit of that Liquor. Those volatile hot Parts, like fire,
rarify the Air included in the Bubbles, and make it more Spirituous and
Elastic; the Oil and Acid being of different natures in different Vegetables,
they variously denominate and distinguish these several Spirits, and give
different Rarefactions to the included Air in the Bubble constituting those
Liquors.

The first production of the Spirits in animal Humors is in the Stomach, when
the Meat being dissolved by Fermentation, or Agitation of its aerial Particles,
the volatilized oily Parts (which give the Foetor) and the volatile Acid, which
smells sharp or sour, mixed with the aerial elastic Particles, and included in
a Bubble of Water, compose the Spirits of animal Humors; the frothiness of the
Contents of the Stomach shows the oily Viscidity of the Chyle, and that was
necessary to constitute the Bubbles for containing the Spirits of animal
Humors.

These Bohnius describes in the Chyle, by the help of the Microscope, Chylus
est fluidum ex globulis diaphanis, per liquorem crystallinum agitatis. -- And
pingues chyli particulae in bullulas sive vesiculas ab aeris A^omis reducuntur.
If too much Slime abound in the Chyle, the most rarefied Parts of the Air, and
volatile Parts of Meat, are fully enclosed and retained, and create a very
windy Liquor; such as is that of new Wine, or Beer, undepurated from its Slime,
and windiness, or spirituous Air. It is in animal Humors as in all other
fermented Liquors, the better it is fermented, the more quick and brisk are the
Spirits; but if they be not sufficiently fermented, the Spirits are windy and
flat; if over fermented, the Spirits are easily Evaporated, or else turned
eager, or acid, or foetid: So all Aromatics, as Orange or Citron Pills, if
fermented too long, they yield a foetid Oil and stink; if less fermented, they
yield an Aromatic Oil.

In the Chyle the Spirits are like that of new Beer, crude, raw, and not
inflammable; but in the Blood they are more depurated by secretion of slimy
Humors, such as the Lacteal Lympha, and by long and frequent Circulations, the
oily, acid, aerial Spirits become more volatile, and are contained in the
Bullulae which make the red particles of Blood: And these Bohnius thus
describes; Rubicundam portionem autopsiae mobiliorem esse, hinc magis activam
ratio suadet. -- Sphaerulae illae agiles gelatinosa ramenta simul in motus
perennes abripiunt, and mutua attritione deliquant, rubicundae vesiculae per
Microscopium apparent per Crystallinam Lympham ferri, quae statim cum secum
quietem componunt, motore vitali destitute, in grumum nigricantem facessunt.
These large red Bullulae in the Blood contain the rarefied Air, and volatile
Particles; and because they do not readily mix with Water, they may have some
Fatness or Oil in them. The use of these is to dissolve and make the
mucilaginous Mass of Blood more fluid, which helps its Circulation and
Secretion, Digestion and Assimulation of the new Chyle; and in this consists
the use of the Vital Spirits. If these Globuli contain a very windy Spirit,
that makes it subject to Effervescences, and Fevers, and Defluxions; for that
forces the Serum that is Cacochymical, too much through the Cephalic, or other
Glands, which ought naturally to be perspired, or go off by Respiration.

If these windy Globuli fill the Respiratory Nerves, and Muscular Membranes,
they produce that stiffness or rigidity observed in the Breast in the Asthma
Fit.

The Spirits we call Animal, are probably a Congeries of the Globuli observed
in the Blood, and are separated from it by the Glands of the Brain; and since
the Animal Spirits pre-existed in the Blood, they must partake of the same
preternatural Quality and State, as is observed in the Chyle and Blood, and be
very windy, and easily rarefied; and because of their mucilaginous Vehicle,
unfit for a free Circulation through the Nervosum Genus, but apt, upon great
Rarefactions, to stand inflated.

There is a continual Flux of the Animal Spirits into the Pneumonic Nerves, for
the necessary use of Respiration, and also into the Cardiac Nerves, to
perpetuate the Circulation of the Blood, as also into the Par intercostale, to
promote the constant Peristaltic motion of the Guts; and these Nerves are
chiefly affected in the Asthma, and none of those which serve for voluntary
Motion, and by reason of the continual Flux of Spirits through the mentioned
Nerves, they must be more open, and apt to receive the windy Spirits from the
Blood, by which the Asthmatic Inflation is made in the Breast and Primae Viae.

The Nerves of the Lungs were also weakened by some precedent Inflammation in
the Spitting Asthma, or else by Hysterical Dyspnaea's in the Hysteric Asthma;
and that determines the motion of the windy Spirits very much that way.

I have described the mucilaginous windy Temper of the Chyle, and Effervescence
of the Blood, and windiness in the Animal Spirits, in a mucilaginous Slime, to
whose Rarefaction the Stiffness and Rigidity and Contraction in the Membranes
is to be imputed.

If I had only described the Globuli, and imputed all Effects to mechanic
Motion, I could not have taken any Indication thence useful in Practice,
therefore it is necessary to describe the Cacochymia's, against which I must
direct my Method and Medicines: And I must desire the Mechanic Writers to
explain in what part of the Globuli the Oil, the Acid, and the Earth stands,
and how Fermentation alters them, and how Medicines work any Alteration in
them. The Chemical Principles are more useful in Practice than the Mechanic,
but above all the old Galenic Cacochymia's: For though Nature be too fine for me
to discern its Figures and Motions in Fermentations, yet it is easy for me to
observe the Effects of that great Instrument of Natures, whereby she changes
Liquors from one Cacochymia to another, and makes the preternatural State
sensibly slimy, windy, acid, serous, or salt, viscid, acrid, bitter or putrid;
this I can see, taste and understand; these were the true, sensible, ancient
Galenic Notions useful in Practice. In his Method of curing Inflations, he
describes the (...) in Animal Bodies, which is raised by the natural Heat, and
ought to perspire from our Humors, after a perfect Digestion; and when the
innate Heat (by which is to be understood the Fermentation of Humors) is weak,
or the Humors half digested, thick, glutinous, that impure Spirit cannot
perspire, especially if the Pores be stopped. He observes farther, that sometimes
the Heat being increased, the thick and glutinous Humors are resolved into
thick Vapors.

Galen describes the (...), as the Matter of flatulent Tumors, which he calls
(...), not (...), nor (...); and this he explains by a different Constitution
of the Air in the South and Northwinds; a tempestuous Air full of Vapors is
like the windy Spirits, but a clear sedate Air like the natural Aetherial well
digested Spirit. This notion is easy, obvious, and true; for in fermenting
Liquors there rises a spirituous Vapor from them, which bursts the Vessels if
restrained, and this is the windy Spirit; but that which agitates the Globuli
of perfectly Fermented and Depurated Liquors, that is more pure and less
Elastic than those beforementioned.

I will next describe those nervous Parts that are filled, inflated, and become
tense or stiff by this immature or ill prepared Spirit.

Galen observes, That the (...) is contained sometimes under the Skin covering
the Bones, sometimes under the Peritonaeum, sometimes in the Belly, sometimes
under the Skins covering the Muscles, and sometimes in the membranous Tendons,
and the Muscles are filled with that Spirit; by which we may observe, that he
observed it was usual for that Spirit to affect the Membranes; but this it does
not only externally by Inflating them, but enters into the hollow Tubes of the
nervous Fibrillae, which constitute the Nerves and Membranes.

The Membranes that are inflated, and thereby contracted in the Asthma; are,

First, Those of the Lungs and Cavity of the Breast. Almost the whole Substance
of the Lungs is Membranous, consisting of the Trachea, Bronchea, and Vesiculae;
the exterior Membrane of the Trachea is described to have motritious Fibers,
which go along the length of it, to abbreviate the Trachea, and circular Fibers
to contract its Cavity. It has also an inward Membrane extremely sensible of
Fume, Dust, or the least Injury, and the Vesiculae of the Lungs constitute a
great spungy Substance of it, and they are described to have muscular Fibers,
for to contract them in Expiration.

Pulmonibus musculum reticularem collulas eorum singulas ambientem, and
comprimentem supersterni. -- Et tracheae tunicam succingentem e rectis and
circularibus staminibus Musculosis coagmentari, is observed by Anatomists; and
these Muscular Stamina, like the Fibrae Nervosae, which move the Stomach and
Guts, are inflated in the Asthma, as the others be in the Primae Viae.

The whole Cavity of the Breast, the Intercostal Muscles, the Diaphragme and
Sternum, are covered with the same Membranes, which are affected more or less
with an Inflation in the Fit of the Asthma; and on this do the Symptoms,
appearing in the Breast, depend.

By this Inflation the Bronchia are contracted or straightened, and that produces
the Wheezing noise in Expiration, and that this Symptom does not depend on
Phlegm is plain, because the Hysteric, who have no Phlegm, Wheeze very much.

The Lungs feel stiff, strait, and admit but little Air, because the Vesiculae
are contracted, as well as the Bronchia; and some express their feeling, as if
the Lungs rose and were drawn upwards, to choke them. This contraction of the
Vesiculae is very probable, because the Bronchia are contracted, and the
Vesiculae have the same Muscular Fibers to help Expiration, by which they may
be drawn so up, as not to admit the Air.

From this Contraction of the Vesiculae and Bronchia of the Lungs, it follows,
if the Air cannot be admitted there, the Breast cannot be dilated duly, to make
a true Inspiration. The motion of our Lungs is like a Pair of Bellows, if they
be opened by the force of our Hands, and the cavity will freely admit the Air,
we can move them easily; but if the Nostrils and entrance of the Air be stopped,
or suppose a Bladder tied within the Bellows to the Nostrils, so to receive the
Air, and suffer none to get into the cavity of the Bellows, but what it
contains; it will follow, that in a perfect stoppage of all the entrances of
Air, the Bellows could not be opened; and if no more entered than may be
contained in the Bladder (supposed above) the Bellows would be opened but a
little way, and would inspire difficultly. So it apapears in the business of
the Asthma, the Inspiration is difficult and laborious, because but little Air
can be admitted into the contracted Bronchia, and the Vesiculae drawn up: This
puts the Scapular and Intercostal Muscles and Diaphragme upon a violent
endeavor to press in the Air, and open the Lungs, which nisus Authors have
mistaken, and supposed the Pneumonic Muscles, especially the Diaphragme, to be
convulsively affected; but it may be easily apprehended, that the Diaphragme
cannot press the Viscera downwards to enlarge the Breast, if the Air cannot
beadmitted into the Lungs to follow its depression, and fill the cavity of the
Breast; for in that case the weight of the Atmosphere pressing on the Belly,
would more than counterpoise its force. And this is the true reason why the
Diaphragme cannot move in the Asthma Fit. Not only the Membranes immediately
composing the Lungs are Inflated, and thereby the cavity is contracted in the
Asthma, but also sometimes the Membranes of one or both of the Pleura's, and
that draws the Asthmatic to lie and lean on that side during the Fit, and
flying Pains are many times observed after the Fit. The Mediastinum is affected
in others, who complain of straitness, weight, or pains toward the Sternum;
and the Pericardium is also affected in those who are subject to Fainting Fits,
or Palpitations, or I^^^mitting Pulses.

The Membranes of the Muscles and Diaphragme being tense or stiff, may hinder
the motion of the Pneumonic Muscles, because the Membranes being supposed to
arise from the Tendons, and being continuations of them, they may divert the
Spirits from the body of the Muscles, and by their straitness hinder both the
flux of Spirits and Blood into the Muscles, by compressing the Arteries and
Nerves.

The slowness of Inspiration and Expiration in the Fit depends on the stiffness
or straitness in the Lungs, and Parts inflated, which resists the Action of the
pectoral Muscles; it is a long time before the Air can be drawn in, and almost
as long before it can be forced out, because of the constriction of the
Bronchia.

The rareness, or stop, or interval betwixt Inspiration and Expiration, depends
on the stop given the Pulse by the Asthma Fit, (and that stop is made either by
the Constriction on the Pericardium, or the Membranes of the Arteries;) for the
stronger and quicker the Pulse is, the more frequent are the Inspirations and
Expirations

The great labor for Inspiration, is, because the Diaphragme cannot move
downward, by reason of the stop given in the Lungs to the Airs Inspiration; for
the Diaphragme should depress the Belly, and thereby enlarge the cavity of the
Breast for Inspiration: This defect obliges the Asthmatic to labor more with
the Muscles of the Shoulders to lift up the Breast, and for the same reason the
Asthmatic must sit up, that the weight of the Belly may a little weigh down the
Diaphragme, and the Asthmatic finds ease in leaning forward, or being held up
under the Arms to enlarge the cavity of the Breast for Air; and this sort of
Breathing is called Sublimis and Magna, because the Breast is more enlarged
upward in this Dyspnaea more than any other, and yet but little Air is drawn
into the Lungs.

Secondly, The Membranes of the Head are much affected in the Asthma with an
Inflation, which makes the sense of numbness in some, in others fullness, or
straitness, as if the Membranes were on all sides drawn downwards; and this
straitness produces a stop in the Blood Vessels, from whence comes Pain,
Dullness, Stupidity, and running irregular Phancies; but this usually remits
before the Fit goes off, after the sleep of the first Night of the Asthma; and
is much abated by Combing the Head backwards, and keeping it cool, and getting
out of Bed in the beginning of the Fit. This stop on the Vessels does in old
Asthmatics produce the Dropsy in the Head, of which they always die Lethargic.

Thirdly, The Membranes of the Stomach and Guts are much affected by Inflations
in the Fits: Hence come frequent Eructations, when the Stomach is empty, yet it
feels full, distended, and the Guts are disturbed with continual Wind, which
sometimes gripes them, or gives Inflations and Contractions; and sometimes the
small Fits of the Asthma, which depend on Weather, are only in the Primae viae,
where the nervous Fibers and Membranes suffer Inflations: The changes of
Weather very much affect the Primae viae, by a flux of serous and flatulent
Humors that way, by which the Contents are violently Rarefied, and the
Membranes irritated into Inflations, and also the windy Spirits raise some
disturbance in the Membranes, and a distention which hinders the motion of the
Diaphragme.

The Incubus is very like the Asthma. It takes Persons therewith affected in
their sleep; they have a difficulty of Breath, and they have the same
difficulty in moving their Hands and Limbs, which is more than is in the
Asthma; the Incubus lasts but a shorter time, depending on the crude Spirit,
filling the Nerves from a full Stomach, which evaporate on waking, or else the
Stagnation of Chyle in the Heart and Lungs, for I have observed their Pulse to
Intermit.

In the Palsy, where the Nerves are obstructed above, there is no Inflation of
the Parts beneath, but they are rather weak and flaccid, but the Asthma Fit
lasts but few hours, or some days; and if in the Asthma the Nerves were
obstructed in the Plexus, how can that be so soon removed? or the Lungs appear
stiff and inflated below? they would rather be relaxed below the Obstruction.

The Irritation of the Nerves by the Serum extravasated in the Head is only in
Cachectic Persons, and those who are Hydropical, and cannot ordinarily produce
the Fits, but is the effect of a long Disease. The Asthma often ends in
Tympanitical Inflations of the Belly, and that Distemper by Analogy may explain
the preternatural State of the Spirits; for windy Inflations affect the Guts
alike in both, and that makes the Parts stiff and rigid; all hot things
increase the Inflations, and cool ones allay them in both; so that the same is
the preternatural state of the Spirits in both, they being crude and unripe,
because contained in a mucilaginous Lympha; so that being Rarefied on any
occasion into large Bubbles or Froth, they produce that Inflation in the
membranous Fibers, the which makes them stiff, and the Inflation contracts the
cavities they constitute in the Lungs, etc.

The windy Tumors of the external Parts, which presently subside again, are
not unlike the Asthmatic Inflations. In the Belly, those windy Tumors depend
on the Tumor of the Viscera, compressing the nervous Parts, and are therefore
more lasting; but in the Asthma the Spirits are only Rarefied, and cause their
own Obstruction and Stagnation for a small time, till the windy Spirits are
Evaporated, or again compressed and restored to their natural Consistence.

I never could observe any Tumor, Pain or Stiffness, Fullness or Convulsion in
any of the Expiratory or Inspiratory Muscles. If the Diaphragme was convulsed,
that would help the Inspiration, by enlarging the Breast, as in its natural
Motions; If the Muscles of the Belly, which help Expiration, were convulsed,
that might easily be observed by their pressing in the Belly; and the same
would be observed in the Triangular Muscle of the Sternum. I must confess I
have observed a twitching sometimes, when the Breast is almost perfectly
subsided, but that is not constant; so that I cannot think any Convulsion is
commonly found in the Asthma Fit, but is sometimes a Symptom, upon Extremities
of Laboring and Suffocation.

No other Hypothesis seems to me fairly to explain this lasting Stiffness of
the Lungs, but an Inflation in its Membranes, which hindering the entrance of
Air, gives a Catalepsis, and Rigidity, or immobility to the Diaphragme, the
Part most unjustly accused of this Tyrannic Oppression.

I shall from the Discourse above about the antecedent Cause of the Asthma, and
the parts affected by it, give the following Definition of this Disease.

The Asthma is a high, slow, rare, and laborious Respiration, which depends
immediately on the Inflation of the Membranes of the Lungs (which constringe
the Bronchia, Bladders of the Lungs and Blood Vessels) by windy Spirits,
rarefied or propelled through the Glands of the Brain, either by external
Accidents, or a periodic Febrile Effervescence of the Blood.

The Priapism is reckoned by old Writers amongst the windy Inflations; and it
is truly so; for as the windy Spirits in the sleep inflate the Membranes of the
Penis, and by stopping the Circulation of Humors make a Stiffness or
Inflation; so it may be in the Nervous Fibers of the Lungs, there are no true
Muscles in either part to make this Inflation, but only nervous Fibers, and in
the muscular Membranes, the stiffness of these Parts is not a Convulsion, for
that is transient, but a true Inflation, which may endure many days; and
therefore Helmont was mistaken when he called the Asthma Pulmonis Caducum,
which seems rather to be of the nature of a Catalepsis, in which all the Parts
stand rigid, stiff and immovable.

CHAP. III.
Of the evident Causes of the Asthmatic Fit; as, the Air, Diet, Exercise,
Passion, etc. and of those Diseases on which the Asthma depends as a Symptom.
I Have described the Nature of the true Flatulent Asthma in the preceding
Chapters, and in this design to describe the Accidental Fits of the Asthma,
depending on the Six Non-naturals, and also several kinds of the Symptomatic
Asthma's.

First, The Air.
No Changes or Alterations happen in the Air without causing some Alterations
in Animal Humors and their Spirits, especially those of the Asthmatic, the Air
being admitted into the Lungs, and every where compressing all the external
Parts of the Animal, according to its several degrees of weight or pressure; it
must affect the Spirits, which are also of an Elastic Quality, and expand
themselves the more the external pressure of the Air is abated. This Mr. Boil
has sufficiently proved. For Animals are wonderfully inflated or blown up in
his Vacuum; the Eyes start out, and they Vomit; but upon the readmission of
Air, they subside into their former bigness; and in very high mountainous
places, it is observed, by reason of a less pressure of the Atmosphere, that
Vomiting, Choleras, Hemorrhages, and Dyspnaea's happen. The Respiration is most
particularly affected by the Alteration of the pressure, because in
Inspiration, the Air, by virtue of its Elasticity, expands the Vesiculae of the
Lungs, and therefore that expansion must alter according to the different
pressure and elasticity of the Air. For want of this due Expansion in the
Vacuum, the Circulation of the Blood is stopped in the Lungs, and the Animal dies
Convulsive: And that the pressure of the Air being weakened, occasions short
breathing, is not only evident by those who have been on very high Mountains;
But Helmont describes an Asthmatic, of whom he tells us, Montanis locis pejus
se habet, ideoque Bruxellis vix pernoctare audet: And it will more fully
appear, by comparing the Observations made of Weather by the Barometer, with
the Changes in the Spirits of Asthmatic Persons, and their Fits, which succeed
on the Changes of Weather.

I will first prove that the Spirits of Animals be very Elastic, and those of
Asthmatics much more so, because very windy.

If the Experiments above mentioned are not sufficient to convince the Reader,
let it be considered, that the Spirits of Vegetables are very Elastic, and
force their Vessels in very high Fermentations, and in bottled Liquors; that
the Changes of the Weather make Vegetable Liquors clear or turbid, and set them
to Ferment again; upon the Changes of the Year, Wines Ferment: And the same
Changes may be observed in Animal Humors, upon Changes of the Weather, and the
Times of the Year, which shows the Similitude of their aerial Spirits, which
keep the same Expansion and Pressure as the Air it self has, which is the great
Instrument of the Agitation by which Fermentation is managed, and also the
chief cause of fluidity in Liquors, as well as the clearness of their
consistence. That the Animal Spirits are Elastic, appears by the Inflation of
the Belly, and all the Habit of the Body in those who die Convulsive, their
whole Body being excessively swelled; and in Poisoned Bodies the same happens
when the Poison comes by those Medicines which act much on the Spirits.

All Liquors, as Milk and Blood, are raised into Bubbles in Vacuo Boyliano,
upon the Pumping of the Air, which is occasioned by the Rarefaction of the
included Air and Spirits; and that Air is included in Animal Humors, is
evident by the application of Cupping-Glasses, by which the pressure of the
external Air being removed, the Internal Spirits and Air become rarefied by its
Heat, and swell the solid Parts in which they are contained.

I will next consider how the Spirits of the Asthmatics are affected in the
different States of Air, and show that those Effects are produced in Animal
Bodies, by the same cause as the Alterations are in a Weather-Glass.

In a dry state of Air, the Spirits of the Asthmatic are most lively, and they
breath free, there being then no Vapors in it, or Fumes to weaken the pressure
of the Air; for in Serene Weather the Mercury stands higher than in other
states, because a larger Cylinder of Air unmixed, presses up the Mercury in the
Barometer, and by this heavy pressure of the clear Air, the Spirits of the
Asthmatic are kept from that Expansion, which ordinarily produces the Fit. It Is
observed that the Intervals of the Fits are largest in dry settled Weather.

When any Mist arises, the Asthmatic breaths difficultly, and finds an
Oppression on his Spirits, especially a Straitness and Fullness at the Stomach,
upon Changes of Weather, though the Fit does not always succeed that complaint.
The Moisture of the Air is most prejudicial to the Asthmatic, whilst the watery
Vapors retain the nature of Exhalations, because then they act most on the
Spirits, and cause the Inflation at the Stomach.

The Rain when it falls, does not much affect the Asthmatic, but the watery
Vapors which precede it one, two, or three Days, because the Vapors weaken
the pressures of the Air, as appears by the Barometer, which sinks sometimes
before Rains, and great Storms, and the Asthma Fits happen two or three Days
usually before such Changes; but I have observed the Animal Spirits to be more
nice, and predict the Alteration before the Weather-Glass. It is observed by
Seamen, that if there be any bad Weather in a Month, it usually happens two or
three Days before, or after the Full or Changes of the Moon, which is the
reason why the Asthmatic Fits happen at those times. The pressure of the Air
being weakened by the Vapors, the windy Asthmatic Spirits expand themselves,
and inflate the Pneumonic Nerves and Membranes, and occasion the Asthmatic Fits
before great Rains.

All damp Houses and fenny Countries, and those Winds that bring fenny Vapors
and Mists, by altering the pressure of the Air, very much affect the Spirits of
the Asthmatics; and such the East Wind often brings, which at its first coming
usually give, the Asthma Fits, upon very great Winds and Storms, though no Rain
follows, the Mercury sinks lowest of all; for these drive away a great quantity
of the usual Cylinder of Air, by which the pressure of the Air is altered; and
before great Storms I have frequently observed great Asthma Fits. It was one of
Van Helmont's Observations, Al^as observavi, quae spirante Borea statim vel in
Hypocaustis Asthmate plecterentur insontes. The South Wind is also offensive by
the moist Air it brings, but the West and North are least prejudicial here in
England.

From other Causes I have observed the Fits of the Asthma to happen, in all the
various Points of the Winds, so that the Changes of the Air and Winds only
dispose or incline the Asthmatic to their Fits, and often occasion them; but such
accidental Fits are short, and I generally observe them to trouble the Stomach
most, where a Windiness inflates it, and hinders the depression of the
Diaphragme, but no great alteration happens in the Lungs; for the Fit goes off
with Wind, and a little Spit, and loose Stools.

In Summer the Asthmatic Fits are most frequent, and grievous; the Asthmatic
are most impatient with Heat, especially that of the Fire, before which they do
not willingly sit, but most of them, taught by long Experience, choose to sit on
the side of it. The heat of the Fire rarefies the Air, or over-heats it, so
that it expands the Animal Spirits in the Lungs, and disposes them to their
Asthmatic Inflations. So we observe in Dogs, a great Dyspnea occasioned by
lying too hot near the Fire.

Van Helmont observes, Aestate saltem saepius and saevius infestat accessus,
quam hyeme, which is generally true, though I have discoursed some who complain
most of the Winter. These Winter Asthmatics have a Catarrh joined with their
Asthma. I had once a Patient who was a fat Woman, who complained of her Winter
Asthma; she Spit very much, and complained of frothy Urine, and Stools like
Barm, who by a Diarrhaea was run very Consumptive, and during the continuance
of that, she had none of the Asthma.

That Vegetable Spirits are expanded by Heat, appears by the Thermometer, and
the Animal are alike expanded by the Heat of the Sun, Fire, Clothes, and the
Bed, or a Crowd, or close Room, because of the hot Air in them are very
offensive. All Heat weakens the pressure of the Air, as it appears in
Cupping-Glasses, and that being weak, it cannot easily expand the Bladders of
the Lungs; therefore Asthmatics seek a moderate cool and free Air, which makes
a more vigorous pressure on their Lungs, and cools their expanded Spirits,
which thereby does refresh them; they love the Windows open, and to be carried
into the open Air in a Chalash, to avoid all hot Places, and Weather, which
Suffocate them.

The Fit of the Asthma is generally increased by the Heat of the Bed, and it
usually seizes them there, and they are obliged to rise out of it, and they can
bear a great degree of Cold, in sitting up all Night with the Windows open on
them, because of the great Expansion of Animal Spirits by the Fit.

I have often had great Fits when the Weather has continued very clear, and
only very hot Weather has succeeded, to which I then imputed the Fits.

In very cold Weather the Fits of the Asthma are less violent, because that
compresses the Expansion of the Spirits; but before any great Snows, the
Asthmatic usually have a Fit, and that a severe one; or, or least, when the Fit
does not succeed, they feel a Fullness at Stomach.

The Quicksilver falls in the Glasses for want of pressure in that state of
Air, and occasions or gives way to the Expansion of the Spirits; and before
such Storms of Snow, the Spirits feel very uneasy and restless, and some
Rheumatic Pains affect the Temples, or top of the Head, with a lightness in the
Head, and other Pains are observed in the Limbs: Hence it appears that frozen
Vapors have the same effect on the Barometer, and the Spirits, as the floating
moist Vapors have, and the reason of both is a less pressure in the Air at
such times.

In calm frosty Weather the Mercury stands high, the cold Air being condensed
weighs most; and in such Weather the Asthmatic is most free from Fits, for by
compression of the Spirits the Asthma is hindered.

The Mercury stands highest in the cold Easterly and Northerly Winds, because
the cold condensed Air is drove hither by those Winds; and since that Air is
heaviest, we must impute the Fits occasioned by them to a sudden check of
Perspiration, which produces the Effervescence, on which the Asthmatic
Inflation depends, and not only to the want of pressure in the Air.

In extreme cold Weather the Circulation is more stopped in the External Parts
by the compression of Air, and therefore then the serous Humors are carried
inwardly toward the Belly, Lungs or Brain, where they pass those Glands, after
the manner of a Defluxion.

Any kind of Smoke offends the Spirits of the Asthmatic, and for that reason
many of them cannot bear the Air of London, whose Smoke, like Fire it self,
irritates their Spirits into an Expansion. I always observed the Smoke of Wood
more Suffocating than that of Coal, and more apt to occasion a Cough.

The fetid smell of a Candle put out, or the smell of melted Grease, will often
occasion a Fit: And I remember an Asthmatic Lady had a severe Fit by the smell
of an Ointment she boiled. Horstius has a Remarkable Story of a Woman who grew
Asthmatic, by holding her Head over the smell of a Lixivium, for the making of
Soap, of which she died after 7 Years; and in her Windpipe opened, black
Glands were observed, of the bigness of Peace or Beans, to which the Fit was
imputed.

A Lady informed me that she smoked Tobacco for an Hysterical Pain in her
Stomach, by which she fell into the Asthma, for which Astrop-Waters gave her
some Relief.

During the Fit of the Asthma, the smoke of Tobacco is so offensive, that it
very much straitens the Breath, if it be smoked the first Day of the Fit, and
much endangers a Suffocation. There are many Asthmatics that cannot bear the
smell of it, therefore its Foetor is injurious at any time, its Heat thickens
the Phlegm, and rarefies their aerial Spirits, making them restless; all the
good it can do, is, to discuss the Windiness after the Fit abates, and to help
the Coughing up the Phlegm; but it generally over heats the Air in the Humors
of Animals, and raises the Fermentation too much.

There is a Remarkable Instance in Bonetus, of an Asthmatic who fell into a
violent Fit, by going into a Wine-Cellar, where the Must was fermenting; and
this shows how much the Spirits may be disturbed by Fumes, which are capable of
Rarefying them, or else causing a Fermentation in the Humors, which will
certainly cause their Expansion to produce an Asthma Fit.

The Fumes of Metals dry the Lungs, and especially those of Quicksilver, which
may corrode the Trachea, or at least irritate the Spirits there, and determine
their motion much toward the Lungs, where the Fumes are received. Fumus
Mercurii (qui ut larvatus semper est tamen Mercurius) statim laringem
praecludit, and constringit: Helmont gives us this Observation; from whence we
may observe the Stipticity of Mercury, and that Stipicity was observed by
Avicenna in Mercury, which Taste is always injurious to the Asthma: Those Fumes
which Irritate, may vitiate the Trachea, and produce the Humid Asthma, as
Helmont describes the Asthma from such Fumes.

The Dust of other Metals fills the Lungs and irritates them, and the Fumes dry
the Lungs like Flesh dried with Smoke, and this Asthma is to be cured by
moistening them with Oil, and Milk-Diet, Mucilaginous Pectorals, and open Air.

Mineral Poisons are best corrected by Mineral Medicines; Mercur. Dulcis with
Lenitive Purges, Antimonium Diaphoreticum with Theriaca to Sweat, Sulphur
Flowers unite with Mercury.

There are some Instances of Shortness of Breath occasioned by Thunder, and
helped by Sulphur Medicines, and Vomiting; to which those who are
Thunderstruck, and recover, are inclined, as I have been told.

Not only foetid offensive Smells occasion the Asthma Fits, but those also that
are strong scented and sweet, and most Asthmatics are affected by Perfumed
Waters and Medicines, as the Chemical Oils offend by their strong Odors. There
is a Relation of a Monk, in Helmont, who when he eat Fish fried with Oil, Ruit
extemplo anhelitu privatus, sicut vix praefocato distinguatur; and this
Observation Helmont farther confirms, Vidi frequentes, quae suave olentium
odore praeter cephalalgias, and syncopes, confestim in extremam respirandi
difficultatem inciderent.

Since I have given these Instances of the great Influence of Smells upon
Animal Spirits, I will beg pardon to digress a little, to consider the nature
of Smells, that by comparing what I shall say of them with my ^ormer Discourse
of Animal Spirits, I may give a general account of these great Effects produced
by Smells.

I will describe the Matter of Smells, then their Differences and Manner how
they variously affect the Animal Spirits.

The^phrastus has observed that every thing that is unm^^'d is without smell,
as well as taste, therefore all Simple Bodies are without smell, as Water, Air,
and Fire are without smell; but that the Earth alone has a smell, because most
mixed.

Tastes and Odors are therefore chiefly to be observed in Juices of Plants or
Animals, or Metals, and it is is a particular Texture in those Juices, which
arises from the mixture of the Principles of things, (viz. the Oil, Acid,
Earth, and Water) which strikes the Organ of Taste, with a particular taste,
and the same specific texture and mixture was necessary to produce a particular
smell, which every Plant and Animal has peculiar to it self; for what gives the
taste in the form of a Liquor, if it be Rarefied and ascends into the Air in
Vapor, it strikes the Organ of Smelling with a particular Odor.

Since there is no Odor without Taste, nor Taste without some Odor, and the
Odor in Wines and Fruits are changed with their Tastes; the matter of both
Tastes and Smells appears to be the same which gives such a vicinity and
sociable accord to both those Senses, that Plants are said to taste as they
smell, and e contra; and we use the names of Smells, as Foetid and Aromatic, to
express our Tastes; and, I think, we ought also to use the Names of Taste, to
express the great variety of our Smells, as I shall do hereafter.

Odors are not sufficiently distinguished into their Species, which want Names,
and they must be borrowed from the tastes of Plants.

Odors are commonly distinguished into pleasant or grateful (...), and
ungrateful or ill smells (...); but since all Animals have a great variety in
their Food, and that was designed to be grateful to them both in Taste and
Smell, the different Temperament of each Animals Humors and Spirits must make
one Food grateful to some, which will prove very ungrateful to others: So it
may be observed of Birds of Prey, as Kites, Crows, delight in putrid Flesh,
which is to Mankind very ungrateful and unnatural; therefore the gratefulness
or disagreeableness of a Taste or Smell consists in its suitable Nature to the
Spirits of each particular Animal.

Every Animal has his peculiar Odor, according to the particular Temperament of
the Humors, which is pleasant and sincere in the Vigor of its Age, and in
perfect Health; it is sweet in Youth, but strong, virose, at the Seasons for
Coition, or when the Humors are changed by Age or Diseases, they smell ill,
strong, rank, as in Rabbets, Goats, Deer.

The Matter and vaporous Nature of Smells in Plants and Animals, does most
immediately represent the Nature of the Spirits of Animals, and their various
States.

1st. Odors are very volatile, lighter than the Air in which they swim, and
such are the nature of Animal Spirits volatile, invisible, as Odors, and the
effects of a thorough Digestion; for Plants have not their true Odor till they
be full ripe, and in Flower; Wine smells more odoriferous than their unripe
Must, and Plants in their native Soil are better ripened, and therefore more
odoriferous than in the Garden Soil, where there is too much crude Juice: And
in a Morning, after a perfect Digestion of Animal Humors, we are sensible that
our Spirits are most pure, active, and lively.

2dly. The Matter of Smells in Plants, is chiefly an Oil, or Turpentine, or
Rosin* in Animals a greasy or fat Substance* Wine and Oil does most easily
imbibe and dissolve Odors, because of the similitude of oily Substance; and in
Oil of Ben and Almonds we usually preserve Aromatics. In Animals the most
odorous Juices are Oily, as Musk and Castor; nothing smells stronger than the
Axungia's, and all these readily mix with Oil, by reason of their oily nature.

Amongst Minerals the Bitumens, which are of a strong smell, have an evident
Oiliness, as Ambergrease, and Petroleum, and Sulphur is ready mixed with
Balsams.

3dly. All Aromatics give a briskness to the Spirits, and please them if smelt
to, and supply a larger quantity, if deficient, and are therefore accounted
Cordials; foetid Smells are accounted Hysteric Medicines, and enlarge the
Expansion of Spirits; and since Smells act so immediately on the Spirits, there
must be a great similitude betwixt their oily Substances.

But these effects of Smells on the Spirits, must be more particularly
considered, and for that end I will divide Smells into their several Species,
and give the Names of Tastes to several of them, whose Effects being well
known, it will be more easy to assign the true Effects of their Smells on
Animal Spirits.

I will give Avicenna's Opinion of Tastes, and their Virtues, Non est possibile
ut sapores dulcis, and amarus, and acutus, and salsus sint nisi in substantia
calida; neque ponticus, Stypticus, and acetosus, nisi in substantia frigida;
and similiter odores acuti non sint nisi in substantia calida; odores quandoque
significant sapores, sicut odor dulcis, and acetosus, and acris and amarus;
sapores sunt octo dulcedo, amaritudo, and acuitas, and salsedo, acetositas,
ponticitas, Stypticitas, unctuositas.

I will reckon all the following Smells amongst the hot Smells, which affect
the Head, and expand the Spirits, and give them a quicker Motion.

1st. Acrid Smells, which are pungent; and Authors call this (...), but these
may be very much distinguished, according to the Degree of Acrimony; for a
cress Acrid is milder, such as Mustard; then a corrosive Acrid, such as
Garlic, or Squills; and Acrids may be distinguished by the Aromatic, or
Bitterness, or Foetor joined with them.

These kind of Smells are most specific to those indispositions of Spirits,
which happen to arise from that state of Humors which requires a hot acrid
Taste to correct them; in Hypochondriac cases we excite the Animal Spirits by
volatile Salts, and we give the same inwardly: In Hysteric cases, we discuss
the flatulent Vapors by foetid and acrid Gums, both outwardly and inwardly, so
that it may be a Rule, where any Taste is necessary and useful inwardly, we
ought to apply the same, if Odorous, outwardly, to rectify any Disorders of
Spirits, that may happen in that case; and why may we not infer, that since any
Medicine externally applied to the Smell, very much gratifies it, the same may
be given inwardly to alter the Cacochymia, from whence the disordered Spirits
are produced? This seems a piece of natural Reasoning, whereby Brutes discover
their Medicines when they are Sick, and they eat what pleases their Smell; and
if any Medicine or Meat pleases both Taste and Smell, we readily use it. If the
piercing and volatile Nature of acrid Smells be considered, we shall never
apply them to Hysterics, where the Spirits are over-volatile and fiery, which
seem only proper for the stupid, dull, contracted State of Animal Spirits.

2dly. All Aromatic Smells, as well as Tastes, are hot, and they have either a
great Acrimony, or a Bitterness joined with them; fresh Orris is bitter, and
exulcerates the Skin, Myrrh, Costus, Cinnamon, Cassia, Juncus Odoratus,
Cyperus, are described by Theophrastus to be hot, acrid and styptic, for which
Tastes they are used as Medicines.

The milder Aromatics have a sweetness, as Fennil, Aniseed; but all strong
Aromatics a bitter Taste: These Smells are on the account of their Acrimony and
Bitterness very hot; these Aromatic Smells we apply to fainting Persons, and
the same are very useful inwardly in a languid state of Blood and Spirits.
These volatile oily Salts or Balsams are easily infused in Vinous Spirits, and
if they be put into Wine as the Ancients used, (viz. they commended Wines
impregnate with Myrrh, Cedar, Rosin, etc.) they affect the Head much, and raise
the Circulation of Blood, and Expansion of Spirits, and by similitude of oily
Parts assimulate themselves with the Animal Spirits.

These Aromatic Smells will not agree with the choleric, hot, fiery Spirits,
because the Aromatic inwardly in that state of Humors are too hot, burning and
inflaming the Humors and Spirits. It Is this excessive Heat of odoriferous
Medicines which gives a vertiginous Motion to the Spirits of hot Constitutions,
and too much expands the windy Spirits, and thereby produces a Dyspnaea.

3dly. Foetid Smells, which the old Writers call (...), Gravis Odor, this is
offensive to the Spirits, as Aromatics are grateful; if they be Narcotic, they
stupify the Spirits, and allay Pains, Watchings, stop Bleedings at Nose, and
too great a volatility of Spirits, and their great expansion in Convulsions:
And these Foetids, though very acrid in Taste, and very bitter, yet because of
a peculiar texture cause a coolness of Spirits, and therefore may be reckoned
amongst the cooling Smells; but all other Foetids, as Assafoetida, Castor,
volatile Salts, Amber, Sulphur, and the fume of the Fat of a Sea-Calf, Horns
and Hoofs are of very hot Parts, very volatile, they expand the Spirits more
than Aromatics, but because they prevent their tumultuous Expansions by
changing their motions or texture, they are useful to some Hysteric Women, but
extremely offensive to others, who cannot bear the least of those foetid
Smells. And Pliny relates that the Ancients did by burning Bitumen, try whether
their Slaves were Epileptic or not; Accenso lapide gagate explorabant
Epilepsiam in servis venalibus; by which one might conclude, that Bitumen, and
other Foetids, are injurious to Convulsive cases, especially when they come
near to be Epileptic; in which cases I should doubt of Castor, Assafoetida,
Powders of the Skull, Vipers, Toads, Worms, the Stones of Horses, or Secundine,
all these being strong Foetids, rarefy tumultuous fiery Spirits into violent
Fits, and drive more morbifie Matter into the Nerves of such Persons, which are
too open to receive extraneous Matter.

All poisonous Plants, whether Narcotic or Corrosive, are very Foetid; such as
Napellus, their Foetor offends the Spirits, and their Burning or nauseous
Taste, the Palate, that thereby Animals might be naturally taught to avoid them.

All putrid things are very Unwholesom in our Diet; and Theophrastus well
observes, (...), the Foetor gives us an aversion to it, therefore I should
always avoid giving Mummy, or other putrid Parts of Animals, as Skulls, Rennet;
to these who have a violent Aversion, especially if we smell their putrid or
virose Odor.

Foetid Smells outwardly, and Foetid Medicines inwardly, are useful always in
the same case, viz. Lethargic and great Dullness of Spirits; the Ancients gave
Castor from i. to ss. and i. for a Dose; for 5 days, they u'sd the same
quantity in Clysters, they mixed it in Sternutories, or used its Fumes, and they
anointed it outwardly, and in very hot Bodies they contrived to temper its
heat, by giving it in Oxymels, or Vinegar, and not in Brandy Spirits, as we
improperly do. It Is plain to me, that Foetids do more good after their Acrimony
is abated by Vinegar, than in a finer Solution: We therefore act very odly,
when we study more for a Menstruum, which shall curiously dissolve a Gum, but
neglect an experienced Vehicle, which makes it better to agree with our
Constitutions. Vinegar does not dissolve Gums well, but coagulates them; but
nothing corrects their corrosive Acrimony like it: Water is their most natural
Menstruum, which turns them into their original Milk, and Brandy Spirits only
dissolve the resinous Part, and not the whole Gum.

The cool Smells are those which abate the Heat, Motion, and Expansion of our
Animal Spirits.

1st. Crude Smells, such is that of fresh Plants which are set in Rooms to
correct the heat of the Air, as Vines, Nymphea Leaves, Willows, and all Plants
of a crude Juice, Meadow sweet, and fenny Plants. The smell of a green Turf is
used to be held to the Noses of them that are struck with a Damp, to recollect
and cool their Spirits, which are too much rarefied by the Sulphur Fumes.

2dly. Acid smells, such as is that of Vinegar: The Seamen use Vinegar much to
correct the putrid Air of their Ships, by washing the Wood and Beams of their
Cabins with it. This is therefore very agreeable to the Sick in many cases.

The smell of Vinegar removes the nauseousness, and prevents Vomiting, and
cools.

Omnes odores ex quibus sentitur mordicatio sunt calidi, and been redolentia,
quapropter dolorem capitis pariunt, and illi ex quibus sentitur acetositas,
omnes sunt frigidi. Avicenna.

The smell of the Fumes of Vinegar is proper for many Hysterical Women, who cut
Rue and Nutmeg, then sprinkle it with Vinegar, so they tie it in a Nodulus to
smell to: This will most effectually compress the expanded Spirits, for Acids
make the Blood black, which the curious Microscope impute to the Globuli
crowded together, as they do the Floridness to the Division and Separation of
the Globuli.

Vinegar will cool the Elastic Particles, and abate their Expansion, for that
corrects all volatile Salts, thickens Oils, coagulates milky Juices, cools
Inflammations, stops Evacuations and Fermentations, and has all properties
contrary to the action of Fire, and all hot Animal Principles, for they rarefy
and expand the Spirits and Humors, and make them more agile, elastic,
fermenting.

Vinegar agrees with Fevers and all Inflammations, and Effervescences of
Humors; therefore the smell of Vinegar is very suitable to all Nervous Effects
depending on such Diseases, such is the Hysteric Fits and Inflations of Spirits
I have described, and in all furious Dispositions of Spirits, where their
motions are tumultuous, in Deliriums, Phrenetics.

3dly. The Narcotic Smells, such as Primrose, Poppies, give a Heaviness to the
Spirits, and dispose them to a less Expansion; therefore we may add these to a
Nodulus with Vinegar to compose the Spirits.

Sweet Smells, such as the Writers call (...), seem to be Cordials refreshing
the Spirits, but neither so strong as to discompose them, but so warm as to
continue the motion or expansion.

A strong ((...)) Smell is when there is very much of a Smell in any thing
which makes a violent impression on the Spirits. The heat of Fire, or of the
Sun, or grinding, causes the Vapor in which the smell is, to rise plentifully
into the Air, and act briskly on the Spirits: Strong Inspiration through the
Nose, and snuffing up any Liquors, gives a more evident Impression on the Sense.

A mild Smell, Mollis, or (...), is a weaker Impression by a more languid
Halitus, Quicquid tenue and molle in odoratu, infirmum est.

The Sensibleness of the Trachea is very evident, because all Asthmatics are
offended by the least Dust made by sweeping of a Room, or making of a Bed. I
knew one who was a Malster, who told me he could not bear the Dust of Corn
whilst it was removed. And Helmont gives a remarkable Instance of a Monk
employed in pulling down Buildings, who grew Asthmatic; and he says of him,
Quoties deinceps locus aliquis vertitur, vel al as ventus pulverem excitat, mox
concidit fere praefocatus, pene praecluso anhelitu ^acet moribundus. In this
case the Dust irritates the Skin of the Trachea, and thereby occasions a
tumultuous motion of Spirits, which of themselves are always disposed in
Asthmatics to expand too much, and cause the Constriction in the muscular
Fibers of the Bladders of the Lungs, and those of the Bronchia.

Secondly, Of Diet, or Meats and Drinks agreeable or injurious to the Asthma.
I shall next treat of such Meat and Drink which Experience shows us is
agreeable to Asthmatics, and what is most disagreeable to them, by occasioning
their Fits.

All strong Liquors are very injurious to the Asthmatic, and this is confirmed
by their constant Experience of shortness of Breathing upon any Debauch by them.

Strong Wines inflame the Spirits, and all strong Malt Liquors increase the
Fits of the Asthma, and shorten the Intervals by expanding and rarefying the
Spirits, by raising a violent Fermentation in the Stomach, as also by breeding
great quantity of viscid Phlegm, whereby the Lungs are oppressed and stopped:
But Brandy above all Liquors is most pernicious to the Asthma, it rarefies the
windy Spirits most of all, and certainly gives a violent Fit. And since Spirits
are so evidently Suffocating to Asthmatics (for Punch will immediately give me
a Dyspnaea) we may thence infer, That the Animal Spirits in the Asthma are too
much rarefied or expanded, and that whatsoever is contrary to Brandy Spirits,
as Watery and Acid Liquors, they will best agree with Asthmatics: And since
this is by my Experience found to be true, I may infer the same thing, a
Nocentibus as well as Juvantibus, that the Spirits and Humors are too much
rarefied in the Fits of an Asthma; this seems to me the true natural way of
discovering the unknown state of Humors in occult Diseases, for that Diet is
most agreeable in every Disease which is contrary to the state of Humors which
produce it, a cooling Diet to rarefied hot Humors, and a hot aromatic acrid
Diet to a crude mucilaginous serous State. If then I consider the Nature of any
Diet, that sick Persons by Experience find most agreeable, I may by that be
instructed, that the Nature of the Disease is contrary to it; and if I know
what are the Tastes and Temper of a Diet which agrees with the Disease, I may
choose the same Temper and Tastes somewhat stronger, but of the same kind in my
Medicines, and those will prove most Specific to the Disease, and that
particular Constitution which has experienced the Diet. As for Example; I have
observed Sack, Sherry, Frontiniac, and all other rich Wines to be the occasion
of Asthma Fits, by raising a Fermentation in the Stomach, and an Ebullition in
the Blood, which ends in an Inflation of the Pneumonic Membranes and Fibers;
but on the contrary I observe, that Mead, or Mulsum unfermented, Wine and Water
are the most agreeable Liquors, because they are not apt to ^erment and raise
Wind in the Stomach, and therefore do not agitate or rarefy the Humors and
Spirits, neither do they thicken the Lympha Lactea, and occasion much Phlegm.
By this certain Experience, and my Rationale on it, I learn to avoid all hot
Diet, and consequently all hot Medicines in the Asthma, and I am taught to use
all the cooling methods, which create no Wind, nor Phlegm, nor rarefie the
Spirits, and it is of no small moment in the Asthma, and many other cases not
to offend in our Liquors, as to the sort of it, or its quantity; for our
Healths, in Chronical cases, much depends on our Liquors, which by raising
accidental Ebullitions occasion our Fits.

All fermenting Wines, or new Drinks have an intestine Agitation of aerial
Spirits, which they communicate to the Spirits of Animals, such an effect in a
high degree all bottled Liquors have, which, by reason of its Windiness is very
disaagreeable to the Asthma. By this Observation it is plain, that all windy
Liquors and Medicines are to be avoided by Asthmatics; therefore, if possible,
they must abstain from fermented Liquors, which are more or less Windy, and
they ought to live on Decoctions of Woods, or some other watery Decoctions of
Herbs.

I know an Asthmatic, who upon any tendency toward a Fit, drinks plentifully
of Milk and Water, which presently allays the Inflation of his Stomach.

Water with a burnt Toast is a good Liquor for young Stomachs, but the aged,
whose Spirits are less hot, cannot bear such poor Liquors; and frequent Fits
often make the Spirits languid, and then they require a moderate Spirituous
Liquor, such is a small Ale of Six-strike in the Hogshead, which is the
strongest Asthmatics ought to drink, with green Broom or Gill dried, putting
lbss. of either to be hung in a Bag in six Gallons of this small Ale, for
ordinary drink at Dinner.

All drinking betwixt Meals is injurious, especially all morning or evening
draughts of Wine or Malt Liquors, for that raises unnatural Windiness in the
Stomach: My general Custom is to drink Toast and Water every morning half a
pint, to drink about a quart of Broom small Beer at Dinner, and at night to
take a Toast and Mead, or Hydromel for my Supper, or else Bread eat with a
Glass or two of Wine and Water: And then in the Winter lbss. of Mum agrees
well; all hot Liquors, as Coffees, Theas; of Cephalic Herbs, as Sage, etc. or
Stomachic, as Buckbean, which is a Centaury I have tried, but find none so good
as Toast and Water.

No Distemper requires more orderly Diet than the Asthma, but especially a
moderation in Drinking, that the Serum of the Blood may not abound too much,
and a constant use of those Liquors that are moderate, neither too hot nor
cool, but suited to the Constitutions and Age. I know a fat Asthmatic who was
much relieved by drinking very little of any Liquor.

From these Observations of the Nature of hot Diet, and its disagreement, I may
argue, that all hot Tastes, as Aromatics, Acrids, Gums, Fetids, or Balsams, or
Oils, or Resins, or Salts, by raising a Windiness and Rarefaction of Humors
and Spirits, are likewise injurious to the Asthmatic.

As to the Food of Asthmatics, I observe that all that which produces a viscid
Chyle, thickens the Humors, creates Phlegm and Wind, and stops the Breathing,
such is that of Pudding, Crust, and most Meal-meats, of Rice, Wheat, Peace,
Beans; and Milk-meats, as Cream, Cheese, etc. and amongst Flesh-meats, those
which abound with a Mucilage, as Fish, Eggs, young Creatures, young Pigs, and
the Extremity of Animals, and Jelly-Broths, Oysters; all which breed a thick
Chyle, which stops in the Lungs in the Spitting Asthma, and that oppresses them.

From this Experience I may infer, that no mucilaginous Gums or Medicines,
Syrup or Pectorals of that nature, can be convenient for the Asthmatic, but
rather Medicines which attenuate without heat, and proper to dissolve a thick
mucilaginous Chyle, without exciting an Effervescence, such as the following
Vinegar.

Galen makes Pythagoras the Author of Vinegar of Squills, which he began to use
about the 50th* Year of his Age, and lived to 117. Galen's Prescript is the
same as in the Dispensatory, which he highly commends against all Flatuosities:
It makes the Senses quick, the Color good, and the Respiration easy; it helps
Digestion, it loosens the Belly, it provokes Urine, discusses Wind, and abates
the Fullness of Flesh. He observed the Pthisical cured by this when desperate;
it cures the Epilepsy, and prevents it; it helps the Gout, and Rheumatic Pains,
and Hardness of Liver, and Spleen.

The Wine of Squills is commended by Galen for the same Diseases: Galen uses
lbxij. of Wine to one of Squills, but the Dispensatory but viii. and he
mentions Honey two or three parts to be added to make it more acceptable; his
Dose was i. (which is too much) before meat, and half an Ounce after it. This
Digestive the Ancients constantly used as part of their Diet, and Emperors used
it to prolong their Lives.

The less the Asthmatic are nourished, the longer are the Intervals of the
Fits, and the clearer is their Breaths; for if we eat moderately, we substract
the quantity of our Chyle, and we better Digest what we take; but any Excess
raises a tumultuous Fermentation in the Stomach and Blood, which produces a
Rarefaction in the Spirits. So true is Hippocrates Observation, If a man eats
and drinks little, he shall have no Disease.

Though we eat moderately, yet in 10 Days, or 14 at most, the Asthma Fit
returns from a Fullness of flatulent Chyle, or nutri^ious Juices, which, like
the morbific matter of an Ague, will not thoroughly assimulate with the Blood,
but Ferments with it, and part of that is forced into the Nerves upon every
Fit; but from such a flatulent Cacochymia windy Spirits are always prepared.

The Asthmatics are best Fasting, and under a very frugal and simple Diet,
which I shall here mention, because I have had so much occasion to touch on
many other particulars of Diet.

They may use Water Gruel cool, not hot, for Breakfast, or Toast and Water, as
I have mentioned; and the same may be their Supper, if agreeable, or else Small
Beer, or Ale, with Bread: The Asthmatic must eat for Dinner of one or two
Dishes at most, Beef, Mutton, roast Veal, Rabbets, Birds, Pork.

All Waterfowl is heavy, slimy, having too much of the moorish crude Taste in
it.

All Pickles, Sauces, Oysters, Salt Meats are very injurious to the Asthmatic*
and all smoked meats; for these raise a Fermentation too high in their
Stomachs, and produce a great disturbance in the Blood and Spirits.

Sallads and Fruits are too cold, and crude, and windy, for most Asthmatics;
Cabbage* Turnips, Colliflowers, all which are of the cress Taste, and are found
very windy on the Stomach of Asthmatics.

The Asthmatic must eat no Flesh Suppers, for if he do, it frequently proves
fatal, or else very suffocating if a Fi^ happen after it.

By all the Reflections on our Diet for the Asthmatic, we learn, that the
Medicine must be like the Diet, contrary to the Disease, that is, of a cooling,
attenuating, carminative Temper, not spirituous, windy, viscid; and such is
Galen's Medicine: The acid cools and discusses Wind, and the better attenuates
the viscid Humors.

Thirdly, Of Exercises*
All violent Exercise makes the Asthmatic to breath short, because their Lungs
are frequently oppressed with Tubercula; and if the Exercise be continued it
occasions a Fit, by putting the Spirits to a great Expansion.

The most agreeable Exercise is Riding, the greatest are Sawing, Bowling,
Ringing of a dumb Bell, Swinging, Dancing; Walking is more vehement than
Riding, but not so great as the other; those Exercises that move the Arms,
exercise the Lungs most.

In a Fi^ no motion is convenient till the Fit is going off; and I find Riding
to help Expectoration; the rubbing of the Breast heats it, and occasions the
Fit; and the rubbing the extreme Parts moves the Blood too much, though that is
commended by Authors, and a Decoction of Guaicum to preserve Perspiration of
Windy Spirits.

They who use no Exercise in the Intervals of Fits, soon fall into Cachexies,
Lethargies, Dropsies, through too much Serum, loss of Appetite, and
Consumption, for want of Perspiration and Expectoration: But in the Fit all
Exercise endangers Suffocation.

Fourthly, Of the Passions.
I will next describe the Effect of Passions in producing the Fit. A fatal
Orthopnea is described by Forestus from a Fright.

The Passion of Anger makes the Spirits restless, and apt to produce the Fit,
and the Asthmatics observe in themselves great restlessness of Spirits the day
preceding the Fit; and Hippocrates's Aphorism advises all Asthmatics to abstain
from Anger and Shouting.

Fear, Solicitude, and much Study, discomposes the Spirits, and produces a
restlesness in them, which may occasion a Fit; the Asthmatics are commonly
Hypochondriacal, which the frequent Fits produce, though that is supposed to
depend on the other.

Study inflames the Spirits, and too much rarefies them; and all violent
motions of the Spirits quicken the Pulse, and thereby produce the Asthma and
Ephemera.

All the related occasions are observed by Helmont, who says, Denique and alias
quae ex potu sacchari, vini hispanici, ex ira, tristi nuntio, vel etiam
objurgate luctuoso mox Asthmate corriperentur; and of these he gives Examples.
And I have observed that Reading or Writing is very injurious in the Fits, and
highly disorders the Asthmatic.

Fifthly, Of Excretions, Natural, Physical, and Preternatural in the Asthmatic.
The Asthmatic always makes a great quantity of pale Water in the Fit, the
first day, but at the going off the Water is of a high Color, with a thick
feverish Sediment.

I cannot perceive much dryness or faintness to attend the pale Water; and
since that happens only in the beginning of the Fit, I cannot believe a true
Diabetes occasions it, but rather an Effervescence of Humors, (which is at
last evident by the high colored Water) may at the beginning of the Fit throw
off a good quantity of crude Serum, which may be the matter of the pale Water;
but I am inclined to believe that the true cause of the pale Water is the
Asthmatic straitness, which stops the Circulation of the Serum through the
Lymphatics; for if the motion of the Lympha up the Thoracic ductus be forced by
the compression of the Belly in Inspiration, in the Asthma, that being
defective, and the motion of the Diaphragme being hindered, it must follow, that
the Lympha must stagnate in the Lymphatics; and if that Serum which should
return from the Kidneys through the Lymphatics be stopped in its Circulation,
for want of the pressure of the Diaphragme, then all the Serum which comes in
the Arteries into the Kidneys must pass into the Ureters, because it cannot
circulate through the Lymphatics; and this happens till the Serum is very much
abated. I remember an Ingenious Experiment of Mr. Nuycke, who teaches us to
make Ligatures on the Veins and Lymphatics, whereby the Liquor injected through
the Arteries is forced into the Ureters; and this seems to confirm my
Conjecture about the pale Water.

In the Fits of the Mother the pale Water flows in great quantity, because the
motion of the Serum is stopped in the Lymphatics, by the convulsive
Constrictions, or the stop put to the motion of the Diaphragme.

A fat Woman, who lived long an Asthmatic, told me she found benefit by
drinking her own Water, and that she observed that before the Fit^ came it grew
very salt. I have tasted my own pale Water, but never observed it either sweet
or sour considerably, but rather very salt.

Alum will not curdle it, as it does other nutritious Juices, which inclines me
to believe that the pale Water is none of the nutritious Juices, but that this
Serum ought to be carried off by the Fits, as appears by this, because when it
is stopped a Dropsy usually succeds.

That the pale Urine is from the Serum is manifest, because it tastes as salt
as any ordinary Urine. I evaporated it in a Spoon, and it left only a brown
saltish Sediment; it smells as strong of Saltness as any ordinary Urine.

The quantity of pale Urine made in one Night was about two Quarts, though I
drank not half a Pint at Supper time.

The Sediment left upon evaporation was not viscid, but sandy and gritty, and
tasted very salt, and therefore had none of the Succus Nutritious in it.

This pale Urine would not coagulate Milk though mixed with it, and therefore no
great acid was in it.

From the past Reflections I conclude the pale Water to be the thin part of the
Serum of the Blood, with a great quantity of Salt in it.

Helmont observed before the Fit, that the Saliva in an Asthma was salt; but
this I was never sensible of in my self, but that it is usually viscid or
mucilaginous the day before the Fit.

As to Spitting and Coughing, that is common at the latter end of the Spitting
Asthma, upon the going off of the Fit: The first and second day they spit
little, but more the third, when the straitness goes off, and then the
mucilaginous Phlegm digesting and putrefying, it loses its viscidity, and so
comes up easier. The Phlegm indigested is like the White of an Egg, and the
first Spits of the Asthma are streaked, or feathered, and like a Spiders Web,
of a blackish color, from Blood, or some acid Splenetic Juice, which probably
being of a Salt nature, it shoots into Figures: This Phlegm comes from the
Glandulous Coat of the Trachea, which by the constriction of the Bronchia is
expressed from that Skin. This Spit Helmont calls Guttas caeruleas liquato
tragacantho similes; it has the same Pellucid clearness as that Gum dissolved:
And he farther observes, Ingravescente senio, graviores screatus, si quid forte
sub finem exscreetur, tantillum id, non prioris and causae occasionalis
rationem subire debet, sed potius producti vicem habet, ex magna coarctatione,
and injuria pulmoni illata. He believed it to be the Succus Nutritious of the
Membranes, which later Anatomists know to be a glandulous Lympha.

Mr. Nuycke observes a Blackness in the excretory Vessels of the salivatory
Glands, so that this black Humor is commonly mixed with the slimy Lympha.

No Pectoral can do any thing toward the curing or preventing of the Fit,
whether oily or detersive, but at the latter end of the Fit, the oily and sweet
Pectorals help the Expectoration of the viscid Phlegm, which gathers in the
Bronchia during their constriction, and it is no occasion of the Fit, but the
product of it; for if it were so, the Fit would not come so suddenly as it
does; and before the Fit I never was sensible of an Oppression or Stuffing of
Phlegm, though I spit much after a Fit.

Vomiting very much relieves the Asthmatic by evacuating a great quantity of
this Phlegm, or mucilaginous Slime from the Stomach and Lungs, which appears to
me all of the same nature, but after some small time the Fits will return again.

I have often vomited a Choleric Matter in the beginning of the Fit, which I
imputed to the vehemence of the Fit, and some compression on the Guts, or the
Gall Bladder, and to be purely accidental.

I have discoursed an Asthmatic, who was extremely troubled with violent
motions of Vomiting in the beginning of each Fit, and nothing composed it like
drinking Water; this Gentleman told me that he received much benefit by
drinking Bath Water, which cured him of his Asthma for some Years, but the
Asthma returning, he came to Bath the second time, where I met him; he was of a
full Habit of Body, he drank the Waters, but durst not adventure to bathe; he
lives near Northampton.

The giving of a Vomit will put some Persons into Fits, though it generally
relieves the straitness and oppression at Stomach in all Asthmatics, but that
will soon return, and the Phlegm be again evacuated into the Stomach. The
breeding of this great quantity of mucilaginous Slime both in the Stomach and
Lungs, depends much on the frequent stop given to Circulation of Humors by the
Asthma Fit; for it is the motion of Humors, and quick circulation that
dissolves the mucilaginous Liquors of Animals; but if they once remit that
motion, they naturally thicken like Gelly-Broth as it cools.

The want of the motion of the Diaphragme in the Asthma Fit, may occasion the
stagnation of the Contents in the Guts, as well as the Chyle in the Lacteals,
and also the Blood in the Mesentery; for these are all helped by its depression
in Respiration: From this stagnation of Humors the Guts may be irritated into
Inflations, which will hinder their natural Peristaltic Motion, and all the
Humors stagnating will be much rarefied, become windy, and swell their
Vessels, so that the Asthma has these degrees; First, there is a straitness in
the Bronchia and Vesiculae, that hinders the descent of the Diaphragme, and the
defect of that gives the pale Water and Inflations in the Belly.

Bleeding, though never so often repeated, will not cure the Asthmatic, but a
little for the present relieve the straitness and suffocation. It is agreeable
to young Persons, but very prejudicial to old habituated Asthmas, who at
present are not much relieved thereby, but after some time they become
Cachectic.

No Diuretic Balsam, or Turpentine, can prevent a Fit, nor cure it, but they
rather make it worse, by rarefying and heating the Humors and Spirits.

Some Persons during some critical Evacuations, as Dysuria, Looseness, or
Ulcers, have no Fits of the Asthma; and I have heard some commend Issues on
that account; and I have been informed that King William during the running of
the Sore upon his Shoulder, made by the bruise of the Cannon-Bullet at the
Battle of the Boyne in Ireland, was free from any trouble of his Asthma.

I have observed the Asthma to be better in some after the Legs begin to swell,
because then the Blood is not so much inclined to Ferment, nor the Spirits to
be rarefied; I have known others much better by copious Urine which relieved
them.

A Gentlewoman about 60 Years old being always Asthmatic, fell into a
Diarrhaea, by which she was freed from Stone, Cholic, and Asthma; but that
being permitted too long, run her into a Consumptive state, and extremely
wasted her fat Body, and disposed her to Surfeit upon every occasion: I cured
her by Rhubarb Purges, Steel, and Bitters. This Diarrhaea is dangerous to thin
Asthmatics, i^ it be stopped it makes them worse; in this case we must neglect
the original Disease* and cure it as an ordinary Scorbutic Diarrhaea, by
S^yptics, Laudanum, and Digestives.

As to Sweat in a severe Fit, it is very great sometimes, and in Bed very hot,
and without any benefit to the Asthmatic, I have often taken Spirit of Hartshorn
to produce Sweat* and to put by the Fit, but it had not that effect, but made
the following Fit more violent. The sitting up all Night does make the
Asthmatic subject to Rheumatic Pains, and Cachexies.

As to Stools, the Asthmatic are seldom bound; and in the beginning of a^ Fit,
as soon as they rise out of Bed, they have a loose Stool, and most of them are
easily Purged.

I could not find that by Purging I could commonly prevent a Fit, but I
observed that Purging did frequently occasion the Fit; and if a Purge be given
in the Fit, it causes an extraordinary Tumult in the Spirits, and endangers a
Suffocation, for which reason I doubt of the sincerity of those Authors, who
prescribe it in a Fit: It gives the same Disorder as Purging in a Fever, but is
more dangerous.

I knew an Asthmatic who made a great quantity of pale Water, and had running
Pains in his Limbs; the pale Water made him lean and sainty* though it tasted
somewhat brackish, and not sweet, as he informed me; he had frequent Fits once
in 14 days, he was often eased by Vomiting with Oxmel Scilliticum, and Oil; that
which was peculiar in this case was, that, he was always very much bound, for
which he used Clysters, Le^itive* Elect. Extract. Ecph. cum Aloe, and for his
Diabetes, Aqu. calcis Composita: This Asthma was very grievous as often as the
Body* was bound extraordinarily, and to that he always imputed his Fit: This
Asthma* upon the stopping of the Diabetes, ended in a Dropsy with a Hectic
Fever, with Hypochondriac Winds and Gripes, of which he died.

What Salivation can do in the Asthma I know not; but since no Evacuation which
I have mentioned, as Purging, Bleeding, Vomiting, Sweating, Diuretics or
Pectorals, can either cure* or prevent the Fits, as I have experienced, though
they have sometimes relieved and palliated it, I must confess I cannot expect
any benefit by Salivation (unless it can cure some of the Scrophilous Tubercula
of the Lu^gs) for Salivation is only the great Evacuation of the Serum of the
Blood, it depresses the Fermentation of the Blood more than raises it, and the
Blood^ becomes more viscid after Salvation, which is injurious to the Asthmatic
straitness: But that I might be better satisfied about the success of
Salivation, I desired my Ingenious Friend Dr. Gibbons, that he would
communicate the succe^s of some Experiment he had made in the Asthma, of which
he gave me the following Account, in his Letter to me on the 20th of September,
94. I have once or twice given Mercurial Medicines in an Asthma with success;
but the Patients were Leprous likewise, which induced to me give them. -- I
have found Gas Sulphuris frequently given, very efficacious when other things
have signified nothing. -- And in Hysteric Asthma's, Laudanum seldom fails.

Sixthly, Of Sleep, and Waking, how they affect the Asthmatic.
I have observed the Fit always to happen after Sleep in the Night, when the
Nerves are filled with windy Spirits, and the heat of the Bed has rarefied the
Spirits and Humors, but the next day Sleep composes the disorder of the
Spirits.

The Night before the Fit the drowsiness and slight Headache are signs of the
Matter entering into the Nerves, and it is like the Sleepiness in the beginning
of the Fit of an Ague, from an Oppression upon the Spirits by serous Humors,
which then occasion also a R^^tching and Yawning.

I have found that by late sitting up, I have put by the Fit for a Night or
two, and I have found it commonly necessary to rise out of Bed, especially in
the Summer time, and to sleep in a Chair the first Night of the Fit; two Nights
before the Fit Asthmatics want sleep frequently.

Narcotics are accounted dangerous to Asthmatics by some Authors, because they
apprehend that they make a greater stoppage in the Breath and Pulse, and
thicken the viscid Humors of the Asthma, if given in any great Dose; but if in
a moderate quantity, they are the fittest Medicines to compress the Inflations;
and Riverius's Experience confirms it, and all our Moderns, as well as the
Ancient Writers* used it in the Asthma.

I wish we had in common use a Preparation of Opium with an acid, that I am
certain would prove more agreeable to the Asthma, because the acid best
corrects the Opium, and that makes all acrid and bitter Medicines more suitable
to that Disease.

The Ancient Writers often object against the knowing of the Nature of all
Medicines by the Tastes; that Narcotics are hot by being bitter, acrid and
foetid, and yet they cool the Humors and thicken them.

To which I may Answer, that Narcotics by those Tastes produce hot Effects, as
well as cool in our Humors; Narcotics are Diuretics, and evidently
Diaphoretics, by their bitterness and acrimony, and they cause an itching in
the Skin sometimes; many of them are also Vomitories, and Purgers, as Tobacco,
which is a Solanum, and Solanum lignosum is Purging; all which Qualities depend
on the Acrimony of them. But besides this Taste, there is an evident mucilage
in Narcotics, as appears in Poppy-leaves, which always cools; but the chief
Effects of Opium lies in the fetid Smell, which being destructive to the
Spirits by a particular texture of its Principles, they being stupefied,
evaporated, or made less elastic; the motion of the Heart and Circulation of
Humors are stopped, on which the coolness and viscidity accidentally depends,
that all these Effects are produced by the hot Tastes of the Narcotic is plain,
because strong Spirits long used, and all hot Regimens, as hot Baths, hot
Drinks, do accidentally chill our Bodies, and evaporate our Spirits: Camphire
cools by its discussing Quality, being a vola^il acrid oilous Salt, it opens
the Pores, and evaporates hot Humors. The Nature of other Poisons, as
Vegetables, lies in their Foetor and Acrimony, as well as in Opium, which we
can never Mechanically explain, because we never can know the Textures of the
Vegetable Juices, nor the Nature of Animal Spirits; but we must be contented,
that we can distinguish by our Tastes and Smells those Plants that are Narcotic
and Poisonous from other Plants, by their offensive Foetors and Corrosiveness.

I shall next describe those Diseases which produce the Asthma as a Symptom.

1st. The Suppression of the natural Evacuations of Blood by the Haemorrhoids
or Menses, which being stopped, do occasion a great Oppression of the Lungs, by
the Viscidity or Fullness of Blood stagnating in the Blood Vessels, which often
makes them varicose, and not only hinders the Circulation there, but occasions
a compression on the Bronchia and Vesiculae, for the Veins and Arteries
accompany the several Branches of the Trachea, which keep the middle, and the
Veins lie over them, and the Arteries underneath; and by this it appears, that
the Stagnation of the Chyle or Blood in those Vessels, may compress the
Bronchia, and by that produce a constant Wheezing in them; and this is to be
cured by restoring the deficient Evacuations of Blood. This stoppage of the
Haemorrhoids I have observed increase the Fits in many Asthmatics, who were
troubled with them, and during their Flux the Asthma was very much relieved.

This stop of the Haemorrhoids is an occasion of a Scorbutic Spitting of Blood
in many Asthmatics; this Hawking up Blood returned every Afternoon in a
particular Asthmatic toward four of the Clock, and I could not stop it by any
Evacuations, or Styptics; but the Cortex immediately cured it.

2dly, By a great quantity of Blood Plethoric Persons have an Oppression in the
Lungs, which gives them a Dyspnaea, till it be emptied by profuse Bleeding, and
Purging, with a spare Diet.

3dly, A Polypus in the Heart and Lungs, upon any motion gives a Shortness of
Breath, because the Blood cannot freely circulate through them, without
oppressing the Bronchia; this gives also a Palpitation and intermitting Pulse,
and upon violent motion they die suddenly; and this is incurable.

4thly, The Coagulation of the Chyle in the Lungs produces the Asthma, and of
these Asthmas there are many Instances given in Authors: This arises from
drinking cold Water, or washing in it whilst the Body is very hot, which by a
sudden compression of rarefied Humors coagulates them, and from hence came the
Catarrhus Suffocativus, which suddenly kills many Children, who drink cold
Water being hot: This is without Intermission, and accompanied with a Fever.
Upon this I believe the Pulmonic Asthma in broken Winded Horses, frequently
depends; it is a continued Asthma upon any motion, they have a dry Cough at
first, but after some time they vent some Slime by their Nostrils, and are
easier whilst their Bodies are kept open by a moist Food; they have a dry
Cough, which is a sign of some great Obstruction in the Lungs; they breath
thick and short, which differs from the Asthma, because that is a high
Breathing, and the Inspirations are very high, and both Inspiration and
Expiration very rare and slow, the Muscles in the Abdomen, which cause
Expiration, labor as well as the Diaphragme, which helps Inspiration, as we
may observe by the motion of the Flank out and inward: The Diaphragme, because
the Air is not freely admitted into the Lungs, moves but little downwards, as
in ordinary Respiration, and the Expiration returns very quick, and causes a
trembling motion in the Flank of the Horse thus affected.

The Crock in a Hawk is usually imputed to some strain in the Membranes, which
contains the Air in the Belly by hard Flying, and is never recovered.

5thly, The Viscid Serum in a Peripneumonia obstructs the Blood Vessels, and
the Glandules of the Lungs with Viscid Phlegm, and the Dyspnaea produced by it
is at first without Stertor, but that by long continuance strains the nervous
Fibers and Membranes, and disposes them to Asthmatic Inflations. And from this
cause the common Pneumonic Humid or Spitting Asthma takes its Original, which
is attended with much Spit as the Fit goes off. It is observed that the inward
Skin of the Trachaea is Glandulous, Vnctuoso humore perfunditur contra aeris
asperitatem; and by the Constriction of the Bronchia a great quantity of this
is expressed during the Fit; for the Circulation of the Blood and Chyle being
retarded by the Fit, some of the Chylaceous Mass is obliged to pass the Glands
of the Membranes in the Trachaea. If a Liquor be injected into the Arterial
Vein of the Lungs, some of it will pass into Trachaea, and this way the slimy
Spit passes in the Asthma Fit; which by its color and consistence appears of a
Chylous Nature.

These Pneumonic Spitting Asthma's have been observed upon Dissection to have
Tubercula or Schirrosity in the Lungs, and they frequently turn to an Abscess,
and that into an Empyema; but that small Tubercula alone will not produce the
Asthma is plain, because all Consumptive People who have them are not Asthmatic.

The Lungs usually in these Asthma's adhere to the Sides, which makes only
short Breathed upon any motion, for which Inconvenience Authors commend the
motion of the Arms and Breast, and Emollient Bathes, and Milk; but all these
Asthmatics usually die Consumptive.

This Pulmonic Asthma depended originally on a Fever, and so does the several
Fits of it, which force some Chylaceous Lympha through the Glandules of the
Lungs, and that produces the Spitting Asthma.

These Fits come suddenly, and with out any sense of Matter collected in the
weakened Glands before the Asthma Fit, but it flows through them in the Fit, so
that an Inflammation of the Lungs does not produce the Asthma in all Persons,
but only the Spitting Symptoms in those who have a Cacochymia, which disposes
them to this Disease, or else it occasions large Tubercula.

6thly, The Stones in the Lungs produce an Asthma, which is continued, and not
periodic: Of this Helmont gives a remarkable Instance, Invenitur sinistri
la^eris lobus in dissecto corpore durus, and ^ pumice lapidescens, pluresque
ejusmodi lapillos sparsim per pulmonis regionem vidi. This was the case of a
Presbyter who lived a sober Life, but of a sudden grew Hoarse, and afterward
Asthmatic; he lived a Year with this Disease.

7thly, In the Pica and other Cachexies, the viscid Chyle stagnates in the
Lungs, and occasions a Dyspnaea; and the Cachectical Serum in the Hydropical
fills the Lymphatics of the Lungs with Serum, and extends them into Hydatides,
which oppresses the Lungs, and gives a Dyspnaea, and these frequently break and
fill the cavity of the Breast with Water, and then the Legs swell, and they can
never lie down without danger of Suffocation; there is a slow mild Fever, a dry
Cough, great Thirst, an Ebullition or Fluctuation of Water, fainting Fits, a
painful Anxiety about the Cartilago Ensiformis, a Blackness in the Face: In
this case some Antihydropical Wine is necessary to Purge off the Serum.

This is Horstius's Prescription:

Take Roots of Enula, Campana, Orris,ad ss. Liquorish ii. Sena x. Agaric.
Trochse ss. Tops of Elder iii. Leaves o^ Carduus, Horehound, of each M. i.
Flowers of Elder, Cham. ad P. i. Seeds of Fennil, Rue, etc. i. Raisins i.
Ginger, Mace, Cinnamon,ad ss. Saffron ss. make an Infusion in lbii. of White
Wine, take a draught for four days.

Vomiting relieves them, and strong Purging, with Diuretic Salts and bitter
Vinegars.

8thly, A long Catarrh ends in an Asthma, for that enlarges the Passages of the
Glands into the Trachea, and disposes them to receive any flux of mucilaginous
Slime, upon any Effervescence of Humors, and this usually happens in the great
Changes of the Year, and gives an Anniversary Asthma, which a Catarrh precedes
and accompanies, and that ends in much Spitting. It may be observed, if the
Asthmatic catch Cold, and have a Rheum in the Teeth, Throat, or Head, within a
Night or two the Fit will follow. In this case it is plain the Effervescence
which usually attends all Catarrhes, pushes some slimy Lympha on the Lungs,
which produces the Fit.

As the Peripneumonia produces a Fit of the Asthma in those disposed to it, and
cannot produce it in others not so prepared; so it is in Catarrhs, the Phlegm
abounding in a Catarrh cannot produce the Asthma in those who are not disposed
to it, but it lays the ground for the Spitting in the Asthma, and excites a
disposition to that Disease, which was la^ent before; and whenever the
Chylaceous Matter gathers or flows into the Glands, it irritates the Bronchia,
and gives the Constriction of the Blood and Air Vessels to produce another Fit.

A young Boy had the Asthma almost from his Birth, upon catching Cold, which
occasioned a great running at his Nose, and constant Wheezing; no Medicines
relieved him, but he died suddenly, being one Year and half old.

If a long Catarrh produces any Tubercula in the Lungs that are large, and they
constantly oppress the Bronchia, by that means a constant Asthma may be
produced which is truly Pulmonic, like that in Broken-winded Horses, which
frequently comes after a long Cold, and they are Asthmatic upon any motion.

The sign of the Breeding of a Tuberculum, is when any one in good Health
begins to breath short, and as that increases a Stertor is observed in
Breathing. There is an Example in Hippocrates of the Daughter of Agasius, who
being a Girl, breathed short from a crude Tuberculum, which did not easily
digest, but when she was with Child it broak, and she became Asthmatic. By this
we find that a Tuberculum may produce the Asthma, whose Fit will return as often
as the Chylaceous Matter fills that Tumor, for then it must constringe the
Bronchia, and that Asthma is truly Symptomatical, depending on that Tumor, and
not the windy Cacochymia.

The Itch repelled, or Ulcers stopped up, may occasion an Asthma, by filling the
Blood with too much malignant Serosity, and that either flows through the
Glandules of the Lungs or Brain, and excites an Effervescence in the Humors.

If a flux of Serum falls on the Stomach, and Intestines, that occasions Gripes
and Inflations there, and many loose Stools, and then the Asthma Fit appears
very little in the Nerves, the Fits are very short, and little Spitting
happens; these sort of Fits frequently happen from a Catarrh, as appears by a
Looseness, but if any defluxion of Serum oppresses the Bronchia, it causes much
Spit, and the straitness on the Bronchia, and the same Inflation there in its
muscular Membranes, which happen in those in the Belly, when the Defluxion of
Serum runs through those Glands, but if the Defluxion of Serum passes the
Glands of the Brain, the straitness is most with dullness in the Head, and the
Fit is longer.

9thly, The Asthma depends on Fevers, the Small Pox often leaves viscid Matter in
the Lungs, which upon any Effervescence of Blood stops that, and the Chyle, and
that stoppage occasions an Inflation in the Lungs. I am certain the Small Pox
increased the Asthma in my self, and others I have discoused with. Horstius
gives an Example of an Asthmatic who died of an Imposthume in the Lungs in that
Disease.

A Young Gentleman about Twenty, was taken with an Asthma after a Pleurisy,
which Spring and Fall gave him great trouble, but after he had had the Small
Pox, his Asthma was very severe, and drew his Breath with more difficulty. He
complained to me of straitness in the Sternum about the middle of it; he could
lie on either side, and does not Wheeze: The straitness takes him in a Morning,
and Spits more now than at first; he found some Benefit by this Method, by
gentle Vomiting, and Purging with gentle Pills, and Castor Pills at Night. I
anointed him with Anticonvulsives, and Emollients; he used an Antiscorbutic
Diet-Drink, and an Anti-asthmatic Syrup; by these he continued well some time,
but the Fits return sometimes; I gave him the Cortex, but it occasioned more
straitness at the Stomach.

Intermitting Fevers are often the occasions of the Asthma Fit, as appears by
the Instances above mentioned, and then it cannot be cured without a plentiful
Dose of the Cortex; but Bleeding, Vomiting, Clysters, and Blisters must
precede, and in great Faintness Anti-spasmodics.

About Eight Years since I had an Intermitting Fever, with Swooning Fits every
Afternoon, to this I impute the settled Periods of my Asthma: In this I used
great quantities of the Cortex, and ii. of Spirit of Hartshorn every Day, which
then very much relieved me; but no Pectorals nor Balsams, or Purging, Vomiting,
Bleeding, nor a long use of the Cortex would put any stop to the Periods of the
Fits, till I used an Oxymel hereafter described, and bitter Thea of Buckbean,
with an exact Diet.

A Gentlewoman of a lean Habit of Body had been Asthmatic from her Youth, after
she had had the Small Pox, to which she imputed it; but these Fits came seldom
but upon taking Cold, or the turns of the Year; but after the Quartan Ague,
which was cured by the Cortex, it came frequently toward Morning, and she had
also a pain on the left Side. I gave her a Vomit of Oxymel Scilliticum, she
Purged with Pil de Hieracum Agarico, de Succino, ad i. once in a week,
afterward she used a Decoction of the Cortex with an Hysteric Julep, and
Hysteric Pills, with an Asthmatic Syrup, because she was very subject to
Hysteric Fits, and did not Spit after her Fits; she drank an Antiscorbutic Diet
Drink, and the Decoction of Bitters, without Sena, for a long time, by which
she continued well for Twelve Months, but then the Ague returned again with the
Asthma Fits, which were cured by the same method. And by this Instance, and the
former I mentioned, I learn, that the Hysteric Asthma depended on an
Intermitting Fever, as well as the Spitting Asthma, and that both of them have
the same Periods, of which I must observe two sorts; for the one, in Pulmonic
or Hysteric Asthma's, happens once in Ten Days, or Fourteen Days at farthest;
and the other only upon Changes of the Year, when Intermitting Fevers return
usually; therefore such Asthmatics ought to use the Cortex Spring and Fall,
after Vomiting, Bleeding, and Purging.

I knew a Divine, who after the Quartan Ague was every Spring seized with the
Asthma, to whom I recommended the method mentioned.

Every Fever will not occasion an Asthma Fit, neither had I any in the Small
Pox; therefore where the Asthma is a Symptom, there seems to be a crude
flatulent Cacochymia in the Blood before the Fever came, and a flatulency of
Spirits, which being rarefied by the Fever, produces the Asthmatic Symptoms,
with Windiness in the Stomach, much Spitting, Intermitting Pulse, Palpitation,
Coldness, Fainting; which Symptoms often appear, attending an Astmatic Fever. If
Tubercula in the Lungs stopped the Feverish Blood, and occasioned the Asthma,
then that would happen in all Fevers to Asthmatics, which I am certain does
not, but some Intermitting Fevers occasion it; and upon curing that, it goes
into its old Periods again.

Mr. B. of Warwickshire, was first seized by the Asthma in Spain, as he thought
by eating of Fruits there; he was then Twenty-five Years old, and was forced to
leave tha^ Country, because when the Rains fell i^ violently held him.

His Grandfather had the Asthma* and died of it about the Fortieth Year of his
Age; but his Father and Mother were very healthful, and never had any Asthma;
but some of his Brothers and Sisters are subject to the same Disease so that it
was a Disease in the Family, but yet missed one Generation.

This Gentleman for the space of Ten Years was Asthmatic in a high degree* for
which he often bled, which made him Consumptive; his Stomach was apt to Surfeit
by Eggs, Sallads, potted Meats, which gave severe Fits; he used Steel, and
Gums, and volatile Salts, which did him great Injury. In London Air his Fits
were much as in the Country; about the Thirty-fifth Year of his Age he had a
Fever, and then his Fi^^s left him for Three Years, but he Spit and Coughed
much more, and that way evacuated the Matter of the Asthma; (...) last an
Intermitting Fever returned on him, but the usual Method proved unsuccessful,
and the Cortex oppressed his Stomach* Asses, Milk purged him, no Pectorals
relieved him; he drank Sarsa Drinks* Emulsions, Pearl Juleps with Bals. Sulp.
Anis in Syrup of Balsam, and other Balsams; he died Hectic in the Winter; I
opened his Thorax, and found the Lungs to stick to the Pleura on both sides;
there were many Tubercula in his Lungs, and some purulent Matter, and I found a
small Schirrus on the Skin: This Consumption was introduced by the Intermitting
Fever, and probably all the Tubercula were the Effects of it. Asthmatics have
no short Cough betwixt the Fits, which makes me doubt whether they commonly
have any Tubercula, especially when I observe they can use great Motion without
Wheezing.

10thly, If a Vomica break in the Lungs, it by a sudden Inundation of Matter
occasions a fatal Asthma.

An Empyema oppresses the Lungs as the Dropsy does, and hinders their
Expansion, and the Empyema has a great Fever in the beginning, which grows
milder as soon as any Matter is concocted, and then it has all the Signs of a
Consumption to accompany it.

It usually succeeds the breach of a Vein, or Vomica Sanguinea, the
Inflammation of the Lungs or Pleura, the Quinsey, Lethargy, Wound or Ulcer,
Pthisic, or the ripening of a Tuberculum.

11thly, Every external Compression of the Lungs, may cause a Pulmonic Asthma,
as too much Fat about the Heart, the growing of the Lungs to the Diaphragme,
Pericardium.

The Gibbous are Asthmatic, because of the contortion of the Spinal Marrow, the
compression of the Nerves, or the ill shape of the Cavity of the Breast, which
straitens the Lungs.

The Asthma often causes a Gibbosity in young Persons, and that is observed to
be fatal ante P^bertatem.

I have described the several kinds of Compression of the Lungs, or Bronchia,
by which Inspiration is hindered, as too much Blood, a Polypus, Coagulation of
Chyle, Hydropical Serum, Tubercula, Empyema, and all external Accidents that
compress the Lungs, but there remains one other, which is in the Cavity of the
Belly, viz.

12thly, The Tumors of the Viscera, which produce a spurious Asthma, as that
of the Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, Pancreas, and all Hydropical Tumors: I remember
a Patient who had a great Tumor on the left side of his Belly, which gave a
great Dyspnaea; I found in him upon Dissection, a Bladder filled with clear
Salt Water, containing about a Gallon of it; this Bladder grew on the Spleen,
and stuck to the Muscles of the Belly, so that if it had been tapped, it would
have sunk; and the Water might have been evacuated; this Tumor by its
greatness stopped the motion of the Diaphragme, and caused that Dyspnaea that
killed him.

I once observed a Diabetes to end in a Tumor amongst the Muscles of the
Belly, which gave the Patient a continual Cough, Rheum, and Shortness of Breath
when he lay down, but he had no Cough all day, and this ended in a Consumption.

Those who have a Dyspnaea from the Tumors of the Belly, can sleep and breath
easiest lying on their Belly.

The Inflation in the Guts and Stomach which happens by a flux of Serum on them
on great Changes of Weather, often gives a short Fit with Windiness, which
hinders the descent of the Diaphragme, and that gives the difficulty of
Inspiration.

I shall next describe those Symptomatic Asthmas, which succeed Cephalic
Diseases.

1st. I have observed an Asthma in very old Persons after a slight touch of an
Apoplectic Fit, or Giddiness, which at first makes them to fall to the Ground;
this Asthma lasts some weeks, and sometimes months, with loss of Appetite, and
it ends in Oedematous Tumors of the Legs, and there seems to me always in this
case a Dropsy in the Breast: Vomits of Oxymel very much relieve these Patients:
Bitters and Diuretics agree, but Purging did never agree with them: I have
given some of them strong Purgers without much advantage. This Asthma in half a
Years time proving fatal to these Patients, I have observed this to happen to
fresh-colour'd old Men, that have sipped much, though not very intemperately of
strong Liquors, and every Night they have severe Fits, but in the day also a
continued Dyspnaea.

The Gout also often ends in a fatal Dyspnaea. A Gouty Lady who first had an
Apoplectic Fit, by Medicines had her Head very much cleared of that, but a
severe Asthma in a small time succeeded, neither Bleeding, Blisters, or any
volatile Medicines gave the least relief.

Dr. Willis describes a Convulsive Asthma after Headache, Giddiness, and
Lethargy.

I have observed an Asthmatic Fit to seize Persons who were in an Intermitting
Fever, with an Inflammation of the Lungs, and Delirium, and this proves always
fatal, notwithstanding Bleeding, Blisters, etc. The Blood in these cases is
very Rheumatic, and there is a great pain in the hinder part of the Head.

2dly, Hysterical Fits frequently occasion the Asthma, because the Convulsions
often stop the motion of the Diaphragme, and binding and straitning the Bronchia
and blood Vessels, by the Nerves, which encompass them, that disposes all the
disordered or ill digested Spirits to move that way, to inflate and constringe
the Lungs and Heart.

Hippocrates imputes the hysterical Disease very much to Wind, because of the
frequent eructations, and windiness of the Belly, or pains of Back or Loins:
This windy Spirit in hysterical Fits is more furious, and inflates the Muscles,
but in the Asthma the high flatulencies being evaporated, they only inflate the
nervous Fibers of the Membranes of the Lungs: And we may observe the hysterical
Fits to end in the Asthma, and for that reason it must be a less degree of
expansion than the Spirits have in the hysteric Fits. Hysterical Women hold
their breaths long through the Convulsion of the Muscles of the Belly during
their Fit, and therefore may by stopping the motion of the breath, strain the
Nerves and Membranes, and dispose them to receive windy Spirits, when admitted
into the Nerves.

The frequent Convulsions, by retarding the motion of Humors, may at last make
them mucilaginous and slimy, by which they are better prepared to retain the
Spirits in the form of Wind, and the frequent disorders of the Spirits spend
much of the volatile Parts, so that the Spirits after long Fits, have neither a
true volatility, or a thin Lympha to float in, and upon these accounts the
Spirits become Asthmatic, and the solid Parts are disposed to the same, by the
Convulsions and Strainings mentioned.

Helmont calls this hysterical Asthma, Caducum Pulmonis; and he affirms of it,
Quicquid Epilepticum Adultum sanat, sanat etiam Asthmaticum.

It will not be improper here to compare the Fits of the Spitting and
Hysterical Asthma.

In the Spitting Asthma there is no less Inflation of the Lungs, and the same
rigidity in the Spitting Asthma, as in the Hysterical, which is commonly called
a Convulsion, but is more like a continued Inflation, or Catalepsis.

The Lungs in the Spitting Asthma are vitiated by Tumors frequently, which
stop the Circulation of the Blood, Spirits, and Chyle, and the filling the
Lungs, may produce the Inflation, or Rigidity, and then this constriction may
be called a Symptom of the Diseases of the Lungs; but in the Hysteric Asthma,
the Disease first began in the Nerves, where a constriction is made on the
blood Vessels, and Bronchia, and those Humors stagnating help the Inflation
and Rigidity of the Lungs by their fullness.

The Hysteric Asthma in time degenerates into the Spitting, after Humous have
been often stopped on the Lungs by frequent Fits, and the Glandules there filled
and become Schirrous Tubercula, they obstruct the Circulation of Chyle, causing
it to pass in small quantities into the Bronchia, where it causes the Spit.

Those who are most subject to the Spitting Asthma, who are of a lean Habit of
Body, and are subject to Rheums, and glandulous Swellings in their Youth, which
are inclining to the Scrophulous Obstructions; these are most subject to the
Tubercula of the Lungs, and much Spitting; they have too much Appetite, and are
troubled with Hypochondriacal Flatuosities.

I observed some fat Hysterical Women who have had the Hysterical Asthma, in
which they Spit little after Twenty Years continuance, but have the same sort
of Spit as the lean Asthmatic, clear and mucilaginous, streaked with black.

Whatsoever Causes produce the Fit of the Hysterical Asthma, produce the same
in the Spitting Asthma, as Changes of Weather, Heat and Cold, violent Motions,
Passions, Wine, Surfeits; in neither kind of Asthma can they bear the heat of
the Bed; since the same Causes produce the Fits in both sorts of Asthmatics,
there is certainly the same Effervescence in both, which occasions the Fits,
and that is plainly proved; for at the end of the hysteric Asthma Fit, the
Water appears feverish, with a thick Sediment; and I observe that there is the
same Interval betwixt the hysteric Asthma Fits, as there is in the spitting
Asthma; and there is the same quantity of pale Water in both kinds of Asthma.

Since therefore these two kinds agree in the same sort of Constriction of the
Bronchia, in the same Effervescence of Humors, occasioned by external Causes,
all these two kinds differ in, is, the first occasion that produced them, and
the Spitting attends the one and not the other, the reason of which I impute to
Inflammation of the Lungs, or a Catarrh, and the other rises after Hysterical
Fits, or a Fever.

In both sorts there is the same flatulent and mucilaginous Cacochymia, which
by the Effervescence is forced upon the Lungs in the one, and on the Nerves in
the other.

3dly. Hypochondriac Fits occasion another sort of Asthma, without Wheezing;
the Breath is short, the Sternum oppressed, flatulencies are in the Stomach,
giddiness in the Head, with fear of Swooning; in these the Lungs are not much
affected, but the Sternum, or Membranes of the Breast, as the Mediastinum, and
this must be cured as the original Cause requires, by Vomiting, Purging,
Chalybeats, and Cephalics.

4thly. When the Scurvy affects the Nerves with too much sharp Serum, it
produces the Asthma Convulsivum, with straitness of the Breast. This is Dr.
Willis's Opinion; and for that he uses volatile Spirits, Tincture of Antimony,
Sulphur, Castor, Lavender, Flowers of Sal Ammoniac, Benzoin, Elixir
Proprietatis: He prescribes Sudorifics, sharp Clysters, Diuretics, for the
evacuating of the Serum.

Dr. Willis relates a History of a Convulsive Asthma, from the Serum in the
hinder part of the Head, and violent Fits of the Asthma seizes them in lying
down; and this succeeds other Diseases, or Cachexies, and is a deplorable state.

Zecchius observes an Asthma without Stertor; when the Constriction or Angustia
falls on the blood Vessels, more than on the Bronchia, he imputes the Cause of
Asthma wholly to a Catarrh from the Head, and prescribes the usual methods for
it to the Head, which is as absurd as the explication of a Catarrh descending
thence; yet we must allow that in the Asthma there is a real flux of Serum,
either through the Lungs or Nerves, and all defluxions like the Asthma are apt
to return.

Zecchius observes many other useful things relating to the Asthma, which I
will mention.

1st. He observes that Asthmaties are hurt by hot Medicines, and that in cold
Climates, if dry, they have best Health, and that the South Wind is injurious;
for the heat of their Liver, that is, their Blood (of which the old Writers
made the Liver the Fountain) he advises, the depurated Juice of Cichory, and
Goats-whey; he observes also a Crudity in the Stomach.

2dly. He observes that the Asthma is Respiratio tarda, magna, rara; and to his
Honor be it, that no other Authors, who generally call the Asthma Respiratio
Densa, have given a true Description of it but he; and he observes the Cough
the Asthmatics sometimes have in Expiration, which puts then to great pain,
because their Lungs are not full enough of Air to cause a Cough; he observes
also, that the Urine is thick and turbid in the Fit.

3dly. In the Fit he prescribes Medicines mixed with Acids, thus,

Take simple Oxymel jss. Oxymel of Squillsss. Sal Ammoniac i. Saffron iij. gr.
powdered, or Ammoniacum i. Musk iij. gr. Saffron ii. gr. with Oxymel of
Squills; make Pills, take them in a Potch'd Egg. He commends this Cleanser for
the Lungs, Turpentine washed i. Sulph. i. Ammonia^um dissolved ii. make Pills,
and let the Patient dilute his Wine with the Decoction of Misletoes.

He observes the Praeludia of the Fit to be a heaviness in the Head, and a
Distillation, with a small Cough, to prevent which Zecchius well advises a
Clyster, and a Blister, and a Narcotic at Night* and afterward Ammoniacum
dissolved in Oxymel, which cleanses and dilates the Lungs, and dries them,
without any immoderate heat.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Cure of the Asthma, both in the Fit, and out of it.
THE Cure of the Asthma Fits requires these following Intentions and Remedies:

First, To abate the quantity of the windy Chyle in the Belly by Clysters, if
the Asthmatic be bound, which carry off the flatulencies: In the Fit they have
generally loose Stools; but in an extreme Fit I once took a Clyster of
Posset Drink, Chamomile-flowers and Sugar, which immediately eased me, after
the Fit had continued many days before.

Vomiting, if gentle, very much relieves the Fit, by evacuating a great
quantity of fermenting Humors from the Stomach, and the straining to Vomit
dissipates the Inflations both in the Lungs and Stomach, and some slimy Lympha
is evacuated from both.

I never could approve of a strong Vomit in the Fit, one ounce of Oxymel
Scylliticum, and as much Oil of Sweet Almonds is sufficient, with Posset Drink
or warm Water. Much straining to Vomit is suffocating, and it is impossible to
drink much in the Fit for the use of a strong Vomit, therefore my custom is to
sip about half an Ounce of Acetum Scylliticum without any mixture, which in a
small time makes me sick, and by the help of a Feather and warm Water, I Vomit
so much as to evacuate all the Contents of the Stomach, which very much
relieves the straitness, though it does not always take off the Fit.

Secondly, To relieve the straitness, or constriction in the Bronchia and Blood
Vessels, which can no other way be suddenly done if the Fit be extreme, than by
bleeding a sufficient quantity, for that helps the circulation through the
Lungs, it empties the fullness of Humors; but this very little relieves the old
Asthmatic, and ought not to be practiced upon common Fits, but only in great
Extremities.

Thirdly, The Rarefaction of the windy Spirit, both in the Stomach, Blood and
Nerves, must be compressed by cool Liquors, as Toast and Water with Gas
Sulphuris, or Pectoral Ptysanes, but these by their sweetness are apt to
ferment, and create Wind, as Mead does; I rather prefer fair Water with an acid
Spirit, or Sal Prunel, Niter, Sal Ammoniac unprepared, small cold Beer, and
Wine and Water and distilled Milk are agreeable Liquors for acid Spirits or
cool Salts; these compress the Inflations, check the Esservescence of Humors,
and by their coolness much refresh the hot Spirits in the Fit: On the contrary,
I have found by experience this very certain, that all hot Medicines, as
volatile Salts, acrid, aromatic and Fetid Plants, all Chimical Sulphurs, Oils,
and spirituous Waters, though never so carminative, endanger the suffocating of
the Asthmatic in the Fit, and very much disagree with them out of it: No
solutions of Gum Ammoniacum, nor Castor Medicines, nor the Cortex ought to be
given in the Fit; the shortness of breath can bear no Pills, nor Bolus, nor
Electuaries. Salts, or acid Spirits, in a carminative Julep, or Ptysan, are the
best Anti-Asthmatic in the Fit; the old Posca of Water and Vinegar, or Verjuice
and Water, may do well in those who cannot purchase other Medicines.

Take Sal Prunel, or Niter and Sal Ammoniac, of each ss. Sugar Candy i. mix
them, give i in Milk-water, or the following Julep or Decoction.

Take Elder-flower Water, Rue, Black-Cherry, Chamomile-flower Water of each iv.
Syrup of red Poppies iss. mix them for a Julep.

Take Eryngo Roots candied iss. Liquorish ii. Barley ss, Raisins i. boil them
in three Pints to two for a Ptysan, add Syrup of Violets, or Syrup of Vinegar
a. a. iii. These cool Febrifuges are to be used two or three times in a day,
till the heat and straitness is repressed, according as the Stomach can bear
them.

4thly. The motion of the Spirits may be turned to the extreme Parts, by many
Blisters applied to the Arms, and Legs, and Shoulders, which may discharge a
Serum from the Nerves.

5thly. After all the Evacuations mentioned, if necessary at Night we ought to
compose the Inflation of the muscular Membrane both of the Stomach and Lungs by
gentle Opiates, at Bedtime thus; Take Diacodium and Oil of Sweet Almonds, mix
equal parts of them with Sugar Candy; take a Spoonful or two at Bedtime, till
sleep comes: Or 10 or 12 drops of Laudanum Liquidum may be given in an
Hysterical Julep, which must be mild, and mixed with Gas Sulphuris. Dr. Willis
says, Pro subita Dispnaeae mere spasmodicae sedatione, nullum praesentius
remedium expertus sum laudani opiati tinctura nostra, quippe somno ob repent
spiritus inordinationes suas remittunt. I have often drank Poppy-water iii. with
Syrup of red Poppies vi. and Sal Prunel ss. to my very great Advantage.

If Castor, Amber, Assafetida, volatile Salts, or Sulphurs be taken inwardly,
they rarefy the Spirits, raise the Effervescence, and drive the windy Spirits
violently into the Nerves, whereby the Strangulation is increased, by which
Experience I find, that the contrary are only proper for the Asthma, viz. cool,
watery Liquors, acids, Spirit, or cooling Salso-acids, or some Carminatives
tempered by Vinegar.

The Ancient Physicians in a Fit gave iii. Aphronitri in lbss. of Mulsum; some
of them usually prescribe a Spoonful in a Day.

Verum in his qui suffocantur Aphronitriiii. cum aquae Mulsae cyathis tribus
praebe, and aliquando cum Cardamomo and statim auxiliatur Aegineta.

Three Drams of Sal Ammoniac may be mixed with lbiss. of Mulsum, or Honey
boiled with Water, and given at many draughts in a day.

As soon as the Asthmatic awakes, they ought to rise out of their Beds, though
in the Night, which shortens the Fit, makes the straitness less, and by sitting
up they breath better; the next day, if the Room be not large, they must remove
into an airy Place, where they may sit in an easy Chair all day without any
motion, for that increases the straitness.

During the Fit the Astmatic ought not to eat any thing, the first day of it,
but Small Beer, and Toast and Butter, or Mead, or Wine and Water with a Toast,
and this may be taken at Noon, but nothing in the Morning till then, but the
coolest Juleps, and Salts; and the same again at Night, or else an Egg or two,
with Vinegar in good quantity.

If the Fits continue violently for two or three Days, continue the same Diet;
for the thinner and smaller the Diet is, the less Chyle is bred to stop on the
Lungs, and the sooner the Phlegm will digest and come up.

Upon occasion of Faintness, I take a Glass of Sack and a Toast, but that
occasions a greater Inflation, and straitness; A potched Egg or two at Dinner
time, with a great quantity of Vinegar, is good Diet, but all Flesh-meats are
very injurious in the Fit, and therefore touch none of it, for the first or
second Day, till the Phlegm begins to expectorate: And that I may deter all
Persons from Flesh-meats in the Fits, I must tell them, that by eating thereof
many have been suffocated, and that causes the Fits to last four or five Days
longer.

No Pectorals but Oil and Sugar do any service in the Fit, but that I use the
second Day, to help the slipping up of the Phlegm, and I sometime use a
Pectoral Ptysan of Figs and Liquorish made very thin in the Summer, and in the
Winter time only common Oil and Sugar, to relax the straitness, and lubricate
the Trachea, and I frequently Butter the Toast and dip it in Small Beer. I take
all Medicines cold, for no hot Liquors agree with the Asthmatic; the Fire
offends, if very hot; the Bed increases the straitness; so much are the Spirits
of the Asthmatic disturbed by every hot thing, that warm Beer, or hot
Water Gruel is very injurious, and increases the straitness.

I always order the Asthmatic to go to Bed the second Night, though the Fit
continues, having first taken his Opiate, or some of this Linctus to compose
his Breathing.

Ol. Amygd. Dulc. Diacod. ad iss. Oxymel. Scyllitici ss. Sacch. Cand. ii. Misce
cap. Coch. semel bis vel ter repetatur.

The next Day as the Fit goes off, he may take a Spoonful of this Asthmatic
Syrup Morning and Night; Sir. de Erysimo, Prassio, Balsamic A. ii. Oxymel
Scyllitici and aq. Bryon Composit. A. i. Bals. de Peru ss. signetur the
Asthmatic Syrup.

Since the Fit of the Asthma begins three Hours after Meat, a Clyster in the
Afternoon is very convenient, before the Fit grows worse, and then Vomit also
if necessary, and eat little or no Supper, but take an Opiate.

I have tried Vomiting, Purging, Sweating over Night, and the Cortex to prevent
the Fit I apprehended was coming, but all in vain, for the Fit was frequently
worse for it; but I find most benefit by drinking of Toast and Water very
plentifully, and adding some Niter and Sal Ammoniac to it; and at Bedtime I
take ii. of Galen's bitter Acid, which generally puts by the Fit.

I think I may appeal to the Cure of the Asthma Fit, to justify my Notion of
it, that a Fit of the Asthma depends on an Ephemera, because whatsoever
composes the inflamed, rarefied, or expanded Spirits in an Ephemera, as cool
Liquors, Clysters, Opiates, acid Medicines, Quiet and Abstinence, that only
agrees with the Asthmatic in the Fit, and all external Accidents that occasion
the Ephemera, produce the Asthma, and those must be removed in both.

The feverish Ferment in the Asthma is very volatile, and perspires insensibly,
as it does in the Ephemera, without much Sweat, the most part goes off in
Urine, or loose Stools, and the feverish Sediment in the Water appears but for
one Night or two after the Fit.

The Air of the Room must be kept cool in the Fit, because that has most weight
to open the obstructed Lungs.

All Fumes and Smells must be avoided, because they offend the Spirits of the
Asthmatic, by rarefying them: A Fire of Wood is more suffocating than that of
Coals, by the Fumes which smell and disperse more in a Room. The smell of
Charcoal is most Suffocating. The Air of a City, by the plenty of Fires and
Smoke is more hot and rarefied than that of the Country, which makes the Fits
worse there; the Air of a Square has but little vent, and the Smoke stands more
in them like Water in a Pool; but those Streets which are short, and that part
of it where four Streets meet, have a more constant motion of Air, and
therefore are more fit for Asthmatics, and especially that part of the City
which stands highest is best: In the Air of a City the viscid Spit is tinged
black with Smoke, which gives a blackish Spit every Morning, and may irritate
the Fit.

The Breast of the Asthmatic ought to be kept cool in the Fit, and not anointed
with Oils that have any smell, because that offends much.

All strait Clothes, and the weight of Blankets hinder the Extention of the
Breath, and raising the Shoulders for Inspiration; and the Asthmatics in Bed
usually lie high, leave their Breast uncovered, and put one Arm out of Bed,
leaning the Hand upon the Thigh, that the Shoulder may be raised high in
Inspiration; and the Belly must not be compressed by any thing, that it may
give way readily to the motion of the Diaphragme; any Plaster on the Breast
hinders Respiration.

Frictions of any Roots give great disturbance by promoting the Circulation of
Humors.

The Medicines of Castor, Saffron, and Musk seem most proper in fainting Fits,
and in them I also use volatile Salts.

Zecchius recommends Saffron 10 grains, Musk gr. i. in a draught of Aromatic
Wine in extreme Fits.

When the Asthma continues for some Months, it is a true Pulmonic Asthma, and
depends on some Disease in the Breast, as Dropsy, Tubercule, Abscess, which
compress the Bronchia, and till that evident cause be removed, it is impossible
to Cure the Asthma Fits; for removing this Compression, Vomiting, Purging,
Bleeding, and the strong Cleansing Pectorals are useful; but if that cannot be
effected, it is best to palliate these Cases by cool methods, as cool Liquors,
Acids, and Opiates, and a very spare Diet, and an open Air, which will not
irritate any Cough, by the smoakiness of it; this Method prevents Inflammation,
Inflations of the Membranes, and the increase of any straitness.

This useful Observation the Ancient Physicians have left us, that Acids
prevent all Imposthumations, and Inflammations; and for this end in the
Pneumonic incurable Asthma, it is very useful to use the Vinegar Acids, to
palliate it, and to abate the Suffocations which depend on the Paroxysms, which
happen in the Night in continued Asthma's, as well as those which are
Periodical.

I have observed very little Spit in some of these continued Pulmonic Asthma's,
except a small quantity of a slimy Mucilage, though the Disease had lasted some
Years; and that no Balsams, as that of Sulphur with Turpentine did them any
service. These Asthmatics breath thicker and shorter than those in the Periodic
Asthma, who breath slowly and very rarely.

Hippocrates observed in Agisis, that she was (...) before her Tuberculum
ripened, and broke, and Asthmatic afterward.

I shall next describe that Method whereby the Return of the Asthma Fit may
best be prevented, which is to be performed,

1st. By Evacuating the flatulent and windy Cacochymia.

2dly. By correcting of it by Digestives.

3dly. By preventing any Effervescence in our Humors, or Rarefactions of
Spirits.

4. The Obstructions of the Glands in the Lungs must be removed, if any be, and
the Glands of the Brain constringed or reduced to a better tone.

If all these Intentions can be performed, we may prevent the breeding of any
more Cacochymia, which when it is in any great plenty, produces a Periodic
Effervescence.

First, the viscid Lympha must be evacuated,

1. By a gentle Vomit both from the Stomach and Lungs; such is a Vomit with
Carduus, or Radish-seeds boiled in Water, to which Oil and Oxymel Scylliticum,
of each an ounce or two, may be added, and this Vomit may be repeated once in a
Month in old Asthmatics, when the Fits return once in ten Days, or thereabouts;
and in others where the Fits are Anniversary, once or twice in a Year, or
quarterly; for there is always a Phlegmatic Saburra in the Lungs, and
especially in the Stomach of the Asthmatic.

To strong Bodies an Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, from ss. to i. are
convenient, or rather some of the Oxysacchara; but Sal Vitrioli is observed by
Bartholet, to be injurious to Diseases of the Lungs by its Stypticity: He gives
it in Oils.

All Asthmatics ought to Vomit frequently, but it is to be managed warily,
because of their aptness to Fits of the Mother in Hysterical Asthmas by strong
Vomits; and I have observed a Fit of the Asthma to have been occasioned by
them. I have given i. of Acetum Scylliticum to Asthmatics to Vomit them, though
they had formerly spit Blood, and that without any Injury.

Without Vomiting sometimes no Asthmatic can be thoroughly relieved, and at
Night after the Vomit, give an Opiate, to quiet the Disorder of Spirits.

2. Clysters once in a Week are much commended by some Persons, who have tried
them with good success, to prevent the Fit.

3. By Purging once, or twice, or three times after the Vomiting, or once in
fourteen days, if it be an Asthma returning in that time.

Pills of Ammoniacum, Hiera cum Agarico, de Succino, Ruffi, are the best
Purgers either single or mixed ii. at Night. Pil. Coch. cum Castoreo, these are
proper in cold Constitutions, in whom Hiera Picra may do well; but in the hot I
only use Purging Salt i. in White Wine Posset Drink, or the Purging Waters
boiled very much: This Purge raises no Effervescencies in the Humors, which
generally occasions an Asthma Fit.

After ordinary Purges, Decoct. Senae, or the bitter Purging Decoction with
Buckthorn agrees with others; a Diet Drink of Sena and Monk's Rhubarb agree
with some; but Sena ferments, because it is a Legumen, and that raises windiness
injurious to the Asthma.

The Decoction of a Cock in Broth, with Sena, and Pectorals, is much commended
by many Authors.

Purging often occasions Fits, by raising an Effervescence in the Humors, and
therefore an Opiate is necessary after them, and sometimes the Cortex too, to
prevent the feverish Returns, which happen after Purging, like those in the
Ague.

The Old Authors Purged with Elaterium, and Troches Alhandall; these may be
proper in the Hydropical Cases, where watery Tumors are in the Limbs, as Pil.
de Cambogia, but in the hot thin Tempers they are certainly mischievous, for
the Serum is deficient in these, but Superabundant in the Hydropical; and where
that overflows, Purging is absolutely necessary, and injurious if deficient.

Aetius Purges with Savin Powder, the first day i. the next day ii. the third
iii. the fourth ss. and this brings away Blood. It Is Aetius's saying, Maximum
est remedium purgatio fortior, per Pharmaca fortiora. I find that ordinary
Asthmatics are very fainty, languid, and hot after Purging, and they generally
say Purging does them no good.

But it was Bellonius's advise, In difficultate spirandi non est formidanda
frequens and magna purgatio. I remember an Asthmatic who took some Quack Pills,
by which he had 20 or 30 Stools, this very much relieved him, because he was
subject to the Dropsy; so that strong Purgers in gross, fat, hydropical Persons
may be proper, but not in the contrary Constitutions. Thus Dr. Waller
prescribes; Pil. de Hiera cum agarico i. Troch. Alkand. gr. ii. Gum Ammoniacum
ss. f. Pil.

4. Issues diminish the quantity of the Serum, but I never found any benefit by
them, though made between the Shoulders, and on the Arms, nor found any injury
by stopping of them up.

I never tried any on the Breast, nor top of the Head, but cannot approve of
either; nor those in the Back, because they require a Ligature which straitens
the Breast.

5. Sudorifics are commended for Catarrhs, as the Decoction of Guaicum, China,
Sarsa, and therefore may be useful where the Asthma happens after a Catarrh;
and in the same case Venice Treacle may be given every Night, which by its
bitter and acrid Taste helps the Digestion, and promotes the Circulation of the
Serum through the Lymphatics, and opens the stopped Perspiration, and by its
opiate Faculty it allays the Inflations of the Spirits; but we ought to take
care that it be not too hot for the Consumption, and in such cases must be mixed
with Acetum Theriacale, or its Extract.

6. Diuretics, as Millepedes, in the great quantity of Serum of the Blood are
very useful, but the Asthmatic seems to make too much Water sometimes.

The common Diuretics are Woodlice, Sassafrass, Pine-tops, Gill, Horehound,
Enula Campana, Orris, Radish-roots, Juniper Berries.

I have used Gilead Balsams, and Balsam of Tolu dissolved in Syrup of Balsam,
and Balsam Sulphur, Anisat, without any advantage; but these ought to be used
in a Diuretic Oxymel to temper their Heat.

Secondly, The mucilaginous and flatulent Cacochymia must be corrected,

1. By diluting and cooling the viscid Humors, for which end we must drink much
of Mead, and Milk-water, Sack and Water, Decoctions of Sarsa and China. Those
Asthmatics whose Blood wants Serum, may bear Chalybeat Waters, but in those who
have old habituated Asthma's, the Serum is too abundant, and in them the
Chalybeat Waters affect the Nerves, and fill the Vessels with too much Serum;
and in some they coagulate the Serum, and give Rheumatic Pains. Asses Milk, and
common Milk, make the Lymphas too viscid, and they cannot agree with the
Asthmatics: Though I know an Asthmatic, who commends Milk and Water, for
allaying the Inflations at the beginning of a Fit. Drinking of Water agrees
with the Young Asthmatic, but the old habituated Asthmatic must use it
moderately, for fear of a Dropsy, and Pains of the Stomach and Spleen, of
which I have heard old Persons complain who drink Water much; but I have
observed that a Person who drank no Malt Liquor, but only Toast and Water, and
rarely a Glass of Wine, lived free from the Asthma, which certainly returned if
he changed his Liquor.

The drinking Bath Waters is much commended for the Asthma, but the going into
the Bath rarefies the Blood and Spirits, breeds more viscid Humors, and is very
injurious to all Asthmatics, as all Authors affirm, and I find observed in
Crato's Concilia.

I discoursed an Asthmatic at Bath, who was extremely troubled with a violent
motion to Vomit in the beginning of each Fit, and nothing composed that like
drinking Water; This Person assured me, that he received much benefit by
drinking Bath Water, which cured him for some Years, but the Asthma returning,
he came then to Bath a second time: He was of a full Habit of Body, and drank
the Waters, but durst not adventure to Bathe.

I drank the Bath Waters, whose heat seemed very disagreeable to me, since no
actual hot Liquor can well agree with me, but I liked these Waters best when I
drank them no hotter than new Milk: They passed well, but I found no benefit by
'em. I went twice for trial into the Cross Bath, and that each time made my
Breath strait, and Spirits and Stomach very languid, by which I learned the
inconvenience of bathing in the Asthma.

I met with other Asthmatics at Bath, who found benefit by drinking, but durst
not bathe.

I know the Hypochondriacal have received some Relief of their Pains on the
Breast by Purging and Bathing, but none for the Asthma, as I could observe in a
Person who was both Hypochondriacal and Asthmatic, neither drinking nor bathing
did him any service.

Thin Bodies can neither bear the heat, nor Purging of the Bath Waters; and all
Sulphur Medicines are disagreeable to Asthmatics, the Tubercula in the Lungs,
Impostumate by bathing; the Heat and Serosity of the Water, does more injury to
such Constitutions, than the cleansing quality of the Niter or Sulphur can
compensate: And I have heard an Ingenious Asthmatic complain, that her Asthma
never was severe till she had drunk the Bath Waters.

The opening the Pores, and rarefying the Humors, make the Asthmatics more
subject to every nice Change of Air, than they were before; the drinking the
Waters gives a strange Oppression and Stupor to the Spirits, with Sleepiness,
and that must consequently affect the Nerves serving Respiration, and make them
more open for receiving of flatulent Spirits. I do in short think the Bath
Waters most agreeable to fat and cool Constitutions, who can well bear their
Heat and Sulphur, and their cleansing Qualities. I remember they sunk the Habit
of the Body too much in very lean dry Bodies.

2. We must avoid all occasions which make the Chyle viscid or windy, such is
Milk, Cheese, Fish, Gelly Broths, strong Wines of a thick consistence,
Malt-drink, baked Pies, and Cakes, and Puddings, all Flower Meats unfermented;
for all these breed viscid Humors.

All crude slimy flatulent Meats are to be avoided, as Herbs, Sallads,
Mushrooms, Peace, Beans.

The most simple Diet is of Flesh-meat boiled or roasted, once in a day, with
good Bread well fermented and well baked, and the Bran not too much dressed
out; the Drink may be Toast and Water, for all young Asthmatics; Wine and Water
for the declining Age, and good small Beer or Ale not bottled; and no Malt
Liquor ought to be used but at Dinner by those who cannot leave it off.

Extreme cold Air increases the viscidity, and is to be avoided by living in a
Town; gentle Riding and Walking attenuate Humors, and discuss Flatulencies,
which arise from ill Digestion; violent Exercise makes our Humors more viscid,
as we observe in laboring People, and their Horses, whose Blood is made seizie
by constant Sweating, by which the Blood becomes inspissated like Serum heated
by the Fire.

Too many Clothes heat and thicken the Blood, by evacuating the Serum, and this
Practice makes them more subject to take Cold; for the more the Humors are
rarefied, the quicker does the Air compress them, or rarefie them upon the
alteration of Weather; they therefore catch least Cold whose Spirits and Humors
have the Air most compressed in them.

Sadness stops the motion of Humors, and makes them more viscid. It Is observed
that all Asthmatics being angry or sad, do fall into Fits oftener than when they
are cheerful.

The Belly must be preserved fluid, the Urine must flow in due quantity, and
the Sweat must be moderately promoted by Exercise; for all these ways the
viscid Humors may be evacuated, and the windy Spirits discussed.

3. We must correct the mucilaginous quality of the Chyle and Lymphas by
Digestives.

First, By Bitters.
I have long used bitter Wines, but those inflame the Blood and Spirits.

Dr. Lowers's bitter Tincture with Steel did me no service, but great injury. I
have heard some Cachectical Persons commend Wormwood Beer and Wine, but they
are generally too hot.

I have used many Ounces of Elixir Proprietatis prepared with volatile Salts,
and Hiera Picra infused in Sack, without any benefit, and that prepared with
fixed Salt is as mischievous to the Asthmatic; but Elixir Proprietatis prepared
with an Acid is less heating, and a truer digestive, and more convenient for
Asthmatics against their Cachexies.

I have used great quantity of Horehound in vain, as lbss. to six Gallons of
very small Table-beer, it produces much Urine, and was pleasant enough, though
a very strong Bitter, of the taste, nature, and quality of the Verbascum, to
which class I therefore think it referrible; but a long use of this did me no
service. But I very much relieved a Cachectical Asthma, by a long use of Syrup
of Horehound in Hyssop-water, which was taken Morning and Night for three
Months.

I tried great quantity of dried Buckbean in Thea for my Breakfast, I drank
half a pint of this with or without Sugar all Winter every Morning; this agreed
with my Stomach, as Centaury Thea did, which I also have frequently used with
Sugar; both these Theas agreed in Color, Taste, and Virtue, for which reason I
call Buckbean a Marsh Centaury.

I tried the bitter of Broom, putting of green Broom lbss. to six Galons in a
Bag; this agreed with my Stomach, and helped my Appetite, though it did the
Asthma no good. I have known it to produce much Water in the Cachectical, and
help the Hydropical Asthmatics: Neither boil the Broom nor dry it, for then it
has a nasty smoaky leguminous Taste; use equal quantity with Hops.

Since Oxymels with bitter acid Cephalics, and Pectorals, are generally
commended by Authors, I thence learned, that a bitter Acid was useful to
Asthmatics, and I observed that they usually prescribed their bitter Gums, and
acrid Medicines to be dissolved in Oxymels, or drank with a Posca.

I was frequently relieved by the following Oxymel, and my Fits kept off many
Months; I used the Prescriptions of Authors in vain, wherein they order the
solution of Gum Ammoniacum, because they failed me in not prescribing a
sufficient quantity of Gum Ammoniacum, as Physicians formerly did err in the
small quantity of the Cortex: This dissolution seems to me convenient, and I
use it till I have spent three Ounces of the Gum.

rad Zedariae i. Coq. in aqu. Font, lbii. ad lbiss. Colaturae add aceti iv. in
quibus dissolvatur Ammoniaci i. Colaturae add Mellis iv. Coq. and dispumatur,
and coletur, Capiat colatur. Cochl. 3. Mane and V^speri per menses aliquot.

There is a very volatile Acrimony in Ammoniacum, which affects the Roof of the
Mouth, besides the Bitterness, by which it sensibly opens the Passages of the
Lungs, and inlarges the Breath; it helps the Digestion, and discusses Winds, it
produces gentle Sweats, and sensibly invigorates the Nerves; but I found it
necessary to follow the Ancients method, in correcting its bitterness and
acrimony by Vinegar, and that makes it more cool; but sometimes I used it thus,
Rad. Emul. candit. i. Coq. in aq. lbii. in Colatura calida; Dissolvatur
Ammoniaci i. and Mellis iv. This was without Vinegar; The Ammoniacum is best
dissolved by Water, but it is no ways disagreeable to the Asthmatic, till
Vinegar is added to abate the heat of its great acrimony and the bitterness,
and by the Experience I had of this Medicine I learned, that no acrid nor
bitter would agree with the Asthmatic, unless they were corrected in their heat
by an Acid; I therefore usually added Vinegar of Squills iii. to the former
Prescription.

Dioscorides commends Aristolochia decocted in Water. I have used that and
Gentian, of each i. infused in lbi. of Vinegar; it is not disagreeable. Briony
and Centaury are commended by the Ancients for the Asthma.

All Acrids are forbid by Galen in the Dyspnaea, because they rarefy the
Humors, and dissipate the thinner part, by which Humors are made more thick. If
Acrids be used, they must be used in small quantity, and well diluted by
Liquids, or rather corrected by Acids.

I like the drinking of Mum in an Evening, half, or a whole Pint, for that
helps Digestion, and keeps the Body open, both which are useful to the
Asthmatic; thin Constitutions may use this all Winter for Supper with Dutch
Biscuit, and it will feed them.

The Theriaca Diatessaron is a good, old and useful Medicine, if taken at a
Night, and some Oxymel after it, to cool its heat.

The bitter Decoction may be used for a Month every Morning, to help Digestion,
with some drops of the Elixir Paracelsi in it.

Centaury, Gentian, or Carduus, may be used in all our small Beers, i. to each
Gallon; or else Broom, Horehound, or Pinetops, Germander, Woodsage, or Gill
lbss. in four Gallons for ordinary Drink; or use Thea of Centaury, Gentian,
Buckbean.

Secondly, By Salsoacid Digestives.
Some Asthmatics have drank their own Urine every Morning, and found much
advantage by it, which gave me a hint of using Sal Ammoniac Preparations.

The Acid Spirit of Sal Ammoniac distilled from that and Sugar, and made into a
Tincture; and iii. to lbi. of a Tincture of Cordial Flowers, it is useful if
given in Water, to a spoonful, or two, or three, in the Cholic, and Fits of the
Mother; and the Flowers of that Salt, which are rarefied from the common Salt,
are given in intermitting Fevers; or else the common Salt of Sal Ammoniac may
be given as a Digestive, or the volatile Salt fixed with Spirit of Vitriol gr.
vii.

Sal Succini is a Salsoacid Volatile, I used some Drams of it without any
benefit.

Aqua Calcis compound seems proper to correct the Phlegm, and cure the Diabetes
attending all Asthmas, and to raise the Digestion; I tried it, but it heated
the Blood extremely, dried the Mouth by its stypticity and saltness, and made
the following Fits worse, neither would agree with any other to whom I
recommended it.

Three Drams of common Sal Ammoniac is prescribed in i. Cyathis of Aqua Mulsa
by the old Writers.

Thus also they used Sal Ammoniac in their Diet; Take Sal Arm. lbi. Pepper,
common Salt, ad iii. Seeds of Rocket, Ammeos, ad ii. Hyssop, Thyme, ad Mii.
Smallage, and Parsley-seeds, of each ii. Origanum i. pound and searse them for
a Powder; half a Spoonful may be used in Diet; and it is much commended for
Windiness and Diseases of Breast and Eyes.

If the Niter of the Ancients was Urinous, we have nothing so like it as Sal
Ammoniac, but they prescribe them and describe them as different Medicines in
the Asthma, but they used them both in it, for their cooling and attenuating
Qualities.

I have observed the Merchants to try the Salt Petre before they buy it, by
throwing it into the Fire, to see whether it will crack, for then they reject
it as full of common Salt. I think the best substitute of the Aphronitum may be
Sal Prunel, and a volatile Salt, for they will have a lixivial Taste, and
ferment with an Acid, and Nitrum regeneratum, and tart nitrated is of a like
taste and quality. All volatile Salt exposed to the Air, has a cool taste like
Niter, and may be mixed with Spirit of Niter.

Thirdly, By Chalybeat, or Vitriolic, and Sulphurous Digestives.
Extractum Ecphracticum cum Aloe, seems the best digestive for Asthmatics, for
though the Steel by its stypticity stops the breath, yet Aloes helps the Steel
off the Stomach. Most Asthmatics complain that Steel heats them, stops their
Stomachs, and Breaths, and thickens the Phlegm, and at last produces a severe
Effervescence which gives the Fit.

Baccius assures us, that Steel-waters by their stypticity offend the
Asthmatic, in them they occasion Rheums and Catarrhs and fill them full of
Serum; the Steel affects the Head with a drowsiness and giddiness, as all Steel
Wines do: Those I have recommended to the Steel Waters have much complained of
them; and the German Spaw-waters did increase my Fits; but I will confess I
have discoursed some Persons, who have been much better for those Waters, the
quantity of cool Water doing more service than the Steel could do injury.

I believe Vitriolum Martis inconvenient, because of its great stypticity;
though it raises no Effervescence in the Blood, yet whatever gives a violent
motion to the Humors produces the Asthma. All Steel Wines are mischievous, as
well as all other Medicines infused in Wine. Lower's Infusion of Steel and
bitter, swelled my Stomach, that I could not bear it, because of the strong
Waters in it.

The Effervescence of the Chyle we call a hot Flatulency, and that of the Blood
an Ephemera Fever; both these ought to be stopped, and the occasions avoided, as
Surfeits, much Drinking, stoppage of the Pores, violent Motions, Passions,
Study, all these Causes rarefy the Air included in the Bubbles, which
constitute the fluids in Animals, and thereby produce Flatulencies,
Effervescencies, Heat, and Expansion of Spirits.

For the suppression of all Effervescencies in our Humors, the Method
prescribed in the Cure of Ephemeras, and the Asthma, must be used, but for
preventing it nothing more likely than the use of the Cortex. Take i. of it
after your quarterly Vomits and Purges; I boil it in Pectoral Drinks, for in
substance the stypticity of it oppresses the Stomach, and makes a greater
straitness than usual.

Though the Cortex cannot prevent the Fits in a Pneumonic Asthma depending on a
great Tuberculum, nor in the flatulent Asthma, where there is a great
Cacochymia, yet I perceive it greatly relieves the Sweats and Faintness
attending the Fits, and Head-achs, and makes the Intervals of the Fits longer,
but it is no ways proper to give it in a Fit, for then it exceedingly huffs up
the Stomach.

It seems to me a rational design, to try more Antifebriles against the Asthma,
after general Evacuations and Digestives are tried, of which kind this seems
proper in the Summer time, and it is commended by Rulandus as very good in the
Asthma.

Take 20 or 30 Leaves of Houseleek, pound them, and express the Juice, putting
to them first a little Water, and two drams of Sal Ammoniac: This Houseleek and
Salt are proper to prevent Effervescies in the Blood, for which reason also we
may try Ribwort, Plantain; for Plantain is used against intermitting Fevers:
Boil Mij. in Posset Drink one Pint.

I drank the Water distilled from the Juice of Houseleek lbiv. with ii. of Sal
Ammoniac in a Sand Furnace; this cools well, but a Syrup would have been much
better.

These are the best Febrifuges to be used in the Summer.

1. Watery cool Liquors, distilled Milk, Water drinking, Decoctions of Sarsa.

2. Acids* as the Tartar Acids and Acerbs, acrid Acids of Vinegar, Sulphur
Acids, Salsoacid Spirits, vitriolic Acids, nitrous Acids.

3. Vitriolated Salts, or Salfoacids, Sal Ammoniac, Niter, Sal Prunel, Sal
Succini.

In the Winter Bitters are the best Febrifuges, as Venice Treacle, bitter
Decoction, Oxymel Scilliticum, and the Acetum, Elixir Proprietatis, with an
Acid.

The watery Toast and Water for ordinary Drink, or else lbi. in a Morning,
after Dinner lbss. and as much at Night. Maxima continentium febrium remedia,
haec duo sunt, venesectio and frigida potio.

The old Practisers gave as much cold Water to drink, as the Patient could
bear, lbiii. or iv. and they affirm, Ipsius febris qua febris aqua frigida est
remedium. I am very well assured, that if an Asthmatic could drink no fermented
Liquor, he would rarely have the Asthma Fits. I usually drank lbi. of Water
heated with a Toast in the beginning of my Fits.

The Decoction of the Woods is very useful Morning and Night.

Take Liquorish bruised i. steep it in fair Water all Night (about lbii.)
without heat, and drink every Morning a large draught, or else use it for
ordinary Drink; others must use a fifth or sixth part of Sack or White Wine,
with a large proportion of Water; others may use Waters boiled with Cinnamon,
or Aniseed, and Raisims. I use this Hydromel, Take Honey lbi. boil it in one
Gallon and a half of Water to one Gallon, scum it well, then add to it Ginger 3
races, Cloves 30, boil it and strain it, then when it is cold bottle it, and use
it Night and Morning with a Toast and Butter, or else for ordinary Drink.

Take boiling Water lbii. Cinnamon ii. the crum of white Bread a good quantity,
Sugar iii. steep them, and put them through Hippocrates Sleeve.

It Is usual to add an Acid to the Water, and then less Water will do; thus,
Take Water lbi. Spirit of Vitriol i.

This Water drinking is very agreeable to all Chronical Diseases, in which
there is an Effervescence of Humors, as the Gout, from whence it is observed,
Rarissimum exemplum ut quis Hydropota fiat Arthriticus. By Water drinking all
Salt and other vicious Tastes of our Humors are diluted, and made more mild and
less corrosive: Water drinking is proper for all Defluxions which depend on the
Ephemera, as Head-achs, the Hysterical, Falling Sickness, Tremblings, dull
Sight, the Melancholic, Bilious, Hemorragies, Putrifactions of the Mouth,
Fluxes of Humors by Stool, Urine, the Womb, and is certainly very useful for
all the hot Cacochymias, as well as all very hot burning Fevers. I have often put
by my Fits, and cured the Inflation of the Stomach by the Hydroposia, for which
reason I cannot but recommend this to other Persons.

The next and most prevalent cooling Taste, is, of the Acid Febrifuges, which
coagulate the consistence of Humors, gathers or compresses the Globuli of the
Blood, and makes the Blood of a blacker color; they cool the Spirits, and
prevent their too great rarefactions: I will first consider the varieties of
Acids, common Vegetables, and then those observable in Animals, and Minerals,
and propose the best Forms of them that I could collect out of Authors, to be
tried in the Asthma.

1. The styptic acerb Tastes, such is Plantain, Polygourd, spotted Aresmart,
Sorrel, the Seda; amongst these the Sedum Majus has been tried, and recommended
in the Asthma by Rulandus, as I mentioned above. Dr. Baynard tells me a
Relation of a Woman relieved in the Asthma by Sorrel, a Posset Drink made with
the Juices of the Seda, or Sorrel may be tried, or a Syrup made of the Juices,
and dissolve it, an ounce of it in four ounces of the distilled Water of the
same Plant, and use in with ss. of depurated Niter, or gr. 15. of Sal Ammoniac.
See the Serum de Sed^ in Bates's Dispensatory.

The Virtue of these Acerbs is to cool Inflammations, Fevers, and astringe all
Fluxes of Humors: Their Tartareous Acidity makes them cooling and diuretio,
and their Stipticity makes them proper for intermitting Fevers, and in these
Cases these acerb Acids must be used.

The most Physical Acerbity we observe in the Fruits of Trees, as in Medlers,
Services, Quinces, Granates, Rhue, Opsoniorum, Barberries, Grapes, Sloes,
Bilberries, Cherries, Pears.

The most acerb Tastes are too styptic for the asthmatic; but the fermented
Acids are commended in the Asthma, as old Verjuice and Vinegar.

The acerb Taste depends on the want of a due Fermentation in the Fruits, for
in a farther and perfect Maturation, they become sweet and more acid, with a
less Astringency: The crude acerb Juice of Grapes has no Acrimony, but Vinegar
having undergone, first, a vinous or perfective Fermentation, and after that, a
second putrefactive Fermentation, it becomes something acid, and is properly an
Acid acrid: From Fruits fermented by Nature a pure Acid is produced, such is
that of ripe Fruits, and I call it,

2. The tartareous Acid; such is the Juice of Limons, Lime Juice; this may be
called the sweet Acid; in these there is a Tartar too cool, but no Stypticity
to bind; but these Acids purge most, and are used chiefly for Thirst and
Fevers; but these ferment too much for the Asthma.

Take Conserve of Wood Sorrel, Hipps, Rob of Berberries; each i. Crem. Tart.
iij. Syrup of Limons; mix them.

Drink Limonade, Limon Posset Drink, or Verjuice Posset Drink, Decoction of
Pippins, sweetened with the Syrup of Limons, Citron, adding Spirit of dulcified
Salt, Niter or Vitriol.

All Meats ought to be acidulated with Oranges, Limons, Sorrel, and the Drinks
too, as Barley Water, lbij. Juices of Oranges or Limons, iiij. Cinnamon Water,
and Syrrup of Rasberries, of each iij. sweet dulcified Spirit of Niter, ij.

See Tabulae Tartareae, and Cicera Tartari in Bates, and Julapium Fragorum and
Ideum, for proper Forms.

Instead of common Salt use Tartar poudered with all your Meats, or Cream of
Tartar, ij. with Juice of Oranges, ij. may be dissolved in lbii. of Barley
Broth to loosen the Belly; one Spoonful of crude Tartar may be used in Broth,
to loosen in a Morning, or else Honey and Cream of Tarter mixed; take three
Drams.

Pulvis hepaticus rubeus is made of Cream of Tartar irrorated with Spirit of
Vitriol: It cools and prevents Drunkenness.

Take Cream of Tartar irrorated with Spirit of Vitriol, Crab's-eyes prepared
with Vinegar, of each i. Oil of Cinnamon, Cloves, of each ss. Sugar, lbss. make
a digestive Powder.

3. I will next consider the acid acrid, or Vinegar Acids, and give the Forms.

The old Posca made of Vinegar i. Water lbi. given vi. three or four times in a
Day: It Is good for the Cholera and Hemorrhages, and consequently for all other
Effervescences: Rose Water, Vinegar distilled, and Sugar, of each i.

Pliny commends Vinegar Medicines as very useful, Vini Vitium transit in
Remedia; it excites our Appetites, and recommends our Meats to our Palates: It
may be mitigated with Water or a Toast, Wine, Pepper, Salt makes it hotter,
otherwise Vinegar is of its self of a cooling; and no less discussing Quality;
it ferments with the Earth, and breaks Stones, which Fire cannot; by which we
observe that it is proper for Stones; if it be drank it takes off Nauseousness,
Hickops, and sneezing by smelling to it: Vinegar is useful in Eye Medicines,
and in Gargarisms for the scorbutic Putrefaction of the Mouth.

Vinegar is proper for diary Fevers, from Heat of the Sun, and for Thirst; and
for these the Ancients used the Aceta Theriacalia.

Vinegar was used by the Ancients for leprose Scurfs, Ulcers, Bites of mad
Dogs, or other venomous Stings; outwardly for Hemorrhages, it is applied with a
Sponge, and two Cuatha may be taken inwardly to dissolve the Blood.

Vinegar is applied to the Procidence of the Arms or Vulva; it helps the old
Cough, Orthopnea, and Decays of the Teeth.

Agrippa had his Legs immersed into hot Vinegar in a cruel Fit of the Gout; by
this it appears, and many other Prescriptions, that Acids were used outwardly
for the Gout, and Crato used Oil of Vitriol five Drops in Broth to prevent the
Gout.

The old Writers always used the Acid of Vinegar and Niter to cool the Humors,
and to abate the Heat, Acrimony, and Bitterness of strong Medicines: I will
give Pliny Commendation of the Acetum Scyllicitum, which all the old Writers
commend in the Asthma.

The old Vinegar of Squills is most approved of; it is profitable in the
Acidity of Digestion, and to those who vomit fasting; it cures the Stench of
the Mouth, Lungs, and Gums; confirms the Teeth, gives a healthfuller Color to
the Face, helps Deafness by gargarising, sharpens the Sight; it is proper for
the Epilepsie, melancholic, vertiginous, hysterical, bruised, infirm Nerves and
Faults of the Kidneys: Thus the Ancients used their medicated Vinegers instead
of acid Spirits, and false acid chemical Salts, and they seem more natural to
our Humors than the others: From the medicated Vinegers they order a
Posset Drink thus, take two Spoonfuls of Vinegar, mix them with lbi. of Milk,
to make a Posset Drink, and any specific Juice or Scurvy Grass may be added.

The Spirit of Vinegar is not so acid as the common Vinegar, and less to be
valued, but the Dose is ij. to ss. in any Julap. Tincture of Steel with Spirit
of Vinegar, Tincture of Opium with Vinegar, may be used in hot Cacochymias.

Sylvius preserved himself from the Plague by Vinegar, one Spoonful in the
Morning. Vinegar is good in Surfeits, Vomiting, Hickops; and outwardly applied
to the Stomach with Leaven and Mint. Vinegar corrects Opium, if a Draught be
taken after it: I think we want an Opiate extracted with Vinegar and Canary for
a Menstruum, or Vinegar Spirit alone; this is more proper for the Asthma and
Fevers, than the Brandy Spirits: The Fumes of Vinegar excite the Lithargy, and
those that faint by Dissipation of Spirits by bathing: Vinegar hinders
Imposthumes, and inwardly and outwardly is used for the Erisipelas; it is
proper for the Scab, Impetigo, Burning, it is proper for the Gout, with Sulphur
in Embrocations, it stops Fluxes of Blood; the Vapor of Vinegar cures the
Noise in Ears and Deafness, and the same Fume is good for the Dropsy: Vinegar
is commended for an old Cough, and Dyspnea. Avicenna gives these Virtues of
Vinegar. I will not only commend Vinegar with the Ancients, but also tell its
Faults as they observed them.

Vinegar is injurious to the Hypochondriacals, because they too much abound
with an acid acrid Humor, but for some Diseases of the Spleen, as Tumors,
Inflammations, Galen commends it both outwardly and inwardly; Vinegar usually
gripes the Hypochondrias.

Vinegar does Injury to the Womb by stopping the Menstrua, which are produced
by an Orgasmus, Effervescence, Ebullition, or Turgescence, which implies not
only a quick Circulation of the Blood, but also an intestine or fermentative
Motion before the Menstruum happen for two or three Days, which gives Pains in
the Back and Loins, with a Lassitude, Pulsation and Heaviness in the Limbs,
Pain in the Head, Inflation in the Hypochondria, and I hope by these Symptoms I
may say that Women have then an Ephemera, which occasions the Flux of their
Blood, which being rarefied, stimulates the circulating Vessels for its
Excretion: But Vinegar, if mixed with Bitters or Honey, does not suppress the
Menstrua, but is proper to cool and cleanse the Womb.

4. Vinegar produces Sterility, by repressing the Flatulency of Spirits, and
coagulating the Sperm, which it will do as it does coagulate Milk.

5. Vinegar is injurious to the Nerves and Nervous Parts when obstructed in a
Palsy, but no way in those Diseases which depend on the hot Cacochymias, as
Deliriums, Phrenities, Epilepsies, Convulsions, Asthmas, Fevers.

6. Vinegar corrodes the Parts ulcerated, as the Guts and Kidneys; it
extenuates the Body, by evacuating the Succus Nutritious; it depresses the
natural Fermentation of Humors, and breeds the Dropsy and Cachexy in cold
Constitutions.

Vinegar is made more acrid and acid by Distillation from Niter, Salt, and Sal
ammoniac; or if ss. of Sal ammoniac be added to distilled Vinegar; by this it
will dissolve Stones and Metals.

The Ancients made purging Vinegar with Sena or Agaric, and an Elixir Salutis
may be made with the same Ingredients as that in Bates's only; use Vinegar for
the Menstruum, or else Vinegar with an equal Quantity of Spirit of Wine. Galen
prescribes Aloes to be dissolved in Vinegar, or else Scammony, or i. to lbi.
Hiera Picra may be infused in it, as well as in Canary or Brandy; the
Oxysacchary, made by the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum in Vinegar, are
certainly more agreeable and most innocent: I have observed stomachic Vinegers
with Quinces or Mint, diuretic Vinegers with Juniper Berries, cordial Vinegers
with Cloves, styptic Vinegers with Roses, pectoral Vinegers with Squills,
diuretic, antihydropical Vinegers with Elder Flowers, cephalic Vinegers with
Rosmary Flowers, uterine Vinegers with Myrrh or Savine, Pennyroyal, Castor,
Assa-foetida; Vinegar with Niter or Sal Ammoniac for the Stone; Aromatics and
Honey may be added to all the Vinegers, or Sugar to make them more agreeable: We
prescribe iv. of Vinegar with Pepper for Obesity every Morning, I have often
doubled. Whether iv. of the Cortex might not be infused in lbi. of Vinegar, to
the great Advantage of hot Patients, who cannot well bear the bitter: A styptic
Vinegar may be made with Sloes, lbss. in lbii. of Vinegar, or else by the
Infusion of Oak Bark; an alexipharmic Vinegar is best of Venice Treacle, Myrrh;
of each i. Saffron, Camphir; of each i. Vinegar, lbii. or prescribe thus,
Syrrup de Scordio, Aqua Epidemica, io. Aceti Bezoardic, Dos. Cochl. i. ad iii.

For pectoral Cases,. Aceti Scyllitici, Syrrup. de Prassio, Aqua Brion.
composit. cum iv. Dos. Cochl. i.

Infinite are the Prescriptions I have met with in the Ancients, made of
Vinegar, with all Sorts of Specifics; but I shall reserve them for a Treatise
of simple Medicines, digested under their several Tastes, but here design to
add more about the Use of Oxymels, which were the pectoral Acids of the
Ancients, but I must not omit that Bellis Minor is an Acid acrid, and may be
properly infused in Vinegar; the Chemists use a Tincture of the Flowers with
Spirit of Vitriol for the Asthma: Anagallis Flore Phaeniceo may be infused in
any Liquor for Fevers, being an acrid Acid, and so is Vrsa Solis, in Aqua
Theriacalis: All the Tythimals and Hellebores are corrected by Vinegar, which
shows the Virtue of Vinegar to correct vicious Humors which are corrosive.

The most acid Oxymel has the fourth Part of Vinegar, in respect of the Honey,
the most sweet, the eighth Part in viscous Humors the Acid is to be used, and
in others the sweeter.

Take of any pectoral Decoction, lbiiij. Acetum Scylliticum, lbss. Honey lbij.
boil it and scum it.

I have made Oxymel Scylliticum thus;. Aceti and Mellis cum lbss. Aquae lbss.
coque cum Scyllae i. and Macis, add cum lbi. and reservetur.

The acid Spirit of Turpentine is the best Diuretic, and the Acid of Guaicum
the best Acid diaphoretic amongst Vegetables.

I think not fit to multiply any farther Receipts from vegetable Acids, but
will pass to the Acids of Animals, where Butter-milk Posset Drink is the chief,
and Butter-milk distilled with Sorrel or Limons; and these I may call the
Tartar Acids in the Chyle of Animals.

The Salso-Acids from Urin, or volatile Salts mixed with Acids, as Sal
ammoniac: Let the Patient drink six Ounces of his own Urine with Specifics:
Take Niter and Sal ammoniac, dissolve them in Vinegar, and crystallize them, or
Sal Polychrest. lbi. Sal ammoniac, i. dissolve and crystallize them.

Take the volatile Salt of Sal ammoniac or Hartshorn, fix it with either
Spirit of Sulpher, Niter, Vitriol, or Salt, putting as much as will dissolve
it, then filter and crystallize it, or evaporate it to be a factitious Sal
ammoniac.

Take Flowers of Sal ammoniac, Grains xv. in Conserve of Hipps for a Month, or
the acid Spirit of Sal ammoniac, mixing iii. in a lbi. of the Tincture of
Cordial Flowers, the Dose one Spoonful in fair Water Night and Morning.

. Flowers of Sal ammoniac, i. Aquae Angelicae, Cardui, aa. iss. Syrup. Citri,
ss. mix for a Sudorific.

. Flowers of Sal Ammoniac, Mortiat.i. take it in a Spoonful of Wormwood Wine in
the Dropsy.

. Take Sal Prunel. iij. Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, i. Flowers of Benjamin ss,
mix them, Dose i. ad ss.

. Juice of House leek, lbiv. Sal Armoniniac,ii. distill them, or else use them
in a Syrup with Sugar for the Asthma.

Sal ammoniac may be used for common Salt.

Amongst Minerals we have Sulphur Acids, which are to be used in Fevers.

Ol. Sulph. ss. ad i. in four Ounces of Purslane Water.

Gas. Sulph. one, two, or three Spoonfuls in a Glass of Water, or any Julap or
pectoral Ptysan.

Take spring Water, lbiii. Spirit of Sulphur, Liquorice, Coriander Seeds; of
each ss. boil them in a Glass Vessel: Briony Water, lbss. Ol. Sulph. ss. Dos.
Cochl.

Take any Cordial or specific Water or Brandy iv. Ol. Sulph. per Campanam
cinnam aa. ss. Digest them to a Tincture; the Dose is thirty Drops in Beer.

Take any pectoral Syrup, lbss. Ol. Sulph, i. the Dose is one Spoonful.

All the Drink or Wine may be sulphurated; many heat their Drink with a
sulphurous hot Coal, and light their Tobacco with a Match, and the Tobacco may
be washed in sulphurated Water; the Water cleanses away much Filth, and the
Sulphur Acid corrects the narcotic Quality of Tobacco.

2. The salse acid Spirits, which are properly diuretic and stomachic.

. Aqua Feniculi, Flores Sambuci, ad lbi. Raphani composit Lucubric. Sir. de 5
Radicibus. add iij. Sals. Absynthii ij. Spir. Salis i. Dos. Coch. 3. cum
quolibet Liquore

(...) The sweet Spirit of Salt, twenty Drops in Beer.

Sal* Gem. may be used as common Salt, or the Rock Salt found in Cheshire may
be powdered and used as common Salt.

3. Vitriolic Acids, for the cooling the Blood, Oil of Vitriol, or Spirit, six
Drops in Broth or Water, vi.

Plantain Water, x. Spirit of Vitriol, ss. Ol. Vitriol. Grains four in Wine or
Broth, twice in a Week: Crato gives it for the Gout, and he prescribes thus;
Syrup of Betony iij. Oil of Vitriol, Grains nine. He first gives one, then two
or three Spoonfuls to them fasting, and says it helps a pituitous and moist
Stomach, for it vehemently dries, deterges, and astringes, and excites the
Appetite; but by its Use the arthritic are made Cachectical, and it injures dry
Bodies.

The Tincture of Roses, with Spirit of Vitriol is useful in Effervescences,
Fevers, Inflammations; in which Cases the Mineral Acids are most useful.

Hartman used Oil of Vitriol with Man's Grease externally, for an Atrophy of
any Part.

Give volatile Spirit of Vitriol, twenty Drops in a cephalic Julap, for the
Epilepsy.

Elixir Vitriol is useful for the Appetite, i. to i.

Mixtura Simplex i. to v. in Aqua Lactis is a Diaphoretic in Fevers.

Spirit of Vitriol is mixed by Chemists, with Cream of Tartar, or Crystals of
the Juice of Wood Sorrel.

Take Hydromel, aromatized with Ginger lbss. Cream Tartar ij. or Tartar
vitriolated ij.

If Vitriolum Martis be convenient, give it with Oily Pectorals thus;

Take Juice of Liq. or Bals. Lucutell. one Ounce, Tart. Vitriolate, and
Vitriolis Martis, of each i. mix them with Oil of sweet Almonds, or Syrup of
Balsam: The Dose is i. or ss. and drink the Antiscorbutic Milk Water after it.

This Method may agree with the Hypochondriac Asthmas, or else Extractum
Ecphracticum, to an Ounce of which add Vitriolum Martis i. make it into Pills.

4. Nitrous Acids to cool in Fevers.

. Aqua Cardui lbij. Rob. Ribi. aa. x. Sacchari ij. Nitri prep. ij. this cools.

Barley Water lbiij. Niter ss. Syrup of Violets iij. take it with Rhenish Wine.

Niter may be used instead of (...)* in Broth or with Meat.

Sal Polychrestum i. take it in Water.

. Vitriolum Martis i. Arcanum Dupli^^ Sal Prunell. aa. ij. Dose i. in long
Fevers.

Take Niter ^ii. Vinegar lbi. the Dose is one Spoonful in great Effervescences.

The most powerful Cooler is made by Distillation of Spirit of Niter and Oil of
Vitriol.

Spirit of Niter is d^lcified, and the Dose i. two or three times in a Day, or
in a pectoral Decoction, or else Spirit of Niter three Drops in a carminative
Julap for Cholick and Flatulency.

Take Sal Prunellae, Cream of Tartar, and Powder of Liquorice, and Sugar Candy,
of each ij. Dose i.

Avicenna observes that Niter has no Stypticity, but cleanses much, and is
given in a Decoction of Rue and Dill: It cures Leanness, but a great Use of it
blackens the Choler.

Bartolet commends a ^actitious Niter with Spirit of Niter, and Oil of Tartar
to make the Diospoliticum, which because of the Niter is laxative, and good for
Flatulencies.

Take Diaspoliticum i. Honey vi. Sal Ammoniac ss. mix them: The Ancients gave
Diaspoliticum before or after Meats; it may be given in Broth.

If the Rue* Cummin, Pepper, and Niter be in equal Parts, it loosens the Belly;
commonly the Niter is but half a Part.

I would make a Diaspoliticum thus: Powder of Cinnamon* Nutmegs, of each ii.
Niter* i. Sugar Candy ij. Mix them with Gum Dragon dissolved, Lozenges may be
made, and ii. of Flower of Brimstone added. Or thus:

Take Niter i. Sugar ii. Ol. Cinnam. or Nutmegs or Cloves ss. the Dose two
Drams in Water.

Salts vitriolated, Diagridium, Grains three or four, Tartar vitriolated ss.
take it in Wormwood Wine, for Dropsies to purge.

Take Tart. vitriol. Salt Prunell. Cream of Tart. aa. ss. Sugar. Candy i. for
twelve Doses, take one Morning and Night.

Take Tartar, Vitriol, i. Rhenish Wine, lbi. Decoction of Barley with Raisins
lbi. Syrup of Violets and small Cinnamon Water, of each half a Pound, the Dose
is iii. twice in a Day; it is a Digestive and Febrifuge.

Hartman orders it thus.

Tartar vitriolated i. dissolve it in a Pint of Wine of Squills; add to it two
Pints of a Decoction of Raisins, Cinnamon ss. boil them in three Pints of Water
to lbii. take a Draught thrice in a Day.

. Tartar prepared with Niter i. Orange Pills ss. infuse them in a Pint of
Parsley Water.

Take Sal Prunell. i. Spirit of Vitriol Grainsten, in a Decoction of Barley, and
the Roots of Sorrel.

. Sal Ammoniac* i. Niter ss. Borax ss. Flowers of Sulphur i. to the colliquated
Niter in a Crucible add the rest.

Arcanum Duplicatum i. in Broth: The Ancients used v. of common Salt to make
Epythimum, purge and boiled them in Aqua Mulsa: Twelve Grains of Sal Succini
may be given in a Julap, or the acid Spirit of Amber twelve Drops to thirty
when an Acid is necessary for cephalic Cases.

I could not omit the various Species of acid Medicines, because no Fit of the
Asthma can be cured or prevented without an Acid.

The Galenical Acids, for Flatulencies and Effervescencies, were Vinegar and
Niter; the chemical are the acid Spirits, and mixed Salts: But because a long
Use of Acids corrodes the Belly, soures Humors, dries the Succus Nutritious,
suppresses the natural Rarefaction of Humors, and introduces a Cachexy instead
of the Effervescence, the Ancients wisely mixed their hot Medicines, as Acrids,
Aromatics, and Bitters, with their acid Medicines, and the bitter helps the
Digestion of Humors, whilst the acid corrects their Effervescence, and both
together keep the Body soluble, and drive out the Flatulencies.

Trallian boyls Marrubium in his Oxymel.

All Authors agree, that the asthmatic Medicines ought to be inciding without
any vehement Heat, because by Heat the Humors become more viscid; therefore no
hot Pectoral ought to be used, but in an Oxymel, nor no Sulphur without Niter,
or acrid Gums without Vinegar* according to ancient Practice: From whence I
learnt Galen's bitter Acid, of which I take ij. or ss. every Night when I fear
a Fit, and drink Toast and Water after it; this generally cures the Inflation
at the Stomach, and puts off the Fit; At first it ought to be taken fourteen
Nights together, but afterward three Nights before and after the Change of the
Moon, and upon Surfeits, and Changes of Weather, and ill Digestion, and when
the Inflation affects the Pit of the Stomach.

I will give some Remarks out of Galen, to show his Opinion, and Cure of the
Asthma: He calls those asthmatic, who breath like one out of breath by running;
and he observes they inspire too little, though their Breast is much dilated,
because of a Straitness in their Lungs, caused by an empyematic Humor, or by an
Inflammation, or by vi^cid Humors, or else a Tumor like an Abcess: He cures the
viscous Humors by Evacuations, and the Use of attenuating and deterging
Medicines; and the viscous Humors require much Drink to dilute and expectorate
them: He observes that all Medicines for the Asthma, ought to attenuate without
Heat, and for that purpose, Vinegar and Oxymel of Squills are useful; and since
all thick Humors are made more viscid, by too much Heat, he doubts of the Use
of Millepedes, which attenuate and discuss much.

He observes those Medicines which cool too much; such as the Opiates, are
injurious, by thickening the Humors; such are Poppy, Mandrake, Hemlock,
Henbane, and Fleabane, Linseed, by their Mucilage.

He commends all Astringents.

He commends moistening, both in Diet and Medicine, for diluting thick Humors,
and commends a thin Diet. It Is observable, that most of the hot Medicines he
cites from Archigenes, are taken with Vinegar, or Niter, or Oxymel, or Water;
of which I will give an Instance thus.

Take Seeds of Rue ss. Aristolochia, Southernwood, Wormwood, Ammoniac, Sulphur,
aa. ss. make Pills with Vinegar, give two with iiij. of Oxymel.

He purged with Coloquintida, or Elaterium, and gave Niter or Salt in Aqua
Mulsa after them.

From Andromachus he had this Medicine; take Squills, Sulphur, Bitumen; ad Dos.
ss. cum Oxymilite.

He mentions Eugenius, who mixed Opiates with Pectorals, for the Abfcess; the
hot Pectoral, as Myrrh, Sulphur, Bitumen, Gums, are recommended.

Avicen commends Niter with the Decoction of Hyssop, Oxymel with Iris and
^epper, and other Acrids, as Nettels, Leeks, Cabbage boiled in Vinegar, and
puts to his Ptysans, of Hyssop, Thyme, Origanum, Niter instead of Salt; and
orders the Breast to be covered with Oil, Niter, and Salt, soaked with Wool;
the Chapter of the Cure of the Asthma is lost unhappily.

Trallian approves of the mixing the hot Medicines with the cool, for viscous
Humors in thin Bodies and Fevers, and says, that in such Cases all the
Physicians used Mustard Seed, Niter, and Sulphur; but he treats not
particularly of the Asthma.

Aegineta vomits with Raphanus* and commends Niter thus; Verum in his qui
suffocantur:. Aphronitri iij. capiat in Aqua Mulsata cyathis tribus, aliquando
cum Cardiamomo, facit and ad coxendium Morbum: Or. Aphronitr. ix. Sulph.ss.
Piperis i. dato* cochl. cum Aqua calida.Take Mustard Seed i. Niter ss.
Elateri^m ss. mix them and make eight Pastilli; the Dose is two; it vomits
without Trouble.

Oribasius commends the Vinegar of Squills, as well as all the former; he
commends two Parts of Orris, with one of Niter, to rub the Breast; and mentions
many bitter and acrid Medicines.

Aesius perfectly transcribes all the former Authors; he says* in a crude
Tuberculum there is neither great Weight, nor are they much asthmatic; but if
it ripens, a Fever attends it, with putrid Spit afterward.

He commends Wormwood, Orris, Castor with Vinegar; he uses Coloquintida with
Acetum Scylliticum, and Elaterium with Niter.

Actuarius cures the Asthma as a Catarrh.

Cornelius Celsus has all the hot Pectorals, but that which I like is datur
utiliter aut Nitrum, aut Nasturtium.

Nicolas Myrexsa has many Anticlotes for the Asthma, but his Diospoliticum, in
which there is Niter, is the best.

Marcellus commends Acetum Scylliticum, and prescribes Sulphur, Niter of each
i. Abrotan. p. 1. give two Spoonfuls, with hot Vinegar.

Avicenna observed the Paroxysms of the Asthma to be like those of the Epilepsy
and Convulsion, and prescribes the Medicines for a Catarrh, strong Vomits and
Purgers: He uses Medicines mixed with Acids, Cummin Seeds, or Nettle Seeds, and
Squills with Vinegar, and prescribes thus: Take Castor, Ammoniacum,
Aristolochia rotunda, of each i. mix them with the Rob of Grapes, and give the
Quantity of a Bean with Oxymel.

He commends Bitters, the Decoction of Centaury, or five Drams of Aristolochia
rotunda every Day, in Water or Gentian constantly: He prescribes Arsnic or
Sulphur, whose Fumes are acid. And Arsnic inwardly in Aqua Mellis; but all this
seems hazardous, and it is better to use what he advises, attenuating Medicines,
without any vehement Heat: He much extols Crocus, and a Decoction of
Faenugreeck, with Figs and Honey.

He cautions much against Baths and flatulent things; he prescribes Aphonitri
ss. Seed of Nausturtion ij. in a Decoction of Hydromel.

Avicenna de Juvamentis Syrupi acetosi, observes, that it incides, subtiliates,
and opens without Heat, and hujusmodi via, est magni Juvamenti, multae
Vtilitatis, and Sufficientiae in art Medicinae: This extinguishes Fevers, and
cools the Liver (that is, the Blood) and incides gross Humors, allays Thirst,
in Inflammations; other acid Syrups have a Stypticity, as that of Apples, or
too much Water, as the Syrup of Citrons; but the Syrup of Vinegar cools Choler,
and excites Appetite, incides Phlegm, and it is proper for the Asthma, and the
Squill Vinegar, he recommends in Epilepsies, if made into a Syrup, and then it
does not injure the Nerves, but this Syrup is inconvenient in Excoriations, and
the Cholic, and Pain of the Womb, and Palsies, Tremors, in which it injures the
Nerves, and the Melancholic Influxes of Urine and the Spittle, and in Rheumatic
Pains of the Back and Knees, and in the Cancer, and those who have a Sowerness
at the Stomach; it hinders Coition and Fertility, and it introduces the Dropsy
in those who are not of a hot Constitution, and much Flesh. From these
Observations we may learn the Benefit and Injury of all acid Medicines.

Joh. Anglus Prescribes the Lungs of a Fox, two Drams, in Aqua Mellis, and
says, it is Medicina Sublimis and experta in Asthmate. He recommends Ammoniacum
in an Oxymel, or Nettle-seeds, boiled with Figs in Barley-water: He advises the
Juice of Fenil with Milk, to sucking Children: He prescribes Medicines too hot,
supposing the Asthma to depend on viscid Humors, and a Catarrh.

Horstius gives many Examples of the Asthma, and Cures them by Oxymel Cratonis,
or Quercitan's Oxymel de Peto: He Purges the Hydropical with Pills of Hiera,
with Agaric i. Diagr. gr. v. Oil Fenil, make Pills: He gives Balsam of Sulphur
in a Diuretic Oxymel.

Sennertus thinks the Asthma does not depend on a Catarrh from the Head, but
the Arteries, and that what is imputed to a Flatus ought to be attributed to a
rarefied fermenting Serum; and he believes Piso's Opinion, That this Disease
depends on an Effervescence of the Serum.

This is Crato's Oxymel*

Take Hyssop, Veronica, Scabios. Horehound, Origanum, Penyrotal, Carduus, of
each M. i. Orris vi. Ginger iss. Agaric ss. infuse them three Days in a
Glass-Vessel warm, in lbiss. of Vinegar, Speedwell and Carduus Water, of each
lbss. boil them; and to lbiss. add Honey lbss. The Dose is two or three
Spoonfuls.

Sennertus advises this, to show his Opinion of Acids, Take Pectoral Water vi.
Syrup of ^^^rehound iss. Spirit of Vitriolss. mix them.

Hartman commends Vomits of Aqua Benedicta, and this,

Water from Bryony-roots lbss. Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur ss. Dose one
Spoonful; and also Sal Ammoniac rectified from decrepitated Salt in Wormwood
Wine.

Sylvius imputes the Asthma to a Flatus, and partly to a Catarrh, and
recommends a mixture of a volatile oily Salt, with a dulcified acid Spirit.

Dr. Willis observes the Orgasmus, or Effervescence in the beginning of the
Asthma Fit, and prescribes Sal Prunel in cool Juleps to check it; but I could
never find any benefit by his hot Pectorals, and Antispasmodics, Tincture of
Castor, of Sulphur, Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, Syrup of Garlic, etc. All that I
found useful in him was a Vomit, and Opiates; he takes too little notice of
Niter, Oxymels, and common Sal Ammoniac.

The best Medicines of the Ancients, and the present Age, has too much followed
his unsuccessful Practice by hot Medicines, no way suited to the Febrile
Effervescence in the Asthma, which requires an Acid to abate the heat of all
his Specifics.

Sir Theodore Mayherne treats the Asthma as a Catarrh by too hot Pectorals
Sulphur of Benjamin, Saffron, which are intolerable to the Asthmatic, if not
given in cool Liquors, or with Acids.

Etmuller observes, That there are more humid Asthmas, through the fault of the
Stomach, than that of the Lungs, and that happens in the Hypochondriacal and
Seorbutic: He recommends the following Digestives; Sal Ammoniac ss. cum gr. xv.
Tartar Vitriolat, Crem Tartar, and Salt of Tartar, Spirit of Salt or Niter
dulcified, Arcanum Duplicatum, Elixir Proprietatis Paracel^i, Spiritus
Carminativus secretus; and Prescribes thus, Hyssop-water iij. small
Cinnamon Water, Oxymel S^ylliticum, Briony Compound water, of each i. Cum
Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar ii. Spir. salis ducl.

For Flatulencies thus, (...) the Carminative Seeds, and give them with Spirit
of Niter* dulcfied, or Spirit of Niter, or Spirit of Aniseeds, and give it in a
Decoction of Camomil-flowers, with Aniseeds and Caroways in Beer. He gives
Spirit of Sulphur in distilled Water in the Fit, and commends the Asthmatic
Spirit of Verdigrease, Sulphur, Ammoniacum, 20 or 30 drops in Briony-water.

He says the Convulsion of the Diaphragme gives an Asthma without Stertor, or
Cough, and he describes the Pneumonic Asthma from Mineral Fumes, Abscess,
Vomica, Empyema, coagulated Blood, Serum, Cachexy, Terror, drinking cold Water
when hot, crude Tuberculae, Grando Stones, Gibbosity.

Helmont gives many Asthmatic Histories, and disproves the Opinion that it is
from Phlegm, because it happens suddenly, and goes off without Spitting, and
that the Spit is the product of the Fit, from the Injury done to the Lungs, and
therefore he thinks Pectorals useless, and Medicines to the Head upon the
account of Catarrhs; and confutes the Opinion, that the growing of the Lungs to
the Sides is the occasion of the Asthma.

Grembs is an Helmontian, and prescribes Cinnabar of Antimony; he uses Oxymels,
and Syrup of Tobacco; he observes that a Cachexy or Hydrops at the beginning
resembles the Asthma, and they are to be cured by Purging, and Digestives; but
the Vis Crescitiva of the Viscera by Mercury. He observes some Asthmas to
depend at last on a Vomica; condemns Purging in the Dropsy of the Breast, and
only allows a Paracentesis.

Riverius describes the Asthma as a Catarrh, and gives all the hot Pectorals;
but prudently adds O! Sulphuris to his Oil of Sugar, and prescribes Spirit of
Sulphur 4 or 5 drops in Broth, and prescribes his Gum Pills thus, Ammoniacum
Bdellum dissolved in Vinegar of Squills, of each ss. Flowers of Sulphur iii.
Oxymel of Squills q. s. make Pills, Dose 4. Lac Sulphuris is milder than the
Flowers, and may be given in an oily Mixture: He commends the Oxymel with
Agaric, and this is his best Medicine; Take Cinnanon-water ii. Oxymel of
Squills i. take one spoonful often.

I have mentioned all these Authors Practice, to show they always used the
mixture of some Acid, with their Anti-Asthmatic; and I could not withstand the
common Practice of hot Pectorals, and Anti-Convulsions, if I had not so much
Authority as well as Success by the contrary Method I have proposed. I shall
next add those Prognostics which the old Writers give, That young Men are
difficultly cured; old Men, and the Hereditary Asthma is only palliated;
Children are usually Suffocated by it: If a Peripneumonia happen with the
Asthma, and Phrenitis, I generally observed it fatal. The Asthma usually ends
in a Consumption in lean Bodies, and then Tubercula are bred in the Lungs, by
the Humors frequently stopped on the Lungs, as I have observed in a Dissection
of a Consumptive Asthmatic, for whom I am certain no hot Pectorals can be
convenient. It seems to me much more convenient to keep the Tubercula from
Imposthumating by Acids, and by a cool Regimen, than to endeavor to cure them
by a hot one.

The Polypus in the Heart often kills Asthmatics suddenly, and the Asthma
frequently ends in Abscesses, Tumors, Vomicas, Ulcers, Spitting of Blood.

The Liver is stopped, and the Asthmatic are subject to the Jaundice, both in the
spitting and dry Asthma.

The Dropsy or Tympany succeeds the Asthma, either from too serous
Constitutions, or the Rupture of the Lymphatics, by the Tumors of the Viscera,
which compress them or the Constriction of the Blood Vessels.

As to the Head, the Asthma very much affects that, with Pain, Fullness,
Vertigo, Lethargy, Apoplexy, or Palsy.

Dr. Willis gives a History of a Convulsive Asthma, after a Vertigo, Pain of
the Head, with a fear of Swooning, which after a few Days became a Lethargy,
and this settled into a Paroxysm of the Asthma; and this he cured by Vomiting
with Sulphurs of Antimony, Cream of Tartar, of each gr. vi. taken in the Pap of
an Apple, and Purging with Resin Jalap gr. v. Merc. Dulcis gr. xii. Castor gr.
iv. Ammoniac. solut. q. s. f. Pil.

I remember an old Asthmatic, who was troubled with difficulty of swallowing,
upon which his Asthma left him; he seemed to me to have some Tumor, or Palsy in
the Oesophagus, but no Methods would relieve it; but since that he has
continued seven or eight Years without the Asthma, who formerly had the Fits
periodically for fourteen Years, and they were ocasioned, as he tells me, by
drinking Small Beer: The Powder of Juniper Berries most relieves the Difficulty
of his Swallowing.

I have observed many Asthmatics, to have the Stone and Gravel, and to die of
it, with a stoppage of Water.

A Patient, who had a Convulsive Cough from his Father, was seized with the
Asthma, and a sort of Diabetes, with frequent returns of an Intermitting Fever,
with Lethargic Symptoms; he spit much, and had sharpness of Urine, and frequent
Stools; but the Decoction of the Cortex, Vomiting, and Steel-waters cured him
for a Twelve Month, when he relapsed into the same Symptoms: His Legs swelled,
the Asthma returned by Fits; he was obscurely Feverish, and died full of Flesh.
All these Symptoms depended on an Intermitting Fever originally.

I have observed diverse Asthmatics with Rheumatic Pains, and Looseness at last,
and others consume by a Diabetes, and a great quantity of Water is made out of
the Fits, as well as in them; and when this flux of Water stops, the Asthmatic
become Hydropic, their Legs swell, and their Breasts are filled with Water.

I shall add some particular Cases of Asthmas, communicated to me by my
Ingenious Friend Dr. Fred. Slare.

Mr. Orlibar of the Temple* having been some Years Asthmatic, died suddenly; in
his Body opened, the Lungs were free from any Imposthumation, or other Cause of
his Death; but the Ventricles of the Bram were full of Water, and on that
depended his Drowsiness, (...), and a constant Asthma upon motion long before
his Death.

Capt. Brent had the Asthma with swelled Legs, and could not he down in his
Bed* he died suddenly, by stooping to take up an Orange; his Breast and Head
were full of Water.

He gave me also a farther account of a Child very Ricke^y with a swelled Head,
who was for some Months Asthmatic, without any Injury appearing in the Lungs,
by Dissection, but the Head was full of Water.

Dr. Slare gave me a particular account o^ Sir Patient Ward's Asthma, with an
Haemoptoe, which lasted about a Year: He often hawk'd up Blood mixed with tough
Phlegm; the Cortex did him no Service, after he became Hydropical, the Legs and
Belly swelled; two spoonfuls of the Acetum Scylliticum vomited him, and made
him to make much Water; then Steel and Diuretics relieved him for some time;
and Laudanum helped his Dyspnea always. When he was opened, 4 or 5 Quarts of
Water was found in his Belly, and two in his Breast, his Lungs were without
Schirrous Matter, or Tubercula; the Lungs stuck to the Right Side: He believes
this Asthma to have been Nervous, and the Dropsy to have happened at last: He
observed the Left Kidney full of Water, and Hydatides encompass it without,
from whose Rupture the Dropsy might come; the Cartilages of the Sternum were
grown Osseous, the Gall in the Bladder was thick and muddy; there appeared no
Vestigia of the Haemoptoe mentioned, upon his Lungs.

The Inundation of the Brain, Breast, Abdomen, by an Hydropical Serum, is
commonly the effect of an old Asthma, and the Anasarcous Tumors of the Body,
depend all on the frequent Constriction of the circulating Vessels, by the
Asthma Fits, by which they are weakened, obstructed, and broken, and the
digestion of Humors decays; as the Circulation is depressed, a thin Serosity
also gives matter to all the sorts of Dropsy, into which the Asthmatic fall,
through too much Bleeding, or Haemorrhages, as it might be in the Case
described.

I shall next give a remarkable Case, communicated to me by the Ingenious and
Learned Dr. Tyson, by which my Hypothesis will be plainly demonstrated, that
the Asthma Fit may depend on the contraction of the Vesiculae, and Bronchia of
the Lungs; and how far that may depend on the straining the Lungs by swift
running, or the Causes the Dr. mentions I must leave the Reader to judge.

A Case of an Asthma communicated by Dr. Tyson.
When I was a Student formerly at Oxon, hearing of a Spanel Dog, that had been
noted for his swiftness in Running; but of late, and on a sudden, had fallen
into so great a shortness of Breath, that he could not run 15 or 20 Yards, but
was forced to stand still and pant for a good while after, would breath very
short and quick, and with a great deal of Labor. I had a Curiosity of seeing
him, and upon my own Observation found what was told me, to be exactly true.
The Person that kept the Dog could give me no account how this happened to him*
but being hereby* rendered altogether useless, for a small matter^ I purchased
the Dog, having a mind to see what occasioned this shortness of Breath upon so
little motion.

Upon Dissection in the Abdomen, there was nothing unusual or uncommon to be
observed: But upon opening the Thora^, I found the Lungs to be very much pu^^'d
up, or contracted, so that they did seem to fill but half that space which the
Lungs of an other Dog of that size would occupy: However I did not find the
Lungs in any other respect out of Order; there was no Discolouration, no
Adhesion to the Pleura; and within no Tubercule or Glands, but the Substance of
the Lungs, soft and spongy as usually. Upon blowing into the Windpipe the
Lungs would be inflated somewhat, but not half so much as in an other Dog. And
what hindered this Inflation ^arther, I could plainly perceive was the
Contraction of the outward or common Membrane of the Lungs, which did seem upon
this Contraction to be somewhat Incrassated, and its Color a little Whiter.

In the Cavity of the Thorax, I observed a small quantity of Water, and
sometimes did suspect whether this Water (if of a Corrosive Nature) might not
contribute to the Contraction of the Membrane. But this I did not think of,
till* 'twas too late to make trial of the Nature of this Extravased Serum; it
being flung away; nor upon the whole do I think it might be the cause of it.
But here I rather suspect the Dog might have lighted upon some sort of Poison
which might particularly affect that Membrane, and cause the Contraction. I
will not trouble you with at present the Reasons I have for such a Conjecture;
or if it was not from an outward Poison taken inward, it might otherwise happen
from an Internal Cause.

However this Observation plainly shows us the Reason why upon Motion this Dog
proved Asthmatical, nor could he continue his Motion but for so short a Time;
since by means of the Contraction of the outward Membrane, the Lungs could
receive by Inspiration, not half the Quantity of Air at a time, as it could
before or usually was wont to do.

I shall give some Observations which were Communicated to me by my worthy
Friend Dr. Pierce of Bath, about four Years since, by which he assures me of
the great benefit of the Bath-Water; which he tried on many Asthmatics both in
the nervous and humorous Asthma, in which the Bath-Waters dilute the Viscidity
of the Phlegm, and deterges it by helping its Expectoration.

He first mentions the Benefit the Old Duchess of Ormond received, by drinking
Bath-Waters, when she was sixty Years Old, which recovered her Appetite, helped
her Expectoration so well, that she could lie down in her Bed, and walk about
her Room before she went away; and on this good Success was encouraged to visit
the Bath, and drink the Waters there some Years after.

The second Case he gives me, is of one Mr. Comin, who came both Asthmatical,
and Scorbutical, and Hydropical to Bath, where he drank the Waters, which
passed well after Purging, Vomiting, and the use of Aqua Asthmatica Quercitani,
and Aqua Raphani Composita; he recovered his Breath and Appetite, and bathed
frequently* By all which, in two Months time, he perfectly recovered to a
Miracle.

The third Case is of the Lady Mary Kirk, who often drank the Bath-Waters for an
Orthopnaea, with great Advantage; for thereby her Fits did Intermit* many
Months. She bathed by the Lady Elizabeth Littleton's Persuasion, who says, she
was cured of her Asthma chiefly by Bathing.

The fourth Case is of Sir Edward Villers, who upon the Healing of an Ulcer in
the Leg, was Asthmatic, for which he drank the Waters, and his Fits came not so
often, and the Pain of the Ulcer was relieved by bathing the Leg.

The fifth Case is of a Lady of Thirty or Forty, Hydropical and Asthmatic, who
both drank the Waters and bathed for the Asthma.

The sixth Case is of Mrs. Whittacre, who had a great Cough and Palpitation of
the Heart, with shortness of Breath, and she was always hot and feverish: She
recovered by drinking Bath-Waters.

The seventh Case is of Sir Robert Craven, who was Asthmatic, and in his fat
Body the Thymus was observed to be enlarged to a great bulk, which upon any
great commotion by Laughing, Talking earnestly, gave him severe Asthmatic Fits,
with blackness in the Face.

This Case shows us how readily the Asthma is produced by any external
Compression of the Lungs, and these Fits did immediately go off again, on the
alteration of the Pressure of this Glandulous Tumor. He died not of this
Asthma, but of a Fever.

The former Cases teach us to use the Bath-Waters for the viscid Humors of the
Asthmatic; and two of the Cases show the benefit the Hydropical and Asthmatical
have by drinking the Waters, and bathing, which is an extreme difficult Case to
Cure; but these Cases being Matter of Fact, ought to be admitted; and I
acknowledge my self obliged to Dr. Pierce for this Information he has given me
in the particular Cases described.

Botrys is a Lamium in Taste and Virtue, and like Ground Ivy; I use it in
Syrup, Decoction, or Thea, it is useful for Coughs.

The Lungs must be cleansed in the Periodic Asthma after every Fit, and the
obstructed Glands opened by Pectorals in the Pulmonic Asthma.

1. By Bitters of the Deadnettle Class, Gill Beer, Gill Thea, sweetened with its
own Syrup, or Powder of Motherwort mixed with Oxymel Scylliticum, Syrup of
Horehound with Milk-water.

2. By the smoaky Bitters, as the Thistle bitters, Syrup of Carduus, Seabiose
mixed with Oxymel Scylliticum, and Oil of Sweet Almonds, or else some Pectoral
Drink.

3. By the bitter Gums; I have used these, Myrrh, Olibanum, Castor, Nutmegs, of
each i. Syrup of Violets, and Oxymel Scylliticum, of each i. make a Linctus.
Take Pennyroial Water, Rhenish Wine, of each lbi. Ammoniac i. dissolve them,
add Syrup of Vinegar iv. or Tincture of Gum Ammoniac 20 drops in any Oxymel,
Elixir Proprietatis Paracelsi i. in small Beer every Morning. The Ancients
mixed Honey, Turpentine, Galbanum, in an Electuary Hiera cum Colo^ynthid^.

4. Terebinthinate Bitters; Tar Pills, or Pills of Wood-Lice, Salt of Amber,
Sal Prunel with Nutmegs and Turpentine.

Balsam of Sulphur, or Gilead Balsam in an Oxymel, with Pectorals; Syrup of
Enula Campana iv. Oil of Sulphur i. mix for an E^legma.

Agarl^ which grows on Turpentine-tree, in an Oxymel.

The Kernels of Pine in an Emulsion, with Almonds.

Hiera cum Agarico.

Savin poudered i. Butter ss. Honey ii. mix them; used for three days, and
repeat it again after three days.

Frankincense and Sugar Candy, in a roasted Apple: Or,

The Roots of Valerian, Butterbur, boiled with Liquorish, Raisins, Aniseeds, or
in an Oxymel.

5. The sweet smoaky Bitters, as Bellis Major, in Decoction, or Syrup, or Thea.

Coltsfoot Syrup, or Eyrngo^roots, Centaury the greater, and Erigerum.

6. By the sweet acrid Aromaticks; Seeds of Parsley, Anise, Cinnamon, Dill,
Parsnep, Roots of Parsnep, Smirwine, Panax, Pimpinella, Saxifrago, Peucedamum,
decocted Diacymenum, with Oil of Aniseeds in Tablets, Diaspoliticum i. mixed
with two or three parts of Honey.

7. Nauseous Bitters of the Lyrbanis Class, Gentian, Centaury, Trifol.
Fibrinum, Saponaria, the bitter Decoction without Se^a for a Month* Th^r^aca,
Diatesseron, cum opio, vel sine ill^.

8. Fetid Bitters naus^ous and purgative; Aristolochia i. with Honey, Juice of
Briony, with Honey, Syrup of Tobacco, distilled Water of Tobacco with Syrup of
Violets, Juice of Squills, with Honey, equal parts, boiled* the Dose is ss.
before or after Meat.

Take Vinegar, Honey, of each iv. Fountain Water lbi. Rhue one handful,
Cinnamon, Cloves, of each half a dram, boil them, and make an Oxymel; the Dose
is one spoonful with a draught of Water.

One Pound of Squills is used to be infused in lbxii. of Vinegar. Hippocrates
is said to be Author of this Medicine.

Galen prescribes it in a Morning, and the walking after it seven Stadia; but I
find it is better to use it at Night* because it Vomits in the Morning; and I
have found it necessary to add Aromatics to it* or strong Waters, or Sugar to
make it a Syrup, or mix it with Syrup.

9. Caustic Acrids* Powder of Aron with Oxymel, or else let i. be boiled in
lbii. of Oxymel.

The Root of Dragon is of the same Virtue.

This is Archig^nes's Medicine; The crude Juice of Squills, boil it with equal
parts of Honey* the Dose is one or two spoonfuls before or after Mea^.

Add ss. of Nettle-seeds to a Pectoral Drink of lbii.

(...) Aq^^ Cinnam. Sir. Vol. (...) Scyll^^^^a. a. ^.

Preserved Garlic and its Syrup is commended, Lee^ Pottage, Onions boiled and
buttered, or roasted, and Honey mixed with them and Butter; (...) boiled and
dissolved in a Decoction of Enula condited i. Tol. lbii. add Syrup of Vinegar
iii.

I was informed by a Lady, that Garlic applied to the Feet, cured her of the
Fit of the Asthma; and I knew one who took an Infusion of Garlic in Cephalic
Waters, with her Steel Medicines. Infuse one Head of Garlic in 12 Ounces of
Cephalic Waters, Rosemary-Lilly, and Black-Cherry, a. a. iv. strain it.

10. Crest Acrids; Syrup of Erysimum, Mustard Seed with Honey, Juice of Horse
Radish Roots, with Sugercandy, D^coction (...), an Oxymel with Rue (...). of
Rue in six Gallons of small (...) unpleasant, but a great Diuretic.

Sal (...). Rocke^ Seed with Honey iv. or the Powders in Mulsum.

11. Moss Acrids; used as Syrup, or boil it in Drink, and (...) or one Handful
boiled in lbii. of Posset Drink with Figs and Liquorice.

12. Leguminous Acride; Seeds of Woodbine Berries, drank with Wine for forty
Days, or the Conserve of the Flower* these are great Diuretics, as most
Pectorals are: In Thoracis Morbis (...) advenae respiciendum.

13. Laurel Acrids; Bay Berries with Honey, Decoction of Guaicum, or Mis^etoe
with Pectorals, or sweetened with Honey.

14. Aromatic Acrids; Thyme, ^^ac^as, Hyssop, Decoction of Calaminth with Figs,
Flowers of Rosemary boiled in Water with Honey, Pennyroyal, or Mint boiled in
Oxymels, Decoction of China with Cephalies, and a Co^k.

15. Burning Aromatics; Orris Tincture in Aniseed Water, or the Roots decocted
in an Oxymel, Species Dia^reon made into Ro^al^^, with Oil of sweet Aniseed and
Sal Prunell* or else the Roots infused in small Ale, or candied.

16. All ^urgers and Vomitories are pectoral, as Briony, Tobacco, Squills,
Agaric, Aloes: Take Syrup of Tobacco, Horehound, Oxymel Scilliticum* Aqua
Brion. ad i. Misce Dos. Cochi.

17. Honey, which is a sweet Gum of Plants, Sugar, and Mead, and all Oxymels
with Orris, Ennula, Liquorice, Leaves of Scabius, Coltsfoot, Horehound, Figs,
Dates, Hyssop in Barley Water with Honey.

18. Foetid Parts of Animals; the Lungs of a Fox, in the Decoction of a Cock,
take vi. with ss. of Oxymel.

Infusion of Millepedes i. in lbii. of the Decoction of Woods.

Fox Lungs powdered with Honey or Oxymel.

Take Castor ii. Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar of Squills ss. make Pills:
Aniseed and Sulphur may be added ad ii.

I have prescribed thus:

. Castorei, Salis Succini aa. ii. Flores Benzo: Croci aa. i. Ammoniac Acet.
Solut.Grains v. Succi Licoritiae, ^^ant Pil.

19. Salts, Sp. Cervi Fuliginis, Cranii, add ss. of Spiritus Lavendulae to i.
of the volatile Spirit, the Dose is thirty Drops in pectoral Waters; these are
fittest in Faintings.

. Millepedes calcined to a Whiteness, mix them with Honey, the Dose is two
Spoonfuls before and after Meat.

20. Sulphurous Medicines, as the Balsams and Tinctures of Sulphur and
Antimony, Flowers of Sulphur i. with Butter.

I never found any Benefit by Sulphur Medicines in the Asthma.

21. Sneezing Powders help Expectoration, but Vomitories most.

22. Lubricating Mucilages and Oils, help up the Phlegm, as Hydromels and
Oxymels, and pectoral Decoctions, Oils, and Sugar: Sapo-Venetus, Sperma Ceti i.
mixed with Oil of Almonds, and Syrup of Balsi, and Lucutellus Balsam, Butter
and Honey mixed, or Honey boiled in Beer.

I have mentioned all these Pectorals, that those may be chosen which are not
too hot, but suitable to each Constitution, Av^^enna gives us this Direction
from the Tastes of Medicines; Acutum est aliud, deinde* amarum, deinde salsum,
quoniam acutum est fortius ad resolvendum, abstergendum, and incidendum quam
amarum, deinde salsum; ponticum est frigidius, deinde stypticum, postea
acetosum, quamvis vero acetosum sit nimis frigidum, tamen majoris
infrigidationis, propter Penetrationem. The old Opinion was, that in turning
Wine into Vinegar, the fiery and aerial Parts were evaporated by the Ferment,
or the Heat of the Sun, as John Anglus describes it.

I shall next give some Remarks on some Errors in Authors.

1. All very violent Purges and Vomits, used by them, commonly disagree with
the Asthmatic, and give Fits.

2. Strong Expectorators, and all hot Medicines are injurious in the Beginning
of Fits, as Balsams, Tinctures, Spirits, and strong Cordials, Wine, Brandy,
Spirits, chemical Oils, and Gums.

3. Eating any solid thing the first Days of the Fit is dangerous.

4. All Fumes of Tobacco, Amber, or Arsenic, are suffocating.

5. All Ointments to the Breast heat it, and offend by their Smells, as Oil of
Amber, and the Axungias, the rubbing of the Breast rarifies the Spirits too
much: Fomentations to the Breast are likewise mischievous, and Plasters hinder
Respiration.

6. All Motion makes the Fit worse; Fire, a close Room, all actually hot Diet,
is intolerable.

7. No Medicines for the Asthma must be infused in Wine or Brandy; no chemical
Oils are useful.

8. Errhines, Apophegmatisms, quilted Caps, are Mistakes, and S^ernutories
dangerous in the Fit; the burning an Issue on the coronal Sutures* Breast,
signify nothing* Cupping-glasses, and Lotions of the Feet are mischievous; no
Benefit is to be expected from Issues.

9. Frequent bleeding brings a Dropsy; bleed only twice in a Year, or upon
extraordinary Fits.

10. Much Water drinking is in^urious to the old, and pure unmixt Acids* great
Astringents stop the Breath; the mucilaginous Gums breed Phlegm, all very ho^
A^omatics, and odorate things inflame too much.

The Cure of the hysteric Asthma in the Fit is the same as that of the spitting
Asthma, because there is the same Windiness in the Stomach, the same
Effervescence of Humors, and Rarefaction of Spirits, as in the other Asthma; no
hot hysteric Medicine is useful in the Fit, as volatile Spirits, or Gums, or
Castor, but only Laudanum twelve Drops, or more in a mild hysteric Draught, the
first and second Night if necessary, after a Glister or Vomit.

For the preventing this Species of Asthma from its Returns, we must*

1. Use the same Vomits and Purgers which are recommended in the other Species
of Asthmas: Purging Salt is most agreeable; and let the Vomits be with Carduus
Water and Squills once a Month, and the Purge once in fourteen Days, till the
Fits remit, and Laudanum after them.

2. The same Digestives are convenient, because there is the same flatulent and
slymy Cacochymia in all Species, but in the hysteric Asthma, because it arose
from those Fits; hysterical Medicines may be mixed with Digestives.

3. The Febrifuges must here be used against the Effervescencies, and Fever
Fits, to prevent their Returns, as a Decoction of the Cortex; give two Ounces
with an hysteric Julap, and repeat it till four Ounces are taken, or else two
Ounces in an Electuary, and this ought to be repeated upon the Turns of the
Year; this Medicine I have found most effectual in the hysteric Asthma, much
more than in the spitting Asthma, for which reason I guess that the periodic
hysteric Fits depended originally on a latent Fever, but in time they introduce
a slimy flatulent Cacochymia, which requires due Evacuations and Digestives,
and then the Repetition of the Cortex with mild Antihysterics.

4. After the general Methods proposed, some Antihysterics may be used, such as
the Aromatic, or foetid Cephalics, to rectify the flatulent Spirits, and they
must be suited both to the Constitution of the Patient, and the Nature of the
Asthma, which will not admit of any inciding hot Medicines, without some Acid
to abate them.

Some Asthmatics have commended Spirit of Lavender, but I always observed it
very injurious to me in my Fits, and it increases the Straitness, because of
the Perfume: Pennyroyal, Sage, Clary, Rue, may be boiled in Oxymels; and I
observe that the old Writers prescribe ss. of Castor in an Oxymel, or else in
their Posca.

Zedoary may be decocted in Oxymels, and its Powder given in Pills: I find
these Prescriptions in Zecchius: Sal Ammoniac i. Musk two Grains, Crocus Grains
three in Oxymel Scylliticum, make Pills.

The Volatility of the Flowers of Benjamin, and their smoaky Smell, is
injurious to some Persons, and for that Reason Bartolet prepares them best by a
Balneum and Distillation.

Take Ammoniac dissolved by Vinegar, Juice of Licorice aa. ij. Flowers of
Benjamin ss. Crocus i. Mosch ss. with Oxymel, make Pills.

In Extremities Crocus ss. Musch Grain one; take it in Oxymel.

Salt of Amber, Sal Prunell. Crab's-eyes, aa. ij. or Oil of Amber in Lozenges
with Salt Prunell. and Cream of Tartar.

This was used anciently, Castor i. Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar ij. make
Pills; for two Doses i. of Saffron may be infused in lbij. of any Liquor; but
the Saffron must be roasted in a Limon: I must confess I never found Benefit by
Saffron.

Seven Grains of Cinnabar of Antimony is commended by Grembs, to be taken for a
Month in a Spoonful of Briony Water.

I have been very much inclined to believe that those Acids which relieve
Epileptic Fits, which are from a higher Degree of Flatulency in the Spirits,
would relieve the hysteric Asthma, and I propose them to the Reader's
Consideration.

The volatile Spirit of Vi^riol ten or twenty Drops, the phlegmatic Spirit ten
Drops, or the Oil dulcified, or the common four Drops in an hysteric Julap.

Spirit of Vitriol distilled with Urine according to Hartman, Clyssus Vitrioli.

Spirit of Gum Ammoniacum, Sulphur, and Aes Viride in E^muller, which mix in
equal Parts with Spirits of An^seed.

Spirit of Sculls, mixed with Spirit of Vitriol.

Spiritus Vitrioli Philosophicus, Julapium Camphoratum with Sal Prunell.

Spiritus Veneris, Guttae 6. ad 12.

Take Sal Prunell. iij. volatile Salt of Hartshorn or Vipers, or Flowers of
Sal Ammoniac i. Dose i. ad ss.

Mixtura simplex i. ad i. in Milk Water and Briony compound.

Take Peony Water ij. Spirit of Blackberries i. volatile Spirit of Hungarian
Vitriol.

Rue Water, Bryony Water, Vinegar of Rue or Squills, Syrup of Peony, of each
one Ounce.

Sweet Allom Water, Apoplectic Water, of each ij. add Phlegm of Vitriol.

For an Opiate, torrified Opium i. Bryony Water vi. Spirit of Vitriol i. digest
Nitrum Saturnisatum in Bates, or Spiritus Saturni ex Saccharo: The acid Spirit
of Sal Ammoniac.

Spiritus Nitri dulcis i. ad i. No Steel seems to agree with the hysteric
Asthma, but the Extractum Ecphracticum cum Aloe, or Steel Waters in young
Asthmatics, because it stops in the Stomach, straitens the Breath, and raises
an Effervescence in the Humors: The Roots and Seeds of Peony ought to be tried
in Powders or Decoctions, continuing it for some Months.

No foetid Fumes of Amber, or Assafoetida can be proper in the hysteric Asthma,
therefore all Fumes must be avoided; but the Smell of Vinegar is more agreeable
if mixed with Rue, or without it.

AN APPENDIX, Containing some Observations omitted, and one about Weighing of
an Asthmatic after Sanctorius's Manner; with an Account of the Weight before,
and in, and after the Fits.
SOME Mornings the Asthmatic (who was betwixt 40 and 50 Years old) upon
weighing fasting was 179, others 178, and 180, and 181. But the Day before the
Fits in the Morning, May 2d. School, he was 180 Pound (including the weight of
the Chair 33 Pound, and the Clothes.) May 3d. the Morning weight was 178 Pound,
after having passed by Urine a Pound and half, by Stool half a Pound. The
Weather was very cold, and Wind N. E. and it Snowed in the Afternoon; the
Asthmatic drank Ale, which with the change of Weather, gave a short Fit with
very little Spit. The Observations I shall make are,

1. The Defluxion of Serum is very evident by the quantity of Urine unusual,
and some Spit more than usual, and the Stools loose.

2. The change of the Air to Snow made the Air lighter, which less compressing
the Blood disposed it to the Asthma Fit with the drinking of Ale, which
occasioned an Effervescence.

3. The great coldness of the N. E. Wind affected the sense of the Skin, and
that by its shivering Contraction compressed the Circulation of the rarefied
Humors inwardly, and occasioned the flux of Serum by Urine and Stool.

4. There was no unusal weight observed in the Asthmatic the day before the
Fit, therefore the Matter of the Asthma is not any great quantity of Serum,
since it cannot be observed by weighing; but the cause of it must be an
Effervescence of Humors, which are flatulent and serous.

The Asthmatic took a spoonful of this Acid Syrup in lbss. of Water, and
repeated it three times before Dinner time: Take Vinegar lbss. Aron Roots ii.
infuse them three Days, strain them, and add Sugar lbss. make a Syrup.

Orris, Enula Campane, or Horse Radish, or Fenil Roots may be infused in the
same manner, or any Carminative Seed i. in lbi. of Vinegar to make the like
Syrup.

These cool things, Toast and Water, with an acid Syrup abate the Windiness,
and compress the rarefied Serum; for the Humors are rarefied by Heat into
Bubbles, which we call Wind. We find in Vinegar a cool Taste from its acid, fit
for the cooling of bilious or only Humors; the Acrimony in it makes it biting,
and, as the Ancients say, fit for Obstructions, from viscid Humors, where
there is a Fever too because it cools and opens both. The Water drank in the
Morning run off by Urin before Dinner.

The Diet of the Asthmatic on the Fit day was at Dinner two Eggs, Toast and
Butter, Small Beer and Water after Dinner two Pound and a half in weight, the
weight of Supper one Pound and quarter, Diet in all, three Pound three
quarters. The weight lost on the Day of the Asthma, three Pound three quarters;
by Urine, three Pound; Insensibly three quarters.

By this it is evident, the Insensible is the fourth part of the whole weight
lost on the day of the Fit; and it appears to me, that usually the Insensible
Perspiration in April last, when it was cold Weather, amounted to but a third
or fourth part of the weight lost. The day following the Asthmatic was the same
weight as on the Morning of the Asthma 178, which is lighter than usually.

May 6. the former Fit being only suppressed, the next change of Weather on
this day toward Rain, the Wind West, and the Weather warm, raised a new
Effervescence and gave a new Fit, rather worse than the former.

May 4th the weight was 178.

5th the weight was 178 three quarters, the weight not considerably increased
before the Fit.

6th in the Morning, lost then by a Stool and Water lbiiss.

The weight was in this Morning 178 Pound, after the Evacuation mentioned.

The whole weight lost the day before the Fits was thus;

Breakfast lbi. 3 quarters.

Lost before Dinner by Urine and Stool lbi. 3 qu.

Dinner lbiiss.

Lost before Supper by Urine lbi.

By Perspiration lbss.

Supper lbi. 1 qu.

Lost in the Night and next Morning,

By Urine and Stool lbiiss.

By Perspiration lbss.

Add the weight to the Diet which was lbvss.

The Morning weight May 5th, 178 lb. 3 qu. both 184, 1 qu.

Lost sensibly by Urine and Stool lbv. 1 qu.

Insensibly lbi.

Lost in all lbvi. 1 qu.

The weight next day after the Asthma, by which we perceive the loss of weight
in the Fit, 177 Pound, which is the least weight, lesser than usually.

Note, The Perspiration was the sixth part the day before the Fit. Therefore
the sensible Evacuations are five times as much as the Perspiration the day
before the Fit.

I weighed a Boy of Fourteen, the weight lost in one day, May 2. was two Pound
3 qu. Diet in all lbii. 3q. By Urine lbiss. By Stool (...) 3 qu. By
Perspiration lbss.
which is about the 4th part of the sensible Evacutions, and of the whole
weight lost the fifth.

If we consider the different weight of our Air, and the grossness of our Diet,
in respect of the Italian Air and Diet, we may well suppose a difference in
England, where the sensible Evacuations are three or four times as much as the
Insensible: But, by Sanctorius, in Italy the sensible Evacuations are exceeded
by the insensible, and they amount to five Pound, if any one eats eight Pound
every day; but much the contrary happens here, the sensible commonly exceed the
insensible three or four times.

The following Purge was communicated to me by a Spitting Periodic Asthmatic,
by which he usually cured his Fits, and he takes it any time of the Night the
Fits happen.

Take Sal Prunel gr. x. Tartar Vitriolategr. vi. Diagryd gr. iv. Lenitive
Electuaryii. make a Bolus.

An Ingenious Physician in London, whose Name I have forgot, informed me that
he gave i. of Merc. Dulcis in a Fit, which by giving two or three loose Stools,
i^ soon relieved.

If any Lenitive Purge may be admitted in a Fit, non^ so convenient as Purging
Salt ss. or vi. and Laudanum at Night after.

This following bitter Acid never fails to give a Stool next Day, if two Drams
or half an Ounce be taken at Night with Toast and Water a draught.

Take Squills dried ii. one Orange Pill, steep them in Vinegar lbi. for a Week,
and strain it out. It ought to be Sunned fourteen Days.

Strong Purges I have observed both in the Fit and out of it, to be injurious
to the thin Hysterical and Hypochondriacal Asthmatics.

June the 4th, I Dissected a Broken Winded Mare, who was exceedingly troubled
with that Disease, and sold for the Dogs Meat, being much Emaciated: I found
all the Viscera in the Belly very sound, the Liver had very little of any
Schirrosities dispirsed in it, the Spleen had none; there was no Water in the
Belly nor Breast; the Diaphragme had no Injury, but was pressed by the Guts
much up toward the Thorax: And the prone Posture of Horses makes the Guts more
subject to press on the Diaphrag me, than it happens in Men, whose Belly hangs
below the Diaphragme, and this occasions the Breathing very short in Horses, as
soon as they have been Watered, or full ^ed.

In the Thorax the Lungs appeared very much swelled or puffed up, and appea^'d
much bigger in the Broken Winded than usual* the Outside of the Lungs seemed
like Tubercula, but upon pressing I found those only Bladders very much
distended with Air, as I found by cutting them. I blew up some Lobes of the
Lungs, and found the Air would no^ come out again, nor the Lungs subside of
themselves; by which it was plain, that the Bladders of the Lungs had been
extended or broken by some Strain in Running, and that the Air remaining either
in the over-distended Bladders, or else passing through some Breach of them,
betwixt the Fibrous Substance of the Lungs; that caused a continual Inflation
of the whole Lungs, which compressing the Bronchia and Blood Vessels, produces
a continual Dyspnaea, in which the external Air cannot pass freely through the
Trachea and its Branches in Inspiration or Expiration; and this difficulty
occasions the great Labor and Nisus of the Respiratory Muscles. There was no
Polypus in the Heart, or the Blood Vessels of the Lungs; no Adhesion of the
Lungs to the Sides, nor any signs of any quantity of Phlegm in the Trachea and
Bronchia, nor no Decay, Tumor, or Corruption or Obstruction in any Part of
them, only the Bladders seemed to make the Superficies of the Skin of the Lungs
unequal, and the whole spungy Substance of the Lungs seemed swelled with Wind;
for no quantity of Humor appeared any where. This Mare had not been Broken
Winded above one Year. By this Observation it appears, that the Broken Wind
depends on an Injury done to the Membranes, rather than to the Humors of the
Body.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
Some Reflections on the Dissection of the Broken Winded Mare.
THere are two sorts of windy Tumors in the external Membranes of the Body; the
one from the admission of the external Air amongst the Membranes, as appears in
a Wound of the Thorax, in which the Membranes are inflated if the Orifice be
small: And another windy Tumor happens to the Membranes of the Knees, Feet,
Hands, Eyes, Belly, by a rarefied Serum filling the Canals of the Nervous
Fibers, and this is properly a Nervous Inflation: For if this Tumor be opened,
no Humor appears to come forth. I desire to apply this Distinction of
flatulent Tumors, to the Inflations which produce the flatulent Asthma, and I
shall reckon two Species of these Inflations; the first is, the Broken Wind,
from the Rupture or Dilatation of the Bladders of the Lungs, by which the Air
is too much retained in the Bladders, or their Interstices, and thereby
produces a permanent flatulent Tumor in the whole Substance of the Lungs. It Is
not easy to explain the Production of a permanent flatulent Tumor in the Lungs,
by a Strain in Running; but by supposing the Bladders of the Trachea too much
distended, and the muscular Fibers which constringe them in Expiration thereby
over-stretched, and made unfit to express the Air afterward: So that these
Bladders retaining more Air than is usual, the Substance of the Lungs must
appear always Inflated. I could not find any other Disorder, but this flatulent
Tumor of the Lungs, in this Mare I Dissected, therefore I shall impute all the
Symptoms to this only Cause, though I have with the Vulgar conjectured, that
the Disease depended on Polypous Concretions of Blood, or Tubercula, which are
observed in some Horses; they are only the effects of a long Broken Windedness,
by its long continuance. This windy Tumor, by compressing the Trachea, hinders
the admission of the Air, and makes a laborious Respiration: The same Tumor
hinders the Efflation of Air, which occasions the Muscles of the Belly to
strain much, as appears by their Working in the Flank.

The return of the Blood to the Heart* and the descent of the Chyle into the
Guts, and its depuration, secretion, and distribution, do naturally depend on
the Motion of the Diaphragme and Breast, and that being hindered, the Horse is
languid, and fainty, for want of a free Circulation, which is also stopped on the
Lungs, by the flatulent Tumor of them, and that much increases the Tumor and
Angustia, Fullness and Straitness in the Breast. The Parts are Emaciated for
want of a full Circulation of Humors into them; neither can the Chyle be well
prepared or assimulated to the Blood, where the Circulation is weak and stopped;
It Is only digested into a slimy Nutriment, which is the Matter of the slimy
Phlegm, both in the Stomach and Lungs.

A Windiness is always observed in the Belly of the broken Winded Horses, for
want of a quick Distribution, or a thorough Preparation, or Fermentation of the
Aliments, for which the slimy Ferment of the Stomach seems unfit.

These Horses Wheeze much after filling their Stomachs, by Water, or Food,
because that keeps up the Diaphragme, and that by reason of their prone Posture
of Body presses much upon the Lungs, which by their Tumor take up too much room
in the Breast. The other flatulent Tumor of the Lungs depending on a rarefied
Serum in the Nerves and Fibers of the Membranes, is sufficiently described in
this Treatise, as to its frequent Paroxysms and Causes.

As it happens in external flatulent Tumors, they at first go off and return,
but at last fix in permanent flatulent Tumors; so it is in the flatulent
Asthma, the frequent nervous Inflations induce at last a constant windy Tumor,
or Inflation; and it ought to be considered how far the holding the Breath in
Hysteric Fits, or the violent Coughing in long Catarrhs, or the great
Distention of the Lungs, by an Inflammation in the Peripneumonia, may strain
the Bladders, and their Muscular Fibers, and thereby produce the same Rupture,
or Dilatation, or Hernia, as happens in the broken Winded. This must be
observed by the help of the Microscope; and if the Air blown into any Lobe will
not be expelled thence, by the natural Tone or Muscle of the Bladders, that the
Lobe may again subside of it self, it is certain, some Injury

is done to the Ventiducts; the Bladders are either broken, and admit the Air
into the Membranous Interstices, or else they are over-distended, like a Hernia
in the Peritoneum; and this will produce an Inflation of the whole Substance of
the Lungs, and that a continual compression of the Air and Blood Vessels, which
will produce a constant Asthma; But where the Fits are Periodic, it is certain
there is no permanent inflated Tumor, but that depends on a flux of windy Serum
into the Nerves, or on the preternatural Rarefaction of the Succus Nervosus, by
external Accidents.

This flatulent Tumor of the Lungs has been often observed in Asthmatics. Car.
Piso observes a Dyspnaea in an Arthritic, a Pulmone tumente. And De Graaf de
Succ. Pancreatico, has this Observation, Saepius offendimus Pulmonum
Parenchyma, atque vasa statu distenta. Rhodius observes, that the Lungs of an
Asthmatic were Turgid with Wind: Other Authors have observed the extraordinary
bigness of the Lungs, and that they could not be easily kept in the Thorax
opened.

The Cure of the broken Wind cannot easily be projected any other way, but by a
Parasentesis in the Thorax; for if the external Air be admitted, it will
compress the flatulent Tumor, and through the same hole a Styptic and
Carminative Hydromel may be injected, to restore by its Stypticity the Tone of
the Membranes, and discuss by its Aromatic Acrimony the windy Spirits, or Air
retained in the Lungs. This may easily be tried in the broken Winded Horses, by
injecting through a Hole made in the declining Part of the Breast.

I perceive the Experiment of Dr. Lowers, by which he produced the Asthma in a
Dog, by cutting the Nerves of the Diaphragme, has occasioned some Moderns to
impute the Asthma, as he does, to some Strain, or loss of Tone in the Nerves of
the Diaphragme. But this cutting of the Nerves, if nearly considered, does only
hinder the motion of the Diaphragme, and that being hindered, the Breast cannot
be dilated fully by the Intercostal Muscles; the want of that Dilatation
compresses the Lungs, and hinders their due Expansion, and this must occasion a
Dyspnaea, as Gibbosity, or a Pleurisy does, in which the Intercostal Muscles
are hindered from dilating the Breast, for which they serve as well as the
Diaphragme. It seems to me a mistake, to believe the Nerves of the Diaphragme
can be injured by any Strain; for Strains only affect the Body of a Muscle, and
not the Nerves inserted into it; and I could never perceive any Injury done to
the Muscle or Tendon of the Diaphragme in the Asthma, but that as well as the
Intercostal Muscles, strive with all their force to dilate the Breast, but all
in vain, because the Bronchia are compressed or constringed by the Inflation of
the Membrane: And if the Air cannot be admitted, the Breast cannot be dilated
by its Muscles, as we plainly perceive when any External Body slips into the
Windpipe, whereby the Air is excluded in some measure; this produces a violent
Orthopnaea and Suffocation very suddenly.

ADVERTISEMENT.
REmarks upon some late Papers relating to the Universal Deluge, and to the
Natural History of the Earth. By John Harris M. of A. and Fellow of the Royal
Society. 8o

FINIS.

