A CHARACTER OF A TRUE PHYSICIAN; OR A TRUE CHEMIST COMPARED with a Goose-Quill
Pedant. With a short view of the Frauds and Abuses in Physic, committed by the
Confederate prescribing Doctoral Methodists, with their Combinators the
Apothecaries: That is to say, Such Apothecaries only as debase themselves to
Truck and truckle under him in his dull method, to the extreme abuse and hazard
of their Patients. Being A Vindication of such Physicians as follow not their
Method, but make and administer their own Medicines, being the honestest,
safest, cheapest, and speediest way of Practice, both for Physician and Patient.

By R. FLETCHER, a True Englishman.

Ecclesiast. 10. 5, 6. There is an evil, which I have seen under the Sun,
Folly set in great dignity, and the Rich in wisdom and virtue set in low
places.

London, Printed for the Author 1676.

A CHARACTER OF A TRUE PHYSICIAN.
A True Physician is one unto whom God has opened the eyes of his mind, and
demonstrated the properties of things, as he did to Adam, before the fall; and
to Solomon, upon his begging of Wisdom; and unto Bazaleel and Aholiab for the
Glory of his Name, in Israel.

II. Or a True Physician is one whom God has qualified with a longing desire
to know Nature, in her operations, Integrity, and defects, and how they may be
amended.

For which he does ask, seek, and knock in a right way, not at the doors of
Aristotle or Galon, with diligence, patience and constancy, till it be given
and opened unto him; his heart is not set upon gain, but out of charity to the
poor distressed, he does persist in this pursuit of knowledge, and the
merciful God hears him, and gives him what he seeks for: Then having received
his Talent, he does not bury it in a napkin, but does improve it, until with
it he gain 2, and with them 5 and with them 10; and then he does not seek to
get worldly Honor, Riches and Fame, so much as the good of those he
undertakes; nor is he startled at the sad Catalogue of incurable diseases,
which the Proud fond usurping School-Doctors have most shamefully compiled; but
he by his Noble Balsamic Medicines, is able to overcome, as the valiant
Champion is reported to have conquered the devouring monster. He, viz. (A Son
of Art) knows how by his Chymick Art, to prepare either Animal, Vegetable, or
Mineral, so as their virtue be separated from all gross Adherents, that it may
be an apt Medicine to perform what God in Nature has granted to it.

But this his Art and knowledge, is not such as he sucks from the Schools, but
such as is applicable to Action, the other being but mere empty shadows or mere
ornaments at best.

But this his Art consists in the knowledge of corruption and generation; for,
he that knows the ways of Generation, will easily come to be acquainted with
the true menstruum of Bodies, which in the Art of preparing Medicines is most
useful.

For every thing that Nature affords for the subsistence and health of Man, is
crude, and needs a further digestion, before it can be converted either into
the substance of Man, or into a wholesome Medicine; so that a Physician ought to
be so skilled in Nature's path, as to imitate and assist Nature, that all crude
bodies, in order to Medicine, may without the kitchen of the stomach be set to
putrify, to be digested and so dissolved, that their spiritual nature may after
that solution, be easily extracted and taken out of them; and so transmitted to
the several parts of the body.

And to this purpose Chemistry serves; for, by the help of this Art, we know
how to digest, to dissolve, to putrify, to separate the pure from the impure,
and so to come by perfect Medicines: For all bodies, more or less, partake of
the grosness and terrestriety of their Matrixes; but after their principles are
separated from that terrestriety adhering, which they drew from their Matrixes,
they make it plain enough by their powerful effects, that it is to this state
they ought to be reduced, before they can work with efficacy, and yet they
still retain their Character, and Internal Idea. Thus will a little quantity of
such a well prepared Medicine manifest its self, in the powerful operating and
assisting of Nature, to cast off her enemies (viz. Diseases) with speed and
safety.

But verily so great and precious a blessing as this, God never bestows nor
imparts to any of those fraudulent Tyrants, who would limit the Holy one of
Israel, and stop and stifle those noble improvements in Physic, which
themselves neither do, nor can understand, whilst they remain proud usurpers
and worshippers of Mammon.

Then Give ear, you Pedantick Galenists, and Chymicophants, of the pretended
College, who persecute this Divine Science, and the Professors thereof; give
ear, I say, and tell me with what conscience can you prosess your selves to be
Physicians, seeing that all Medicines or Physic are without Chemistry,
imperfect; Without that Chemistry, I say, which out of the Manifest Light of
Nature has its invincible Grounds and Canons, laid down in those, excellent
Writings of the Hermetick Philosophers; for,

This is the only Art (which by supplying us out of the Light of Nature, with
convenient means and particular Natures to separate the pure from the impure)
will teach us; first how to heal all the Diseases of the Macrocosmicall
substances, and afterward by examples and experiments deduced from those
exterior Cures, will show us the right and infallible cure of all Diseases in
our own Bodies.

He that knows not how to purge and heal Metals, how can he restore the decayed
or weakened Radical Balsam in Man, and repair it by comfortable and concordant
Medicines, to perform perfectly all its appointed functions; which must
necessarily be put into action, before any Disease can be expelled: he that
knows not what that is in Antimony, which purges Gold, how can he come by an
effectual and wholesome Medicine that will purge and cast out those extrarious
peccant causes that afflict and destroy he Body of Man? He that knows not how
to fix Arsenick, or to take away the corrosive nature of Sublimate, or to
coagulate sulphurous spirits, and by a convenient specifical Medium to break
and dissolve stones in the greater World, will never in the Body of Man allay
and tame the Arsenicall Spirits of the Microseomic Salt, nor take away venomous
indispositions of Sulphur, nor dissolve the Stone in the Bladder, and drive it
out being dissolved. Now, as the Ancient Philosophers, who knew Nature indeed,
obtained their noble Medicines by the strict and exact observations of Nature
in her own path; how that kind was multiplied by kind, and without putrefaction
there could be no generation; and as they found out excellent Medicines, by
doing all things in the Metallic Kingdom, according to the possibility of
nature: so if you would have A Medicine, indeed, although inferior to theirs,
whether of the Mineral, Animal, or Vegetable Kingdom, you must proceed in the
same method; for as I said before, as kind is multiplied by kind, and not
without putrefaction; so if we will exalt any Concrete to make it a friendly
Medicine, whether Vegetable, Animal, or Mineral, it must be in Nature's path,
kind with kind, and that by putrefaction, etc.

Now, let me compare Notes, and examine the Modern Goose-quil Doctor by the
Chemist, to see unto which the name Quack belongs; for, so they call all other
Physicians, that are not of their Tribe of Pedants.

And for this, give me leave to make use of that worthy Philosopher Dr. G.
Starkey, in his Preface to Nature's Explication, and Helmont's Vindication, etc.

First, says he, the whole of a real or pretended Physician, may be referred
to these two Heads, namely the knowledge of the Diseases, and the finding out
the Remedy: The latter of which, is either Theoretically to know the Medicine,
or practically to provide, prepare, and apply the same. Then first of all, we
differ from the Goose-quil Doctor or Tribe, in the Theoretical Discovery of
Diseases; and secondly, in the Practical Cure of them. Now, as to the Theory of
Diseases, and the Philosophical Contemplation of Simples, it is not essential
to a Physician; for a Man may know the Remedies by which a Disease is cured,
and yet err very much in the Discovery of the cause. And now I think on it, I
must desire the Pedantick Methodist, to tell me where the Seats and Seeds of
Diseases are; and whether they do not mistake, and take a Cause for an Effect,
and an Effect for a Cause. But to our former Discourse; the Remedy being to the
Disease, as water to fire, which will undoubtedly quench it: and as a Man may
know certainly by water to quench fire, and yet err in the Philosophic
apprehension of the same; so may a Man by a proper Remedy, rightly prepared,
and in due proportion applied, certainly cure the Disease, and he able to
distinguish the same generally, though he be not able to find out and apprehend
the manner of its original, with its occasional causes, progress, and
variation. So then the Absolute things requisite in one that would conscionably
undertake the Sick, are first to know how to unlock those Medicines, which the
Almighty has created, and how to prepare them, and when, and to whom to apply
them; and how to order and dispose the Patient so, as that he may reap that
good from them, which by careful administration of them is expected.

For every Artist is properly to be judged by his Works, and not by his words;
for, whatever is merely notional, are but vain Chymeras, unworthy for a serious
Man to busy his time in learning, lest he Embrace a cloud for Juno.

And this is the misery of our Schools and Academies, that the one teach barely
words, and the other bare notions; which indeed are nothing but empty shadows;
for he that seeks to Apply them to practice, beyond vain Disputation, can
proceed no further. Away then with all those foolish, though specious pretenses
and curiosities, by which a Man is never the nearer any practical verity.

So then, Medicine is the Art of healing and restoring all defects, to which
Mankind is subject to, in reference to the Body.

And healing or curing, is taking care of the Sick, and applying such
Medicines, with directions for ordering the Patient, that Recovery may be with
speed and safety.

And this Restoring of the Sick, is a grand mark of a True Son of Art; it is his
Diploma, by which he appears to be one created of God, and not by the Schools;
for their Creatures they adorn with empty titles, and God graceth his with real
abilities.

But as Dr. Huybert says in his Book, called the Corner Stone, There is such
ado about this feather in the Cap, called a Doctor of Physic, that I could
wish, says he, that it might be despised, by the People of England; for if
they knew so well as I do, of how light esteem it is beyond Sea, and how easy
to be gained, so many would not dote, as they have done, upon so many that run
loose from being Schoolmasters, or Preachers, or University Men, in England,
to be made Doctors at Leyden, and the like places beyond Sea; and by reading of
a few Books and prating, intrude into a Calling, which is not to be acquired
but by Years of labor and study, of Experimental, not School Philosophy. And
truly such Men ought to be ordained of God in Nature for that purpose; for, of
the other tatling book Doctors, the world is too full of. And too many of them
have crept in, from time to time, to be principal Fellows; of the pretended
College, to which they have been, and are admitted, upon producing a Diploma,
with good store of white and yellow metallic seals to it, besides the public
Seal of the University to the Parchment, which they obtain for about ten pound,
and the answering of a few slight questions about Doctrine and method.

And now, to set up his Trade, he begins to consult Nurses, Midwives, and the
Interests of Families, and acquaint himself with an Apothecary, See the Book
Lex Talionis, written by an Apothecary against the Pedant Doctors.
who usually furnishes him a room or two gratis, (and this must be considered
in the Apothecary's Bills) he must also be attended on by his Servants, and by
the Mistress into the bargain, if necessity urges: And now, besides his Fees,
he must go-snips with the Apothecary in his gains, as about 5 shillings or a
Noble the pound. And this way the Pedant may come by Money to buy a little
coach and pair of Horses; and thus going to visit a Patient, the half piece is
but ill taken, and pop'd into the left pocket, and possibly may cause the
Patient to send to his worship, before he shall see his face again, to the
hazard of another Angel: But this must be done with a Diploma in his pocket to
authorize the Fop.

But it becomes not them (as worthy Dr. Marchamont Nedham says) to set their
hands to work, to attain a true knowledge of mixed Bodies by Chymicall Anatomy.
No, no, their Sectators imagine they should wrong their Gravity, and Doctoral
state, to defile and foul their fists with the blackness of charcoal. No, now
he must make it part of his business to inquire what Practitioners are about
the City, and who has most Employment, and whether such Men are Chemists, and
who are of the Tribe, and who not. And as many as they can hear of, that are
any whit Eminent for doing Good in their Generation, then to mark such Men on
the back with the black coal of Ignorance and Envy, in all Alehouses,
Coffee-Houses and Taverns, where they frame Discourses of such Men; and the
best word they have for them is, Quack, Empirick Mountebanck Illiterate cheat,
etc. and if there be any notorious ignoramus, professing that Noble Faculty of
Physic about the City, other Men must becompar'd with them, and reckoned all
alike. But, by your leave, Mr. Pedant, it is apparently manifest, that the
greatest part of your College, are equally ignorant in the Materia Medica, to
your Brother Dunce Jones of Moorfields, and Hatten Garden, and Gray the Q. with
which Paper sculs, some of your Brethren have folded me in their pittyfull
Broadside, Entitled Some Reasons of the present Decay of the Practice of
Physic in learned approved Doctors, by A. B. C. D. Doctor and Apothecary truly
so called. And thus the Younger Fry spend their time, never seeking any further
into the knowledge of things; but rest in their mere received traditional
Doctrine, and fantastic opinions wrapped up in general conclusions and
definitions, grounded upon mere pretended principles, etc.

But the courses of the Chemical Philosophers have been, and are quite
contrary; their Learning lies not in Philosophical Maxims, raised by mere
Contemplation, but are persuaded, that Operation ought to be joined to it, to
attain full delight and satisfaction, and lay firm, sound and sure foundations
to their Reasonings, being unwilling to build upon the quicksands of vain,
frivolous and fantastic opinions; which makes them willing to undergo the
charges, toil and labor of practical Chemistry, the sooner to attain to a
solid knowledge of the works of Nature, and find out by several Experiments of
their works and process, the abstruse causes of her wonderful effect. For, it
is a very difficult matter for any to attain to the exact knowledge of things
Natural, without the guidance of Chemistry, and an acquaintance therewith:
Neither can any be reckoned a perfect Physician, without the help of Hermetick
Philosophy; since it is the truest Ground of Physic, without which no
Practitioners can deserve any other name or title, than that of Emperick, or
Quack; for it is not a Gown, nor Degrees taken in a University, which makes a
Man a Physician, but a solid knowledge in Nature, grounded upon Reason,
improved by long practical Experience. And as the Lord Bacon in his Preface to
the Advancement of Learning makes Sense the surest Guide for our Understanding,
in Discovering the Secrets of Nature, and proves at large, that if we will have
any sound knowledge of Nature, there is a necessity of deriving Philosophy from
sensible Experiments, we must use our own Industry, and trust our own eyes and
observations, because they produce to us somewhat that is certain, etc.

But let me a little inquire into some of the Writings, and complaints of some
of your Brethren of the College, when the great fudes were between them and
the Apothecaries; for they pretend they speak the sense of the whole. Doctor
Merret in his Short View of the frauds and abuses committed by Apothecaries,
page 7. thus writes:

In these ensuing Papers, I hope to prove (says he) that these abuses
complained of by all sorts of persons, arise from this cause; viz. That
Physicians dispense not themselves such Medicines as they use for the relief of
the Sick, but commit this work to the Apothecaries, or rather to their Servants.

[Pag. 27.] The desire of most Persons, and the Censure of all wise men, is
toward us, who say we are wanting to our own Interest, if we make not use of
the Remedies in our own hands, performing our Art in all its members, whereof
making Medicines is a chief one. The Kings Physicians formerly made the Kings
Medicines; as it is manifest by the Lord Coke in his Institutes, Book the
fourth, part fourth, page 251.

[Pag. 36.] He may so contrive his Medicines, first, that they may be taken in
small quantities, and be made more grateful to the taste and stomach, and
perform more then those of the Apothecaries, commonly slovenly made, and
themselves nauseous and sluggish.

[Pag. 41.] Physicians will strive who shall exceed each other in Noble
Remedies, and from thence render a full and happy Improvement of whatsoever God
has created for the recovery of Man's health.

[Pag. 44.] He will gain Reputation to his Art, by restoring it to its first
Institution and Practice.

[Pag. 45.] By constant practice with such Medicines, he will find out a better
method of cure, and thereby arrive at the true causes of Diseases.

The Patient will have a better opinion of the Medicines, and confidence in the
use of them, and the Physician will be more satisfied in conscience, and better
assured of the success.

[Pag. 46.] He will have more scope to be charitable to the Poor, and may cure
them gratis, and other Persons for little charge. And another of your College
tells us thus; viz. Dr. Goddard in his Discourse, p. 36. There is one further
advantage of great importance, by the Physician giving his own preparations,
that is, the certainty he shall be at in all his Medicaments, as to their
efficacy, strength, and operations, much beyond what can be in the way of
Writing Bills to Apothecaries; for, a rational and judicious choice of one, or
a very few Medicines, may signify much more to the good of the Patient, than a
Luxuriant variety.

And the same Dr. says page 29. If the Patients knew all, they would not be
satisfied in the greatest number and variety of Medicines, and the most
frequent plying them therewith. For this is done of design in some Physicians,
to render themselves the more acceptable to Apothecaries in general, or upon
some combination between the Apothecary and Physician, mutually to advance each
other; for the principal Art of all is, for the Apothecary to cry up, and bring
into the Patients such Physicians, who through design must comply with the
Apothecaries interest; and such Practisers they extol, and cry up for good
Physicians, (as indeed they are for their advantage, but not for the Patient's
health, ease, or Purse, unless to empty it.

Now this Good Apothecaries Doctor they describe by his frequent, though
needless visits, and multitude of Bills, to be a very careful, diligent, and
painful man, for he visits twice or thrice a day, and still is writing of new
Bills for more Medicines; when perhaps not half or none of the former have been
used, making the Patient's House like an Apothecarie' s Shop, planting the
Cupboards, Tables, and Windows, with pots and glasses; and thus the Physician
never goes away from his Patient without a Bill, lest the Apothecary should
grumble, or himself want his fee.

And thus burdening the Sick with multiplicity of Medicines, often contrary and
destructive one of another.

But then the worst mischief of all is, if we may believe what dropped from a
Quil plucked from the right wing of their own Body; viz. their Brother Merret,
who tells us, That these Apothecaries counterfeit their Medicines, both Simple
and Compound, and sell one thing for another; viz. They sell Myrtle leaves for
Sena, a Binder for a Purger; Mushroms of the Oak rubbed over with chalk for
Agarie; Hemlock, Dropwort Roots, for Paeony Roots, Poisons for wholesome
Medicines, Dog-Berries, for Buck Thorn; no Purgers for streng ones; Sheeps
lungs for Fox lungs; the hone of an Ox, for that of a Stags Heart, Damsons for
Damase prunes, Syrup of Limons, for Syrup of Citrons; Briony Roots for
Mechoacan.

They falsify the Grand Compositions of the London Dispensatory, it being a
common trade with the Apothecaries to buy unsound and decayed drugs, and to
return back to the Drugest so much of the Composition, as will pay for the
Simples.

It Is common with them to load Medicines, with great quantity of Honey and other
cheap ingredients, and to leave out the whole, or part of them, of greater
value in Ruffus' s pill and Oxycroceum Plaster, they color with Turmeric and
sanders instead of Saffron; Diascordium made only with Honey and Bole Armonick.
Many of the London, and most of the Country Apothecaries, buy of the whole
Salemen in London, who affirm, that they cannot sell their Medicines honestly
made at so low a rate as they do, but the retail Apothecary will give no better
price, and they must have them to keep custom.

But if it were true, that all Medicines in the London Dispensatory were truly
made; yet if (...) may believe another of the College Brethren; viz. Dr.
Goddard in his Discourse, setting forth the unhappy condition of the Practice
of Physic in London, tells us thus, page 28.

Who ever with judgment (says he) peruseth the London Dispensatory, may soon
estimate to what an Epitome it may be reduced; how many Compositions may be
spair'd, how many Ingredients almost in every Composition. And as to the forms
or Receipts of which it is made up, it was never judged otherwise by able
Physicians, but that there are in them many ingredients impertinent, and some
contrary to the main intention for which they are in use, besides their
Irrational proportions and quantities, etc.

This being the condition and state of that Book, the College of Physicians
have no such cause; as the common People may think, to envy them the
Translation of it; nor have they any such Treasure of it, as they may suppose
themselves.

Is it not high time then for People to be well advised what Physicians they
make use of, seeing these grand abuses are committed by those which pretend a
law, to impose upon all People such Medicines, and do sue and molest at Law all
Persons better informed, that make it their sole business to serve their
Generation, with a better method and Medicines than themselves understand; and
if such Men have a Law to molest such Men, is it that good reason that
Magistrates, be informed ^^at such monopolies are injurious to the Public, and
that they may with good reason make such void and of non effect; but I highly
question, whether there be any such Law or not, as these Men pretend; for their
Brother Doctor Goddard pleads thus, speaking for Liberty for Improvers, page
16. All Laws (says he) of Nature and Nations; all Justice, Equity and Reason
of Mankind, do allow to every Person the benefit of his own industry; which, if
it be of that nature, that the bringing of it into use and practice, does
necessarily import the discovery of it, according to our Laws, Patents for
terms of years are granted; but if an invention be of such a nature, that it
may be concealed in the use and practice, no limitation for private advantage
or profit thereby, is set by Law; it is only Honesty and Ingenuity, that can
restrain Men from making unreasonable or unconscionable advantage thereof in
such a case. Now, any Medicine or Recepts for Cure of Diseases, invented by
Physicians, or coming to their private knowledge only, or any new use or virtue
of an old known Medicine discovered by any Physician, as far as they are of any
consideration or virtue, are of this nature, that is, they are inventions that
may be kept secret by them, and whereof nothing hinders them from the
advantage. The Law of the Land (as well as in other Countries) allowing and
authorizing Physicians to practice their Art in all its parts and members; and
so by consequence to make any Medicine themselves; and to administer them to
the good of the Poor for nothing; and to others for reasonable reward.

And now you persecuting College, what can you say for your selves? are not
your own Members witnesses against you? Are you not like your Fathers, who
persecuted the worthies of old? are you not like the Jews, who killed the
Prophets, and when the great Physician appeared, killed him? Did not they cry,
We have Moses and the Prophets? and do not you boast and cry, we are the
learned College, We have Diplomas, and we have been Dubbed Doctors, we have
Gallen and Hippocrates? Are you not as the Pope, to compel all Men to
obedience to you? for, he cries out, We are the Church, we have the Keys of
Heaven and Hell, I am Christ's Vicar the infallible, and all that are not
within the pale of this Church are Heretics? and do not they persecute all as
much as in them lies that are better persuaded? Do not you persecute all at Law
that are not of your Tribe, or own not obedience to you? but thanks be to God,
millions are better persuaded; But I cannot but wonder at many worthy Persons
of this City, that they should be so blind as to make use of these Persons: but
they will tell me, the reason why they advise with them, is, Because they
believe them to be Learned Men: But by the same parrallel line, why do you not
advise with the Conclave of Cardinals of Rome, for the health of your Souls, as
well as with the pretended College, for the health of your Body? for, they
have but one and the same traditional Education and Root, and if you abhor the
one, how can you, if you do but well consider, be satisfied with the other?
would they not bind all People to make use of them, and no other? Do they not
go about to prohibit all People from consulting with, or making use of those
whom they are satisfied, are both honest and able?

Oh Monsters in Nature! Good People look not only to your purses, but to your
Lives also: For, what pretenses can these Men have for their persecutiing Dr.
Huybert's and the worthy Dr. M. Nedham, but their own covetous ends? if they
pretend they only design to suppress the Ignorant, they betray themselves, for
they trouble those Men at Law, more Learned then themselves, in that shadow of
a substance, which they call Learning. And for that part of Learning, which
themselves are ignorant of, these Men are worthy proficients; viz. In the Art
of Healing, etc. But least these papers should swell beyond my intention, I
shall briefly end.

Refering you for farther information and satisfaction in these matters, to the
Writings of that worthy Dr. M. Nedham, in his Medela Medicinae, and his Preface
to Sylvius's New Idaea of Physic; and to Dr. G. Starkey's Natures Explication,
and Helmout's Vindication; Dr. G. Thompson's Learned Piece, called Ortho
Methodus Jatro Chymica, and Dr. Huybert's Corner Stone; in which Books you may
find those Men well dissected. I must expect the Censure of the Ignorant, and
the Envy of the College; but I am satisfied in that I inform the Honest how to
avoid the knavish, etc.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER.
LEst the Reader should be mistaken, and think, that I speaking against those
Pedantick usurping prescribing Heteromethodists, and such Apothecaries as are
in combination with them:

That thereby, I mean all manner of Persons that profess Physic and
Philosophy, that have been educated in Universities, or that I mean
Apothecaries in general. No, many of these Men have been studious and elaborate
inquirers into Nature by Practical Philosophy; these Men, I say, with many of
our London Chirurgians, are better persuaded than to follow the old Pedantick
way: and such worthy Men as these, I both own and honor, as Persons fit to
undertake the Sick.

But I only mean those Envious Ignorants, whether Physicians or Apothecaries,
who being bewitched by the authority and custom of other blind Guides, and who
having been beguiled with their covetous crafty deceits, are clearly of
opinion, that there is no more truth to be found in Hermetick Philosophy, than
in the pretended Philosophic principles of Aristotle and Galen; such as Doctor
Cox-Comb, the late Chymick Renegado by virtue of Matrimonial Contract, and most
of the prescribing pretended College, with their Confederates, such
Apothecaries, who perversely maintaining of, and persisting in the great and
manifest errors of Aristotle's Physics, and the evident imperfections of the
Galenical Medicines, out of a lewd disposition or malignity of mind, and
wilful dotage, do persecute and bespatter those better informed; and dissuade
other growing and hopeful Wits, from applying themselves to the study of the
Hermetick Science.

Those are the men whom I aim at, as being Sophisters and deceivers in Physic;
a sort of Pedants, being bred up like a Carrier's Horse to foot it in a common
Road, and if he goes besides it, he then loses his way, and is in amaze; and by
way of Distinction from those that are indeed Physicians, let them be called
PEDANTS, for such they are indeed; therefore let that be the word throughout
England for ever.

But one word more to the Reader: And that is to inform him what a Pedant is in
Philosophy and Physic: He is a Creature half learned, and half unlearned; that
is to say, learned in Letters, old Rules, and speculations of old Authors, so
far as he has conversed with them, yet that is usually not very far; and were
he never so far or profoundly studied in them, it would be to little use or
purpose, for the benefit of Mankind; so that the other half of the Ridiculous
monster, after he has been trickt up with all the trappings of his Academick
Authors Formalities and Notions, appears to be unlearned in Things, Realities,
Essential forms, Intimate Virtues, and powers of Natural subjects, and
ignorant which way to educe and reduce them to practice for a public good: so
that for the honor of this University way of Education, and of his Doctorships
Diploma, he and his old Doctrine, are fit for little but to make good the old
Proverb, Merus Scholastious merus Asinus; for, trimed up with his gayeties of
very little Latin, and less Greek Rhombus, through all his Purple-habiliments
you may spy what sort of Creature it is; especially if you turn your eyes
upwards, you will be more evidently informed, when you view his Ears peeping
through his Velvet-cushion-cap-case.

Talk he can, and prate as a Man: So could Balaam's Ass; but he poor Animal
lived out his time, then died, and for all his talk and jogging on the road,
could never make a Physician. -- I met to other day with a Gentleman, who bad
me salute all the Doctor Pedants thus in Greek and Latin, LOGIATRI, VALETE;
and tell them, that not many of them are able to construe the English of it
without much conning and thumbing of a Lexicon.

One word yet more to the Reader.
I am newly informed, that the Collegiates, being all sick of the Stone, I mean
of that notable Book called Dr. Huybert's Cornerstone, lately published, and
not daring to venture to cure themselves with any things of their own, have
applied themselves to the use of Goddard's Drops in Good-Ale, in Clerkenwell,
where dwells that pittyfull Distiller, A Small Quack, that would fain curry
favor with the greater ones, to gain their custom: where note, that the
Pedants will (as they ever have done) kiss the breech of any Quack, so it be in
private, that can help them with a Medicine; but if their Disease were curable,
as it is not, Alas! what can Good-Ale wit Drops do, after they have been smiten
under the fifth Rib by the hands of Huyberts? Their next fate will be, to be
buried by the City, without lamentation: M. Bays may do well to crown their
funeral, and Marvel not, if you find on their Tombe-stone for a memorial
(because most of them are pretended Scholars) these words, This is
GOLGOTHAMGEMULAM, which if Mr. Franckland P. D. Solliciter happen to survive,
he may interpret if he be able.
And does he think they will be satisfied with Good Ale, instead of wine at
such funeral? But more planly thus, Dr. Huyberts, in his Book (which is a Book
that concerns every Man in this Nation to read) having stripped naked their
Doctorships, and their fallacies, their imperfections, and their arrogant
persecuting of him, and other meritorious persons, without Reason, or ground of
Law, he then saluted them with two remarkable Challenges, which are these.

1. He challenges them; To nominate any one Particular of improvement, that
their Society has made in the Art of Curing, since their first Incorporation,
to this day: And thereupon he will prove the contrary.

2. Whereas they pretend to have done much in discovcries by Anatomy: And
whereas Mr. Boil, in his Book of Experimental Philosophy, says; he does not
see wherein by those new Discoveries, they have done any thing to better the
Cure of Diseases.

Dr. Huyberts also says; that if the Masters of the Anatomical Stage, please
to justify themselves, he is ready to refute them, and manifest publicly in
Print, that they have not done any thing worth a Straw beyond what was done by
the Ancients.

These are the Challenges; but why do they not accept and enter upon the
Combat? Is it for the Honor of their Worships, to admit a Puny Drop-Seller to
be their Champion, and then under hand to supply him as I am told with
Materials, to patch up a Pamphlet with a bold face of a Lame Answer? This is
their way of Answering; And thus I remember, they served worthy Dr. Marchamont,
Nedham's Book ten years ago called Medela Medicinae; which remains yet
unanswered, and approved by all but themselves: for instead, of returning a
solid and through answer by some of their Grandees, which was a Task becoming
the best Heads amongst them, they employed four of their Puny Members to whisle
with some Pareels, and Sentences, instead of an orderly Demolition of the
Ground work, the design, and structure of the whole Book, as becomes men that
would pretend to be Scholars.

Those Puny Scriblers were men scarce known, and so could lose no Reputation,
in case they made, as they did, very frivolous Answers to some parts, without
considering the entire Composition of the whole: And Doubtless the Grandees
dealt very warily, to decline an engaging themselves, and to set on their
Underlings to Write against a Book which they well knew was not to be answered
yet they had the impudence to cry in all places, that they had confuted the
Doctor in four several Answers. This was the Art used then to save their
Credits, with the Injudicious and weaker sort of people.

And now seeing I hear they are upon practicing that same trick again, by
employing against Huyberts; one Goodale from whom is not to be expected any
tolerable Answer; and he being none of the College, Dr. Huyberts is not
concerned to make any Reply to ought that shall be Written on that account,
unless it shall appear in Print owned under the name of the College, or of
some one of their number, on their behalf. For, the Doctor is resolved not to
take notice of that Drop-seller, but will commit the care of a Reply unto a Man
of his own, whose name is Jack Straw. A fit man to Foil such a Champion, being
able to deal with Mr. Goodale, and his good Masters too; in case they deal with
him now, as formerly they did with Dr. Nedhams Book, that is, if they shall cry
up this their new Treatise, which is now forming by that incompetent Adversary,
to be a sufficient Answer.

Before I conclude, I cannot but take notice, by way of Admiration, of the
condition of that worthy and Ancient Company of Surgeons of London, what a
base thing it is, that such persons as they, should suffer so long a time as
they have done, under the Insolence and Pride of the Pedants, who have for a
hundred and fifty Years past, made attempts from time to time to inslave and
debar them from the practice of Physic, in following their Profession; which
to do, is absolutely a great Burden to the Subject, and disgrace to the
Kingdom.

There being no reason why a Chirurgical Patient, should be put to the charge
of a Fop Doctor; Ignorant of Surgery (as most of them are) when as if
occasion require a Doctor, the Chyrurgeon may be Chyrurgeon and Doctor too; for
so they are, and ought to be at Sea; or else his Majesty, and the Merchants,
may lose their Men that daily go forth in their services. And how shall they be
fit for Sea, if they and their Masters that Breed them, have not a freedom to
practice both ways by Land as well as by Sea. Besides, Physic and Surgery were
everheretofore in one hand, till the idle Pride of Pedants made a Distinction:
From which arose the destruction of Physic in all its concerns. And it will
never be well till they run both again in on Channel.

Farewell, Courteous Reader, and favor the Attempts of him whose Aim is thy
Good, whilst he is

R. Fletcher.
From the Sun in Gutter-Lane, London 1676.
Advertisement.
THere will be speedily Printed, a Commentary upon the Learned Preface, which
was Written by the worthy Dr. Mar. Nedham last Summer, and set forth in Print
before Dr. Richard Gowers Translation of Sylvius the Dutchman's new Idea of
Physic. Being a Piece worthy to be perused by all men in the Nation, that they
may see, how they have been Gulled, with the Title of University Doctor,
instead of real Physician: it will be Printed in Octavo in 4. Sheets (the very
Marrow of things) to avoid the pedantick way of Tiring the World with long
Discourses.


