Virginia and Maryland. OR, The Lord Baltamore's printed CASE, uncased and
answered. Showing, the illegality of his Patent and usurpation of Royal
Jurisdiction and Dominion there. With, The Injustice and Tyranny practiced in
the Government, against the Laws and Liberties of the English Nation, and the
just Right and Interest of the Adventurers and Planters. Also, A short RELATION
of the Papists late Rebellion against the Government of his Highness the Lord
Protector, to which they were reduced by the Parliaments Commissioners; but
since revolting, and by Lord Baltamore's instructions caused to assault the
Protestants there in their Plantations, were by a far lesser number repulsed,
some slain, and all the rest taken Prisoners. To which is added, A brief
Account of the Commissioners proceedings in the reducing of Maryland, with the
Grounds and Reason thereof; the Commission and Instructions by which they
acted; the Report of the Committee of the Navy, concerning that Province; and
some other Papers and Passages relating thereunto: together with the Copy of a
Writing under the Lord Baltamore's Hand and Seal, 1644. discovering his
Practices, with the King at Oxford against the Parliament, concerning the
Londoners and others trading in Virginia.

For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I
arise, says the Lord, I will set him in safety, from him that puffs at him,
Psalm. 12. 5. London, printed, and are to be sold at the Crown in
Popes-head-Ally, and in Westminster Hall, 1655.

Virginia and Maryland. OR, The Lord Baltamores printed Case, uncased, and
answered.
IN the year 1607. diverse preceding discoveries having confirmed an Opinion,
That the Country of Virginia was fit for Plantation; It pleased God to affect
the minds of very many worthily disposed Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others to
conceive it as a matter of great Religion and Honor, to undertake the work of
perfecting a Christian Plantation in those parts. Whereupon King James was
pleased to become the first Founder of this noble work, and by his Letters
Patents from time to time renewed and enlarged, granted all ample Privileges
and Immunities, both to those that managed in England, and those that went to
inhabit there: which gave so great an encouragement, that fifty Earls and
Barons, three hundred and fifty Knights, and six hundred Gentlemen, and
Merchants of primest rank* became incoporated, and were originally named in the
Letters Patents by the name of the Company of Virginia, being a greater union
of Nobles and Commons, then ever concurred to such an undertaking. But
nevertheless, partly by the natural difficulties incident to all new
Plantations; but chiefly, through the unnatural and faulty impediments arising
by the cross agitations of two powerful factions in the Company, the work went
heavily on for the first twelve years, appearing desperate in the several ill
successes thereof. And though afterward somewhat advanced and prosperous, yet
in the year 1621. by the fatal blow of a Massacre, it was almost shattered to
pieces, and brought to a very low and calamitous condition; which occasion the
contrary faction presently took hold of, insomuch that they exceedingly
slighted the action, and cared not to cast aspersions on the Country, and on
the whole management of that affair. And then further strongly possessed and
advised the then King, against the form of the Companies Government, as
consisting of an excessive number of Councillors, and a confused Popularity,
as being a Nurse of Parliamentary spirits, and obnoxious to Monarchical
Government. Thereupon Order was made upon the eighth day of October, 1623. at
the Council Table, whereby the Company were moved to give in their assents for
surrendeing their Patent, and altering their form of Government, and a new one
proposed, wherein the Interests and Rights of all men should be preserved:
which Order the Company not submitting unto, A Quo Warranto was directed for
the calling in of their Patent, and an advantage taken upon their mispleading.
The Patent was condemned in Trinity-Term following: but for many years after,
not vacated upon the Record in the Office of the Rolls, whereby some that
sought the overthrow of the Lord Baltamore's Patent for Maryland, in the
beginning of the Parliament, 1640. took out the Virginia Patent again under the
broad Seal of England: therefore thought by primest Lawyers now to be
unquestionably in force, at least to point of interest; and that Patent of
Maryland unconsistent and void.

Thus in brief was the late Company dissolved, and a Commission given to diverse
Lords and others, for present directing and ordering the affairs of Virginia;
and that they should advise touching a better form of Government for advancing
and establishing the Colony. Then issued also several Proclamations, and
several Orders from the Council Table, with great assurances under the Broad
Seal and privy Seal, that all men, with the Adventurers, and Planters, should
be assured, that their Rights and Interests should be conserved and enlarged,
only alteration in point of Government. But both that Commission and renewing
of the Companies Charter expired, and all those Proceedings were delayed, by
reason of the death of King James, which then suddenly ensued. The principal
scope of that Commission was, that they should find a better form of
Government for the Countries advancement, and therein was especially promised
the conservation of every man's right; intentions worthy the wisdom and justice
of so great a Prince. But nothing was done by those Commissioners touching
either of those ends, nor by those by whose prosecutions these things happened,
who having attained their private ends of spleen and profit upon the changes
and revolutions of ensuing times* deserted the interest of the Colony, and left
her weltring in her blood, unsupplied with Ammunition and Arms in the heat of a
difficult war with the Indians: the burden and charge whereof was only
undergone by the remaining Planters, who thus forsaken by their former friends,
were constrained both to work and fight for their lives and subsistence; and
thereby preserved the Colony from desertion, and at last restored it by the
blessing of God to peace and plenty.

And then, about the year 1633. Lord Baltamore pretending* though not truly,
the greatest part of the Country was unplanted, procured that the aforesaid
judgment so long delayed, was entered, and obtained a Patent, for that part now
called Maryland, which he has since held with a few people and small
Adventurers, bebarring of those to whom it belonged from planting of it;
destroying and ruinating those formerly seated under Virginia, at the Isle of
Kent; and interdicting Trade with the Indians for Furs, discovered and begun by
the Virginians, by direction and commission from the King; which since by this
means is enjoyed by the Dutch and Swedes, with the profit of many thousand
pounds yearly; which Trade had been solely in the English Nations hands, had
not the Lord Baltamore interdicted ^t, and seized all Vessels, and displanted
their Plantations. And those Swedes and Dutch do trade for great quantities of
Guns Powder and Shot with our Indians, to the total endangering this Colony, if
not timely prevented. Such a Groundwork, had the Patent of Maryland upon the
Rights and Labors of others; and as unreasonable and unjust have been the
whole proceedings and management of their Colony and Interests, at their first
arrival surprising and confiscating many Vessels with the Goods of diverse that
they found trading with the Natives under the commissions of Virginia, which
they had enjoyed ^eer thirty years. And professing an establishment of the
Romish Religion only, they suppressed the poor Protestants among them, and
carried on the whole frame of their Government in the Lord Proprietaries name;
all their Proceedings, Judicature, Trials and Warrants, in his name, Power and
Dignity, and from him only: not the least mention of the Sovereign Authority
of England in all their Government; to that purpose, forceably imposing Oaths,
(judged illegal in a Repor^ made by a Committee of the Council of State, 1652.)
to maintain his royal Jurisdictions, Prerogatives, and Dominions, as absolute
Lord and Proprietary, to protect chiefly the Roman Catholic Religion in the
free exercise thereof; and all done by yearly Instructions from him out of
England, as if he had been absolute Prince and King. By all which it is easily
evident, that the Patent of Maryland was grounded upon no good foundation.

The King being misinformed; when in nothing more deeply and directly, could
the Honor and Justice of his Throne be concerned, then in confirming and
conserving the Interest of so great a conjuncture of Nobles, Knights, Gentlemen
and Merchants, who so piously and worthyly adventured their Moneys, and
expended their Estates and Labors; whose Rights and Interests, though their
Patent were called in, for the time, in point of Government, yet had received
the most solemn Declarations and Assurances, under the Broad Seal and Privy
Signet* Orders of Councels, Letters to the Colony, and by general Proclamations
there and here.

That it were impious to think that either the then King or King James being
rightly informed, would ever have gr^nted such a Patent as this of Maryland, it
being near two third parts of the better Territory of Virginia; and as no way
consistent with Equity, and the Honor and public Faith of the Kingdom: so was
no way agreeable (in the absolute and regal power assumed and executed by him)
to the late Monarchical Government, or to the present Authority of the
Commonwealth of England, under his Highness the Lord Protector, and most
injurious to the Rights and Interests of the noble Adventurers, and the painful
indefatigable Planters, who had so long, under God, conserved the Country from
total ruin.

A short and successive Narration of most of the aforesaid public Assurances,
follows, viz.
1. BY an Order of the Council the eighth of October, 1623. before the Quo
Warranto brought to Arm the minds of the Adventurers and Planters against any
mistaken fear and apprehension, as if their Estates should receive prejudice,

2. And whereas the Lords of the Council were informed* that the intended
change of the Government, had begot a general discouragement amongst the
Adventurers: notwithstanding sundry other Declarations made at the Board, Viva
Voce, and that former Act of Council* their Lordships were pleased by an Order
of the twentieth of October, 1623. to declare again, that there was no other
intention, but only and merely in reforming and change of the present
Government; and that no man should receive any prejudice, but have his Estate
fully and wholly confirmed; and if in any thing defective, better to be
secured; which Order was sent over by their Lordships command, and published in
Virginia for encouragement of the Planter.

3. King James was also pleased to express the same in his Commission to sundry
of his own privy Council, and other Commissioners for the time being, for the
affairs of Virginia, July 5. 1624. that his intention was to alter the Letters
Pa^ents, as to the form of Government; but with the preservation of the
Interest of every Adventurer and Planter.

4. The like Declaration of the King's intentions was expressed in the Commission
then sent to Sir Francis Wiat, and the Council then appointed by his Majesty,
to direct the Affairs and People in Virginia; and the like has been inserted
in all King Charles his Commissions, and of all the Governors of Virginia,
that have been since that time to this present.

5. The said King Charles by his Proclamation, May 13. 1625. declared, That his
aim was only to reduce the Government into such a right course, as might best
agree with the form held in the rest of his Monarchy, and not intended to
impeach the interest of any Adventurer or Planter in Virginia.

6. The Lords of the Council by their Letter dated the 24 of October, 1625.
declare to the Colony, That the Kings pleasure was to preserve every man's
particular right, and the Planters to enjoy their former privileges; with
addition of other requisite immunities; encouraging also the Planter to
discoveries both by Sea and Land; and to perfect the Trade of Furs: which
Letter, according to their Lordships command, was published in Virginia. But
Captain Cleyborn who was thereupon employed by Commission from the Governor,
under the King's Broad Seal, and the Seal of the Colony, and then discovered
those parts of the Trade of Maryland, was thereby utterly undone, supplanted
and expelled by the Lord Baltamore.

7. The King also, for the encouragement of the Planters, by his Royal Letters
the 12 of September, 1628. was pleased to promise thereby to renew and confirm
unto the Colony under the great Seal of England, their Lands and Privileges
formerly granted to them.

8. And when the general Assembly, consisting of the Governors, Council, and
Burgesses of the whole Colony complained to the Lords of the Council, of the
interruption of their Trade by the Lord Baltamore's Deputies their Lordships
were pleased by their Letter July 22. 1634. to signify that the Plantation of
Virginia should enjoy their Estates and Trade, with the same freedom and
privilege as they did before the recalling of their Patent.

By all which it appears, that howsoever the Government could not be reduced
from that popular form of the Company in England, but by revocation of the
Patent it self; yet in respect of both those Kings Declarations, and the Lords
Orders, the Adventurers and Planters of Virginia, as to their Rights and
Privileges, according to the Rule of Equity, remain in the same condition, as
if no such Judgment had been given.

Object. But they answer hereunto to this effect, though not truly neither,
That the Lord Baltamore his Patent takes in no part, that the Virginians had
then planted, and so the interests of all men is preserved; and, that Maryland
is no other, then a particular Plantation, as the Company used to grant to
diverse Adventurers and Planters; and, that the King might do as much as the
Company while they stood.

Answ. 1. We reply, That the Adventurers and Planters were encouraged to expend
their Estates, in so vast a proportion, and to hazard their lives in all
extremities, always accompanying new designs and beginnings, in hope, that
their shares upon the division of Lands, being four hundred Miles along the
Seashore, and into the Land from Sea to Sea, would recompense them and their
Heirs, as in Ireland, heretofore, and now is done. But this Interest by the
Patent of the Lord Baltamore's comprehending near two degrees, which is an
hundred and twenty Miles, is wholly taken from them, and scarce is there any
room for any Adventurers to take up any Land due unto them.

It is truly answered, that all the Adventurers of the Company were Tenants in
common to all the Land, which was not actually divided and set out, and their
claim cannot justly be thus nullified, and yet their interest said to be
reserved.

3. It is granted, That the Lord Baltamore may have as large a proportion of
Land, as ever was granted to any by the Company, though his adventures have
never been proportionable to sommens. But we think it agreeing to reason, that
he should people it, and either show his right to it by the adventure of people
sent over to plant it, which was by the Company appointed to be fifty Acres to
every person transported thither; otherwise, how unreasonable is it, that he
should possess two third parts of the Bay of Virginia, which may perhaps be
said to be as big as the Kingdom of England* and Scotland, and yet now in many
years have not more men there* except such as have gone from Virginia, then can
or do plant as much as is contained in a small corner thereof, and those
chiefly employed in Tobacco; and the great name of Maryland is but in effect
made a factory for Trade; Ammunition and Arms being as commonly s^ld to the
Indians, (though not altogether so openly) as among the Swede^ ^ Dutch, a
Nursery for Jesuits, and a bar to keep off other Planters from the greatest
part of the Country left void, and for the most part not known by him or his.

5. We say, that after we had discovered, and brought the Indians of those
parts of Maryland to a Trade of Corn and Beaver, by virtue of the King's
instructions under the Broad Seal of England, with the expense of our Bloods
and Estates, and exercised annual intercourse with them above eight and twenty
years: how can it be said, our Interests and Rights are preserved, when we are
forbidden this Trade, our Men slain, Vessels and Goods seized, Persons
imprisoned, and the whole Trade assumed only to the Lord Baltamore's use, and
he not able to manage it neither, but left it to the Swedes and Dutch?

6. And chiefly we answer, We claim Right by Possession* having planted the
Isle of Kent almost three years before ever the name of Maryland was heard of,
and Burgesses for that place sitting in the Assembly of Virginia; whereby it is
evident, that the Lord Baltamore's suggestions to the King, mentioned in his
Patent, that those parts were uncultivated and unplanted, unless by barbarous
people not having the knowledge of God, was a misinformation; and by it, that
Patent appears to be surreptitiously and illegally gotten: and if the Lord
Baltamore takes a way those Lands from them, who have also purchased the
Interest of the Natives, (a Right not inconsiderable) and seize their Goods,
and that in an hostile manner as he has done; How can it be said, that those
men's Interests and Rights are preserved, they being the first Discoverers of
that Island, by virtue of the King's Commission, and planted there under the
Government of Virginia, on the confidence they apprehended from the former
assurances, and there began in great part the Trade of Furs.

How unjust an intrusion then will the Lord Baltamore's Patent appear, which
overthrows the Interests of so many and such Persons: for the Company of
Virginia were of a nature diversified from other Companies; which if it had not
been founded on so good Grounds, yet their zeal and pious endeavors to
propagate the true Christian Religion, enlarge the English Dominions, and to
increase the Trade and strength of shipping, and considerably the Customs, do
deserve justice, with addition of reward for so honorable and good intentions.

In the next place, to prove the Lord Baltamore's usurpation of Royal
Jurisdiction and Dominion in Maryland, as absolute Lord and Proprietary, there
needs no more then his Commissions and Processes running in this style, viz.
We, Us, and, Given under our hand and greater Seal of Arms, in such a year of
our Dominion, etc. The Oath also, that he tenders to all his Subjects and the
Inhabitants, such being the very words thereof, as by the Oath it self, copied
from his own hand, and herewith published, appears. This is surely incompatible
to the English Nation, that there should be any such principality erected over
them, whereas the books of Law teach us, that all Writs, Executions, and
Commands ought to be done in the name of the Supreme Authority only, and is so
appointed by the late Platform of Government, for all the Dominions of the
Commmonwealth, of which this is a part; and by a late Ordinance declaring
Treason upon such penalty, that none ought to exercise any power, but in the
Lord Protector's name; and these men acting so wilfully, cannot excuse
themselves. By the ancient English Laws, all those Pleas that concern Life, and
Member, and Pardons, cannot be done in the name of any inferior Person; and all
Writs, Indictments, and Process as heretofore, so must now only be in the name
of the Lord Protector, and not in the name of the Lord Baltamore's, as he has
assumed in Maryland. And whereas the Lord Baltamore pretends to the like
privileges as in the County-Palatine of Duresme, even those privileges of
Duresme, and all the other County-Palatines of England, were, and are taken
away as dishonorable, and incongruent to the English Nation, by the Statute of
the 27 Hen. 8. 25. With what strange confidence then does the Lord Baltamore
publish to the world, That these Royalties and Privileges are warranted by his
Patent, when as they are contrary to Law, and to the Government now established
under his Highness, and to a Clause in his Patent, wherein it is provided, That
no Construction be made thereof, whereby the Government in the Commonwealth of
England should suffer any prejudice or diminution.

Whereby it appears there was as good Cause to reduce Maryland as Virginia; the
People, and General Assembly thereof also complaining of their Grievance, among
many other exorbitant Usurpations of Lord Baltamore over them, as appears by
their Complaint in Governor Green's time, made and Recorded there by a
Committee of that Assembly: But it is known that Governor Green was deposed by
Lord Baltamore, for suffering that Committee, and not for proclaiming the
King's Son, as he aleadgeth, when no such thing appears in rerum natura, nor no
word in all his many Instructions, of the Parliament, much less of his
pretended affection to them, or their friends, but clean contrary: And it is
notoriously known that all the Lord Baltamore's Governors usually took the
Kings part against the Parliament; and his Brother, Mr. Leo. Calvert, his only
Governor while he lived there, ever declared himself against them: And to
evince this irrefrageably, and clearly to demonstrate the management and
complexion of this business, both Lord Baltamore himself, and his Brother, by
long Solitations at Oxford. procured and sent over in Anno 1644. Commissions
under the Kings Broad Seal, to surprise the Parliaments and London-ships in
Virginia; and to impose Customs, raise Regiments, and Fortify the Country
against the Parliament; which appears by several Writings under the Lord
Baltamore's Hand and Seal, (one of which is hereunto annexed.) They did with
zeal proclaim the Kings Son, Charles the Second, at Maryland; and some that
read it, and assisted therein, of the primest rank, are still continued
Counselors by him, and never a word of blame; whereas it is evident his own
Interest is more than circumspectly watched over, and contended for. How can he
pretend that his Governor, Captain Stone, bare any affection to the Parliament,
when without check from himself, in their Assemblies Laws, he used the name of
King, and His Majesty; and of Charles the First, when the Second was Proclaimed
there? And why did Lord Baltamore himself in England advisedly consent and
approve those Laws in terminis, under his hand, 1650. if such had not been his
own thoughts toward the Parliament? The Commissioners that were employed by the
Parliament to Reduce Virginia, Anno. 1652. were commanded to Reduce all the
Plantations in the Bay of Chesapiak; and then, that all Writs should issue in
the Name of the Keepers of the Liberty of England: They saw not how they could
decline this service, well knowing how contrary to those Commands, and the
Honor and Interest of the Parliament, the Government of Maryland was exercised;
and think strange any should pretend assistance and supply of Victuals from
Maryland to that Fleet, when no such thing ever was; that the Parliament Ships
were entertained there in his Harbors, whenas never any of them came at
Maryland, nor within near 100. miles thereof, save only the Ginny Frigot, who
went thither to Reduce that Province; they knew his Governor had always bore
affection to the Kings side, that Charles the Second (as has been said) was
proclaimed there, that the Council were all Papists, or indifferently affected,
and that they refused to Govern the people by the Laws of England (another
Clause in the Parliaments Commission) to which several of their actings, and
even Lord Baltamore's Instructions were contrary, as in this particular, and
many others, appears by the Reports of the Committee of the Navy, and the
Council of State, to whom the Parliament referred this Cause; a Copy of which
Report is hereunto annexed: And they ruled in Maryland in such an absolute way
and authority, as no Christian Prince or State in Europe exercises the like.

His Governor has an absolute Negative Voice in all things, and in the
Assembly of the Burgesses; calls into the Upper House (as he terms it) whom he
will, to over-vote the rest; places and dis-places whom he will in that
Council: and the Lord Baltamore himself, though in England, appoints all
Officers, even to the meanest degree; and who flatter him most, are sure to
have it: His Mandates are sent over to stop Justice, and the Judges imprisoned
for proceeding according to Justice: Writs are given out under the Governors
hand in his own Case, without any judgment of Court, to seize men's Goods into
the Governors hands: His Governors are not suable for any just debts, and so
they usually exercise their privileges, even to the oppression and discontent
of the people: No Appeals allowed from their Courts, though consisting but of
two men, and those perhaps of no great knowledge or skill in Government, no not
to the general Representative Assemblies. It would be infinite to rake in this
Dunghill; but all indifferent men that have lived and been there* know these
things to be sad Truths; and surely not without cause, have the general
Assemblies there, most of the Council and the Freemen, been often contesting
with the Lord Baltamore's Governors about these things, and yet could never
obtain any redress from him; but have resolved to Petition the State of England.

Why therefore should Maryland, so ill Founded, and so ill Managed, be wrung
from the right of Virginia, against all Law and Equity, as is before truly set
forth? And be established to Lord Baltamore, a professed Recusant, as his
published Book intimates; who has in effect made it a subject of his own
domination and tyrranny (being his main aim:) But to color it, and the better
to get friends, first made it a receptacle for Papists, and Priests, and
Jesuits, in some extraordinary and zealous manner; but has since discontented
them many times and many ways; though Intelligence with Bulls, Letters, etc.
from the Pope and Rome be ordinary for his own Interests; and now admits all
sorts of Religions, and intended even 2000 Irish, and by his own Letters clears
and indemnifies one, that said, Those Irish would not leave a Bible in
Maryland. His Country, till he employed Captain Stone, never had but Papist
Governors and Counselors, dedicated to St. Ignatius, as they call him and*
his Chapel and Holyday kept solemnly: The Protestants for the most time
miserably disturbed in the exercise of their Religion, by many ways plainly
enforced, or by subtle practices, or hope of preferment, to turn Papists, of
which a very sad account may from time to time be given, even from their first
arrival, to this very day.

Virginia has used all good Neighborhood toward them, without which
assistance and supply, even of all things, they could not have subsisted; for
their numbers were inconsiderable, and their Adventures small and very little
after the first ship, in comparison of such a work. And though Lord Baltamore
pretends great Adventures with his Friends thither; yet none have appeared
there to any considerable value from him for many years, only what Merchants,
and some few have done upon Returns of Tobacco and Beaver: so that in Truth it
will appear, and that by his own Letters too, Maryland has been chiefly
planted by Virginia from first to last, and by people from thence wanting seats
in their narrow limits; Maryland taking away above half the Country, which (as
has been said before) was only discovered by Virginia, with continual Trade
and abode of people there for above 20 years, by Commissions and Warrants in
the King's Name, and was planted by Colonel Claiborn under Virginia Government,
some years before ever the name of Maryland, or Lord Baltamore was ever heard
of there; which himself knew, though he misinformed the King, and obtained his
Patent upon pretense of Unplanted places only.

But the many illegal Executions and Murders of several persons at the Isle of
Kent by the Lord Baltamore's commands and his Officers; the Imprisonments,
Confiscations of many men's Estates, and of Widows and Orphans, to the
destruction of many Families there; especially his seizure of Captain
Claiborn's Estate, though out of his Patent, because planted, to the value of
6000 pounds, with the great tyranny and wrong done there, although the then
King Declared and Commanded the contrary, but was disobeyed by the Lord
Baltamore's Agents, are too long to be inserted here.

Many Inconveniences and Losses has Virginia suffered by Maryland, of which
the continual Invitation and Entertainment of runaway servants, and protecting
fugitive persons and indebted, is not the least: But above all, it is easy to
be made appear that the Lord Baltamore has continually ever since their
seating there, interposed in the matters of Government in Virginia by the
potency of his friends in the late Kings Court, both by placing and displacing
the Governors, Counselors, and Supreme Officers, as they stood affected or
were displeasing to him.

Mr. Bennet and Captain Claiborn being two of the Commissioners, that were
employed by the Parliament to reduce Virginia and Maryland, are strangely taxed
by Lord Baltamore for being his declared enemies: indeed, it seems for their
service to the Parliament, he is become implacable toward them, though Captain
Curtis, another Commissioner now in England, and all Maryland can testify how
unwilling, and how tenderly they did any thing, there, and how much they
desired and endeavored to have declined any alteration, if either Captain
Stone the Governor or the Council, would here issued out Writs in the name of
the Keepers of the Liberty of England, and have promised to govern according to
the Laws of England; both which they refused under their hands: and the
Commissioners being sent to Maryland, is since owned by the Report of the
Committee of the Council of State, and the Lord Baltamore taxed and blamed for
not issuing out Writs as they required them; and therefore seems a bold
aspersion for the Lord Baltamore to publish, that Maryland being struck out of
their commission, was afterward by some mistake put into the Commission the
second time: and as strange it seems, that now since the reduction of Maryland
the Lord Baltamore in opposition and contempt of the Supreme Authority of
England, should cause his Governor and Council most falsely and rebelliously to
revolt and recede from the same, and give instructions under his own hand, as
he had lately done, to issue out all Writs and Proceedings in his own name
only: which they have accordingly done, and not the least mention of the Lord
Protector's name in all their Government. This the said Commissioners, though
they received confirmation of their Commission from the Parliament under the
Seal, (the Original the first time miscarrying) yet bore with a long time only
by ^etters out of Virginia, admonished Captain Stone and that Council of their
error, and protested against their actings: but they continued obstinate. The
Commissioners were desirous still to expect and attend a settlement and
determination out of England, and to intermeddle as little as they could. But
about a year since Lord Baltamore sends over Instructions and Commands to
Captain Stone* and his new made Council, all or most Papists, or indifferent,
to seize the Lands and Estates of all such as would not take the Oath of
fidelity (as he styles it) before specified. But the people of Maryland
generally abhorred this Oath, and justly as is conceived, especially those of
Patuxent and Severn declined to take it, as being against their Engagement,
incompatible with their subjection to the Commonwealth of England, and in^
congruous to swear to serve two absolute Superiors, whereupon Captain Stone and
his Counsel proclaim them seditious, and rebels to Lord Baltamore, and forget
not to include the two Commissioners, though in Virginia under the same name,
with other opprobious terms: whereupon the people of Patuxent Sovern, and Kent
often and earnestly apply themselves if possible to have relief from those
Comissioners, yet they still desirously forbore to intermeddle, hoping it would
be done out of England until after many solicitations Mr. Bennet and Captain
Cla^bo^^ with only two men in July last went thither in a Boat, yet using all
^air means: but how ill they were treated for their moderation, and intended to
be surprised by night, and made Prisoners, and how they were necessitated to
prevent greater mischief and the present ruin of hundreds of Families to
interpose to have that Oath suspended, and the Government managed in the Lord
Protector's name* (which being denied to avoid bloodshed* they reassumed the
Government out of those hands that so ill-managed it, and placed it in others
for the time being under his Highness the Lord Protector, until he should
please to signify his further pleasure) will appear in a Declaration then and
herewith published, together with the peoples Petition, the Commissioners
answer thereunto, and an Order for settling the Government in the hands of
Captain William Fuller, and others.

The Lord Baltamore also since gives particular Commission and Command to seize
the persons of those Commissioners, under his Hand and Seal, dated in November
last; and for their service to the Lord Protector to proceed against them as
abettors in muti^y and sedition; chides, and upraid Captain Stone for cowardice
provokes him to fighting and bloodshed, (a course too often acted in Maryland)
appoints another Governor in case he decline it, and yet sends no revocation of
the Commissioners reducement, though he acknowledges he sought it earnestly of
the Lord Protector but could not obtain it; yet to bli^de and delude Captain
Stone and his Counsel* there came over (...) Letter of Recommendation from his
Highness of one Captain Barbar, and by what practice or mistake is not known* a
subscription thereon to Captain Stone Governor of Maryland. And by this
(together with a Copy of that Petition of the Merchan^s and others trading to
Virginia, brought in by Mr. Eltonhead, and sent over by Lord Baltamore,)
Captain Stone, and all Maryland fall to arms, and disarm and plunder those that
would not accept the aforesaid Oath. A part of them at last stood upon their
guard, only sought to Captain Stone to show his Commission, and they would
submit; he caused to imprison their Messengers* and being of far greater
number, assaulted them at their houses, threatens to have their blood, calls
them Roundhead Rogues and Dogs, brought whole bagfuls of chewed Bullets,
rolled in powder, saying, The Devil take him that spares any; and so falls on
upon the day dedicated to the Virgin Mary, with the word Hey for St. Mary: but
the Protestants commanded their men not to shoot upon pain of death, until some
being slain by a volly of shot from the Marylands, they defended themselves,
and God confounded Capt. Stone and all his Company before them: there were near
double the number in Prisoners to the Victors, twenty slain, many wounded and
all the place strewed with Papist beads where they fled; but the Proceedings
thereof, and how the arm of the Lord was revealed, and his mighty power
manifested even to administration, together with the success, and the evils
drawn upon themselves, appears by the relation thereof, at this time also
published by a Messenger from thence.

The Lord Baltamore pretends in print, his entertainment into Maryland of the
Parliaments Friends thrust out of Virginia; but those very men whom he so
styles coming thither being promised by Captain Stone, that he would (...)
urging the Oath upon them, complain of it to the Parliament, are in answer
thereunto vilified by Lord Baltamore, and publicly taxed for obscure factious
fellows* and in his later Letters termed the basest of men, and unworthy of the
least favor or forbearance; such advantages does he make on all sides, at such
a distance, and in such incomposed times, that he confidently takes the liberty
to aver such extreme and contrary things which amaze other men that see them.
The place, as himself confesses, had been deserted, if not peopled from
Virginia. He might with more reason scruple to supplant the Rights of the most
considerable conjuncture of worthy men that ever undertook such an Adventure,
as Plantation out of England; which has been the beginner and parent of all
the rest.

The late King James revoked the Virginia-Companies Patent, for denying him to
alter the Government, for which he had fundamentally provided to give
Instructions from time to time, and was the same, which the last King did by
his Commission to Sir William Davenant, of which the Lord Baltamore speaks so
much, and makes such inferences as serve his own ends. But the Truth is, all
that can rightly and properly be collected from thence is only this, (his
right to the Soil being in express words reserved) if the King might dispose of
the Government of Maryland, why not the Parliament, as they have done; and why
not the Lord Protector as he also has done? Another of those Fundamentals was,
That no Papists should be tolerated to remain in Virginia, but sent away if
they would not take the Oath of Allegiance, and was so practiced: this the old
Lord Baltamore refusing, stayed not in Virginia; and, Hinc illa lachryma, to
all those that were of the Council, who with their wives and children have not
suffered a little for it; of which only Colonel Matthews and Colonel Claiborn
remain alive. His Son this Lord Baltamore now publishes himself a Recusant, and
avers contrarily, that the Laws against Papists and Recusants extend not
thither; yet his Patent says, No interpretation shall be admitted thereof, by
which God's holy and truly Christian Religion, or the allegiance due to the
Successors of the State of England, should suffer any prejudice or diminution.

By all which surely it is most evident, This County Palatine aimed and coveted
by him, appears disagreeable to Law and to his own Patent: and as a Monster
unlike the rest of the Dominions of the Commonwealth of England, and contrary
to the late Platform of Government under his Highness the Lord Protector; yet
has he omitted no means to enforce his Dominion on those men that are most
unwilling to submit to him as an absolute Prince and hereditary Monarch.
Neither does that instance of the Roman Commonwealth in his printed Pamphlet
hold for him, who though they permitted and continued many Kingships over
people that formerly had them, as is now done in Virginia among the Indians;
yet he cannot show, that ever they constituted Kings over the people of Rome to
govern absolutely over them, as this case pleads for, to have a negative voice,
yea, and as power ad placitum, in all things that is before specified, to the
great regret of the Inhabitants, the oppression of many, and the obstruction of
justice, of which Maryland has afforded no mean examples and complement.

But although Virginia seeks the re-establishment of her bounds so often
assured under the great Seal of England, and otherwise, yet to renew any such
Authority as this of Maryland, or that of the Company over her, she desires it
not; but to be from time to time under such Government as the State of England
shall appoint.

Duplicate, Instructions for Captain Robert Dennis, Mr. Rich, Bennet, Mr. Tho.
Sleg, and Capt. William Claiborn appointed Commissioners for the reducement of
Virginia, and the Inhabitants thereof to their due obedience to the
Commonwealth of England.
WHereas the Parliament of England by an Act entitled, An Act prohibiting
trade with the Barbados, Virginia, Bermudas and Antego, has committed to this
Council several powers therein expressed, for the settling, reducing, and
governing the said Islands, printed Copies of which Acts are herewith delivered
you. In pursuance whereof, a Fleet is now set forth victualled, armed, and
manned under the command and conduct of Captain Robert Dennis, to effect by the
blessing of God the ends aforesaid, and for the management of that service, you
are hereby jointly nominated and appointed Commissioners: and for your better
directions and proceedings therein, you are to follow these Instructions
following:

Such of you as are here to repair on board the ships, John or the Guinny
Friggot of the States, which of them you shall think fit, and wind and weather
permitting to sail to Virginia, as Captain Robert Dennis shall direct and
appoint. And upon your arrival in Virginia, you, or any two or more of you,
(whereof Captain Robert Dennis to be one) shall use your best endeavors to
reduce all the Plantations within the Bay of Chesopiack to their due obedience
to the Parliament and the Commonwealth of England.

For which purpose, you, or any two or more of you, (whereof Captain Robert
Dennis to be one) have hereby power to assure, pardon, and indemnity to all the
Inhabitants of the said Plantations that shall submit unto the present
Government, and Authority as it is established in this Commonwealth; in which
pardons you may make such limitations and exceptions, as you or any two or more
of you, whereof capt. Robert Dennis to be one, shall think fit.

And in case they shall not submit by fair ways, and means you are to use all
acts of hostility that lies in your power to enforce them, and if you shall find
the people so to stand out as that you can by no other ways o^ means reduce
them to their due obedience, you or any two or more of you whereof capt. Rob.
Dennis to be one have power to appoint captains, and other Officers, and to
raise forces (...) in every of the plantations a foresaid, forth esurtherance
and good of the service, and such persons at shall come in unto you and serve
as soldiers, if their masters shall stand in opposition to the prelent
Government of this Commonwealth* you or any two or more of you whereof cap.
R^b; Dennis to be one, have here by power to discharge, and set free from their
mast^gs all such persons so serving as soldiers.

You shall cause and see all the several Acts of parliament against Kingship,
and the house of Lords to be received and published; as also the Acts for
abolishing the Book of common prayer, and for subscribing the engagement, and
all of the^ Acts therewith delivered to you.

You or any two or more of you have full power to admi^ster an Oath to all the
Inhabitants and planters there; to be true and faithful to the commonwealth of
England as it is now established without a King or house of Lo^os: You or any
two or more of you, whereof cap Robett Denneis^* be one, have power to give
liberty to the inhabitants, and planters who shall have taken the engagement
fomerly mentioned to choose such Burgesses as they shall think fit, and send to
the place you shall appoint f^r the better Regulating and governing affairs
there; provided that nothing be ^cted contrary to the Government of the
commonwealth of England, and the Laws established.

You shall cause all Writs, Warrants, and other process whatsoever to be
issued forth as occasion shall require, in the name of the Keepers of the
Liberty of England, by authority of Parlamant.

In case of Mortality, or absence of Cap. Rob. Dennis, you or any two, or more
of you have power to put in execution these instructions. In case of Mortality
or absence of Cap Rob: Dennis, Edmund Curtis command et of the Guinny Frigot is
hereby empowered to act as Commissioner with you, or any two or more of you, and
he is also in the absence of Capt. Robert Dennis to take the charge of the
Fleet so far as concerns the shipping, according to the power given to Cap.
Rob: Dennis. And lastly as we doubt not but you will use your best diligence,
and care in carrying on of this affair of consequence with which you are
entrusted, and that by your good endeavors it will have a good issue, so the
Counsel will take the same into consideration, that respect may beh^d of your
pains, and travel therein, and of a recompense agreeable to your service, when
the same shall be completed, and work upon which you are employed shall be
fi^^shed.

Whitehal 26 Sept: 1651. Signed in the name, and by order of the Council of
State appointed by authority of Parlane John Bradshaw President. Jo: Thurlo^
Cler: of the Counsel.

Committee Navy 31 December: 1652.
IN pursuance of an order of Parliament of the 31 Aug. 1652. whereby the 4. and
part of the 7. and (...) Articles agreed on at James City for the surrendering,
and settling of plantation of Virginia, with certain parchments concerning
Mariland, end the petition of the Inhabitants of Virginia, are referred unto
this Committee to consider what patent is set to be granted to the said
Inhabitants of Virginia, and to hear all parties, and to consider of their
particular claims, and to report the same unto the Parliament. This Committee
upon examination of the matter of fact, and upon hearing both partier, and
their Counsel, do find, and humbly certify.

That by a Patent dated the 23 day of May, in the 7th year of King James. there
was granted to diverse Adventurers and Planters by the name of the Virginia
Company, all those Lands, Countries, and Territories situate in that part of
America called Virginia, from Capt. or point comfort al along the seacoast to
the North ward two hundred mile; and from she said Cape, or point comfort all
along the seacoast to the Southward 200 miles; all that space of Land lying
from the seacoast of the preci^ct foresaid up into the Lands throughout from
sea to sea, West and Northwest, and and all the Islands lying within 100 miles
along the coast of both seas of the precincts a foresaid, with the soyls etc.
thereunto belonging to hold to them and their heirs for ever under the several
reservations therein mentioned.

That the said patent was afterward by a Quo wararnto in the 21 of the said
King repealed, and made void.

That in the 8th year of the late King, upon the humble petition of the Ld.
Baltemore, that he might have and enjoy a collony or parcel of ground in
America then uncuitivated, and not inhabited by any save the Indians, there was
by patent dated 20 June 8 Car. granted to the said Lord Baltemore all that
parcel of La^d lying in the part of America from the sea on the East to the Bay
of Chessaphia on the West, extending from Watkins point to Delowarr Bay, and
from Delawar Bay to Potowmeck River, and so along to Watkins point, together
with the Islands thereunto belonging, and by the said patent called the
Province of Mariland. To hold the some in as ample manner as any Bishop of
Durham, within the Bishohprick or County palatine of Durham in England,
heretofor ever held or enjoyed, and to hold the lame in free and common so^^dg,
as of the Castle of Windsor Reserving to the King, his Heirs, and successors
says, allegiance, and dominion, and two indian arrows yearly with the fifth
part of all gold and filver O ar found in and upon the said province, and also
liberty for any the people ^f England, or Ireland to fish as well in those
seas, as in any ports, or Creeks of the said province, and to salt and cure
their fish there. That in and by the said pat^nt, pov^e^ is granted to the Lord
Baltemore, and his heirs to make Laws by and with the Counsel assen^, and
approbatiou of the Freemen of the said Province, or the Major part of them,
that sh^l concern life, or Member as often as his Lordship shall think fit etc.
so as such Laws be consonant to reason and not repugnant, nor contrary, but as
near as possibles may be agreeable to the Laws of this Nation.

That by the said Patent the said Province is separated from Virginia, but by
express provisoe declared to be subject, and depending upon the Crown of
England. And in case any doubts arise about any claim in the said patent, the
same were to be decided by the Courts of England.

It also appears by examinations taken by this Committee that Kentish Island
was before the date of the said P^^e^t part of Virginia, and planted, and
inhabited by Cap. C^^aiborn three years before the arrival of the Lord
Baltemores Agenes in Maryland, and that Burgesses sat in the Assembly a^ James
Town in Virginia for the said Island. And that the Virginians had the sole
possession of the Bay of Chejopiack, and a free Trade with the Indiats.

That in the year 1633. upon the arrival of the Lord Baltemores Agents in
Maryland, the Virginians were prohibited from trading with the Indians, in any
part of Maryland, which formerly they had accustomed, whereupon several
differences arose between Capt. C^aiborns men, and the L. B planters, and capt.
Clayborn continuing his trade, a Vessel called the Longtail, was seized upon
by the Marilanders, and and one Li^u enan^ Warren (with some others whom he
sent to rescue the said Vessel) were killed by the Marilander in that attempt
in Potomoke River. That the goods of M^ Har^man, and others were all seized by
the Lord Baltemores Agents, and at length after three years suffering,
Captain Claiborn was forsibly dissei^d, and dispossessed of his plantation in
Kentish Island; and forced for safety of his life to fly into England, and ever
since the L: B. has had possession of the said Island, not suffering any of
the Virginians to trade in the said Bay without ceisure, and confiscation of
their Goods.

It likewise appears unto this Committee upon perusal of the several parchments
mentioned in the Order of Parliament, that the L: B. has constituted forms of
Oaths, and enjoined the taking thereof by all persons as well Officers, as
others within the said province, and that not to the King, but to himself, and
that he has issued out Writs in his own name, all his Commissions and process
running in this style ( viz.) we, us, and given under our hand, and greater
seal of arms in such a year of out Dominions over the said Province That he
has likewise appointed an upper and lower house of Assembly and also a privy
counsel of State, which is not mentioned in the said patent. And we further
find that several of the Laws made by the said Lord Baltemore are not agreeable
to the Laws, Statutes, and customs of England, as for instance.

That the Lands sold by the said Lord Baltemore are directed to be purchased,
and held of him, and his Heirs only in succadg as of the Manor etc.

That the Oaths hereafter mentioned must be taken by all that shall bear Office,
or shall in habit, or come into the said province upon pain ofe being
banished, and if they return, and resuse, to be subject to such Fine as his
Lordship shall think fi^.

The Oath of the Lieutenant or chief Governor of the Province of Maryland.
I A. B. do Swear I will be true and faithful to the Right Honorable
Cecilius, Lord Baron of Baltemore, the true and absolute Lord and Proprietary
of this Province of Maryland, and his Heirs, and him and them, and his and
their Rights, Royal Jurisdictions and Seigniory, all and every of them into or
over the said Province and Ill^nds (...) unto belonging. Will at all times
Dfend and Maintain to the utmost of my power; and will never accept of, nor
execute any Place, Office, or Employment within the said Province, any way
concerning or relating to (...) Government of the said Province, from any
person or Authority, but by, from, or under the hand and Seal at Arms of his
said Lordship, or his Heirs or Assigns, Lords and Proprietaries of the said
Province. I will faithfully serve his said Lordship, as Lieutenant of the said
Province, and in all other Offices committed to my Charge by his said Lordships
Commission or Commissions to me, and will willingly yield up the said
Commission and Commissions again, and all Offices, Powers, and Authorities
granted or to be granted by them or any of them, into the hands of his said
Lordship, and his Heirs and Assigns, or to such person or persons as he or
they shall appoint, whenever he or they shall appoint me so to do, and shall
signify the same to me in writing under his or their hand and Seal at Arms.
And will not presume to put in execution, or attempt to executes any Office,
Power, or Authority granted unto me by any of the said Commissions after that
his Lordship, his Heirs or Assigns, Lords and Proprietaries of the said
Province shall repeals them on any of them respectively by any writing under
his or their respective hand and Seal at Arms, and that the said Repeal be
published in this Province. I will do equal Right and Justice to the poor
and to the rich, within the said Province, to my best skill, judgment, and
power, according to the Laws and Ordinances of the said province, and in
default thereof according to my conscience, and best discretion, and the power
granted and to be granted to me by his said Lordships Commission or
Commissions; I will not for fear favor or affection, or any other cause let,
hinder, or delay Justice to any but shall truly execute the said Office and
Offices respectively according to his said Lordships Commissions to me in that
beha^f, and to the true intent and meaning thereof, and not otherwise to the
best of my understanding and Judgment. I will not know of any attempt against
his said Lordships person, or his Rights or Dominion into, or over the said
province, and the people the^in, but I will prevent resist, and oppose it with
the utmost of my power, and make the same known with all convenient speed to
his said lordship and I will in all things from time to time as occasion shall
serve faithfully counsel and advise his said Lordship according to my heart and
conscience; And I do further swear I will not by my self, nor any other person
directly, trouble molest, or discountenance any person whatsoever in the said
province professing to believe in Jesus Christ, and in particular no Roman
catholic, for or in respect of his or her Religion, no his or her free
exercise thereof within the said province, so as they be not unfaithful to his
said Lordship or molest or conspire against the civil Government established
under him, nor will I m^ke any difference of persons in conferring O^fices
Rewards, or Favors proceeding from the Authority which his Lordship has
conferred on me as his Lietenant here, for or in resp^ct ^o their said Religion
respectiatly, but merely as I shall find them faithful and wel-deserving of his
said Lordship, and to the b^st of my understanding endowed with moral virtues
and abilities fi^^ing for such Offices, Rewards or Favour^ wherein my prime aim
and end shall be from time to time (...) the advancement of his said Lordships
service here, and the public unity and good of the Province without
partiallity to any, or any other fini^^ster end* whatsoever. And if any other
Officer or persons whatsoever shall during the time of my being his said
Lordships Li^vtenant here, without my consent, or privity molest or disturb any
person within this province professing to believe in Jesus Christ merely for,
or in respect of his, or her Religion, or the free exercise thereof, upon
notice or complaint thereof made unto him* I will apply my power, and Authority
to rel^eve any person so molested, or troubled, whereby he may have Right done
him for any damage which he shall suffer in that kind, and to the utmost of my
power will cause all and every such person or persons as shall molest or tro^b^e
any other person or persons in that manner to be punishment* I will faithfully
serve his Lordship as his Chansellor* and Keeper of his great Seal of this
Province committed to my charge and custody by his said Lordships Commission to
me, to the best of my skill, and understanding I will caus^ the impression in Wax
of the said Seal to be affix^d to all such things as I have, or shall from time
to time receive commission or ^arrant for* so doing from his said (...) his
hand and Seal at arms; and that it shall no^ be ^ffixed ^o any other Writing,
or thing whatsoever, directly o^ indirectly with my privy consent, or knowledge,
(...) best endeavor carefully to preserve the said Great (...) in my custody
so long as it shall please his said Lordship to continue me in the charge, and
keeping thereof, (...) and that it may no^ be lost, stolen, or unlawfully
taken from me; And (...) by any other Person may (...) the impression thereof
unto any Wri^ing* or thing whatsoe^er without Authority for ^o doing lawfully
derived, or to be derived from by, or under a commission or Warrant under his
said Lordships Hand and Seal (...), and that I will truly and faithfully deliver
up again the said great* Seal into the hands of such Person or Persons as his
sa^^ Lordship, or his Heirs shall appoent, when his, or their pleasure for that
purpose shall be signified to me under hi^, or their hands and Seals at arms;
so help me God, and by the contents of this Book.

The Oath of fidelity to the Lord Proprietor.
I A: B. Do faithfully and truly acknowledge the Right Honorable Cecilius Lord
Baron of Balt^more to be the true and absolute Lord and Pro^itiary of this
Province and Country of M^^yland, and the Islands ther^unto belonging; And I do
swear that I will bear true faith unto his Lordship, and his Heirs as to the
true and absolute Lords and proprietories of the said Province* and the Islands
thereunto belonging, and will not at a^y time by words or actions in public or
private, wittingly or willingly to the best of my understanding any way
deroga^^ from; but w^ll at all tim^^ as occasion shall require to the uttermost
(...) my power defend and maintain all such (...) said Lordships (...),
^^itle, Interest, Pr^viledges* an^ his Royal Jurisdiction, Prerogative
propriety and Dominion over, and in the said (...) of* Maryland and the Islands
thereunto belonging and over the people who (...) shall be therein for the time
being (...) are granted (...) be granted to his said Lordship, and to his Heirs
by ^he King of E^gland in his said Lordships patent of the said province under
the Great ^eale of England, I do also swear that I will with all expedition
discover to his said Lordship, or his Lieutenane or other chief Governor of the
said province for the time being, and also (...) my best endeavors to
prevent(...) any (...)^conspiracy, or combination which I shall know or have
cause to suspect is intended or shall be intended against the person of his said
Lordship, o^ which shall tend my (...) to the disin^erison or deprivation of his
said Lordships or his heirs the Right, Title, Royal Jurisdiction or Dominion
aforesaid, or any part thereof, and I do swear that I will not either by my
self* or by any other person, or persons directly, or indirectly take accept
receive, purchase or possess any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditant^ within the
said Province of Maryland, or the Isla^ds thereunto belonging from any Indian
or Indians to any other use or uses, but to the use of his said Lordship and
his heirs or knowingly from any other person or persons not deriving a legal
Title thereunto from or under some Grant from his said Lordship, or his said
Heirs legally passed or to be passed under his or their Great Seal of the said
pr^vince for the time being, so help me God* and by the Contents of this Book.

The Oath of a Counselor of State in Maryland.
I A: B. Do swear that I will be true and faithful to the Right Honorable
Cecilius Lord Baron of Baltemore, the true and absolute Lord and Proprietory of
this Province or Maryland, and his Heirs, and him and them: and his and their
Right, Royal Jurisdictions and signiory, and every of them into and over the
said Province and Islande hereunto belonging will as all times defend and
maintain to the utmost of my power, and will never accept of, nor execute any
Place, Office, or Employment within the said Province any way concerning or
relating to the Government from time to time, but from his said Lordship* or
his Heirs, Lords, and proprietaries of the said Province, under his or their
Hands and Seal at Arms. The peace and welfare of the people of this Province I
will ever procure, as far as I can: I will aid and assist the administering and
execution of Justice in all things to my power^ to none will I delay or deny
Right, for fear, favor, or affection; I will to my best skill, and according to
my heart and conscience, give good and faithful Counsel to the said Lord and
Proprietary, and his Heirs, and to his, and their Lieutenant and chief Governor
of this Province for the time being, when thereunto I shall be called; I will
keep secret all matters committed or revealed unto me, or which shall be moved
or debated secretly in Council, and faithfully declare my mind and opinion
therein, according to my heart and conscience: And if any of the said Treaties
and Council shall touch any the Privy Counselors of this Province, I will not
reveal the same to him so touched or concerned, but will keep the same secret
until such time as by the consent of the Lord Proprietary, or chief Governor
here for* the time being, publication shall be made thereof; I will as a
Counselor, as a Justice, and Commissioner, for conservation of the peace of
this Province, do equal right unto the poor, and to the rich, to the best of my
understanding and judgment, according to the Laws from time to time in force
within this Province; and in default thereof, according to my best discretion,
and generally in all things will do as a faithful Counselor to the Lord
Proprietary; And I do further Swear, I will not by my self, or any other
person, directly or indirectly trouble, molest, or discountenance any person or
persons in the said Province, professing to believe in Jesus Christ, and in
particular, no Roman Catholic, for, or in respect of his or their Religion,
nor in his or her free exercise thereof within the said Province, so as they be
not unfaithful to his said Lordship, nor molest or conspire against the Civil
Government established under him. So help me God, and the Contents of this Book.

That whosoever shall call any one an Idolater, Papish Priest, Jesuit,
Jesuited Papist, etc. to forfeit ten pounds; and that no Papist shall be
troubled for exercise of his Religion, so as they be faithful to his Lordship.

Whosoever shall be accessory to the running away of an Apprentice, shall
suffer death; but the party himself, if apprehended, to serve his time double.

Whosoever shall counterfeit his Lordships Seal or Sign Manual, shall suffer
the loss of his hand, imprisonment during life, or pains of death, or
confiscation of Lands or Estate, or any one or more of them, as the Governor,
and Chancellor, and Council, shall think fit.

His Lordship suffers Dutch, French, or Italian Descents to plant, and enjoy
equal privileges with the British and Irish Nations.

And lastly, In one of his Laws he mentions the High and Mighty Prince Charles,
the First of that name; and in another expresses, That none shall transport any
Tobacco's in any Dutch Vessel bound for any other Port than his Majesty's.

Unto all which Exceptions, Answer having been made by the Lord Baltamore,
which is hereunto annexed; the same is humbly submitted to the Judgment and
further direction of this Honorable House.

It has been confessed by the Lord Baltamore, That one Captain Green his
Lievtenant-Governor of Maryland, did soon after the death of the late King,
proclaim his Son Charles Stewart King of England, etc. for which his Lordship
^aith he did by a Writing under his hand and seal (which is one of the
parchments remaining with this Committee) revoke the Commission granted to the
said Captain Green, and appointed one Stone in his room: but there is no such
cause mentioned in the said Writing.

It likewise appears, That in March 1651. the Governor and Council of Maryland,
being required by the Commissioners that were sent thither, to issue forth
Writs in the Name of The Keepers of the Liberty of England; they refused the
same, saying, They could not do it without breach of their Trust and Oath.

To the Honorable, Richard Bennet, and Col. William Claibourn, Esquires,
Commissioners of the Commonwealth of England, for Virginia and Maryland.
The Humble Petition of the Commissioners and Inhabitants of Severne, alias Ann
Arundel County.
Shows,
THat whereas we were invited and encouraged by Captain Stone, the Lord
Baltamore's Governor of Maryland, to remove our selves and Estates into this
Province, with promise of enjoying the liberty of our Consciences in matter of
Religion, and all other privileges of English Subjects; And your Petitioners
did upon this ground, with great cost, labor, and danger, remove our selves;
and have been at great charges in building and clearing: Now the Lord Baltamore
imposes an Oath upon us, by Proclamation, which he requires his Lieutenant
forthwith to publish; which if we do not take within three months after
publication, all our Lands are to be seized for his Lordships use. This Oath we
conceive not agreeable to the terms on which we came hither, nor to the liberty
of our Consciences as Christians and free Subjects of the Commonwealth of
England: Neither can we be persuaded in our Consciences by any light of God, or
engagement upon us, to take such a^ Oath; but rather humbly conceive it to be a
very real grievance, and such an oppression as we are not able to bear; neither
do we see by what lawful power such an Oath, with such extreme penalties, can
by his Lordship be exacted of us who are free Subjects of the Commonwealth of
England, and have taken the Engagement to them. We have Complained of this
grievance to the late honorable Council of State in a Petition subscribed by
us, which never received any answer, such as might clear the lawfulness of such
his proceedings with us: but an aspersion cast upon us of being Factious
fellows; neither have we received any Conviction of our error in not taking the
said Oath, nor Order by that power, before whom our Petition is still
depending, to take it hereafter; neither can we believe that the Commonwealth
of England will ever expose us to such a manifest, and real bondage (who assert
themselves, The maintainers of the lawful Liberties of the Subject) as to make
us Swear absolute subjection to a Government, where the Ministers of State are
bound by Oath to countenance and defend the Roman Popish Religion, which we
apprehend to be contrary to the Fundamental Laws of England, the Covenant taken
in the three Kingdoms, and the Consciences of true English Subjects: and does
carry on an arbitrary power, so as whatever is done by the people at great
costs in Assemblies, for the good of the people* is liable to be made Null by
the negative Voice of his Lordship; But affirmative Propositions and Commands
are incessantly urged, and pressed, and must not be denied.

In Consideration whereof, we humbly tender our Condition and Distraction, upon
this occasion falling upon the hearts of all the people, to your view and
Consideration, entreating your honors to relieve us according to the Cause and
the power wherewith you are entrusted by the Commonwealth of England: the
rather, because upon such an exigent as this, we have none to fly to but your
selves the honorable Commissioners of the Commen-wealth of England; not
doubting but God will direct you into what his mind and will is in this matter
concerning us, and that you will faithfully apply your selves to our Redress in
what is Just, and our lawful Liberty; which is the Prayer of your poor
Petitioners.

Severn River, the 30. of January, 1653* Subscribed by Edw. Lloyd, and 77.
persons of the Housekeepers, and Freemen, Inhabitants.

To the Honorable Richard Bennet, and Colonel William Claibourn, Esquires,
Commissioners for the Commonwealth of England, within the Bay of Chesopiak.
The Humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the North-side of Patuxent River in
the Province of Maryland.
Shows,
THat we being reduced by your Honors from that Tyrannical power exercised over
the people of this Province by the Lord Baltamore and his Agents, unto the
Obedience of the Commonwealth of England, to which Government we have
Subjected and Engaged, and have by your Honors been often enjoined real
conformity and obedience to the same, and not to own any other power or
Authority as we will answer the contrary: In subjection whereunto, we have had
peace and freedom hitherto, which with all thankfulness we cannot but
acknowledge, and in our continued obedience, do expect from the Parliament next
under God continued peace, liberty, and protection from the pride, rage, and
insolency of their, and our adversaries: Now so it is, may it please your
honors, that of late the Lord Baltamore does by his Order and Agents seek to
set over us the old form of Government formerly exercised by him in this
Province, which we did conceive, by the blessing of God upon your honors
endeavors, had been fully made Null and void; yet notwithstanding, by the
Arbitrariness of his own will* ^he appoints Laws for us, and sets up Popish
Officers over us, o^ting those Officers of Justice appointed by you; issuing
forth Writs in his own name, contrary to your honors Order and appointment: And
does by Proclamation under his own Hand, and in his own Name, impose an Oath,
which if refused by us, after three months, all our Lands and Plantations are
to be seized upon to his Lordships use: And if taken by us, we shall be engaged
at his will to fight his battles, defend and maintain him in his Patent, as it
was granted to him by the late King, etc. Which Oath, we humbly conceive, is
contrary to the Liberty and freedom of our Consciences, as Christians, and
contrary to the fundamental Laws of England; contrary to the Engagement we have
taken in Subjection to the Commonwealth of England, and unsuitable to Freemen,
to own any other power than that to which we belong, and to whom we are, and
have Engaged; and contrary to the Word of God, to fight for, and defend, and
maintain Popery, and a Popish Antichristian Government; which we dare not do,
unless we should be found Traitors to our Country, fighters against God, and
Covenant-breakers.

The Premises Considered, we humbly spread our Condition before your view and
Consideration, hoping that as you are Commissioners for the Commonwealth of
England, and that power which God has put into your hands, that you will up,
and be doing, in the name and power of our God, that we be not left for our
faithfulness as a prey to ungodly, and unreasonable men, before we can make our
Complaint and Grievance known to the Supreme Authority of England; which with
all readiness we shall endeavor to do by the first opportunity; and from whom
we do hope, and shall expect, by God's blessing* to have a gracious Answer, and
suitable Redress; And your Petitioners hereunto Subscribed, shall pray, etc.

Dated in Patuxent River, in the Province of Maryland, the first of March,
1653. Subscribed, Richard Preston, and 60. more of the Housekeepers, and
Freemen.

An Answer to the Petitions lately Received from the Inhabitants of the Rivers
of Severn and Patuxent.
Gentlemen,
WE have lately Received from you a Petition and Complaint against the Lord
Baltamore his Governor and Officers there, who upon pretense of some uncertain
Papers and Relations to be sent out of England, but no way certified or
authenticated, have presumed to recede from their Obedience to the
Commonwealth of England, to which they were reduced by the Parliaments
Commissioners; to the contrary whereof, nothing has been sent out of England
as far as is yet made appear unto us; But Duplicates and Confirmation of the
Commissioners Power and Actions were sent from the Parliament since the
Reduction of Virginia and Maryland. Now whereas you Complain of real Grievences
and Oppressions, as also of the Imposition of an Oath upon you against the
Liberty of your Consciences, which you say you cannot take as Christians, or as
Free Subjects of the Commonwealth of England; We have thought good to send you
this Answer, That because we, nor you, have not as yet received, or seen
sufficient order, or directions from the Parliament and State of England,
contrary to the form to which you were Reduced and Established by the
Parliaments said Commissioners; Therefore we advise and require you, that in no
Case you depart from the same, but that you continue in your due Obedience to
the Commonwealth of England, in such manner as you, and they, were then
appointed and engaged; And not to be drawn a^ide from the same upon any
pretense of such uncertain Relations, as we hear are divulged among you. To
which we expect your real Conformity, as you will answer the contrary;
notwithstanding any pretense of power from the Lord Baltamore's Agents, or any
other whatsoever to the contrary.

Virginia, March the 12, 1654. Your very loving friends, Richard Bennet. Will.
Claibourn.

A DECLARATION Published in MARYLAND.
IT cannot be unknown to the Inhabitants of Maryland, that about two years
since, this Province was Reduced and Settled under the Obedience of the
Commonwealth of England, by the Parliaments Commissioners sent thither with
special Commission and Instructions to that purpose: And that Captain William
Stone, Mr. Tho. Hatton, and others, re-assuming the power and place of Governor
and Council here, undertook, and promised to continue in their said Obedience,
and to issue out all Writs, Process, and proceedings in the Name of the Keepers
of the Liberty of England, as was Commanded by the said Instructions, by which
Maryland was Reduced; which said Commission and Instructions have been since
renewed, and the proceedings of the said Commissioners owned by the Committee
of the Council of State, as by their Order and Report drawn up for the
Parliament may appear, wherein the Lord Baltamore's Agents are taxed for
refusing to issue out Writs in the Name of the Keepers of the Liberty of
England. Notwithstanding all which appearing so clear and evident, The said
Captain Stone, and Mr. Hatton, though they continued, and exercised the
Government for some time, and for diverse Courts, in the Name of the Keepers of
the Liberty of England, yet have they since, upon no good ground, falsified
their said trust and engagement, though acted publicly, and after long Advice
and Consideration: And having rejected, and cast off their said Obedience to
the Commonwealth of England, have further refused to Govern this Province
according to the Laws of England, but declare and assume a power and practice
contrary thereunto, and contrary to the late Platform of Government of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereof; As
namely, by the Governors Negative Voice in Assemblies, and his choosing and
removing Counselors at pleasure, and the like, is manifest. And whereas we
have lately received Commands from his Highness the Lord Protector, to publish
the said Platform of Government; and that all Writs and Proceedings should be
issued in the Name of his Highness; to which, though we desire this Government
should be conformable, yet the said Captain Stone, and Mr. Hatton, having
lately Associated unto them diverse Counselors, all of the Romish Religion, and
excluding others appointed by the Parliaments Commissioners, have, and do
refuse to be obedient to the Constitutions thereof, and to the Lord Protector
therein; And have in the name, and by special direction of the said Lord
Baltamore, made Proclamation, and exacted an Oath of Fidelity from all the
Inhabitants of the Province, contrary, and inconsistent to the said Platform of
Government; which said Oath nevertheless, and the Law here commanding the same,
and many other Laws, are likewise by the Report of the said Committee of the
Council of State, declared to be contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the
English Nation; which is an express breach of his Patent. And whereas the said
Oath, in many particulars, is distasted by all the Inhabitants of Maryland; and
especially out of tenderness of Conscience by all Northern Plantations of
Patuxent and Severne, who having lately engaged to the Parliament of England,
do say, and declare, they cannot take the said Oath to the Lord Baltamore to be
absolute Lord and Proprietary of Maryland, and to the utmost of their power, to
defend and maintain all his Rights, and Royal Jurisdictions, Prerogatives,
Dominion, etc. Upon which their refusal of the said Oath, the said Captain
Stone, by the said Lord Baltamore's especial direction, has set forth a
Proclamation, declaring, That all such persons so refusing, shall be for ever
debarred from any Right, or Claim to the Lands they now enjoy, and live on: And
that the said Captain Stone, as his Lordships Governor, is thereby required to
cause the said Lands to be entered, and seized upon, to his Lordships use.

By which strange, and exorbitant proceedings, many great Cruelties and
Mischiefs are likely to be committed, and many hundreds, with their Wives and
Families, are utterly ruined, as has been formerly done here, and at Kent.
though Planted before the Lord Baltamore's Claim to Maryland; with many
Murders, and illegal Executions of men, Confiscations of Estates and Goods, and
great miseries sustained by Women and Orphans: In Consideration and just fear
whereof* the said Planters of Patuxent and Severne, have made their often
Addresses to us, as some of the then Commissioners for the Reducement of
Maryland, and most lamentably Complain of the great Danger they stand in of
being utterly undone, and chiefly for engaging their Fidelity to the
Commonwealth and Parliament of England, now devolved to his Highness the Lord
Protector; their Obedience, and Faith to both, being plainly repugnant to each
other, and inconsistent.

We therefore the Commissioners of the Parliament, having written and proposed
to the said Captain Stone and that Council, for a Meeting, to procure a right
understanding in the matters aforesaid, and to prevent the great inconveniences
likely to ensue; In Answer thereunto, though they acknowledge our Lines
Peaceable, yet so exulcerated are their minds, that in the very next Line they
add, We in plain terms say, We suppose you to be Wolves in Sheeps clothing;
with many other following like uncivil, and uncomely words, and expressions.

In Contemplation therefore of all the Premises, we have thought fit for to
make publication hereof, and to justify and manifest our proceedings in these
Affairs, left many people may be ensnared by false and cunning suggestions and
pre^ences, as lately has been practiced herein, the falsitie whereof time has
sufficiently demonstrated; And we are ready to give further satisfaction for
the truth of any of the particulars before alleged, if any shall desire it, or
repair to us to that purpose, which they may securely do.

Wherefore we advise, and in the Name of his Highness the Lord Protector,
Require all the Inhabitants of this Province, to take notice of the Premises,
and to contain, and keep themselves in their due obedience under his Highness
the Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto
belonging, of which, this is undoubtedly a part, and ought to be Governed
accordingly; whereby they may assure themselves of the peaceable enjoyment of
their Liberties profession of their Religion, and their Estates, and that they
shall be protected from wrong and violence in what kind soever.

Hereby also Protesting against the said Captain William Stone, Mr. Thomas
Hatton, and all others any way Confederate, or Assistant with them in their
unlawful practices, that they may be accomptable, and answerable to God and the
State of England under his Highness the Lord Protector, for all the mischiefs,
damages, losses, and disorders that may, or shall happen thereby.

Dated at Patuxent in Maryland the 15. of July, 1654. Richard Bennet. Will.
Claiborne.

Captain William Stone's RESIGNATION of the GOVERNMENT.
Whereas since the Orders or Directions of the Commissioners of the State of
England for the Government of this Province of Maryland, of the 28* of June,
1652. I William Stone Esquire, Governor of the said Province, was Enjoined by
the Direction, and Appointment of the Right Honorable, the Lord Baltamore, Lord
Proprietary of the said Province, to issue out all Writs, and Process, within
this Province, in his the said Lord Proprietaries name, and to admit of those
of the Council which were appointed by his Lordship and no other: And whereas
upon my Compliance with his Lordships Commands therein, not any ways
contradictory, so far as I understand, to any Command from the Supreme
Authority in England; the said Commissioners, in pursuance of their
Declarations lately here published, have threatened, and gone about by force of
Arms to compel me to decline his, the said Lord Proprietaries, Directions and
Commands before mentioned; which in regard of the trust reposed in me, by his
said Lordship, as Governor here under him, I conceive I was engaged not to do;
I have therefore thought fit, for prevention of the effusion of Blood, and
ruin of the Country and Inhabitants, by an Hostile Contest upon this occasion,
to lay down my Power as Governor of this Province under his Lordship; and do
promise for the future, to submit to such Government as shall be set over us by
the said Commissioners, in the Name, and under the Authority of his Highness
the Lord Protector.

Witness my Hand the 20. of July, 1654. In presence of William Stone. Thomas
Gerrard. Thomas Hatton. Edm. Scarburgh.


Order for settling the GOVERNMENT OF MARYLAND.
Whereas by several Orders drawn up and Published at St. Marie's the 29. of
March, and the 28. of June, 1652. Maryland was Reduced and settled under the
Authority and Obedience of the Commonwealth of England, as to the Government
thereof, by special Order and Command of the Council of State by Commission
from the Parliament, and was left in the hands of Captain William Stone, Mr.
Hatton, and others; who were required, and promised to issue out Writs and
other Process in the Name of the Keepers of the Liberty of England, according
to the express words of the Commission and Instructions for Reducing, Settling,
and Governing of all the Plantations in the Bay of Chesapiak to the Obedience
of the Commonwealth of England, as in, and by the aforesaid Orders and
Proclamations may, and does appear: And whereas the aforesaid Captain Stone, by
special Order and Directions from the Lord Baltamore as it appears, was
persuaded, and induced to go away from his Obligation and the Trust reposed in
him, By issuing forth Writs, and all other Process in the Name of the Lord
Proprietary of this Province, placing and displacing those of the Council, and
imposing an Oath upon the Inhabitants, contrary unto, and inconsistent with the
said Engagement and Oath to the Commonwealth of England, upon the Penalty and
Forfeiture of the Lands of all such as should Refuse to take the same within
three Months after publication thereof, which were then to be Entered upon, and
Seized to his Lordships use; thereby occasioning great discontent and
disturbance among the Inhabitants, besides the Irregularity and Cruelty of the
said proceedings, and the Opposition, Contempt* and Rebellion therein to the
Commonwealth of England, and his Highness the Lord Protector. And further,
whereas by a late Proclamation, dated the 4th. of this Month, published in this
Province, both the Commissioners of State, and the people who adhered to their
Engagment to the Commonwealth of England, and refused to own, or acknowledge
any other Name or Authority, as to Government, or to take any other Oath but
what they had already taken to that power, were charged, That they drew away
the people, and led them into Faction, Sedition, and Rebellion against the Lord
Baltamore; whereby not only the Lands and Plantations of many hundreds of
people, but also their Estates and Lives were liable to be taken away at the
pleasure of the aforesaid Lord Baltamore and his Officers: By all which unjust
and unreasonable proceedings, the people were put upon a necessity of standing
upon their own defense, for the Vindication of their just Rights and Liberties,
and freeing themselves from those great Oppressions, whereby the whole Province
was very much threatened, and apparently endangered. For the prevention whereof,
as also for the Relief of those who were so deeply distressed, and for the
Settlement of the Province in peace, and in their due Obedience under his
Highness, The said Commissioners by Authority derived unto them from his
Highness the Lord Protector, applied themselves unto Captain William Stone the
Governor, and the Council of Maryland, according to a Declaration of the 15 of
this Month, herewith published, who returning only opprobrious, and uncivil
language, presently mustered his whole power of men and Soldiers in Arms,
intending to surprise the said Commissioners, and as could be imagined, to
destroy all those that had refused the said unlawful Oath, and only kept
themselves in their due obedience to the Commonwealth of England, under which
they were Reduced and Settled by the Parliaments Authority and Commission as
aforesaid; Then the said Commissioners in peaceable and quiet manner, with some
of the people of Patuxent and Severne, went over the River of Patuxe^t, and
there at length received a Message from Capt. Stone, That the next day they
would meet and treat in the Woods; and thereupon being in some fear of a party
to come from Virginia, he condescended to lay down his power lately assumed
from the Lord Baltamore, and to submit (as he had once before done) to such
Government as the Commissioners should appoint under his Highness the Lord
Protector.

It is therefore Ordered and Declared by the said Commissioners, That for
Conservation of the Peace and public administration of Justice within the said
Province of Maryland, Captain William Fuller, Mr. Richard Preston, Mr. William
Durand, Mr. Edward Lloyd, Captain John Smith, Mr. Leonard Strong, Mr. Lawson,
Mr. John Hatch, Mr. Richard Wells, and Mr. Richard Ewen, or any Four of them,
whereof Captain William Fuller, Mr. Richard Preston, or Mr. William Durand to
be always one, to be Commissioners for the well Ordering, Directing, and
Governing the Affairs of Maryland, under his Highness the Lord Protector of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereof, and in his Name
only, and no other; and to proceed therein as they shall see cause, and as near
as may be, according to the Laws of England: To appoint and hold Courts for the
due administration of Justice and Right in such places, and at such times as
they shall think fit and necessary: And any of the Commissioners of the Quorum,
to issue forth Writs, Warrants* Subpoena's, etc. As also that they Summon an
Assembly to begin on the 20th. day of October next; For which Assembly all such
shall be disabled to give any Vote, or to be Elected Members thereof, as have
born Arms in War against the Parliament, or do profess the Roman Catholic
Religion. And the said Mr. William Durand is hereby appointed to he Secretary
to the said Commissioners, and to receive the Records from Mr. Thomas Hatton;
And Captain John Smith to be Sheriff for this ensuing year.

Dated at Patuxent, in the Province of Maryland, the 22 of July, 1654. Richard
Bennet. William Claiborne.


CEcilius, Lord Baltamore, To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas our Sovereign Lord the King, by His Highness Commission under the Great
Seal of England, bearing date at Oxford the 28 day of February now last past,
Has authorized Leonard Calvert Esquire, Brother of me the said Lord Baltamore,
to Treat, Conclude, and Agree at, and with the General Assembly of the Colony
of Virginia, for, and concerning the Ascertaining and Establishing by Act of
General Assembly there, of Customs and Duties to be paid to His Majesty, His
Heirs, and Successors in Virginia, upon Exportation of Tobacco, and other Goods
and Merchandises from thence, and upon all other Goods and Merchandises brought
in and imported there, other then for necessary supply for Clothing imported,
as by the said Commission more at large appears: And whereas by a Contract or
Agreement in Writing, bearing date the day of the date of the said Commission,
made between our Sovereign Lord the King, of the one party; and me, the said
Lord Baltamore, on the other party, Reciting the said Commission herein before
recited; our said Sovereign Lord the King, for the considerations in the said
Contract or Agreement expressed, Is pleased, and has agreed with me the said
Lord Baltamore, that in case a certainty of Customs and Duties shall be
Established by Act of General Assembly of the said Colony of Virginia,
according to the tenor of the said Commission, That then His said Majesty will
make a Lease or Grant to me, and such others as I shall desire to be joined
with me, of the same Customs and Duties which shall be established as
aforesaid, for such term, and under such Rents and Covenants as in the same
Contract or Agreement, are expressed; And that immediately after the
Establishing of the said Customs and Duties as aforesaid, and until such Lease
or Grant shall be made as aforesaid, I the said Lord Baltamore, and such as I
shall appoint, shall be the Receiver or Receivers, Collector or Collectors of
all such Customs and Duties as shall be established as aforesaid, to the proper
use of me the said Lord Baltamore, my Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
without account; paying certain Rents, Salaries, and Entertainments in the said
Contract or Agreement expressed and mentioned. And His Majesty has by the same
Contract or Agreement, Constituted and Ordained me, the said Lord Baltamore,
and my Deputy or Deputies, to be appointed by me, to be his Collector and
Receiver of all Customs and Duties which shall become due and payable to His
Majesty, as aforesaid, as by that part of the said Contract or Agreement which
is remaining with me the said Lord Baltamore, being under the Great Seal of
England, more at large appears: Knowye now, That I the said Lord Baltamore,
for diverse good Causes and Considerations me thereunto moving, Have
substituted, ordained, made, and appointed; And by these Presents do
Substitute, Ordain, Make, and Appoint to be my Deputy in this behalf, and do by
force and virtue of the same Contract or Agreement, Authorize and put the said
in my place and stead, and to the use of me, my Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, to Receive, Collect, and Gather all such Customs
and Duties whatsoever, as in pursuance of the before recited Commission, and
Contract, or Agreement shall be established to be paid to his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors in Virginia aforesaid, by Act of General Assembly of the
said Colony, and out of the same, to pay, and discharge all such Rents,
Salaries, and Entertainments, as by the said Contract or Agreement are
mentioned to be by me paid and discharged; rendering to me my Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, the Overplus or Remainder of the same Customs and
Duties: Giving, and hereby Granting unto the said as full Power and Authority
to recover, and receive the said Customs and Duties to be Established as
aforesaid, to the use aforesaid, when the same shall grow due; and to give
Acquittances and Receipts for the same, and to Substitute and Appoint one or
more Person or Persons under him in this behalf, and the same to re^^ke at his
will and pleasure, and to pay and discharge the said Salaries and
Entertainments, as I my self have, or may, or might claim to have by force and
virtue of the said Contract or Agre^ment; And further, to do, execute, and
finish all and every such further, and other Acts and things whith shall be
expedient and necessary to be done by the said touching the Premises by reason
of his being my Deputy as aforesaid, as effectually as I might do the same
being personally present: Ratifying, Confirming, and Allowing all, and
whatsoever the said shall do, or cause to be done in the Premises in pursuance
hereof.

In witness whereof I the said Lord Baltamore have hereunto put my Hand and
Seal at Arms, the tenth day of April; 1644. Annoque Regis Carols Angl. etc.
vicessimo. C. Baltamore.

FINIS.

