THE IMPERFECTION Of most Governments, Taken out of the EPITOMY of the ROMAN
HISTORY: Written by Lucius Annaeus Florus.
Where it plainly appears that the Liberty of the most Flourishing
Commonwealth of the Romans destroyed all Property, and its own Government
turned to Levelling, Discord and Confusion, till it brought in the Government
it most hated.

With a Reason or two added why, all Great and Free Commonwealths will be
subject to the same.

Written by Roger Trusty.
To all my Country Men whose only Love of their Nation, inclines them to a
Commonwealth; I would but show all Powers equally frail.
GENTLEMEN,
I Had no Design to cry down Liberty, nor disparage Commonwealths. I love no
coercive power in Church or State, more than is necessary for preservation of
the public ^eace, but I presume you would not incline your Nation in Blood and
Rapine on a mistake; ^specially when the Major part of our own three Kingdoms
are like to differ from you, and ^wo hundred thousand French in Arms, are
neglecting their other advantages on Christen^ome, to incorporate themselves in
your Common wealth, by yoar own Fire-sides with your ^ives and Daughters when
you Rebel. I suppose those Jealousies will be more insupporta^le to you than
your present ones, when you have Read here what you may find in Florus; (...)
not, I must conclude you are more inclined to bring in Popery than I could wish
you, for ^our supposed unerring Government.

I would have many Readers, and therefore have contracted a Subject fit for a
^ollume to a two-peny Pamphlet, which can be but half an hours trouble to any
man, if ^^y endeavors do you and my Contry a kindness, I have the only End
aimed at, by

Your humble Servant, Roger Trusty.


IT is unknown to no Body that reads Historys, that the Romans had seven Kings
in their Infancy, most of them Elected, and six of them good Princes, who did
cultivate them with Religion, Virtue, Arts and Arms according to their Mode:
but the seventh was a Usurper, Tarquin the Proud, a Man naturally Wicked, but
necessitated by his Usurpation to continue a Tyrant, because all Persons or
Powers must maintain such Wrongs by a standng Army, which turns the best
Gover-ments that can be to the worst.

But his Own and his Wives insupportable Humor, with his Sons barbarous Rape of
the fair and virtuous Lus ^coelia; gave the icensed Romans a unanimous Courage
to revolt from him, and Kingly Government together.

But though their attempts was successful, it was hardly maintained against
their Neighbors the Latins, and especially against P^rsenna King of the
Hetourians, who Armed for Tarquin, (though they could find nothing Lovely in
him,) because they did not like such a president for deposing of Kings.

But the Romans I find (in the ninth Chapter and first Book of Florus) did
submit to the Model and Persons of Brutus and Colla-tine the Husband of
Lucretia) whom they first obeyed as Consuls or Annual Kings: but the People
removed Collatine (because aliened to Tarquin) and chose Valerius Publicola in
his place, in whose Consulship it was ordained, that there should be Appeals
from the Sentences of the Consuls to the People, which made the Government an
absolute Common wealth; and this seemed alasting Foundation of Liberty, and
their continual Wars with their Neighbors kept them at Unity longer than so
great a Commonwealth could otherwise have been; for the Grecian and Italian
Commonwealths subsisted by their smalness. Venice is an Aristocracy, or
Tyranny of the Nobility, and the States of Holland are so little accountable to
their People, and so great Taxers even of Travelers on their necessary
occasions, that they may be called so too. But to come to the sirstr Buds of
disorders, in the only considerable Commonwealth that ever was, except the
Carthaginian. Florus his first Book and two and twentieth Chapter begins with
their Armies, who presuming on Liberty, stoned their General Posthumus, for
disappointing them of a Booty he had promised, and another time when they might
have vanquished the Enemy under their General Apius Claudius they refused to
Fight.

And in the same Chapter is mentioned; that one Valeron having animated the
People against their Consul, they all refused to be involved for Soldiers, and
broke the Rods carried before the Consul, as well as his Commands, this Chapter
farther says, that they grew so hardy as to send into Banishment the most
excellent of the nobility whom they believed opposite to their unbridled
desires, and Coriolanus would have obliged them to till the Earth, for which
they banished him: but he was able to besiege Rome for this, and had Ruined
their Government, had not Intercession prevailed.

Camillius was also banished by them, because they pretended that he had not
made an equal partition of the spoils of the Veens, Conquered by him between
the Army and People.

Though this gallant and honest man, Armed afterward at their intercession
against the Gauls, possessed at Rome, and saved them from Ruin by beating them
out, and then without Revenge lived and died peaceably amongst them. And this
pregnant Chapter tells us of two vehement Contests between the Senate and
People which Past the Bounds of Reason and Equity, for the Sedition was so
great, that the People abandoned their Houses and threatened to make a Desert of
the Town, and bury it in its Ruins.

The three and twentieth Chapter, first Book, mentions a Civil discord, but on
a more Just occasion against Usurers, which was appeased by an Oration.

The four and twentieth Chapter and first Book, tells us of an other Sedition,
caused by the Usurpation of the Decemury, chief Citizens, Commanded by the
people to contract the Greek Laws into twelve Tables, but these Favorites of
the people were so insolent, when they had executed their Commission, to
continue their Authority, and so far to Tyrannise: that Appius one of their
number attempted to Ravish a noble Maid, procured an unjust Sentence to pass
against her, and caused her to be draged as a Slave, till her Father Virginius
tore her from them, killed her in the Street, and than found a party strong
enough, to subdue and imprison that insolent Magistrate.

The twentieth fifth Chapter, first Book, mentions a Sedition of the people,
about Marriage into the Familys of Senators, and Cammilus tribune of the people
was the Author of that Tumult.

The twenty sixth Chapter, first Book mentions another Commotion about
admittance to Dignities equally with the Nobles, which they extorted from the
Senate.

They caused Spurius Cassius to be Murdered on a bare suspicion of affecting
Royalty.

They also destroyed Metius on the same distrust merely for being liberal to
themselves.

And for Manlius who had defended the Capital for them against the Gauls: they
for a punishment of his Pride precipitated from the top of the Rock: which he
had preferved, as the last stake of his ungrateful People, and these were the
Diseases of this infant Commonwealth, all in the first Book of Florus whilst
Italy was scarce yet sebdued.

But all this while the Comunes (being Warlike, well Armed and disciplined.)
prospered in their Wars though slowly, for they were five hundred years in
subduing Italy.

But their next quarrel being with the great Cathaginian Commonwealth, those
effiminate Affricans were worsted by Sea and Land, and justled out of Sicily,
Sardinia, and almost all Spain, till the great Hannibal General of the
Carthaginians, entertaining great Bodies of Gauls and Spanish Horse, beat them
in four set Battails, and had ruined them, if his factious Commonwealth had
not retarded his supplys, to pursue his Victory whilst the Romans were
dejected, but they recovered and beat his supplys, and then invading Afric,
Hannibal was forced to ship his Foot and leave his Victorious Horse, and was
beaten in Afric, and Carthage subdued.

So that Africa fell into their Hands, as easily as the Effeminate Asiatiques
afterward did, so that the Conquest of those two parts of the World in two
hundred years, (with some pieces in Europe was not so strange as Florus would
have it) for Alexander the great, did almost the same in ten years.

But I pretend not to Write their History, but only for a Hint that there
great Wars kept the more united at Home.

For to return to my Undertaking, the thirteenth Chapter of the third Book of
Florus, tells us plainly, that the Power of the Tribunes of the People, was the
sourse and cause of the Seditions of the Multitude.

For they being well designed as Orators and Advocates for their Preservation,
sought to increase their Authority, and Favor, by proposing plausible Laws in
their behalf,

1. As for the dividing of Lands and Inheritances for their Use. 2. The giving
away Corn to the poorer Citizens. 3. And the reducing of Causes Public and
Private to their Judicature.
All these had shows of Justice, for what could seem more equitable, then that
the People, slould recover their Original Rights from the incroachment of the
Senators.

And that they enjoying the Government of Provinces, the Knights might sustain
their Dignities, by the Profits of Causes and Judgments yet these things (says
my Author) tended to the Ruin of the Commonwealth, for it seems that the
transferring the Judicature, soon brought the Public Tribute or Revenue to
nothing, and the charging the Corn of the Poor on the public Treasure, and
wasted that also, and (as Florus says) weakened the very Nerves of the
Commonwealth, and how (says he) could one give back to the People; their
ancient Lands, without Ruining those who possessed them, and who were a part of
the People also, and enjoyed those Lands as the Inheritances of their
Ancestors, by proscription of time.

And now the fourteenth Chapter of the third Book, tells us of Tiberius
Bracchus an eioquent and graceful Tribune of the People, who mounted the
Tribunal, and proposed a Law to pass by Votes of the People, for taking away
Lands from the owners, (and by three Comissioners than appointed) to give them
to such Levellers as most wanted them, the Nobility, the owners, and some of
his Fellow Tribunes opposed him.

But he caused Eneus Octaivus his Fellow Tribune, to be thrown of the Tribunal,
threatened him with Death and made him quit his Office, but though he prevailed
then.

He Mounted another day, and then the Nobility and Owners fell to Blows with
him, made him fly to the Capital, where touching his Head to move the People
to defend him, one Scipio Nasica animated the people against him, with pretense
that he wanted a Diadem, upon which supposition his expected Protectors turned
his immediate destroyers, for they gave him no Audience before they killed him.

In the next Chapter his Brother Caius Gracchus pursued the same hopes, with
larger promises to the People.

But one of the Tribunes opposed him, and they first killed his Friends, and
the Consul Opinius Massacred him.

The sixteenth Chapter third Book, tells us that notwithstanding this Aprielus
Saturninus supported by the General Marius, always an Enemy of the Nobility
renewed the quarrel of the Gracchi, Marius caused Annius the Compeditor of
Saturninus to be publicly Murdered, they forcibly substituted a new Tribune
another Gracchus, a mean Man: but Saturninus forced the Senate to pass the Laws
of the Gracchi, threatening to deprive the Opposers the use of Fire and Water.

This Saturninus continued his Usurpation three years, was chosen Consul,
caused his Collogue Caius Memmius to be Murdered, to substitute one Glaucias an
instrument of his Civility in his Room, but the Senate at last was so Ivitated
at his Outrages and Marius forsaking him, and Bandying against him their
Forces, made him fly to the Capitol, but beleaguering him there, and cutting
off his Water, he Capitulated, Submitted, and seemed Penitent, and was admitted
into the Senate House, where the people (whose Laws he had asserted) broke in
forcibly upon him, and after an assault with Cudgels, and other Instruments of
Indignation, they Tore and Cut him to pieces.

But at last the Laws of the Gracchi were established, by new Violencies, the
power of the Senate abated, and that of the Knights so exalted, tbat they had
the Lives and Fortunes of the Senate, People, and Nobility at their despose:
seized the public Revenues, and all Italy fell into Rebellion, which the
Romans at last with much Blood and hazard quenched, as appears in the 17th and
18th Chapters of the third Book, and it also appears, tbat these Divisions
between Senate and Tribunes gave Courage to the very Slaves to Rebel against
their Masters, in the following Chapter.

And this was the natural Corruption and Club-Law of this Free-Comman-wealth,
mixed Government, where my Lords, the People could never agree with their own
Trustees, longer than their Common Enemies obliged them, but these were the
beginnings of their Miseries, the People had Liberty, and a free Commonwealth
was designed to preserve property, but I fear that in any great Kingdom or
Empire it does necessarily destroy it.

For now in the 21 Chapter of the third Book of Florus Marius a Popular General
of high Reputation, assisted by Sulpitious the Tribune of the People procured
his own Election by them, to go fight Mitridates, though Sylla had the
Commission, and was succesfully employed before him by the general Votes of the
Senate.

But Sylla not able to endure this injury, returns with his Army and enters
Rome with Fire and Sword, Slaughters and pro^ribes Marius his Party and he
hardly escaped in the Disguise of a Slave.

But Cinna and Octavius being Consuls, they divided, one being for Marius and
his Party, and the other for Sylla and the Senate, but though both were Armed,
Cinna was chaced away to the banished.

But Marius returning out of Africa, his Party flocked to him breaks open
Prisons, and making up an Army, Marches to Ostia and sacks it, his Army then
enters Rome, and spilt more Blood (says my Author) of the Senators and chief of
the Citizens, than was shed at the Sack of Carthage.

But Sylla returns again by long Marches from Asia, was again Victorious. Young
Marius and his dispairing Party in Rome commit new slaughters, not sparing the
Temples.

Sylla returns and perseveres in Cruel Slaughters, when the War was ended, they
were numberless whose Throats were Cut in the Town, till Fursidius told Sylla,
that he must leave some alive to be Commanded, Sylla then made a Roll of two
thousand of the flower of Senators and Knights, which with several sorts of
torturing Deaths finished the Cruelry at Rome, but not in other miserable
Cities of Italy.

Spain had also a share of this Confusion, in a long War under Sertorius,
proscribed by Sylla.

The next ill effect of this Dissension, was Catalines Conspiracy, to have
burnt Rome, who was hardly destroyed in a great Battle after the Discovery.

Notwithstanding the Romans Victory over the Usurping Cataline, which seemed to
have resetled their Commonwealth by the good Conduct of Cicero, the wise and
Eloquent Consul, Cato and other bold Senators, yet the World was grown so weary
of their weak and factious Government, with the bloody mischiefs it produced,
that there was a continued succession of Usurpers on it.

For the second Chapter of the fourth Book of Florus, tells us, That Pompey,
Caesar and Crassus, uniting themselves together did so overawe the Jealous
Senate and People of Rome, that without any Bloodshed, they Governed as three
Princes, for ten years together, but Crassus being slain in the Parthian War,
and Julia the Daughter of Caesar, and Wife of Pompey, dying also, the Link of
the Triumvirat was broken and Caesar and Pompey, who both aimed at Sovereign
Power, were now to dispute for the great Stake of the World together, Caesar
had fewer Nations, and less numerous Forces to follow him, but having made only
the difficult Conquest of Gaul and Germany for the Romans; he knew those
Nations united to his invincible Courage, Conduct and Fortune might give a bold
Defiance, to all the rest of the World, his success answerred his expectation,
for he beat Pompeys Lieutenant in Spain and subdued it, drove him and the
Senate together out of Italy; and at Pharsalia made the Victorious Pompey fly
his Fury, and by his personal Valor got more difficult Victories of his
Warlike Enemy in Africa and Spain, and returned Triumphant to Rome.

But Brutus and Cassius ambitious to restore their Commonwealth, cut down
Caesar, the greatest and gallantest Usurper that ever lived in the Senate, and
Pompey being Dead before him, one would have thought that the Commonwealth of
Rome must have been restored.

But the dead Caesar had more Friends than the living Senate. The People of
Rome were grown so weary of the Miseries of their own exorbitant Power, that
Brutus and Cassius were forced to fly from Rome, to other Nations, to raise an
Army to recover their last Commonwealth.

But the Major part of the Romans fought against them and their Old Government,
and beat them under their Conduct of Augustus Caesar and Anthony, and so ended
this prodigious Commonwealth.

Augustus Anthony, and Lepidus, afterward set up a most Bloody Triumvirat,
destroying by Proscription all the adverse Faction, and all that had Power or
Wealth to hurt them; and Augustus was the Cruellest of the three, whilst he
could lay the Faults upon his Colleagues; but when he prevailed upon them both,
and became sole Emperor; He proved a Wise, Just and Merciful Prince; which is
a Note to me that the Absolute Government of many Interests or Rulers in an
Aristocracy, is a greater Tyranny and Oppression then single Persons commonly
are.

But some wicked Emperors succeeded, and at last the Armies Usurped upon them,
sold and murdered them at Pleasure till their Variety of Elections brought the
Empire to decay; but the great Constantine Victorious over them all (though he
advanced Christianity) quite Ruined the Empire, by dividing it into Eastern and
Western.

By all which it appears, That Elective Empires, Usurping Powers, and Factious
Commonwealths, will be Governed and ruined by their or Foreign Armies; which
makes the World affect Hereditary Crowns.

And now I shall add some brief Comments of my own, on this Historical
Pamphlet, or Epitomy of the Roman Government When they threw off Kings, they
made the most careful Provision against Oppression and Cruelty; that a most
Ingenious People could do; for they chose two Consuls, lest one should Usurp or
Tyranize; and lest time should give them too much power to Combine together;
they made a yearly Relation or Change of those two chief Magistrates and yet
farther, to serve all on that side, they made Appeals from their Sentences to
the People as the supreme Power.

But they could not make such an Annual Rotation or Alteration in the whole
Body of the Senate or Council of State, for if that Power be not fixed in known
wise Persons improved by Practice and Experience, no Treaties of War and Peace
could go on, no private Leagues of weaker Nations against a stronger; or
Intelligence from Foreign Counsels could be had; for it cannot be thought where
Men's Lives and Fortunes depends upon Secrecy; that they will trust new
Ministers of State every year; who come in ignorant of the past Correspondances
and Transactions, nor can the Executive power of a Nation, betray Secrets by
giving a public Account to the Legislative power; and if the Romans had not
Lodged the Supreme Power, and last Appeals to themselves, they had set up an
Aristocracy, or Confederacy of many interressed Families, with their Kindred,
Friends and Relation to them. But they did not consider that the poorest sort
of the people is the greatest number, and that they must necessarily turn
Levellers for two weighty Reasons.

The first is because they want what other Men have: And the other, because
none can Usurp their Government but Rich men.

And therefore all Industrious men, that have gotten Estates must be taken
down, to the destruction of all Traffic and Industry, for who will Labor for
others to take their gains from them.

This having been the practice of the Roman Commonwealth, and the reasons
seeming apparent, that all great Nations replenishment with poor People will
do the same by themselves or Trustees, I must Conclude as I began, with
deploring the Insufficiency with most or all Governments, and wishing we may
all agree to strengthen our old fabric, since we may be knocked on the Head,
in the pulling it down* but shall never agree on a new Building though Our
potent Enemies should let us alone.

And this was too evident in Our own Government in 1641. where the Lords and
Commons deposed the King, the peoples Trustees the Commons deposed the Lords
House, and then deposed of men* Lives and Fortunes by their Votes, as a
perpetual standing Aristocratical Tyranny despising the Last for a Triennial
Succession of Parliaments as much as the other Laws of the Land, till after
many years sitting they were first Weeded and then Rooted out by their own
Army; by which it appears, that the Peoples Trustees can destroy Liberty and
Poverty, as well as the People themselves, the more to confirm the Imperfection
of all Governments, when once the Rule of the Law is broken.

This Popular Army Governed as the Romans Army did, and used the Name of a
Commonwealth sometimes, but were settled in nothing but their own Divisions,
till the Major part of them, and the people agreed to return to the ancient Law
and Government of the Nation.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtiss.


