MERCY In the midst of JUDGMENT, WITH A GLYMPSE of OR A GLANCE on LONDON'S
GLORIOUS RESURRECTION, Like a Phoenix out of it is Ashes.

Delivered in a Sermon Preached at St Dunstans in the West, Sept. 2. 1669.
Being the day of Public Fasting and Humiliation, in consideration of the late
Dreadful Fire.

By CHR. FLOWER, Master of Arts, and Rector of St Margaret Loathbury, London.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Sign of the Angel in Cornhill,
MDCLXIX.

To the Right Honorable Sir Samuel Starling Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
London, and the Honorable Court of Aldermen.
Right Honorable,
THrough the Conduct of Divine Providence having attained the place of my
Nativity, some few days before the Anniversary Fast for that Dreadful Fire,
Nigro Carbone Notandus, which cannot be marked with too black a coal; being
desired by a Reverend Brother of mine in the Ministry to Preach for him on the
forementioned day, never to be forgotten: Though my unpreparedness for so
great a Task might have furnished me with a denial, yet I entertained the
motion, having only that of the Divine Proverbialist to Apologize for my
Presumption (if it may merit such an Appellation) Pro. 16. 1
The preparations of the heart are in man, but the Answer of the tongue is from
the Lord. Having spoke a word in season, as it was thought, and being desired
to Publish it; how could I, having received so great a wound in my Temporals,
but shelter my self, and this weak Birth of my Brain under your Honors
Patronage, Those Stars of the greatest Magnitude that shine so bright in the
Firmament of the Metropolis of this Nation, whose care and vigilance has been
so influential to the carrying on of the re-edifying of it even to Admiration;
That a City, so great a City should be burnt down in three days, and rebuilt
in respect of the Diamond in the Ring of the Ornamentals of it, the Royal
Exchange, and in respect of the chief Streets of it, within the space of three
years (I had almost said two years) and a little more; this cannot but create
wonder in all that shall either see it, or hear of it: As if that in the
Prophet Isaiah Cap. 41. 6, 7.
were now fulfilled in a good sense, every one helped his Neighbor, and every
one said to his Brother, be of good courage; So the Carpenter encouraged the
Goldsmith, and he that smootheth with the Hammer him that smote the Anvil,
saying, it is ready for the Sodering, and he fastened it with Nails, so that it
could not be moved. And think it no small thing to be instruments in Gods hand
to make up those Breaches in our Ruinated Jerusalem, which our sins have made.
You may suppose me, Noble Senators, if you please, to present you with a Sprig
of Rosemary in one hand, and a Branch of Laurel in the other, or if you will,
to present you with the City in its Ruins and Ashes, and like a Phoenix
gloriously rising out of them. May it never be said, that the Re-builders of it
held a Trowel in one hand, and a Sword in the other, but may a Continuation of
Peace Crown the endeavors of all those that are employed in so Noble an
Enterprise. This is his hearty, and daily Prayer, who is

Yours Honors most humble Chr. Flower.

MALACHI IV. 5. And behold I will send Elijah the Prophet, before the Coming of
the Great and Dreadful Day of the Lord.
SOME there are that understand these words of the first Coming of Christ in
the Flesh, which though it was a Day of Salvation to God's People, yet to
others it was terrible. But I shall treat of them at present as they relate to
the day of Judgment. And if we consult the answer which the Angel gave to
Esdras, enquiring of him about the day of Judgment, we shall find this to be
part of it; And there shall Fires break forth in many places. I hope then I
need not Apologize for my self, because I have made choice of this subject, as
if a Word not in Season.

Now the two Columns on which I intend to build the Structure of my ensuing
discourse, are only the two Epithetes here in the Text given by the Holy Ghost
to the Day of the Lord; of which I shall speak first severally, and then
jointly in the Application.

The day of the Lord is here styled, Dies magnus, the Great day, and that not
without great reason: For then there shall be such a Convention, such a huge
meeting as never was before that day, and never will be after it.

For 1. Christ shall come from Heaven with Power and great Glory, as he himself
expresses it, Luke 21. 27. Saint Paul says as much, Titus 2. ver. 13. Looking
for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ. The first coming of Christ was in Humility. The second
time he shall come as the Great God with Power, and great Glory. All things
shall be subject unto him. He shall have his feet upon the neck of all Rule, of
all Authority, and of all Power: And the knees of all things in Heaven, in
Earth, and under the Earth shall bow down to him: and every Tongue confess him
to be the Lord, to the Glory of God the Father, as Saint Paul has it, Phil. 2
11.

2. All the Angels shall be present, attending like so many Courtiers upon him;
for he himself has said it, The Son of man shall come in his Glory, and all
the Holy Angels with him, Mat. 25. He shall not leave one behind him in Heaven.
The vast Regions of the Air that that multitude must needs fill! Oh what a
brave, glorious, great day must that needs be, when so many glorious Suns shall
shine in the Firmament, and among, and above them all Christ the Sun of
Righteousness! Some think the Angels at that day will bear him aloft with their
natural strength as on their shoulders, that his Glory and Power might be the
more visible to the greater terror of the wicked.

3. All the Elect will be present with him in glorious glorified Bodies, as his
Children, and dearest Friends, according to that Prophecy of Enoch, mentioned
by Saint Jude, Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints: that is,
with an innumerable company, who together with Christ shall judge the world.

4. Before him on that day shall be gathered all Nations, Mat. 25. 32. even as
many as ever were born into the world from the beginning to the end of it: Then
shall Adam see all his offspring at once, none shall be exempted from
appearing at this general Assizes; neither shall any appear by Proxy, but every
one in person; neither shall men only, but all the Legions of the Devils, how
many soever they be, they shall then appear, and that (as it is thought) in a
corporeal shape to be seen. Lord! what a great, wonderful, stupendous sight
must that needs be, to see the whole Hemisphere above embroidered with Saints
and Angels reaching unto Heaven; and beneath an innumerable multitude of the
Damned covering the face of the Earth far and near, howling, and weeping, and
sighing: but in the midst of these two vast Bodies wonderfully rallied
together, Christ the Judge. Ought not this to be styled a Great day? who ever
saw at any time such a Convention, such a Meeting, such an Assembly? Great,
confessedly great will this day of Jesreel be, that is, of the Seed of God; for
Christ shall then separate his Seed from the Seed of the Devil. As in an
Amphitheatre, such as the Romans had, innumerable spectators sat round about
it above, and below on the floor were the poor persons condemned to be devoured
by Beasts, ruefully expecting them to be turned loose upon them. Thus all the
Saints will be as so many spectators placed in the Region of the Air above; but
on the Earth the Damned that are by the Devils (when the sentence shall be
given) to be dragged to Hell.

2. It may be called the Great Day, because on that day business of the
greatest Concernment shall be Transacted. Not about the Affairs of one single
Empire, or of some certain Kingdoms, but the work of that day will be about the
business of the whole World: About the chiefest and eternal Good, about the
chiefest and eternal Evil. At that day it will be known what condition every
particular person shall abide, and continue in to all Eternity. For then as the
Tree falls, whether toward the South, or toward the North, in the place where
the Tree falls there it shall be, Eccles. 11. 3. which denotes an Eternity of
Bliss or Torment.

3. It may be called the Great Day, because that day will comprehend the past
days of all Ages: it will be as a Recapitulation of all days, from the first
day that ever dawned; and on it, as in the last Scene of a Comedy, whatsoever
at any time was acted on the Stage of the World, shall then be exhibited to
view.

1. For all the actions of mortals shall be laid open, and surveyed as at one
view. There is not an idle word, but we shall give an account of it, Mat. 12.
36. Saint Paul goes somewhat farther then this, Romans 2. 16. In that day God
shall judge, (...). The secrets of men's hearts.

2. Those Thoughts, Words, and Actions shall be examined by Christ -- Quem
latebit nil occultum,
Nec relinquet quid inultum;
as one has it: Who will suffer no Person, or Thing to escape his most exact
Scrutiny.

3. Every one shall be rewarded by Christ according to what he has acted in
the Flesh. Then the Lord will open his Treasures both of Rewards and
Punishments, which he heaped up together till that day, then to be distributed;
hence is that, Deuteronomy. 32. 32. Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed
up among my Treasures? A Treasure, you know, is a great heap, or heaps of Money
that has been a great while a gathering; and such are the actions of men, and
the deserts of them locked up from the beginning of the world in the mind and
memory of Almighty God, which he will open on that day, and reward every one
according to his doings. Saint Peter calls this day the day of Restitution of
all things, saying, that the Heaven must receive Christ, (...), till the times
of Restitution of all things, Acts 3. 21. meaning, he shall then restore
whatsoever any committed to him, or deposited as in his hand. The Apostle using
that Expression, minds me of Razis, of whom we may read in the 2. Book of
Machabees, Chap. 14. who that he might animate and encourage the Jews to stand
for their Laws, fatally wounded himself being over-zealous, rather then he
would give himself into the hands of wicked men; so when his blood was utterly
gone, says the History, he took out his own Bowels with his hands, and threw
them upon the People, calling upon the Lord of Life and Spirit, that he would
restore them again unto him, viz. at the last and Great Day, and so he dyed.
The same reason holds for evil actions, witness that expression of Saint Paul,
Romans 2. 5. But after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy
self wrath against the day of wrath. Now in treasuring, as one has well
observed, there is, 1. A laying in. 2. A lying hid. 3. A bringing out again, as
there is occasion. Thus wicked profligate persons, while by following of their
Lusts they think they do somewhat to the furthering of their happiness, they
shall in the end find, pro Thesauro Carbones, instead of other Treasure, hot
burning coals. And if it will be thus, what is there hid that shall not be made
manifest, that it may have its reward? The Adulterer who waits for the
twilight, and to whom the morning is as the shadow of death, shall in that day
be manifest at Noontide to the view of Men and Angels; and if his being known
here puts him in the terror of the shadow of death; how terrible shall that day
be to him, when what he has done in secret shall be proclaimed on the house
top!

4. It merits to be called the Great Day, because it will be a day of the
gretest combat and conquest. For behold, says the Lord, by the Prophet Joel,
In those days, and at that time, I will gather all Nations, and will bring them
down into the valley of Jehosaphat, and will plead with them there, Joel 3. 2.
Behold here the Warrior, and the Triumphant Conqueror. But with what Weapons
will he wage War? I answer, with no other then the two edged Sword of the Word
of his mouth, with which he will object against the wicked their abominable
ingratitude; so that they shall have nothing to say for themselves, no more
then he in the Gospel who had not on his wedding garment; it is said of him, he
was speechless, Mat. 22. Suppose we Christ sitting in the Air near Jerusalem
judging the world there where himself was judged, and using this, or the like
language.

Behold me sitting over against that place where first I labored, and began my
Passion; here, here in Gethsemani I did sweat blood for you; here I was
betrayed, and taken, and led like some notorious Thief, or Robber into the
City, where I was hurried from one Tribunal to another, scourged, buffeted,
abused, and at length unjustly condemned; after that, lugging my Cross, I came
to Mount Calvary, where I was Crucified for you. Behold the very place where
hanging between Heaven and Earth, (being placed between two Thieves) I offered
my self a Sacrifice for you to the Father: you Pilat can witness this, and you
Herod, Caiphas, Annas, Judas, and ye o Jews that opened thus like a pack of
Bloodhounds upon me, Away with him, away with him, he is not worthy to live;
Crucify him, Crucify him: Heaven and Earth can witness as much, for the
Heaven that was darkened* all the face of it, and the Earth opened, and did
cleave asunder the most rocky part of it: Nay, these very scars that your eyes
see in my body testify no less: After this being risen from the dead, I
ascended up into Heaven from this very Mount of Olives, in the public view of
my Apostles and many other Disciples, to show that I came down from Heaven for
your Salvation, and my Embassy being done was to return to my Father. The
Angels at my Ascension were heard to say, that I should so come in like manner
as you saw me go into Heaven; and I my self spoke of it to Caiphas, the chief
Priests, and the Jews, using this very Language; Ye shall see the Son of man
sitting on the right hand of Power, and coming in the Clouds of Heaven: why
then did ye not credit so great, and so good Testimony? Behold now my condition
is changed with yours, ye sat once as Judges, and I was the Prisoner at the
Bar, now ye are the Malefactors, and I am the Judge; see my hands and my feet,
that it is I my self; see the very holes that ye dig'd with your instruments of
cruelty in this Body of mine. These like so many mouths cry out against you,
these accuse and condemn you* go ye unworthy Wretches, ye Christ-Killers, get
ye packing into unquenchable fire; and ye o Infidels, Turks, and profligate
Christians, who know these things, or might have known them, but ye have
neglected, but ye have despised, and contemned whatsoever I did, and suffered;
ye accounted the Blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, ye chose rather to
follow the dictates of your own Lusts then of my Law: ye preferred Riches, and
sensual Pleasures, and momentary Preferments, before Eternal Salvation promised
by me; ye made a mock of me when I threatened Eternal Torments: now ye see him
whom ye have despised, now ye find my words to be more then wind; my
Threatenings not to be vain, but true; my Promises not to be Chimera's, but
realities; now ye experience your Delights and Dignities, and sinful Pleasures
ye so much magnified, to be vain and fallacious: now ye see how foolish, and
sottish, and senseless ye have been in your love; ye now lament and bewail with
a passionate wringing of your hands, and beating of your breasts, but too late,
and therefore all in vain. Go therefore ye Wicked, go ye Ungrateful, go ye
Infidels, go ye Cursed into everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels; but for you my Apostles, who saw me in this place Condemned, Scourged,
Crucified, Murdered, and yet believed in me, followed me throw the same Red
Sea of Blood; and you Apostolical, and Religious Persons, who did contemn the
world, and were not ashamed of my Cross, espoused my Poverty and Humility,
propagating my Doctrine and Faith throughout the whole world: and as for you, O
ye Faithful ones, who did believe in me your Redeemer, hope in me, love,
worship, and obey me, leading a life worthy of me, a sober, righteous, and a
godly life, who did look for that blessed hope, and this my second coming to
judgment; Come ye, come ye my Elect, come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you, from the Foundation of the world. That then must
needs be a Great Day that determines business of such great Concernment.

5. It may be styled the Great Day, because that day will put an end to the
world, will put a period to time, to troubles, and all kind of impieties, and
to all the labors and endeavors of men. Thus those days among the Romans were
called Great Days, which did put an end to great and grievous Troubles:
Alexander got the Appellation of Great in that he won strong holds, and slew
the Kings of the Earth, so that the whole world stood in awe of him, it was
hush and silent, but that silence continued not long, but till his death, which
soon came to pass. But Christ the King of Kings in that Great Day, when he has
destroyed all the wicked, he shall impose a perpetual and universal silence on
the whole world. Then the Heavens shall be silent because their motion shall
cease, and so consequently the vicissitude of day and night, winter and summer
must cease too: The motion of the Elements shall cease, and so consequently
Clouds, Winds, Rain, Hail, Tempests, and Earthquakes will be no more: All
Creatures will be silent, because there will be none to make any disturbance:
All the Studies, Arts, Disciplines, Desires, Quarrels, and Contentions of Men
will be silent, because all things that were in motion will obtain their
period; methinks our Savior pointed at this (as it were) with his finger; for
when he read that place in the Prophet Isaiah, which runs thus, The Spirit of
the Lord is upon me, etc. to Preach the acceptable year of the Lord; Et Diem
retributionis, and the Day of Retribution, it is said, he closed the Book, Luke
4. 18. hinting thus much to us, that in that Great Day of Restitution, or
Retribution, all things shall have an end, and the Heavens be rolled up like a
Book or Scroll once more. This Day of the Lord it may be styled the Great Day,
because the beginning of that Great Day called Eternity: A Type of which Day we
may read of in the Book of Josuah, Chap. 10. when Josuah that he might pursue
his Enemies to purpose, caused the Sun to stand still: The Sun and Moon stood
still the space of one whole day, so that one day was as long as two, says the
Son of Syrach; there was no day like that, before it or after it, says the
Holy Ghost, Josuah 10. 14. Thus when Christ shall encounter his Enemies, he
will make the Sun and Moon to stand still till he has revenged himself upon
them: But because that vengeance is to be Eternal, the Day must be Eternal too:
I may add, as in the Day of Josuah's victory one part of the Heaven was always
bright, and the other dark; thus in that Day it will be eternally light to the
Elect, but as long darkness with the Damned: What shall we think those People
thought in the time of Josuah, who in the opposite part of the Heavens had so
long night, with what a deal of perplexity did they expect day? and if so, what
will an Eternal night be? but if to an Eternal Night be added an Eternal
Prison, everlasting Hunger, and Thirst, a never-dying Worm, an Eternal Stink,
an Eternal Horror, Eternal Weeping, and Wailing, an Eternal Fire, and whatever
misery the mind of man is able to think of: Qualis illa nox erit! Tell me, if
you are able, what a Night that will be? Good reason then there is that this
Day of the Lord spoken of here in my Text should be styled Dies Magnus, the
Great Day.

That which remains for me to show you, is, in what respect it will be
Terrible, or Dreadful. Behold I will send you Elijah the Prophet, before the
Coming of the Great and Dreadful Day of the Lord.

Certainly, Beloved, the Dreadfulness of that Day will consist chiefly in the
Judge: As,

1. In his Dreadful coming to Judgment, which Saint John therefore ushers in
with an Ecce, Rev. 1. 7. Behold he comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see
him: The Royal Chariot then of this Judge will be a Cloud: But what kind of
Cloud think you? such a one as was that, which defended the Israelites from
extremity of heat in the day, and gave them light by night? Or like that little
Cloud in the days of Elias, no bigger at first then a man's hand, which
increasing brought rain to the parched Earth? certainly no: The Clouds that are
for this service will not be such as our eyes may often behold, coasting about
the Regions of the Air as they are driven by the Winds, and employing
themselves to the refreshment of the Earth; but stormy tempestuous Clouds
breathing Fire, and casting forth hot Thunderbolts: hence is that, Psalm 50.
3. Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence, a Fire shall devour before
him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him: Not before him only,
but, which is very observable, round about him, lest the wicked should hope to
escape by creeping behind him. That was a terrible Tempest I read of that befell
Alexander the Great, and his Army marching into the Country of Gabiza, when by
reason of continual Thundering, and Lightning with Hailstones, and Light-Bolts,
the Army was dis-ranked, so that they wandered many ways: but alas that was
nothing to the rout that will be at the coming of this Judge; Saint Paul in his
first Epistle to the Thessalonians, Chap. 1. 8. he says that he will come in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God; it is true, our
Savior has appeared comfortably to his, though over-shadow'd with a Cloud, as
at his Transfiguration; but when he comes in a warlike manner against his
Enemies, as he will do then, his appearance must needs be Dreadful.

2. This Dreadfulness will consist in his being known, Revelations 1. ver. 13.
we may read of one in the midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks like to the
Son of man, which shows that Christ the Judge of the world will be so manifest
as to be acknowledged: Then there shall be no contest about him, as whether he
be Elias, or Jeremias, or the Baptist; such questions as these shall then be
put out of question. Neither shall he come obscurely, as when he came first in
the flesh: But why is he said to be like the Son of man only, and is not called
the Son of man, as he was called when he lived on Earth? because, says one,
Sicut in Christo aliquando Divinitatis suae gloriam occultabai Humanitas, etc.
As the Humanity once obscured in Christ the Glory of his Divinity, so now the
meanness of his Humanity will seem to be swallowed up of the Glory of his
Majesty; as then at first he appeared so meanly, that little or nothing of his
Divinity externally showed it self; so at his coming to Judgment he will appear
so splendent, and glorious, that he will be believed by all to be the Son of
God. Suffer me here a little to expostulate; If powerful Herod feared him lying
in the Manger, will he not be much more feared sitting upon his Throne? If the
Buyers and Sellers were drove out of the Temple by him having a scourge of
small cords only in his hand, who shall stand before him punishing to death
with Scorpions? If he so stunned a whole Troop of his Enemies in the Garden at
the speaking of one word, that they fell backward, what Terror will it be to
hear him pronounce the last Sentence of Damnation? What amazement and shame
will take hold of them who either believed him not to be God, or did not
believe in him aright, or honored him not with a good life, who yet confessed
him to be God with their lips? Then Herod will look upon him with astonishment
as the wisest, whom when on Earth he did cause to be gorgeously attired like a
fool, on purpose to laugh at him, and deride him. Then Caiphas will behold him
coming in the Clouds of Heaven, as he himself told him to his head, whom
therefore he did pronounce a Blasphemer. Then will Pilate see him whom he
exposed to the People to be seen, nay, delivered up to their brutish will. Then
will the Jews know whether he was their King whom they denied; and then shall
all wicked wretches, who said in the pride of their hearts, Nolumus hunc
regnare, we will not have this Christ to Reign over us, see him Reigning over
them, and Arraigning them both as King and Judge.

3. In the Authority, and Power he shall be invested with, shadowed forth by
the Garment he was clothed with, which reached down to his feet, Rev. 1. 13.
Kings, says the Proverb, have long hands, but they are not so long, but some
sometimes escape unpunished in some blind places of their Kingdoms. From this
Judge there is no flinching; every Transgression, and Transgressor from him
shall receive a just recompense of reward; even those Corruptions that are most
inward, and lie up in the heart of the Country, as it were; those Pollutions,
not of flesh only (that is, worldly lusts, and gross evils) but of spirit also,
more spiritual lusts come within his cognizance: He eyes not only the act but
the intention.

4. The Dreadfulness of this Day of the Lord consists in the rigorousness of
the Judge. It Is true, he is said to be girt about the paps with a golden
girdle, but this denotes severity as well as mercy: The pardoning of the Thief
on the Cross; the long waiting for the Conversion of the Jews, and the patience
of his which we daily exercise, shows that he has paps; But a time will come,
I mean, the Day of Judgment, when he will shut up his bosom, and girt it close
about with a girdle of gold, to show the justice of such a proceeding, they
being deservedly despised then, who despise him now when he offers the milk of
Grace, and Mercy unto them.

5. In the Equity of the Judge this Dreadfulness will consist; his head, and
his hairs, it is said, were white like Wool, as white as Snow, Rev. 1. 14 that
is, the Decisions, or Conclusions of this Judge will be most pure, most true,
and most just. It Is confessed in the Fifth Chapter of the Canticles, where he is
described resembling one that is young; his locks are said to be bushy, and
black as a Raven: Because here in this life we experience Christ benign, and
liberal, for he rewards true repentance with receiving into his favor, gives
Heaven for a few Cordial Sighs, or Groans, proceeding from an humble, and a
contrite Heart; but the case will be altered when he comes to sit in Judgment,
then he will appear white as Snow, the Ancient of days, not to be wrought upon
to show favor. Youth (you know) is more liberal then old Age: Ancient people
hardly part with any thing, as knowing the difficulty of getting what youth
freely gives.

6. His Eyes, it is said, were like a Flame of Fire, that is, agile, nimble, and
able to penetrate any thing; hence is that of the Apostle, Heb. 4. 13. (...)
(...). There is not any creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all
things are naked, (...) and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to
do: naked for the outside; dissected, quartered, cleft in the backbone for
the inside; Erasmus renders it resupinata, making it a Metaphor from those
that lie with their faces upward, that all Passengers may see who they are.
Thou numbrest my steps, says Job; he did no less then confess that he kept an
exact account of every sin of his, of every step that he trod awry, yea, though
it were but some wry motion of his mind, so curious and critical he is in his
observation; even then when to many he seems to sleep, and to shut his eyes,
and to see nothing, he takes notice of every thing. Of this Judge it is said,
Psalm 11. His eyes behold, his eyelids try the Children of men. Where his eye
points out his knowledge, and his eyelids his critical descant. Those Creatures
that have fiery eyes can see in the night; and there is nothing but is open to
the sight of this Judge. Again, It Is said, his Feet were like fine Brass, as if
burned in a Furnace: which may signify the inflexibleness of this Judge,
proceeding from an ardent zeal to do justice: while life lasts he is pleased to
bend his feet, and bow them going forth in a way of Commiseration, and
compassion toward the Sons of Men: but it shall not be so, when he acts the
Judge: Then his Legs will be Marble, and his Feet Brass; where he places his
Foot, there it shall inflexibly stand. This very thing is signified likewise by
the twofold Rod, which the Scripture speaks of; the one is a Rod of Wood,
mentioned Psalm 23. which Rod is easily bowed if any thing of weight be fastened
to the end of it; but the other altogether inflexible as being a Rod of Iren,
spoken of, Psalm 2. which the Holy Ghost there puts into the hand of this
Judge. It Is possible that the Rods of earthly Judges may be bowed if a Purse of
Money be tied at the end of them; but the Rod of this Judge is not of Wood, but
Iron, and so is inflexible.

To proceed; His voice is said to be as the sound of many Waters, terrible;
suppose, as the noise of a whole Army that is heard far, and near. A River or
Stream that is damm'd up for a time, when once it breaks forth, the noise it
makes is inutterable, not to be expressed. No wonder then if the Ocean of the
wrath of God straightened, as it were, for so many thousand years, at length
breaks forth like the sound of many Waters. I have a long time held my Peace,
says the Lord himself, I have been still, and refrained my self, now will I
cry like a traveling Woman, I will destroy, and devour at once, Isaiah 42. 14.
If Job was forced to say, Destruction from God was a terror to me, and by
reason of his Highness I could not endure; How will the Damned be able to bear
the weight of that Sentence, Arise ye Dead, and come to Judgment? or of that, I
was an Hungry, and ye gave me no meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink,
etc. And if these whisperings, as I may say, be so terrible, how terrible and
insupportable will the pronouncing of this Sentence be; Ite maledicti, Go, or
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire? words which breath nothing but
fire, and brimstone, stings, and horrors.

Neither is this all, for it is said, out of his mouth went a sharp two edged
Sword, which some interpret of the definitive Sentence of the Judge, and its
Executi^n: citing that passage in Deuteronomy, Chap. 32. 41. If I whet my
glittering Sword, and my hand take hold of Judgment, I will make mine Arrows
drunk with Blood, and my Sword shall devour flesh, that is, say they, shall
consume all the Corruptibility of the flesh, so that the bad as well as the
good shall be incapable of dying any more. The Sword was two edged, to show the
(...) fullness of this, doubtless, to the Bad, yea, and to the Good also at
first, till they have recollected, or (...) thought themselves, terrible it
will be to the Bad, because they know themselves guilty, and terrible to the
Good too, since they know they cannot stand in judgment without God's Grace,
cannot by any strength of their own escape. Thus while the Parent corrects a
refractory Child, the more ingenuous, and obedient fear, and tremble, because
they think they may commit the same fault for which the other is beaten: As the
wicked shall be sure to be condemned, that are on the left hand; so the
righteous shall hardly be saved, that are on the right hand.

It Is added by Saint John in his Description of this Judge, That his
Countenance was as the Sun in his strength, or in its Zenith. If the righteous
shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, as they shall, Mat. 13.
43. how much more bright shall Christ shine, who will appear in the strength of
his own glory? Christ was a Sun on Earth, who rose, as I may say, at his
Nativity, and set or went down at his Death. But alas, how few minded that Day
of his, because that Sun was obscured with the Cloud of his Humanity, much more
by the darkness of the Jews obstinate blindness. He rose again at his
Resurrection, beginning, as it were, another day; was in the Ascendant, when he
Ascended; at the Day of Judgment he will be in the Meridian, and will never set
again unless it be to the wicked, from whom he will for ever obscure himself,
not vouchsafing them the least ray of the light of his Countenance to all
Eternity.

Thus I have showed you in what respects the Day of the Lord may styled, Dies
Magnus, the Great Day, and in what respects the Dreadful Day. As in respect of
the Judges dreadful coming to judgment mounted on the Clouds; in respect of his
being well known to all to be the same as was judged, and unjustly condemned;
in respect of his Authority, rigor, and strict justice that he will execute,
in respect of his piercing eye, his inexorableness; his dreadful denouncing of
Sentence; and in respect of his brightness, every Ray of which will be as a
Dagger to stab the Reprobates at the very heart.

I come now (according to my promise) to speak jointly of these two Epithites
by way of Application to our selves of what has been already said.

1. Then is there a day, that the Lord has appointed to judge the world in?
Then let us take Saint Paul's golden Counsel which he gives to his Corinthians.
Let us judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who will bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the
heart, 1 Cor. 4. 5. Let no man anticipate this Judge, take his office out of
his hand by judging his brethren. Exact knowledge is requisite in a Judge, the
eyes of Man are too dim to judge of the Actions of others, because they cannot
see into the heart, their root, or fountain, for God alone is the searcher of
the Heart. Hence it is that holy men in this life are often judged to be
Hypocrites, when as on the contrary, the glistring Glowworm of morality in
this dark night of the world goes under the the notion of holiness, and
integrity. Thus the righteous are condemned, and the wicked ustified by those
who judge after the light of their eyes, according to appearance, and not
righteous judgment.

2. Is this day coming? The thought of this should take off the wheels of their
Chariots, make them drive heavily, who walk not only, but run in the way of
their hearts, and in the sight of their eyes, those windows of wickedness, and
loop-holes of lust. Know this whosoever thou art thac take thy swing in
sinful courses, that God will bring the to judgment, either in this life as he
did Hophni, and Phineas, Nadah, and Abihu, or infallibly at thy Death's day,
which is thy Doomsday, then God will bring thee per force be thou never so
loath to come to it, he will hale thee to his Tribunal be it never so much
against the heart, and against the hair of thee.

To contract, will this Day of the Lord which is coming, be a great and
terrible or dreadful day in so many respects as you have heard? Then as you
tender the safety of your immortal Souls in that Day, soak them before in the
consideration of it; and to this end suffer me to furnish you with a few
Meditations, which may conduce to the farther setting home of what has been
already said on this subject As Almighty God has shared his Power in the
creating of things, his Wisdom in the Government of them, his Mercy in the
Restoration of fallen man; so he has reserved his justice in punishing of
wicked to be declared eminently on this Day. It Is true, the wicked meet often
with some of Gods vengeance here in this life; but that is only as the
heat-drops to the swinging shower of Gods wrath, and indignation, which on this
day will take hold upon them; it is but the brief Preface to the huge Volume of
misery that then will attain them. For if he made such variety of things to
show his power, so wonderfully has qualified them as he has done to show his
wisdom: If he has done, and suffered so much as he has done that he might
manifest his mercy to all, what think you will he do when he sets himself about
it, makes it his business to manifest the greatness of his justice? Or if you
will thus, to make this day appear somewhat more dreadful yet; If when he
intended to show the greatness of his mercy, He the Son of God would be born in
a Stable, lie in a Manger, converse with sinners here in the world, and at
length for wretched sinners be apprehended, bound, spit upon, buffeted, crowned
with thorns, ridiculously arrayed, bear his Massy Cross on his own shoulders,
and at last on it be Crucified between two Malefactors; if, I say, the Son of
God deigned to undergo such things to the astonishment of Heaven, and Earth,
Men, and Angels, and this to declare the greatness of his Goodness, and Mercy:
Then conceive, if you can, what he will do when he intends fully to declare the
greatness of his Justice, kept with much long-suffering and patience till this
Great Day. If you would have this farther illustrated, then thus: Saint Luke in
his relation of the manner of Saint Paul's Conversion, tells us, in the 9.
Chap. of the Acts, that after he was dismounted he heard a voice, saying, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? and he said, who art thou Lord? and the Lord
said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest; and he trembling, and astonished, said,
Lord what will thou have me to do? To apply this to our purpose, If the Apostle
was struck with such trembling, and astonishment, when he did but come to the
knowledge that it was Jesus whom he persecuted, crying out, Lord what will thou
have to do? as if he should have said, behold I am ready to believe, ready to
obey, ready to dye for thee, ready to suffer any thing at thy hand for what I
have ignorantly done: Oh what fear, what trembling, what amazement, what
horror, will take hold of the wicked, when they shall see Christ coming in such
Glory, and Majesty, and Power, whom they for them embracing of most vile things
have neglected, contemned, and despised, to speak the best of it; whose
Ministers they have scoft at and abused, whose menaces, and threats they have
vilified, whose precious Pearls of Promises, and wholesome Admonitions they like
Swine have trampled on, whose Livery they have worn, but have served
themselves. Neither is it to be past by without wonder, that so much trembling,
and astonishment should surprise Saint Paul; for what dreadfulness could there
be in that voice that courteously called him (so vile a person) by his name;
brought life to him that persecuted the Lord of life, and Glory; promised
Salvation to one that breathed forth nothing but malice and hatred; kindly
received so cruel an Enemy? And yet being not able to bear up under the weight
of this voice from Heaven, nor to endure that beam or glympse of the Divine
Majesty; it is said, he fell on the Earth as if destitute of life and spirit:
What then will their Torment, and Destraction, be whom the same Majesty of God
shall entertain not with smiles, but frowns, not with life, but death and
destruction; not with any token of love, but with a drawn sword, and all manner
of cruelty? certainly, they that cannot endure him calling them to Repentance,
will not be able to endure him coming to take Vengeance; they that cannot bear
the guilt of their sins, will never endure to look the Avenger of sin in the
face. Mountainous s^nners at this Great and Dreadful day will be forced to call
upon the Mountains to fall upon them, and the Hills to hide them from the
presence of him that shall sit as Judge on his Throne. I shall shut up my
discourse with this story: When Sapores King of Persia raised a violent
Persecution against the Christians; one Vsthazanes an old Nobleman, a Courtier,
that had Sapores Government in his Minority, being a Christian, was so
terrified, that he left off his Profession: but he sitting at the Court-gate
when Simeon an aged Bishop frowned upon him, and turned away his face with
indignation, as being loath to look upon a man that had denied the Faith;
Vsthazanes fell a weeping, says my Author, went into his chamber, put off his
Courtly attire, and brake out into these words, Ah! how shall I appear before
the Great God of Heaven, whom I have denied, when Simeon but a man will not
look on me? if he frown, how will God look upon me, when I come before his
Tribunal? The thought of Gods Judgment Seat wrought so strongly upon him, that
he recovered his spiritual strength, and dyed a Glorious Martyr. Thus did but
men consider, that they must one day stand before the Bar of Gods Tribunal,
they would be casting up how things stand betwixt him and their own Souls:
would any man loyter away the day when he knows he must show his work to his
Master at night? Let every man in all his doings remember his end, and so he
shall never do amiss; remember that all must come to a reckoning in this Great
and Dreadful day, and that though here in this world men may wear Vizard Masks
of Hypocrisy, yet when they consider they shall be plucked off in that day, it
will be a means that they will order their lives so that their appearance may
be with comfort.

I have done with my Text, and it may now be expected that I should speak
somewhat of the occasion. For you are to know we at present solemnize no less
then the Funeral of the Metropolis of this Nation. But if you look that I
(though present when it was on Fire, and a Fellow-Sufferer with many of you)
should present you with a Hypotyposis or Description of that most lamentable
and devouring Fire, as it is deservedly styled; you must excuse me if I
frustrate your expectation; that I conceive is more lively to be depainted by a
Pensil, then a Pen, and better expressed on a Table or Draught then by the
Tongue, only thus much I shall speak: As it is said concerning the roll of a
Book given to Ezekiel, that it was written within and without, and there was
written therein Lamentation and Mourning, and Woe, Ezekiel. 2. So in every
circumstance that accompanied this dismal Conflagration, Judgment was writ as
in Text Letters, whether we consider the Time when it first broke forth, the
dead of night; or the Place, a close narrow Lane, where many Houses were burned
down before any Engines could come to play in order to the extinguishing of it;
or Manner of it, burning against the wind so fiercely, that is spared no
Fabric in its way though never so august and stately: Churches now proved no
Sanctuaries as in the time of other Fires: I may add, it was an amazing
Judgment, which deluded People, and deprived them of the use of their reason. I
believe there are some here present, who with my self, did not think that ever
the Adversary and Enemy, that Dreadful Fire would have entered into our Streets,
the place where it began being so far distant from our Habitations: And so
you will say this Fire well deserves both the Epithetes in my Text, Great and
Dreadful; as if Almighty God had spoke to London in terminis, expressly under
the name or notion of a Forest, as once he did to Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 20 47.
Behold, I will kindle a Fire in thee, and it shall devour every green Tree in
thee, and every dry Tree in thee, the flaming flame shall not be quenched, etc.
And all flesh shall see that I the Lord have kindled it, and it shall not be
quenched: I the Lord who am a consuming Fire. 'Twas brought to pass then, Deo
irato, and irritato, God being not only angry, but provoked. It was not long
before this Fire happened that God visited this City with the Plague of
Pestilence, which walked in as much state along the Streets as ever the chief
Magistrate of it did; its retinue wore a kind of Purple to the fatal spots
being of that color. O the high silence that I was witness of (to Gods Glory
be it spoke) in many places of the City, at other times clamorous and
tumultuous enough! Had it been asked where dwells such a one, the answer would
have been, he is dead; where his Wife? dead; where his Children? dead; where
his Man; his Maid? dead. Pale Death sat in the Windows, kept Shop, sealed up
Doors, so that none durst enter. But London soon forgot this Tragedy; her
filthiness was in her skirts, she remembered not her last end, or rather how
near to her end (in some sense) she was brought: God had no sooner turned her
sorrow into joy; her sighing into singing; her mourning into melody; her
prayers into praises; her Tears into Triumphs, but they, nay, we made a bad use
of his mercy, till a Flood of Fire brake in upon us, as a Deluge of Water did
on the old World. Hence it was that she came down wonderfully, to use that
expression in the Lamentation of Jeremy, concerning Jerusalem. Londons
incogitancy and and inconsiderateness, together with the licentious lewdness
following thereupon, not to spare the place of my Nativity, brought her down
with a vengeance to sit in Ashes, as Job's calamities brought him to the
Dunghill. You may suppose her then as a disconsolate Matron using these words;
Is it nothing to you all ye that pass by, behold, and see if there be any
desolation like unto my desolation, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord
has afflicted me in the day of his fierce, or fiery anger: He has sent Fire
among my buildings, and it has prevailed against me, he has made me desolate.
Is it in the wishes of you the Inhabitants of this place, whose habitations are
yet standing, that they should not partake of Londons punishment? would you
that your Bethel (in which through God^s goodness ye are assembled at this
time) should never be turned into Bethaven? would you not have Iccobod written
upon all that you can call Beautiful and Glorious? then see you decline such
sins as are mentioned in the specific Prayer for this occasion. Neither are we
to forget that in the midst of judgment God remembered mercy: not only in not
consuming the whole Suburbs that were contiguous, but in sparing some of the
City, and in blessing the endeavors of the Re-builders of it even to a
miracle: The little time I have been in it, I have seen enough to be thankful
for while I live: As if when in its rubbish it had been solemnly buried by some
of her Ministers in several places of it, saying, since it has pleased
Almighty God in his righteousness to take away from us our dear Habitations in
which we so much delighted, we commit them to the ground, Earth to Earth, Ashes
to Ashes, Rubbish to Rubbish, in sure and certain hope to see them to have such
a Glorious Resurrection (like a Phoenix out of its Ashes) as shall create
wonder in all that shall behold it, and this through his Almighty Power who is
able to subdue not persons only, but all things to himself, even the vastest
Structures, and can with as much ease give them a being again. Or as if the
whole Body of her Inhabitants, to the credit of us their Teachers, had said,
seeing the Fire approaching their Habitations, well, Gods will be done, we
brought nothing into this world, neither shall we carry any thing out of it,
the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.
Nay, we know that if these earthly Houses of ours, these Candle-Rents, old
Timber Buildings be dissolved, be consumed by Fire, we shall have buildings run
up so strongly, and so suddenly, as if they had been made without hands; nay,
we shall have buildings of Gods own making, for except the Lord build the
house, they labor in vain that build it. There is no good to be done unless
God set his Fiat to it, and say let it be done. If he blast and not bless men's
endeavors and policies, they are all but Arena sine Calce, sand without lime,
they will not hang together, but like untemper'd Mortar fall asunder. The Jews
at this day when they build a house, they are, say the Rabbis, to leave one
part of it unfurnisht, and lying rude, in remembrance that Jerusalem and the
Temple are at present desolate; at least they use to leave about a yard square
of the house unplaistred, on which they write in great letters that of the
Psalmist, If I forget thee o Jerusalem, let my right hand forget its cunning. I
know not whether any of you that are Building or have Built your Houses, will
be willing to leave a yard square of them unplaistred to write in it in great
letters, If I forget thee O London, etc. this may be thought too great a
blemish in your fair beautiful Buildings; but as ever you would have the Bricks
laid in order to continue long so, and not to be burnt again, but to crumble
away between the teeth of Time; let old London dreadfully consumed by Fire have
a room in your minds and memories, not forgetting the mercy God showed in the
midst of that dreadful judgment.

To conclude; Let those of us that have been large sharers in this judgment,
who are Christians not by Water only but by Fire, heartily be of God that we
may come forth of the Crucible of Affliction, as Gold does out of the fire
refined, that we may lose the dross only of our sins, not the gold of our
patience, and holy submission to his will, and other graces. And you whose
Habitations are standing Monuments of Gods Goodness, be sure at least that you
thus warble it on this solemn day, so often as it shall come about; If it had
not been the Lord who was on our side, we may well say, if it had not been the
Lord who was on our side when the Fire brake out most furiously upon us, then
the Flames had consumed our Habitations, when the Fire of Gods wrath was
kindled against us; but blessed be the Lord who has not given our Habitations
up to ruin, but has mercifully plucked them as so many brands out of the fire.
Beloved, God has many ways to make desolate, he can effect it by Fire, or
Sword, or Pestilence, or Famine, and there is but one safe way to avoid those
outgoings of his judgment, and in the Prophet Jeremie's language is to take
away the fore-skins of your heart, Jer. 4. 4. That place of Scripture is well
worthy my citing of it, and your diligent attention to it, it runs thus;
Circumcise your selves unto the Lord, and take away the fore-skins of your
hearts ye Men of Judah, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, lest my fury come forth
like fire, and burn that none can quench it. Begin at Adam's sin, heartily
bewail that, and then set upon your beloved sin; out with that Eye, off with
that Hand, cast away all your Transgressions, with as great indignation as
angry Ziporah did her child's foreskin; so will the Lord lengthen out your
Tranquillity, neither shall your iniquities be your ruin.

FINIS.

