God's Goodness TO HIS ISRAEL In All Ages.

Being the Substance of some SERMONS, ON PSALM Lxxiii. 1.

Truly God is good to Israel, even to such (...) are of a clean heart. By J. F.
Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel. 1700.

God's Goodness TO HIS ISRAEL In all Ages.
Psalm LXXIII. 1. Truly God is good to Israel, and to such as are of a clean
heart.


THEY that will be at pains to peruse (...) Psalm throughout, will easily
perce^ under what a sad tepmtation the Psalm (whether Asaph or David, is not
mater^ had been at this time, having observed how (...) wicked prospered, and
what miseries the godly (...) undergo; he did begin to conclude that it were
great matter whether he followed the ways of g^liness any more; or whether he
turned Profane (...) Atheistical: v. 2, 3. As for me my feet were alm^^^ gone,
my steps had well nigh slipped; for I was envio^ at the foolish, when I saw the
prosperity of the wicked v. 13, 14. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain and
washed my hands in innocence; for all the day long have I been plagued, and
chastened every morning. While thus he was conflicting with the temptation, the
Lord directed him to the use of a blessed means, whereby he came to be better
instructed; He went into the sanctuary (i.e. he consulted the Oracles of God,
he searched the Records of Heaven, the Holy Scriptures, he was diligent in the
practice of all duties of Temple-worship, then in use; he consulted with God
and his Spirit, and Jesus Christ, the Sactuary was the Type and he the
Antitype) and then he could say, Surely thou have set them in slippery places;
thou castest them down into destruction: how are they brought into desolation,
as in a moment? they are utterly consumed with terrors, as a dream, when one
awaketh; so, O Lord, when thou awakest, shall thou despise their image. Having
now overcome the temptation, he pens this Psalm, an excellent Prospective Glass
for the Church and People of God in all ages; wherein they may see, 1. The
variety and wonderfulness of the Dispensations of Gods Providence toward his
Creatures. 2. That its common and ordinary, for wicked men, to have worldly
prosperity. 3. That ^^tentimes, as to outward things, Saints are of all ^men
the most miserable; so 1 Cor. 15. to the end, Psalm. (...) 22. We are accounted
all day long as sheep for the ^^^ughter. 4* That they that are most spiritual,
are ^ble to temptations, and in a readiness to comply ^erewith, and therefore
let him who thinks he ^nds, take heed lest he fall. 5. One of the best means
under heaven to get victory over a temptati^on, is to go into the Sanctuary,
taking it in the forementioned sense. Lastly, Tempted ones taking this course
to wait upon God, in the use of appointed means, have sometime or other a
glorious issue; and not only so, but they prove the most choice and excellent,
the most humble and lowly, the most affectionate and loving, the m^ Christ
excelling and Soul edifying Christians; the improve their temptations, their
Exercises under them, and their issues out of them to some purpose for the
glory of God, the good of their own souls, and the spiritual advantage of
others. This improvement the Psalmist made, is worthy of our observation. 1. He
is now able with a holy asseveration to attest to this truth which he did so
unbelievingly question, Truly God is good to Israel. 2. He bemoans his
bruitishness, stupidity, and atheistical ignorance, v. 22. So foolish was I and
ignorant, I was as a beast before thee. 3. He did attribute his preservation
from yielding to temptation, to the divine supports of the free grace of God
only; v. 23. Nevertheless thou art continually with me, thou have holden me by
thy right hand. 4. By the mercy received, he is engaged to act a fiducial
dependence upon God as long as he lives; v. 24 Thou shall guide me with thy
counsel, and afterward receive me to glory. 5. He has more sublimated, raised,
and elevated affections than ever; v. 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee, there
is none in all the earth I desire besides thee. Lastly, He is fully grounded,
settled, and established in this truth, that let the wicked prosper a thousand
times over, yet woe shall be to them in conclusion, v. 27. For lo they that are
from thee, shall perish, thou have destroyed (it is as sure as if thou had
already done it) all them that go a whoring from thee: and on the contrary, the
^owns of Providence on Gods people, shall never make him out of love with
holiness: I shall still say, It is good for me to draw near to God; I have put
my trust in the Lord, that I may declare all thy works.

Thus you see how the scope of the whole Psalm ^oes so much conduce to the
clearing of what is contained in the first verse, Truly God is good to Israel.
Some read the first word, Although, or, Yet surely, i.e. Though once I was
under a strong temptation, the Devil and my own carnal heart, would have
persuaded me that God did not care for his people: Notwithstanding that to
sense and reason, providence do often speak forth the happiness of the wicked,
and the godlies miseries; though this be the Opinion of the vulgar and common
sort of people, yet now I can set my seal to this truth, God is good to Israel,
with a surely, a truly, a verily. In the words there are these two things that
need explication; 1. Who are the Israel here spoken of. 2. What we are to
understand by those that are of a clean heart.

For the first, Israel was that Name which God gave unto Jacob after he had
wrestled with the angel and prevailed; Genesis 32.28. Thy name shall be called no
more Jacob, but Israel, for as a Prince have thou power with God and with men,
and have prevailed; Hos. 12.13. The reason of the change of Name was no doubt
for honors sake. Sometimes it signifies all the posterity of Jacob, Isa. 48.1.
Hear this O house of Jacob, which art called by the name of Israel, Romans 9.4. 2
Cor. 11.23. Phil. 3.5. Sometimes for the Church under the Old Testament,
consisting of the posterity of Jacob, and Gentile Proselytes; Psalm. 68.35. The
God of Israel is he that gives strength and power to his people; and 125.
last. Joh. 1.49. Romans 9.6. For the Christian Church under the New Testament
converted to the faith of Christ; Gal. 6.16. 1 Cor. 10.18. He is not a Jew,
which is one outwardly; neither is that circumcision, which is outward in the
flesh: but he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the
heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter; whose praise is not of men, but of
God: Romans 2.28, 29. When this Psalm was first penned, by Israel here spoken of,
the Old Testament Church were principally understood, but in our treating of
this Subject, we are not to restrict it to them only.

2. That we may the better know who those of a clean heart are, this
distinction is necessary: 1. There is a Legal cleanness of heart, which is a
perfect and complete purity, according to what the Law requires. 2. There is an
Evangelical or Gospel cleanness of heart, which is, 1. A godly sorrow and
humiliation from heart-uncleanness. 2. A holy detestation, hatred, and
abhorrence of every sin. 3. A constant endeavor every day more and more to be
rid of sin. 4. A sincere cordial love to holiness and heart purity. 5. A
fervent and earnest praying with David, Psalm. 51. Create in me a clean heart,
and renew a right spirit within me. 6. An unfeigned faith, whereby a humbled
soul, does notwithstanding of the guilt and filth of sin, lay hold on Christ
for Justification and Sanctification. It Is of this later and not the former,
the assertion in the Text is verified; Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed is the man whose
sins is forgiven, and whose transgression is covered; blessed is the man unto
whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guil.

By this time you may perceive that my Text points at these three things: 1.
The goodness of God here mentioned, it not that common providential bounty
whereof the whole Creation are made partakers, but the specialties of Gods love
and favor. 2. Though there are many titular Christians that go under the name
of Church Members, Saints, and Professors, yet the specialty of Love, is the
peculiar privilege and portion of upright-hearted ones only. 3. It is a most
infallible, certain, and undoubted truth, that God is good to his Church and
people, especially such as are sincere souls amongst them. O how sweet is it to
speak of this goodness of God, but how much more sweet to taste of it: O its
sweet to know it, but much more sweet to feel it experimentally, and to have a
lively sense of his goodness to my own soul in particular.

For the opening of this more fully, I shall propose this method, 1. Give some
few Scripture-proofs of this truth, God is good to his people. 2. Some
demonstrations thereof, from what has been common to his people in all ages. 3.
From some particular blessings bestowed upon the Jews under the Old Testament.
4. What the goodness of God was to the Gospel Church, as in contradistinction
to the Jews. 5. What were the peculiar blessings of God to the Primitive
Church, in Christ and the Apostles days. 6. Wherein the goodness of God
appeared to the Church for the first Three hundred years after the death of
Christ and his Apostles. 7. What from the first rise of Antichrist, till he
came to his full height, and during his reign. 8. What the good providence of
God is like to be from the first remarkable beginning of Antichrists ruin, to
the time and period of his utter destruction, from the beginning of the work of
Reformation, to the end of the World.

Here Is Work enough carved out for me to speak, and you to hear of; we may well
say, Who is sufficient for these things? We might be greatly discouraged, even
at our first entrance upon it, were it not for this one thing, That God with
whom we have to do, and whose work we are about, is of infinite goodness,
grace, mercy, love, and bounty, abundant in goodness and truth; he gives
liberally, and upbraideth no man, Jam. 1.5.

First, For Scripture proofs take these few instead of many, Psalm. 31.19. O how
great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee; which
^hou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of men! Zech. 3.
last ver. Psalm. 103.11, 12, 13* 15, 16, 17, etc. Psalm. 107. this is four or
five ^imes reiterated, O that men would praise the Lord, for his goodness and
for his wonderful works to the sons of men; and Psalm. 136. this is 26 times
repeated, The mercy of the Lord endures for ever. and 145.7, ^, 9. They shall
abundantly utter the memory of thy ^reat goodness* and shall sing of thy
righteousness; the Lord is gracious and full of compassion, slow to anger and
of great mercy; the Lord is good to all, and his ten^er mercies are ever all
his works.

Secondly, The consideration of such blessings as ^re common to the upright
hearted ones in all ages, (...) a farther demonstration of this truth, and they
^re these: 1. There Is none of them, but it was upon the heart of God to do them
good before the ^oundation of the world; Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6. 2 Timothy 1.^0. 2. That
unspeakable and unparallell*d mercy (...) God in promising and sending his dear
Son to work redemption for his people, is a confirmation ^f this. Joh. 3 16.
God so loved the world 3. There Is one of Gods peculiar ones, but in due time
have ^een effectually called from darkness to light; he ^kes the heirs of hell,
wrath, and damnation; and ^dopts them for his own children; 1 John 3.1. Be^old
what manner of love and goodness this is. (...) Pardon of sin is that that all
the people of God have been partakers of; Micah 7.18. O who is a God like unto
our God, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the
remnant of his heritage! Isa. 43.25. Ezekiel. 36.22. 5. All such have had the
soul-saving and sanctifying graces of the spirit bestowed upon them; 2 Pet 1.4.
6. They have had Ordinances and means, whereby grace and all spiritual
blessings may be communicated to them; Psalm. 147.19, 20. He shows his word to
Jacob, his statutes and his judgments to Israel; he has not dealt so with any
Nation -- 7. Whatever blessings they have, all is by the tenure of a Covenant
of Grace; 2 Cor. 1.20.. All promises are Yea and Amen in Christ to them that
believe. O the never-enough-admired goodness of this God, that has condiscended
so far, as by a voluntary Contract and Covenant to make himself a Debtor to
such undeserving wretches! Psalm. 34.3. O come let us magnify the goodness of
the Lord together! 8. God is so good, that he has in all ages furnished his
people with what he knew to be most convenient for them; if the light of his
countenance was best for them, than they had; if the joys and consolations of
the Holy Ghost, if the hidings of his face -- if poverties, i^ aches, if
Ordinances, or if sometimes the want of Ordinances, was good for them; if
persecution, or deliverance from it -- He has sanctified every state and
condition, making all things work for their good; Romans 8.28. in one word, Psalm.
84.11. The Lord is a Sun and a Shield, he gives grace and glory, no good thing
will he withold from them that walk uprightly: and 37.37. Mark the perfect
man and behold the upright, behold the end of that man is peace Isa. 64.4.
Psalm. 40.12. Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works, which thou have
done, and thy thoughts which are to usward; they cannot be reckoned up in
order before thee, if I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can
be numbered.

Thirdly, The consideration of the eminent acts of God's gracious Providence
toward the Church of the Jews, under the Old Testament, is a proof of this
truth; some few whereof are these. 1. Of all Nations under Heaven them only he
separated, to be a holy People for himself. Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8. Thou art a holy
people unto the Lord thy God; the Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special
people for himself, above all the people that are upon the face of the earth;
the Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more in
number than any other people, for ye were the fewest of all people, but because
the Lord loves you.

2. That Egyptian Deliverance, so miraculously wrought for them, was an
eminent act of God's good Providence to them, and that in these respects. 1. He
furnished them with a General every way fit for that Expedition, Ps. 105.26. He
sent Moses his servant and Aaron whom he had chosen. 2. He inflicted ten
several tremendous Plagues and fearful Judgments on their persecuting and
oppressive Enemies, because they would not allow them liberty to worship God
according to the Command of God and their own Consciences. Ps. 105.27. That of
the cutting off all the Firstborn of their Adversaries in one night, when the
de^^^oying Angel passed over them, is memorable; as also their being in Goshen,
a Land of Light for three days together, when the other were in Darkness. 3. In
spite of all Opposers, they had one very glorious Sacramental Passover-day,
before they were brought forth. 4. He did greatly enrich them with Earrings
and Jewels of their cruel Taskmasters, Exodus 22.36. 5. While they were
surrounded with the Red Sea, on the one hand, and Pharaoh's Army on the other,
you know what great Salvation he wrought for them. Exodus 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. O
sing unto the Lord for he has triumphed gloriously, the horse and his rider
has he thrown into the Sea.

3. The many signal passages of his Providence toward them in the Wilderness,
do demonstrate this Truth, Truly God is good to Israel. 1. He sweetened the
bitter Waters of Marah for them, Exodus 15.23, 24, 25. 2. He Rained Manna from
Heaven upon them, and gave them Quails to eat, even when in a pettish murmuring
Humor, they said unto Moses and Aaron, would to God we had Died by the Hand of
the Lord in the Land of Egypt, when we sat by the Fleshpots, and when we did
eat Bread to the full, for ye have brought us forth into the Wilderness to kill
the whole Assembly with Hunger. 3. When they Thirsted and had no Drink, He
opened the Rock, and the Waters gushed out, they ran in the dry places like a
River, Psalm. 105.41. 4. Through the prevalency of Moses's Prayer, they obtained
a glorious Victory over the Amalekites, Aaron and Hur, holding up his Hands,
for which an Altar was errected to the Lord as an eternal Monument of that
Me^^, Exodus 17. end. 5. They had the Pillar of the Cloud by Day to keep them
from the violence and scorching Heat of the Sun, and the Pillar of Fire by
Night to shelter them from the cold thereof, and to lead them on their way in
the Dark, Ps. 105.39. 6. They had the Law in a most solemn way and manner given
forth from Mount Sinai, Exodus 20. O happy is that People that is under a
Theocracy, and who are governed only by that Law which is purely Divine: The
Law Moral, did in a general way teach them their Duty both to God and Man. The
Ceremonial did teach them more particularly what to give unto God, and the
judicial Law did inform them how they ought to walk one toward another as
Members of such a Body Politic, Nation, Kingdom, or Commonwealth. 7. The Lord
did institute Tabernacle-Worship first in the Wilderness: Better be in the
Wilderness with God's Ordinances, than in Egypt without them. 8. When they
proved Idolatrous in erecting a Molten Calf, to be a visible representation of
God's marching on before them, upon their Repentance and Moses's Prayer, God
was graciously pleased to pardon their Sin, Exodus 32.11, 12, 13, 14, 9. All
that Forty Years they were in the Wilderness, they had no need to renew their
Shoes nor Garments. 10. When they were stung with fiery Serpents, they had a
brazen Serpent erected, as an Ordinance of divine Institution for their Remedy
and Cure, Numb. 21.9. Lastly, Most of all these things, their Manna, Water out
of the Rock, Tabernacles, high Priest, Ark, Sacrifices, Altars, Pillar of the
Cloud, and Fire, and the brazen Serpent, were Typical representations of Jesus
Christ, and visible Signs of his Presence amongst them. I was lately very much
taken with the Reading of the First, Second, Third and Fourth Chapters of
Numbers, where after numbering the Children of Israel, they are Ranked in
Battalia as a Camp; in the midst of this Camp was the Tabernacle, with the Ark
of the Covenant; next unto it the Priests and Levites, and round about them,
the rest of the Tribes; when the Priests and Levites stood with the Ark, the
People stood, when the Ark moved and marched on, they accordingly followed; and
what did all this signify? But that they were even in the Wilderness, under
the conduct of their great Captain General Jesus Christ, Deuteronomy. 32.11, 12, 13.
As an Eagle stirs up her nest, and fluttereth over her Young, spreads
abroad her wings. So the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange God
with him, he made him ride on high places of the earth, that he might eat the
increase of the fields, and he made him to suck honey out of the Rock, and oil
out of the stinty rock. Genesis 32.34. Behold mine Angel shall go before thee; it
was in Allusion to this marching Posture of their's, that the Psalmist breaks
forth, Psalm. 46. Though the Mountains be removed, the Lord of Hosts is with us,
the God of Jacob is our Refuge, God is in the midst of her, she shall not be
moved. And Cant. 6.16. Who is she that looks forth as the Morning, fair as
the Moon, clear as the Sun, terrible as an Army with banners.

Time would fail in telling you what God did in dividing Jordan, in possessing
them with a Land that did flow with Milk and Honey, in distributing to every
Tribe their Portion and Inheritance, by lot, in driving out their Enemies, the
Ammonites Moabites, the Hivites, Jebusites and Gargasites, what shall I tell
you of his raising up Deborah and Barak, Gideon, Sampson, Ely, Samuel and
others endued with an extraordinary Spirit, to be not only Princes and Judges
over them, but also to rescue them out of the Hands of their Enemies, to whom
their Sins had enslaved them, what shall I tell you of all the gracious acts of
favor conferred upon them under the good Kings, David, Solomon, Asa,
Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah? O how good was God to them, even in Babylon: How
many of them were kept faithful in the worst times, he sent extraordinary
Prophets to Preach Repentance to them after they had revolted. Isaiah and
Jeremiah were commissioned to prophesy their deliverance from the Babylonish
Captivity, Daniel prayed for it. O how miraculously were they preserved from
Haman's bloody Conspiracy and intended Massacre, in Esther and Mordecai's time.
O how they were preserved in Daniel's time, notwithstanding of that tyrannical
Edict and Decree, That whosoever would not fall down before their abominable
idolatrous Image, should be thrown into the Fiery Furnace. O the goodness of
God to them in stirring up the Spirit of Nehemiah and Ezra for rebuilding the
Temple. O the goodness of God, in raising Cyrus to be so favorable to them, as
to grant their desire, and give them all due Encouragement to go on in the Work
of the Lord. If I should proceed to particulars here, I should not know where
to make an end: The providence of God to them in Egypt may be known from the
15th Chap. of Exodus the 78.105. and 106. Psalms with the 7th Chap. of the Acts.
If you would know God's goodness to them under the Judges and Kings, Read
Joshua, Judges, Samuel, Kings and Chronicles: If while in Babylon, Read Esther,
Ezra and Nehemiah: after the deliverance Read the Books commonly called
Apocrypha, to which we may give an Historical Faith, as to any other Histories.
O how gloriously good was God in raising up Judas Maccabeus to rescue his
Brethren and People from the cruel Tyranny of Antiochus Epiphanes. A short
Epitome and Summary Recapitulation of all you have, Romans 9.4, 5. Who are
Israelites to whom pertains the Adoption, they were the only Children of God,
and the Glory, i. e. either all that Glory whereby God exalted them above
others in respect of many miraculous Deliverances, or the Ark of the Covenant
so called, 1 Samuel 4.21, 22. Because the Cherubims of Glory covered it, as also
it was a Shadow and Figure of the Divine Glory and Majesty of God, Psalm. 26.8,
Heb. 9.5. And the Covenants, i. e. the Tables of the Law, Deuteronomy. 9.11. Heb. 9.4.
And the Lawgiving, i. e. the judicial Law, the former being understood of the
Moral; and the Service of God, i. e. his Worship which was first Preached in
the Tabernacle, afterward in Solomon's Temple, and the promises, to wit of
sending the Messiah, and with him all other Blessings and Benefits, Acts 2.39.
Ephesians. 2.12. whose are the Fathers, i. e. they were descended of the Patriarchs,
and the Fathers are of them, and of whom Christ is for as much as concern the
Flesh, who is God over all, Blessed for ever, Amen.

Before I proceed, I would have you make this use of what has been said. 1. Was
God so good to his People of Old? And is not he the same still, Yesterday, to
Day, and for evermore? Trust in the Lord and do good, and verily thou shall be
fed as well as they, Psalm. 37.3. The Mercy of the Lord endures for ever. 2.
When the Lord's peculiar ones provoked him with their Sins, they were not
privileged with an exemption from Punishments, as we may see at this Day: Let
us learn to stand in awe, and fear to offend. This very use the Apostle Paul
makes of this point, Romans 11.20, 21, 22, 23. Because of unbelief they were
broken off, and thou stand by Faith: Be not high minded, but fear: For if
God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee:
Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God on them which fell, severity,
but toward thee, goodness if thou continue in his goodness; otherwise thou
also shall be cut off.

Fourthly, God's goodness to his Gospel Church far exceeds his goodness to them
of old. 1. Gospel-Converts are far more numerous than formerly; the Jews and
their Proselytes were but very few in comparison of all the rest of the World
then, and of Gospel-Converts now. For now there are Thousands in Germany,
Thousands in France, Thousands in Britain, Netherlands. 2. Christ himself is
now actually come, Dead, Risen, Ascended and Glorified, and therefore the Glory
of the latter House, is greater than that of the former, Hag. 2.9. They were
promised that he should come, and were accordingly to believe on him, which
made honest Abraham so to rejoice in seeing his Day, though but a far off. O
how good is the Lord then to us, whose lot is fallen under this dispensation of
Grace, where we may clearly discern, that the work of reconciliation between
God and us, is perfectly accomplished, Divine Justice is satisfied to the full,
and all our Enemies so far conquered, that they cannot in the least injure us.
3. God has delivered us from the Ceremonies of Moses's Law; a Yoke that
neither they nor their Fathers were well able to bear, Acts 15.10. Their
Ceremonies were so many, and each of them significant, that it was a great
burden to their Memories to remember all: They were also very costly and
chargeably, they must kill many Lambs, Goats, Bullocks, keep several solemn
Festivals, and all at Jerusalem, but now the goodness of God to us is in this,
that he does not put us upon any such tedious Journies, he does not require
such chargeable Sacrifices of us, not so limit his Worship to any one place,
but it is as acceptable in one as another, John 4.24, 25. 1 Timothy 2.8.
Deliverance from the Ceremonial Law, is an act of favor to us; upon this
account also, that it was a Wall of separation, in a visible way to distinguish
between the Jews and us, to signify that they were the People of God and we
not, Ephesians. 2.14. Colos. 2.14. 4. Their Ordinances were comparatively carnal,
Heb. 9.10. Which stood only in Meats and Drinks and Washings, and were imposed
on them till the time of Reformation; ours are far more Spiritual; they had
many Sacraments, to wit Manna, the Rock, the Pillar of the Cloud, brazen
Serpent, Circumcision, and the paschal Lamb, in stead of all these, we have
only Baptism and the Lord's Supper. 5. Though the Covenant, under which they
were, and we are, be the same for substance, yet in respect of the diversity of
administration, our mercy far exceeds theirs. 1. Their Covenant was in a more
legal strain than ours, Romans 10.5, 6. Moses describes the Righteousness which
is of the Law, That the Man which does these things shall live by them, but the
Righteousness which is of Faith, speaks on this wise, Say not in thine Heart
who shall ascend -- the word is nigh thee, even in thy Mouth, and in thine
Heart, that if thou shall confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine Heart, that God has raised him from the Dead, thou shall be
saved. 2. Their's was administered by the Hands of Moses, a typical Mediator
only; ours by Christ himself, Gal. 3.19. Heb. 1.1, 2. God who at sundry times,
and in diverse manners, spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets,
has in these lost Days spoke unto us by his Son, whom he has appointed heir
of all things. 3. The dispensation they were under, was full of Dread, Horror
and Terror, Gal. 4. end. Heb. 12. When the Law was given forth from Sinai, the
Mount was all in a Fire, to point at the hot burning Wrath they might look for,
in case they were found transgressors; ^ur's from Mount Sion, is full of
Meekness, Gentleness, Mercy and Love. St. John, If ye love me keep my
Commandments. 4. The promises of our Covenant are better than theirs; if they
did observe the Statutes and Ordinances of God, they might warrantably expect
to be blessed in their Basket and Store, and such other temporal things,
according to Deuteronomy. 28. But now though we cannot by virtue of a promise expect
blessings of this kind upon our observation of Divine Precepts, but rather the
contrary, Matthew. 10. Whoever will be my Disciple must deny himself, take up his
Cross, and follow me. And Acts 4. Through manifold Temptations or Tribulations,
we must all enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And 1 Timothy 2.12. All that will
live Godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer Persection; yet we may expect Spiritual
Blessings, and that in a greater measure than they. 1. We are promised greater
plenty of Spiritual Knowledge than they. That of Isa. 11.9. relates to
Gospel Times. The Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the
Waters cover the Sea. And 35.5. Then shall the eyes of the blind be opened, and
the ears of the deaf be unstopped. And 32.3, 4. And 42.16. I will bring the
blind by a way they know not, I will lead them in paths they have not known: I
will make darkness light before them, and crooked things strait. These things
will I do unto them, and not forsake them. 2 Cor. 3.15, 16, 18. And 4.3. The
Preaching of the Gospel is not Darkened with Types, Figures and Ceremonies as in
the Days of old. 2. Spiritual Fruitfulness is promised to us, Matthew 21.41. The
Kingdom of God shall be taken from you Jews, and given to a Nation bringing
forth the Fruits thereof. Isa. 35.7, 8. In the wilderness shall waters break
out, and streams in the desert, and the parched ground shall become a pool, and
the thirsty land Springs of water; in the habitation of dragons, where each
lay, shall be reeds and rushes. 3. Spiritual peace, joy and comfort is promised
to our Days, Isa. 32.17. The Work of Righteousness shall be peace, and the
effect of Righteousness quietness and assurance for ever, Romans 5. Begin: Being
justified by Faith, we have Peace with God through Jesus Christ our Lord, by
whom also we have access by Faith into this Grace wherein we stand and rejoice
in hope of the Glory of God, and not only so, but we Glory in Tribulation also,
knowing that Tribulation works Patience, and Patience Experience, and
Experience Hope, and Hope makes not ashamed, because the Love of God is shed
abroad into our Hearts by the holy Ghost. 1 Pet. 1. In whom believing ye
rejoice with a joy unspeakable and full of Glory. 4. We have the promise of the
Spirit more than they, Joel 2.28. I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh.
Acts 2.17. Isa. 44.3. O how good is the Lord to us in this respect, if we are
not wanting to our selves through unbelief; the dispensation under which we
are, promises the pourings forth of the Spirit to us, O! who are we that we
should be thus dealt by?

Let Us make some use of what has been said as to this head, and so I go on.

1. Let Men and Angels be summoned in to admire and adore, let our Souls and
all that is within us, Extol and Magnify the rich Grace and Goodness of this
God, that has cast off his Ancient People, and has taken us gentile sinners,
who were Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers to the Covenant,
and made us heirs of the promises, Romans 11.17. O the depth of the Riches both
of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his Judgments and his
Ways past finding out! O what are we poor wild Olives, that we should be
grafted in amongst the Natural Branches, and partake of the fatness of the
Olives! O blessed are your Eyes and Ears which see and hear such things as were
denied many of the Fathers! See Romans 11. Ephesians. 3.8, 9, 10. Acts 28. end. O how
good is this God that has invested every particular Church of gentile
Believers, with greater privileges than their National Church had, and private
Christians are in some respects privileged beyond their Church Officers, Rev.
1.4. He has made us Kings and Priests to God, to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices
of Praise and Thanksgiving to him through Christ.

2. Study to walk worthy of this goodness of the Lord unto all well-pleasing,
Col. 1. Let every Soul say, O what shall I render to the Lord. 1. Take heed
thou do not live in any the least Sin; beware of Ignorance; if any thing
prove the Condemnation of the World, it will be this, That light is come, and
they de light in darkness more than in light, John 3.19. We may now say, 2 Cor.
4.3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that Perish. beware of unbelief,
John 3.18. He that believes not on him, is condemned already, because he has
not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God. O beware of
ingratitude, and turning Grace into Wantonness, Jude 4. There are certain Men
who were before of old ordained to Condemnation, ungodly Men turning the Grace
of God into Lasciviousness -- Say rather Romans 6.1. Shall I Sin because I am
under Grace? God forbid. 2. Think it not enough to abstain from Sin, and to
have true Grace, but that your Graces may in some measure be answerable to the
Covenant you are under; has God been pleased to make great promises, and wilt
not thou labor for such a Faith as may apply these promises according to their
full Latitude and extent? Has God now manifested the Riches of his Grace in
reconciling the World to himself, through his Son, declaring also, that
whosoever will believe on him shall be saved? And why art thou still in a
doubting and questioning Condition? 3. Lay out your selves in glorifying this
good God, especially in these two. 1. In a Gospel-Frame of Spirit, Col. 3.12.
Put on therefore as the Elect of God, dearly and beloved bowels of Mercies,
kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, long-Suffering, forbearing one another
and forgiving one another: If any Man have a quarrel against any, even as
Christ forgave you, so also do ye, and above all these things put on Charity,
which is the Bond of perfection, and let the Peace of God Rule in your Hearts;
to the which also ye were called in one Body and be ye thankful. 2. In a
Gospel-Conversation, Phil. 1.27. Romans 13.12, 13, 14. The Night is far spent,
the day is at hand, let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and lets
us put on the armor of light, let us walk honestly, as in the day, not in
rioting and drunkenness, not in strife and envying, not in Chambering and
wantonness, but put ye on the Lord Jesus. 4. Take all in good part that comes
from the Hands of a good God. Learn Contentation with a suffering Condition,
and a persecuted State: Live by Faith on the promises made to persons in such a
Condition, John 16.33. In the World ye shall have tribulation, but be of good
cheer, I have overcome the World. Mark 10.29, 30. Jesus says unto them, verily
I say unto you, there is no Man that has left house, or brethren, or sisters,
or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake and the
gospels, but he shall receive an hundredfold in this time, houses, and
brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions;
and in the world to come eternal life. Matthew. 5.10, 11. Blessed are they which
are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven,
blessed are ye, when Men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil of you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for
great is your reward in heaven, so persecuted they the prophets which were
before you. 1 Pet. 4.14. If ye are reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are
ye, for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you, on their part he is
evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified. And 16, 17, 18. If any Man
suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God on this
behalf, for the time is come that judgment must begin at the House of God, and
if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel
of God, wherefore let them that suffer according to the Will of God, commit the
keeping of their Souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator. And
5.10. But the God of all grace, who has called us unto his eternal glory by
Jesus Christ, after that ye have suffered a while, make ye perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle you. 2 Timothy 1.12. For the Gospel of Chist I suffer these
things, nevertheless I am not ashamed, for I know whom I have believed, and I
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against
that day. And 2.10, 11, 12. Therefore I endure all for the elects sake, that
they may also obtain the salvation, which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal
glory. It is a faithful saying, If we be dead with him, we shall also live with
him, if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. Romans 8.17, 18, 35,
36. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. Lastly, Study a thankful improvement of your privileges
for all God's goodness toward your. 1. Seeing it cost Christ no less than his
precious Blood to purchase a liberty for you, from the Mosaical Ceremonies,
which were once of Divine Institution, and consequently much more from such as
are of mere humane institution, whether Heathenish or Antichristian, you ought
not upon any pretense whatsoever, suffer your selves to be entangled again with
that Yoke of Bondage: There Is a great noise about the Churches Power to impose
Ceremonies, in matters indifferent; but I dare be bold to say, if there be such
a thing in the World as Christian Liberty in any thing, it is not to be imposed
upon in Ceremonies; and if any thing be a lording it over the Lord's heritage
it is in not leaving those things indifferent which Christ has left
indifferent. Christian Liberty is not easily to be parted with, because it cost
Christ so dear. 2. All that mediatory fullness of Grace and Spirit that is in
Jesus Christ, is freely made over to us, let us therefore improve this
privilege, so as every moment upon all occasions to be still fetching supplies
for our Soul-wants: From this overflowing Fountain, say thus, Lord, I want
Wisdom, Faith, Patience, Power against Corruptions, Temptations, Enemies -- in
my Flesh dwells no good thing; but oh, is there not Goodness and Grace enough
in thee; and is not this Goodness of thine communicable; Out of thy Son's
fullness let me receive grace for grace, Joh. 1.16. 3. Through that new and
living way, we have liberty of access to the throne of Grace. Let us
accordingly improve this Privilege, in coming with a full assurance of Faith,
to find grace and help in time of need: Let Us come with a Child like
confidence; with a holy and humble boldness, Heb. 2. end, and 4. end, and
10.22, 23, 24. 4. Through God's gracious Goodness, we are made joint heirs with
Christ, his Blessings, Benefits, Death and Intercession, are all ours; improve
this Privilege to a deliverance from slavish fears. If Christ has triumphed
over Principalities and Powers, Sin and Satan, Death and the World, what is
Man, O Gospel Saint, that thou art afraid of him; if he has purchased pardon of
Sin, peace of Conscience, the Joys of the Holy Ghost, Grace here, and Heaven's
Glory hereafter, thou need'st not fear that the Powers of Hell shall be able to
deprive thee thereof.

Fifthly, God was very good to the primitive Church in the days of Christ and
the Apostles, and that in these respects. 1. He did, as it were from Heaven,
give an immediate Call and extraordinary Commission to John Baptist to be the
Harbinger and For-runner of the Son of God and Savior of the World. It was he
that first brought into the World the good news of the near approach of the
Kingdom of Heaven, which did call aloud upon them to Repent, Matthew. 3.2. The
aggravation of the Mercy was in the seasonableness of it, he was sent at such a
time, when the Church was so deeply corrupted, that there was hardly the face
of a visible Church to be seen upon them. See further of him, Is. 40.3. Mal.
4.5, 6. Matthew. 3.7, 8,9. Mark 1.8. Luke 3.16. Joh. 1.26. Matthew. 3.11, 12.
Matthew. 11.14. Luke 1.15, 16, 17.

2. The primitive Church was honored with Christ's own corporal Presence
amongst them; hence they were called the Children of the Bridegroom; and it
could not but be a day of rejoicing to them, to hear the Bridgroom's voice.
Joh. 3.29. Mark 2.19. When that good Woman, Elizabeth, heard of the Salutation
of Mary, the Babe leaped in her Womb, and the was filled with the Holy Ghost.
Luke 1.41. Mary her self broke forth into a Doxology and Song of praises, which
you may see Luke 1.46. to 55. Zacharias also was filled with the Holy Ghost,
and Prophesied, saying, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited
and redeemed his people; he has raised up a born of Salvation for us in the
house of David, as he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been
since the world began. -- The very Angels in Heaven thought it not too mean an
Employment for them, to bring this Message to the Shepherds. Luke 2.8, 9, 10.
Fear not, for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to
all people; for unto you is born this day, in the City of David, a Savior,
which is Christ the Lord, verse 13.14. And suddenly there was with the Angel a
multitude of the heavenly host, praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the
highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men: And that good old Man,
Simeon, verse 28, 29. When he had seen the Child, Jesus, he took him up in is
Arms, and blessed God, saying, Now let thou thy Servant depart in peace
according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation -- a light to
lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of they people Israel. Christ himself being
come, they might now know, that God was a great Lover of Mankind; now they had
an ample proof of his faithfulness, in making good what he had long before
promised: Now they might be sure that Shadows would flee away, the Substance
being come: Now they might be assured of the downfall of the Devil's Kingdom;
witness the silencing the Oracles of Jupiter, Apollo, and Hecate; as also the
locking up the Temple of Janus.

3. God's goodness to the primitive Church, was in furnishing them with Pastors
according to his own Heart; the greatness of which Mercy may appear from the
Consideration of these Circumstances. 1. The number of primitive
Church Officers was perfect and complete for species and kind, there was none
wanting which her Condition did then call for. Of extraordinary Officers there
were Twelve Apostles, Acts 1.1. Seventy Evangelists; particular Churches had
their ordinary Officers, to wit, Bishops, i. e. Pastors and Teachers, to whom
the Administration of Ordinances, and Oversight of the Flock was committed,
Presbyters or Elders, who were to look to the Peoples Manners, and Government
of the Church, 1 Timothy 5. And Deacons, who were to take care of the Poor, Acts
6. begin* 2. There was then a parity and equality of all Officers in their
kinds: Amongst the Apostles, none claimed a Superiority over the rest: Peter's
Supremacy was then unknown; as the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven were given to
him, Matthew. 16.19. so also to the rest, Joh. 20.23. The very affectation of
pre-eminence, was, in those days, distastful to Christ, Matthew. 18.1, 2, 3, 4.
and 20.25, 26, Jesus called them unto him, and said, Ye know that the Princes
of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, but it shall not be so among you;
but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your Minister; and whosoever
will be chief among you, let him be you Servant; even as the Son of man came
not to be ministered unto, but to minister. -- And as it was distastful to
Christ, so also to themselves. Matthew. 20.21, 22, 23, 24. When the ten heard
what the Mother of Zebedee's Children had asked for her two Sons, they were
moved with indignation against them: And as one Apostle was not over the rest
of the Apostles, so there was a parity between Bishops and Presbyters, i. e.
ordinary Preaching and Ruling Officers or Elders; they were not two distinct
Offices nor Officers; as may appear from Act. 20.17. with 28. whom he had
called Presbyters v. 17. he calls Bishops v. 28. 2. From Philip. 1.1. he
directs the Epistle to the Bishops and Deacons: Philippi being but a City, it
cannot be imagined that there were Metropolitan of Diocesan Bishops, in the
plural number, in it; therefore the Bishops there spoken of, were only ordinary
Church Officers: This is the observation of Chrysostom on the Text. 3. From
Tit. 1.5. with 7. For this cause left I thee in Crete to ordain Presbyters; for
a Bishop must be blameless -- This for must either be a reason of what is in
the preceding verse, or it signifies nothing; the qualifications required in
both are the same, therefore they are not distinct Officers. 4. From 1 Pet.
5.1, 2. The Apostle exhorts the Presbyters to watch over their Flocks -- v. 5.
taking the oversight of them, (...), Bishoping it over them: The Work of both
is the same, and therefore the Office is the same. 5. From Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
where all sorts of Officers, both extraordinary and ordinary, are reckoned; and
if Lord Prelates be neither Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, nor
Techers, They are none of Christ's Creatures, but of Humane Institution. 6.
From 1 Timothy 3.1. to v. 8 begin. where the Apostle gives Rules for the
Examination and Ordination of a Bishop, and then immediately he passes to the
Office of a Deacon, without so much as mentioning any thing of a Presbyter; as
taking it for granted, that Bishop and Presbyter were one and the same, the
Rules for Examination and Ordination of both are the same. And thus you see God
was good to the Primitive Church, in giving her such Officers, as did neither
Lord it over one another, nor over the Lord's Heritage. A Third circumstance of
this Mercy, was, the extent of the Apostolical Commission, Matthew. 28. Go Preach
the Gospel to all the World; whereas formerly it was confined within the
compass of the Land of Judea; such is the goodness of God to the Sons of Men
now, that he is not willing any should perish, but all should come to the
knowledge of the Truth. See Act. 10.28, 34, 35. Mark 16.15. Luke 24.47. Act.
1.8. and 20.21. Romans 1.4, 5. 4. He did furnish the Apostles with variety of
eminent Gifts and Graces, suitable to their Work; they had such a Gift of
Preaching, that they needed not Read or Study, but they spoke by immediate
Inspiration from the Holy Ghost, Gal. 1.11, 12. Ephesians. 3.3. At one of their
Sermons three Thousand were Converted, Act. 2.41. At another five Thousand,
Act. 4.4. They had a Spirit of Prayer, they needed not a Book to read a Prayer
by a set form: They had the Gist of working Miracles, Matthew. 10.8. By laying on
of hands they could confer the gift of the Holy Ghost upon others, Act. 8.17.
and 10.44. and 19.6. In matters of Faith, that concerned the Salvation of
Sinners, and the Church's Edification, they were acted by a Spirit of
infallibility, Joh. 16.13. They could inflict corporal Punishments upon
notorious Hypocrites and Blasphemers, Act. 5.9, 10. and 13.11. 2 Cor. 10.6.
They were endued with a prophetical Spirit, whereby they could foretell things
to come, Romans 11.5, 26. 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. 1 Timothy 4.1. 2 Timothy 3.1. Joh. 16.13. The
whole Book of the Revelation is prophetical.

4. Consider the Church it self, and God's goodness was great to them in these
respects. 1. Of Ordinances. 2. Order and Government. 3. Of the Purity and
Simplicity of the Truth in those days. 4. Of their Gifts. 5. Their Graces. 6.
Perseverance. 7. Sufferings. 1st. They had no Ordinances but what were of
Divine Institution; these also were divinely Administered; and a glorious
Presence of God was that, that did highly beautify all their Administrations.
Act. 4.31. When they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were
assembled, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost. Rev. 1.12, 14. In the
midst of the seven golden candlesticks was one like unto the Son of man,
clothed with a Garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden
girdle, i. e. Jesus Christ who in respect of his Priestly Office had a tender
Heart, and was both willing and ready to do them good. His head and his hair
were white like wool; as white as snow, and his eyes were as a flame of fire,
i. e. In respect of his Prophetical Office, he did show himself, in all their
Church-Administrations, to be full of Wisdom, Gravity, Prudence, and
Understanding; And his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a
furnace; and his voice was as the voice of many waters, i, e. He did
triumphantly conquer many stout-hearted and rebellious Sinners, by virtue of
his Kingly Power and Regal Authority in his Ordinances, Ps. 110.3, 4. and 45.

2dly, God was good in respect of that good Order, Discipline and Government
that was amongst them: Christ himself was their Sovereign and Supreme Lawgiver
in all Church Matters, according to what was Prophesied, Is. 9.6, 7. The
government shall be upon his shoulders: Zech. 6.13. Even he shall build the
temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the glory; and he shall sit and rule upon
his throne. The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven were put in the hands of those
that were faithful: Of Peter, Matthew. 16.19. Of all the Apostles, Joh. 20. Of
the whole Church, Matthew. 18.17, 18. Herein was their Order and Polity; that
Church Officers meddled only with what was proper for them, to wit, the
Authoritative exercise of Church Power; and the Church meddled with nothing but
what was proper for them. In the Primitive Church, during the first Century,
nothing was done sine consensu plebis, without the consent of the People, as
Mr. Jacob proves by an hundred Testimonies out of the purest Antiquity, they
had the power of choosing their own Officers, Act. 1. end, and 6. begin. Of
admitting Members, as in the case of Readiness seeking to adjoin himself, who was
hindered by the Brethren of the Church, till they received satisfaction from
Barnabas's. Act. Of casting out offending Members, 1 Cor. 5. Of re-admitting
Excommunicate Penitents, 2 Cor. 2. Their order was, that no particular Church
did arrogate Power or Jurisdiction over other particular Churches; the Church
of Antioch's sending to Jerusalem, Act. 15. to consult with them concerning
some Doctrinal Differences, does argue, That they had full power to determine
the matter among themselves, without making any appeal: their order was, that
they did not press things indifferent upon scrupling Consciences, as if they
had been necessary, Romans 14. 1 Cor. 8. and 9. Chapters: They well knew that to
have done otherwise, would have been Tyranny, and destructive to Christian
Liberty; and so for many other things.

3. The Primitive Church, in respect of purity of Doctrine, was called, Rev.
12. 1* A Woman that had on her Head a Crown of twelve Stars; however they were
branded by their Enemies as Heretical; yet the Doctrine they professed was
purely Apostolical. It Is true, false Teachers did creep in now and then amongst
them, and corrupted several Truths; but, through the vigilance and faithfulness
of the Servants of God, they were quickly and convincingly confuted: They did
teach that we must seek Righteousness for Justification, partly by Christ, and
partly by the Ceremonies of Moses's Law; but the Epistles to Coloss. Galat. and
Hebrews were written against this Heresy. Cerinthus denied the Divinity of
Christ, for which the Gospel of John was written, 2 Cor. 11* 2, 3. I am jealous
over you with a godly jealousy; for I have espoused you to one husband, that I
may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ: for I fear left as by any means
the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.

4. Herein was the Glory of the Primitive Church, That not only the Officers,
but also many of their Members, were Men singularly qualified with gifts. 1
Cor. 1.5, 7. By him ye are enriched in every thing; in all utterance, and in
all knowledge: So that ye come behind in no Gift. See 1 Cor. 14. Act. 8. Mark
16.17. These signs shall follow them that believe, in my name shall they cast
out Devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents, and
if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them, they shall lay hands on
the sick and they shall recover.

5. God was good to them in respect of Grace: Romans 15.14. And I my self am
persuaded of you brethren, that ye are full of goodness. 1 Cor. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.3,
4, 5. Philip. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. being confident of this very thing, that he
which has begun a good work in you will perform it until the day of Jesus
Christ: even as it is meet for me to think this of you all, because I have you
in my heart, in as much as both in my bonds, and in the defense and
confirmation of the Gospel ye are all partakers of my grace: and this I pray,
that your love may yet more and more abound in all knowledge, and in all
judgment. Col. 1.3, 4. We give thanks unto God -- since we heard of your Faith
in Christ Jesus, and of the love which ye have to all the Saints. 1 These. 1.3.
Remembering without ceasing, your work of Faith, your labor of love, and
patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God and of our
Father; knowing, brethren beloved, your election of God. It was no small part
of their Glory that they did so abound in Love, which did evidence it self in
two notable Acts 1. They kept the unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace;
though some were for Circumcision, others against it; some for observation of
Days, Ceremonies, eating Meats, and others not, yet they did in a great measure
live in Love and Unity, Acts 4.32. The multitude of them that believed, were of
one Heart, and of one Soul. 2. There was none of them wanted necessaries so
long as others had wherewithal to supply them, 2 Cor. 9.12, 13, 14. The
administration of this service, not only supplieth the want of the Saints, but
is abundant also, by many thanksgivings unto God; whiles by the experiment of
this Ministration they glorify God for your professed subjection unto the
gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution unto them, and unto all
Men: And by their prayer for you, which long after you, for the exceeding grace
of God in you: Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift. Romans 15.25, 26, 27.
I go to Jerusalem to minister to the Saints, for it has pleased them of
Macedonia and Achaia, to make a certain contribution for the poor Saints which
are at Jerusalem, it has pleased them verily and their debtors they are: For
if the Gentiles have been partakers of their spiritual things, their duty is
also to Minister unto them in carnal things. Acts 2.44, 45. All that believed
were together, and had all things common, and sold their possessions and goods,
and parted them to all Men, as every Man had need. And 4.32. Neither said any
of them that ought of the things which he possessed was his own, but they had
all things common. 6. In all Changes and Conditions, they were constant, still
one and the same, not sickle or variable, some times for one thing, sometimes
for another, Acts 2.42. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine
and in fellowship, and in breaking of bread and in prayers. 46.47. And they
continued daily in the Temple with one accord, and breaking bread from house to
house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God,
and having favor with all people; and the Lord added to the Church daily such
as should be saved. 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. 1 These. 3.12, 13. Rev. 3.10. Thou have
kept the word of my patience. And 2.13. I know thy works and where thou
dwell, even where Satan's seat is, and hold fast my Name, and have not
denied my Faith, even in those days wherein Antipas was my faithful Martyr --
Lastly, The Lord was graciously pleased to confer the Honor of Martyrdom upon
them: Stephen was the Proto-Martyr, Acts 7. They were scattered at Jerusalem by
reason of Persecution. Acts. 8. Paul and Peter suffered at Rome. under Nero;
the one Beheaded, the other Crucified: So also James surnamed Justus, Nay there
was not one of the Apostles that escaped a violent Death, John only excepted.
Let us make some use of all this in some Three or Four things. 1. Let us bless
God for his goodness to them. O Blessed be the Lord that ever there was such a
one as the Apostle Paul -- O Blessed be the Lord for the Truths, Ordinances,
Gifts and Graces that were communicated to them; we are in a sense sharers in
the Mercies, What was then written or transacted, said or done, was all for our
Instruction. 2. Did the Lord give forth such an abundant measure of the Spirit,
at the first Plantation of the Gospel, according to what the Work of that Day
did require, which was to bring the carnal Jews from off their Ceremonies, and
the heathenish Gentiles from Satan to God, who must see Miracles, otherwise
they will not believe? Let us believe and be confident that the same good God
will not be wanting to proportion the Gifts and Graces of his Churches and
Servants to the Work of this our Day, which is the reformation of Religion from
Antichristianism. Blessed be the Lord for any small bedewings and besprinklings
of the Spirit poured forth upon any in our times in order hereunto. 3. Let us
from hence bemoan our selves, and others that go under the Name of Churches of
Christ, who have degenerated so far from them in Doctrine, Discipline, Worship,
Gifts, Graces, Holiness of Conversation, Perseverance in Sufferings --
contraria mixta seposita clarius elucescunt: In the primitive times Christ
placed us in a kind of Paradise, but we have not kept our first Habitation. 4.
Let Us not only remember whence we are fallen, but also return to our first
Estate, and when we set about a Reformation, whether Personal or
Ecclesiastical: Let Us be sure to set the primitive Pattern before us, as near
as may be: Let Us Love as they did, endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in
the Bond of Peace as they did; continue steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine,
in fellowship, in breaking of Bread and Prayers as they did -- No sufferings
frighted them from following the Lamb; be followers of them in all things,
imitable so far as they were followers of Christ.

Sixthly, God was good to his Gospel- Israel, after the Death of the Apostles,
till Constantine's time. And here before I come to particulars, it will be
necessary to premise these few general considerations as introductory for the
clearing of what is further intended. 1. Be it known to you, that immediately
upon the Death of the Apostles the Church was in a persecuted state: It Is true,
it was so in their time, but not as afterward, when there were public Laws
and Edicts made against the profession and professors of the Christian
Religion, providence so ordering it, that they should have some respite till
the Gospel and Churches had some Plantation. 2. The time of this persecuted
Condition was Three Hundred Years or thereabouts. 3. The Instruments whom the
Devil made use of for this diabolical Service, were the heathen Emperors of
Rome, Rev. 12.3. The party there combating against Michael and his Angels,
Christ and his People is thus described, A great red Dragon, having seven Heads
and ten Horns, and seven Crowns upon his Heads. A Dragon because of his Power,
red because of his Cruelty, having seven Heads i. e. seven several sorts of
Governments in Rome heathenish, as also it was built upon seven Hills, having
ten Heads with seven Crowns thereupon, to distinguish Rome-heathen from
Rome-Antichristian, Rev. 13.1. That has not only seven Heads and ten Horns, but
also Crowns upon the Horns, to intimate that Antichrist made Kingdoms of those
that were but Provinces, during the Dragon's Reign under the heathen Emperors.
4. Having perused several writers of great Note, both for Godliness and
Learning, upon that transcendantly high mystical Scripture, of the Revelation:
It Is most probable as I humbly conceive, that they guess right who assert that
the Seals Chap. 6. hold forth this State of the Church during the first three
Centuries, of which Chapter 12. to verse 13. seems to be explicatory. 5. In
treating of this Subject, I shall be necessitated to make use of History, to
which I require no more of you but a Historical Faith: I account it a great
Mercy that every Age has had some faithful Servants of God, whose care it has
been to transmit to posterity the memorable acts of Divine Providence to his
People, Psalm. 145.4. One generation shall praise thy works to another, and
shall declare thy mighty acts, I will speak of the glorious honor of thy
Majesty, and of thy wondrous works.

1. God was good to them in giving forth this incomparable rich and rare
Monument of the Revelation of John the Divine, the principal scope and
intendment whereof was, 1. To forewarn them of the near approach of suffering
times, that so they might not be surprised, but in a readiness to encounter
therewith. 2. That they might know what their sufferings would be, by whom, and
of what continuance. 3. That they should be comforted and encouraged under all,
especially upon this twofold consideration. 1. There Is no sufferings shall
befall you, but according to the predetermination and fore-appointment of a
wise God, and loving Father. 2. Let the Churches troubles be what they will,
they shall have a glorious and an assured issue; seeing this was the good end
of God in transmitting this prophetical Piece of holy Writ to us, that it might
be a Lanthorn to our Feet to direct our steps in a dark Place: Let Us not slight
this good providence, so as not at all to peruse it; only for the Lord's sake
study Sobriety, Self-denial, Humility and Spirituality in your perusal, and
then there will be no great danger, otherwise there may, and will Rev. 3.1, 3.
Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and
keep these things.

2. God's good Providence so ordered it, that their sufferings were for
Righteousness sake, Rev. 6.9. They were slain for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they held. Their Testimony was this, The Devil is not to be
Worshipped, nor any other Creature whatsoever. This enraged the Dragon who was
then Worshipped, to raise a persecution against them, Rev. 12.7. Their
Testimony was that their present way of Worship, though practiced by the
Emperors, and established by the public Laws of the Empire, yet it was
idolatrous, sinful and detestable to God; this enraged the Emperors against
them; they testified that Jesus Christ was the only Son of God, and Savior of
the World: The Senate of Rome refused to acknowledge his Divinity, till first
by some Act or Law of theirs, it should be so approved of and ratified, Romans
1.21, 22. Herein the Romans (...) became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish Heart was full of darkness, when they professed themselves to be wise,
they became fools. From all this it is evident that they suffered in a very
righteous Cause. 2. From this also that they refused conformity to their way of
Worship, and would not do any the least thing that might but seem to honor
their Idols, though much solicited thereunto, both by promises of great rewards
on the one hand, and threatenings of sore punishments on the other, Eustachius a
Christian Soldier, with his whole Family, was put to Death, though otherwise
he had done great service, merely because he would not on the day of Triumph,
Sacrifice with the Emperor. Dioclesian's own Wife being a Christian suffered on
the same account. Marcus Arethusius not only refused to build the Idols Temple,
which himself had pulled down, but also chused Death rather than to contribute
one Farthing toward it: They would not deliver up their Bibles; they would not
give so much as a Clout or Rag, they would not so much as throw a little
incense on their Altars: A certain Christian Soldier would needs carry his
Garland in his Hand, when his fellows did wear it on their Heads, in Testimony
of Honor to their Idols. 3. They suffered because they would not persecute
their fellow Christians: A memorable instance is of that Christian Legion of
Soldiers, who after an excellent Oration made by Mauritius their Commander to
the Emperor Maximinianus, after they had been twice decimated, were afterward
all of them Slain, upon no other account, but because they would not fall upon
their fellows. 4. That they suffered for Righteousness sake; may appear from
the many false calumnies and accusations that were brought against them, Rev.
12.10. When the Dragon in the persecuting Emperors had his deadly Wound, it is
thus expressed, The accuser of our brethren is cast down. 1. They were accused
for being Enemies to civil Government upon a twofold account. 1. Because of
their nonconformity to such edicts of the Empire, as were contrary to the Law
of God. 2 Because they talked so much of the Kingdom of Christ, that in matters
of Conference and Worship they acknowledged no Sovereignty nor Laws but his.
Trajan's Persecution did arise upon Euaristus's exercising of Discipline in the
Churches, without dependence upon the civil Power. The Emperor Domitian did
diligently search for all that were any kin to Christ according to the Flesh,
least happily some of them might lay claim to his Crown; that the primitive
Christians were Enemies to Magistrates and civil Government was a notorious
falseshood both their Principles and Practices do abundantly testify, for
sometimes when there were many hundreds of them Burnt in Churches, and
thousands of them that were Soldiers in Arms, able enough to defend themselves,
destroyed, they chused to suffer, rather than sinfully to make resistance. 2.
They were most abominably slandered by Magicians, Idolatrous Priests, Jews, and
other Apostate Christians, as guilty of the most horrid sins that could be
named, at their Meetings; to wit, Incest, Adultrey, Drunkenness, Inhumanity --
3. Whatever Plagues were inflicted upon Persecutors, the blame of all was cast
upon the Christians, as if they had been the only cause thereof; whereas indeed
it was their own Sin of Persecuting God's People, and contempt of the Gospel,
that occasioned all their judgments. 4. That they suffered for Righteousness,
may appear from the Laws which were made against them; to wit these. 1. That
all their Bibles should be delivered up and destroyed. 2. That they should not
meet together for Religious exercises, unless it were Men apart, and Women
apart, and so Women were to teach Women, contrary to Christ's Law. 3. That no
Ministers should meet together in any Synod, or otherwise; and that wherever
they were apprehended they should be carried away to Prison. The Laws made by
Julian for the extirpation of Christianity were these. 1. That no Children of
Christians should be trained up in Schools, that so being ignorant, they might
be incapacitated to plead for the Christian Religion 2. That none should be
beneficed with any place, civil or military, but they that would Sacrifice to
Idols. 3. That no Ministers should have any maintenance. 4. Merely in spite to
the Christians, he enacted a toleration to all sorts of Religion; whence the
Jews were encouraged to lay the Foundation of the Temple, that abomination of
desolation, against which God did so miraculously appear from Heaven above, and
Earthquakes beneath, that there was not one Stone left upon another, according
to what was prophesied by Christ, Matthew. 24.2.

3. God was good to them in this respect, That during their Persecuted Estate,
he furnished them with Ministers, and others singularly qualified for the
Service and Sufferings of that Day, as may appear, 1. By comparing Rev. 6.1, 3,
5, 7. with 4.7. By the Beasts which cried, Come and see, at the opening of the
Seals, the Ministers of Christ are signified, the first was like a Lion, i. e.
they did deliver their Masters Message, and do his Work, with an undaunted Lion
like Courage and Boldness. The second was like a Calf, i. e. they were fitted
with a Spirit of Patience, and Meekness contentedly to undergo the Yoke of hard
Labor and sore Pressures: The Third had the Face of a Man, i. e. they were
furnished with a great measure of Heavenly Wisdom and Prudence in all their
administrations. The fourth like a flying Eagle, i. e. some of them did soar
aloft in searching into, and discovering of the great Mysteries of the Kingdom
of Heaven; they were very Heavenly-minded, and insisted much on such things as
might make the Christians Dead to all things here below, such a one was
Polycarpus, who thus answered the Proconsul pressing him to deny Christ: These
Eighty Six Years I have served a good Master, and why should I now deny him? At
another time thus, I do even long for the Teeth of the devouring Beasts;
they will only grind us in a Mill, that we may be Wheat fit for our Masters
Table. And Ignatius thus, I covet nothing that can be seen with Bodily Eyes, so
that I may but enjoy Jesus Christ. Let the Fire, the Cross, the Beasts, the
breaking of Bones, convulsion of Members, bruising of the whole Body, and the
torments of the Devil seize upon me, provided I may be partaker of Christ. 2.
The evidence of this may be evinced, if we consider, how that through their
means the Gospel did so triumphantly conquer and captivate the Hearts and
Affections of so many hundreds and thousands to the obedience of Christ, that
of Rev. 6.2. was applicable to their times. I saw, and behold a white Horse,
and he that sat on him had a Bow, and a Crown was given unto him, and he went
forth conquering and to conquer: The Gospel was then spread abroad into many
several Nations: There was almost no place where the Christian Religion was not
professed. Plinius reports, That the number of Christians did so increase,
notwithstanding of Persecution, that few or none did frequent the Idols Temples
and Sacrifices. Tertullian said, all the other Monarchies have their Bounds and
Limits, only Christ's Dominion was spread over all, and had no Bounds, whence
he proved, That Christ could be no other but the Son of God: And as the same
Author relates, If they had all forsaken the Towns of the Heathens they had
left them almost desolate. Sanguine fundata est ecclesia, Sanguine crevit. 3.
The greatness of the Mercy did appear in this, That the Lord did raise up some
of very great eminency, to plead their Cause against Enemies of all sorts. 1.
Quadratus, Aristides, Apollonius, Melito, Asianus, Justin Martyr and
Tertullian, did learnedly plead against Persecutors and Presented their
Apologeticks to the Emperors. 2. Origin and Celsus did manage their cause
against the Heathens. 3. Justin Martyr against the Jews, in his Book called,
Dialogus cum Tryphone. 4. Tertullian both against Jews and Gentiles. 5.
Irenaeus and Tertullian against Heretics 4. As they strenuously contended for
the truth against all Enemies, so they labored mightily to keep the Churches
at peace among themselves, especially Irenaeus and Polycarpus, who kept the
Western and Eastern Churches in concord, notwithstanding of their difference
about keeping of Easter; the one pleading it should be kept on the Sabbath, the
other on the same Day that the Jews of old did observe; let it fall to be the
Sabbath, or ay other Day of the Week, in this Pacificatory Work they prevailed
much, and were very successful, till Victor Bishop of Rome took upon him to
excommunicate them of the East, Anno 200 5. They were such as did with all
seriousness call aloud upon the Churches to consider the things that were of
greatest concernment to them in that Estate. Rev. 6. At the opening of every
Seal, they called thus, Come and see. 1. That this was nothing but what was
Prophesied of before. 2. Come and see, i. e. consider that these things do not
befall you by chance or Fortune, but take special notice of the Hand of God in
all these providential Occurrences. 3. Come and see that Persecutors are
limited, they cannot go beyond their Commission no further than Providence
permits: A Horse and a Rider is the Type of every one of the four first Seals,
to signify that the reins of Persecutors are not upon their own Necks, but
were wisely ordered and guided by the Hand of a skillkful Rider. 4. Come and
see your own sins as the procuring cause of all these Persecutions and
Punishments, inflicted upon you. Cyprian Lib. 4. Epist. 4. Quicquid patimur,
peccata nostra meruere dum viam domini non tenemus, nee data nobis ad salutem
caelestia mandata servamus, fecit dominus noster voluntatem patris, at nos non
facimus domini voluntatem patrimonio and lucro students, superbiam sectantes,
aemulationi ac dissentioni vacantes. There were these particular sins which he
acknowledged to be amongst them. 1. In general they did not walk so close with
God as they should have done, nor did they study exactness in keeping the
Commands of God, according to the pattern of Christ. 2. They did with two much
eagerness pursue after the World. 3. They were Proud. 4. There were Emulations,
Dissensions, Envyings and Divisions amongst them. 5. They were not so
plainhearted and faithful in their dealings, as they should have been.
Simplicitatis and fidei negligentis. 6. They denied themselves of the World in
Words only, but not in Deeds; saeculo verbis solis and non factis,
renunciantes. 7. Every one sought to please himself, displeasing others.
Unusquisque sibi placentes and aliis non placentes.

5. Come and see the ends of God in all this 1. It is to declare his Holiness
and Righteousness; he cannot away with Sin in any, how near or dear so ever to
him. 2. To humble them for their Sins. 3. To exercise their Graces. 4. To
discover Hypocrites. 5. That the Truths of the Gospel might be sufficiently
confirmed and commended to after Ages, and succeeding Generations: After the
Martyrdom of so many, there needs no new Miracles, to make us believe the
Gospel. 6. That they might be Patterns to us in point of Suffering, demeaning
our selves as they did.

6. Come and see the ends of God in delaying so long to give them deliverance.
1. Because Wicked Men had not yet filled up the measure of their Sins. 2. He
had a mind to honor some more of his Servants with the Crown of Martyrdom.
Rev. 6.10. And it was said unto them that they should rest for a little season
until their fellow servants also and brethren that should be killed as they
were, should be fulfilled. When the scrowl of them that God had marked out for
Sufferings, was made up, then they might expect Deliverance: Histories do
relate, that in these purer primitive times, before the Apostasy of Rome, all
their Ministers were Martyrs, till Sylvester the first, in Constantine's days.

4. God was very good to his People in those days, in giving them now and then
some breathing time and respite from the heat of Persecution; as after
Domitian's Death, they were not troubled for one whole year's time; under
Commodus and Heliogabalus, they were free from Persecution; after Decius they
had Peace for forty years together: It Is very observable, That their Sufferings
were little or nothing at all under some that were otherwise most notoriously
Wicked; and they suffered greatly from some that were otherwise morally good
Magistrates, to wit, Hadrian, that was called Restaurator Orbis, and Trajan,
called Princeps Optimus; insomuch, that it afterward became Proverbial, in
Congratulating new Emperors with this Salutation, Foelicior Augusto, melior
Trajano; so also under Antoninus Pius, and Severus: Morality without Grace is
sometimes a greater Enemy to the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ, than open
Atheism and Profaneness. However, let the Persons and Instruments, under whom
they had respite, be what they will, all was still to be attributed to the
goodness of God, who did accomplish and bring it to pass, by such wonderful
means; some whereof are these. 1. Antoninus Pius was taken off from Persecuting
them by that extraordinary act of Providence, in hearing the Prayers of a
Legion of Soldiers that were Christians, whereby his whole Army, in a great
strait for Rain, were abundantly refreshed, and his Enemies miraculously
defeated; God from Heaven fighting with Thunder and Lightning against them, for
which that Legion was called, Legio fulminatrix, the Thundering Legion: This
wrought so upon the Emperor, that presently he commanded the Christians should
neither be sought for, nor punished if presented, but that their Accusers
should be punished; For, says he, my own safety, and the safety of my Empire
depends upon their Prayers. 2. Aurelianus having issued forth an Edict
against the Christians, was so terrified with Thunder that he recalled it. 3.
Alexander Severus was persuaded by his Mother Mammea to show them favor; she
hearing of the Learning of Origin sent for him, and was instructed by him. 4.
Hadrian's Persecution was something mitigated by the Apologies which were
presented to him by Aristides and Quadratus. 5. Antoninus Pius was made to
relent by Justin Martyr's Apologetick. 6. Under Trajan the Persecution was
staid by Plinius Secundus, who writ to the Emperor concerning their Innocence,
That they were not Guilty of the Crimes charged upon them, in regard the Law of
their God was very strict against such Sins; and that they used to meet before
Day to Sing Psalms, and to Worship one called JESUS.

5. God's goodness to them was in respect of the remarkable Judgments, which he
brought upon most, if not all of their greatest Persecutors: I Will give you a
Summary Survey of the Tragical ends of all of them throughout the Ten
Persecutions. The First was under Nero, Anno 67. Who being hated of Men, and
persued by the Senate of Rome, killed himself. Second under Domitian, Anno 90.
His wife and Friends finding a Roll of the Names of Christians, which he had
marked out for suffering, and their own amongst the rest, they killed him.
Third under Trajan, Anno. 100. who was all his Life time vexed with great
troubles and commotions, and at last cut off by a strange Disease. Fourth under
Hadrian and Antoninus Pius, Anno 126. Hadrian Died in great horror of
Conscience; it was he that cried out, O animula, vagula, blandula -- Pius Died
of a Fever in three Days after he Sickned. Fifth under Antoninus Philosophus
and Verus, I find nothing recorded of their Death, but Antoninus knew much
trouble in his Lifetime, from the Germans, Samaritans, Avidius, Cassius and
others. Sixth, under Severus, Anno 208. He was slain at York, by the Northern
Men and Scots, and in his time a certain Judge, that pronounced Sentence
against Agapetus, a holy Martyr, fell from the Bench, and Died suddenly.
Seventh, under Maximinus Anno, 236. He was killed by his own Son, and Soldiers
in his Tent at the Seige of Aquileia. Eighth under Decius, Anno 251. Being
overcome by the Scythians or Goths, he threw himself into a Pit, where he
ended his Life, and his Body could never be found. Ninth, under Gallus and
Volusianus, Anno 258. A sad Pestilence in his time; was slain by Aemilianus,
one of his own Captains, together with his Son. Valerianus being overcome by
the Persians, Sopor trod upon him while he took Horse. The last was under
Dioclesian and Maximinian, Anno 300. Both of them in one Day divested
themselves of the imperial dignity; and chused to live in Dens and Caves:
Dioclesian afterward Poisoned himself, rather than he would see Constantine;
and Maximinianus hanged himself.

6. God was good in giving them a glorious deliverance from this their
persecuted State, and that by the Hands of Constantine, where these passages of
Providence are remarkable. 1. He had a kind of immediate Call from Heaven, both
to embrace the Christian Religion, as also to go against that Persecuting
Tyrant Maxentius; witness the voice which he heard, (...), in Christ thou shall
overcome: Eusebius that lived in his time, tells us, That he heard himself
relate this, confirming it with an Oath. 2. God preserved him for this Service
from the treacherous Design of his Father in Law Maximinianus, his Wife having
discovered it to him. 3. Maxentius had made a device to drown him and his Men,
when he passed over a Bridge, by which Maxentius himself was afterward drowned,
and he escaped, for which the Christians sung, Psalm. 9.16. And 7.15. 4. Having
giving himself to Fasting and Prayer, he obtained Victory over Maximinus and
Licinius; and though Licinius had once greatly reproached Christ and
Christianity yet being brought to condign Punishment, he was made to confess
that great was the Christians God, and great was Constantine's God.

Let Us make some Application of the Premises in these few Particulars.

1. This calls upon us highly to esteem of the glorious Truths of Christ, in
regard they have been Sealed and Witnessed to with the Blood of so many
Millions of Martyrs. O how wonderful are the Ways of God that would take such a
Course to commend the Gospel of the Son of God to us, who knows, but they of
that Age suffered, that we and others might at least in a great measure be
excused.

2. Though they excused us so far that the Church is never like to be in a
Persecuted State for Three hundred Years together, yet there is no Age in which
this, or the other particular Person can promise an exemption from Persecution to
himself; and therefore it sounds an Alarm to us in the times of our greatest
Peace and Prosperity, to prepare for Persecution: Lay in a stock of Suffering
Graces before, that so it may never surprise you unawares, but, come when it
will, you may be ready for it. Take special notice of these three things. 1.
Persecution has been in all Ages, an inseparable Concomitant of the plain and
faithful Preaching of the Gospel, Matthew. 10.34, 35. 2. It was never better with
the Church and People of God than in times of Persecution; there was never a
more glorious Luster and Beauty upon Ordinances; Ministers never more Lively
and Spiritual; the Conversation of Christians never more in Heaven; and the
number of Converts never more increased. 3. Be confirmed in this, That the
speciality of God's Love in Christ to his People, may very well stand with
their being in a Persecuted Condition; so that it may be always said, Truly God
is good to Israel.

3. In all your Sufferings set the Martyrs of those times before you as
Patterns for imitation. 1. As I would not have you decline Sufferings for the
Gospel and Righteousness sake, when indeed called of God thereunto, so be
careful not to suffer as Busy bodies, or Evildoers: Mattyrdom for Christ was
accounted so honorable amongst them, that the Names of all that were Martyrs
indeed, were registered, and kept upon Record; and such as did Suffer, either
not for Truth, or without a Call, out of an itching appetite for Honor, were
not Enrolled. 2. In all your Sufferings own Magistracy, and honor the
Authority of Magistrates; I am sure this was the Doctrine and Practice of
Christ, the Apostles and the purer primitive Churches. 3. Show all Meekness
toward your Persecutors, that they may be convinced, it is not through a
peevish humoursomness or Pride, but really for Conscience sake, because you
dare not sin against God, that you do and suffer what you do; condescend to
them in all things civil, unless they impose upon your Consciences, something
contrary to God's Word. 4. Show Love to the Souls of those that hate you with a
most cruel hatred, in praying sincerely, heartily, and constantly for them,
Matthew. 5. end. 5. Do not use any sinful or unlawful means to deliver your self
from sufferings, Heb. 11.25, 26. 6. As I would have none to venture upon
sufferings in their own Strength a Fleshly confidence will fail you in an Hour
of Temptation, so let not the sense of thy own weakness cause discouragement
and a despondence of Spirit, but rather act dependence upon this good God, that
when ever he gives the Call, he will proportion thy Strength in some measure to
thy Sufferings, 1 Cor. 10.13. 7. These primitive Martyrs were not only patient,
but of a cheerful Spirit in all their Sufferings, they Sung Psalms to one
Jesus. Let this be the Gospel-Frame of Spirit you are of, in every thing give
thanks, for this is the will of God your Heavenly Father, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. 8. Be
much in Prayer, in the exercise of Repentance, and of Faith, in applying
particular Promises to your own Souls, and in realizing the Glorious things of
Eternity. 9. In all your Sufferings be public Spirited. i. e. Let Gods Glory,
the honor of the Gospel, the Edification of Churches and Christians, and thy
own Souls Advantage be aimed at: Do not think how thou may get Honor and a
Name to thy self, but rather (1 Cor. 10.31. whatsoever thou do do or suffer,
let all be for the Glory of God. 10. Think it not enough to begin well, but
resolve in the Lord's Strength to continue faithful to the Death, and thou
shall be sure of the Crown of Life.

7. God was good to his People from Constantine's time, and the first beginning
of Antichrists Rise, to his full height, and to put the two last in one, he has
been good to them ever since he began to decay, and will continue his Goodness
to them more and more, to the end of the World: And here it will be necessary
for your better understanding of this Subject, to premise a few things. 1. No
sooner was the Church delivered from a Persecuted State, but immediately upon
the back of that, a new Storm did arise. 2. The Churches Trials now, are of a
different Nature from what they were formerly, as then they Suffered from
professed Pagans, so now they are exercised with Spiritual Judgments, they were
pestered with Heresies and Errors from within, and such as by Profession were
Christians. 3. This is not so to be understood, as if they shall not now suffer
Persecution, but the Denomination of the Churches State, is from that which is
Chief and Principal of the two Evils, Heresies were the greatest. 4. The
Instruments by whom they suffered, were Antichrist and his Adherents. 5. In
treating of these things, I shall take it for granted, that the Churches
sufferings in this Age, is contained under the Trumpets, 8. and 9. Chap. of the
Revel. 6. I understand the 7th Chap. of the Revel. to be only a preparative to
the sounding of the Trumpets, and intervenes between the opening of the 6th and
7th Seals, as also that the 10th Chap. and beginning of the 11th is no new
Prophesy distinct from the Prophesy of the Trumpets, but only intervenes
between the 6th and 7th. 7. I must speak particularly and more largely than I
intended of the evils of this Age, that so the Goodness of God in preserving
them from the same, may appear to be the greater, and so for methods sake, I
shall summarily give you the substance of the 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th, Chap.
of the Revel. as they lie in order.

Revelations Chap. Seven.
1. Take notice, that the Nature of the Evil to ensue is hinted at v. 1, 2.
There were Four Angels standing on the four Corners of the Earth, holding the
four Winds, that they should not blow upon the Earth, nor on the Sea, nor on
the Trees. This was the Judgment that was to come upon earthy, unstable and
self-conceited Professors of the visible Church, even a suspension of the
influences of the North and South Wind of the Spirit, throughout all the
Corners of the Earth. 2. It is observable that this, nor any other kind of evil
can befall Creatures by chance, but by the Hand of an Overruling Divine
providence. Four Angels are Empowered and Commissioned from above, before the
thing be put in Execution. 3. From verse 2.3. Observe, Such is God's Goodness,
and Christ's tender Care toward his poor People, that he suffers not these
Commissioned Executioners of Divine Justice, to go on hastily with their Work,
till they were sufficiently prepared and guarded against it. 4. The Great Lord
Chancellor, the Keeper of the Great Seal of Heaven, is pleased to set his own
Mark upon his chosen Ones, whereby they may be ensafed, and secured against
this ensuing Evil: Hurt not -- till we have Sealed the Servants of our God in
their Foreheads. He gives them that excellent Unction 1 John 2. and anointing
of the Spirit, that though Antichristian Calamities may reach their Bodies, yet
they shall never be able to do their Souls any considerable hurt. 5. herein is
the Goodness of God yet further, that during Antichrists Rage, the Sealed Ones
are exactly Numbered to a Man, in the Court-Rolls of Heaven One Hundred Forty
Four Thousand out of all the Tribes of Israel, i. e. as the Twelve Tribes of
Israel were but few in respect of other Nations, and the Elect of God among
themselves, were but few in respect of those that were called Israelites; so
the Number of those that are preserved from Antichristian Pollutiones shall be
few in respect of a world of carnal Professors, that shall wonder after the
Beast. 6. From verse 9. to the end, you have an excellent prophetical hint of
their deliverance from Antichristianism, and then their Condition shall be
glorious comparatively, i. e. in respect of her Wilderness condition, and
prophesying in Sackcloath; then shall there be a multitude which no Man can
Number, of all Nations, and they shall stand before the Throne, and before the
Lamb. Though it was hardly visible, whether there was a Church or no formerly,
yet now they shall openly show themselves, Clothed with white Robes, to show
that they have shaken off Popery, with its Doctrine of Merits, Indulgences,
Penances and Satisfactions, and seek Justification only by Faith in Christ, and
his Righteousness; having Palms in their Hands, as a sign of Victory over the
Beast, over his Mark, his Image, and the Number of his Name; and they cried
with a loud Voice, Salvation of our God, which sits upon the Throne, and to
the Lamb, and the Angels also fell on their Faces before the Throne, and
Worshipped God, saying, Amen. Blessing, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving
and Honor, and Power, and Might, be unto our God, for ever and ever, Amen. The
State of the Church, shall now be a kind of Heaven upon Earth, in comparison of
what it was during Antichrists Reign, and her Glory shall still increase from
one Degree to another, till she be fully possessed of Heaven it self, where
their shall be a total exemption from all Evil, and an abundant affluence of
all good, truly God is good to Israel

Chapter Eighth.
This Eighth Chapter does under the First four Trumpets, contain as I humbly
conceive the Churches Sufferings for the next Three Hundred Years after
Constantine; where observe. 1. Upon opening the Seventh Seal, there was silence
in Heaven for half an hour, i. e. for some short time the Church had some
respite from outward Commotions and Troubles; and this is to be reckoned among
the Demonstrations of God's goodness to them; or it signifies a holy attention
in Heaven's Inhabitants, the Christians, to what God shall be pleased to speak
to them by this Seal, that brings forth Seven several Trumps, and each of them
a several Judgment; it put them in a kind of amaze to consider, That no sooner
they were delivered from Paganish Persecutions, which lasted for Three hundred
Years, but immediately there is a new Cloud a gathering.

2. To the Seven Angels, which stood before God, were given Seven Trumpets, v.
2. to intimate God's goodness in this, That he did solemnly denounce Wrath and
Judgment against Carnal Christians, that began to corrupt their Ways, and
thereby did call aloud upon them to Repent; Trumpets are for an Alarm to War,
and they give a distinct sound, that every one may know their Duty: So good is
God, that he is not willing that any should Perish, but all should come to the
knowledge of the Truth, Repent and be Saved.

3. Even in those Days God had a Praying People, whose Persons and Prayers
found acceptance, through the Intercession of Jesus Christ, Verse 3, 4. Another
Angel came, and stood at the Altar, having a golden censer, and there was given
unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of the Saints,
upon the golden Altar which was before the throne; and the smoke of the
incense, which came with the prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God out
of the Angel's hand.

4. The very same Angel of the Covenant, Christ himself, takes some Fire from
off the Altar, and casts it into the Earth: And then there were voices, and
thundrings, and lightnings, and earthquakes, v. 5. It Is he that perfumes the
Saints Prayers, that plagues and punishes the world of Apostate Professors with
spiritual Judgments; All Judgment is committed of the Father to the Son, and
therefore the Sealed ones may be secure; they need not be afraid of what shall
fall out. O the goodness of God in this thing: And now! come to the Trumpets
themselves.

When the first Angel sounded, there followed hail and fire mingled with blood,
and they were cast upon the earth, and the third part of the trees were burnt
up, and all green grass was burnt up, verse. 7. This may be fitly applied to
Arrianism, the first spiritual Plague wherewith the Church was pestered even in
Constantine's time; It brought Hail with it, which is a cold and nipping thing,
destructive, especially to Trees and Grass. Many Trees, i. e. Eminent Ones,
became cold in matters of Worship, and in their Love one to another: And all
Grass was burnt up, i. e. The generality of common Professors throughout the
World were much Baptized into Arrianism: There was Fire mingled with Blood, i.
e. It produced a most bloody Persecution of all that were Asserters of the
Divinity of Christ, and his being Co equal, Coessential and Coeternal with the
Father.

God's goodness under this Trumpet was in these two, 1. There was but a third
part of the Trees burnt up, i. e. There were several Persons of great Note,
both Magistrates and Ministers, who did, even in those days, faithfully witness
to the Truth; of Emperors, Constantine, Valentinian, Gratian, Theodosius; of
Ministers, Alexander, Hosius, Foelix Secundus, etc. 2. Though Fundamental Truths
were much struck at, yet the Lord caused the Earth to help the Woman, Rev.
12.16. i. e. Though their Synods and Councils did begin to grow very earthly,
carnal, and corrupt, yet God made use of them for the prefervation of
Fundamental Controverted Truths, in there Purity and Incorruption. In the
Council of Nice, called by Constantine, Anno 330. Arrianism was abundantly
confuted; in that of Constantinople, Anno 380. under Gratian and Theodosius.
Macedonius, and his Followers, called (...), because they denied the
Personality of the Holy Ghost, were confuted: The Third great Council at
Ephesus, under Theodosius II. Anno 431. did condemn Nestorius's holding that
Christ had two Persons: The Fourth at Chalcedon, under Martianus, An. 451.
condemned the Eutychians confounding the Natures of Christ.

Upon the sounding of the Second Trumpet There was as it were, a mountain
burning with fire cast into the Sea; and the third part of the Sea became
blood; and the third part of the creatures, which were in the Sea, and had
life, died; and the third part of the Ships were destroyed, i.e. Now began hot
contests between Churchmen for Precedence; and this did quickly corrupt the
Ordinances themselves, the Seas and Ships, by which, Christians, as such, do
maintain a Spiritual Trade and Commerce with God and one with another:
Contentions among Churchmen were a fair Foundation, laid by the Dragon, for
the intended and designed Superstructure of Antichristianism; and they were
kindled, 1. By their own Pride and Ambition. 2. By reason of the great
Benefices bestowed upon them by Constantine; witness that Voice then heard,
Hodie venenum effusum est in ecclesiam, this day Poison is poured out on the
Church: It might then be said, Religio peperit divitias, and filia devoravit
matrem. 3. They had the favor of the Emperors, and great Men. 4. Because their
Ministry was in the Imperial Seat, they claimed more than ordinary Privileges.
5. Some good Men, being much wronged and injured, by the unjust Sentences and
Church Censures, issued forth against them in the Eastern Councils, did address
themselves to the Church of Rome, as being then most pure, that they would
interpose for some Remedy and Redress, which was afterward so much abused,
That the Sea of Rome claimed it as a privilege, That all Appeals should be made
to them; as may appear in the case of Appiarius, at a Council of
Constantinople: This being withstood by the Eastern Churches, occasioned many
hot Debates; and now it was that they had Wooden Bishops, and Golden Chalices;
whereas, in the days of Persecution, they had Golden Bishops, but Wooden
Chalices.

The goodness of God, under this Trumpet, was, in suffering only a third part
of the Waters to be corrupted; he preserves still some, both Professors and
Ordinances, from Antichristian Pollutions.

Upon the sounding of the Third Angel, There fell a great Star from heaven,
burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the Rivers, and
upon the fountains of waters; and the name of the Star is called Wormwood; and
the third part o the waters became Wormwood, and many men died of the waters,
because they were made bitter, i. e. Now the Apostasy grows higher, whereas
before Trees, and Grass, and Seas, now Rivers and Fountains are Corrupted, i.
e. The very Scriptures, and some of the choicest Streams thereof, which convey
spiritual Light and Life to Souls, were much perverted, the preceding Trumpers
did strike at Christ in his Person and Natures, this at his Offices; now comes
in the Doctrine of Merit, Popish Pennances, Indulgences, Mediators, Invocation
of Saints. This is fitly applicable to Pelagius, who lived in the days of
Honorius and Arcadius, An. 405, or 415, He corrupted the Covenant of Grace it
self; that River, the Streams whereof make glad the People of God: He was a
great Star, that did burn as it were a Lamp; he was a Man of great Parts and
seemingly Godly; but it was only the flourishes of natural and acquired
Accomplishments, not saving Grace wherewith he did shine.

God's goodness here was in this, that he suffered only a third part of the
Waters to be embittered, though Pelaganism did exceedingly spread through Italy,
France, and Britain, yet the Lord had still some eminent Lights in the Church,
that set themselves against it; to wit, Augustine, Jerome, Prosper, Optatus,
etc.

Upon the sounding of the Fourth Angel, The third part of the Sun was darkened,
and the third part of the Moon, and the third part of the Stars, and the day
shone not for a third part of it, and the night likewise, i. e. This degree of
Apostasy is so much higher than the former, as the Sun Moon, and Stars, are
higher than the Earth, Seas, Fountains, and Rivers; Now Darkness does in a
great measure overspread the whole Face of the visible Church; former Evils did
arise from Pride and Ambition, more than Ignorance, but now both go together:
This is applicable to the Sixth Century, wherein lights of all sorts came to be
Darkened and Obscured, there was a general decay of Simplicity and Purity in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government; a thick Veil upon Scriptures,
Officers, Ordinances, People, and All; now the Gospel was much eclypsed with
Humane Traditions, Cerem^nies, and Superstitions; now we read of building of
Abbeys and Monastries, of Kings and Queens deserting a Married stare to go a
Pilgrimage, merely out of a blind Devotion, multiplying of holy Days; and many
other Superstitious Fopperies. God's goodness also here is obvious from the
Text; a third part of the Sun only was darkened, etc. as also from the last
verse, which is only a Transition to what follows, intimating, that though these
four Woes that are past be great, yet there are three greater to come, though the
Churches afflictions, during this Century, were very sad, yet not comparable to
what others, especially those of the succeeding Age, encountered with.

A few words of Application. 1. From all this we may learn, That one of the
greatest designs that ever the Devil had against the Church was to corrupt
Truths, Ordinances, and Worship. Let us therefore Counter-work him in studying
and endeavoring nothing more, than the preservation of the Purity of the
Gospel both in Doctrine and Worship. 2. So hard a matter it is for Professors
and Preachers to have their Garments kept clean from such pollution, that the
Sealings of God by Jesus Christ are the only preservative against the same: It
is not Morality, Learning, Policy, or great Parts, without saving Grace, that
will do. All you that are in any measure chaste Virgins, acknowledge the Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of Heaven for this rich Mercy. 3. As I observed
before, that the Church never knew a more thriving time than under Persecution;
so it never fared worse with them, than in a time of temporal and secular
Prosperity: Let us therefore, when God calls to it, be content with
Persecution, as well as Prosperity. 4. From what has been said, it is clear as
the Sun, That the great Antichrist had his first Rise and Origination out of
the Ashes of the Pride and Covetousness of the carnal Clergy; and wherever
these are found in this Day, I dare be bold to say, It is a piece of
Antichristianism, marked out for Destruction, by the Righteous Judge of all the
World. 5. Much of God's goodness is in this, That all these Trumpets are not
sounded together, but one after another, and he begins to punish with lesser,
before he proceed to greater Judgments. O stand in awe and sin not; take
warning by one Rod, otherwise thou shall know that he has more Rods than one.
6. We see Antichrist's Promotion and Advancement was by degrees, and so shall
also his Ruin, therefore we had need of Patience.

Chap. Ninth.
This Chapter contains two Trumpets more; the 5th from the beginning to verse.
13. and 6th to the end. The 5th holds forth the Mystery of Iniquity as higher
than ever, so that things cannot be in a more Corrupted State than now, the
method I shall observe shall be as briefly as may be to open the Words as they
lie in order.

Upon the founding of the first Angel. 1. You have the fall of a Star from
Heaven to Earth; this is Boniface the Third Bishop of Rome, who Anno 606 got
himself to be styled universal Bishop, by the means of Phocas, after he had
killed his Master Mauritius the Emperor. 2. His Commission showed him to be the
Dragons Lord Lieutenant. Whereas Originally Ministers did receive the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven, from Christ, Antichrist receives the Keys of the
bottomless Pit, and derives his Authority from the Devil. v. 1.

3. You have the Execution of his Commission, no sooner is he invested with
this Power, but he improves it; he opened the bottomless Pit, now Hell it self
is set loose, to do what mischief it can. Verse 2.4. The effects that followed
upon this opening, are these Two, 1. There arose a Smoke like the Smoke of a
great Furnace, whereby the Sun and Air were Darkened, i. e. whereas under the
fourth Trumpet only a Third part of the Sun was Darkened; Now there is a total
Eclipse, and a thick Mist upon the Face of the whole Earth; the petty
Antichrists that preceded, did only Corrupt and Adulterate some Truths and
Ordinances: Thus all. His Smoke is as the Smoke of a great Furnace, a complex
Body, a Flood and Inundation of all manner of Errors and Heresies: He calls all
that endeavor a Reformation in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, Heretics and
Schismatics, but indeed, he is the great Heretic. 2. Out of this Smoke came
out Locusts. Verse 3. i. e. the Romish and Antichristian Clergy, called
Locusts. 1. Because there are such numerous swarms of them, that were never of
Divine Institution. Popes, Cardinals, Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Archbishops,
Lord-Prelates, etc. some do reckon 35 orders of that Hierarchy, to which Alsted
says do belong 225044 Monastaries. 2. Because of their hurtfulness to Souls, as
Locusts to Trees and Grass. They are further described from verse 4. to the end
of this Trumpet, the Spirit of God hereby pointing to us, That this Romish
Hierarchy is one of the greatest Pillars of Antichrists Kingdom; where you may
mark these properties in them. 1. They have power to String, i. e. to torment
the Souls and Consciences of Men and Women. Verse 3, 5, 6. They shall so put
them on the Rack, That in those days Men shall seek Death, and shall not find
it, they shall desire Death, and it shall flee away. They Preach that they must
believe as the Church believes, that they must perfectly keep the Law of God,
otherwise they are Damned -- and having thus wounded, the Remedy is worse than
the Disease; they put Men upon satisfying God's Justice at least for some sins,
and procuring Peace of Conscience by their own good Works and Merits, that no
Man can be assured of his Salvation in this Life, that after Death their Souls
go into Purgatory, out of which they are to be redeemed by saying so many
Soul-Masses for them, for which they must endow the Church with a good part of
their Estates: This their Stinging was like unto a Scorpion a dangerous kind of
Serpent, that goes waywardly, and Stings when it seems not to do so: Their
Power thus to torment, was but for five Months, this is in allusion to the
Locusts who continue from April to September, to destroy Trees and Grass. Verse
5.2. As to their shape, they were like unto Horses prepared unto Battle, i. e.
they are swift, nimble and active, strong and well fed, mere belly-Gods. 3. On
their Heads they have Crowns, as it were like unto Gold, i. e. they live in
such State, Pomp and Grandeur, that they are more like Monarchs than
Gospel Ministers, though indeed they are neither, for their Crowns are not
Gold, but like unto it; they plead that their Church Government is of Divine
Right, their Authority is from Jesus Christ, but all is not Gold that glisters,
pretend what they will, they came out of the bottomless Pit. 4. Their faces
were as the faces of Men. Verse 7. i. e. They show themselves very sociable and
affable, merely to insinuate into the Affections of others, or, they plead, its
reason by which they are regulated in all their Administrations, is it not
reason that all things should be done decently and in order, that the Church
should have a Power in Ceremonies and Matters indifferent to determine the
Practices of People, how can their be any peace without Uniformity? Non
conformists can be no other but a company of proud Persons that affect Novelty
and Singularity. 5. Their hair is like the hair of Women. Verse 8. i. e. They
are Spiritually Effeminate, and with their whorish Deckings and Attire, they
allure others to commit Spiritual Fornication. 6. Their teeth are as the teeth
of Lions. Verse 8, i. e. They are very, cruel but cunning, the teeth lie hid;
in this they are distinguished from the Turks in the following Trumpet, Whose
heads are as lions, i. e. They openly profess their Cruelty. 7. They had
breast-plates as it were of iron, i. e. They arm themselves so, that none can
do them hurt, either they get Magstirates to be on their side, or to be
privileged with immunities from the jurisdiction of Magistrates. 8. The sound
of their wings is as the sound of Chariets of many horses, running to battle,
i. e. Their Church Censures, Bulls and Excommunications is with great noise,
horror, and dread, by which Emperors and Kings themselves have been greatly
awed. 9. They have stings in their tails. Verse 10. i. e. With their flattering
Speeches, and plausible Pretenses they captivate poor simple ones. Lastly, They
have a King over them, which is the Angel of the bottomless Pit, whose name in
the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, destroyer. i. e. Though they have many several
orders and degrees amongst themselves, yet they are all of them subordinate to
one supreme Head the Pope; though some may pretend very fair, yet their
Offices, Orders and Degrees, came Originally from him that is the Angel of the
bottomless Pit.

The goodness of God under this trumpet is in the 9th, Verse. Though their
Commission was very extensive in having power to hurt all, yet it did not reach
the Sealed Ones, and to say no more but this, the greater the judgment was, the
more did the goodness of God appear in securing his hidden Ones from it. And
thus of the 5th Trumpet.

The Scope of the sixth Trumpet, is to show that Idolatry and Superstition
being now so rife amongst those that were called Christians; the Righteous God
was resolved to raise up the Sarazens and Turks as a scourge for the same, the
judgment of this Trumpet not being a Spiritual, but a Temporal one. Most
Expressions may be understood literally; I will cursorily run over the whole.

Upon the sounding of the sixth Angel, a voice was heard from the 4 Horns of
the Golden Altar which is before God, saying, Loose the four Angels which are
bound in the great River Euphrates, which was accordingly done Verse 14.15. i.
e. Whereas the forementioned barbarous People were hereto by God's Providence
restrained from breaking in upon the Western part of the World, and kept on the
other side of Euphrates, now they are commissioned from Jesus Christ to come
against the Christians for their Idolatry. The number of the army of the
horsemen, were two hundred thousand thousand, i. e. Of all People in the World
none comparable to the Turks for Horses; they are infinitely numerous, v. 16.
And the riders that sat on them have breast-plates of fire, of jacinct, and of
brimstone, and the heads of the horses were as the heads of lions, i. e. they
are terrible and cruel, and profess themselves to be so; and out of their
mouths issued fire and smoke, and brimstone: Some understand hereby their great
Guns and Cannons, which Instruments of War were first invented by them, v. 17.
And by the fire, smoke, and brimstone, which issued out of their mouths, the
third part of men were killed, ver. 18. The Locusts work was but to torment and
hurt, but these do make havoc, kill and destroy; Their power also is in their
mouth and in their tails, for their tails were like unto serpents, and had
heads, and with them they do hurt, ver. 19. i. e. As they exercise horrid
cruelty in killing the Bodies of Men and Women, so also they vent pestiferous
Doctrine in their Alcoran and Mohammedan Religion; the Locusts had the stings of
Scorpions in their tails, but Mahomet has not only the sting of a Serpent, but
also the head of a Serpent; does openly appear upon his tail, i. e. Popery is a
mystery of Iniquity, but any may easily discover the Turks Alcoran to be
nothing else but a compound of Judaism, Paganism, and Christianism: This to me
is a strong Argument, why the Pope, not the Turk, must be the Great Antichrist.
And the rest of the Men which were not killed by these Plagues yet repented not
of the Works of their hands that they should not Worship Devils and Idols of
Gold and Silver and Brass, Stone and Wood, neither can See, and Hear nor Walk.
Verse 20. i. e Notwithstanding all the judgments wherewith God punished the
Papists for their Idolatry, yet they repented not, but remained Idolatrous
still, neither repented they of their Murders; they killed the Souls and
Bodies of Men as fast as ever, nor of their Sorceries, they did bewitch and
allure People to their Whorish Worships still, nor of their Fornications,
Spiritual or Bodily, the Pope is said to have Forty Thousand Crowns a Year by
Stews and Bawdy Houses, nor of their thefts. Verse 21. Though most of their
Church Lands and Revenues were Originally got by indirect courses cozening many
poor Creatures, in making them give away their Estates, for saying some
Soul-Masses, to redeem them out of Purgatory, yet they will not make
restitution, they accuse others of Sacrilege, that would but resume and take
back their own, while they themselves are most impiously Sacrilegious.

God's Goodness in reference to this Trumpet, is, 1. That in the management of
this great Affair, of Commissioning the Turk against the Papists, lies upon
Jesus Christ. O blessed be our God that takes so great care of Christians. 2.
The Turks Commission is principally against the Western Idolaters on this side
Euphrates, he that set bounds to the raging of the Waves of the Sea, has
limited him that he can go so far and no farther: And hence it is that we in
this part of the World have never received any considerable hurt by him, nor
are ever like to receive hurt hereafter, unless we shall Apostatize to open
Idolatry. 3. As his Commission is limited both as to Persons and Places, so
also as to Times; the time of his Rage and Reign shall be for an hour, and a
day, and a month, and a year. ver. 15. i. e. It is exactly reckoned and
calculated with God to an hour. 4. Though God destroys and makes havoc of a
third part of the Pope's Dominions by the Turks, yet the mystery of Iniquity is
not so much as once touched by them; the Discovery and Destruction thereof he
reserves for some others of his dear Servants, which shall be done under the
next Trumpet. 5. O how good is this God, and what a miracle of Mercy is it,
that he will grant some time for Repentance, even to Antichristian Sinners,
that he will send Judgments on purpose to bring them to Repentance;
extraordinary means, answerable to the greatness of their Diseases! O the
Long-suffering and Patience of God, that notwithstanding of their Impenitency,
and misimproving of Providence, he does not utterly, in an instant, destroy
them, but delays the execution of his Justice and Wrath, as at this day, and if
his Long-suffering and Patience be so great to his Enemies, what will his
goodness be to his Friends? Blessed be our God that has begun to give
Antichrist such a blow by the Barbarians; it is to me an infallible assuring
Evidence, that the Work shall go on and prosper till it come to its full period.

Chapter Tenth.
This whole Chapter and the beginning of the Eleventh to the 15th verse, I
understand to be a preparation to the sounding of the 7th Trumpet, and that for
the comfort of God's People, who might be apt to droop and despond concerning
the event of all those sad dispensations, Antichrist being brought to a great
height under the foregoing Trumpets, and they not knowing what way God would
take to turn the Scales.

1. It Is here in a Vision showed to John, that Antichrist persisting impenitent
for all that the Turks had done, Chap. 9.21. Christ himself would now take some
course with him: He is described as a mighty Angel coming down from Heaven,
Clothed with a cloud, as a sign of divine Glory and Majesty, having a Rainbow
on his head, by this representation to assure them that he would prove a
Covenant-keeping God, that Antichrist shall not Lord it over them at the old
rate, his face was as the Sun, and his feet as pillars of fire, ver. 1. i. e.
In his bringing Ruin on Antichrist he shall be very Glorious, it shall be with
such clearness and perspicuity of Light, as shall be sufficient to dispel all
the Smoke that arose out of the Bottomless Pit; and it shall be with a Power
and Efficacy irresistible. 2. We have some intimation of the way Christ will
take for the accomplishment of this; He had an open book in his hand, and he
set his right foot on the sea, and his left foot on the earth, and cried with a
loud voice, as when a lion cries, and when he cried seven thunders uttered
their voices; ver. 2, 3, 4. i. e. He will make the plain and powerful preaching
of the Gospel, to have a more free passage throughout the World than formerly:
The Command John had to Seal up these things, may signify that what is here
hinted belongs to some other Prophecy in this Book, the clear and full
Revelation whereof is to be reserved till the time of its fulfilling. 3.
Because the Destruction of Antichrist, after he had domineered for so many
hundred Years, seems almost impossible and incredible; therefore Christ does,
for the confirmation of the Faith of his poor weak Ones, enter into a solemn
Oath, By him that lives for ever, who created the heaven and the things that
are therein -- that time shall be no longer, and that the seventh trumpet
should finish the mystery of God, ver. 5, 6, 7. His time of Reigning shall be
no longer, his Ruin shall now certainly begin, and be carried on till time be
no more. 4. The Book in the Angel's hand is given to John, who, Eating it,
finds it sweet in his Mouth as honey, but bitter in the Belly, ver. 8, 9, 10,
11. Christ has not only perfect knowledge of these Mysteries himself, the Book
is open in his hand, but also he qualifies some of his faithful
Gospel Ministers, not only to preach the Everlasting Gospel, but more
particularly to prophecy Babylon's Downfall, which though it be a very
delightful and pleasing piece of service in the doing of it, yet afterward it
exposes them to sore Persecutions that prove bitter.

Chap. Eleven.
The former Chapter having Prophesied of Rome's ruin, of the Discovery and
Destruction of the Mystery of Iniquity and Son of Perdition, and that by the
preaching of the Everlasting Gospel, a doubt now arises concerning the
fulfilling of this, how can there be any Prophesying or Preaching where there
is no Church, and if there be no Church, there can be no Prophets? Antichrist
has now possessed himself of the Temple of God, and so Corrupted all under the
foregoing Trumpets, as has been already cleared, that it is hardly visible
whether Christ have any Church or Kingdom in the World. This Chap. solves this
Scruple, and affords some grounds of sweet comfort against this Discouragement.
The substance of the Chap. so much as concerns the Slaying and Resurrection of
the witnesses take in some few Doctrinal Propositions.

1. When Antichrist is at his height, then does the Work of Reformation begin.
There was given me a Reed like unto a Rod, commanding me to measure the Temple,
the Altar, and them that Worship therein Verse 1. A Metaphor taken from Masons
or such Artificers, who in building a New House, or repairing an Old, do use a
measuring Line. Now is the time come that God will have Antichrist's
Church State, Worship, Ordinances and all to be tried and examined by the Rule
of God's Word? 2. When Antichristianism is at its height, Reformation cannot be
without separation. The Court which is without the Temple leave out, i. e. Let
it now be known by the measuring Line, that their Temple, Altar, Worship, and
Worshippers are none of mine. 3. Antichristian Worship weighed in the balance
of the Sanctuary is in God's Account Gentilism. The outer Court is given to the
Gentiles, i. e. To such who though they profess Christianity, and that highly
too, glorying that they are the only true Church, yet their Practice pure
Gentilism, Antichristian, Rites and Ceremonies are most of them borrowed from
Heathens. 4. Antichrists treading under the holy City, shall not be for ever,
it shall be for an appointed time; to wit, 42 Months, Verse 2. 5. In the height
of Antichristianism, Christ shall have a competent number of such as shall give
a faithful Testimony against him. I will give power unto my two witnesses, and
they shall prophecy a thousand two hundred and threescore days clothed in
sackcloath. Verse 3. The Sackcloath notes the meanness and lowness of their
Condition; their number two, their paucity or fewness, yet competent, out of
the Mouth of two or three witnesses shall every Truth be established: If this
one thousand two hundred and threescore Days be the same with the Forty two
Months, the time of Antichrists Reign, as it is very probable, reckoning Thirty
Days to every Month, then by the two witnesses cannot be meant Magistracy and
Ministry, because there have not been during the whole time of Antichrist's
Reign, always some Magistrates, who, as such have given a Testimony for Christ
against him; only that Christ and in all Ages and Countries a competent number,
-- as in England, Wickliff; in Italy, Marsilius Patavinus; in Bohemid; John
Husse and Jerome of Prague; in Saxony* Luther and Melanchton; in Helvetia,
Zwingli^^, in Basil, Oecolampadius. -- 6. They that have been called to
witnessing-work, have had a special Anointing for the Work of their Day. These
are the two Olive Trees and the two Candlesticks standing before the God of the
Earth, verse. 4. In allusion to the Lamps of the Candlestick in the Temple,
under the Old Testament, which were kept burning by two Olive Trees continually
emptying themselves into them; so did Christ, out of his Fullness continually
communicae abundant supplies of Grace and Gifts to his Servants. 7. Of all Men
in the World Christ's Martyrs or Witnesses, have the greatest interest in
Heaven: If any Man hurts them, fire proceeds out of their Mouth, and
devoureth their Enemies. An allusion to what Elias did, 2 Kings 1.10. They have
power to shut Heaven, that it Rain not in the Days of their Prophecy. To what
Elias did, 1 Kings 17.1. Jam. 5.17. They have power over Waters, to turn them
into Blood, and to smite the Earth with all Plagues as often as they will. This
alludes to what Moses and Aaron did in Egypt, verse. 5, 6. i. e. They did
denounce Wrath, and Prophesied of sore judgments that would befall their
Persecutors, and accordingly it came to pass, God made good their word; they
were Wrestlers, and Israes indeed, prevailers with God. Luther was so mighty in
Prayer, that quicquid voluit potuit, he could do what he would with God.

From verse. 7. to 11. you have a particular narrative of the slaying of the
Witnesses, from thence to 15 of their Resurrection.

The time of the slaying of the Witnesses is, 1. Set down when they shall have
finished their Testimony, or according to the Original, when they are about to
finish their Testimony, verse 7. i. e. toward the end of the 1260 Days, and
toward the end of the Beasts 42 Months, which is not so to be understood,
according to the great mistake of many, as if they should never after this,
witness any more, nor Antichrist Reign any more, but only thus, They shall
finish their Testimony in Sackcloath, and their Wilderness-State, and he shall
never Reign again so as when he trod under the holy City, while the Church was
in the Wilderness. 2. The person by whom they are slain, to wit the Beast that
ascends out of the bottomless Pit, verse. 7. i. e. The Pope and those that
derive their Authority from him, as was shown Chap. 9.2, 3. Whether this
slaying of them be the taking away their Natural lives only, or a Civil and
Spiritual Death, depriving them of all privileges which they enjoyed, both as
Men and Christians, in silencing Ministers, not giving them the liberty of
their Consciences, in matters of Religion, according to the word, or something
that comprehends both: I shall not curiously enquire, nor positively determine,
only the latter I most incline to, for many were slain in their Bodies, and
others suffered a Civil and Ecclesiastical Death, by Banishments,
Excomunications, and otherwise. 2. The ^^ace where, is in the Street of the
great City, which Spiritually is called Sodom, and Egypt, verse. 8. i. e. In
some places of the World, which do professedly own themselves to be of the
Popes Dominions whose City is a second Sodom, for fullness of Bread, Idleness,
and all manner of Uncleanness, and never did Old Egypt abound in heathenish
Idolatries, and oppress the People of God more than it. I like will enough of
that conjecture that speaks of Germany, for it may be fitly called the Street
of the great City, as being a principal part of the Roman Empire. The first
thing that follows upon their being slain, is the great Inhumanity of
Adversaries, they would not suffer their Dead Bodies to be put in Graves, for
three Days and a half, verse. 9. For some short time they do pour forth all
manner of opprobrious contempt upon them: The literal sense is not altogether
to be rejected; the Papists would not suffer Zwinglius's Body to be Buried: So
they served the Admiral of France, with many* others in the Parisian Massacre,
and in Queen Mary's Days, Bucer's Bones were raised, and burnt. 2. They that
dwell upon the Earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry, because they are
rid of their Tormenters, verse. 10. This must be at such a time when the Popish
party are insufferably proud, insulting over the slain Servants of God, that
had tormented them with a plain Testimony against all their Abominations. Mali
cum injuriam facere non sinuntur, injuriam se accipere existimant.

From this Narrative of the slaying of the Witnesses, learn these few
Instructions, 1. Providence sometimes so orders it that God's Servants shall
well near have finished their Work, before their Enemies can hurt them, that so
their Testimony for Christ, may Live when they are dead and gone. 2.
Reformation has been always attended with great Persecution. 3. A begun-work of
Reformation may have such a sentence of Death pass upon it for a season, that
to all probability it shall never have a revival. 4. Christ's Witnesses must
expect nothing but Barbarity from Men of Popish Principles and Spirits. 5. It Is
no new thing to see wicked Men triumphantly insult over God's persecuted
People. The 1. thing in the Narrative of the Resurrection of the Witnesses is
the time thereof, after three Days and a half, verse. 11. Some short time, some
apply this to John Husse and Jerome, who were condemned by the Council of
Constance, that began, Anno 1414, December the 8th. and ended 1418. May 22.
Three Years and a half. 2. The means by which this was brought about, the
Spirit of Life from God entered into them; they were stirred up by a Spirit of
Zeal from God, to be lively and active in carrying on the work again. 3. Their
posture, they stood upon their feet, verse. 11. Either the former slain
Witnesses, I mean Civilly an Spiritually slain, or others of the same
Principles, and Spirit, did openly appear in and for it again. 4. The effect,
great fear fell upon all that saw them. 5. The heard a voice from Heaven,
saying, Come up hither, and accordingly they did ascend up to Heaven in a Cloud
and their Enemies beheld them, verse. 12. The work of Reformation, and
Separation, became now more glorious than ever before. 6. About the same time
there was a great Earthquake and a tenth part of the City fell, verse. 13. i. e.
When ever the Resurrection of the Witnesses is, the Lord shall wonderfully go
forth in some remarkable Providence and Tremendous Judgments against the Roman
Empire, to the great weakening thereof. Some apply it to the Bohemian War,
after the sufferings of Husse and Jerome, where Sigismundus had great successes
against the Antichristian Army. From all this learn these few instructions. 1.
Commonly the sufferings of Reformers are short. 2. God's Spirit is the great
Engine for carrying on God's Work. 3. Boldness in witness-bearing, is from
God's Spirit, standing on their Feet, an open and a vowed Profession is from
the Spirit of Life, from God. 4. Commonly wicked Men begin to be afraid, when
they perceive that Persecution does but make God's People more bold, and God's
Work to prosper the more. 5. Reformation and Separation from Antichristian
Pollutions has a great brightness of illustrious Divine Glory upon it.

Quest. Is this Prophecy of the Slaying and Resurrection of the Witness yet
fulfilled? And whereabouts are we of this Age, under the Sixth or Seventh
Trumpet? Are the one thousand two hundred and threescore Days and forty two
Month at an end or not?

For Answ. Let me premise a few things before I come to the thing it self. 1.
This cannot be resolved, unless we are at some certainty where to fix the
beginning of the one thousand two hundred and threescore Days, or the Churches
wilderness-State, and of the forty two Months, or Antichrist's first Rise,
whether from Constantine, immediately after the third Century, or from
Boniface's time, Anno 606. I shall endeavor by and by to prove that both did
commence from the time that did immediately follow after the first 300 Years.
2. It is more than probable, that the one thousand two hundred and threescore
Days, and forty two Months are not to be understood literally, for just so many
Natural Days and Astronomical Months, because matter of fact proves that
Antichrist's Reign, and the Churches wilderness-State, has been already of a
longer continuance, but figuratively and Mystically for Days of Years and
Months of Years, according to, Ezekiel. 4.6. Being an usual thing for Prophets
thus to express themselves. These things premised, I answer in the affirmative,
That this prophecy has had its accomplishment already, and the one thousand two
hundred and threescore Days and forty two Months are expired; and that for
these reasons.

1. If these Days and Months did commence from the time, immediately after the
first three hundred Years, not from six hundred six, then this Prophecy is
fulfilled, and the time past, but this is so -- as may appear, 1. from Rev.
12.5, 6. As soon as the Woman brought forth a Man Child, which was caught up to
God, she fled into the Wilderness. i. e. Immediately after the Church was
delivered from Heathenish Persecutions, her wilderness-Estate, (the same with
the one thousand two hundred and threescore Days in this 11th. Chap.) does
begin. This is also hinted again to us from Rev. 12.13, 14. The Church is
nourished in the Wilderness, for a time, times and half a time, i. e. Three
Years and a half; the same with one thousand two hundred and threescore Days
and forty two Months. 2. from 2 Thessalonians. 2.7, 8. The mystery of iniquity does
already work, only he who now lets, will let, until he be taken out of the
way, and then shall that wicked one be revealed -- i. e. As soon as ever the
Heathen persecuting Emperors were removed, and not till then should it appear,
what design the Devil had, to advance the Mystery of Iniquity. 3. Though it is
true, the Church did not suffer from the great Antichrist, till six hundred and
six; yet all that went before him, after Constantine, were petty Antichrists,
only at first it was but young Days with Antichrist; in six hundred and six, he
was of riper Years, the Churches suffering were all that while of the same
kind, Majus and minus non variant speciem, all that went before did but make
way for him; and his predecessors Persecutions are all of them charged upon
him, because he did practically approve of them. And this is the first thing
that proves the foresaid Days and Months to be expired, and this Prophecy to be
already fulfilled. 2. The inconsequences and absurdities that follow upon
contrary opinions, which do assert that it is now a fulfilling, or the
futurition of it, as a thing yet to come, make me to conclude that it is past.
From what has been already said in opening the Chap. it is clear, That it is not
now a fulfilling. 1. This time cannot be exactly toward the end of the one
thousand two hundred and threescore Days and forty two Months, and if it be,
When did they begin? 2. Antichrist is not now at the highest, nor the Church at
the lowest. 3. We cannot be said to be the Street of the great City, nor our
times times of Popery. 4. We are not the first that laid the measuringline to
Antichrist's Temples, Altar and Worshippers. 5. This savours of Spiritual
Pride, and can hardly be asserted, without reflecting upon the glorious Martyrs
that have gone before us, as if they had not deserved the Names of Witnesses in
respect of us, whereas indeed neither we, nor our sufferings, are worthy once
to be named in way of comparison with them, and their sufferings: Some do
fondly fancy, that nothing is to be witnessed to, but some one Notion of their
own. 6. This would argue ingratitude and murmuring, as if we were still in the
Wilderness, when indeed we have rather cause to bless God, saying, We bless
thee, Lord God Almighty, because thou have taken to thee thy great Power, and
have reigned -- The absurdities that follow upon asserting that this is yet to
come, and that the foresaid Days and Months did begin with six hundred and six,
are these, 1. By adding one thousand two hundred and threescore to six hundred
and six, will be one thousand eight hundred and sixty six, about two hundred
Years hence. 2. This may breed security in this present Age. 3. For two hundred
Years Antichrist must still be a increasing to a greater height than ever. 4.
Either all the glorious late Transactions throughout the World, have had no
tendency to the prophesied ruin of Antichrist, or if they had, all that has
been done, must be undone again, and all the Nations that have cast off the
Popes supremacy, must Apostatize, and become worse than before: Is it probable,
that God has brought so many out of Egypt, to bring them back again? No
verily. 5. If it be determined of God, that Antichrist's forty two Months shall
not expire, nor his prophesied Reign begin till then, then it will be but in
vain to attempt any thing against him all this while.

And this is the second ground proving the preterition of this Prophecy. There
is but one more, to wit the harmony and concurrence of providential Events:
Which this prophecy, understanding it according to the interpretation given,
makes me conclude it is over; add 1260 to 300, and the number that results
thence is 1560. Now let us inquire a little what state the Church was toward
the concluding period of this time, or near thereupon. Anno 1546, in the War
between the Emperor and Duke of Saxony, the Protestants were almost totally
routed, the Prince himself imprisoned; Magistrates divested of their Robes;
many Ministers banished and imprisoned for not taking the Interm; the
Antichristian party insult exceedingly in sending great Guns and Prisoners,
which they had taken as Trophies of an absolute Victory over Lutheranism: About
the same time there was a great persecution in France, in the Netherlands under
the Duke of Alva, of the Waldenses in Provence, Anno 1545. They of Piedmont by
the Duke of Savoy: It is not unknown what was here in Queen Mary's days. It is
observed by some that within a few of these Years, the number of them that
suffered for Christ, were 900000, and this may relate to the slaying of the
Witnesses; and as for the Resurrection about 1559, the Work of Reformation had
a great reviving in German. At a Diet of the Empire at Ausburg, by public
Authority, the Protestants had free liberty to make Profession of their
Religion, without prejudice to their Estates, and civil Privileges; about the
same time Reformation had a reviving in Scotland. In France under Charles the
9th, Anno 1560. Queen Mary Reigned about 1554, and died some five Years after,
and Queen Elizabeth brought glorious days to Protestantism in general, in
respect of the Marian days. Besides all these Arguments, my own observation of
the Acts of Providence at this day, do more and more confirm me in this
persuasion, however if any can show me more convincing Reasons to the contary,
I hope through Grace I shall not be found pertinacious.

I cannot slightly pass over so material a point as this is without drawing
some practical Inferences from it by way of Application.

1st. For Instruction. 1. The longest Day that ever was had an end:
Antichrist's forty two Months have their period. 2. When Persecutors are at the
highest, then their Downfall draws nigh; Nihil violentum durabile. 3. O that all
the Sons of Wickedness would be wise, and instructed from what has befallen
others, to tremble and fear God because of his Judgments. 4. Christ's Witnesses
do carry on his Work by their Sufferings, as well as Services, Passive
Obedience is as acceptable to God, and useful to others, as Active. 5. No Cause
of Christ, sealed with a bloody Testimony, shall ever be quite lost. 6. The
Reformed Churches that have in any measure cast off the Yoke of
Antichristianism, are highly to be esteemed of; though it was never intended of
God that Reformation should stand at what it did begin, either in Doctrine,
Worship or Discipline; yet the state of the Primitive Reformers was a Heaven
upon Earth in comparison of what their Prececessors state was.

More particularly from these things we may venture to make some sober
conjecture concerning the Dispensation this Age is under.

1. If this Prophecy of the Witnesses be fulfilled about an hundred Years ago,
then we are now under the 7th Trumpet, which contemporizeth with their
Resurrection, or does at least follow immediately upon it. 2. The Work of
Reformation is not to begin; the Right Hand of the most High has already laid
the Foundation. 3. Antichrist has been already at the highest, and is now a
going down the Wind; all the endeavors of Men and Devils shall not be able to
raise him again to what once he was, nor to support or keep him from falling;
though this and two or three Nations more should Apostatize to Popery more than
ever, yet it is nothing contrary to my assertion, unless Bohemia, Switzerland,
Helvetia, Hungary, Holland, and all in Germany, France, Sweden, and other
parts, do professedly return to Rome again, and become more Idolatrous than
before, which shall never be. 4. We shall never know such another slaying of
Witnesses as this. 1. Those were in the Wilderness, the suffering Witnesses of
after Ages shall be out of the Wilderness. 2. They were then in Sackcloth,
after Ages shall never know such a mournful Condition. 3. They suffered before
the Temple of God was opened in Heaven, which is under the 7th Trumpet, chapter 11.
there was not before them any considerable visible Separation from the Church
of Rome; not so with us. 4. There were but two then, i. e. a few in comparison
of what shall be after, if we suffer for Christ now, we shall have many
Copartners. 5. That very work of God which has been begun amongst us, I mean
Reformation in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, shall some where or other in
God's own time and way, go on and prosper, maugre all opposition.

Lastly, The consideration and belief of this Truth, that the Witnesses are
slain and risen, may teach us how to demean our selves in this Day, 1. Toward
God. 2. Enemies. 3. One another. 4. In respect of our selves.

Toward God.

1. We are Monsters for Ingratitude, if we do not trumpet forth his Praises
aloud, for bringing us forth in such a glorious Age and Time; certainly if our
Godly Ancestors had seen and heard what we now do, especially they that Lived
about an hundred Years ago, would have said, Now the Kingdom of our God and of
his Christ is Come. 2. Be very Patient under all the Corrections and
Chastisements of this Good God. 1. Your Sufferings are but a Fleabite to the
Sufferings of others that have gone before you. 2. Your Punishments are still
less than your Sin's deserts. 3. Consider what the Glorious Son of God has
suffered for you, and yours is nothing. 4. It Is a most glorious, honorable and
advantageous thing to suffer for Christ in a righteous Cause; See 1 Pet. 4.13,
14, 15, 16. with several others formerly commended to you. 5. Your sufferings
may be sharp for a Season, but short. 6. Your Sufferings after a begun Work of
Reformation, are for the Trial of your Faith and Patience, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. Heb.
10.36, 37, 38. Rev. 14.12. Here is the Patience of the Saints; here are they
that keep the Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus. 7. The issue of your
Sufferings will be Glorious to your selves, but dreadful to your Enemies, 1
Pet. 4.17. 2 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5, 6.

Toward Enemies.

1. Look upon them as the Rod of God upon you for your sins of Ingratitude,
Earthlymindedness, Carnality, Pride, Self-seeking Hypocrisy, Formality, etc. 2.
If your Enemies are any kin to Antichrist, you need not, you ought not to fear
them, with a slavish fear, for they are falling and going down, even when they
seem to rise. 3. Seeing you can in some measure guess at the issue and event of
things, pity and pray for Persecutors, as knowing what that Wrath that abides
them, is, unless, they repent. 4. Abhor the very thoughts of a sinful
compliance with any Antichristian pollutions and abominations in God's Worship,
if you had lived a hundred Years ago, there had been some colorable excuse for
your Conformity and Compliance, but now there can be one, 1 John 5. ult. My
little Children keep your selves from Idols.

Toward one another.

1. Love and Honor all under what Name or Notion soever that have but their
Faces Zion ward, especially such as have Suffered, do now, or may yet Suffer
for the Word of God and for the Testimony of Jesus; the rebukes of God upon
Professors, call aloud to them to lay aside their sinful differences and
divisions which have undone them, and to love one another not in Word but in
Deed, with a pure heart fervently: You have all common Enemies, and why you
should not love one another I know not. 2. If any that bear the Name of Christ
should solicit you to join with them in any sinful irregular course to work
your Deliverance, hearken not to them; God himself does now stand engaged to go
on with that which is God's Work indeed, and therefore he needs not your hand
nor help.

In respect of your selves.

1. Though the great slaying of the Witnesses be past, yet each of us ought to be
always prepared for the greatest of Trials, because no particular Person can at
any time promise himself an absolute exemption from Sufferings from this time
forth to the end of the World; and it stands with reason in should be so, for
the Destruction of Antichrist being gradual, by seven several Vials; when one
Vial has done its work, there is still something more of him to be destroyed,
and his utter Destruction will not be till the end of the World, how can it
then be otherwise but so long as he has any power or being he will he making
some bustle against those that oppose; Some are of opinion that even after the
conversion of the Jews, which will be a most glorious time, the Church will
have great troubles and that for forty five Years together, Daniel 12. Begin.
Nay, and after the 1000 Years, Rev. 20.1. They shall be in as great trouble as
ever they knew from the beginning of the World to that Day, which will be
immediately before the coming of the Son of God to Judgment. Many have strongly
fancied, that the time was come that the should have nothing to do but to rule
the World; the Lord in mercy convince them of their mistakes; certainly a
glorious Day may be looked for before this World be at an end; but it is so
called comparatively, i.e. in respect of our present Day and Times that are
past. 2. This calls aloud upon us to be deeply humbled before the Lord, because
of our manifold sins and unsuitableness of Spirit to the Work of our Day: We
may well say thus, Is the Work of Reformation now upon the Wheel of Providence?
And is Antichrist a declining? Ah, how does the Work stick and go on so slowly?
Sure it is my Sins and others that retards and hinders it. When I consider the
great Distempers of the Spirits of all sorts of Professors, I do not at all
wonder at what has befallen us. 3. Let us therefore, by all means, labor for
such a Spirit as may suit with the Work of our Day; a Spirit of Understanding
to know what is God's Work, and what ours; to know what is Antichristian, and
what not -- a Spirit of Wisdom to find out such Holy and righteous ways as may
most conduce for the carrying on of this Work; a Spirit of Humility,
Mortification, Self-denial, Sincerity, Faithfulness, holy Courage and Boldness,
a Spirit of Prayer, Faith and Zeal, for God's Glory.

They that would yet know more particularly under what dispensation we now are,
and what hereafter may be expected, must study well the 7th Trumpet, Rev. 11.
End, and the seven Vials, Chap. 16. I will but just give a very short hint at
each of the Vials, and so shut up all. The 1st is poured out upon that which is
the Earth in the Antichristian World, i. e. the Fundamentals of the Popish
Kingdom are struck at, and such Doctrines upon which the whole structure of
Antichristianism is built, without which it cannot stand, no more than the
Fabric of this Universe without the Earth. Erasmus says of Luther, that he
committed two unpardonable faults, in meddling with the Popes Mitre and the
Monks Bellies. Antichrist's Ruin is the Churches Rise; the confuting of their
Antichristian Doctrines did clear up the principal Fundamental Truths of the
Gospel. 2. Upon the Sea, i. e. Their Worship and Ordinances by which they trade
on with another. The first Reformers were so taken up with the clearing up of
the Doctrinal part of the Gospel, that they could not have the while to think
of mattes of Worship, which was done to some purpose after in the Council of
Trent, by Chemnitius and others. 3. Is upon the Rivers and Fountains of Waters,
i. e. The Romish Clergy: It Is by them the Christians of the Antichristian World
are moistended; they come from the Sea, and run into it; they were Originally
bred by the Romish Religion, and are the great supporters of it; they are Wells
of Water, 2 Pet. 2. And Rev. 16.5, 6, 7. It Is they that have shed the Blood of
Saints and Prophets. According to this interpretation these three Vials are at
least in some measure poured forth already, only more may be yet expected. 4.
Upon the Sun, i. e. Either some that are eminent for upholding Antichrist in
his civil power and jurisdiction, such as the King of Spain, the Pope's Eldest
Son, or the House of Austria, or something that is a great light to them in
respect of their Ecclesiastical State, such as is the whole Body of their
Cannon Law -- or both these. 5. Is upon the seat of the Beast; this may be
understood of the Destruction of Rome or the Pope's Principality; as the 5th
Trumpet set him upon his Throne, the 5th Vial shall Dethrone him. 6. Dries up
the great River Euphrates, i. e. Destroys the Great Turk and his Empire, which
shall make way for the Kings of the East to go up into their own Land, i. e.
The shall the Jews be Converted, the Glory of which time I have discoursed at
large in my Treatise of the Fifth Monarchy. 7. and last puts an end to all.
Antichrist is not only utterly ruined, but also Gog and Magog, all sorts of
Christ's, and the Churches Enemies. The Lambs Marriage Day is solemnized before
God, Angels and Men, and his Spouse is caught up to himself to be with the Lord
for ever: The Spirit and the Bride says, Come, even so come quickly, Lord
Jesus, Amen. And let every Soul say, Amen. Truly God is good to Israel, and to
such as are of a clean heart.

Gloria perpetuo sit tribuenda Deo.
FINIS.

