AN ESSAY of Original RIGHTEOUSNESS AND CONVEYED SIN, Wherein the question is
rightly stated, the latent venom of some of Dr. Jeremiah Tayler's heretical
assertions detected, and accurately impugn'd.

By (...) lord Gentleman.

Epist. ad Gal. 1. 8. But though we, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other
Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed. Permissu superiorum, Printed, 1657.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE AND most truly Noble LORD, the Marquess of Dorchester,
the great Example of true Honor, Learning, and Chivalry.
Right Honorable Lord,
WHereas your Illustrious Honor is not ignorant, and all the World knows, that
as Divinity and essential truths are therefore eternal and (...) because such;
so falsehood must needs decay and vanish, and that the learning of our late
reforming Divines consisting only in some superficial Talent of preaching
language or elocution, and not in deep knowledge of Philosophy, Metaphysick,
and much less of that most solid profitable and subtle method called School
Divinity, aims only at non procedere ad perfectioneni sed ad permutationem,
still teaching to go forward not to perfection but to perpetual change, leaping
from ignorance to a prejudicate opinion and never taking a good judgment in
their way: and this, for that the enemy of mankind moving Heretics to deride
and slight School Divinity looks at no less then the total ruin of all
Religion and faith -- Hence most Honorable Lord, I thought it no ill Office of
a Patriot for the und^ceiving of many to contrive this succinct Methodical
Treatise of School Divinity, which now runs for shelter to the glorious
protection of your Honor, a person incomparably Illustrious and accomplished
in all royal and moral virtues, nam geminas animi nobilitate genus: the general
report, fame and applause of your rare genius, transcendent worth, and known
abilities in most part of all learning has invited me to the boldness of this
address; for to whom more fitly should a small Treatise intended for to
establish truth (now when most malign'd and despised) run ^or Patronage then to
your most illustrious Lordship, a Vigorous honourer and indefatigable
Investigator of truth, the natural pleasing object of our understanding! Pray
Heaven it prove worthy your acceptance: for my part I shall ever acknowledge
your greatness, admire your glory, and from your goodness raise to my self a
hope that you will vouchsafe to cherish these weak fruits of my elucubrations;
for such is the sublime, and magnificent amplitude of your soul as it will
harbor with benign indifferency what is spoken against your own sense,
judgment, and consent, my scope being to serve and honor not to instruct you,
neither to engage you in the Patronage of what I deliver more then truth shall
convince your judgment. Vale and diu feliciter vive Nobilium decus and magnae
Britania^^ ornamenium -- This shall be the constant humble supplication of

Most truly Noble And Right Honorable Lord, Your humble and obsequious
Servant, J. FORD.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
IN an Age so pregnant of vice, desirous of profane novelties, affected and
advantageous ignorance, it is no wonder the structures of true Religion,
Devotion, and Antiquity decay and ruin. For if men did but seriously consider
how unsatisfactory new Faiths, new Opinions are, they would quickly be
convinced of this varity in seeking: For proof of this, I appeal to the
Conscience ^f any that by misguided zeal have been transported with this fury,
whether they have not with indignation beheld their former Tenets, applau^ing
their present condition, as escaped from the pit of perdition, and yet in that
instant of imagined felicity and safety have not an ^^ching desire and of new
Lights, and a perfecter walking, which in a short time they prosecute so
eagerly by ever learning to a Contradiction and Opposition of their ^ate found
happiness, as to account also that state desperate and damnable? In this
circular progress of Religion, what hope c^n these have of salvation or
comfort in the agonies of Conscience, o^ languishings of mortality, when their
recovery may restore them to a defiance of their present belief and uncertain^y
what Creed to die in? If the Apostle tells us of one Hope, one Lord, one Faith,
sure the d^viation from this V^ity must be Schism* and persevering in (...);
utter destruction; because the multiplying a Deity, oppose^^ its Essence, as
much as the denying it^; and he will be no less mistaken, that thinks by
bypathes unknown and uncertain ways to go to Heaven, a^ he that denees any.

A more illustrious moral reason of this cannot be given then that of the
Philosopher, Eu^tibus via errantibus nulla; because they in the true^way ^ake
their progress in righteousness, the misguided only in errors. It much
imports men to be very circumspect and inquisitive after the right way; if
neither living or dying they cannot by those ungodly reflections they now
wander in, attain any certain hopes of salvation. I have not without admiration
looked upon the incomparable ignorance of the most professing Teachers, who
have no other cognizance of their zeal, then the want of good Literature; and
I cannot judge the products of their instruction to be more then blind
devotion, they themselves being such blind Leaders. For if I should ask them a
reason of their Faith, or of those many Mysteries contained in the New
Testament, or why they have abrogated holy Ceremonies, continued from the
Primitive times even until these late days of Apostacy; I suppose they could
render no other account, then what a great Rabbi, to justify their abominable
proceedings, replied* That the pious actings of these later days would not
have passed for religious or devout in the Primitive times. How cautious then
should all good minded Christians be, to bear the Doctrines of such dangerous
Preacher^, which are Libels and Contradictions to the Primevall Church, and
sent only for politic ends, by special faith to cast me into a Lethargy of
godliness, oblivion, and detestation (out of I know not what fear) of good
deeds and just dealings. It Is strange, where the Priests lips should preserve
knowledge, the ancient and boyish Elders of our times should zealously affect
the contrary; except that being deceived, they may more securely deceive
others, or may with more audacious security precipitate, together with
themselves, others into destruction, according to that of Thucidides.

A (...), Ignorance is the Mother of confidence, or by want of knowledge the
more facil may stupifie the clamours of a corrupt conscience hide their
covetousness, and for their private craft the more undiscernably cry up Great
is Diana of the Ephes^a^^. They might eas^^y have avoided these present Pas^^s
and fearful Paroxysms for the ^osse of ^ithes, ^^ they at first had vigorously
Preached, and showed the severe ^e^aces, and damnable pu^ishments for
Sacr^^^dge; and may yet free us from ra^i^e^ and unjust negotiations, if they
themselves would cease to be covetous, and truly convince men that godliness is
great gain. It cannot be expected, that those men who are ene^i^s to Learning,
should be friends to Antiquity, lest by i^ ^he^ folly should be made manifest:
For I assure my self, there is no stronger argument to demonstrate the truth of
Christianity, their Tradition; hence the Prophet knew the good way from the old
paths; our Savior showing the good seed to be so^e^ before the ^ares; and even
in nature truth is before falsehood. It Is no marvel, I say, that men no deeper
rooted should be carried away with every wind of Doctrine; but that Doctor
Tay-ler, a man of that universal and profound reading, ingenuity, and grace in
writing, such a pillar of the Church of England, should so unseasonably,
contrary to the grave advice of very Learned and Reverend Admonishers, not only
fall into a gross and damnable error, but endeavor by raked and false
interpretation^ to make the Church his Patron, is to be looked upon with pity
and indignation. I think the enemy of mankind, that he might in cur days
complete his malice, has not only by delusion made the vulgar unlearned his
instruments, but under pretense of piety, has employed one of the best parts
to undermine the chiefest foundations of Religion; his male sarra argument^,
and dangerous inferences which from this his Opinion may be drawn, I shall
leave the intelligent Reader to consider, wondering much that an Opinion
maintained in Gods Church in all Ages, and confirmed by several General
Councils, should at last be styled by Dr. Tailor a Vulgar Error; but I am well
satisfied with his zeal, to maintain one Error, that has writ in defense of
all. The God of Truth and Order enlighten this Nation, that the scales of
ignorance and misguided zeal may fall from their eyes, and bring into the way
of salvation all such as have erred and are deceived.

THE DOCTRINE OF Original Sin.
CHAP. I.
Of the happy state of man before his Fall.
ALmighty God, who is independent of all Beings, Immense in his extent, Eternal
in his duration, infinite in all his perfections, immutable and absolute over
all creatures, and he who was without doubt the mystery hidden under the veil
of that ancient Statute which bore for device, I am what is, what shall be, and
what has been, whose cover no man has taken off, seeing no object out of
himself which could deserve his love; and besides this love, being incited by
a holy desire of communicating it self, it was requisite to frame a copy of the
Intellectual Original which was in his Idea, and in his heavenly mind; and the
world being but a lively vacuum, but an universal privation of forms and
qualities, was chosen as the blank Table whereon he resolved to draw the first
strokes of his goodness; and so all nature, as heavens, earth, sea, light,
stars, trees, fishes, flashes, furnaces of fire and flames, vast extent of
air^, clouds, abysses, peecipices, all engendered out of it by the sole power of
the Divinity, by the command of the Word and Love. What I pray does remain
after all these prodigies of power and rare works of love? The Angels are lost
without Redemption, and the punishment their insolence has merited, will
pursue them without relaxation, term, or pity. It must therefore be concerning
man's creation and redemption that a decree is past; it is on man the great God
reflected; it is man who must be substitute in the place of Angels; without man
all created works seem not sufficiently perfect Now God, the fountain, cause,
and origin of the Universe, the wise and all-knowing Workman, to whom all
things possible, drew ^ut of dirt, mortar, and dust, man his masterpiece and
object of his favor, the Image* of his divine E^^ence, the Accomplisher of his
commands, and his Lieutenant upon earth: It was only man that well deserved the
last touches of his omnipotent hands, as the most glorious term of his power,
the fa^rest piece of the Universe, a work so admirable, that it may rather
beget admiration, then expressive words: whereas Plato cries o^t, that man is
the miracle of all visible miracles, the Horison of all creatures, the all of
all, and as it were, the soul of the World. Finally, Pyth^gora^ looks upon man
as the measure of all things, in whom are found the longitudes, latitudes,
altitudes, and pro^^ndities of all beings; for its known he has a being common
with (...), a life common with plant^, a sense common with beasts, and an
understanding which equals him with Angels; but he excells them all, in that he
was created from Gods Idea, as the most lively ^^^resentation of his great
Maker; what ever learned Autho^s did in general speak in the praise (...), it is
certain, that of all the Encomions given to him, the most noble, most august,
and most transcendent, is, that man is created to the Image of God, as a
character of his Substance and Divinity. O great God, who has incited thee to
heap together in one vessel wrought so admirably out of clay and dust, all the
treasures of wisdom, greatness, and sanctity? why so many sciences, so many
knowledges, so many splendors in one mans^ soul? and why in one single man so
many superexcellent graces, perfections, and virtues, the primitive justice,
original righteousness, a rare rectitude of the inner man, a just
subordination of the inferior faculties to the superior (...) clear light,
and the Empire (...) ^e Universe? Herehence Gods nature requires homages, his
Majesty, servitudes; his glory, a^^iration; his goodness, all acknowledgments
and affections of hearts; and though God is good and liberal, yet is he dread,
just, and all foreseeing: If then he foreseeth some danger and evil, let him
providently dissolve the occasion, and obstruct the ways which lead man unto a
precipice; let him not unite so many millions of members unto a head, which is
able to corrupt them all in an instant, and leave unto the heart of man in
dependency on created things, and cause efficaciously his affections to be
still fastened unto his Creator, that so he alone may be the source of his
motions and effects: No, no, the old Adam, our first Parent, must be created
perfect; God saw every thing that he made, and behold it was very good; but
mutable, for so it pleased God to prepare a way to the execution of his hidden
decree: Adam must be the cause of our good and evil, and on his good or bad
fortune ours must wholly depend: It was very convenient, that God as absolute
Lord and Master, should leave Adam some commandment; and it was likewise very
reasonable that Adam as his servant and creature, should be pliable and
obsequious to so just a command and decree, as that of God, reserving the use
of tree of the knowledge of good and evil, of which he expressly, and upon pain
of death forbids Adam to taste or gather any fruit amongst all the trees which
God has planted in Paradise: Notwithstanding Adam swallowed down that fatal
bit, which has since infected all his posterity, his weakness not able to
deny that to his Wife, which God reserved to himself, and blindly have done
for the love of a foolish woman, what the eternal wisdom had so expressly
forbidden him. O disloyal Adam! that gave more credit to a serpent that
deceived thee, then to your Creator, and Truth which can never fail. Here
through this act of disobedience in Adam we all fell, and became under sin and
death, and all mankind were convicted and sentenced to the eternal and
temporal death, in the conviction and sentence that passed upon him, Genesis 3.
6, 11, 17. 19. Romans 5. 12, 18. and this without the knowledge or motions of the
individualls or particular persons that were to proceed from Adam, yet so
verily, vertually, really, and indeed, that all that came forth from him by
propagation, do then, and in that birth, and there thoroughly partake of sin,
death, and misery, and in their several persons respectively bear the image of
the first Adam as he was in his ^all; see Genesis 5. 3. Romans 17. 19. Job 4. 1:
Psalm* 51. 5. Romans 9. 8. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. etc, Here we may find out the origin and
source of all our evils: hence our miseries daily finds deplorable increase;
and hence the most shameful portion of a most sad and disastrous inheritance
is daily transported to the poor children of Adam.

Now man being created for a determinate end, and for a state convenient for
his nature, and able to satisfy the original appetences of his soul; and no
man by natural means able to arrive to the end and period of happiness, we
must follow henceforward the conduct of a supernatural guide, since nature
quitteth us here, having led us on as long as she was able We may consider that
God, when he created man, did not assign him to remain in the state of pure
nature, but did out of his goodness confer original righteousness and grace
upon him, which exceeded the sphere of his nature; for God being in his own
Essence goodness it self, cannot choose, but do unto whatsoever proceeds
from him, all that good which the nature of it is capable of (whether by
natural or supernatural means) and his wisdom can readily contrive the means
to bring that to pass, which his goodness disposes him to do, and his
omnipotency as easily acts what his other two attributes have projected so
that there wanting an infinite capacity of the soul, and without which she
must be eternally miserable, it remains, that he who gave that capacity, must
also afford the object, and assign means how to compass and gain it; all which
is out of the reach of nature to discern; and therefore it follows of
consequence, that the Author of nature must needs endow man with supernatural
means, if he be in a fit disposition to receive them, which may bring him to
the supernatural end he was created for.

And of the supernatural gifts, the first, and the ground and foundation of all
the rest is faith; for whereas that we cannot by any natural means attain to
the knowledge of any object that may render us completely happy in the next
life; and yet such knowledge must be had, to the end we may direct our actions
to gain the fruition of that object: Therefore there is no way left to compass
this, but by the instructions and discipline of some Master, whose goodness and
knowledge we can no ways doubt of; by which two perfections in him, we may be
secure, that he neither can be deceived himself, nor will deceive us. Now the
Doctrine that such a divine Master shall teach for such an end, we call faith:
Now we must determine that this Master must be God and man, and that the Author
of that doctrine we must believe, the instructor of the actions we must
perform, and the promiser of the happiness we may hope for, be God himself;
who only knows of himself what is said in matters of these natures, and who
only is neither liable to be deceived, nor can deceive others, as being the
prime verity it self: Therefore it was necessary Christ, God and man, should
come into the world to teach us what to believe, and what to do, and preach
unto us by his example, and himself be our Leader in the way that he instructed
us to take. And we must determine, that those unto whom Christ did immediately
preach this faith, and unto whom he gave Commission to preach it unto others,
and spread it through the world after he ascends to Heaven, ought to be
believed as firmly as he himself: The reason of this Assertion is, that their
doctrine, though delivered by secondary mouths, yet it proceeds from the same
fountain, which is God himself, the prime verity, that cannot deceive nor be
deceived. But all the difficulty herein, is to know who had this immediate
Commission from Christ, and by what seal should we discern it to have been no
forged one: The solution of this arises out of the same Argument, which
proves that Christ himself was God, and that doctrine he taught was true and
divine, which is the miracles and wonders he did, exceeding the power of
nature, which could not be effected by any but by God himself; for he being
truth it self, cannot by any action immediately proceeding from him, witness
and confirm a falsehood. In like manner, the Apostles doing such admirable works
and miracles, as neither by nature nor by Art Magic could be brought to pass,
that must necessarily infer God himself co operated with them, to justify what
they said. It is evident that their doctrine (not their own, but received from
Christ) must be true and divine: This Faith thus taught by Christ, and
propagated by the Apostles, and necessary to mankind to believe, depends
intrinsecally upon the testimony of the Primitive Doctors, Fathers, and
Councels in church Catholic and Apostolic, which is ordained conserve and
deliver it from age to age; and this cannot be but either by the immediate
preaching of Christ, or else by the information (either in writing, or by word
of mouth) of them that learned it from him, and their delivering it over to
others, and so from hand to hand: But from Christ's own mouth none could have it
but those that lived in the age that he did; therefore there remained no other
means to have it derived down to after ages, then by this delivery over from
hand to hand of Fathers dispersed throughout the world to the whole
congregation of sons or youngers; which proves that the Church Apostolic is
the Conserver of the whole doctrine of Faith necessary for salvation, and
likewise of the divine Writ dictated by the holy Ghost, and written by the
Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles, which we are also bound to believe. Hence
we may deduce, that into Christ's Catholic Church no false doctrine in any age
can be admitted or creep in; that is to say, no false proposition whatsoever
can ever be received and embraced by the Catholic Church as a proposition of
faith. For whatsoever the Church believes as a proposition of faith, is upon
this ground, that Christ taught it as such unto the Church he planted himself,
and so left it in trust to be by it delivered over to the next age: And the
reason why the present Church believes any proposition to be of faith* is
because the immediate preceding Church of the age before delivered it as such;
and so you may derive it on from age to age, until you come to the Apostles
and Christ: For to have any false proposition of faith admitted into the Church
in any age, does suppose that all they of that age must unanimously conspire to
deceive their children, telling them that they were taught by their Fathers to
believe as of faith some proposition which indeed was not; which being
impossible (as it will evidently appear to any prudent person that shall
reasonably ponder the matter) that so many men spread throughout the whole
world, so different in their particular interests and ends, and of such various
dispositions and natures, should all agree together in the forgery of any
precise lie, which is most impossible; though any one man may be liable to be
deceived, or out of some indirect end may be induced to deceive others: Whence
I come to say that faith depends on these two propositions; First, that
whatsoever God said is true Next, that God I said this, whatsoever it be that
is delivered thus by the general practice of the Church. And the primary
original natural appetence of man's soul, is the love of truth, which it
vehemently desires, and is always unquiet and ardent in the search of it upon
what occasion soever; and this acquisition of truth is that which the soul in
every action naturally aims at, and detesteth salshood. Therefore, although
any particular man, as Dr. Tailor, may have his sense or fantasy so depraved,
as to take imperfect or maimed impressions of outward objects; or the powers of
his understanding so weak, as to make a preposterous and disorderly collection
out of them; or his judgment so misguided by preoccupation of any affection or
particular end, as he may in himself be deceived, and feed his soul with
falsehood in stead of truth; or else that sinister respects and interests, or
sordid apprehensions of commodity to himself by the sensual passions
tyrannizing over him, a^ ^o cause him to swallow mortal baits, making him
employ the faculties of his understanding, and the powers of his soul, contrary
to their natural inclination, to the maintaining of a lie: Yet it is impossible
that all mankind, or such a vast multitude of men as contain in them all the
variety of dispositions and affections incident to man's nature, and that are
dispersed through the world, so as they can have no communion together whereby
they might infect one another / nor can have finister ends common all alike to
them all which should invite them to conspire together to forge a falsehood. It
is impossible, I say, that such a company of Saints and Doctors should so
degenerate from their own nature, which is to love truth, as they should invent
a lie, and that (in so important a matter as faith is) they should concur to
deceive the world of men that should come after them in things of such nature,
as their deceit must of necessity damn for all eternity both themselves and all
them that shall receive that lie from them; and take it upon their credit. This
general de^ection from truth in mankind is as impossible, as that all one
entire element, or any prim^genial nature should absolutely perish.

Thus I conceive I have made good the Assertion that has begotten this
discourse; which is, that Faith conserved and practiced in the Catholic
Church, and delivered by perpetual Succession, is most certain, and most
infallible: But all this is not enough, our disquifition must not rest here, we
must not content our selves in this divine affair and supernatural doctrine,
with a certitude depending only upon natural causes: The wisdom of God
proportioneth out congruent means to bring on every thing to their proper end;
and man's obtaining beatitude, being the highest end that any creature can
arrive unto, and altogether supernatural, it requires supernatural causes to
bring us to that end, and a supernaural infallibility to secure us in that
journey: we must therefore not only have a supernatural way to travel in (which
is faith) but also supernatural assurance of the right way, which we may with
an humble confidence expect and claim at Gods divine hands: God therefore has
given to his Church the continual assistance of the holy Ghost, to confirm it
in the true faith, and to preserve it from error, and to illuminate the
understanding of it in right disce^ning the true sense of those mysteries of
faith that are committed to the custody of it, and to work supe^ natural effects
of true devotion and sanctity in that Church: For Christ's doctrine is
practical, and aymeth at the working of an effect, which is the reduction of
mankind to beatitude; and that this mankind: conthre^^ prehendeth not only
those that lived in that age when he preached, but also all others that ever
were since, or shall be to the end of the world. It is apparent, that to
accomplish that end it was necessary Christ should so effectually imprint his
doctrine in their hearts whom he delivered it unto, as it might upon all
occasions and at all times infallibly express it self in action, and in the
delivery of it over from hand to hand, should in virtue and strength of the
first operation produce ever after like effects in all others. Now unto these
rational considerations, let us add the promises which Christ made to his
Church, that the gates of Hell should not prevail against it, that the true
Doctrine of Christ is conserved, that it can never fail, but must infallibly
continue until the end. Thus having produced that a supernatural doctrine is
necessary to b^ing mankind to beatitude, that Christ taught this doctrine, that
from him the Church received it, and is the Sacrary in which it is conserved;
that this Church planted by him in the delivery over of his Doctrine cannot
err, and that it is perpetual: And that if any particular man should go about
to introduce new doctrine of faith no^ formerly heard of, or renew old damned
er^ors, as Dr. Tailor does, drawing the Arguments of confirmation thereof out
of his own ratiotination and private discourse, that were enough to convince
him of falsehood, imposture, and he^esie, since he should the^eby undertake to
know what were impossible for him of himself to attain to the knowledge o^;
for herefie I count to be an opinion repugnant to the grounds of Christian
Faith, obstinately maintained by any that profess the name of Christ. It
remains now that I close up this discourse by applying the premises to my
purpose and matter at hand. It is an undeniable truth, that Baptism ordained
for the cleansing and taking away of original sin, derived to all the relative
descendants of Adam, is a supernatural doctrine absolutely necessary to bring
mankind to beatitude; that Christ taught this doctrine, and that the same the
Apostles and the Church by him planted, received it from him immediately; and
that this Doctrine was ever conserved, practiced, and deliverd over from hand
to hand by the Primitive best Fathers and Luminaries of that Church until this
very day without any interruption; which to deny were not only most impious and
heretical, but most absurd to whosoever considers the infinite goodness,
providence, wisdom, and omnipotency of the Almighty, yet notwithstanding
Pelagius a Welchman, and is usually styled Pelagius the Brittan, to distinguish
him from Pelagius the Samosatensian Bishop; his name in Welsh was Morgan, which
signifies the Sea: This pernicious wretch lived in the time of the Emperor
Theodosius the younger, and Honorius, about the year of our Lord 416. This man,
I say, and his followers Julianus and Celestius, maintained damnable Heresies
against Christ's express doctrine; for they taught Adams sin to be noxious to
himself only, and not to his posterity, and the^e to be no original sin: Lust
and concupiscence being natural not to be evil, but rather good; and sin not
to be propaga^ed by generation: The former being granted, children to have no
original sin from their parents, and children, though not baptized, to be
saved. See Pontanus Cath. Heretic. This Pestilent Heresy was spread abroad in
many places, but chiefly in England, because Pelagius being driven from Rome,
came thither and infected it with his execrable Erro^s: But by the diligent
travels and great zeal of one Germanus Altisidorensis and Palladius, sent from
Celestinus Pope, both England and Scotland became free from those his Errors,
solemnly condemned in the Synod of Carthage, An. 415. in which there were
assembled 2^7 Bishops in Numidia, and in the Arausican in Franc. You may find
his errors set down by August. Hierome, Ambrose, Isidor. Prosper, and Fulgent.
yet notwithstanding in these our late Error-abounding days, partly through the
instigation and malice of Satan, and partly through the power of the Almighties
wrath, punishing the contempt of his revealed truth, those damned Heresies of
Pelagius does begin to be covertly revived by the crafty insinuating conveyance
of one Dr. Tailor, the great Luminary and Pillar of the Protestant Church in
England, the only Idol of the Nation, and whose writings are generally cried
up, and highly extolled by the unsteady multitude, for no other reason that I
can imagine, but for his sympathizing correspondency with them in blindness,
inconstancy, and ignorance; yet he is a man that has his senses or fantasy so
depraved, as to take imperfect and maimed impressions of outward objects, and
the powers of his understanding so weak and perverted as to make preposterous
and disorderly coll^ctions out of them, and whose judgment is so misguided by
pre-occupation of self affection or particular ends, as himself becomes most
lamentably deceived, feeding his soul with falsehood i^ stead of truth, blindly
wading too far without and above his obscure capacity, and low proportion of
knowledge, into particular useless subtilties, doting about frivolous questions
and logomachies, whereof comes no fruit other then presumption, dissension,
railings, dissolution, ^vill surmisings, con^empt of Christ, of his Doctrine,
Sacraments, and divine Ordinances, leaving every man to the dictamens of his
own private judgment, according to the several tempers and circumstances that
sway in every particular, which leads on inevitably to Atheism and
unchristianity; and all this for sordid apprehensions of base commodity to
himself* having employed the faculties of his understanding contrary unto
their natural inclinations, to the maintaining of lies, and the deceiving of
others, expressly against Scripture, and the generally received Doctrine of all
the Orthodox Fathers, in all Ages perspicuous and eminent in knowledge of
tongues, in^ight into Antiquity, profoundnesse in Sciences, Perfection and true
Sanctity of life, which have shined most rarely in them, and none will deny but
these are the likeliest means to gain a right intelligence of the true and
deep sense of Scripture, and not the vain dreams and deluding suggestions of
the private spirit of any Tailor, Sailer, Cobbler, Body seller, Tinker, or such
like swarm of Locusts, which have so miserably invaded and infected this brave
Island, all pretending to have their commission and power derived from Jesus
Christ, with so much intemperate boldness, as if they were the only persons
employed and entrusted by him to do o^ undo as they please: But let them
pretend what they will, its manifest Christ concluded of such, John 10. 1. He
that enters not in by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other
way, the same is a thief and a robber. Our Savior himself was the door to his
Apostles, and his Apostles and their Successors the door to all that ever were
admitted Shepherds in a regular and Apostolic manner. Now if any desires to
know who are the false Prophets, and false Teachers, Dr. Tailor shall resolve
him in his Doctrine delivered in his Episcopacy asserted, where he holds forth
that Christ did institute a government to order and rule his Church by his
Authority, and that this government was delegated to the Apostles by immediate
substitution by Christ in traditione clavium, inspiratione spiritus, etc. And
he holds further, that this power was not to expire with their person^; for
when the great Shepherd had reduced his wandering sheep into a fold, he would
not leave them without guides to govern them, so long as the woolf might
possibly prey upon them, and that is till the last separation of the sheep from
the goats; and this Christ intimates in that his promise, E^vobiscnm, not with
your persons, for they dyed long ago; but vobiscum and vestri similibus, with
Apostolical Successors of yours till the end of the wo^ld; an^ therefore that
the Apostolat might be perpetual and successive, Christ gave them a power of
Ordination, that by imposing hands on others, they might impart that power
which they received from Christ, which was both ordinery and extraordinary; as
immediate Mi^lion, unlimited Jurisdiction, and miraculous Operations. It
follows therefore that there must remain a power of giving faculty and
capacity to persons successively, for the execution of that in which he
promised perpetual assistance, which were the Offices and Powers of Preaching,
Baptizing, Consecrating, Ordaining and Governing, necessary for the
perpetuating of a Church, unless men could be Christians that were never
Christened, become Priests without Calling of God and Ordination, have their
sins pardoned without Absolution, be Members, Parts, and Sons of a Church
whereof there is no codunation, no Authority, no Governor: It follows
therefore out of this Doctrine, that if Dr. Tailor, or all other Proiestant
Ministers, Teachers, or Preachers in England, have not received lawful power,
mission, Apostalical faculty, or ordination by hand-imposition from true
Apostolical Successors they all are reduced to the Nonsuch of their Calling,
become mere Laics, and incapable of any colorable pretense to any successive
Ministerial Apostolical Ordination or Mission derived from Christ and his
Apostles, left as unfit dispensers of the mysteries of the Kingdom: Then pray
by what power or commission does Dr. Tailor, and other such giddy pretending
spirits, preach, teach, guide souls, plant Religion, interpret Scripture, and
administer Sacraments, intruding themselves, and with a sottish arrogance
usurping those sacred Functions? sure the result of this his doctrine, is, that
both he, and all other such Ministers, Preachers, Doctors, etc. of the now
Protestant Church in England, must be Roman Catholics, or claim not at all a
pretense to any true Apostolical successive ordination or mission derived from
Christ, ex ore tuo te judico serve nequam. Thus you see the Doctor pledged in
his own cup, and proved a destroyer of his own Doctrine and pretended
Ministry: I p^tty the souls of his misguided and deluded Proselytes*
Notwithstanding this his Doctrine in his Episcopacy asserted, you shall find
quite contradictory in his Epistle Dedicatory to his liberty of Prophesying,
and all along in that his work, where he allows an indifferency or countenance
to all Sects and new Religions, teaching and encouraging varieties of Sects,
and contradictions in opinions, and that men may be saved in any Religion; what
is this other then to overthrow all Successive Apostolical Ordination and
Mission derived from the Apostles for Baptizing, Preaching, Consecrating, and
administering Sacraments, allowed and taught by him in his Episcopacy asserted,
and to open a wide gate, and make way for all Schism, irreverence, pride of
understanding, and for a colluvies of Heresies, and by consequence destroy all
Religion: and for to justify forsooth the new birth of his rebellious brain,
the first stroke of his pen must be to lay a taint of ignorance and error upon
the whole Current of ancient Fathers of the Church and General Councils, and to
blast their authority, whose names and records ought to be sacred with
posterity: and to settle a like belief in all men, he gives no general and
certain rule, but leaving every man to the dictamen of his own private
judgment; hence must result (as by dire experience may be seen) a variety of
daily new opinions as those dictamens of private spirits are different: for who
is able to number all the divisions and subdivisious of all the new Sects that
these later days have hatched in England, occasioned by the large liberty of
Prophesying and interpreting Scripture, given by our new Dr. to all Laics to
preach, teach, guide souls, administer Sacraments, interpret Scripture, and
invent new Religions* and what not? Oh times! oh manners! is this the fr^^t of
the new ways, fresh w^^s, and daily inventions, whereby the utter desolation
is day by day consummated? are these our new pretended Reformers and Lights?
Sure they are but mere exhalations, sulphurous M^t^ors, igues fatu^, good for
nothing but to lead men into lakes and ditches.

If the Reader will but seriously consider and peruse with attention this loose
and Independent doctrine of Dr. Tailor, he will find him like the Chamelion,
changing himself unto all colors, and inventing a trick to min^ this doctrine,
as may be most serviceable to his particular Design and Interest; for sometimes
he steers according to the express doctrine of Roman Catholick^s he so much
declames against; sometimes according to the face of a rigid Presbyterian;
sometimes according to the success and achievements of illiterate
Anabaptists; sometimes according to the itch and inclination of Independents;
and finally, according to the genius of damned Pelagius, of whom Luther said
that he was so called from Pelagus, the Sea; whereas his most impious erors,
like the Sea, did in a manner overflow the world: Might not Dr: Tailor as well
out of his name Tailor be, not unfitly, called cauda Draconis, the erring tail
of the Dragon meant by S. John, Revel. 12. 4. who saw clearly in a Vision that
a time would come when the tail of the Dragon should draw the third part of the
stars from heaven: A man may think now the time to be i^ which that Revelation
is fulfilled in Dr. Tailor the posthumus hereticorum filius and cauda; for does
not he vigorously endeavor to overthrow and quite abolish the efficacy of
Baptism, made the Characteristick note of a Christian from an Heretic, Jew, or
Infidel, showing himself to be of so strange and imperious a spirit, as that
he would fain confine all the Wits in England to his particular erroneous
fancy; so far mistaking himself, as to think his bare assertions, without
competent proof, should be received for Oracles: What is this but to aim from
the blind tail of the people to advance himself to such a pitch of
presumption, as to pretend to trample upon the Head, Sacraments, and all the
mystical body of Christ the universal Redeemer, and bring consequently
Religion, State and ^all to ruin and confusion. Take from Plutarch to this
purpose a story of a serpent whose tail was discontented that the head should
have the power to govern and carry it which way soever it pleased; the tail
therefore petitioned that the same power might reside in it; which being
unwarily granted upon great importunity, the tail, a member o^ a very active
and stirring nature* but withal blind, carried the head, breast and body
through many holes and crevises, until at last (...) brought it self into
such narrow straits that it could not stir, but both head, body, and tail were
all destroyed. This, though but a Fable, has in it an important moral truth,
and may pertinently be applied by the ingenious to Dr. Tailor. Do but observe
what a brave flourishing Island, most famous for Learning, Piety, Sanctity, and
true Religion, settled by Christ the divine Architect, has England been while
souls were governed and ruled in the way to common salvation by the Head, viz.
by the true Apostolical Doctors and Preachers, sent and authorized with divine
Power, Ordination, and Commission, by fit and legal Ministers of the mysteries
of the Kingdom, by Christ's Emyassadors for Peace and Reconciliation: Then
indeed the saving doctrine purely extracted from the true Fountain, did at all
times most perspicuously appear against all avouch'd Heresies and intolerable
Blasphemies. Then there has been seen a blessed harmonious union in all
fundamental principles of Religion constantly maintained and preserved both in
Church and State: But alas! since the planting of new fangl'd Religions, and
the rule and government of souls has been by usurpation assumed by the
over-bufie, blind and erring tail, viz. by Dr. Tailor, and other such like
upstart subpedanean Divines, (made Ministers only according to the new model by
humane ordination, and now justly cast out of Church Government, and levelled
to the rank of the unsteady vulgar) this gallant Nation is become inglorious,
the light and liberty of the Gospel extremely eclipsed, if not quite
extinguished; new inventions and dreams, leading to confusion, death, and
perdi^ion, daily cried up and entertained; the Lords Prayer, Apostles Creed,
all Sacraments, and the 39. Articles, antiquated and contemned, pernicious
doctrines in faith hourly accruing together with an inundation of vices and
corrupted manners; no faith cut fancy and opinion; no hop^ but presumption; no
charity but lust; no God but an Idol; as S. Au^. said Ep. 64. Homini extra
Ecclesiam Religio sua est cultus phantasinatum suorum, aut error suus est De^s
suus. Thus leaving the Dr. Tail to the reclaiming and detestation of his
confused doctrine, I come to my main intendment.

CHAP. II.
Of the dismal state of man of his Fall.
ADam the great Representative of Mankind, and the beginner of a temporal
happy life, in the first instance of his Creation, amongst many other graces
and singular endowments, did receive from God Original righteousness, which is
not the same distributive justice, one of the cardinal virtues; neither that by
which we are justified, which is called the grace of remission of sins: But
this Original Justice in Adam is a certain kind of rectitude in the whole man,
viz. of the body to the soul, and of the sensitive appetite to reason meant by
the Ecclesiast in these words, Fecit Deus hominem rectum, God made man upright;
and because this rare gift of righteousness has been received by Adam from
God, and was to be transmitted by original propagation to Adams Posterity, if
he had not sinned, its fitly called original. By this original justice man's
will was more firmly fastened to God then by grace; for this unites us to our
final end as a supernatural good; but original righteousness unites to the same
as both convenient and delectable; and by this rectitude, reason became subject
to God, the inferior faculties to reason, and the body to the soul: the first
subjection being the cause of the second and third; for reason remained subject
to God all the inferior faculties must also remain subject; which cannot be
unless grace be conjoined with original justice; and this subjection of the
body to the soul, and of inferior faculties to the superior, could not be a
natural gift, but rather a supernatural; otherwise it would have remained in
man after his fall, whereas in damned souls all natural gifts does still
remain. By this supernatural gift superinduced Adam had a title and right to
heaven, which with nature was to be transfused to poste^ity if sin had not
hindered it; but the sin of Adam destroyed his original righteousness, and lost
it to us for ever; it corrupted his nature and ours too, and the consequent and
saddest of all is, by it we are borne enemies of God, sons of wrath, and heirs
of eternal damnation, carrying and deriving still a natural pronesse afomes, or
nest of sin imprinted in our souls, despoyled and divested by way of
punishment of all the supernatural assistances which God put into our nature,
being left naked and in pure naturalls, deprived of any title to heaven; that
is, it has in it neither strength to live a supernatural life, nor title to a
heavenly; so as the sin which was committed in the original of mankind by our
first parent, and which had a sad influence upon all his posterity, brought
upon Adam and us all that God threatened and no more, which is eternal and
temporal death with the proper effects and affections of mortality; and thus we
are formally and properly made sinners by Adam, and in him by interpretation we
all have sinned, and God does truly and justly impute his to us to make us as
guilty as he that did it, and as much punished and liable to eternal damnation.
Whereas all the supernatural gifts and eudowments conferred on Adam, were not
conferred on him as he was an individual person, but as he was a public
representative and common head of all humane nature, to be transfused to
posterity by a continual series of seminal generation; whence original justice
comes rightly so to be called; neither Adam became obliged to transmit those
preternatural gifts to his children by any precept or covenant other then by
the same of not eating of the forbidden fruit; for we are bound by no other
precept to preserve grace then by the same by which we are obliged to observe
Gods Law; because the Author of nature had power to oblige all mankind in Adam
the f^^st original and head thereof; so as that he prevariting all his
posterity, should likewise be comprehended both in the sin and guilt thereof
(now the reason of original sin begins to appear.) But whereas Adam then has
been not only all humane nature, but also the seed and seminal root thereof, in
whose loins all mankind as in the original, head, fountain, and seminary were
comprehended, involved, and included, though not formally, yet originally,
radically, representatively, and seminally, by his transgression of the first
commandment imposed under inevitable pain of eternal and temporal death,
brought on himself and all mankind both the guilt of sin and death; as S.
Aug. hyp. art. 2. says, Cum Adam peccavit natura in illo tota peccavit. When
Adam sinned, in him all nature likewise have sinned; the reason is, because
that sin was voluntary in order to us, Adams posterity; whereas for the
preservatio^ of that original righteousness bes^owed upon all humane nature,
Adams will in a manner was accounted and reputed the will of all mankind; as a
Kings will is accounted the will of the whole Kingdom and the will of a Civil
Magistrate the will of all the Citizens, manifestly expressed by Saint Paul in
those words, in quo omnes peccaverunt; which words have their reference to the
man, not to the sin; for the greek word is the masculine gender, as S. Austust.
understood it lib. de peccatorum merit is, cap. 10. his reason is, Quia ait
omnes homines fuerunt ille unus homo, viz. Adam quod intellige non formaliter,
sed originaliter, radicaliter, seminaliter, and representative quia viz. omnes
homines in illo primo homine quasi radice, parente, and principio suo contenti,
censi, and comprehensi fuerunt: nam quidquid Adam fecit omnes ejus posteri
fecisse censentur, sicut Rex representat regnum, and Magistratus Civitatem. Of
this judgment was Origines, Chrysostom. Theoph. Occumen, and for the most part
all the Latin and Greek Fathers. If you will ask why God was pleased that if Adam
should sin, we his posterity should contract the guilt of his sin? I answer,
that it was done by the occult judgment and decree of God, according to S.
Aug. l. 5. contra Julia. c. 3. and S. Bernard Sermon. ^. de Dominica post oct.
Epiphan. And if further you will ask why God did place our merit and demerit in
the hand and will of Adam, to the prejudice as it were of his dominion and
power, by which he could both do and decree what ever he pleased? I answer
with all the wise and learned, The reason was, that Adam should be the t^pe and
figure of Christ, in whose hand and will God was pleased to place our
happiness and redemption, and that he for us may merit grace and glory, as
Adam brought upon us the guilt both of sin and punishment. Before Adam was
created or prevaricated. God from all eternity by a conditional omniscient
knowledge did foresee all future contingent things, and according to the same
has willed and decreed to certain purposes, that both Adam and all his
posterity should be in order to Christ, and to be as the type and true figure
of Christ, and of all things that were to be brought to pass by Christ; for
God was pleased to manifest in Christ all his power, wisdom and glory; and
therefore ordained and decreed that he should be the origin, exemplar, and
period, not only of all elects, but also of his works, as is clearly put down,
Coloss. ^. 15. So that there has been not only in the real execution, but also
in the very divine decree of God a mutual contradependency or Anthithesis
betwixt Christ and Adam: Whereas Adam would not have been the first father,
origin, and representative head of all men, for that reason only, that he
might transmit or convey either original righteousness or sin to his
posterity, unless it should have been to that end that he might be a true type
and figure of Christ, who was to be the common Father and Redeemer of all Gods
Children. This comparative Analogy, and most rare and specious Antithesis
betwixt God and man, twixt the Creator and cerature, twixt the two great
representative heads and beginnings of Sin and Grace, the first and second Adam
is made manifest by many reasons.

First, Even as the terrene Adam without any Father was framed from incorrupted
earth; even so the Celestial Adam Christ was conceived and borne by the
operation of the Holy Ghost from the everblessed Virgin Mary.

Secondly As Adam was the beginning of an animal and sinful life; so Christ
was the true fountain and offspring of a pure spiritual life.

And thirdly, As Eve for the propagation of monkinde was edified from a rib of
Adams side; even so in Christ, the saving Church his Spouse (which would daily
engender children for him by means of the great Sacraments the conduits of his
blood) did flow from his sacred side on Mount Calvary: And as Adam by eating of
the forbidden fruit did transgress Gods command, and therewith brought on all
his posterity, even before we could know any thing of it, sin and death. Even
so Christ on the fatal beam of the Cross, obeying the commands of his Heavenly
Father, redeemed and restored us from* death to life. Finally, as through*
Adams vi^iated seminal generation we are daily borne children of wrath, and
heirs of damation, the guilt of sin remaining still occult and hidden: Evenso
through Baptism, institued by Christ, we are daily regenerat^d, grace still
remaining hidden and occult.

CHAP. III.
Where the state of the question depending of the right understanding of
Original Sin, as touching the true sense and verbal signification thereof, is
held forth.
COncerning this; it will not be amiss in order to many good purposes, to
observe that Original sin* may be considered in order to God, and so it may be
called death, wrath, and enmity; for by it God was induced to punish both Adam
and his posterity; and in this sense its calle^ in Scripture ire or wrath; so
S. Paul, Ephesians. 2. said, that ^e have been by nature childen of wrath; which
Li^a expounds thus, we are borne in original sin. Secondly, It may be compared
to the Vision Beatifical, which is true everlasting life, from which original
sin does avert and turn; fitly thus its called death, as S. Paul, Romans 5. By
the death of one man many are dead, and by the sin of one man death reigned.
Thus original sin is truly called death, for that it averted from God true
life. Thirdly, If original sin, considered as in order to the soul of man, may
be called infirmity, whereas man's soul by it is rendered weak and infirm,
hardly able to resist illegal and lustful motions and desires: This kind of
infirmity the Royal Prophet complained of, and did acknowledge, when he said,
Miserere mei Domine, quia infirmus sum. It may likewise not unfitly be called
feditas, or macula, a stain, or imperfection; for the soul by it is maculated
and stained, according to Jeremi. 2. Si laveris te nitro maculata es in
iniquitate tua coram me dicit Dominus. It may also be called a pronenesse, or
propension to evil, by reason that man's will, disrobed of original justice
through sin, has incurred an innate and genuine propension to sin and evil
motions, Genesis 6. Cuncta cogitati^ cordis intentae est ad^malum omni tempore. It
may likewise be called a Vice, diminishing natural Virtues, whereas all men
conceived in original sin do feel great reluctance to godliness, etc.
Finally, original sin considered according to its proper sense and meaning,
has two parts; the one, the mate^ial part, viz. Concupiscence, which is a kind
of infirm and weak quality; the other the formal part, viz. the want or
privation of original justice due to nature; as in the actual sin of wilful
murder two things may be considered: a positive thing in the soul, viz. a
certain deliberate act consented to by the will, as is velle occidere; this is
intrinsecal, and is quid materiale, but the formal part is the privation or
want of the righteousness which ought to be in that act, which if had been in
it, the act could never be a sin: So in original sin is included both the guilt
of sin and of punishment; the guilt of sin, because its a privation of original
justice, a deformity, curuity, or obliquity in the soul; the guilt of
punishment, which in Infants is termed concupiscibility, and in the adults
actual concupiscence: Hence we infer that original sin properly does consist in
the privation of original justice due to humane nature received and lost in
Adam; for sin' properly is injustice, and injustice nothing but the privation
of justice: Here we may consider, that of things some are positive, others
privative; the positive are all real substances, together with their
properties and passions, powers and faculties, imprinted by the Almighty in
their nature* the privative, are those that does grant and presuppose the
absence of some such real entity as ought to be in the thing; and such is sin,
which proproperly is no existing, or real thing, or entity, but rather the
absence of some such substance which ought to be in the creature; and although
it be inherent in positive things as a mere privation, yet it always ought to
be really distinguished from them; so as that sin is no other then the very
want, loss or privation of that good which God ingraff'd in the nature of his
creature. For example: Original sin transmitted to Adams posterity, is but the
privation or want of original justice and grace ingraffed in Adams nature, to
be conveyed to his children; Si Adam non posuissem demeritum and ^bicem. We may
further consider to our purpose, that a thing which in its proper nature is
evil, in Gods eternal counsel is respectively good, being ordered as the
occasion, means, or way to man^fest Gods glory, his justice, goodness and
mercy: For God per^i^teth evil by a certain voluntary permission, in that he
for saketh the second cause in working evil, either by withholding, or
detracting the grace it had, or not bestowing that which is wanting; neither in
this must we imagine God unjust, who is indebted to none: And that which is
thus evil by Gods permission, may be deem^d good in order to his glory.

First, in that its a punishment for sin, and punishment is accounted a moral
good, it being the part or* office of a just Judge to punish sin and
transgressions.

Or secondly, as a mere action; which if so considered. God is not only a bare
^e^missive Agent in producing an evil work, but also a powerful effecter of
the same, yet so as neither instilleth an aberration, curbity, or obliquity in
the act, neither yet supporteth or intends the same, but most freely
suffers evil, disposing it best to his own greater glory; and so he does
not assist man with new grace for to stand, but for just causes forsakes him,
and so leaves him quite to fall from God. Thus we may consider Adam created
perfect, yet changeable; for so it pleased God to prepare a way to the
executition of the decrees of his divine providence.

CHAP. IV.
Where Original Sin is clearly proved to be formally and properly a sin, not
figuratively, as Dr. Tailor does dream with Pelagius his cursed Symmist.
ORiginal Sin is attributed to Adams posterity, as relating to nature, and
common to all mankind, not to any singular person; for whatever is attributed
in respect of nature, is attributed to all men, as if they were all one single
man; for Porphirus has in praedic. de specie, that Participatione speciei
plures homines sunt u^us homo. As for example: To be rational, is not
attributed to any particular or singular person; as distinct from all others,
but generally to all, as they are one man; because it is attributed to man in
respect of all nature; for this, and that man, nay all men, as they are
rational, they differ not one from another, but are counted specifice one
rational man: So that even as actual sin is attributed to some man in respect
of his individual person to whom it is proper to act; and sin, according to
Aristotle in 1. Metaph. Suppo^^rorum sunt actiones: Even so original sin, viz.
the sin conveyed by origin or generation, is attributed to man in respect of
nature; for whereas generation was ordained for the conservation thereof, which
nature is together with sin communicated to all individually; for even as the
hand that committed a murder (as is already said) is not culpable, for that it
was not moved to the act precisely from it self, but by the command of the
will; yet in as much as it is a member of that man that wilfully committed the
murder, its really and truly counted culpable, and is justly mutilated; even
so, though every individual relative descend^nt of Adam be not, in respect of
the person, culpable, yet every man, having received his nature from him that
depraved and voluntarily maculated the same, is in a manner voluntarily become
culpable, in just, and a sinner; so as that the original inordination, or
natural sin in every natural person, is not voluntary by the will of that
singular person, but by the will of the first man, who as the first origin,
moved, communicated, and conveyed by way of generation, nature so infected and
vitiated to posterity. For example: Adam, after the loss of original
righteousness begat children, and consequently after he felt and had a
rebellion in his flesh against his spirit, and an inordinate motion in his
members, and so the act of generation in him became mixed with lust and
concupiscence; and this ever since the loss of original righteousness, by
which he was to be ruled: And for this reason nature traduced or conveyed from
him, is still found with sin and corruption; and if you look for the narrow
way, through which original sin is conveyed, it is the infected slesh
transmitted by concupiscence, whereby the soul, created without any stain, is
maculated: This is manifest from Saint Augustins answer to Julian the Apostates
question: Quid quer^^ ti^am cum habens apertam ^anuam? As if the Saint had
said, Look for no other conveyance or cause but Adams sin, and the natural
propagation of his infected flesh, which by a moral efficiency corrupted and
stained the soul; neither this propagation can absolutely be the cause,
whereas this would have been in the state of innocence; but its lust, yet not
lust absolutely, but the inordinate ardor of lust; so that the soul contracts
original sin, because the same is produced in the corrupt flesh, not
Physically, but only Morally, by natural propagation.

Original sin is no stain or spot in the flesh, neither a privation of any such
quality in the same, by which it should become subject or rebellious to the
spirit, or the infe^iour faculties to the superior: This is manifest, because
sin is injustice; but the flesh is incapable of justice or in justice; neither
is original sin essentially concupiscence, whether it be taken for the natural
inclination to evil, or for the voluntary or involuntary motion of
concupiscence, because habitual concupiscence is a sensitive appetite which is
n^tural to man, and therefore no sin; neither can it be the inclination of the
will, for that is natural, and a real positive entity; neither is it a
privation of any natural rectitude, but of a supernatural; neither is it only
punishment of sin, but has in it the nature of sin essentially and formally;
and is called the sin of nature, because its derived by natural or seminal
generation.

It Is therefore most certain, that original sin is no vicious habit, no
pronesse or concupiscence of the flesh, neither any infectious disease,
positive stain, or rust in man's soul, but it is a privation of original
justice which ought to be in our nature, as due to it, because received and
lost in our first Father Adam: But concupiscence, by many Saints held to be
original sin, may be two way^s considered; either as it is an act, habit, or a
pronenesse in the sensitive appetite, and neither of these is formally a sin;
for sin is never in the sensitive part; or else this concupiscence is the
pronesse in the rational appetite, viz. the will, exciting to the desire of
things pleasing, and immoderately convenient to the sensitive appetite to which
it is conjoined: And thus concupiscence considered is the material part in
original sin, because the will, through the want of original justice, is left
prone to rebellion against reason.

That original sin is formally the want of original justice, is thus proved:
Every sin formally is injustice; Ergo every sin is the privation of some
justice or righteousness due, but the righteousness due to Infants, is not
actual but original: Ergo original sin is formally the want of original
righteousness due to every individual.

Further, Even as actual sin is the want or loss of the righteousness and
rectitude which ought to be in the consented act of the will; even so original
sin is the privation of original justice and rectitude which ought to be in
uature, which rectitude is original righteousness; for as every act has
naturally annexed to it a proper rectitude, so humane nature was created by God
with its proper natural and supernatural rectitude; whereas original justice as
a special gift bestowed by God, not only on Adam, but also on all his relative
descendants, was a kind of rectitude and justice due and belonging to nature,
so as the loss* privation, or want thereof, became a vice or sin in nature; and
thus the want of it is the want of due justice or righteousness, but the
privation or want of it is a sin, not actual, because its not lost by any
proper consented act of the will, but rather it is sin original that is
contracted and derived to us daily through the actual disobedience of Adam.

Further, I say that by original Justice man was made acceptable and gra^eful
to God; therefore by the loss or privation of original justice, man is out of
Gods favor and grace; and for this reason sin is counted the death of the
soul, as grace is the life of it; for without habitual grace, which is
equivalent to original justice, none can become grateful to God, nor be capable
of any title to Heaven: Whence we may infer children to be in God Almighties
debt for original righteousness; for they all have received it in Adam from
God, who giving the same to him by his antecedent will, gave it likewi^e to all
his posterity; though it was not given by a consequent will, quia Adam posuit
demeritum; which is the reason why God does justly exact the same of us, and so
we become in his debt in just and formally sinners: In this all the Ancient
Doctors do agree.

And although original sin conveyed to posterity, cannot without special
revelation be proved or evinced by any natural ratiotination; (for how can it
by humane discourse be evidenced that Adam did receive f^r himself and his
posterity the gift of original justice? or that Adam was appointed the great
representative head in ess^ morali of all humane nature? or that by him those
principles of morally working well, viz. grace, righteousness, innocence, etc.
should be derived to his posterity? and that as the propagation of humane
nature in esse naturali did depend of him, so should likewise the conservation
or loss of that happy state in esse morali? or how can it appear by natural
reason, that Adam prevaricating, all his posterity not existing in rerum
natura, should prevaricate also?) which without the light of faith, and the
belief of what is said, cannot be apprehended; yet we may find out for the
explicating of original sin, some congruent Theological reasons: The first is,
that ever in Gods Church, from its very beginning, there has been not only in
the law of nature, but also in the old and new, a special remedy, instituted
for the cleansing of original sin from Infants; so its most manifest, that the
Church held and taught that Infants do contract original sin; for if they had
not in them original ^n to be washed away by Circumcision or Baptism, then the
form of Circumcision and Baptism in them would prove false; but the consequent
is absurd and heretical, Ergo etc.

Now let us but further consider what reasons may induce us to submit to this
Doctrine of original sin.

First, For the Antiquity of it: We find some footsteps thereof under the Law,
yea before the Law, though more darkly; but under the Law we may see the
footsteps thereof more manifest, though not so perspicuous as under the Gospel,
where truth appears, as it were, with open face; for you may read Genesis 17. The
uncircumcised manchild whose flesh is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut
off from the people. The which Text Saint August. lib. 1^. de Civitat. Dei c.
27. and lib. 2. de p^ccato originali, etc. 30. contra Coelestium, understands
as relating to Infants not circumcised, and therefore liable to punishment;
which S. August. a^scribes to Adams prevarication, in which all Infants have
prevaricated, and became sinners upon that account.

Secondly, You may read, Psalm 50. the Royal Prophet moaning that he was
conceived in ^niquity and sin, according to the Hebrew Text.

Thirdly, You may read in Eccles. 25. A muliere initium peccat^ and per illam
omnes moriuntur. And in Job, Pereat dies in quae na^us sum, and nex in qua
dictum est conceptus est homo. And in the 14. Chapt. Quis potest facere mundum
de imundo concep^um semine, etc. And Chap. 25. according to the 70
Interpreters, Nemo mundus a sorde neque Infans unius diei: Whence John Baptist
cried out, Ecce Agnus Dei, ^cce qui tellit peccata mundi. In the Greek Text we
read peccatum mundi, which is Adams sin conveyed to posterity. These are very
plain; but more manifestly clear places you may read in the New Testament.
First S. Paul to the Romans, C. 5. Sicut per unum hominem peccatum and per
peccatum mors, etc. Which words, the Primitive Church and all the Ancient
Fathers do understand of original sin; which Interpretation is allowed and
defined by many Councels. The second place is 2. ad Corinth. 4. Si u^^us pro
omnibus mortu^s est Christus etc. therefore all were dead, then Christ dyed f^r
Infants: But they died, not by any actual sin; therefore it must be by original
sin. The third place is that of S. Paul Ephesians. 2. Eramus natura filii irae:
From which place S. August. de peccatorum merit. and remiss. c. 20. and in
Sermon. 14. de verbis Apost. Expounds these words, natura filii irae,
originaliter, saying, filius autem irae is a sinner: So if we all have been by
nature children of wrath, we all must by nature be sinners. And its observable,
that Adams sin (as its revealed in holy Scripture) had two far different
effects; the one proper and conna^ur^l to his offense, which was the infection
of all his posterity, borne (by natural generation) with original sin; the
other effect was also by occasion of that general infection of all mankind, but
properly of the inexplicable goodness and mercy of God, ordaining for remedy
of this universal infection, the Incarnation and death of our blessed Savior
Christ, by whose superabundant grace his faithful children are cleansed from
all sins original and actual, and rendered far more exceeding gracious and
glorious then otherwis^ they should have been. Both which effects S. Paul
teaches, Romans 8. v. 12, 13, 14. concluding this first pol^ with an Appendix,
that Ada^ wa^ a figure of Christ to come, signifying, that as by the sin of
Adam we all dyed, so by the grace of Christ all his children do live Touching
the other effect, viz. abundance of grace by Christ, he adds the great
difference, saying, But not as the offense, so also the gif^. For if by the
one, m^n^ died; much more the grace of God, and the gift in the grace of one
man Jesus Christ has abounded upon many, v. 15. And not as by one sin, s^ also
the gift for judgment (...) of one ^^condemnation: but grace (...) of m^^y
offe^ces^^ justification, v. (...). For if (...) the ^^^ence of one, death
reigned by one; much more they that receive the abundance of grace, and of the
donation of justice (...) shall reign in life by one Jesus, verse. 17. Thus by
S. Paul's* Doctrine in that place, and ver. 18, and 19. is verified that which
the ^ue Church so solemnly sings in the great Festivity of our redemption: O
certe necessarium. Adae peccacatum quod Christ's mirt^ deletum est. And O (...)
culpa (...) and ^autum meritum hab^re ^re^dempt^rem. Whereto agree many other
passages in the rest of S. Paul^ Doctrine; and the same is brie^ly comprised in
that which S. John Baptist denounced of our blessed Savior, saying. Behold the
Lamb of God, behold him: that takes away* the sin of the world. That is,
principally Christ came to take away the general sin, which being actual in
Adam, is original in the whole world; and therefore is called the sin of the
world. And the same is the general doctrine of S. John Apost. and Evangelist,
saying, If we walk in the light, as God also is in the light, and the blood of
Jesus his son cleanses us from all sin; first, from original, then also from
actual. You may find moreover in S. Luke 10. v. 30. all mankind divested of
grace, and wounded in natural faculties by Adams fall; for our Savior in a
Parable says, How a certain man went down from Jerusalem unto Jericho, and
fell among the (...), who spoiled him, and giving him wounds, went away leaving
him half dead. Of no particular man can this Parable be so properly expounded,
as of all mankind in general, contained in Adam our first Parent, who being
endued with all necessary gifts narural and supernatural, going from Gods
commandment, yielded to false imaginations of bettering his state, as it were
descending from Jerusalem the Vision of peace to Jericho, signifying the Moon
(which is unconstant and mutable) fell among thieves, the Devils, who spoiled
and wounded him, and left him half dead; for Adam by sinning, and all men in
him were spoiled of original justice and all supernatural graces, and wounded
in natural powers of understanding and f^e^will^, not wholly deprived of all,
but spoiled of the best part, and wounded in the rest; spiritually dead, and
subject both to temporal and eternal death, (...) relicto, le^t half dead and
half alive; though left without help by the Priest and Levi^e, the Sacrifices,
and other Ministeries. The result of all is this* Original sin is no inherent
substantial thing in man, but a privation of original justice; and after the
laver of Regeneration and Justification by Baptism, sin properly so called, is
no longer remaining in the regenerate; yet still there remains an inclination
unto sin, called concupiscence, out of which sin notwithstanding cannot be
produced but by our negligence and free consent: All this is affirmed by many
Saints, and especially by S. Basil in oratione quod Deus non sit Author
malorum. S. Epiphanius, S. Ambrose, Cyprian, S. Hierom, S. Hilarious, S. John
Chrysostom, etc. This Doctrine was decreed in several general Councels, as
hereafter shall appear. But that Infants were holy from their mothers womb,
and may be saved without Baptism, and that therefore there is no necessity of
the Laver of Regeneraon to wash away original sin, was the expressed heresy of
Pelagi^s, this day held forth boldly, though covertly, by Dr. Tailor; which
perverse Doctrine was condemned by several Councels. First in the East, at the
first Palestine Council it was solemnly condemned. After in the West, in
Efrick, in the Milevit^^ Council it was decreed Can. 2: That whosoever deny
Baptism to newborn Infants, or aver that they contract not Original stain
and sin from Adam, which needs a Regeneration, Anathe^ia sit. In the (...)
Council turned out of Greec^ (...) Pisanus, and in the first Constantinople
Council in Simbolo. This was decreed in the fourth Council of Carthage, where
there met 217. Prelates and most learned Doctors. And in the fifth
Constantinople Council, Zoara, S^us Monachus, Severus An^icher, Petrus
Antichenus, and Antymus, were as Parabaptists condemned. You may read in the
sixth Tolletan Council, Can. 2. of the three Divine persons, only the Son of
God became man for the Redemption of mankind from the debt of sin originally
contracted from Adams inobedience. In the second Araus^c^n Council in France,
Can. 2. you have what does follow. If any man shall hold that Adams sin hurted
him alone, and not his Posterity, or that only it brought corporal, (...) not
eternal death, which is (...), the cause of temporal death upon all mankind,
this man does great in justice to God, and downright contradicts the Apostle S,
Paul, who teaches that by one man sin came into the world, and by sin death,
and so death was derived to all men. I^ the Maguntine Council in Germany Can.
5. we read thus: The sin of our first Parent has been conveyed to all men by
seminal propagation, and draws along with it punishment, so as all men are
guilty of Gods enmity and eternal damnation, and all are become prone to sin.
All which Decrees were renewed in the two last general Councels Florentinum and
Tridentinum, which in literis vniouis teaches thus; The souls of those that
departed in actual or original sin only does descend into hell there to be
punished, though not all alike: Therefore neither our Dr. Tailor, nor the
Anabaptists, can without impudent temerity renew or maintain this most
pernicious venom of Heresy, so often and so solemnly condemned. From this
uniform ancient Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers, Saints, and holy Doctors, is
discovered that manifest gross error of Doctor Tailor, who does acknowledge no
inl^^^ent sin but that which is com^^tted by a real proper consent of the will,
which is such another pitiful mistake, as that this word original sin was not
used or mentioned in Scripture or Fathers before by S. Augustine invented,
which is notoriously false; whereas this is such another mere illusion as the
same of the Arians, who denied absolutely the word homusion to be found in the
Gospel: But just as those inveterate Heretics were confuted, and convicted, so
is our modern Dr. Tailor: For as in the Gospel we have these words, I and my
Father, are one, comes to be the same in substance, as if homusion were
expressly set down; for where the real thing in sense and substance is found,
there the name is included: Thus what is more clearly expressed in Scripture
then that our first Parent Adam was created upright, viz. in a rectitude of
virtues, grace, and faculties, by which he was left capable of attaining to
that final supernatural end for which he was created; and likewise all his
Posterity had a just title thereunto, while Adam would have had continued in
his obedience to God; whence the word original justice is derived and evinced,
which may be called innated, connatural, native, and genuine Justice: Even so
by S. Paul in many places, All men have sinned in Adam, and are denounced by
nature children of wrath and perdition; which in express significant terms is
nothing else then that Adams actual sin has been the natural, innated,
hereditary, genuine, and lin^ally descending habitual sin of his posterity,
contracted by seminal generation from him; which in effect is original sin
superinduced and conveyed by natural generation by Gods occult decree.

CHAP. V.
The former Doctrine proved out of the Fathers, shamefully corrupted by Dr.
Tailor.
IS it possible that a man that pretends not only to be a Christian, but a
Minister, a Preacher of the Word, a Doctor, and such as is generally counted
for a learned and spiritual writer among the Protestants, so far to forget
himself, as most shamefully to bring Antiquity it self for his Doctrine, and
particularly those very Authors who were the greatest opposers of his Pelagian
Heresy, as Chrysostom, S. Ignat. Martyr, S. Ambrose, etc. Sure the Dr. cannot
gain but dishonor and infamy, in alleging Authors for patronage of his
Errors, the whole strain of whose writings are so directly opposite unto him
and his Doctrine; and in producing these Doctors as of his mind and judgment,
he does but abuse them, and they rightly understood, accuse him: For not one of
the passages quoted out of the Fathers by him that give the least shadow of an
approbation or countenance to any of those his heretical Assertions; neither do
I find, to my remembrance, throughout his whole Treatise of Original Sin one
quotation, taken either out of Scripture, Fathers, or modern Interpreters,
pertinently applied, nor any solid thing like an Argument to prove the thing he
undertakes to show, as the ingenious Reader shall clearly perceive; and that
all his Allegations out of Scripture and Fathers help him not at all, but
rather expressly speak against him: Do but take notice, with what Engines does
he draw his Conclusion from the premises of S. Dio^is. Areopag. his doctrine;
for nothing does he say that looks his way, but rather against him; here are
his words, lib. de Ecclesiast. Hierarch. c. 3 p. 3. where he does ascribe Adams
sin to all humane nature, and at last gives a reason for it, Quia natura
humana cedens fraudibus Satanae vitale jugum excussit. I refer the Reader to
this place in the Author, where he will plainly find all along the Doctor
Tailor impugned; he brings S. Ignatius his doctrine to agree with his; but its
observable that in him there is no syllable to prove how or wherein; whereas in
his Epistle ad Trallianos he has thus. Christus dilexit nos dans semetipsum
pro nobis ut nos sanguine suo mundaret ab antiqua impietate. Here lies the
miserable mistake of the Doctor Tail, taking impiety for temporal death, which
is most absurd and ridiculous: for impiety here by the Saint is taken for Adams
sin conveyed to mankind, for which Christ died: S. Irenaeus; lib. 5. c. 17.
has these words: Delevit Christus Chirographum, viz. debita nostra affigens
illud cruci uti quema^modum per lignum facti sumus debitores Deo, per lignum
accipiamus debiti remissionem. Are not these words expressly against the Doctors
doctrine; for out of this Author every relative from Adam descendant has
contracted a debt through Adams transgression; for every particular individual
had obligation in Adam to preserve original righteousness; and because it was
not preserved, but lost by Adam for him and us his posterity, every of us
becomes indebted to God for the same, which in effect is original sin, the
which is remitted by the sacred blood of Christ in his Sacrament of Baptism.
The Reader may find more to this purpose in this Author, l. 3. c. 20. and in
S. Aug. lib. 1. contra Julianum, c. 2. Tertullian in his Book de anima, c. 40.
has Omnis anima eousque in Adam cense^ur donec in Christo recenseatur, tamdiu
imunda quamdiu recenseatur; peccatrix autem quiae imunda. Is no^ this to make
every soul a sinner always before Baptism, which takes away the stain of
original sin, contracted by and in Adam, quite contrary to Dr Tailors
judgment. Origines hom. 8. in Leviticum, says, Quaecunque anima in carne
nascitur, iniquitatis and peccati sorde polluitur, propter quod dictum est nemo
mundus a sorde, nec Infans cujus est uui^ is diei vita super terram: By this
Assertion every soul born from Adams flesh is counted polluted with sin and
iniquity, and every Infant is proved to have the same sin inherent in him;
which come quite opposite to Dr. Taylers deliration, in applying this iniquity
and sin here meant by Origines, to effects of mortality. And S. Eyprian, quoted
by the Dr. lib. 3. Epist. 8. ad Fidum, says, Recens natus nil peccavit nisi
quod secundum Adam carnaliter natus contagium mortis antiquae prima nativitate
c^ntraxit; this Saint, and likewise all the rest, by ancient death, do mean,
sin, and eternal death, whereas from sin came death; according to S. Paul,
stipendium peccati mors, the wages of sin is death, sin the precedent cause to
death, the subsequent effect; quite contrary to the Doctors dream, mistaking
temporal death for the eternal. I refer the ingenious Reader to S. Athanas. in
his Sermon upon those words, Omnia mihi tradicta sunt, etc. and to S. Hilarious,
in explicatione, Psalm. 32. diligis misericordiam and judicium: in which places
Doctor Tailor is confuted and impugned most manifestly as a pernicious
Impostor. The Doctor boldly avers that all Antiquity is on his side; setting
down barely two or three broken ends of Sentences, grounding no Argument, as
indeed he cannot, upon those passages for his opinion. The Doctor seems rather
ambitious to be accounted able to read a piece of the Fathers Writings, then
able to understand them; he cited the Fathers most impertinently and
imperfectly; endeavoring to make his own face and impure Doctrine clean, by
throwing dirt in great Saints faces. He did not like an honorable Guest expect
a meal from them, but like a beggar, their scraps aad fragments only. I refer
the Reader to fol 483. in his Explication of Original sin, where he cites S.
Ambrose sor him: est and alia mors quae secunda dicitur, etc. there is
anotherdeath in hell, which is called the second death, which we suffer not for
Adam's sin: this testimony of S. Ambrose is plain against the Doctor, for why
does he leave out that which goes before, and which follows? for the
illuminated Doctor in his precedent words affirmed, that we all sinned in the
mass of Adam; and his following discourse clearly states the question, and
declares downright, that Adam's sin is derived to his posterity: these are his
words in Apologia David, cap. 11. antequam nascimur maculamur contagio,
antequam usuram lucis originis ipsius injuriam excipimus, in iniquitate
concipimur, quid clarius: and a little after, merito David deploravit in se
inquinamenta naturae quod prius inciperet in homine macula quam vita: and
further, lib. 1. de penitentia, c. 2. omnes homines sub peccato nascimur quorum
ipse ortus in vitio est. See many more manifest places in S. August. lib. 1. in
Jul. c. 2. and lib. de nuptiis and concupiscentia, c. 35. and lib. 1. ad
Bonifacium, c. 11: Thus you see how manifestly Doctor Tailor does set down some
lose fragments of the Saints, as it we^e for him, and conceals the rest that
declares the Saints mind and tru^ sense* which he does break and pitifully
mangle; not understanding what he reads or writes from Authou^s against his
conscience and truth. And the Author Comentar* in Epistolas Pauli, which are
attributed to S. Ambrose, Coment. in c. 5. ad Romanos holds forth thus,
Manifest^^^ est omnes in Adam peccasse ut in m^ss^, Doctor Tailor leaves out
stolidly that which follows, because it makes expressly against his Doctrine.
What does follow is this, Ipse enim (meaning Adam) per peccatum corruptus, quos
genuit, omnes nati sunt in peccato, ex eo igitur peccatores quia (...) ipso
sumus omnes. Here S. Ambroseo does expressly teach Original sin derived from
Adam to all his relative descendants; so that I cannot but wonder at the new
Doctors frontless boldness, in averring that all Antiquity is for him: when the
Reader does manifestly see all the ancient Doctors and Fathers rather against
him. S. Chrysostom hom. 10. in Roman is quoted by the Doctor most maimedly and
shamefully page 484. it seems to have in it no small question that it is said,
that by the disobedience of one man many because sinners; for sinning and being
made mortal, it is not unlikely that they which spring from him should be so
too: but that another should be made a sinner by his disobedience, what
agreement or consequent can it have? etc. here the Saint makes many
interiogations, all which are expressed by our Modern Doctor; but leaves out
quite the ancient Doctors answer, mind, and sound conclusion: these words are
omitted, quod aut^m in questionem cadit est qua de causa id factum est? the
Saint inquires the cause of the punishment of death derived from Adam to all
mankind, qua de causa nondum addidit exquirit mortis radicem^ quae igitur est
mortis radix? supplicinm ex uno in omnes derivatum fuisse Paulus ostendit: quae
radix mortis? the Saint answers and resolves his own quaere, that it was sin.
Propterea art ut sicut regnaverat peccatum in mortem it a and gratia regnaret
per justitiam ad vitam eternam per Christum; hoc dixit ostendens peccatum loco
Regis fuisse, mortem autem loco militis sub peccato in acies tantem and ab illo
armatam: now comes in the Saints Conclusion expressly against D. Tailor: Ergo
s^^peccatum mortem armavit clarum est quod justitia per gratiam ad vecta que
peccatum toll^t and mortem spoliat and dissolvit. And a little after he says,
Quod igitur Christi Crux and Sepulchrum hoc nobis Baptisma fuit; ille enim
carni and nortuus and sepultus; nos autem peccato and mortui and sepulti ubi
peccatum ibi mors nam and suplicio liberati sumus and vitium deposuimus and de
integro regenerati sumus and resurreximus, sepulto vetere homine, and redempti
and sanctificati and adopti Filii and justificati, and Fratres effecti in
eandem corporis unitatem redacti and ut corpus capiti fic illi uniti sumu^.
Hence the ingenious Reader may infer, how that the Saint does allege that
temporal death is the effect of sin; and that if we derive no sin from Adam,
death we cannot derive, which is the punishment of sin: and for this reason it
was decreed in the Aravsican Council, Can. 2. Non posse mortem sine peccato ad
hominem transire nisi injustitia Deo daretur and contra dicatur Apostolo
dicenti per unum hominem peccatum intravit in mundum. I deliver it in English
thus: Temporal death (allowed by D. Tailor) cannot be conveyed as punishment
to Adam's children without sin, unless great injustice be offered to God, and a
contradiction to S. Paul's Doctrine, v^z. By the sin of one man death entered,
etc. This is the express downright Doctrine of S. John Chrysostom, who
vigorously holds forth Baptism as a laver and sepulcher of sin; saying,
Peccato mortui and sepulti, etc. and that beside the bare imputation and
communication of Adam's sin, d^eam'd of by Dr. Tailor, there is in every Infant
newly born Original sin inherent, which is a privation of Original justice, a
guilt of eternal death, a stain, spot, enmity with God, the guilt of
punishment: which is an obligation or ordination to punishment: where the Saint
condemns Dr. Taylor's folly in averring that Original sin is nothing other then
Adam's actual sin bar^ly imputed to his Posterity. For further declaration
hereof, S. Cirillus Herosolimitan, Cathechesi 2. has most important Doctrine,
to him I remit the Reader -- S. Gregory Nazian, Orat. 3. de pace, says to our
purpose, Totus lapsus sum atque ex primigenii hominis inobedientia and diaboli
fraud condemnatus sum: S. Herom. in Commentario Oseae, c: 6. in paradiso omnes
prevaricati sunt in similitudinem prevaricationis Adam, non enim est mirum quod
in parente precessi^ hoc in fi^is condemnetur^ this Doctor and S. Cyprian does
admonish Infants to be baptized. The Reader may find much more to our purpose
in S. John Chrysostom in homilia ad Neop^^tos. Look Rufinus in Comentario in
Psalm. 20. S. Siricius in E^ist. 1. ad Himer. cap. 2. with many more in S.
August. lib. ^. in ^ulianum.

CHAP. VI.
That Original sin is properly and not metonimically a sin, proved by Reason;
and Dr. Taylor's contrary Doctrine proved heretical.
Heresy is an adhesion to some private and singular opinion or error in
faith, contrary to holy Scripture, and the general approved Doctrine of the
Church: but to hold, That Original sin is not properly and formally, but only
metonimically a sin, is expressly contrary to holy Scripture, and the general
approved Doctrine of the Church; Ergo, etc. That it is contrary to the general
approved Doctrine of the Church, is already proved out of the Doctrine of the
primitive Fathers, maintained by Beza, de justify, lib. 1. cap. 13. where he
says, Omnes homines plane reos nasci, contracta jam inde a primo par^nte
culpa: and Calvin has these express words, Peccato Adae non per solam
imputationem damnamur ^^sed ideo quia and culpae sumus rei, quatenus natura
nostra in illo vitiata iniquitatis reatu constringitur. That it is contrary to
Scripture, any man that is not purblinde may see, in many places; especially in
S. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, c. 5. v. 18, 19. Verse 18. As by the offense
of one sin came on ^all men to condemnation: so by the justifying of one, the
benefit abounded toward all men, to the justification of life. And v. 19. For
as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners: so by the obedience of one
shall many also be made righteous. The conclusion of Saint Paul's most profound
Doctrine concerning his comparison betwixt Christ and Adam, begun from the
twelfth Verse, is fully contained in these two Verses, 18 and 19. and his
Divine Apostolical Antithesis perfectly ended and completed; which
Apostolical Antithesis our D. Tailor does abominably endeavor to cross,
corrupt, and quite overthrow; in holding that Original sin conveyed to Adam's
Posterity, is only figuratively a fin: for S. Paul says expressly, that by one
man's disobedience many were made sinners; which word made sinners cannot be
understood figuratively by any solid unbias'd judgment, but rather (...)
tisnate. And the second Milivetan Council, in the fifth age, c. 2.

CHAP. VII.
The Objections against the former Doctrine waved.
FIrst objection. S. Chrysostom in some place averreth that none by the sin of
our proto- parents can be made a sinner excluded from Heaven, nor liable to
eternal damnation: I answer that the Saint did not here exclude absolutely the
sin conveyed to mankind, through the transgression of Adam; but only did
advertise that Adam's posterity were not made sinners upon that account only,
that our first parents have committed actual sins, but that their posterity
also in Adam, and along with him have sinned, whereas all by the participation
of humane nature were one man with Adam; and as nature to them is conveyed, so
is the vice and corruption in nature by them participated: for if they had not
really sinned in Adam in whom as in the original and seminal root they were
vertually involved; they could not be made sinners by Adam's actual sin: Nullus
enim (ut recte ai^ Chysosto.) ex alieno peccato and a se non participato
peccator existit. and Deus in regenerationis lavacro mentem gratia tang it,
radicale peccatum evellit and hominem illustri^rem reddit; here the Saint calls
Original sin, washed away by baptismal regeneration, radicale peccotum --
Objection 2. S. August lib. 16. de Civit. dei c. 18. says, we are not properly
but originally only born sinners: I answer, that S. August. is to be
understood so as that we are not born sinners by a consented act of our will
properly, but by the sinful act of Adam's inobedience which had a moral
influence on all mankind to bring on them the guilt of sin.

Objection 3. Until the Law sin was in the world, but sin is not imputed where
there is no Law; yet death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that have
not sinned after the similitude of Adam's actual transgression, who is the
figure of the Messiah: This place is ignorantly interpreted by our Doctor thus.
Death reigned upon them whose sins therefore would not be so imputed as Adam's
sin was, because there was no Law with an express threatening given to them as
it was to Adam. I answer, the same Law that was given with express threatening
to Adam in Paradise, was likewise by interpretation given in him to all his
posterity; and because Adam transgressed that Law, all his posterity with him
have transgressed; according to those words of S. Paul, In quo omnes
peccaverunt: Hence our Doctor's mistake is detected in not endeavoring to
understand how that the same Law that was given to Adam did extend it self to
his relative descendants, and that not only temporal, but also eternal death
was threatened both to him and his posterity.

Objection 4. Taken out of those words of S. Paul, By one man's disobedience
many were made sinners, etc. Whence the Dr. Tailor does strive to prove that if
Adam's sin were imputed to his posterity as a guilt of an inherent sin, then it
should extend to all his posterity but out of this place it does only extend
to many, not to all: Erg^ not Original sin, but temporal death is absolutely
derived. I answer, that the B. Apostle does use both words, many, and all;
whereas in the preceding Chapter he expressly averred that Adam's sin, and
Christ's righteousness was derived and conveyed to all Adam's posterity; and in
this verse 19. he avers that only many were made sinners by Adam's inobedience;
and that by Christ's righteousness many also are maderighteous. Now I ask who be
those that are born sinners from Adam? and who be those that are regenerated in
Christ through baptism? these are understood to be both all and many. They
were not all absolutely because Christ and Evae were not made sinners by Adam,
neither Infidels are by Christ justified; but those only that are in Christ
regenerated, and those only that are borne by seminal generation from Adam, are
here meant by the B. Apostle: After this manner we may understand those words
in Genesis 17. Patrem multarum gentium constitui te, and in semine tuo
benedicentur omnes gentes, c. 22. Where it is most manifest, that those who are
promised to Abraham as children are counted in one place many, and all, in an
other; because they all are in some sense understood, yet not absolutely all,
if considered in order to all humane kind.

5. Object. From the 18th. of Ezekel. The child shall not bear the iniquity
of the father. To this may be opposed another place in Exodus, the 20. I am a
zealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, etc. I
thus reconcile both these places in answer to the Objection: that temporal
punishment, as the loss of means and estates, banishment, infamy, and such
like; children as being secundum corpus pars patris, may justly suffer by the
Law for the sins of their parents: but eternal punishment of the guilt of sin,
and an exclusion from Heaven, is only inflicted on them that are properly and
really made sinners propria voluntate or ali^nae, by interpretation whereas
secundum animam, the son is not pars patris. Furthermore I answer, that the
child shall not bear the fathers sin, if the child become not partaker of
his fathers sin; as when the child imitates his fathers sin, or when the son's
will and consent be implicitly involved in the fathers will: as it was with
Adam, in whose will all the wills of all his posterity are ever by
interpretation and by Gods secret decree involved.

6. Object. From S. August. and S. Fulgent. who averreth that Infants are
punished by eternal flames of hell fire: I answer, that there is an infernal
place where in never ending flames the damned souls are eternally punished in
their senses; and the holy fathers are of opinion that though unbaptized
Infants are in this infernal place, yet are not tormented or punished at all by
that fire as the wicked are.

7. Object. It seems horrid to impute to the goodness and justice of God to be
Author of so great calamity to innocents as to be damned even to the eternal
loss of the sight of Gods glorious face, for this cannot be inflicted upon
Infants because they are not capable of a Law when they had no life, no
consent, no act of understanding nor of will, etc. which argument, what sense,
what piety or what probability it can have in it needs not much inquiery: such
a weak friend of God to plead for his justice and goodness as Doctor Tailor
pretends to be, may very well be answered as Job did answer his mistaken
comforters, Job 13. Does God stand in need of your lie? I wish you would
altogether hold your peace, and it would be your wisdom; though this weak
and disingenious argument is to satisfaction solued in many places of the
preceding Chapters; yet ^ add what follows, Gods mercy and goodness is
abundantly shown in that he has provided gracious remedies sufficient for all
men to be saved, of which remedies if any be deprived through default either of
themselves or others, or by chance; then is their being so deprived to be
ascribed accordingly either to themselves, or to other men, or to chance, and
not to any defect of Gods infinite mercy, goodness or justice; and indeed if
circumcision and baptism had not been in most divine and merciful providence
instituted by Christ for the salvation of Infants, then Doctor Tailor might
justly charge him with in justice and cruelty.

The Doctor bringt a great deal of ridiculous stuff concerning concupiscence to
be original sin: Its true S. Austin called it a sin, viz. the material part or
substract signification of sin; and as the natural instrument of generation
proving only concupiscence thus to be prejudicial to us, and an evil, against
Pelagius who denied the rebellion of the flesh to be an effect of sin, but
rather natural bonum. Read Saint Austin, contra Julian. And its observable
that whosoever will be at the pains to compare Dr. Taylers obsolet doctrine
with that of Pelagius* Julian, and other such horrid wretches, in whom the
spirit of the worst Heresies did rage, shall find that all his late arguments
borrowed from them, are both weak, impertinent, and increased to a great
number, as the same body put in many diverse habits and needless variation of
shapes --

Thus the Ingenuous Reader has the misterious question of the present subject
rightly stated; Christ as universal Savior, and the revealed truth of his
Sacraments vindicated; the horrid impostures odious falsehood and latent venom
of the pernicious assertions of an aerie and blind Enthusiast unmaslied and
accurately refuted. As for my particular, pure zeal I assure you was the motive
and prevailing argument that set my brain and pen awork about this subject, for
the undeceiving of the missed; I hope I have done my duty, having sincerely
produced Scripture-reason, and the best authority for to secure the interests
and advantages of piety, Gods justice, goodness, and truth, and of the lives
and salvation of many. I expect from all the wiser seriously to examine whether
this Orthodox Doctrine, or the contrary of Doctor Tailor in his Vnum
Necessarium does better agree or explicate the truth with greater reason and to
better purpose against the patronizing sin and damnation of innocent souls. Let
not I pray sordid prejudice forstal the moderate Readers judgment, nor envious
passion supplant his reason: For if this short Treatise be perused diligently,
compared exactly, and the verdict given uprightly in presence of the all seeing
eye: then I doubt not but the Reader seeking, shall find; and finding shall
confess that the truth of Christian Religion, ever holy, ever victorious,
though ever opposed by the wicked, is still the same; for the confirmation of
which God engaged his own faith by oath: and that Doctor Tayler's confused
doctrine is Doctrina mendaciorum non desursum descendens, sed terrena,
animalis, and diabolica; and that he is worthy of all contempt and unhappiness
for peremptorily distrusting and odiously confounding this eternal divine
verity.

The Postscript.
IT is a point most worthy of all admiration to behold such a vast number of
graceless presuming Theologues now in England, perpetually laboring in
searching out new whymsical inventions of religion, and filling the Land with
ridiculous and shameful Pamphlets, and unprofitable controversies about an
object more perspicuous then the Sun, preferring their own sorry inventions to
the prime substance of Gods heavenly endeavors; the celestial faith which the
infinite wisdom of man-God has planted on earth as the masterpiece of all
his great works and wonders.

Lord, what can any expect while those that presume to be the godly pillars,
and reformers of Religion are quite corrupted, unstable, staggering and
stealing men's affections and inclinations from embracing the true doctrine of
the only saving Religion? how can any that has but his wits about him, venture
to pin the salvation of his soul upon the threadbare sleeves of any of the
giddy spirits of these times, who daily endeavor to trike up anew the great
work of Religion, as if it were the work of man? I then demand of you (Noble
Reader) whether all this well considered, you ought not to abhor these petty
and odiously proud undertakers, who seem to come to the world to prescribe
rules of faith in it, and believe and teach what pleases them and the humorous
itch of their incredulous Proselytes, to displease God and confound his prime
verity? Sure an inevitable malediction is tied to those that voluntarily
withdraw themselves and others from the true light, and shake off the blessed
yoke of lawful revealed Ordinances, which ought rather to be reverenced then
disputed with unprofitable wranglings and gross falsities, impudently denying
things most manifest; avouching without shame things odiously false; proposing
things impious, as the first principles of faith; condemning of heresy, things
Orthodox; boasting and quoting the holy Fathers, when nothing is followed less
then their Doctrine.

Now if I should ask whether or no in the so plausible reformation begun in
Queen Elizabeth, for the glory, light and liberty of the Gospel (as it was
pretended) was there salvation to be had or no? Doctor Tailor for fear of shame
and laughter will answer affirmatively; why then does he dare subvert the whole
fabric of the same, and quit undo at a breach what has been so long a doing?
sure it was to the end that (God permitting) the monster of reformation should
reveal its own turpitud and horrid basis, and betray it self by sects,
divisions, and subdivisions, that those that are come to some eminency in
learning and zeal might easily discern it to be not a City built on a mountain,
but a wall raised and dawbed without tempering, Ezekiel 13. 11. A fools Cottage
erected upon slying sand where no settled footing can be found; for the old
Proverb of the Hebrews is most sure, that truth has strong and steadfast
footing, and is of a permanent perpetual durance; but a lie of a tottering
foundation; easily supplanted and overthrown; therefore all reformations of
forged Sectaries, are to be esteemed as weak and groundless lies and
fooleries; according to the doctrine of Trismegistus, Omne quod alteratur
falsitas est non manens in se ipso; every thing subject to alteration is false.
And it is very observable how one of the grave Prelates and first reformers,
being asked by an ingenious Gentleman, why did the new reformers accuse the
ancient Church of Rome of Idolatry and superstition, which she only had
suppressed both in this Nation, and in the whole universe, as all Historians do
witness: The Prelate ingeniously and heartily returned answer, that the
reformation began with lies, follies and vain inventions, and so it must end in
lies and impostures. This prediction seems manifestly come to pass this day;
for that the reformation began with lies and gross falsehoods, I need not
prove, any man that is compos mentis may see: but that reformation now ends in
lies, is manifestly evinced by the late doctrine of Doctor Jeremiah Tailor: for
how can there be a more gross and horrid lie then to hold that Infants are
saved, and not by Christ? and that any may be saved in any religion or sect
whatsoever? that Laics have power to administer Sacraments, Preach, interpret
Scripture, and what not? and that Original sin is so called abusive? that in
the Sacrament of baptism there is had but a figurative remission of sin? thus
does our brave Doctor end the specious reformation. Thus you may observe how he
brings up the rear of new denials of some part of the ancient faith, which
former reformers had not yet obtained the impudent boldness to reject: Such
and no other be all reformations, a daily taking away, and negative abolitions
of the ancient Tenets without any positive institution: Was not I pray the
necessity of faith and merit of works taken away by some, Feast-days, Lents,
and all fasting rejected by others; Priest, his power and Mass (which were as
ancient in England, and generally throughout the whole world, as Christianity
it self) put down by some, contrition and Penance by others: Was not soon after
Sacrificing, Unction, Altars, Vows, Pilgramage, chased away by some; the
Lords-prayer, the Ten Commandments, cried down and neglected by new Tub
praters, and by the unrelenting malice of hellish monsters: Thus by a gradual
proceedeng of infidelity and blasphemy of the whole fabric of Christian
Religion, there is not left one stone upon another. Only unum baptismae in
remissionem peccatorum, as the distinctive character betwixt Christian and
Pagan left; together with the real presence in the Lords Supper maintained in
the 39. Article, are this day contemned by Doctor Tailor, and reduced to bare
shades, figures, and dreams; so perfecting the work by degrees, leaves us but
damnation: Were all reformers before him sent from God with devine commission
to inlighten the world? if they were, why then did they not do their work to
the full? must an ignorant Tailor or Bungler, at the end of a full age step in
to accomplish it? yes sure, now our Tailor has done the deed to the utmost
beyond all addition; now the reformation consisting of the denial of essential
truths, and all practical principles of Religion, is brought to the non plus
ultra, he brings up the rear, having ushered and ^ed by the hand James Naylor
to Pillory, and with him many thousands into horrid blasphemies and atheism;
neither does his impiety stay here, but dares deny against Scripture ancient
Fathers, and the general received practice of all ages; the necessity and
reality of Christ's body in the B. Eucharist. For its a general rule approved
by all Divines, that we must never understand any place in Scripture
figuratively, unless we be evidently compelled thereunto; but no such matter
in these words, This is my body; for our Savior does not say this bread is my
body, neither can his words be so understood, especially seeing the word hoc,
this, is both in Greek and Latin Texts of the Neuter Gender, and the word
bread is of the Masculine. And by the figures of this most B. Sacrament, the
Catholic doctrine is thus proved: the figures ought necessarily to be of a
meaner dignity then the thing figured, Colos. 2. But if the Eucharist were no
more then simple and natural bread, signifying Christ's body, and not his very
body it self, then should the figures thereof be no whit inferior in dignity
to the B. Eucharist it self, yea some figures should be more excellent then it,
which is most absurd; for if we consider a Lamb and bread as they are natural
things, no question but the Lamb is more excellent then bread, if considered
only as external signs; for who sees not that Christ's flesh is far better
signified by the flesh of a Lamb then by bread? Christ's death is better
signified by the death of a Lamb, then by breaking of bread; Christ's innocence,
meekness, etc. are better signified by the property of the fame, then by those
of bread. As for the Manna it was made with Angels hands; it rained down from
heaven; it had all kind of taste; in all which respect it was far more
excellent then bread: so as that now Christians would be in a far more sad and
more pitious condition then those of the old Law, if we had figuratively only
Christ's body and blood, and not really present in the B. Eucharist; and there
is no color in the world why any should admit Christ's words to be otherwise
taken then really and properly: for the four Evangelists use them unanimously.
None of the ancient Fathers ever understood them figuratively, but expressly
reach that they are to be understood properly, no place of Scripture, no
Article of faith, no decree of Council, no explication of the Church compels
us to take them figuratively; therefore we must needs take them really with all
the Saints and primitive fathers: See the 28. Article of the Church of England,
and the 94. of Ireland, established in Dublin in the year 1615. Where the
Protestants do teach, that in the Eucharist the body and blood of Christ is not
only signified and offered, but also really, substantially, and truly
presented, exhibited and communicated, and consequently that the bread is not a
bare sign significative only, but also exhibitive of Christ's body: See Usher's
Sermon before the Commons, Page 16. Edit. 2. Sure had Christ's body been only
figuratively presented, he would have removed the doubt when he saw the Jews
offended at the reality (as Heretics be now a days) John 6. and he would not
have confirmed and repeated his saying in terminis with promise of a greater
wonder, John 6. 62.

The Lutherans believe our Savior to be as really in the Eucharist as he was
upon the Cross, but do not adore him; the Roman Catholics both believe the
reality of it, and adore it. For my part I should clearly hold with these; for
S. Paul, and all the four Evangelists unanimously teach the Doctrine of the
real presence, and not one single place produceable, that in direct terms
calls the B. Eucharist a sign or figure of Christ's body; notwithstanding the
vain cursed maintainers thereof admit no proof as authentical, but the pr^cise
Text of Scripture; but in this so important controversy they fly to logical
inferences and Philosophical discourses, and so make their own bare reason the
Judge, and not the word of God; rendering by their new and private
interpretations this great Sacrament inferior in dignity, not only to the
Paschal Lamb a type of Christ, but even to Manna which was but a figure of this
very mystery. Surely if we shall add to so many and so evident Texts of
S^ripture, the constant judgment of the Fathers, and the universal practice of
the whole Christian world, for above a thousand years, we may safely conclude
the doctrine of our Saviors presence in the B. Eucharist to be most probable
and true, and consequently Roman Catholics in no wise accusable of rashness
or obstinacy in believing a position so efficaciously recommended to them, and
conveyed from hand to hand, therefore what can be more dangerous and pernicious
to any Kingdom, then to quite abolish such a dread Sacrament plainly
invincible, which adorneth and graceth the whole universe, fomenteth innocence,
extirpats vice, and by most evident ways demonstrate that a living God lies
under it, and set up in its place a piece of profane bread which never yet
discovered more grace or force in the Ministers hand, then it brought out of
the Oven. As its evinced out of Christ's repeated words.

By this so important digression we have the omnipotency of God against all
weakness, idle curiosities, sophisms and artificial falsities of new wits, as
a pledge sufficient enough to evince and secure the reality of Christ in the
Sacrament of the Altar, and believe that under the Sacramental species sensible
and corruptible, our Savior subsisted with a glorious body which is called by
S. Paul spiritual body because its dignified with qualities and conditions of
spirit though it lose not the essence of a body, adoring therein with all
humility that which cannot be sufficiently comprehended, but by express
passages of Scripture, clear decision of 40. Councels, the testimony of above
500. Authors, ancient and holy; which ought to be preferred to the chimeras,
imaginary figments, and bare assertions of any particular Layman; and if plain
Scripture-Texts, with the Church, Saints and general Councels exposition be not
sufficient for a man to rest both his Science and Conscience upon, I know not
where he will find a resting satisfiable place; it may shoot at random, but
never come to take a right aim. It being the most palpable folly which can
creep into the brain of man to desire wisdom contrary to the wisdom of
Saints; my firm hope is that Doctor Tailor having with so much labor and
charges endeavored to honor Christ in a mere shadow, will now in the name of
God, turn his tongue and pen to honor and glorify him in his true real and
substantial body, and receive those rules of Religion ever unalterable,
eternal, universal, and constant, and not any longer to run with the Jews after
simple figures, and weak elements: Now its more then time to look after Christ's
true Church, still the same without opposition to it self in any fundamental
doctrine, when all other arising Sects are notoriously known to contradict both
their Associates and themselves at the end. Behold more then sufficient cause
and ground for all those that pretend to any fear of God, any care or regard of
their souls eternal welfare, utterly to detest and anathematize all novellism
and damnable principles; now its time to return to the Catholic Church settled
by Christ upon a Rock, never to be prevailed against by humane or devils power:
Cause enough there is to take warning for the future, not to remit the planting
of religion to every giddy pretending spirit. Now its more then time that truth
the center of our understanding maugre never so long or strong opposition
should powerfully work upon those very many Machievillians of our times, that
seriously and deliberately say, Pox on it, I Will be of any Sect rather then
hazard my liberty, honor or fortunes: I Will keep my consciene to my self, but
I Will never lose my Land for want of outward compliance or conformity with the
prevailing l^bertines: Alas how many brave ancient families, are quite
extinguished and brought to nothing for want of compliance or conformity with
God and his holy revealed Ordinances; as its by woeful experience obvious to
any judicious person, for non est prudentia, non est concilium contra Dominum:
for my own part I cannot but wonder that any man acknowledging his sold
immortal, and that either Hell or Heaven must be the eternal domicil after this
life, and withal acknowledging that a false wavering religion cannot be the way
to beatitude, shall not desert that sect of whose falsenesse and damnablenesse
to man's soul, and inconsistency with a well ordered Church, he has so many and
pregnant demonstrations to the eye. Finally its time for all to begin to follow
the main current and generality of Religion ancient and well grounded Erubescat
senectus quae se emendare non potest, nullus pudor est ad meliora transire, S.
Ambros. Ep. 31. ad valent. And now that we see the Protestants, fighting,
writing and preaching against Protestants for Protestant Religion: The old
Catholic Religion must be the white, at which we must all aim, out of which
none can hope for salvation.

I beseech God the Father of light and mercy may open the heart and eyes of our
Doctor and of his Profelytes, and resolve them herein for to receive that faith
which has God himself for object.

Let me now end with two words concerning the B. Virgin Mother, ever most
highly reverenced under God by all Christians upon earth, as the blessed
instrument of our welfare; who but a turbulent Momus or a windy Sc^olist filled
with a spirit of contradiction would dare to disable, and disluster the truth
of her immaculate conception, revealed and proposed by the voice and consent of
the Church: This truth is most ancient, though not so aparently revealed to the
primitive Fathers. Galatinus lib. 7. de arcanis cap. 4. holds this truth to be
from the very time of the Synagogue: For the Jews believed for certain that the
Mother of the Messiah would be without Original stain. In the Apostles time S.
Andrew Apostle expressly said, Ad Egeum, ut in gest is ejus refert Abdias lib.
^. Historiarum sicu^ primus Adam formatus (...)* ex terra non (...), it^
secundus Adam for^^^^ ex ^erra virginea and nunquam maledicta: in the
Jeros^limitan Council held by the Apostles, Anno 44. Vt inventum est in monte
granatensi; these words are. Illa virgo illa Maria santa in instanti suae
conceptionis fuit as originali peccato praeservata and qui ita non senserit
salutem non consequetur eternam. see Sanzez. Luzero Baptista de Lezana Carmel.
Sedulius the Christian Poet, that flourished Anno 430. in lib. 2. Oper. paschal
and habetur tomo 8. Biblioth. PP. has thus, En velut a spinis rosa mollis
surgit acutis
Nil quod laedat habens matrisque obscurat honorem
Sic Evae de stirpe Sacra veniente Maria
Virginis antiquae facinus nova Virgo piaevit.


Wherefore in her conception, nature and grace meeting together (said Damascen)
Orat^^ De^^ativit. Virg. natura gratiam antevertere (...) est ^usa sed
expectavit donec gratia prius fructum suum produxisset Which was ingeniously
verified by a modern Poet.

Gratia natunam cum qua est congressa su^egit
Et forti posuit clara-trophea manu.
And this is nothing strange to hear she being the first object of Gods
predestination as the great work prepared for his habitation: Opus grande est
non enim homini preparatur habitatio sed Deo, ^ Paral. 29. Sexta Sinodus cun.
32. Veneratur Liturgiam D. Jacobi Apost in qua sep^ haec verba habentur,
commemorantes sanctissimam matrem Christi irreprehensam, etc. likewise in the
7. Synod, Action 3. she is called, immaculata, and omni sensibili and
intellectuali natura purior --

Leaving many other proofs of the Fathers, and pregnant reasons for another
occasion. Now I come to show our B. Ladies imaculate conception, is likely to
become an Article of faith and defined. That truth which is supernatural and
much conducing to Christian piety and belong to divine Worship may be defined
and become an Article of faith, but the imaculate conception is such; Ergo it
may be defined: as the Nativity of our B. Lady, to be preserved from mortal and
venial sin, her ascension into heaven are supernatural truths generally allowed
of by the Church, as Christianam pi^tatem and divinum cultum concernentia: even
so her imaculate conception already celebrated, authoritate Ecclesiae,
instituted and confirmed a great festivitie sub nomine praeservationis, must be
a supernatural truth plurimum referens ad Christianam pietatem and divinum
cultum: Ergo it is likely to become an Article of faith: for the Church cannot
err about such things which concerns Christian piety and divine worship: Ergo
neither in defining that which is established, decreed, so lemnly proclaimed,
preached and taught, summi pontificis and Ecclesiae authoritate. Whereas there
is nothing required for the definibility of any dogmatical doctrine other then
cognitio and deprehensio alioujus infallibilis med^, by which may appear the
same to be revealed by God and such is the common sense and consent of the
Church manifested and propounded, ut decet sive in concilio sive extra. All
which does concur in the mystery of the imaculate conception of our B. Lady;
Ergo it may be defined.

The major is manifest, ex materia de fide; for illud est de fide, which is
revealed by God: the minor is proved out of many places in Scripture, in which
the constant assistance of the divine spirit is promised to the Church, ne
erret in rebus fidei; hence S. Paul 1 ad Tim. 3. does call the Church the
pillar and foundation of truth: but the universal Church does celebrate a
solemn festivity with an Octave of the imaculate conception not under the name
of sanctification, but of preservation: Ergo the B. Virgin was conceived truly
without Original sin; Ergo it may be defined: the consequence is clear, because
if she were defiled and conspurcated with Original sin, her conception could
not be celebrated by the Church: Quae non potest errare in rebus fidei,
propounding untruths for truths, which is the reason why S. Bernard in Epist.
174. ad canonicos Lugdi^ens. did reprehend them for celebrating the feast of
the imaculate conception sine Ecclesiae authoritate.

Laus Deo. Deiparaeque Virgini.

