A RELATION OF THE COUNTRY OF JANSENIA; WHEREIN Is treated of the Singularities
founded therein, the Customs, Manners, and Religion of it is Inhabitants.
With a Map of the Country.

Composed in French by Lewis Fountain, Esquire And newly Translated into English
by P. B.

London, Printed for the Author, and are sold by A. Banks, and C. Harper, over
against St. Dunstans-Church in Fleetstreet 1668

TO MONSIEUR DE***
SIR,
I Have heard you often complain that we see Relations enough of China and
Canada, but that none had yet appeared which truly declared, what Country
Jansenia is. Be content, Sir, here is what you have longed for, another would
have made a great volume hereof, but I know how tedious prolixity is to you: I
have considered your inclination, and to tell you all, my own, which does not
carry me to that enlargement of speeches which you term the profit of the
Stationer, and the torment of the Reader. If I had further amplified my
discourse, you would perhaps have laid it aside, either through contempt or
irksomness, as we do great talkers; and many persons who abridge themselves of
their dearest satisfaction would have easily bereaved themselves of a Book that
had cost more. We may tell many things in seven or eight leafs of paper, and I
am mistaken if you find nothing in these that approach College amplifications,
or the style of Commentaries. I had believed that the discourse I address unto
you should have been sufficient to satisfy your curiosity, and that of the
public also, but some body advised me to join to it the Map which you see
here, where in a moment the site of the Country is expose to the worlds view;
the Rivers that water it, and that bind it to the neighboring kingdoms; the
several things that it produces, and the Sea where all the waters of so famous
a Country fall. Some one will perhaps have a desire to make a more exact and
regulate description of it, when he has seen this, I shall be very glad of it,
and I Am sure 'twill have a greater sale in France, than the Almanac that made
so much noise, after the Declaration of Pope Innocent the tenth, and since
Jansenisme was beaten down. I would not dare to tell you, that you will do that
better than any other, for it would be to excite you to follow my lights, and I
acknowledge that I have none which equal yours. Do then, Sir, what you please;
and believe me ever,

Your most humble, and obedient Servant, FONTAINE.

A RELATION OF THE COUNTRY OF JANSENIA, In which it is discoursed of the
Singularities that are there, of the Customs, Manners, and Religion of its
Inhabitants.
I Will make the description of a Country, which to this day, the Geographers
have never spoken of, and they must believe what I Will tell of it, because I have
been there; I dwelt in it almost five years, and I will say nothing but upon
the faith of my own eyes.

Jansenia is a very pleasant and fertile Province, placed betwixt Libertinia,
that limits it on the Oriental part by it is vast and champion grounds.
Desesperia (almost filled with sands and stony ways) that bounds it on the
Occidental part, and Calvinia that borders it on the Septentrional part. On the
Meridional coast it has that tempestuous Sea, the depth whereof could never
yet be found, and which is no less renound for the Monsters it bears than for
the Ships that perish therein.

The chief Town, where there is a Sovereign Court and an University, is
situated exactly in the middle of the Country over which it rules, and it is
believed that the principal Founders thereof judged it most expedient to place
it there, for the greater convenience of going into the three neighboring
Provinces; for thus the ways are equal in length, and to whatsoever part a man
will go, the way is so little wearisome, that a Jansenian if he be a good
footman, on condition that he puts forth betimes may go thither with ease in
four days. There are always some Posts ordained for those that are in more
have, and some Coaches which never fail to go on their appointed days.

That Land was first inhabited by a Colony of Flemings, who named it, and who
soon after made it famous, through the novelty of their Laws. Curiosity and
Interest have since that drawn into it many people of diverse Nations, who have
made it populous as we see at this time.

The Men of this Country are commonly very little, and the tallest do not pass
our moderate stature, although the Pictures which they make of them, do
represent them all of an extraordinary magnitude.

They have a small head, but very hard in respect of the spissitude of their
brainpans, and their minds follow the constitution of their bodies.

By the dissection that was made of them at several times, it has been found,
that many of them have a double heart, and it is believed that this is the cause
they are not sincere in their proceedings; they have always diverse ends, and at
the same time they can intend contraries.

Their most ordinary sickness is a dangerous swelling, whereof they almost all
dye, and for which yet they could never yet find any remedy, but by going forth
of their Country, whereunto very few can be persuaded, for the climate seems to
them very sweet, and when they perceive that any one of their Country will part
from them, they use so many artifices, and oblige them in so many fashions,
that they force them to stay there.

They Rule themselves by the Moon, and not by the Sun, as do other Nations; and
half their time they know not how they live, because their clocks never go
well, being so little industrious to direct them, as the inward part of the
Machine is never correspondent to the outward, that is to say, to the Hand of
the Clock. Their Houses are almost like ours, and every one has its backdoor,
for the greater commodity of going whither they please, without being peceived
by any.

They visit one another rather by night than day, to the end (say they) they
may gain that time upon sleep; and all their chief businesses are treated but
by the Candle.

To make a distinction between themselves and other people (which they much
covet) they affect a particular character, which is observed in their manner of
living, in their apparel, and in their Language. They march even on a certain
pace which they have learned, they use Tones which are not usual with us, and
at every moment they turn up their eyes with measure (which they term the
Apostrophes of the sight) and that in such a fashion that you would say they
are even ready to die.

They esteem themselves the most learnd men in the world, and there is no so
petty a Schoolmaster or Cook among them, wearing along Coat, who has not that
judgment of himself. They believe also that they alone possess the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil, and the fruit that proceeds from it being not
communicated to others, they must of necessity be ignorant of the best things.

Printing is the Art to which they most apply themselves, and wherein they have
best success, and indeed we see nothing more exact nor more pretty then what
they do in that kind. But they care not so much for the matter or substance, as
for the manner of handling it. If something slip in it against good faith or
the truth, they trouble not themselves much for that, on condition that their
Errata's be perfectly corrected, in fair Characters, in fine Paper, and very
neatly bound. This makes them go off readily, especially among women, who are
much taken with fine gilded books, without looking any further into the matter.

All the Arms which they use come to them from Calvinia, either because they
have not the Art to make them themselves, or because they will not take so much
pains, but they Polish them excellently, and make them so fair and clear, that
the Lawyers, Women also buy them often enough for curiosity sake to set out
their Clossets with them.

Hereof they give every year some presents to one an other for New-years-gifts,
and I could not one day forbear laughing at a Lady who bargained for a pair of
Pistols for a present to her friend.

They use only White-powder, wherein they are very dangerous; nevertheless
being the custom of the Country no body reproves it, and they laugh at us, who
cannot use a Gun without making it known to all the Neighbors, nor kill a Bird
without noise.

They have many famous Fairs, to which the Calvinists send whole Libraries,
which are sold in the twinkling of an eye, for there is a great correspondency
between them and the Jansenists, as well for learning as for Arms, and they
also mutually lend their Professors, when by death some Chair is vacant, and
they have no body to supply it.

From thence also they have the finest Characters which they use in their
Impressions, and they have of all sorts but Roman letters.

They traffic in Libertinia, with their Neighbors, and draw from them much
money for the Merchandises which they send thither, which are Wines, Sugars,
Ambergrcece, which is common enough in their Coasts, Silks, Fine Linen, and
many other things which serve for pleasure and sensuality.

Their Traffic is more sad and of less profit in Desesperia, whither they send
only that which is most conformable to the humor of the Country, that is to
say, Knives, Cords, Hemp, to use as they list, Hersecloaths of diverse stuffs
and several prices, Torches for Burials, Druggs to Embalm the Corpse,
Marble-tables, Plates of Brass sitted for the reception of Epitaphs. If they
apply themselves to some Science, it is always without tying themselves to any
form, for they had rather make Rules than receive them, yea they contest the
principles which all others agree in.

Their Philosophers admit not the common sense, and when I was in the Country,
one of their Professors was cashiered for making it one of the Articles of his
dispute.

Behold now how they pass their Doctors: He that will be received presents
himself into the Company of the Expert ('it is so they term it) and after be
has given many proofs of his capacity by a public dispute, if he has the
major part of the voices, they cause him first to swear upon a Book, which they
call the Holy Book, never to depart from the Doctrine of the Country. This Book
is of no less veneration among them than was heretofore that of the Sybill's in
Rome.

And although the People know not what it contains, nevertheless upon the
belief they have given it, that it is full of Oracles and Revelations from
God, he kisses the Cover of it with respect when they permit him it, and
believes that happy are the gardians of that sacred Volume wherein are
contained so many mysteries.

After this they give the new Doctor a Robe of course Bays, having the sleeves
lined with Fox-skins in stead of Ermines; which being done, they put upon his
Head an old Hat, which serves always at such a Ceremony; it is that of the
Doctor that first founded their University, and which they have conserved ever
since his death, because they fancy that no Doctor can be well instituted or
worthy of his dignity, if he has not worn that Hat. The last Ceremony is the
Green Cap, and whosoever is promoted to this dignity, may assure himself of,
being at ease all his life time; for the people tax themselves to maintain him
fatly, and the devout Women take care of that religious service.

Rhetoric is so much used in Jansenia, that every one has a hand in it; but
they cannot suffer Music, therefore they will never hear of any accord.
Notwithstanding they love the Trumpet, for as much as it serves at war, to
which they have a great inclination, albeit they are always overcome, and never
return without some Badges thereof. When they have lost a Battle, they are so
subtle in disguising their trouble, that to see and hear them you would think
they had won it; and to amuse the people, their Commanders never fail to ordain
that there be put in their Churches with great Ceremony, some Standards as
taken from the Enemy, which notwithstanding they themselves have made to serve
to that use of vanity.

It Is a great pleasure to hear them speak of the Antiquity of their Town. They
say 'twas built by a Prince of Hippo, who lived above twelve hundred years ago,
and they boast that they have Titles that prove it so plainly, that it is
impossible to scruple it. Their hardiest Annalists go farther, and averr that
this Lord did only repair it; that it had been founded four hundred years
before, by a famous Prince of Tarsus a great Warrior, who lived in the time of
Gamaliel, and who in his Youth had that famous Person for his Tutor and
Instructour.

To this effect they show unto Strangers a great Sword, which they say is the
same that he used in his Battles, as that of the Pucelle d' Orleans is shown at
Saint Denis near Paris. But I was informed by a Jansenian, a friend of mine,
and one more ingenuous than the rest, that this Sword was but of thirty years
standing; that they had framed it after the fashion of Old Arms, and that he
that made it died within these few ears.

The whole Town is full of Statues which they have caused to be perfumed with
smoke to give them the color which time gives to it is works; but it is not
necessary to be very skillful in Antiquity to discover the fraud; and yet as
there are in the Country some Historiographers maintained to compose some books
wherein those falsities are contained, and certain men appointed to distribute
them up and down, the sottish people believe what is Printed, and they vaunt
themselves of Antiquity which makes the more clearer understandings among them
to laugh at themselves when no body is by to hear them. If any stranger desires
to be naturalized in the Country, they do not impede him, for as much as they
believe that it is the honor of the Nation, and instead of making him pay for
his Letters, they even hive him money to receive them, which is the cause that
many who are reduced to poverty, forsake their Country, where they hope for
nothing from fortune; but those who are thus received and admitted cannot be
promoted to any employment till time does make appear they have gotten the
Spirit of the Land, that there is no more fear of them, and are very secret
persons; for diffidence is natural to all Jansenians, and that so much, that
even in trivial things, they use precaution; for that cause they entertain a
great number of Spies in all parts to relate unto them what is done, and are at
a great charge in Letters, that what is said hereof seems incredible.

There is no Kingdom in the World wherein Sciences be better rewarded, nor
after a more honorable manner, and there is seen in the public place, a
Statue with it is Elogy, to eternize the memory of a person, who in his time was
employed in Italy in a negotiation with little success; it is said also, that
some one had taken occasion from thence to put these two Latin words at the
foot of the Figure, Itineri, non tibi; to declare that this honor was ordered
him, not because he had done well, but to pay his journey.

Those kind of rewards are so common in the Country, that two men have received
the same honor for having both Composed a Book upon the Laws that are observed
among them, the learneder of them having afforded the matter, and the other the
fair teams, which occasioned this question, to wit, Whither a man could be a
Child of two Fathers; and supposed he can be, Whither he should be esteemed
legitimate and rightly born.

The Title of Heroine is given to all well moneyed women, who contribute to the
reparation of the Townwalls, to the melting of Canons, and to the payment of
the Garrison.

To them Authors usually Dedicate their Books to engage them yet more in the
interest of the Land, with their fine Dedicatorie Epistles, and to puff up
their heart. The height of honor is to permit them to take place among the
Doctors of Divinity, and many are admitted to it, but they must before hand
have read some certain traductions which do inspire sufficiency, and give good
testimony in writing.

In that Region are found many Animals, which are altogether unknown to us: As
Wolves that bear Wool, Foxes of all Hairs, and tame ones too that go up and
down with their pullen, and without offending them, as it is said. Black Parats,
which speak very well: Pilled Owls, that sing melodiously, and that make a
better harmony than our Nightingals.

Their Calves are much bigger than ours, their Asses the like, and out of a
Custom received in the Land time out of mind; they take care to cover their
Ears; it is the Women's function to make Biggins and Caps that are for this use.
Their Pyes which Chatter very much, remember nothing but such injurions words
as are taught them. Their Dogs Bark at none but Strangers, for they know them
by their smell, and cover their nastyness as Cats do.

But in so neat a manner, that there is not the least thing to be seen, which
has given ground to some of the ignorant sort to believe that they render up
by transpiration the superfluity of foods.

Whereas they please themselves very much in Writing, they keep to that purpose
a great number of Geese, which makes it evident they were much wronged, when
'twas said that they used none but Eagles Pens.

They have no less store of Horned Beasts than we, both tame and wild, and
their Forests bear Staggs of a remarkable greatness: but although they take
often enough of them, they have not yet thought of hanging the Heads at their
Gates.

They believed when I was there that some Inchanter had thrown a Charm and
mischievous Witcherie over the Nets of their Hunters; for notwithstanding all
their care and vigilance, they never caught but Bitterns or Cranes

The aconit is the Flower that grows more naturally in the Land, and all their
Gardens are infected with that Poison. In recompense the Baytree grows there
very finely, wherewith they Crown themselves; for as they believe themselves
near Kinsmen men to the Muses, they willingly take the equipage of Parnassus,
and besides there are some among them so persuaded of their Victories, merely
imagining it to be so, that they render to their own selves the honor of a
perpetual triumph.

This Country is very subject to be blasted with Thunder, which makes the
Inhabitants scarce concerned at it: yet it is said they were extremely troubled
when the Thunder without Lightning before, and without making any great noise,
did beat in pieces the Epitaph of their Nation's Prince.

Besides the Rivers divided for the good of the grounds, and for the commodity
of Commerce, there is seen a Lake, which many esteem very like that of Geneva;
but others believe that the figure of it is a little unlike, and it is certain,
that the water of it is far more subtle.

This Province produces Mines of gold and silver, which make it considerable
above any other thing: Quick silver is more common in it, and many people make
it their business to find out the secret of fixing it. But instead of bringing
it to pass, it always flies up into their heads, and at length, by a necessary
sequel brings great quakings upon them.

Of all fruits, there is only the Winter-pear, called, Bon-Christian that
cannot grow there, whatever Art you use: but they have another which is almost
like it, and which they call after the same name; the difference is known only
by the taste, which has nothing of the sweetness of the true Chritian's-pear.

The Jansenians received the Gospel from one Margalicus, a professed enemy to
our Kings (they do not agree of the year) but intermingled with so many wicked
and abominable opinions, that one can neither read nor hear them without
horror.

They maintain with much obstinacy, that there are some certain people for whom
alone our Savior dyed: that others, the number whereof is incomparably far
greater, receive no manner of helps which might lead them to an happy Eternity:
that Jesus Christ never intended any such thing, when he shed his blood; that
if it happens that he give his grace in Baptism, or in Penance to any one of
these wretches, it is like a favorable Wind which feeds hope for a while, but
which will never lead them into the Haven, and which abandoneth them in the
middle of the Waves, thereby to be unavoidably suffocated; sometimes also
without having given occasion thereof by any infidelity.

That it is pleasing to God to be thus rigourous; that to him our salvation is
assured, or otherways, by granting it, or refusing his graces; that he admits
but of few, because he will largely punish Adam's Children for their Father's
sin. That he charge them with Laws, which they cannot observe, but with that
aid which is denied them: that notwithstanding it is enough to destroy them
justly, to be able to say they have not done what was commanded them, because
it suffices that God ordains a thing to bind a man to the execution of the
precept, were it to fly, though he has no wings, or that by mishap they have
been cut away from him.

That God does good enough to the wicked, when he gives them being, together
with all temporal favors, that make them pass away their lives deliciously.
That having destinated them to be the victimes of his fury, it is a great
gratification to them to fatten them up for the day of Sacrifice, and Crown
them with Flowers that all his mercies to these unfortunate People, are only
fine vailes to cover his design of damning them; sweet amusements, which
nevertheless bind them to call God their good Lord, their Savior, their loving
Father, although he prepares for them unavoidable punishments; and that all
their Prayers, all their Penances be not able to move him upon this Article of
Eternity. To be short, that setting aside a small handful of such as he has
Elected for Salvation right or wrong, the Devils and all humane kind are alike
to him.

As to the Pope, they say that the Holy Ghost has not been promised him: that
he is not to be heeded in what he says, if he speak alone; that he imagin's to
see in Books what never was in them; and also that he cannot Read. That he is
an Usurper of Sovereign power, which ought not to be suffered: that three heads
of their Countrymen have more Brains in them, and Learning, than he and all
the Cardinals together, with all the Divines in the world: That such as have
received in times past (as decisions of faith) the declarations of Popes were
mere simpletons, brainless and heartless People.

It Is not yet clearly known what they believe of the Eucharist, but most
certainly, this is said to be their opinion of it. To show it the greater
respect, they are wont to hang it up in the Church; their reason for it is that
this was done heretofore, and that the time past, as the most venerable, ought
to be the Rule of the present time: That Jesus Christ, according to Saint Paul,
is separated from sinners, in a higher degree than the Heaven, upon which is
placed the Throne of his Majesty, that consequently our Tabernacles have not
those great significations which do represent Mysteries, and which oblige
Christians to remember that our Savior is above them through sanctity and
place.

Some were minded to tell them, that we ought to go along with the times we
live in; that this hanging up of the Host may occasion many accidents, and that
it is a sad thing to see the Sacrament down upon the ground when the cord is
gnawn by some beast, or chances to break through age. That the Tabernacles
which at this day are in use in other Countries, and within hand's reach, do
perfectly well express that admirable descending of the humbled Word into a
strange nature, and declare that he is come near us by his holy Incarnation.
This advice was judged of no weight, and they did determine for ever that the
blessed Sacrament should be hanged up, when there was no other reason but only
that all other Nations, from whom they ought to receive no rule, do not use
that way, and that they must oppose them in it.

They have so much respect for the Eucharist, that one of their greatest
desires would be to be deprived of it all their life time out of humility, and
even at the hour of death.

In some places they hire Priests to say Mass but seldom, to introduce a
Custom of it: a thing singular enough among these People, to pay people for
doing nothing.

I have seen in that Country a form of prayers, amongst others this which they
are to say at the Elevation of the Blessed Sacrament: Lord, I adore you upon
your Cross, and at the general judgment, which is to be at the world's end:
As if a man should say to the King, Sir, I salute your Majesty in the Army
where you were two years ago, and in the Palace in your Seat of Justice, where
you will be within six weeks. Which made me think theirs is not the same as
ours, touching that Article, or that the Authors of those fine Prayers, who
have so many times examined them, and made them so often be Printed, do
explicate themselves very badly.

Their Priests take great delight to hear their Penitents repeat their sins
several times. After they have put them to the trouble of telling all, they
most often deny them Absolution, without any cause that deserves it, and
comfort them up with promises: this repeating establishes sometimes a great
familiarity upon matters very grievous among persons, that should not have any:
or causes an exceeding shame, which keeps many from Confession, resolving
rather to perish than gain their grace by these redoubled confusions, and which
are not necessary at all.

Indeed it is said that the Doctors of that Country, do not hold Absolution a
very effective thing, that they teach that it is but a simple declaration of
the grace one has obtained by an inward sorrow: that a man may very well be
without it, and that the released Prisoner ought little to care to be told that
the Jailer has set open the Door, or that nothing be said of it to him.

Upon this supposal they do not hasten themselves to give Absolution; that they
refuse it often enough to dying persons, and remit them to the next week.

This rigorous proceeding has cast many into despair, and constrained many
others to go out of the Country to discharge themselves of their sins, amongst
more humane and more reasonable people, where the Yoke of Christian Religion is
no heavier than Jesus Christ made it.

The Jansenians speak much of public Penance, but as Women do of Armies where
they never go, for there is no one seen to do it, and all this tattle aims and
ends but in one thing, to abstain from the Eucharist, or not to go to hear
Mass, wherein they find most wonderful facilities. This is their Public
Penance, their principal austerity, their admirable sanctification.

As the abstaining from the Eucharist seems to them the most meritorious of all
their Fasts, they reckon the Weeks and Months they have forborne it to make to
themselves a great subject of consolation thereon; sometimes also they let
Easter pass without receiving, and say to their Countrymen, God be thanked,
it is now almost two years since I received the Sacrament, which puts me in
hopes of greater strength, and that he who recompenseth the humble will grant
me graces which he affords not those intemperants of communion, who would think
themselves starved if they were not continually at the Holy Table: So have they
often this word in their mouth, O Lord, withdraw your self from me, for I am a
sinner, rather than this, Come to me, and I Will comfort you.

Notwithstanding not long since, in some places they affect frequent Communion,
and combat their own maxims, to stop the mouths of such as might say: Truly
these people are not wise, who believe that Grace is more abundantly given
when one forbears coming to the source of it; that the heavenly Bread does
profit those most who eat it not, than those who use it very often: In fine,
that sick people find themselves better, if they bar themselves of a remedy
ordained for their recovery.

But their Books, which they cannot suppress now, have declared so much as a
man may say without judging rashly, that in those places where they receive the
Blessed Sacrament most, that practice what they have condemned, they subvert
what they have endeavored to build, with all the artifices and cavils of their
dangerous eloquence.

But perhaps, that since they have set forth those Books, humane nature has
been altered in them, and falls no more into such faults as are common to the
just, which said howsoever shall be an impediment of Communion, when that with
the difficulties which they did find in it, they persuaded the people to
forbear it altogether.

Their Calender is very different from ours; they have blotted out of it twelve
or fifteen Popes, whereof the most part have pronounced against the errors
which they profess, and it is doubted whither it be through vengeance, or to
make place for other Saints whose names agree with those of their men, and who
please them most.

They admit of no Moncks, but like well of Nuns, without letting a man know
wherefore, for the Institution is one and the same, and it seems that the
consequences be alike to such as inquire not after reasons in the difference of
Sexes.

There Is great striving who shall be Directour of these Nuns, and those who are
chosen for that purpose find therein so many allurements, so much gentleness,
so much fruit to be done, that they have much ado to depart from their grates.
They forbid them expressly all Books which they have not composed, as being not
worth redding or pernicious; sometimes they go further, and make them vow never
to see any of them, least the answers made to their own may change the minds of
these Beata's whom they keep under Tyranny; and to mitigate this tedious
servitude by curiosity, which is natural to the Sex, they teach their
Philosophy in their Vulgar tongue, or teach them Latin.

In some places the Directours leave off their long Coats every morning, and
transform themselves into Handicrafts-men, to get leave to go into the inward
Gardens (which they could not do otherways in good conscience) and after they
have worked the hour with the Spade or Mattock, by a second Metamorphose they
change their condition, they wash their hands and face to take off the dust and
sweat, they put on again the long Coat which they had left off, they become
graver, they speak of spiritual things, and then they are called Priests, as I
have been informed by a Nun of the Country, whom I had permission to speak
with, but after many Ceremonies: yet although this is passed over without
scandal, yea with modesty, as she assured me, nevertheless a thing so
extraordinary does for all that much amaze me.

They are so zealous in their way, for the propagation of their Faith, that
they do not only depute men to establish it where it has not yet been
received, but female Missionaries, who explicate their Divinity very bravely,
which occasioned the saying, That in Jansenia there are Professors of all
Sexes, and that Doctrine was fallen into the Distaffe.

Nay, they have Agents of Religion disguised, who go into other Countries to
gain people. These same are long before they discover themselves, after they
have gotten the repute of being peaceable and quiet men, that mind nothing but
the pure glory of God, and only when they foresee that that may serve for the
advancement of the Sect.

That they may be esteemed more Religious, they have some Demy-Anachorets, who
are neither Monoks nor Seculars; these live very retiredly, and a man can hear
nothing of their solitude, but that some of them make Baskets, others pattins
or Card-matches, which are afterward sold at the Market, and which the more
devout amongst them esteem as relics.

The Dutchmen that have gone into the Country have there cried down the
Jesuits, wherefore they have made a Statute never to admit them, and it is
believed they will be more constant in this resolutior, than has been the
Republic of Venice.

These people live in a wonderful Union, what one does the rest allow of it
without any farther examination; they praise one another very friendly, and
this mutual and perpetual Panegyric is an intimation of a great deal of
charity.

To give renown to their Preachers, they draw to their Sermons certain folks,
instructed in all such gestures as may testify a rapture in them, that it is
impossible to Preach better; yea, they take care that many Coaches may be seen
at the Gates of the Churches where the Sermon is, and that the Coachmen make a
great railing.

If they give Alms, it is ever very exemplarily, for they take order that all
the World may know it. For a Shirt that one shall have bestowed upon a Beggar,
it shall be presently noised abroad, that he has laid out in Charitable deeds
above eight hundred else of linen. For a Mess of Broth he shall have sent to
a Sick Body, they will speak of no less than of a Tun of Gelly,; what they say
they desire should be kept private, is always thundered abroad, and a Shilling
that falls from their hand, makes a greater noise than all the Bells in our
Ladies Church at Paris. In this they seem to imitate very much our Lotteries,
where for a threepenny Looking-glass a man shall have drawn, for a Pair of
Gloves the Trumpet declares it to all standers by.

This it is that gives credit to their Alms be they never so small: They make a
Common Purse of all that each particular person has a devotion to give: as
their number is very great, ye must not wonder that so many drops of water do
fill up the Basin. This heap being made, the care of it is committed to certain
quaint, well agreeing, neat, well spoken persons, and that have a devout, sweet
and winning countenance. Being in possession of this money, which is not
useless to them, they spread it in several places, and look into the
neceffities of the people, that they might have an opportunity of employing
those collected sums, not as Deputies, but as Religious and zealous persons,
that value not the riches of this world, that give them by hand-fulls, and that
believe that their patrimony does belong to such as stand most in need of it.
Yet very often those persons thus sent about give not any thing of their own,
and the people believe that they are the spring, when they are but the Pipes.

Upon this opinion it is said that the Spirit of Jansenia is a Spirit of
Charity, and that there are Divine Men in it who distribute what ever they have
amongst the poor: who had rather suffer their own selves than see their
Neighbor suffer; although, to say the truth, they well know that these praises
are not due to them. Yet they do willingly accept them and with a smiling
countenance they tell the company that they are very sorry they are not able to
do any more.

This makes them admired, followed, and makes every thing allowed of that comes
from their mouth, for the People cannot believe that such charitable people can
or will lie.

It is reported that savage people for a Bottle of Strong-water, which they
love very well, are easily persuaded to be Christians; but that the Water of
Baptism alone does not move them to any devotion. The same is seen in such as
yield to the Jansenians; for the doctrine proposed unto them is received but
for the liberalities sake which attend it: To make this Drugg be swallowed
down, the Doctors have taken care that interest should be an assured vehicule
of it.

This same zeal which they affect to show toward they poor, makes them
disapprove of what they are told, that in other Countries the Churches are
enriched with Marble and precious Pictures.

They think that justice is done to the poor, to deprive God of these great
Ornaments which do him no good, to convert them to their own use: and that
Solomon will have been well scourged in the other world for having built so
magnificent a Temple, which was gilded to the very walls: That at that very
time he began to fall from his Wisdom, and that there is no doubt to be made,
but that all the good people of Jerusalem were much scandalized at it.

The have Colleges to instruct their youth, and some Silly rich one gottin by
flatteries and praises, he takes upon him the payment of the Professors wages,
or the Scholars Pension, if they are poor, but upon condition they shall with
speed teach them that Jesus Christ did not suffer for Still-born Children, and
that all Infidels actions, nay to save a Man's Father from Shipwreck, or to
hinder homicide, are so many mortal sins that deserve everlasting damnation,
and that God ought to punish as violators, Parricides and Sacriledges; for they
esteem it a point of Salvation, to know and believe all this as well as the
Mystery of the Trinity, and the Incarnation of the World; which is known by
the great care they take to inculcate this Doctrine into the minds of
Serving-men, Chambermaids, Artisans, and by the stir they keep when the
contrary is avouched.

Upon which account they give a Book to the young Scholars, the leaves whereof
are divided in two Columns: The one contains the Rules of Grammar, the other
the Doctrine of still-born Children, and the Sins of Infidels. If they do not
learn both Lessons together, their hinder-part answers for their Head. Lo! here
one of their questions. Come hither, Child, if you were an Infidel, and that
your Father were fallen into a Well, would you take him out of it? If he says
no, Ah you ungrateful wicked, says the Master, he has nothing of good nature.
If he says yes, he replies to him. Child, you would do very ill: God would take
it ill from you, you would damn your self; what, to save a Father would you
commit a mortal sin? it would be much more enormous than in letting him perish:
For sins of omission are more pardonable than the others. When you shall be
further advanced in learning, you will hear of a certain person called the
pious Aeneas, because he carried his Father upon his Back to save him from
fire. He was a wicked man, and he could not carry away the good old man without
mortal sin.

They Will tell you farther, that Biton and Cleobis were good felldws, because
their sick. Mother having a mind to go to the Temple upon a Festival-day, and
having no Coacih-horses, they fastened themselves to the Coach, and drew her
thither. This good office, which gained them an immortal fame, was a great sin;
and if ever any one tells you the contrary, stand in it stiffly.

You may in time come to read the Bible, (for you may become Priests:) when you
read in it that the Mid-wives of Egypt would not suffocate the Hebrew Children
as they had order, beware you value not that impious mercy, for you would value
a very wicked action.

In a word, the justice which a Pagan Judge does to the people, of it self
deserves burning, because that without grace all that he does is vitiated and
becomes a crime out of a corrupted end.

As to Still-bom children here is what they say. Children, ye must observe that
there are exceptions, of redemption as there are of Grammar, and that those
must needs perish, whom Christ would not have to be comprehended in the number
of the redeemed. Among these excluded wretches are comprised still-born
Children; Alas (say they) God would not have suffered for you (young people) if
your Mothers had hurt themselves before their Lying-in, if ^hey had flung
themselves out of a Window, or into ^he River, if a Tile had fallen on their
Head! but because you were not smohered in their Wombs, it may very well be
that Jesus Christ may have shed his blood for your salvation; for to assure you
of it, I neither can, nor ought not. May be he has not suffered for this fine
Child, nor for that neither; may be he has, and it is the opinion of our
Doctors that there is no certainty in that point.

As the Masters are only waged to teach them those things and others as ^t
falls out, they are mighty careful that their Scholars be not ignorant
therein, should they die for fear, or go out of their wits, as 't often comes
to pass.

The Women that are ordained to teach little Girls to read, are not in
appearance less zealous in inspiring their belief into those young ones. Do
not think Girls, say they, that God's grace is always with us; alas! no. There
are some miserable times, when there is a necessity of perishing: What should
we do if God withdraw himself from us? This happens very often though; are not
we very unhappy? Chastity is enjoined us, and sometimes we are destitute of
necessary power to continue it: Be mindful of this (Girls) it concerns your
Salvation not to be ignorant of it, and you may upon occasion stand in need of
it. There are Husbands that would not be so cruel to their Wives had they
studied Divinity; for they would know that grace is often times denied us, and
that in this case they must rather pity ^out infirmities, than be angry at
faults we fall into by the absence of such helps as God does refuse us, either
to chastise us for our infidelities, or to teach us by a necessary fall that we
can do nothing without him.

Thus they frame little Girls to that patience which runs them into the
greatest shames of the Sex, when the solicitations are pressing, and the
occasions present: for although they intend not to give Lessons of impudicity
to their little Scholars, yet the Doctrine tends to it, and when age has
ripened the body, nature can quicken the memory with it.

The Gallants too in Jansenia never fail to quote their Doctors to such as
they will corrupt, and to tell them that there are moments wherein resistance
is not in our power.

This impression, togerther with concupiscence, which is stirred up by these
pernicious discourses, makes a miserable creature easily believe that the
moment wherein she is spoken to is that very insant which is not in the
disposion of the will, and that it is time to yield, since that God does no
longer side with assanlted virtue.

Among them single-life is annexed to Priesthood as in the Roman Church, but
it is unknown whither they would admit this Cuftome into the Country, if it were
not already introduced into it. And indeed I have seen some officious Laymen,
who did purpose to remonstrate how very incommodious it was; that it may cause
much incontinency in such as have dedicated themselves to the Altar: that by
means of this rigorous Law, the Devotion to the Sacrament of Marriage would be
deadned; and they said all this with their eyes turned up to heaven, lifting up
their Shoulders with many sighs.

They suffer Lay People to receive under one kind, but many among them affirm
that the contrary would be much coveted. It Is believed that this light was
brought to them from England with other Merchandises, whereof they made no
brags, because they were liable to Confiscation, and that they would have been
reprehended for having received them contrary to the Magistrates order.

It Is a common opinion that the people of Jansenia would easily acknowledge the
authority of the Holy Sea, if the Doctors of the Law did not hinder it. But
above all things they have an eye to that, and go from house to house to
confirm such as waver in their Faith, exhorting them with great importunity to
perseverance in the Religion of the Country, and even suffer Martyrdom, in
case any Foraign Power should force them to be of another opinion.

This care did not for all this hinder a public Mutiny some years since, upon
the violent suspicion that many had, that their easiness was abused, and that
the reason why there was no intelligence with the Pope, is because Rome and
Error do not agree. Upon those complaints, the consequences whereof might be
very dangerous; the Doctors assembled concluded that time was to be obeyed,
content the people, and send Deputies to the Bishop of Rome, as it were to
submit themselves to his orders, and to desire of him the clearing of some
doubts which troubled their consciences. That if he approved their Doctrrine,
all the better, because they demanded nothing more, but that the Church should
yield and own that she had failed till then; that if to the contrary he
determined any thing that they did not usually teach, they would search after
explications that would satisfy the people, without any ways hurting the
belief of the Country; and because they gave a near guefs to what Rome ought to
say upon that matter, that they would have answers ready to satisfy the
objections of their enemies. That they would moreover make many Translations of
certain Treatises of the Fathers which seemed not to swarve much from their
Opinion, and that when there should be but one period that might favor them,
they ought to Translate the whole Book, to show it to the people and women.

Moreover 'twas decreed, that if any of them, to avoid the Thunder of the
Vatican, did slacken in his obedience, and did come to Sign any Article that
might prejudice them, they would declare him separated from their Body,
unworthy worthy of ever having been of it, and of being capable to be of it;
that as one Excommunicated he should no longer share in the graces of their
friendship, entertainment, elogies, nor in the merits of their purse.

Before they separated themselves, they bethought themselves of some means to
gain some Bishops, which might very much contribute to the reputation of their
Doctrine, even when the Pope had condemned him for an Heretic, because it
would be an easy matter to persuade the weaker sort of people, that the faith
of tire Prelate is always that of the Church.

Some did represent, that in Italy there were many poor Bishops, that it should
be proposed to some of them by civil Letters, that if they would have the
goodness to come into Jansenia, where their fame was already much spread, they
should there receive all the honor due to their merits; that although it was
not decent to propose reasons of utility to disinterested Prelates,
nevertheless they were desired to bear with that word: That Jansenia did well
know how to reward their pains, that it would maintain their Tables, their
Coaches, their whole train, and farther that none should know so much.

'Twas to be added, that if they apprehend the trouble of giving orders, they
might often dispense therewith, because they would have but very few Priests,
and that one Mass a Week in each Church would suffice, that they would allow
them great Vicars that should be people of repute, if they would not make
choice of some themselves; but that above all, they should not bring any Moncks
with them, because that Generation speaks of nothing but Privileges, and that
their Country allows not of them.

Others were of Opinion, that they should write into Spain, where they believed
they might find men ready to do any thing out of consideration of greatness,
for it is the passion of Spaniards, and a man thinks himself happy enough if he
has the Wall, though he were to suck nothing but Wind, and cat nothing but
Reddishes. They were to represent in these Letters the disposition they were in
to give them the same rank among them as the Pope has in Rome; that nothing
should be done without their order; that the whole Nation was of the same mind,
and resolved to spare nothing to make the Bishop and his People bear the image
of the Triumphant Church.

Some did turn their thoughts toward France, but others of a more clearer wit
give notice that in that Kingdom the Bishops did in such manner concur with
the Pope, that not was it credible that they would ever be willing to forsake
him. That if any one of them did stand up for Jansenia, he would be looked upon
by the other Prelates as a desertour of the Faith; and what ever show he might
make of honesty, no one would have a good opinion of him: In a word, that it
would be a superfluous thing, and they would expose themselves to a manifest
refusal, by drawing to their party men that have resolved the contrary, and who
for to gain the world would not expose themselves to so great an infamy.

This diversity of Opinions was the cause at that time they did determine
nothing as to that Article, and thus they broke off having admonished their
Deputies, that the Air of Rome was no ways wholesome for them, that they should
not forget their Caps, to the end they might be always covered, even before the
Pope, and that when they should be returned back into Jansenia their native
Country, it would be time enough to uncover themselves.

Not long after there was a rumor spread up and down, that the Plague had
spoiled all Jansenia, and that there was not a soul left in it; for albeit that
this Province be subject to great winds, which made a doubt that it was not
EAolia, yet the Plague makes there often great ravages, which much amazeth the
Physicians, and there was ground to believe that the distemp had been great.

Then it was that one might easily perceive that the Jansenians were abominable
to the whole world. For upon the news that their generation was extinguished,
many people did strive who should make the greatest Bone-fires, and knocked out
the Heads of Winevessels in the streets, believing that they could not be too
profuse in expressing their joy; but this satisfaction did last no longer than
till the beginning of the following Winter. For even then those Jansenians whom
the Plague had dispersed, and who had retired themselves into their Caverns,
began to come out of their Holes, with countenances that had not yet lost all
the marks of fear. They came to Town again by little and little, sometimes
single, sometimes two by two, after having an hundred times drawn back their
feet upon suspicion, whither they should be safe in their first Lodgings. In
fine, all fear was laid aside, experience having shown that the ill air was
dissipated, and because the mortality had not been great, whatever fears or
noise it had raised, in less then six months the Town was near as full as ever.

The other people that had rejoiced for their death, did express so much
trouble for the return of the Jansenians, that they were even going into
mourning. Since that there has been nothing but insultings on all sides; the
one taxing their enemies with cowardice, for having been so passionate against
such as they believed were dead: They on the contrary upholding that they had
not done enough, and that the world could not show joy enough in being rid of
such a wretched Sect.

END
IANSENIA


AN EXPLICATION OF THE MAP.
JAnsenisme is in an equal disposition to Liberty, Despair, and Calvinisme. The
opinion that Grace does necessitate the will to good, when it is granted us,
happen what will, and do what one can, makes the Libertine. The Doctrine that
teaches that Jesus Christ did not dye for all, and that he will refuse his
Grace to many, that cannot be saved but by it, makes the Desperate. The Sect
that debars the Liberty of Man of the source thereof, that maintains that God's
Commandments are impossible, that moves one to the contempt of the Supreme
Bishop, of his Decrees, of his Censures, makes the Calvinist and Presbyterian.

Those that seem not to reach so far, loose themselves in Jansenisme it self,
as you may perceive by these Monsters, and by those Shipwracks in the Sea that
bears it is name.

These Rivers, these Coaches, these Posthorses, these Boats laden with Books
and other Merchandise, do make appear whither Jansenisme does tend, and the
reaches thereof: Her communications with the Errants, whom she will not own,
and in fine, how dangerous it is to profess a Doctrine, the principles whereof
does invite and draw people to Charenton, to Debauchery, or to the Halter.

These Cypress-trees which grow amongst the Rocks, these doleful trees where ye
see Men hanged up, make it appear that the Country bordering upon Jansenia on
the Western part is a Land of Despair. That which ye see over against it, has
not any thing but what is pleasing, so is it more inhabited than the other,
because that Liberty allures more people, than the diffidence of God's goodness
does ruin. Those Statues of Bacchus and of Venus do evidence the exercises of
such as went from Jansenisme into this Land of Pleasure, and the Gods that are
adored there. Calvinia that takes the upper hand of the Map, and whither ye see
so many people go, notifies what ye know of these wretches, who after having
for a time tossed themselves to and fro under an ambiguous name, did at length
declare themselves true Disciples of Calvin. These others that dig the ground
in Jansenia, would not be so earnest at their work if they were not in hopes to
reap some benefit thereby. The Sepulcher stricken with a Thunderbolt is that
of the Flemish Professor's, whose Epitaph was condemned and caused to be razed
out by the Pope. The Book says enough of the Lake. This same Forest where you
see a place of Habitation, is the Retiring-house of the Demy-Moncks, who are
what they are not, and are not what they are. It Is left to you to guess the
Creatures for your service: These half Muzled Asses, these Flocks of Geese,
these huge Calves that a man would take for Oxen, these Sheep-wolves, these
pleasant Owls, these great horned Stags, these Foxes that befriend Hens so
much, for all these well deferve your pains in looking into the meaning of
them. There are yet other creatures spoken of in the Relation of the Country,
weigh all the words of it, there are none but may be made use of, if ye read it
as ye should do from one end to the other, ye will (with delight) discover what
the Jansenists do teach, what they hatch, what they have done, and what they
can do.

Just as I was making an end of this Relation, these two Letters which treat of
the fame thing, were put into my Hand by a friend that had taken a Copy of
them. I thought it would oblige you, Reader, to let you have a sight of them.
SIR,
I Am told that Jansenisme lies desperate^y sick: if it dies, as it is very
likely, it will not have lived long. We ought to believe that God is absolutely
willing it should be destroyed; since that all manner of remedies prove
ineffectual, and that although it be in the height of youth, yet it cannot
escape. It Is affirmed, that it has made a Will, and that it Bequeaths its
Books to a Minister, whose name I could not learn: He that will be chosen to
make the Funeral Sermon, will have matter enough if he will forget nothing, and
follow his instructions. I saw a Paper by chance, wherein he is highly praised,
for having been so generous as to fly out against two Popes, and for having
withstood four Anathemes without stirring. I do not think there is any praying
for it now it is dead, nor that it will receive the usual Ceremonies to the
deceased, because it is near Relations will believe it to be glorious in heaven,
at the very moment of it is expiration, and that they are not people that wilt
apply to him the Indulgencies of Rome, or sprinkle it with holy Water; for as
you well know it is not their devotion. If they follow the custom of their good
friends, they may well say thus, Sleep Corpse until the Lord does awake thee. My
Letter mentions that many of the sick persons Domestics will not need to
trouble themselves to look a Master after its death, because many worthy
persons of several qualities, and some Churchmen have engaged to take them,
giving them another kind of Livery. We shall know for certain by that, those
that were the deceased's true friends, and there will be no farther need of
guessing at inclinations, that will be better known by their Signs than any
Scrivener. If there be an Inventary made of all movables, with the forms
received in France, those that take delight to disguise themselves at
Shrovetide will be fitted at a cheap rate; for it is said there are above fifty,
as well Perriwigs as Beards, and as many several habits as it usually wore,
suitable to the part it would act, when it had no mind to be known: But there is
no likelihood that the heirs will produce all this: They may keep them for
their own use, and prudence will undoubtedlyoblige them to divide among
themselves in a friendly manner all things of this nature. I fancy they will be
careful in burning several Letters and other Papers, which might reveal
Mysteries if seen; for to this day all things are written in Ciphers, and since
what was discovered in the Flemish Doctors Letters, which were more obscure
than any Aenigma, it is not credible that a secret communicated to a friend in
unknown terms or barbarous figures, can be long without being known, if it
falls into anunderstanding man's hands. When I know more, I will acquaint you
with it, in the mean time I will remain as ever

SIR, Your most humble, etc.

Answer.
SIR,
I cannot conceive where you have disposed of your charity, truly it is not well
done, to jeer sick persons thus. You make that the subject of your recreation
which to many others is a great affliction. Will you believe that I have seen
some so overcome with pain that they even almost lost their senses. If death
follows the disease, it will be far worse, and I am much afraid they may
chance to exclaim against persons in power whichwould deserve an examplary
punishment; for I question not but the Magistrates would take notice of it, and
there would be an end of them if they were called to the Bar. But, I pray,
think me not a worse Catholic for being of this judgment, for although those
people be not of our Religion, yet their tears move me, because I am a man, and
because compassion is a due from us, not only to the just that are afflicted,
but also to wretched criminals, I am

SIR, Your, etc.


