A DISCOVERY OF New Worlds.

From the FRENCH.

Made ENGLISH By Mrs. A. BEHN.

To which is prefixed a PREFACE, by way of ESSAY on Translated PROSE; wherein
the Arguments of Father Tacquet, and others, against the System of Copernicus
(as to the Motion of the Earth) are likewise considered, and answered: Wholly
new.

LONDON, Printed for William Canning, at his Shop in the Temple-Cloysters, 1688.

To the Right Honorable, William, Earl of Drumlangrig, Eldest Son to his
Grace, William, Duke of Queensberry; and one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council in the Kingdom of Scotland.
My Lord,
THe Esteem I have for your Nation in general, and the great Veneration I am
obliged to have for some particular Persons of Quality of it, has made me
ambitious of being known to all those of Wit and fine Parts. Amongst that
Number, none has a greater Character than your Lordship, whose early Knowledge
of all that is excellent in Learning, and of all the Graces of the Mind,
promised the World that accomplished Great Man, it now with so much Pride and
Satisfaction beholds; and which, even without the addition of your illustrious
Birth, were sufficient, to gain you the Esteem of all Mankind; and you are
never mentioned, but with such vast Accumulations of Praise, as are given only
to uncommon Men, and such, as something extraordinary alone can merit.

To all your advantages of Nature, elevated Birth, Virtue, Knowledge, Wit,
Youth, and Honors, to complete your Happiness, Fortune has added her part too;
and has allied your Lordship by Marriage to the Great and Noble Family of
Burlington, which has at once been honored with more Earls than any great
Family could ever boast, and whose Virtues, and Loyalty, deserve particular and
lasting Trophies to celebrate them to Posterity.

My Lord, I presume to dedicate this little Book to your Lordship, which I
ventured to translate, because it pleased me in the French; and tho but a
trifle, has something in it out of the way of ordinary Wit, which renders it
more worthy to be laid at your Lordships Feet. If it is not done with that
exactness it merits, I hope your Lordship will pardon it in a Woman, who is not
supposed to be well versed in the Terms of Philosophy, being but a new beginner
in that Science; but where I have failed, your Lordship's Judgment can supply;
and if it finds acceptance with your Lordship, I am already so much a
Philosopher, as to despise what the World says of it, and will pride my self
only in being,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble and most obedient Servant, A. Behn.

The Translator's PREFACE.
THE General Applause this little Book of the Plurality of Worlds has met with,
both in France and England in the Original, made me attempt to translate it
into English. The Reputation of the Author, (who is the same, who writ the
Dialogues of the Dead) the Novelty of the Subject in vulgar Languages, and the
Authors introducing a Woman as one of the speakers in these five Discourses,
were further Motives for me to undertake this little work; for I thought an
English Woman might adventure to translate any thing, a French Woman may be
supposed to have spoken: But when I had made a Trial, I found the Task not so
easy as I believed at first. Therefore, before I say any thing, either of the
Design of the Author, or of the Book it self, give me leave to say someting of
Translation of Prose in general: As for Translation of Verse, nothing can be
added to that Incomparable Essay of the late Earl of Roscommon, the nearer the
Idioms or turn of the Phrase of two Languages agree, it is the easier to
translate one into the other. The Italian, Spanish and French, are all three at
best Corruptions of the Latin, with the mixture of Gothic, Arabic and Gaulish
Words. The Italian, as it is nearest the Latin, is also nearest the English:
For its mixture being composed of Latin, and the Language of the Goths,
Vandals, and other Northern Nations, who overran the Roman Empire, and
conquered its Language with its Provinces, most of these Northern Nations spoke
the Teutonick or Dialects of it, of which the English is one also; and that is
the Reason, that the English and Italian learn the Language of one another
sooner than any other; because not only the Phrase, but the Accent of both do
very much agree, the Spanish is next of kin to the English, for almost the same
Reason: Because the Goths and Vandals having overrun Africa, and kept
Possession of it for some hundred of Years, where mixing with the Moors, no
doubt, gave them a great Tincture of their Tongue. These Moors afterward
invaded and conquered Spain; besides Spain was before that also invaded and
conquered by the Goths, who possessed it long after the time of the two Sons of
Theodosius the Great, Arcadus and Honorius. The French, as it is most remote
from the Latin, so the Phrase and Accent differ most from the English: It may
be, it is more agreeable with the Welsh, which is near akin to the Basbritton
and Biscagne Languages, which is derived from the old Celtick Tongue, the first
that was spoken amongst the Ancient Gauls, who descended from the Celts.

The French therefore is of all the hardest to translate into English. For
Proof of this, there are other Reasons also. And first, the nearer the Genious
and Humor of two Nations agree, the Idioms of their Speech are the nearer; and
every Body knows there is more Affinity between the English and Italian People,
than the English and the French, as to their Humors; and for that Reason, and
for what I have said before, it is very difficult to translate Spanish into
French; and I believe hardly possible to translate French into Dutch. The
second Reason is, the Italian Language is the same now it was some hundred of
Years ago, so is the Spanish, not only as to the Phrase, but even as to the
Words and Orthography; whereas the French Language has suffered more Changes
this hundred Years past, since Francis the first, than the Fashions of their
Cloths and Ribbons, in Phrase, Words and Orthography. So that I am confident a
French Man a hundred Years hence will no more understand an old Edition of
Froisard's History, than he will understand Arabic. I confess the French Arms,
Money and Intrigues have made their Language very universal of late, for this
they are to be commended: It is an Accident, which they owe to the greatness of
their King and their own Industry; and it may fall out hereafter to be
otherwise. A third Reason is as I said before, that the French being a
Corruption of the Latin, French Authors take a liberty to borrow whatever Word
they want from the Latin, without farther Ceremony, especially when they treat
of Sciences. This the English do not do, but at second hand from the French. It
is Modish to Ape the French in every thing: Therefore, we not only naturalize
their words, but words they steal from other Languages. I wish in this and
several other things, we had a little more of the Italian and Spanish Humor,
and did not chop and change our Language, as we do our Cloths, at the Pleasure
of every French Tailor.

In translating French into English, most People are very cautious and
unwilling to print a French Word at first out of a new Book, till Use has
rendered it more familiar to us; and therefore it runs a little rough in
English, to express one French Word, by two or three of ours; and thus much, as
to the Ease and Difficulty of translating these Languages in general: But, as
to the French in particular, it has as many Advantages of the English, as to
the Sound, as ours has of the French, as to the Signification; which is another
Argument of the different Genius of the two Nations. Almost all the Relatives,
Articles, and Pronouns in the French Language, end in Vowels, and are written
with two or three Letters. Many of their words begin with Vowels; so, that when
a word after a Relative, Pronoun or Article, ends with a Vowel, and begins with
another, they admit of their beloved Figure Apostrophe, and cut off the first
Vowel. This they do to shun an ill sound; and they are so musical as to that,
that they will go against all the Rules of Sense and Grammar, rather than fail;
as for Example, speaking of a Man's Wife they say, son Epouse; whereas in
Grammar, it ought to be sa Epouse; but this would throw a Frenchman into a Fit
of a Fever, to hear one say, by way of Apostrophe S' Epouse, as this makes
their Language to run smoother, so by this they express several Words very
shortly, as qu'entend je, in English, what do I hear? In this Example, three
words have the Sound but of one, for Sound prevails with them in the beginning,
middle and end. Secondly, their words generally end in Vowels, or if they do
not, they do not pronounce the Consonant, for the most part, unless there be
two together, or that the next word begins with a Vowel Thirdly, by the help of
their Relatives, they can shortly, and with ease resume a long Preceding
Sentence, in two or three short words; these are the Advantages of the French
Tongue, all which they borrow from the Latin. But as the French do not value a
plain Suit without a Garniture, they are not satisfied with the Advantages they
have, but confound their own Language with needless Repetitions and
Tautologies; and by a certain Rhetorical Figure, peculiar to themselves, imply
twenty Lines, to express what an English Man would say, with more Ease and
Sense in five; and this is the great Misfortune of translating French into
English: If one endeavors to make it English Standard, it is no Translation.
If one follows their Flourishes and Embroideries, it is worse than French
Tinsel. But these defects are only comparatively, in respect of English: And I
do not say this so much, to condemn the French, as to praise our own
Mother Tongue, for what we think a Deformity, they may think a Perfection; as
the Negroes of Guinney think us as ugly, as we think them: But to return to my
present Translation.

I have endeavored to give you the true meaning of the Author, and have kept
as near his Words as was possible; I was necessitated to add a little in some
places, otherwise the Book could not have been understood. I have used all
along the Latin Word Axis, which is Axle-tree in English, which I did not think
so proper a Word in a Treatise of this nature; but it is what is generally
understood by every Body. There is another Word in the two last Nights, which
was very uneasy to me, and the more so for that it was so often repeated,
which is Tourbillion, which signifies commonly a Whirlwind; but Monsieur Des
Chartes understands it in a more general sense, and I call it a Whirling; the
Author has given a very good Definition of it, and I need say no more, but
that I retain the Word unwillingly, in regard of what I have said in the
beginning of this Preface.

I know a Character of the Book will be expected from me, and I am obliged to
give it to satisfy my self for being at the pains to translate it, but I wish
with all my heart I could forbear it; for I have that Value for the ingenious
French Author, that I am sorry I must write what some may understand to be a
Satyr against him. The Design of the Author is to treat of this part of Natural
Philosophy in a more familiar Way than any other has done, and to make every
body understand him: For this End, he introduces a Woman of Quality as one of
the Speakers in these five Discourses, whom he feigns never to have heard of
any such thing as Philosophy before. How well he has performed his Undertaking
you will best judge when you have perused the Book: But if you would know
beforehand my Thoughts, I must tell you freely, he has failed in his Design;
for endeavoring to render this part of Natural Philosophy familiar, he has
turned it into Ridicule; he has pushed his wild Notion of the Plurality of
Worlds to that height of Extravagancy, that he most certainly will confound
those Readers, who have not Judgment and Wit to distinguish between what is
truly solid (or, at least, probable) and what is trifling and airy: and there
is no less Skill and Understanding required in this, than in comprehending the
whole Subject he treats of. And for his Lady Marquiese, he makes her say a
great many very silly things, though sometimes she makes Observations so learned,
that the greatest Philosophers in Europe could make no better. His way of
Arguing is extremely fine, and his Examples and Comparisons are for the most
part extraordinary, just, natural, and lofty, if he had not concluded with that
of a Rose, which is very irregular. The whole Book is very unequal; the first,
fourth, and the beginning of the fifth Discourses are incomparably the best. He
ascribes all to Nature, and says not a Word of God Almighty, from the Beginning
to the End; so that one would almost take him to be a Pagan. He endeavors
chiefly two things; one is, that there are thousands of Worlds inhabited by
Animals, besides our Earth, and has urged this Fancy too far: I shall not
presume to defend his Opinion, but one may make a very good use of many things
he has expressed very finely, in endeavoring to assist his wild Fancy; for he
gives a magnificent Idea of the vastness of the Universe, and of the almighty
and infinite Power of the Creator, to be comprehended by the meanest Capacity.
This he proves judiciously, by the Appearances and Distances of the Planets and
fixed Stars; and if he had let alone his learned Men, Philosophical
Transactions, and Telescopes in the Planet Jupiter, and his Inhabitants not
only there, but in all the fixed Stars, and even in the Milky-Way, and only
stuck to the greatness of the Universe, he had deserved much more Praise.

The other thing he endeavors to defend and assert, is, the System of
Copernicus. As to this, I cannot but take his part as far as a Woman's
Reasoning can go. I shall not venture upon the Astronomical part, but leave
that to the Mathematicians; but because I know, that when this Opinion of
Copernicus (as to the Motion of the Earth, and the Sun's being fixed in the
Center of the Universe, without any other Motion, but upon his own Axis) was
first heard of in the World, those who neither understood the old System of
Ptolemy, nor the new one of Copernicus, said, That this new Opinion was
expressly contrary to the holy Scriptures, and therefore not to be embraced;
nay, it was condemned as Heretical upon the same Account: After it had been
examined by the best Mathematicians in Europe, and that they found it answered
all the Phaenomena's and Motions of the Spheres and Stars better than the
System of Ptolemy; that it was plainer, and not so perplexing and confused as
the old Opinion; several of these learned Men therefore embraced this; but
those that held out, when they saw all Arguments against Copernicus would not
do, they had recourse to what I said before, that this System was expressly
against the holy Scriptures. Amongst this Number is the learned Father Tacquit,
a Jesuit; who, I am told, has writ a large Course of Mathematics, and
particularly, of Astronomy, which is deservedly much esteemed. In the end of
this Treatise, he cites several Texts of Scripture; and particularly, the 19th.
Psalm, And the Sun standing still at the Command of Joshua. If I can make it
appear, that this Text of Scripture is, at least, as much for Copernicus as
Ptolemy, I hope it will not be unacceptable to my Readers: Therefore, with all
due Reverence and Respect to the Word of God, I hope I may be allowed to say,
that the design of the Bible was not to instruct Mankind in Astronomy,
Geometry, or Chronology, but in the Law of God, to lead us to Eternal Life; and
the Spirit of God has been so condescending to our Weakness, that through the
whole Bible, when any thing of that kind is mentioned, the Expressions are
always turned to fit our Capacities, and to fit the common Acceptance, or
Appearances of things to the Vulgar. As to Astronomy, I shall reserve that to
the last, and shall begin with Geometry; and though I could give many Instances
of all three, yet I shall give but one or two at most. The Measure and
Dimensions of Solomon's Molten Brass Sea in 1 King. 7.23. the Words are these,
And he made a molten Sea, ten Cubits from one brim to the other, it was round
all about, and his height was five Cubits, and a Line of thirty Cubits did
compass it round about: That is to say, the Diameter of this Vessel was a Third
of its Circumference: This is indeed commonly understood to be so, but is far
from a Geometrical Exactness, and will not hold to a Mathematical
Demonstration, as to the just Proportion between the Diameter and Circumference
of a Circle. In the next place, as to Chronology, I could give many Instances
out of the Bible, but shall only name two that are very apparent, and easy to
be understood by the meanest Capacity. See 1 King. 6.1. the Words are these,
And it came to pass, in the four hundred and fourscorth Year after the Children
of Israel were come out of the Land of Egypt, in the fourth Year of Solomon's
Reign over Israel, in the Month Zif, which is the second Month, he began to
build the House of the Lord. Compare this Text, and number of Years with Act.
13.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. which is the beginning of St. Paul's Sermon to the
Jews of Antioch, and the number of Years therein contained: The Words are these,

Ver. 17. The God of this People of Israel chose our Fathers, and exalted the
People when they dwelt as Strangers in the Land of Egypt, and with an high Hand
brought he them out of it.

Ver. 18. And about the time of forty Years suffered he their Manners in the
Wilderness.

Ver. 19. And when he had destroyed seven Nations in the Land of Canaan, he
divided their Land to them by Lot.

Ver. 20. And after that, he gave unto them Judges, about the space of four
hundred and fifty Years, until Samuel the Prophet.

Ver. 21. And afterward they desired a King, and God gave them Saul, the Son
of Kish, a Man of the Tribe of Benjamin, for the space of forty Years.

Ver. 22. And when he had removed him, he raised up unto them David to be their
King.

King David the Prophet reigned seven Years in Hebron, and thirty three Years i
Jerusalem; and for this see 1 King. 2.11. To this you must add the first three
Years of his Son Solomon, according to the Text I have cited, in 1 King. 6.1.
Put all these Numbers together, which are contained in St. Paul's Sermon at
Antioch, with the Reign of King David, the first three Years of Solomon, and
seven Years of Joshua's Government, before the Land was divided by Lot, which
is expressly set down in Act. 13.19. the number of the Years will run thus:
Forty Years in the Wilderness, the seven Years of Joshua, before the dividing
the Land by Lot; from thence, till Samuel, four hundred and fifty Years; forty
Years for the Reign of Saul, forty Years for the Reign of David, and the first
three Years of Solomon; all these Numbers added together, make five hundred and
eighty Years; which Computation differs an hundred Years from that in 1 King.
6.1. which is but four hundred and eighty. It is not my present Business to
reconcile this difference; but I can easily do it; if any Body think it worth
their Pains to quarrel with my Boldness, I am able to defend my self.

The second Instance is, as to the Reign of King Solomon; for this, see 1 King.
11.42. where it is said, he reigned but forty Years over Israel. Josephus says
expressly, in the third Chapter of his eighth Book of Antiquities, that King
Solomon reigned eighty Years, and died at the Age of ninety four. I would not
presume to name this famous Historian in contradiction to the Holy Scriptures,
if it were not easy to prove by the Scriptures, that Solomon reigned almost
twice forty Years. The Greek Version of the Bible, called commonly the
Septuagint or seventy two Interpreters has it most expressly in 3 King. 2. But
the first Book of Kings according to our Translation in English, says, that
Solomon sat upon the Throne of his Father David, when he was twelve Years of
Age. But for Confirmation, be pleased to see 1 Chr. 22.5. and 29.1. where it is
said, that Solomon was but young and tender for so great a work, as the
building of the Temple. Rehoboam the Son of Solomon was forty one Years old,
when he began to reign, see 1 King. 14.21. How was it possible then that
Solomon could beget a Son, when he was but a Child himself, or of eleven Years
of Age according to the Septuagint? This Difficulty did strangely surprise a
Primitive Bishop, by Name, Vitalis, who proposed this Doubt to St. Jerome, who
was strangely put to it to return an Answer; and the Learned Holy Father is
forced at last to say, that the Letter of the Scripture does often kill, but
the Spirit enlivens. The Difficulty is still greater than what Vitalis proposed
to St. Jerome in his Epistle. Rehoboam was the Son of Naamah an Ammonitish,
stranger Woman, as you may see in 1 King. 14.31. Now it is clear, that Solomon
did not abandon the Law of God, nor give himself to strange Women till the end
of his Reign, see 1 King. 9. where he had so many strange Wives and Concubines,
besides his lawful Queen, the King of Aegypt's Daughter; and I hope this will
convince any rational Man, that the Scripture names only the first forty Years
of the Reign of King Solomon, which was the time, wherein he did what was Right
in the Sight of the Lord; which I think is Demonstration, that the Holy
Scripture was not designed, to teach Mankind Geometry, or instruct them in
Chronology. The Learned Anthony Godean, Lord and Bishop of Venice, seems to
have been sensible of this great Difficulty; for in his Learned Church History,
his Epitome from Adam to Jesus Christ, writing the Life of Solomon, he says, he
was twenty three Years old when he began his Reign. Upon what Grounds, or from
what Authority I know not; but this agrees better with the Age of Solomon's Son
Rehoboam; but it does not remove the Difficulty, so well as what I have said.

I come now in the last place to perform what I undertook, which is to prove,
that the Scripture was not designed to teach us Astronomy, no more than
Geometry or Chronology. And to make it appear that the two Texts cited by
Father Tacquet, viz. that of Psalm. 19.4, 5, 6. and Josh. 10.12, etc. are at
least as much for Copernicus his System, as they are for Ptolemy's. The Words
of the 19th Psalm are, In them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which is
as a Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber; and rejoices as a strong Man to run
his Race, etc.

That these words are Allegorical is most plain. Does not the Word Set import
Stability, Fix'dness and Rest, as much as the Words run his Race, and come
forth of his Chamber, do signify motion or turning round? Do not the Words
Tabernacle and Chamber express Places of Rest and Stability? And why may not I
safely believe, that this makes for the Opinion of Copernicus, as well as for
that of Ptolemy? For the Words of the Scriptures favor one Opinion as much as
the other. The Texts of the Suns standing still at the Command of Joshua, are
yet plainer for Copernicus, in Josh. 10. and the latter part of v. 12. the
Words are these. Sun stand thou still on Gibeon, and thou Moon on the Valley of
Ajalon, etc.

The best Edition of the English Bible, which is printed in a small Folio by
Buck, in Cambridge, has an Asterism at the Word stand, and renders it in the
Margent, from the Hebrew, Be thou silent: If it be so in the Hebrew, be thou
silent makes as much for the Motion of the Earth, according to Copernicus, as
for the Motion of the Sun according to Ptolemy, but not to criticize upon
Words, consider this miraculous Passage, not only the Sun is commanded to stand
still, but the Moon also, And thou Moon on the Valley of Ajalon. The Reason the
Sun was commanded to stand still, was to the end the Children of Israel might
have Light to guide them, to destroy their Enemies. Now when by this Miracle
they had the Light of the Sun, of what Advantage could the Moon be to them? Why
was she commanded to stand still upon the Valley of Ajalon? Besides, be pleased
to consider, the Holy Land is but a very little Country or Province: The Valley
of Ajalon is very near Gibeon, where Joshua spoke to both Sun and Moon together
to stand still above, in Places so near each other, it is Demonstration, that
the Moon was at that time very near the Sun; and by Consequence was at that
time either a day or two before her change, or a day or two at most after new
Moon; and then she is nearer to the Body of the Sun, as to appearance, so could
not assist the Children of Israel with Light, having so little of her own: It
was then for some other Reason that the Moon stood still; and for some other
Reason that it is taken notice of in Holy Scripture. Both Systems agree that
the Moon is the nearest Planets to the Earth, and subservient to it, to
enlighten it, during the Night, in Absence of the Sun. Besides this, the Moon
has other strange Effects, not only on the Earth it self, but upon all the
living Creatures that inhabit it; many of them are invisible, and as yet
unknown to Mankind; some of them are most apparent; and above all, her
wonderful Influence over the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, at such regular
Times and Seasons, if not interrupted by the Accident of some Storm, or great
Wind. We know of no Relation or Corresponding between the Sun and the Moon,
unless it be what is common with all the rest of the Planets, that the Moon
receives her Light from the Sun, which she restores again by Reflection. If the
Sun did move, according to the System of Ptolemy, where was the necessity of
the Moon's standing still? For if the Moon had gone on her Course, where was
the Loss or Disorder in Nature? She having, as I demonstrated before, so little
Light, being so very near her Change, would have recovered her Loss at the next
Appearance of the Sun, and the Earth could have suffered nothing by the
Accident; whereas the Earth moving at the same time, in an Annual and Diurnal
Course, according to the System of Copernicus, would have occasioned such a
Disorder and Confusion in Nature, that nothing less than two or three new
Miracles, all as great as the first, could have set the World in Order again:
The regular Ebbings and Flowings of the Sea must have been interrupted, as also
the Appearing of the Sun in the Horizon, besides many other Inconveniences in
Nature; as, the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, which are now so regular, that an
Astronomer could tell you to a Minute, what Eclipses will be for thousands of
Years to come, both of Sun and Moon; when, and in what Climates they will be
visible, and how long they will last, how many Degrees and Digits of those two
great Luminaries will be obscured. So that I doubt not but when this
stupendous Miracle was performed by the Almighty and Infinite Power of God,
his omnipotent Arm did in an Instant stop the Course of Nature, and the whole
Frame of the Universe was at a stand, though the Sun and Moon be only named,
being, to vulgar Appearance, the two great Luminaries that govern the Universe.
This was the space of a Day in Time, yet can be called no part of Time, since
Time and Nature are always in motion, and this Day was a stop of that Course.
What is there in all this wonderful stop of Time, that is not as strong for the
System of Copernicus, as for that of Ptolemy? And why does my Belief of the
Motion of the Earth, and the Rest of the Sun contradict the holy Scriptures? Am
not I as much obliged to believe that the Sun lodges in a Tabernacle? (as in
Psalm. 19.) Are not all these Allegorical Sayings? In the abovenamed Edition of
the English Bible of Buck's at Cambridge, see Isa. 8.38. where the Shadow
returned ten Degrees backwards, as a Sign of King Hezekiah's Recovery, and
there follow these Words, And the Sun returned ten Degrees; but on the Margin
you will find it from the Hebrew, The Shadow returned ten Degrees by the Sun;
and this is yet as much for Copernicus as Ptolemy. Whether God Almighty added
ten Degrees or Hours to that Day, or by another kind of Miracle, made the
Shadow to return upon the Dial of Ahaz, I will not presume to determine; but
still you see the Hebrew is most agreeable to the new System of Copernicus.

Thus I hope I have performed my Undertaking, in making it appear, that the
holy Scriptures, in things that are not material to the Salvation of Mankind,
do altogether condescend to the vulgar Capacity; and that these two Texts of
Psalm. 19. and Josh. 10. are as much for Copernicus as against him. I hope none
will think my Undertaking too bold, in making so much use of the Scripture, on
such an Occasion. I have a Precedent, much esteemed by all ingenious Men; that
is, Mr. Burnet's Book of Paradise, and Antedeluvian World, which incroaches as
much, if not more, on the holy Scriptures. But I have another Reason for saying
so much of the Scriptures at this time: We live in an Age, wherein many believe
nothing contained in that holy Book, others turn it into Ridicule: Some use it
only for Mischief, and as a Foundation and Ground for Rebellion: Some keep
close to the Literal Sense, and others give the Word of God only that Meaning
and Sense that pleases their own Humors, or suits best their present Purpose
and Interest. As I quoted an Epistle of St. Jerome to Vitalis before, where
that great Father says, that the Letter kills, but the Spirit enlivens; I think
it is the Duty of all good Christians to acquiesce in the Opinion and Decrees
of the Church of Christ, in whom dwells the Spirit of God, which enlightens us
to Matters of Religion and Faith; and as to other things contained in the Holy
Scriptures relating to Astronomy, Geometry, Chronology, or other liberal
Sciences, we leave those Points to the Opinion of the Learned, who by comparing
the several Copies, Translations, Versions, and Editions of the Bible, are best
able to reconcile any apparent Differences; and this with all Submission to the
Canons of General Councils, and Decrees of the Church. For the Schoolmen
agitate and delate many things of a higher Nature, than the standing still, or
the Motion of the Sun or the Earth. And therefore, I hope my Readers will be so
just as to think, I intend no Reflection on Religion by this Essay; which being
no Matter of Faith, is free for every one to believe, or not believe, as they
please. I have adventured to say nothing, but from good Authority: And as this
is approved of by the World, I may hereafter venture to publish somewhat may be
more useful to the Public. I shall conclude therefore with some few Lines, as
to my present Translation.

I have laid the Scene at Paris, where the Original was writ; and have
translated the Book near the Words of the Author. I have made bold to correct a
Fault of the French Copy, as to the height of our Air or Sphere of Activity of
the Earth, which the French Copy makes twenty or thirty Leagues, I call it two
or three, because sure this was a Fault of the Printer, and not a mistake of
the Author. For Monsieur Des Carts, and Monsieur Rohalt, both assert it to be
but two or three Leagues. I thought Paris and St. Denis fitter to be made use
of as Examples, to compare the Earth and the Moon to, than London and
Greenwich; because St. Denis having several Steeples and Walls, is more like
Paris, than Greenwich is to London. Greenwich has no Walls, and but one very
low Steeple, not to be seen from the Monument without a Prospective Glass. And
I resolved either to give you the French Book into English, or to give you the
subject quite changed and made my own; but having neither health nor leisure
for the last I offer you the first such as it is.

The Author's PREFACE.
I Find my self reduced almost to the same Condition in which Cicero was, when
he undertook to put Matters of Philosophy into Latin; which, till that time,
had never been treated of, but in Greek. He tells us, it would be said, his
Works would be unprofitable, since those who loved Philosophy, having already
taken the pains to find it in the Greek, would neglect, after that, to read it
again in Latin (that not being the Original;) and that those who did not care
for Philosophy, would not seek it, either in the Latin, or the Greek. But to
this Cicero himself answers; and says, That those who were not Philosophers
would be tempted to the Reading of it, by the Facility they Would find in its
being in the Latin Tongue; and that those who were Philosophers would be
curious enough to see how well it had been turned from the Greek to the Latin.

Cicero had reason to answer in this manner; the Excellency of his Genius, and
the great Reputation he had already acquired sufficiently defend this new
Undertaking of his, which he had dedicated to the benefit of the Public. For
my part, I am far from offering at any Defense for this of mine, though the
Enterprise be the same; for I would treat of Philosophy in a manner altogether
unphilosophical, and have endeavored to bring it to a Point not too rough and
harsh for the Capacity of the Numbers, nor too light and trivial for the
Learned. But if they should say to me as they did to Cicero, that this Work is
not at all proper for the Learned, nor would it instruct the rest of the World,
who are careless of Knowledge; far be it from me to answer as Cicero did, who,
perhaps, in searching for a middle way to Philosophy, such as would improve
every Understanding, I have taken that which possibly will be advantageous to
none: It is very hard to keep to a Medium, and I believe I shall scarce take
the pains to search a second Method to please. And if it happen that this Book
should be read, I advertise those that have some Knowledge in Philosophy, that
I have not pretended to instruct, but to divert them, in presenting to them in
a more agreeable manner, that which they already know solidly: And I also
advertise those to whom this Subject is new, that I believe it will at once
instruct and please them: The Knowing will act, contrary to my Intentions, if
they seek only Profit; and the rest, if they seek only Pleasure.

I will not amuse my self in telling you, that I have taken out of Philosophy
the matter the most capable of inspiring a Curiosity; for in my Opinion, we
ought to seek no greater Interest, than to know how this World which we
inhabit, is made, and that there are other Worlds that resemble it, and that
are inhabited as well as this: After all, let those that please, give
themselves the trouble of finding out this Truth, but I am sure they will not
do it in Complaisance to my Book: Those that have any Thoughts to lose, may
cast them away here; but all People are not in a Condition, you will say, to
make such an unprofitable Expense of Time.

In this Discourse I have introduced a fair Lady to be instructed in
Philosophy, which, till now, never heard any speak of it; imagining, by this
Fiction, I shall render my Work more agreeable, and to encourage the fair Sex
(who lose so much time at their Toylets in a less charming Study) by the
Example of a Lady who had no supernatural Character, and who never goes beyond
the Bounds of a Person who has no Tincture of Learning, and yet understands all
that is told her, and retains all the Notions of Tourbillions and Worlds,
without Confusion: And why should this imaginary Lady have the Precedence of
all the rest of her delicate Sex? Or do they believe they are not as capable of
conceiving that which she learned with so much Facility?

The truth is, Madam the Marquiese applies her self to this Knowledge; but what
is this Application? It is not to penetrate by force of Meditation, into a
thing that is obscure in it self, or any thing that is obscurely explained;
it is only to read, and to represent to your selves at the same time what you
read, and to form some Image of it that may be clear and free from perplexing
Difficulties. I ask of the Ladies (for this System) but the same Attention that
they must give the Princess of Cleve, if they would follow the Intrigue, and
find out the Beauties of it; though the truth is, that the Idea's of this Book
are not so familiar to the most part of Ladies, as those of the Princess of
Cleve; but they are not more obscure, than those of that Novel, and yet they
need not think above twice at most, and they will be capable of taking a true
Measure, and having a just Sense of the whole.

I do not pretend to take a System in the Air, without a Foundation, but I have
made use of true Philosophical Reasons; and of those, employed as many as are
necessary; and, as it happily falls out, the Notions of Philosophy upon this
Subject are pleasant; and at the same time that they satisfy the Reason, they
content the Imagination with a Prospect as agreeable, as if they had been made
on purpose to entertain it.

Where I found some pieces not altogether so diverting as I wished, I gave them
Foreign Ornaments: Virgil made use of the same Method in his Georgicks, where
he adorned his Subject (of it self altogether dull) with several Disgressions,
and very often agreeably. Ovid himself has done as much in his Art of Loving,
though the Foundation of his Theme was infinitely more agreeable than any thing
that could be mixed with it; therefore it is to be supposed, he imagined it
would be tiresome, always to treat of one and the same thing, though it was of
Gallantry: But for my part, I, who have much more need of the Assistance of
Disgression, have, notwithstanding, made use of them very frugally: I have
authorized them by the Liberty of natural Conversation, and have put them but
in those places where I thought every body would be glad to find them; I have
put the greatest part of them in the beginning of my Work, because the Mind
will not be then so well accustomed to the principal Idea's that I present. In
fine, I have taken them from the Subject it self, or, at least, approaching to
it.

I would not have any Imagination of the Inhabitants of the Worlds that are
entirely fabulous, but have endeavored to relate only that which might be
thought most reasonable; and the Visions themselves that I have added, have
something of a real Foundation in them; the True and the False are here mixed,
but they always are very easy to be distinguished; yet I do not undertake to
justify a Composure so fantastical: This is the most important Point of this
Work, and it is this only that I cannot give a Reason for; but the public
Censure will inform me, what I ought to think of this Design.

There remains no more for me to say in this Preface, but to speak to one sort
of People, who, perhaps, will be the most difficult to content (and yet I have
very good Reasons to give them, but, possibly, such as they will not take for
current Pay, unless they appear to them to be good;) and these are the
scrupulous Persons, who may imagine, that in regard of Religion, there may be
danger in placing Inhabitants any where, but on this Earth; but I have had a
Respect, even to the most delicate Niceties of Religion, and would not be
guilty of any thing that should shock it in a public Work, though that Care
were contrary to my Opinion. But that which will surprise you is, that Religion
is not at all concerned in this System, where I fill an infinite number of
Worlds with Inhabitants; and you need only reform and clear one Error of the
Imagination: But when I shall tell you the Moon is inhabited, you presently
represent to your Fancy Men made as we are; and if you are a little of the
Theologician, you will then be presently full of Difficulties: The Posterity of
Adam could not possibly extend to the Moon, nor send Colonies into that
Country; then they are not the Sons of Adam: And that would be a great
perplexing Point in Theology, to imagine there should be Men, and those not to
descend from Adam; there is no need of saying any more, all the Difficulties
are reduced to that, and the Arguments we ought to employ in a tedious
Explanation, are too worthy of Gravity to be put into this Book, though perhaps
I could answer solidly enough to their Objections, if I undertook it; but it is
certain, I have no need of answering them; let the Men in the Moon do it, who
are only concerned; for it is they that put the Men there, I only put
Inhabitants, which, perhaps, are not Men. What are they then? It Is not that I
have seen them, that I speak of them; yet do not imagine that I design, (by
saying there are no Men in the Moon) to evade your Objections, but you shall
see, that it is impossible (according to the Idea's that I have of the infinite
Diversity that Nature ought to use in her Works) that there can be none. This
Idea governs all the Book, and it cannot be confuted by any Philosopher;
therefore I believe I shall meet with no Objection from any, but those who
speak of these Entertainments, without having read them. But is this Reason
enough for me to depend on? No, it is rather a sufficient Reason for me to fear,
that this Objection will be often urged in several places.

TO Monsieur de L --
SIR,
YOU expect I should give you an exact Account in what manner I passed my Time
in the Country, at the Castle of Madam the Marquiese of -- but I am afraid this
Account will enlarge it self to a Volume, and that which is worse, to a Volume
of Philosophy, while you, perhaps, expect to hear of Feasting, Parties at play,
and Hunting-matches. No, Sir; you will hear of nothing but Planets, Worlds and
Tourbillions, nor has there been any other things discoursed on. Perhaps you
are a Philosopher, and will not believe my Discourse, so ridiculous as it may
appear to the less Learned; and possibly, you will be glad to hear that I have
drawn Madam the Marquiese into our Party: We could not have made an Advantage
more considerable, since I always esteemed Youth and Beauty as things of great
value. If Wisdom her self would appear to Mankind, with a Design to be well
received, she would not do ill to assume the Form and Resemblance of Madam the
Marquiese; and could she be so agreeable in her Conversation, I assure you, all
the World would run after her Precepts. You must not expect to hear Wonders,
when I shall make you a Relation of the Discourse I had with this beautiful
Lady; and I ought to have as much Wit as her self, to repeat all she said in
the same graceful manner she expressed it; however, I hope to make you sensible
of the Readiness of her Genius, in comprehending all things; for my part, I
esteem her perfectly witty, since she is so with the most Facility in the
World. Perhaps you will be apt to say, that her Sex must needs be wanting in
those Perfections which adorn ours, because they do not read so much. But what
signifies the reading of so many vast Volumes over, since there are a great
many Men who have made that the Business of their whole Lives, to whom, if I
durst, I would scarce allow the Knowledge of any thing? As for the rest, you
will be obliged to me. I know, before I begin to open the Conversation I had
with Madam the Marquiese, I ought, of Course, to describe to you the Castle,
whither she was retired, to pass the Autumn. People are apt, on such Occasions,
to make very large Descriptions, but I Will be more favorable to you. Let it
suffice, that when I arrived there, I found no Company, which I was very glad
of: The two first Days there passed nothing remarkable, but our Time was spent
in discoursing of the News of Paris, from whence I came: After this, passed
those Entertainments which, in the Sequel, I will impart to you. I will divide
our Discourse therefore into Nights, because, indeed, we had none, but in the
Nights.

THE First Night.
WE went one Evening after Supper to walk in the Park, the Air was cool and
refreshing, which made us sufficient amends for the excessive heat of the Day,
and of which I find I shall be obliged to make you a Description, which I
cannot well avoid, the fineness of it leading me so necessarily to it.

The Moon was about an hour high, which shining through the Boughs of the
Trees, made a most agreeable Mixture, and checkered the Paths beneath with a
most resplendent white upon the green, which appeared to be black by that
Light; there was no Cloud to be seen that could hide from us, or obscure the
smallest of the Stars, which looked all like pure polisht Gold, whose Luster was
extremely heightened by the deep Azure Field on which they were placed: These
pleasant Objects set me a thinking, and had it not been for Madam la Marquiese,
I might have continued longer in that silent Contemplation; but the Presence of
a Person of her Wit and Beauty hindered me from giving up my Thoughts entirely
to the Moon and Stars. Do not you believe, Madam, said I, that the clearness of
this Night exceeds the Glory of the brightest day? I confess, said she, the Day
must yield to such a Night; the day which resembles a fair Beauty, which though
more sparkling, is not so charming as one of a brown Complexion, who is a true
Emblem of the Night. You are very generous, Madam, said I, to give the
advantage to the brown, you who are so admirably fair your self: Yet without
dispute, day is the most beautiful thing in Nature; and most of the Heroines in
Romances, which are modelled after the most perfect Idea fancy can represent by
the most ingenious of mankind, are generally described to be fair. But, said
she, Beauty is insipid, if it want the pleasure and power of charming; and you
must acknowledge that the brightest day that ever you saw could never have
engaged you in so agreeable an Ecstasie, as you were just now like to have fallen
into by the powerful attractions of this Night.

I agree to what you say, Madam, said I, but I must own at the same time, that
a Beauty of your complexion would give me another sort of transport than the
finest Night with all the advantages obscurity can give it.

Though that were true, said she, I should not be satisfied; since those fair
Beauties that so resemble the day, produce not those soft Effects of the other.
How comes it, that Lovers who are the best Judges of what is pleasing and
touching, do always address themselves to the Night, in all their Songs and
Elegies? I told her, that they most certainly paid their acknowledgments to the
Night; for she was ever most favorable to all their Designs. But, Sir, replied
the Marquiese, she receives also all their Complaints, as a true Confident of
all their Entrigues; from whence proceeds that? The silence and gloom of the
Night, said I, inspires the restless Sigher with thoughts very passionate and
languishing, which the busier day diverts a thousand little ways (though one
would think the Night should charm all things to repose) and though the day
affords Solitudes, dark Recesses, Groves and Grottoes, equally obscure and
silent as the Night it self; yet we fansy that the Stars move with a more
silent motion than the Sun, and that all the Objects which the Heavens
represent to our view, are softer, and stay our sight more easily; and
flattering our selves that we are the only Persons at that time awake, we are
vain enough to give a loose to a thousand thoughts extravagant and easing.
Besides, the Scene of the Universe by daylight appears too Uniform, we
beholding but one Great Luminary in an Arched Vault of Azure, of a Vast Extent,
while all the Stars appear confusedly dispersed, and disposed as it were by
chance in a thousand different Figures, which assists our roving Fancies to
fall agreeably into silent thoughts. Sir, replied Madam la Marqueise, I have
always felt those effects of Night you tell me of, I love the Stars, and could
be heartily angry with the Sun for taking them from my sight. Ah, cried I, I
cannot forgive his taking from me the sight of all those Worlds that are there.
Worlds, said she, what Worlds? And looking earnestly upon me, asked me again,
what I meant? I ask your Pardon, Madam, said I, I was insensibly led to this
fond discovery of my weakness. What weakness, said she, more earnestly than
before? Alas, said I, I am sorry that I must confess I have imagined to my
self, that every Star may perchance be another World, yet I would not swear
that it is so; but I will believe it to be true, because that Opinion is so
pleasant to me, and gives me very diverting Idea's, which have fixed themselves
delightfully in my Imaginations, and it is necessary that even solid Truth
should have its agreeableness. Well, said she, since your Folly is so pleasing
to you, give me a share of it; I will believe whatever you please concerning
the Stars, if I find it pleasant. Ah, Madam, said I, hastily, it is not such a
Pleasure as you find in one of Mullier's Plays; it is a Pleasure that is -- I
know not where, in our Reason, and which only transports the Mind. What,
replied she, do you think me then incapable of all those Pleasures which
entertain our Reason, and only treat the Mind? I will instantly show you the
contrary, at least as soon as you have told me what you know of your Stars. Ah,
Madam, cried I, I shall never endure to be reproached with that neglect of my
own happiness, that in a Grove at ten a Clock of the Night, I talked of nothing
but Philosophy, to the greatest Beauty in the World; no, Madam, search for
Philosophy some where else.

But 'twas in vain to put her off by Excuses, from a Novelty she was already
but too much prepossest with: There was a necessity of yielding, and all I
could do was to prevail with her to be secret, for the saving my Honor; but
when I found my self engaged past retreat, and had a design to speak, I knew
not where to begin my discourse, for to prove to her (who understood nothing of
Natural Philosophy) that the Earth was a Planet, and all the other Planets so
many Earths, and all the Stars Worlds, it was necessary for the explaining my
self, to bring my Arguments a great way off; and therefore I still endeavored
to persuade her that 'twas much better to pass the time in another manner of
Conversation, which the most reasonable People in our Circumstances would do;
but I pleaded to no Purpose, and at last to satisfy her, and give her a
general Idea of Philosophy, I made use of this way of arguing.

All Philosophy is grounded on two Principles, that of a passionate thirst of
knowledge of the Mind, and the weakness of the Organs of the Body; for if the
Eyesight were in perfection, you could as easily discern there were Worlds in
the Stars, as that there are Stars: On the other hand, if you were less curious
and desirous of knowledge, you would be indifferent, whether it were so or not,
which indeed comes all to the same purpose; but we would gladly know more than
we see, and there is the difficulty: for if we could see well and truly what we
see, we should know enough; but we see most Objects quite otherwise than they
are; so that the true Philosophers spend their time in not believing what they
see, and in endeavoring to guess at the knowledge of what they see not; and in
my Opinion this kind of life is not much to be envied; but I fansy still to my
self that Nature is a great Scene, or Representation, much like one of our
Opera's; for, from the place where you sit to behold the Opera, you do not see
the Stage, as really it is, Since every thing is disposed there for the
representing agreeable Objects to your sight, from a large distance, while the
wheels and weights, which move and counterpoise the Machines are all concealed
from our view; nor do we trouble our selves so much to find out how all those
Motions that we see there, are performed; and it may be among so vast a number
of Spectators, there is not above one Enginier in the whole Pit, that troubles
himself with the consideration how those flights are managed that seem so new
and so extraordinary to him, and who resolves at any rate to find out the
contrivance of them; You cannot but guess, Madam, that this Enginier is not
unlike a Philosopher; but that which makes the difficulty incomparably greater
to Philosophers, is, that the Ropes, Pullies, Wheels and Weights, which give
motion to the different Scenes represented to us by Nature, are so well hid
both from our sight and understanding, that it was a long time before mankind
could so much as guess at the Causes that moved the vast Frame of the Universe.

Pray, Madam, imagine to your self, the Ancient Philosophers beholding one of
our Opera's, such an one as Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, and many more, whose
Names and Reputations make so great a noise in the World; and suppose they were
to behold the flying of Phaeton, who is carried aloft by the Winds, and that
they could not discern the Ropes and Pullies, but were altogether ignorant of
the contrivance of the Machine behind the Scenes, one of them would be apt to
say -- It is a certain Secret Virtue that carries up Phaeton. Another, That
Phaeton is composed of certain Numbers, which make him mount upwards. The third
-- That Phaeton has a certain kindness for the highest Part of the Theater, and
is uneasy when he is not there. And a fourth -- That Phaeton was not made for
flying, but that he had rather fly, than leave the upper part of the Stage
void: Besides a hundred other Notions, which I wonder have not entirely ruined
the Reputation of the Ancients. In our Age Des Carts, and some other Moderns
would say -- That Phaetons 's flight upward is because he is hoisted by Ropes,
and that while he ascends, a greater weight than he descends.

And now men do not believe that any corporeal being moves it self, unless it
be set on Motion, or pusht by another Body, or drawn by Ropes; nor that any
heavy thing ascends or descends, without a counter-poise equal with it in
weight to balance it; or that it is guided by Springs. And could we see Nature
as it is, we should see nothing but the hinder part of the Theater at the
Opera. By what you say, said Madam la Marquiese, Philosophy is become very
Mechanical. So very Mechanical, said I, that I am afraid men will quickly be
ashamed of it; for some would have the Universe no other thing in Greeat, than
a Watch is in Little; and that all things in it are ordered by Regular Motion,
which depends upon the just and equal disposal of its Parts; Confess the Truth,
Madam, have not you had heretofore a more sublime Idea of the Universe, and
have not you honored it with a better Opinion than it deserved? I have known
several esteem it less since they believed they knew it better; and for my
part, said she, I esteem it more since I knew it is so like a Watch: And it is
most surprising to me, that the course and order of Nature, how ever admirable
it appears to be, moves upon Principles and Things that are so very easy and
simple. I know not, replied I, who has given you so just Idea's of it, but it is
not ordinary to have such; most People retain in their minds some false
Principle or other of Admiration, wraped up in obscurity, which they adore:
They admire Nature, only because they look on it as a kind of Miracle, which
they do not understand; and it is certain that those sort of People never
despise any thing, but from the moment they begin to understand it: But, Madam,
I find you so well disposed to comprehend all I have to say to you, that
without further Preface, I need only draw the Curtain, and show you the World.

From the Earth where we are, that which we see at the greatest distance from
us, is that Azure Heaven, or that vast Vault, where the Stars are placed as so
many Golden Nails, which are called fixed, because they seem to have no other
motion, but that of their proper Sphere, which carries them along with it, from
East to West; between the Earth and the last, or lowest Heaven* are hung at
different heights, the Sun, the Moon, and five other Stars, which are called
Planets, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. These Planets not being
fixed to any one Sphere, and having unequal Motions, they are in different
Aspects, one to another, and according as they are in conjunction, or at
distance, they make different Figures; whereas the fixed Stars are always in the
same Position, one toward another: As for Example, Charles's- Wain, or the
Constellation of the Great Bear, which you see, and which consists of Seven
Stars, has always been, and will still continue the same; but the Moon is
sometimes near the Sun, and sometimes at a great distance from it, and so
through all the rest of the Planets: It was in this manner that the Celestial
Bodies appeared to the Ancient Chaldean Shepherds, whose great leisure produced
these first Observations, which have since been so well improved; and upon
which all Astronomy is founded: For Astronomy had its beginning in Chaldea, as
Geometry, was invented in Egypt, where the inundations of the River Nile,
having confounded and removed the Limits and the Landmarks of the several
Possessions of the Inhabitants, did prompt them to find out sure and exact
Measures, by which every one might know his own Field from that of his
Neighbors: So that Astronomy is the Daughter of Idleness, Geometry is the
Child of Interest; and should we inquire into the Original of Poetry, we should
in all appearance find, that it owes its beginning to Love.

I am extremely glad, said the Marquiese, that I have learned the Genealogy of
the Sciences, and I find that I must content my self with Astronomy, Geometry,
according to what you have said, requiring a Soul more interested in worldly
Concerns, than I am, and for Poetry, it is most proper for those of a more
Amorous Inclination; but I have all the leisure and time to spare that
Astronomy requires: Besides that I live now happily retired in the Fields and
Groves, and lead a sort of Pastoral Life, so very agreeable to Astronomy. Do
not deceive your self, Madam, said I; it is not a true Pastoral Life, to talk of
Planets and fixed Stars: Be pleased to consider, that the Shepherds in the
Story of Astroea did not pass their time in that kind of divertisement; they
had business of a softer, and more agreeable Nature. Oh, said she, the Life of
the Pastorals of Astraea is too dangerous: I like that of the Chaldean
Shepherds better, of whom you spoke but now: Go on with them, for I will hear
nothing from you, but Chaldean: So soon as that Order, and these Motions of the
Heavens were discovered, what was the next thing to be considered? The next
thing, said I, was, to guess how the several parts of the Universe were to be
disposed and ranged in order; and that is what the Learned call, The making a
System: But before, Madam, I explain to you the first System, be pleased to
observe, that we are all naturally made like a certain Athenian Fool, of whom
you have heard; who fansied that all the Ships that came into the Port of
Piraa, belonged to him; for we are so vain as to believe, that all this vast
Frame of Nature was destined to our use: For if a Philosopher be asked, for
what all this prodigious number of fixed Stars serve (since a very few would
supply the business of the whole) he will tell you gravely, that they were made
to please our sight. Upon this Principle, at first, Man believed, that the
Earth was immoveably fixed in the Center of the Universe, whilst all the
Celestial Bodies (made only for her) were at the pains of turning continually
round, to give Light to the Earth: And that it was therefore above the Earth,
they placed the Moon; above the Moon, Mercury; then Venus, the Sun, Mars,
Jupiter, Saturn; and above all, the Sphere of the fixed Stars: The Earth,
according to this Opinion, was just in the middle of the several Circles,
described by the Planets; and the greater these Circles were, the further they
were distant from the Earth; and by consequence, they took a longer time in
completing their round; which is certainly true. I know not, said the
Marquiese, why you should not approve of this Order of the Universe, which
seems to be so clear and intelligible; for my part, I am extremely pleased and
satisfied with it. Madam, said I, without Vanity, I have very much softened and
explained this System: Should I expose it to you such as it was first invented
by its Author Ptolemy, or by those that have followed his Principles, it would
frighten you: The motion of the Planets being irregular, they move sometimes
fast, sometimes slow; sometimes toward one side, sometimes to another; at one
time near the Earth, at another far from it. The Ancients did imagine I know
not how many Circles, differently interwoven one with another; by which they
fansy'd to themselves, they understood all the irregular Phaenomena's, or
Appearances in Nature. And the Confusion of these Circles was so great, that at
that time, when men knew no better, a King of Arragon, a great Mathematician
(not over devout) said, That if God had called him to his Council when he
formed the Universe, he could have given him good Advice. The thought was
impious, yet it is odd to reflect, that the confusion of Ptolemy's System gave
an occasion for the sin of that King: The good Advice he would have given, was,
no doubt, for surpassing these different Circles, which had so embarrass'd the
Celestial Motions; and, it may be also, with regard to the two or three
superfluous Spheres, which they had placed above the fixed Stars. The
Philosophers, to explain one kind of motion of the heavenly Bodies, did fancy
a Sphere of Crystal above that Heaven which we see, which set the inferior
Heaven on motion; and if any one made a new discovery of any other Motion, they
immediately made a new Sphere of Crystal: in short, these Christalline Heavens
cost them nothing. But why Spheres of Crystal, said Madam la Marquiese? Would
no other Substance serve? No, said I, Madam; for there was a necessity of their
being transparent, that the Light might penetrate; as it was requisite for them
to be solid Beams. Aristotle had found out, that Solidity was inherent in the
Excellency of their Nature; and because he said it, no body would adventure to
question the truth of it. But there have appeared Comets, which we know to have
been vastly higher from the Earth, than was believed by the Ancients: These, in
their course, would have broke all those Crystal Spheres; and indeed, must
have ruined the Universe: So that there was an absolute necessity to believe
the Heavens to be made of a fluid substance; at least, it is not to be doubted,
from the observation of this, and the last Age, that Venus and Mercury move
round the Sun, and not round the Earth. So that the ancient System is not to be
defended, as to this particular: But I will propose one to you, which solves
all Objections, and which will put the King of Arragon out of a condition of
advising; and which is so surprisingly simple and easy, that that good quality
alone ought to make it preferrable to all others. Methinks, said Madam la
Marquiese, that your Philosophy is a kind of Sale* or Farm, where those that
offer to do the Affair at the smallest Expense, are preferred. It Is very true,
said I; and it is only by that, that we are able to guess at the Scheme, upon
which Nature has framed her Work: She is very saving, and will take the
shortest and cheapest way: Yet notwithstanding, this Frugality is accompanied
with a most surprising Magnificence, which shines in all she has done; but the
Magnificence is in the Design, and the Economy in the Execution: And indeed,
there is nothing finer than a great Design, carried on with a little Expense.
But we are very apt to overturn all these Operations of Nature, by contrary
Idea's: We put Economy in the Design, and Magnificence in the Execution: We
give her a little Design, which we make her perform with ten times a greater
Charge than is needful. I shall be very glad, said she, that this System, you
are to speak of, will imitate Nature so exactly; for this good Husbandry will
turn to the advantage of my Understanding, since by it I shall have less
trouble to comprehend what you have to say. There is in this System no more
unnecessary difficulties.

Know then, that a certain German, named Copernicus, does at one blow cut off
all these different Circles, and Christalline Spheres, invented by the
Ancients; destroying the one, and breaks the other in pieces; and being
inspired with a Noble Astronomical Fury, takes the Earth, and hangs it at a
vast distance from the Center of the World, and sets the Sun in its place, to
whom that Honor does more properly belong; the Planets do no longer turn round
the Earth, nor do they any longer contain it in the Circle they describe; and
if they enlighten us, it is by chance, and because they find us in their way:
All things now turn round the Sun; among which, the Globe it self, to punish it
for the long Rest, so falsely attributed to it before; and Copernicus has loaded
the Earth with all those Motions, formerly attributed to the other Planets;
having left this little Globe none of all the Celestial Train, save only the
Moon, whose natural Course it is, to turn round the Earth. Soft and fair, said
Madam la Marquiese; you are in so great a Rapture, and express your self with
so much Pomp and Eloquence, I hardly understand what you mean: You place the
Sun unmovable in the Center of the Universe; Pray, what follows next? Mercury,
said I, who turns round the Sun; so that the Sun is in the Center of the Circle
he describes: And above Mercury, Venus; who turns also round the Sun: Next
comes the Earth; which being more elivated than Mercury, or Venus, describes a
Circle of a greater Circumference that those two Planets: Last, come Mars,
Jupiter and Saturn, in their order, as I have named 'em: So that you see
easily, that Saturn ought to make the greatest Circle round the Sun; it is
therefore that Saturn takes more time to make his Revolution, than any other
Planet. Ah, but, said the Marquiese, interrupting me, you forget the Moon. Do
not fear, said I, Madam; I shall soon find her again. The Moon turns round the
Earth, and never leaves it; and as the Earth moves in the Circle it describes
round the Sun, the Moon follows the Earth in turning round it; and if the Moon
do move round the Sun, it is only because she will not abandon the Earth. I
understand you, said she: I love the Moon for staying with us, when all the
other Planets have left us; and you must confess, that your German Copernicus
would have taken her from us too, had it been in his power; for I perceive by
his procedure, he had no great kindness for the Earth. I am extremely pleased
with him, said I, for having humbled the Vanity of mankind, who had usurped the
first and best Situation in the Universe; and I am glad to see the Earth under
the same Circumstances with the other Planets. That Is very fine, said the
Marquiese: Do you believe that the Vanity of Man places it self in Astronomy;
or that I am any way humbled, because you tell me the Earth turns round the
Sun? I Will swear, I do not esteem my self one whit the less. Good Lord, Madam,
said I, Do you think I can imagine you can be as zealous for a Precedence in
the Universe, as you would be for that in a Chamber? No, Madam; the Rank of
Place between two Planets will never make such a bustle in the World, as that
of two Ambassadors: Nevertheless, the same inclination that makes us endeavor
to have the first place in a Ceremony, prevails with a Philosopher in composing
his System, to place himself in the Center of the World, if he can: He is proud
to fancy all things made for himself; and without reflection, flatters his
Senses with this Opinion, which consists purely in Speculation. Oh, said the
Marquiese, this is a Calumny of your own invention against mankind, which ought
never to have received Copernicus his Opinion, since so easy, and so humble.
Copernicus, said I, Madam, himself was the most diffident of his own System; so
that it was a long time before he would venture to publish it, and at last
resolved to do it at the earnest entreaty of People of the first Quality. But
do you know what he did, the Day they brought him the first printed Copy of his
Book? That he might not be troubled to answer all the Objections and
Contradictions he was sure to meet with, he wisely left the World, and died.
Hold, said the Marquiese, we ought to do Justice to all the World; and it is
most certain, it is very hard to believe we turn round, since we do not change
places, and that we find our selves in the Morning, where we lay down the Night
before. I see very well by your Looks, what it is you are going to say; That
since the Earth moves all together -- Most certainly, said I: It Is the same
thing as if you were asleep in a Boat, sailing on a River, you would find your
self in the same place in the Morning, and in the same Situation as to the
several parts of the Boat. True, said she, but with this difference; I should
at my waking, find another Shore; and that would convince me, my Boat had
changed its Situation: But it is not the same with the Earth; for there I find
every thing as I left it the Night before. Not at all, Madam, said I; the Earth
changes the Shore, as well as your Boat. You know, Madam, that above and beyond
all the Circles, described by the Planets, is the Sphere of the fixed Stars;
that is our Shore: I am on the Earth, which makes a great Circle round the Sun;
I look toward the Center of this Circle, there I see the Sun; if the
brightness of his Rays did not remove the Stars from my sight, by looking in a
straight Line, I shoud easily perceive the Sun corresponding to some fixed Star
beyond him; but in the Nightime, I see clearly the Stars, to which the Sun
did answer, or was opposite to, the Day before; which is, indeed, the same
thing. If the Earth were immovable, and did not alter its Situation in its own
Circle, I should always see the Sun opposite to the same fixed Stars; but I see
the Sun in different Opposition to the Stars, every Day of the Year: It most
necessarily follows then, the Circle changes its Situation, that is, the Shore,
round which we go daily: And as the Earth performs its Revolution in a Year, I
see the Sun, in that space of time, answer in direct Opposition to a whole
Circle of fixed Stars; this Circle is called the Zodiac: Will you please,
Madam, that I trace the Figure of it on the Sand? By no means, said she; I can
satisfy my self, without that Demonstration: Besides that, it would give a
certain Mathematical Air to my Park, which I do not like. Have not I heard of a
certain Philosopher, who being shipwrecked, and cast upon an unknown Island;
who seeing some Mathematical Propositions drawn on the Sea-sands, called to one
of those with him, and cried, Courage, my Friend, here are the Footsteps of
Men; this Country is inhabited? You know, it is not decent in me to make such
Footsteps, nor must they be seen in this place. It Is fit, continued I, Madam,
that nothing be seen here, but Steps of Lovers; that is to say, your Name and
Cipher engraven on the Bark of Trees by the hand of your Adorers. Pray, Sir,
said she, let Adorers alone, and let us speak of the Sun. I understand very
well, how we imagine he describes that Circle, which, indeed, we our selves
describe; but this requires a whole Year's time, when one would think the Sun
passes over our heads every day: How comes that to pass? Have you not observed,
said I, that a Bowl thrown on the Earth, has two different Motions; it runs
toward the Jack, to which it is thrown; and at the same time it turns over and
over several times, before it comes that Length; so that you will see the Mark
that is on the Bowl, sometimes above, and sometimes below: It Is just so with
the Earth; in the time it advances on the Circle it makes round the Sun, in its
yearly Course, it turns over once every four and twenty Hours, upon its own
Axis; so that in that space of time, which is one natural Day, every point of
the Earth (which is not near the South or North-Poles) loses and recovers the
sight of the Sun: And as we turn toward the Sun, we imagine the Sun is rising
upon us; so when we turn from it, we believe she is setting. This is very
pleasant, said the Marquiese: You make the Circle to do all, and the Sun to
stand idle; and when we see the Moon, Planets and fixed Stars turn round us in
four and twenty Hours, all is but bare Imagination. Nothing else, said I, but
pure Fancy, which proceeds from the same Cause; only the Planets make their
Circle round the Sun, not in the same space of time, but according to their
unequal distance from it; and that Planet which we see to day, look to a
certain Point of the Zodiac, or Sphere of fixed Stars, we shall see it answer
to every other Point to Morrow; y as well because that Planet moves on its
Course, as that we proceed in ours: We move, and so do the other Planets: By
this means we vary both Situation and Opposition, as to them, and we think we
discover Irregularities in their Revolutions, which I will not now trouble you
with; it is sufficient for you to know, that any thing that may appear to us to
be irregular, in the Course of the Planets, is occasioned by our own Motion
meeting theirs in such different manners; but upon the whole the Course of the
Planets, is most regular. I agree with all my heart, said the Marquiese; yet I
wish with all my heart, that that Regularity were not so laborious to the
Earth: I fancy Copernicus has not been very careful of its Concerns, in making
so weighty and solid a Mass run about so nimbly. But, Madam, said I, would you
rather, that the Sun, and the Stars (which are generally far greater Bodies)
should make a vast Circumference round the Earth in a Day, and run an infinite
number of Leagues in twenty four Hours time? Which they must of necessity do,
if the Earth have not that Diurnal Motion on its own Axis. Oh! answered she,
the Sun and Stars are all Fire, swiftness of Motion is easy to them; but for
the Earth, that does not seem to be very portable. And would you believe it,
said I, Madam, if you had never seen the Experiment, that a First-Rate Ship, of
a hundred and twenty Guns, with fifteen hundred Men, and proportionable
Provision, with all her Ammunition and Tackle a-board, were a very portable
thing? Notwithstanding, a gentle Breeze will move this Ship on the Sea, because
the Water is liquid, and yielding easily, makes no resistance to the motion of
the Vessel: So the Earth, notwithstanding of as vast bulk and weight, is easily
moved in the Celestial Matter, which is a thousand times more fluid than the
Water of the Sea; and which fills all that vast Extent, where the Planets swim,
as it were: And to what would you fix or grapple the Earth, to hinder it from
being carried along with the Current of this Celestial Matter or Substance? It
would be just as if a little wooden Ball should not follow the Current of a
rapid River.

But, said she, how does the Earth support its vast weight, on your Heavenly
Substance, which ought to be very light, since it is so fluid? That does not
follow, answered I, Madam, that a thing must be light, because it is fluid:
What say you to the First-Rate Ship, I spoke of, with all its Lading? Yet it is
lighter than the Water, because it swims upon it. As long as you command your
First-Rate Frigate, said she, angrily, I will not argue with you; but can you
assure me, that I am in no danger, by inhabiting such a little Humming-Top, as
you have made the World to be? Well, Madam, said I, the Earth shall be
supported by four Elephants, as the Indians fancy it is. Here Is a new System
indeed, cried Madam la Marquiese; yet I love those Men, for providing for their
own security, by resting upon a solid Foundation; whereas we that follow
Copernicus, are so inconsiderate, as to swim at a venture upon your Celestial
Matter: And I dare say, if these Indians thought the Earth in any danger of
falling, they would quickly double the number of their Elephants. They would
have all the reason in the World to do so, said I, Madam; (laughing at her
fancy;) and would not spare Elephants to sleep in quiet, without fear of
falling: And, Madam, we will add as many as you please to our System for this
Night, and take them away by degrees, as you get more Assurance. Really, said
she, I do not think they are needful at present; for I feel I have Courage
sufficient to turn round. You must go a step further, said I, and you shall
turn round with delight; upon this System you will form to your self very
pleasant and agreeable Idea's: As for Example; Sometimes I fancy I am hanging
in the Air, and that I stay there without moving, while the Earth turns round
under me in four and twenty Hours time, and that I see beneath me all those
different Faces; some white, some black, some tawny, others of an Olive-colour;
first I see Hats, then Turbants, there Hands covered with Wool, there shaved
Heads; sometimes Towns with Steeples, some with their long small-pointed
Pyramids, and Half-moons on their tops; sometimes Towns with Porcelane Towers;
after them, spacious Fields, without Towns, only Tents and Huts; here vast
Seas, frightful Deserts; in short, all the Variety that is to be seen upon the
Face of the Earth. Indeed, said she, such a sight would be very well worth
twenty four Hours of ones Time: So that by this System, through the same place
where we now are (I do not mean this Park, but that space of Air which our
Bodies fill) several other Nations must successively pass, and we return
hither, in twenty four hours, to our own place again.

Copernicus himself, said I, Madam, did not understand it better. At first will
be here the English, discoursing, it may be, upon some politic Design, with
more Gravity, but less Pleasure, than we talk of our Philosophy: Next will come
a vast Ocean, in which there will be sailing some Ships, perhaps not so much at
their Ease as we are: Then will appear the Canibals, eating some Prisoners of
War alive, they seeming very unconcerned at what they suffer: After them, the
Women of the Country of Iesso, who spend all their time in preparing their
Husbands Meals, and in painting their Lips and Eyebrows with Blew, to please
the ugliest Fellows in the World: Next will succeed the Tartars, who go, with
great Devotion, on Pilgrimage to that great Priest, who never comes out of an
obscure place, where he has no other Light but Lamps, by which they adore him:
After them, the beautiful Circassian Women, who make no difficulty of granting
any Favor to the first Comer, except what they essential know does belong to
their Husbands: Then the Crim, or Little Tartars, who live by stealing of Wives
for the Turks and Persians: And at last, our selves again, perhaps talking as
we do now.

I am mightily taken, said the Marquiese, with the Fancy of what you say; but
if I could see all these things from above, I would wish to have the power to
hasten and stop the Motion of the Earth, according as I liked or dis-lik'd the
several Objects that pass under me; I would make the Politicians, and those
that eat their Enemies, to move very fast: But there are others that I should
be very curious to observe; and particularly, the fine Cercassian Women, who
have one so peculiar a Custom. That is, said I, their Husbands, who finding so
many Charms in their Embraces, as more than satisfy them, do freely abandon
their fair Wives to Strangers. The Women of our Country, said the Marquiese,
must be very ugly, if compared to the Circassians; for our Husbands will part
with nothing. That is the reason, said I, that the more is taken from 'em;
whereas -- No more of these Fooleries, said the Marquiese, interrupting me;
there is a serious Difficulty come into my head: If the Earth turn round, then
we change Air every Moment, and must breath still that of another Country. By
no means, Madam, said I; the Air which encompasses the Earth extends it self to
a certain height, it may be, about twenty Leagues, and turns round with us.
You have, no doubt, seen a thousand times the business of the Silkworm, where
the Balls which these little Creatures do work with so much Art, for their own
Imprisonment, are compact, and wrought together with Silk, which is very
closely joined; but they are covered with a kind of Down, that is very light
and soft: Thus it is, that the Earth, which is very solid, is wrapped in a
Covering of soft Down of twenty Leagues thickness, which is the Air that is
carried round at the same time with it: Above the Air is that Celestial Matter
I spoke of, incomparably more pure, more subtle, and more agitated than the
Air.

You represent the Earth to me, said the Marquiese, as a very contemptible
thing, by the despicable Idea's you give me of it: It Is, nevertheless, upon
this Silk-Worm-Ball, there are performed such mighty Works; and where there are
such terrible Wars, and such strange Commotions as reign every where. It Is
certainly true, said I, Madam; while at the same time, Nature, who is not at
the pains to consider these Troubles and Commotions, carries us all along
together, by a general Motion, and does, as it were, play with this little
Globe. It seems to me, said she, that it is very ridiculous to inhabit any thing
that turns so often, and is so much agitated; and the worst of all is, that we
are not assured whether we turn round, or not; for, to be plain with you, and
that I may keep none of my Doubts from you, I do extremely suspect, that all
the Pre-cautions you can take, will not convince me of the Motion of the Earth:
For is it possible, but Nature would have taken care to have given us some
sensible Sign, by which we might discover the turning round of so vast a Body?
The Motions (answered I) which are most natural to remove, are the least
perceptible; and which holds true, even in Morality; for the Motion of
Self-love is so natural to us, that for the most part we do not feel it, while
we believe we act by other Principles. Ah, said she, do you begin to speak of
Moral Philosophy, when the Question is of that which is altogether natural? But
I perceive you are sleepy, and begin to yawn; let us therefore retire, for
there is enough said for the first Night, to morrow we shall return hither
again; you with your Systems, and I with my Ignorance. In returning to the
Castle, to make an end of what might be said to Systems, I told her, there was
a third Opinion invented by Ticho-brahe, who would have the Earth absolutely
immovable, and placed in the Center of the Universe, and made the Sun to turn
round it, as he did the other Planets to turn round the Sun; because, since the
new Discoveries, it could not be imagined that the other Planets turned round
the Earth. But my Lady Marquiese, whose Judgment and Understanding is solid and
penetrating, found, there was too much Affectation in endeavoring to free the
Earth from turning round the Sun, since several other great Bodies could not be
exempt from that Labor; and that the Sun was not so proper and fit to turn
round the Earth, since the other Planets turn round the Sun; and that this new
System was only good to maintain the standing still of the Earth, if one had a
mind to undertake that Argument; but it is not proper to persuade another to
believe it. At last, we resolved to hold our selves to the Opinion of
Copernicus, which is more uniform, and more agreeable, without the least
mixture of Prejudice; and, indeed, its Simplicity and Easiness persuades as
much as its Boldness pleases.

The Second Night.
AS soon as one could get into my Lady Marquiese's Apartment, I sent to know
how she did, and how she had slept that Night in turning round. She sent me
word, that now she was pretty well accustomed to the Motion of the Earth, and
that Copernicus himself could not have rested better that Night than she did. A
little after this, there came Company to visit my Lady, which, according to the
nauseous Country-fashion, stayed till the Evening, and yet we thought our
selves happy that we were so easily rid of 'em then, since, according to the
custom of the Country, they might have prolonged their Visit till the next Day;
but they were so civil, as not to do it; so that Madam the Marquiese and I
found our selves at liberty. In the Evening we went again to the Park, and the
Conversation began as it ended before, of our System: My Lady Marquiese had
comprehended 'em so well, that she would not be at the pains to reassume any
thing of what had passed, but pressed me to lead her to something that was new.
Well, said I, since the Sun, which is now immovable, and no longer a Planet;
and that the Earth, that moves round the Sun, is now one, be not surpised if I
tell you, the Moon is another Earth, and is, by all appearance, inhabited. Said
she, I never heard of the Moon's being inhabited, but as a Fable. So it may be
still, said I; I concern my self no further in these Matters, than Men use to
do in Civil Wars; where the Uncertainty of what may be, makes People still
entertain a Correspondence with the adverse Party: As for me, though I see the
Moon inhabited, I live very civilly with those that do not believe it; and I
carry my self so trimmingly, that I may, upon occasion, with Honor go over to
their side who have the better; but still they gain some considerable Advantage
over us. I Will tell you my Reasons that make me take part with the Inhabitants
of the Moon: Suppose then, there had never been any Commerce between Paris and
St. Denis, and that a Citizen of Paris, who had never been out of that City,
should go up to the top of the Steeple of our Lady, and should view St. Denis
at a distance, and one should ask him if he believed St. Denis to be inhabited;
he would answer boldly, Not at all; for (he would say) I see the Inhabitants of
Paris, but I do not see those of St. Denis, nor ever heard of 'em. It may be,
some body standing by, would represent to him, That it was true, one could not
see the Inhabitants of St. Denis from our Lady's Church, but that the distance
was the cause of it; yet that all we could see of St. Denis, was very like to
Paris; for St. Denis had Steeples, Houses and Walls; and that it might resemble
Paris in every thing else, and be inhabited as well as it. All these Arguments
would not prevail upon my Citizen; who would continue still obstinate in
maintaining, that St. Denis was not inhabited, because he saw none of the
People. The Moon is our St. Denis, and we the Citizens of Paris, that never
went out of our own Town. Ah, interrupted the Marquiese, you do us wrong; we
are not so foolish as your Citizens of Paris: Since he sees that St. Denis is
so like to Paris in every thing, he must have lost his Reason, if he did not
think it was inhabited: But for the Moon, that is nothing like the Earth. Have a
care, Madam, said I, what you say; for if I make it appear, that the Moon is in
every thing like the Earth, you are obliged to believe that the Moon is
inhabited. I acknowledge, said she, if you do that, I must yield; and your
Looks are so assured, that you frighten me already: The two different Motions
of the Earth, which would never have entered into my Thoughts, make me very
apprehensive of all you say. But is it possible that the Earth can be an
enlightened Body, as the Moon is? For, to resemble it, it must be so. Alas,
Madam, said I, to be enlightened, is not so great a matter as you imagine, and
the Sun only is remarkable for that Quality: it is he alone that is enlightened
of himself, by virtue of his particular Essence; but the other Planets shine
only, as being enlightened by the Sun: The Sun communicates his Light to the
Moon, which reflects it upon the Earth; as the Earth, without doubt, reflects
it back again to the Moon, since the distance from the Moon to the Earth is the
same as from the Earth to the Moon.

But, said the Marquiese, is the Earth as proper for reflecting the Light of
the Sun, as the Moon? You are always for the Moon, said I, and you cannot rid
your self of those Remains of Kindness you have for her. Light is composed for
little Balls, which rebound upon any solid Body, which is opaque, or obscure,
and are sent back another way; whereas they pass through any thing that offers
them an Opening, or Passage, in a straight Line; which is Diaplanus, or clear;
such as Air and Glass: So that the Moon enlightens us, because she is an
Opaque, solid Body, which retorts these little Balls upon us; and I believe you
will not dispute the same Solidity to the Earth. Admire then, Madam, how
advantageous it is, to be well posted; so that the Moon being at a great
distance from us, we see it as an enlightened Body only, but are ignorant that
it is a gross, solid Mass, very much like the Earth: On the other hand, the
Earth having the ill luck to be seen by us too near, we consider it only as a
great massy Body, fit only for the producing of Food for living Creatures. It Is
just, said the Marquiese, as when we are struck and surpised with the
Splendor of Quality above our own; we do not perceive, that in the main,
there is no difference between them and us. It Is just so, said I; and we will
needs be judging of every thing; but we have the misfortune, still to be
placed in a false Light: Would we judge of our selves, we are too near; if of
others, we are too far off: Could one be placed between the Moon and the Earth,
that would be a true Station to consider both well: To this End, we ought only
to be Spectators of the World, and not Inhabitants. I shall never be satisfied,
said the Marquiese, with the Injury we do the Earth, in being too favorably
engaged for the Inhabitants of the Moon, unless you can assure me, that they
are as ignorant of their Advantages, as we are of ours; and that they take our
Earth for a Star, without knowing that the Globe they inhabit is one also. Be
assured of that, Madam, said I, that the Earth appears to them to perform all
the Functions of a Star: It Is true, they do not see the Earth describe a Circle
round 'em, but that is all one; I Will explain to you what it is: That side of the
Moon which was turned toward the Earth at the beginning of the World, has
continued toward the Earth ever since; which still represents to us these same
Eyes, Nose and Mouth, which our Imaginations fancy we see composed of these
Spots, Lights and Shadows, which are the Surface of the Moon: Could we see the
other half of the Moon, it is possible our Fancy would represent to us some
other Figure. This does not argue, but the Moon turns however upon her own
Axis, and takes as much time to perform that Revolution, as she does to go
round the Earth in a Month. But then, when the Moon performs a part of her
Revolutions on her own Axis, and that she ought to hide from us (for Example)
one Cheek of this imaginary Face, and appear to us in another Position, she
does at the same time perform as much of the Circle she describes in turning
round the Earth; and though she is in a new Point of Sight or Opposition as to
us, yet she represents to us still the same Cheek: So that the Moon, in regard
to the Sun, and the other Planets, turns upon her own Axis; but does not so as
to the Earth.

The Inhabitants of the Moon see all the other Planets rise and set in the
space of fifteen Days, but they see our Earth always hanging in the same Point
of the Heavens. This seeming Immovability does not very well agree with a Body
that ought to pass for a Planet; but the truth is, the Earth is not in such
perfection: Besides, the Moon has a certain trembling Quality, which does
sometimes hide a little of her imaginary Face, and at other times shows a
little of her opposite Side; and no doubt but the Inhabitants of the Moon
attribute this shaking to the Earth, and believe we make a certain swinging in
the Heavens, like the Pendulum of a Clock. All these Planets, said the
Marquiese, are like us Mortals, who always cast our own Faults upon others:
Says the Earth, It is not I that turn round, it is the Sun: Says the Moon, It is
not I that tremble, it is the Earth: There are Errors and Mistakes every where.
I would not advise you, said I, to undertake to reform any of 'em; it is better
that I make an end in convincing you, that the Moon is in all things like the
Earth. Represent to your self these two great Globes, hanging in the Heavens;
you know that the Sun does always enlighten one half of any Globe, and the
other half is in the Shadow; there is therefore always one half of both Moon
and Earth that is enlightened, or half Day, and the other half is still in the
Darkness of Night. Be pleased, besides, to consider that a Ball has less force
and swiftness after it re-bounds from a Wall, against which it was thrown, than
it had before it touched the Wall, which sends it another way; so Light is not
so strong, after it is reflected by any solid Body: This pale Light which comes
to us from the Moon, is the Light of the Sun it self, but we have it only by
Reflection from the Moon, and has lost a great deal of that Strength and
Vivacity which it had when 'twas received by the Moon, directly from the Sun;
and that bright and dazzling Light which we receive from the Sun, must in the
same manner appear to the Inhabitants of the Moon, after it is reflected by the
Earth, on the Moon: So that the Surface of the Moon, which we see enlightened,
and which shines upon us in the Night, is that half of the Moon that enjoys the
Day, as that half of the Globe of the Earth which is enlightened by the Sun,
when it is turned toward the darkened half of the Globe of the Moon, does give
Light to the Inhabitants there, during their Nights. All depends upon the
different Opposition and Aspects between the Moon and the Earth: The first and
second Day of the Moon, we do not see her, because she is betwixt the Sun and
us, and moves with the Sun by our Day; it necessarily follows, that the half of
the Moon which is enlightened, is turned toward the Sun, and the obscure part
toward the Earth; it is no wonder then, that we cannot see that half which is
dark; but that same half of the Moon which is in Darkness, being turned toward
the enlightened half of the Earth, the Inhabitants see us, without being seen,
and the Earth appears to them, as their Full-Moon does to us; and so, if one
may use the Expression, it is with them Full-Earth. After this, the Moon going
on in her Monthly Circle, dis-engages her self from the Sun, and begins to turn
toward us a part of her enlightened half, which is the Crescent; at the very
same time, the darkened half of the Moon loses some share of the enlightened part
of the Earth, and then the Earth is in the Wain, as to its Inhabitants.

Say no more, said the Marquiese, briskly, I shall know all the rest when I
please; I need only think a little, and follow the Moon in her Monthly Circle:
I see in general, that the Inhabitants of the Moon have their Month, the exact
Reverse of ours; and I am persuaded, when it is Full-Moon, the enlightened half
of it is turned toward the obscure part of the Earth, and then they do not see
us, but a certain new Earth. I would not have any Body reproach me with the
want of so much Sense, as that you need explain so easy a thing to me. But as
to the Eclipses, What is the Cause of them? If you do not understand that, said
I, it is your own fault. When it is New Moon, and that she is between the Sun and
the Earth, and that all her obscure half is turned toward us, who then enjoy
the Day, you may see easily, that the Shadow of this darkened half is cast upon
the Earth; if the Moon be directly under the Sun, this Shadow hides the Sun
from us, and at the same time darkens a part of the enlightened half of the
Earth, which was seen by the Inhabitants of the obscure half of the Moon: And
this is an Eclipse of the Sun to us, in our Day; and an Eclipse of the Earth to
those in the Moon, in their Night. When the Moon is at the Full, the Earth is
betwixt her and the Sun, and all the obscure part of the Earth is turned
toward the enlightened half of the Moon, the Shadow of the Earth is then cast
upon the Moon; and if it falls directly on her Surface, it obscures the
enlightened half which we see, and hides the Sun from that enlightened part of
the Moon that enjoyed the Day: This is an Eclipse of the Moon to us, during our
Night; and an Eclipse of the Sun to them, during their Day. By this Reason, it
falls out, that there are not always Eclipses when the Moon interposes between
the Sun and the Earth, or the Earth is interjected between the Sun and the
Moon; because these three Bodies are not opposite one to another, in a straight
Line; and by consequence, that of the three, which ought to make the Eclipse,
casts its shadow a little to one side of that which should be eclipsed.

I am extremely surpised, said the Marquiese, that (since there is so little
of Mystery or Difficulty in Eclipses) every body does not find out the Cause of
'em. Do not wonder at that, said I, Madam; there are many Nations in the World,
that, as they go to work, will not find it out for Ages to come; for all over
the East-India's, the Inhabitants believe, that when the Sun or Moon is
eclipsed, certain Demons, or Spirits, who have very black Claws, do stretch
them forth upon these two Luminaries, which he endeavors to sieze: and during
the time of the Eclipse, you may see all the Rivers covered with Heads of
Indians; for they go into the Water, up to the Neck, thinking that most devout
posture for obtaining from the Sun and Moon, a defense against that Demon. In
America, the People were persuaded, that the Sun and Moon were angry with 'em
when they were eclipsed; and God knows what pains they are at, to make their
Peace with 'em. But the Grecians, who were so polite a People, Did not they
believe for a long time, that the Moon was bewitched, and that the Magicians
made her come down, to throw a certain poisonous Scum or Dew upon the Herbs and
Grass? And even we our selves, Were we not frightened out of our Wits at an
Eclipse of the Sun, that happened about thirty Years since? Did not a great
many People shut themselves up in Vaults and Cellars? And did not the learned
Men write in vain, to assure us, there was no danger? Certainly, said the
Marquiese, that is very disgraceful to Mankind; and I think there ought to be a
Law made by universal Consent, never to speak of Eclipses hereafter, lest the
memory of such Folly should be preserved to Posterity. Pray, Madam, said I, let
there be another Law made, for abolishing the Memory of all things past; for I
know of nothing, that is not a Monument of the Folly of Mankind. Pray, tell me,
said the Marquiese; Are the Inhabitants of the Moon as much afraid of Eclipses
as we are? It seems to me very ridiculous, that some of 'em should run into the
Water up to the Neck; that others should think our Earth angry with 'em; some,
that our Earth should be bewitched, and that we are coming to spoil their
Grass. Without all doubt, said I, Madam: Why should the Inhabitants of the Moon
have more Sense than we? And what Right have they to frighten us, more than we
have to frighten them? Nay, more; I am apt to believe, that as there has been,
and still are, many Inhabitants in our Globe, who are such Fools to adore the
Moon; there are also Inhabitants in the Moon, foolish enough to adore our
Earth. At that rate, said the Marquiese, we may very well pretend to send
Influences to the Moon, and to give a Judgment on their Distempers. But since
there is only requisite, a little more Wit and Ingenuity in the Inhabitants of
that Country, to blast the Honor we flatter our selves with, I confess, I am
still apprehensive, they may have some Advantage over us. Do not fear, said I;
there is no likelihood that we are the only Fools of the Universe. Ignorance is
naturally a very general Talent; and though I do but guess at that of the
Inhabitants of the Moon, yet I no more doubt of it, than I do of the most
certain News we have from thence.

And what, pray, are these certain News you have from thence, interrupted she?
They are, said I, Madam, such as are brought us every Day by the Learned, who
travel daily thither by the help of long Telescopes: They tell us, they have
discovered vast Countries, Seas, Lakes, high Mountains, and deep Valleys.

You surprise me, said the Marquiese: I know very well, that Mountains and
Valleys may be discovered in the Moon, by the remarkable Inequality we see in
its Surface; But how do they distinguish Countries and Seas? Very easily, said
I; because the Water permits a part of the Light to pass through it, and
reflects less, and appears, at a great distance, to be obscure Spots; and that
the Earth, which is solid, reflects the whole Light, and therefore must appear
the brightest part of the Globe of the Moon. These different parts are all so
well known, that they have given them all Names of learned Men: One place is
called Copernicus; another, Archimedes; and a third, Galileus: There are too a
Caspian-Sea, Porphory-Hills, and the Black Lake. In short, they have framed so
exact a Description of the Moon, that a learned Man, if he were there, would be
in no more danger of losing his Way, than I would be, if I were at Paris.

But, replied the Marquiese, I should be very well pleased to have a farther
Account of this Country. It Is impossible, replied I, that the nicest
Observators should inform you so well as Astolpho, of whom you ought to
enquire; and who was conducted to the Moon by St. John. What I shall tell you
now, is one of the most pleasant Fooleries in all Ariosto; and I am satisfied,
'twill not displease you to know it. I own, I ought not to meddle with St.
John, whose Name is so worthy of Respect: But since there is a Poetical
License, and Liberty of Conscience, it ought to pass as a Gayety. The whole
Poem is dedicated to a great Churchman, and another great Churchman has
honored it with a signal Approbation; which one may perceive by the several
Editions. See what he treats of.

Orlando Nephew to Charlemain, became mad, because the fair Angelica had
proffered Medora to him; one day Astolpho the brave Paladine, found himself in
a terrestrial Paradise, which was on the brink of a very high Mountain whither
his flying Horse had carried him; there he met Saint -- who told him that to
cure the Madness of Orlando, 'twas necessary they should take a Voyage to the
Moon; Astolpho who desired nothing more than to see that Country, wanted no
entreaties, and behold on a sudden a Chariot of Fire carried the Saint, and the
Paladine through the Air. As Astolpho was no great Philosopher, he was much
surpised to see the Moon so vastly bigger than it had appeared to him upon the
Earth, and was much more amazed to see Rivers, Lakes, Mountains, Plains,
Groves, Towns, and Forests, (and that which would have surpised me also)
beautiful Nymphs that hunted in those Forests. But that which he beheld yet
more rare, was a Valley where he found all things that were lost on Earth, of
what kind soever, Crowns, Riches, Renown, and Grandeur, Infinity of hopes, time
lost in waiting and depending on promising Statesmen, or thrown away at Play;
the Alms that one causes to be given after ones Death; The Verses and
Dedications one presents to Princes and the sighs of Lovers. As for the Sighs
of Lovers, replied the Marquiese, interrupting me, I know not whether in the
time of Ariosto they were lost or not, but in ours, I know of none that go into
the Moon. Were there none but you Madam replied I, smiling, you have caused so
many to sigh in vain, that you have made a considerable Treasure in the Moon:
in short the Moon is exact in collecting all that is lost here below, and which
are all to be found there, even to the Donation of Constantine. (But Astolpho
told me this only in my Ear.) Besides all the Folly that was ever committed
upon the Earth is well preserved there; these are so many Vials full of a
subtle and penetrating Liquor, which easily evaporates as soon as opened, and
upon every one of these Vials is writ the name of those to whom it belongs. I
believe that Ariosto put 'em all in one Cup, but I had rather fancy to my self
that they were orderly placed in one Gallery. Astolpho was very much astonished
to see the Vials of so many Persons whom he believed to be very wise, and yet
notwithstanding their Vials were so very full; and for my part, I am persuaded
that mine is as full as any since I entertain you with Visions, both Philophick
and poetical. That which comforts me is, that it is possible by what I am
persuading you to believe, I shall very suddenly make you have a Vial in the
Moon as well as my self. The good Paladine did not fail to find his own among
the Number, and by the Permission of the Saint, he took it and snuff'd up the
Spirit as if it had been the Queen of Hungary's Water: But Ariosto said he
would not carry it far, and that it would return to the Moon again by a Folly
that he committed seven Years after: But he did not forget the Vial of Orlando
which was the occasion of his Voyage; he had a great deal of difficulty to
carry it, for the Spirit of this Hero was in its own Nature very heavy, and did
not want a drop of being full. But here Ariosto according to the laudable
Custom of speaking what he pleased, addressing himself to his Mistress, speaks
to her thus in good Verse. That I ought to cause one to mount the Heavens, my
fair one, to make me recover the Senses your Charms have made me lose, yet I
will not complain of this Loss, provided it does not go too far, but if there
be a Necessity that your Cruelties must continue, as they have begun, I have no
more to do but to expect just such a Fate as Orlando's; however I do not
believe, that to recover my Senses it is requisite I go through the Air to the
Moon; my Soul does not lodge so high; it wanders about your fair Eyes, and
Mouth; and if you will be pleased to give me leave to take it, permit me to
recover it with my Lips. Is not this witty for me to reason like Ariosto? I am
of opinion that a Man never loses his Wits but for Love; and you see they do
not travel far, while their Lips only know so well how to recover 'em. But when
one loses 'em by other means (as we lose 'em by Philosophizing) they go
directly to the Moon, and one cannot retrieve 'em when one pleases. In
recompense of this, said the Marquiese, our Vials shall be Honorable among the
Ranks of the Philosophers: For our Spirits will go on in wandering and erring on
something that is worthy of 'em; but to accomplish this, and rid me of mine.

But pray tell me seriously, said the Marquiese, do you believe that there are
Men in the Moon? For hitherto, you have said nothing to me positively as to
that. I do not believe there are Men there, Madam, but some other odd sort of
Creatures: Pray, Madam, consider but how much the Face of Nature is changed
betwixt this and China; other Faces, other Shapes, other Manners, and almost
quite different Principles of reasoning, from this to the Moon the difference
ought to be more considerable. When one travels toward the new discovered
World of America, etc. and finds the Inhabitants there to be hardly Men, but
rather a kind of Brutes in humane shape, and that not perfect neither, so that
could we travel to the Orb of the Moon, I do not think we should find Men and
Women there. What kind of Creatures should we find then said the Marquiese,
with a very impatient look? I swear I cannot tell, said I Madam, were it
possible for us to be rational Creatures and yet not Men, and that we inhabited
the Moon, could it ever enter into our Imagination, that there dwelt here below
so extravagant an Animal as that of Mankind? Could we fancy to our selves any
living Creatures with such foolish Passions, and so wise Reflections; of so
small Duration, and yet can see so vast a Prospect beyond it; of so much
knowledge in Trifles, and so much Ignorance of important things; so earnest for
liberty, yet so inclined to servitude and Slavery; so very desirous of
Happiness, and yet so incapable of attaining it; it would require a great deal
of Wit and Judgment in the Inhabitants of the Moon, to find the Reason and
Mystery of such an odd composition; for we that see one another daily, have not
as yet found out how we are made. It was said of old amongst the Heathens, that
the Gods when they made Man were drunk with Nectar, whom when they had
considered when sober, they could not forbear laughing at the ridiculousness of
their handy Work. We are then secure enough, said the Marquiese, that the
Inhabitants of the Moon will never guess what we are; but I wish we could
attain to the knowledge of them; for I must confess it makes me uneasy to
think there are Inhabitants in the Moon, and yet I cannot so much as fancy
what kind of Creatures they are. And why are you not as uneasy, said I, upon
the account of the Inhabitants under and near the South-Pole, which is
altogether unknown to us? They and we are carried as it were in the same Ship,
they in the Stern, and we in the Head; and yet you see there is no
communication between the Stern and the Head, and that those at the one end of
the Ship do not know what kind of People they are on the other, nor what they
are doing, and yet you would know what passes in the Moon, in that other great
Ship sailing in the Heavens at a vast distance from us. Ah, said the Marquiese,
I look upon the Inhabitants under the South-Pole, as a People known to us,
because they are most certainly very like us; and that we may see them if we
please to give our selves the trouble; they will continue still where they are,
and cannot run away from our knowledge; but we shall never know what these
Inhabitants of the Moon are; it is that that vexes me. If I should answer you
seriously, said I, that we may one day know 'em, would not you laugh at me? Nay
and I should deserve it: Yet I could defend my self very well if I should say
so; there is a certain ridiculous thought in my Head, which has some shadow of
likelihood, which satisfies me, tho I do not know on what it is founded, it
being so impertinent as it is; yet I will lay you what you will, that I will
oblige you to believe against all Reason, that there may one day be a
correspondence between the Earth and the Moon. Reflect a little, Madam, upon
the State and Condition of America, before it was discovered by Christopher
Columbus; it is Inhabitants lived in a most profound Ignorance, so far from the
knowledge of Sciences, that they were ignorant of the most simple and useful
Art: They went stark naked and could not imagine that Men could be covered by
Skins of Beasts; had no other Arms but Bows, and who look upon the Sea as a
vast space forbidden to mankind, joining, as they thought, to the Sky; beyond
which they saw nothing. It Is true after having spent several years with
hollowing the root of a great Tree with sharp Flints, they after ventured to go
in this kind of Boat, which was driven along the Shore by the Winds and the
Waves; but as this kind of Vessel was very subject to be over-set very often,
they were necessitated to swim to catch their Boat again; and indeed, they did
swim for the most part, except when they were weary. If any Body had told them
there was a Navigation much more perfect than that they knew; and that by it,
it was easy to cross that vast extent of Water to any side, and in what manner
we pleased, and that it was possible to stop and lie still in the midst of the
Waves, while the Vessel is in Motion; that Men could move fast or slow as they
pleased; and that the Sea, notwithstanding the vastness of its extent, was no
hindrance to the commerce of distant Nations, provided that there were People
on the other shore; surely the Indians would never have believed that Man that
should have told 'em this, to them impossibility: nevertheless, the day came,
that the strangest and least expected Sight that ever they saw, presented it
self to their view, huge great Bodies, which seemed to have white wings with
which they flew upon the Sea belching Fire from all parts, and at last landed
upon their shore a Race of unknown Men, all crusted over with pollish'd Steel,
ordering and disposing at their Pleasure the Monsters that brought 'em thither,
carrying Thunder in their Hands which destroyed all that made any resistance,
while the wondering Indians cried, from whence came they? who brought them over
the Seas? who has given 'em the Power of Fire and Thunder? are they Gods or the
Children of the Sun? for certainly, they are not Men. I know not, Madam,
whether you conceive as I do, the extraordinary surprise of these Americans,
but certainly there was never any equal to it; and after that, I will not
swear, but there may be one day, a commerce betwixt the Earth and the Moon: Had
the Americans, any Reason to hope for a correspondence betwixt America and
Europe, (which they did not know?) It is true, there will be a Necessity to
cross the vast Extent of Air and Heaven that is betwixt the Earth and the Moon.
But did these Americans think the Ocean more proper to be crossed, and passed
through? Sure, said the Marquiese, you are mad; and looking earnestly on me; I
do not deny it, answered I; nay, said she, it is not sufficient to confess it,
I will prove you to be mad. The Americans were so ignorant, that the
Possibility of making a way or passage through the vast Ocean, could never
enter into their Thoughts; but we that know so much, we easily find out that it
would be no hard matter to pass through the Air if we could support our selves.
There are those Men, said I, who have found out more than a possibility of it;
for they actually begin to fly a little, and several have made and fitted wings
to themselves, and invented a way to give themselves Motion, for supporting the
Body in the Air, for crossing of Rivers, and flying from one steeple to
another. It Is true, these were not flights of an Eagle; and it has cost some of
these new Birds a Leg or an Arm: But this Essay is like the first Planks that
were carried on the Water, which yet gave beginnings to shipping; and there was
a very great difference between these Planks and Ships of mighty burden; yet
you see that time by degrees has produced great Ships. The Art of flying is but
in its Infancy, time must bring it to Maturity, and one day Men will be able to
fly to the Moon. Do you pretend to have discovered all things, said she, or to
have brought them to that perfection that nothing can be added? Pray, Madam,
said I, by consent, let us save something for the Age to come. I will never
yield, said she, that Men will ever be able to fly without breaking their
Necks. Well, said I, Madam, since you will needs have Men always to fly so ill,
it may be the Inhabitants of the Moon will fly better, and will be fitter for
that Trade; for it is all one, if we go to them or they to us. And we shall be
like the Americans, who did not believe Navigation possible, when at the same
time, sailing was so well understood on the other half of the Globe. Sure, said
she, in anger, the Inhabitants of the Moon would have been with us before now,
if that were likely. Pardon me, said I, Madam, the Europaeans did not sail to
America, till after six thousand years, all that time was requisite for
performing Navigation. The Inhabitants of the Moon, it may be, at that time,
knew how to make little Journeys in the Air, and are now practicing; and it may
be when they have more skill, we shall see 'em. And God knows what a strange
Surprise 'twill be to us. This is insupportable, said the Marquiese, to banter
me on thus with such frivolous Arguments. If you anger me, said I, I know what
I have to say to enforce 'em, and make all good. Observe, Madam, how the World
is daily more and more unfolded. The Ancients believed the torrid and the
frozen Zones uninhabituable for extremity of cold or heat: And the Romans
confined the general Map of the World to their own Empire, which carried as
much of Grandeur as Ignorance. But we know that there are Inhabitants both in
these extreme hot, and extreme cold Countries; by this the World is much
augmented. Then it was believed, that the Ocean covered all the Earth, except
what was inhabited: And that there was no Antipodes; for the Ancients never
heard of them: Besides they could not believe Men could have their Feet
opposite to ours, with their Heads hanging down; and yet after all this the
Antipodes are discovered, the Map of the World is corrected, and a new half
added to the World. You understand my meaning, said I, Madam; these Antipodes
which have been discovered contrary to all Expectation, ought to make us more
circumspect in judging by appearances: The World, and secrets of Nature will be
daily more and more discovered; and at last we may come to know somewhat more
of the Moon. Certainly, said the Marquiese, looking earnestly on me, I see you
so charmed with this Opinion, that I doubt not but you believe all you say. I
should be very sorry to find my self so, said I; my endeavor is only to show,
that chimerical Opinion may be so far defended by strength of Argument, as to
amuse a Person of your Understanding and Sense, but not to persuade: Nothing
but truth it self has that Influence; even without the Ornaments of all its
convincing Proofs; it penetrates so naturally into the Soul, that one seems but
to call it to mind; tho it be the first time that ever one heard of it. Now you
ease me, said she, for your false way of arguing did confound and incommode me,
but now I can go sleep soundly; so, if you please, let us retire.

The Third Night.
MY Lady Marquiese would needs engage me to pursue and continue our Discourse
by Daylight; but I told her, 'twas more proper to reserve our Fancies and
Notions till the Night; and since the Moon and Stars were the Subjects of our
Conversation, to trust it only to them. We did not fail to go that Evening into
the Park, which was now become a place consecrated to our Philosophical
Entertainment. I have a great deal of News to tell you, said I: The Moon, which
I told you last Night (by all appearance) was inhabited, now I begin to think,
may be otherwise; for I have been reflecting upon a thing, which puts its
Inhabitants in great danger. I shall never suffer that, said the Marquiese; for
you having prepared me last Night, put me in hopes to see these People arrive
one Day upon our Earth; and to day, you will not allow them a being in the
Universe: You shall not impose upon me at this rate. You made me believe there
were Inhabitants in the Moon; I have overcome all the Difficulties my Reason
suggested to me against that Opinion, and now I am resolved I will believe it.
You go too fast, said I, Madam; one ought to give but one half of ones Thoughts
and Belief to Opinions of this nature, reserving the other half free for
receiving the contrary Opinion, if there be occasion. I am not to be deluded,
replied the Marquiese, with fair Words; let us come to the subject matter in
debate: Must not we reason the same way of the Inhabitants of the Moon, as we
did of your St. Denis? Not at all, Madam, answered I; the Moon does not so much
resemble the Earth, as St. Denis does Paris. The Sun draws from the Earth,
Waters, Exhalations and Vapors; which ascending into the Air, to a certain
height, are gathered together, and form Clouds; these Clouds, hanging in the
Air, move regularly round our Globe, and over shadows sometimes one Country,
sometimes another: And if it were possible for any one to see and consider the
Earth at a great distance, he would perceive great Changes as to the appearance
of its Surface; for a great Country, covered with Clouds, would appear to be a
very obscure part of the Globe, and will become clear and enlightened as soon as
these Clouds dis-appear; and one would see these obscure places change their
Situation, meeting together in different Figures, or disappearing all together.
We should see therefore the same Changes upon the Surface of the Moon, were it
encompassed with Clouds, as the Earth is; but on the contrary, all the
Obscurities, or dark places, as also those parts that are enlightened, are still
the same, fixed to the same Situation, without Variation or Change; there lies
the difficulty: And for this reason, the Sun draws no Vapors or Exhalation
from the Globe of the Moon; and by consequence, it is a Body infinitely harder,
and more solid than our Earth, whose subtle parts are easily separated from
the rest, and mount upward, being once set in motion by the heat of the Sun: So
that the Moon must needs be nothing else but a vast heap of Rocks and Marble,
from which no Vapor can be exhaled; which Vapors are so essential and natural
to Waters, that it is impossible the one can be without the other. Who can then
be the Inhabitants of those Rocks that produce nothing? Or what living
Creatures can subsist in a Country without Water? How! cried my Lady Marquiese;
Have you forgot that you assured me, there were Seas in the Moon, which we
could distinguish from hence? That Is only a Conjecture, said I; and I am very
sorry that these obscure places, that may be taken for Seas, are, possibly,
nothing else but deep Caverns, and vast Cavities; and guessing is pardonable,
at the great distance we are at from the Moon. But, said she, is that
sufficient to make us reject the Inhabitants of the Moon? Not altogether,
Madam, said I; nor must we absolutely declare either for 'em, or against 'em. I
confess my weakness, said she; I am not capable of such Indifference, and I
must be positive in my Belief; therefore let us free our selves of one Opinion;
let us either preserve the Inhabitants of the Moon, or annihilate 'em for ever,
never to be heard of again; but, if possible, let us preserve 'em, for I have
an Inclination and a Kindness for 'em, I would not willingly lose. I shall not
unpeople the Moon then, Madam, said I, but for your sake shall restore to it
its Inhabitants: And the truth is, that by the Appearance of the obscure and
enlightened places of the Moon, which are still the same, without change, we
have no reason to believe that there are any Clouds surrounding it, which might
obscure sometimes one place, sometimes another; but yet that does not argue,
but she may emit Vapors and Exhalations: Our Clouds which we see carried in
the Air, are nothing but Exhalations and Vapors, which are separate in
Particles, too small to be seen; which meeting with cold Airs, as they ascend,
by it are condensed, and rendered visible to us, by the Reunion of their
Parts; after which, they become thick and black Clouds, which float in the Air,
as Stranger-Bodies, till at last they fall upon the Earth in Rain: But
sometimes it falls out, that the same Vapors and Exhalations are extended, and
kept from joining together, and so are imperceptible, and are only gathered
together so far as to form a kind of small Dew, so very subtle, that it cannot
be seen as it is a-falling. It may be, in like manner, that the Vapors which
proceed from the Moon (for certainly it emits Vapors;) and it is impossible to
believe, that the Moon can be such a Body, as that all its parts should be of
an equal Solidity, and so equal a temper, one with the other, that they are
incapable of receiving any Change, by the attracting and moving Influence of
the Sun upon 'em: We know no Body of this nature, the hardest Marbles are not
of this kind; and there is no Body, how hard and solid soever, but is subject
to Change and Alteration, either by secret and invisible Motion in it self, or
by some exterior Impulse it receives from another. It may be therefore, as I
said, that Vapors which arise from the Moon are not gathered together, as a
rounded Surface, into Clouds, but fall gently upon it again in insensible Dews,
and not in Rain: And it is sufficient to demonstrate this, to conjecture only,
that the Air which environs the Moon, is as different from the Air that
environs the Earth, as the Vapors of the Air from the Exhalations of the
other; which is more than likely to be true; and it must follow, that Matter
being otherwise disposed of in the Moon, than in the Earth, its effects should
also be different; and imports nothing, whether it be an interior Motion of the
parts of the Moon, or the Production of external Causes, which furnish it with
Inhabitants, and them with a sufficient Food for their Subsistence; so that, in
our Imagination, we may furnish 'em with Fruits and Grain of several sorts,
Waters, and what else we please; for Fruit, Grain and Water, I understand, are
agreeable to the nature of the Moon, of whose Nature I know nothing; and all
these proportioned and fitted to the Necessities of the Inhabitants, of whom I
know as little. That is to say, said the Marquiese, that you only know, that
all is very well there, without knowing in what manner; that is a great deal of
Ignorance, with a little Knowledge; but we must have patience: However, I think
my self very happy, you have restored the Moon its Inhabitants again; and I am
very much pleased, you have surrounded it with Air of its own; for without
that, I should think a Planet too naked.

These different Airs, answered I, hinder the Communication and Commerce of
these two Planets: If flying would do the business, what do I know, but we
might come to perfection in that Art I discoursed of last Night. I confess,
Madam, there seems but little likelihood of what I say, since the great
distance between the Moon and the Earth makes the difficulty so hard to
overcome, which is very considerable; but though it were not, and that the Earth
and the Moon were placed near one another, yet it would not be possible to pass
from the Air of the Earth, to the Air of the Moon. The Water is the Air and
Element of Fish, who never pass into the Air and Element of Birds; it is not the
distance that hinders 'em, but it is because every one of 'em are confined to
the Air which they breath. We find that our Air is mixed with Vapors, that are
thicker and grosser than those of the Moon; and by consequence, any Inhabitants
of the Moon, who should arrive upon the Confines of our World, would be drowned
and suffocated as soon as they entered into our Air, and we should see 'em fall
dead upon the Earth.

Oh, but I should be glad, cried the Marquiese, that some great Ship-wreck,
occasioned by a mighty Tempest, would throw a good many of these People upon
our World, that we might at leisure consider their extraordinary Shape and
Figure. But, answered I, if they had Skill enough to sail upon the external
Surface of our Air, and that from thence they should catch us, like Fish, out
of a Curiosity of seeing us; would that please you, Madam? Why not, said she,
laughing? I would go of my self into their Nets, to have the satisfaction of
seeing those that had caught me. Consider, said I, that you would be very weak
and feeble, before you come to the Surface of our Air; for we cannot breath it
in all its Extent, and we can hardly live on the Tops of high Mountains; and I
wonder that those who are so foolish as to believe, that Corporeal Geniuses
inhabit the purest Air, do not tell us why these Geniuses visit us so seldom,
and stay so short a while: I do believe, it is because few amongst 'em know how
to dive; and that even those who are skilful in that Art, have great difficulty
to penetrate the grosness of the Air which we breath. You see therefore, that
Nature has set many Bars and Fences, to hinder us from going out of our World,
into that of the Moon. However, for our Satisfaction, let us conjecture and
guess as much as we can of that world: For Example; I fancy that the
Inhabitants of the Moon must see the Heavens, the Sun, and the Stars, of a
different Color than what they appear to us. All these Objects we see through
a kind of natural Perspective-Glass, which changes them to us; this
Perspective-glass of ours is mixed with Vapors and Exhalations, which do not
ascend very high. Some of late pretend, that the Air of it self is blew, as
well as the Water of the Sea; and that that Color is not apparent in the one,
nor the other, but at a great depth: The Heavens, say they, in which are placed
the fixed Stars, has of it self no Light; and by consequence, ought to appear
black: But we see it through our Air, which is blew; and therefore the Heavens
appear of that Color. If it be so, the Beams of the Sun and Stars cannot pass
through the Air, without taking a little of its Tincture, and at the same time
lose as much of their own natural Color: But supposing the Air had no Color
of it self, it is certain, that a Flambeau, seen at a distance, through a thick
Fog, appears of a reddish Color, though that be not natural to it; so all our
Air, which is nothing else but a thick Fog, must certainly alter the true
natural Color of the Heavens, Sun and Stars to us; for nothing but the pure
heavenly Substance is capable to convey to us Light and Colors, in their
Purity and Perfection, as they are: So that the Air of the Moon is of another
nature than our Air, or is, of it self, of an indifferent Color; or, at least,
is another Fog, changing, in appearance, the Colors of the Celestial Bodies.
In short, if there be Inhabitants in the Moon, they see all things changed,
through their Perspective-glasses, which is their Air.

That makes me prefer our place of Habitation, said the Marquiese, to that of
the Moon; for I cannot believe, that the mixture of the Heavenly Colors is so
fine there, as it is here. Let us suppose, if you will, the Heavens of a
reddish Color, and the Stars of a greenish, the Effect would not be half so
agreeable as Stars of Gold, upon a deep Blue. To hear you speak, said I, one
would think you were fitting of Furniture for a Room, or choosing a Garniture
for a Suit of Cloths: Believe me, Nature is very ingenious, therefore let us
leave to her Care the finding out a Mixture of Colors agreeable to the
Inhabitants of the Moon; and I assure you, 'twill be perfectly well understood;
she certainly has not failed of changing the Scene of the Universe, according
to the different Situation and Position of the Beholders, and still in a new
and agreeable way. I know the Skill of Nature perfectly well, said Madam the
Marquiese; and she has spared her self the pains of changing her Objects, as to
the several Points from whence they may be seen, and has only changed the
Perspective-glasses, through which they are seen; and has the Honor of this
great Variety, without the Expense: She has bestowed on us a blue Heaven, with
a blue Air; and it may be, she has bestowed upon the Inhabitants of the Moon, a
Heaven of Scarlet, with an Air of the same Color, and yet their Heaven and
ours is one and the same: And it seems to me, that Nature has given every one
of us a Perspective-glass, or Tube, through which we behold Objects in a very
different manner, one from the other. Alexander the Great saw the Earth as a
fine place, fit for him to form a great Empire upon: Celadon only looked upon
it, as the Dewlling Place of Astraea: A Philosopher considers it as a great
Planet, all covered over with Fools, moving through the Heavens: And I do not
see that the Object changes more from the Earth to the Moon, than it does here
from one Man to another.

The Change of Sights is more surprising to our Imagination, said I; for they
are still the same Objects we see at different Views; and it may be, in the
Moon they see other Objects than we see; at least, they do not see a part of
those we see: Perhaps in that Country they know nothing of the Dawning of the
Day, of the Twilight before Sunrising, and after Sunsetting; for the Beams
of the Sun, at these two times, being oblique and faint, have not strength to
penetrate the grosness and thickness of the Air, with which we are environed;
but are received and intercepted by the Air, before they can fall upon the
Earth, and are reflected upon us by the Air; so that Daybreak and Twilight
are Favors of Nature which we enjoy by the by, or, as it were, by chance, they
not having been destined for us; but it is likely that the Air of the Moon,
being purer than ours, is not so proper and fit for reflecting the faint Beams
of the Sun before its Rising, and after its Setting; therefore I suppose, the
Inhabitants of the Moon do not enjoy the favorable light of the Aurora, or
Dawning; which growing stronger and stronger, does prepare us for the glorious
Appearance of the Sun at Noon; nor the Twilight, which becoming more faint by
degrees, we are insensibly accustomed to the Absence of the Sun: So that the
Inhabitants of the Moon are in profound Darkness, when on a sudden a Curtain
is drawn, as it were, and their Eyes are dazzled with the Rays of the Sun, and
they enjoy a bright resplendent Light; when by a sudden motion, as quick as
the former, down falls the Curtain, and instantly they are reduced to their
former Darkness: They want those Mediums, or Interstices, which join Day and
Night together (and which participates of both) which we enjoy. Besides, these
People have no Rainbow; for as the Dawning is an Effect of the thickness of
our Air, so the Rainbow is formed upon Exhalations and Vapors, condensed into
black Clouds, which pour down Rain upon us, by diverse Reflections and
Refections of the Sunbeams upon these Clouds: So that we owe the Obligation of
the most agreeable and pleasant Effects, to the ugliest and most dis-agreeable
Causes in Nature: And since the Purity of the Air of the Moon deprives it of
Clouds, Vapors and Rain, adieu to Rainbow and Aurora: To what then can the
Lovers in the Moon compare their Mistresses, without these two things?

I do much regret that loss, said the Marquiese, for in my Opinion, the
Inhabitants of the Moon are fully recompensed for the want of the Rainbow,
daybreak and twilight, since for the same Reason, they have neither Thunder
nor Lightning, both which are produced by Clouds and Exhalations; they enjoy
bright serene Days, and never lose the Sun by Day, nor the Stars by Night. They
know nothing of Storms and Tempest; which seem to us the effects of the wrath
of Heaven. And can you think their condition is so much to be lamented? You,
said I, Madam, represent the Moon as a most charming abode. Now methinks it
should not be so desirous and agreeable to have a burning Sun always over ones
Head, without the interposition of any Clouds to moderate its heat: And it may
be for this Reason, Nature has sunk these Caverns in the Moon, which are big
enough to be seen by our Telescopes: Who knows but the Inhabitants of the Moon,
retire into these Cavities, when they are incommoded with the Excessive heat of
the Sun, and it may be they live no where else, but build their Towns and
Villages in these hollow places? And do not we know that Rome, which is built
under ground, is almost as great as the City above ground? So that if we should
suppose, that the City of Rome above ground should be rased, and quite removed,
Rome under ground would then be just such a Town, as those I have imagined to
be in the Moon. Whole Nations live in these vast Caverns; and I doubt not but
there may be Passages under ground, for the communication and commerce of one
People and Nation with another. You are pleased to laugh, Madam, at my Fancy,
do so with all my Heart, I agree you should; and yet you may be more mistaken
than I: For you believe, that the Inhabitants of the Moon dwell upon the
Surface of their Globe, as we do on that of the Earth; it is very likely that
it is just the contrary; for there is most certain, a vast difference between
their way of living and ours. No matter, said the Marquiese, I cannot resolve
to suffer the Inhabitants of the Moon to live in perpetual Darkness. You would
be harder put to it, Madam, said I, if you knew that a great Philosopher of
old, believed the Moon to be the abode and dwelling of the Souls who had
merited Happiness by their good Life in this World; and that theit Felicity
consisted in hearing the Harmony of the Spheres as they turned round, and that
they were deprived of this heavenly Music, as often as the Moon was obscured
by the Shadow of the Earth; and that then these Souls roared and cried out as
in despair, and that the Moon made haste to recover her Light again, to bring
the Souls out of that Affliction. At that rate, said she, we should see the
blessed Souls come from the Moon to us; for why should not the Earth be to the
Moon, as the Moon is to the Earth, since according to the opinion of your
Philosopher, there was no other Felicity for the Souls of the blessed, than to
be transported from one World to the other? Seriously, said I, Madam, 'twould
be a great Pleasure and Satisfaction to see several different Worlds; and I am
often glad, to make these Journeys in Imagination; what joy then it would be to
do it in reality; that would be far better than to travel from hence to Iapan,
crawling as it were with difficulty from one point of this Globe to another,
and still to see nothing but Men and Women over and over again. Well, said she,
what hinders, but we should make a Journey through the Planets as well as we
can? Let us by imagination place our selves in several Positions, and
situations, fit for considering the Universe. Have we no more to see in the
Moon? No, said I, at least, I have shown you all I know. Going out of the Moon
toward the Sun, the first Planet you meet with is Venus; and here I must again
make use of my former Simile of Paris and St. Denis. Venus turns round the Sun
on her own Axis, as the Moon does round the Earth; and by the means of
Telescopes, we discover that Venus waxes and wanes, being sometimes altogether
enlightened, and sometimes darkened according to her different Positions in
respect to the Earth.

By all appearance the Moon is inhabited, why should not Venus be so, as well
as she? Ay, but interrupted the Marquiese by your why nots, you will people all
the Planets. Do not doubt of it, Madam, answered I; why has not Nature
sufficient to give Inhabitants to 'em all? We see that all the Planets are of
the same Nature, that they are all Opaque solid Bodies, having no Light but
what they receive from the Sun; which they send one to another by Reflection,
and that they have all the same kind of motion; thus far equal, and after all
this must we conceive that all these vast Bodies were made not to be inhabited?
And that Nature has made only an exception in Favor of the Earth, he that will
believe this, may, but for my part I cannot. I find you, said the Marquiese,
very resolute and settled in your opinion of a sudden: A little while ago, you
would scarce allow the Moon to be inhabited; and seemed to be very indifferent,
whether it were so or not; whereas now, I am confident, you would be very angry
with any body that should tell you that all the Planets were not inhabited. It
is true, Madam, in the minute wherein you have surpised me, had you
contradicted me, as to the Inhabitants of all the Planets, I would not only
have defended my opinion, but have proceeded, to have given you an exact
description of all the several Inhabitants of the Planets. There are certain
Moments of believing things; and I never so firmly believed the Planets to be
inhabited, as in that Moment I spoke of 'em; but now, after cooler Thoughts, I
should think it very strange, that the Earth should be inhabited as it is; and
the other Planets should be so entirely desolate and desarted: For you must not
think, that we see all the living Creatures that inhabit the Earth. For there
are as many several species and kinds of Animals invisible, as there are
visible. We see distinctly from the Elephant to the Mite; there our sight is
bounded, and there are infinite numbers of living Creatures lesser than a Mite,
to whom, a Mite is as big in proportion, as an Elephant is to it. The late
invention of Glasses called Microscopes, have discovered thousands of small
living Creatures, in certain Liquors, which we could never have imagined to
have been there. And it may be the different tastes of these Liquors, proceed
from these little Animals, who bite, and sting our Tongues and Palates. If you
mix certain ingredients in these Liquors, (as Pepper in Water,) and expose 'em
to the heat of the Sun, or let 'em putrefie, you shall see other new species or
living Creatures. Several Bodies, which appear to be solid, are nothing else
but Collections or little heaps of these imperceptible Animals; who find there
as much room, as is requisite for them to move in. The leaf of a Tree, is a
little World inhabited, by such invisible little Worms: To them this leaf seems
of a vast Extent, they find Hills and Valleys upon it: And there is no more
Communication between the living Creatures on the one side, and those on the
other, than between us and the Antipodes. And I think there is more reason, to
believe a Planet (which is so vast a Body) to be inhabited. There has been
found in several sorts of very hard Stones, infinite multitudes of little
Worms, lodged all over them in insensible varieties; and who are nourished upon
the Substance of these Stones which they eat. Consider the vast Numbers of
these little Animals, and how long a tract of Years they have lived upon a
grain of Sand. And by this Argument, tho my Moon were nothing but a confused
heap of Marble Rocks, I would rather make it be devoured and consumed by its
Inhabitants, than to place none at all in it.

To conclude, every thing lives, and every thing is animated; that is to say,
if you comprehend the Animals, that are generally known; the living Creatures
lately discovered, and those that will be discovered herafter, you will find
that the Earth is very well Peopled; and that Nature has been so liberal in
bestowing them, that she has not been at the pains to discover half of 'em.
After this, can you believe, that Nature, who has been fruitful to Excess as to
the Earth, is barren to all the rest of the Planets? My Reason is convinced,
said the Marquiese, but my Fancy in confounded with the infinite Number of
living Creatures, that are in the Planets; and my thoughts are strangely
embarass'd with the variety that one must of Necessity imagine to be amongst
'em; because I know Nature does not love Repetitions; and therefore they must
all be different. But how is it possible for one to represent all these to our
Fancy? Our Imaginations can never comprehend this variety, said I, let us be
satisfied with our Eyes, or we may easily conceive by an universal view, Nature
has formed variety in the several Worlds. All the Faces of Mankind are in
general near the same Form. Yet the two great Nations of our Globe, the
Europaeans and Africans, seem to have been made after different Models. Nay,
there is a certain resemblance and Air of the Countenance peculiar to every
Family or Race of Men. Yet it is wonderful to observe how many Millions of
Times, Nature has varied so simple a thing as the Face of a Man. We, the
Inhabitants of the Earth, are but one little Family of the Universe, we
resemble one another. The Inhabitants of another Planet, are another Family,
whose Faces have another Air peculiar to themselves; by all appearance, the
difference increases with the distance, for could one see an Inhabitant of the
Earth, and one of the Moon together, he would perceive less difference between
them, than between an Inhabitant of the Earth, and an Inhabitant of Saturn.
Here (for Example) we have the use of the Tongue and Voice, and in another
Planet, it may be, they only speak by Signs. In another the Inhabitants speaks
not at all. Here our Reason is formed and made perfect by Experience. In
another Place, Experience adds little or nothing to Reason. Further off, the
old know no more than the young. Here we trouble our selves more to know what is
to come, than to know what is past. In another Planet, they neither afflict
themselves with the one nor the other; and it is likely they are not the less
happy for that. Some say we want a sixth Sense by which we should know a great
many things we are now ignorant of. It may be the Inhabitants of some other
Planet have this advantage; but want some of those other five we enjoy; it may
be also that there are a great many more natural Senses in other Worlds; but we
are satisfied with the five that are fallen to our Share, because we know no
better. Our Knowledge is bounded to certain limits, which the Wit of Man could
never yet exceed. There is a certain point where our Ingenuity is at a stand;
that which is beyond it is for some other World, where it may be some things,
that are familiar to us, are altogether unknown. Our Globe enjoys the Pleasure
of Love; but is destroyed in several places by the fury of War. Another Planet
enjoys constant Peace, without the delights of Love, which must render their
Lives very irksom. In fine, Nature has done to the several Worlds in great, as
she has done to us Mortals in little by making some happy, others miserable.
Yet she has never forgot her admirable Art in varying all things, tho she has
made some equal in some respects, by compensating the want of any one thing,
with another of equal value.

Are you satisfied, said I, Madam, very gravely; have not I told you Chimeras
in abundance? Truly, I find not so much difficulty to comprehend these
differences of Worlds; my Imagination is working upon the Model you have given
me And I am representing to my own Mind odd Characters and Customs for these
Inhabitants of the other Planets. Nay more, I am forming extravagant shapes and
figures for 'em: I can describe 'em to you; for I fancy I see 'em here. I
leave these shapes, said I, Madam, to entertain you in Dreams this Night, to
morrow, we shall know, if they have assisted you, to describe the Inhabitants
of some other Planet.

The Fourth Night.
THe Dreams of my Lady Marquiese were not lucky, they still represented to her
something like what we see on Earth; so that I had as much reason to reproach
her, as certain People have to blame us when they see some of our Pictures; for
they being ignorant of drawing, and designing, and pleasing themselves with
their extravagant and grotesque Figures, tell us, our Pictures are nothing but
Men and Women, and that there is no Fancy in 'em; there was therefore a
necessity of laying aside all sorts of the Forms and Figures of those Animals
that inhabit several Planets, and to rest satisfied by guessing as well as we
can, in pursuing our Journey, which we had begun, through the several Worlds of
the Universe.

We were at Venus: And there is no doubt, said I to my Lady Marquiese, but
Venus turns upon her own Axis, but it is not known in what time, and by
consequence, we know not the length of her Days, but her Years must consist but
of eight Months, since Venus turns round the Sun in that space of time. As
Venus is forty times less than the Earth, the Earth must necessarily appear to
the Inhabitants of Venus, to be forty times bigger than Venus appears to us;
and as the Moon is also forty times less than the Earth, by consequence, it
must appear to the Inhabitants of Venus, about the same bigness that Venus
appears to us.

You afflict me, said the Marquiese, extremely; I see very well, that our Earth
is not that happy Planet to the Inhabitants of Venus, as she is to us; for our
Globe of the Earth must appear too big to the Inhabitants of Venus, to be the
Fountain of Love, but the Moon, which appears to the World of Venus, of the
same size that Venus appears to us, is exactly cut out to be the Source of
their Amors, and the lucky Star of their Intrigues; which Titles are most
agreeable to the pretty, clear, twinkling Planets, which have in 'em a certain
Air of Gallantry. It Is certainly a happy Fate for our Moon to give Laws to the
Loves of the Inhabitants of Venus: No doubt, but these People are very soft,
and have the Art to please extremely well. Without dispute, Madam, said I; the
very Mobile of Venus are all made up of Celladons and Silvanders, and their
most ordinary Conversations excel the finest in Clelia; the Climate being more
savourable to Love: Venus being nearer the Sun than we, receives from its
Influence a brighter Light, and a more enlivening Heat. I perceive very well,
interrupted the Marquiese, what kind of People the Inhabitants of Venus are;
they are, like our Moors of Granada, a sort of little Sunburned Gentlemen,
always in Love, full of Life and Fire, given to making Verses, and great Lovers
of Music, and every Day inventing Feasts, Balls and Masquerades, to entertain
their Mistresses. Pray, Madam, said I, you are very ill acquainted with the
Inhabitants of Venus; for our Moors of Granada are, in respect to them, as the
Inhabitants of Lapland, or Greenland, for Coldness and Stupidity.

But what then must the Inhabitants of Mercury be, for they are yet more near
to the Sun? They must certainly be mad, by having too much Light and Fire; and
I believe they have no more Memory, than the most part of our Negroes; they
never think, and are void of all Reflection, and they only act by Chance, and
by sudden Impulses. In short, the Planet Mercury must certainly be the Bethlem
of the Universe; they see the Sun a great deal bigger than we do, because they
are so much nearer to it; he darts upon 'em so strong a Light, that if the
Inhabitants of Venus were here, they would take our finest Days for the Remains
of a saint Twilight; and it may be, the Light we enjoy, would not serve them
to distinguish one Object from another; and the Heat they are accustomed to is
so excessive, that the greatest warmth enjoyed by the Inhabitants of the middle
of Africa, would frieze them to death. Their Year casts but three Months; the
length of their Day is yet unknown, Mercury being so little a Planet, and so
near the Sun, in whose Rays he is so continually lost, that he is hitherto
scarce discoverable by the Art and Skill of Astronomers, who could never yet
get so much hold of Mercury, as to observe the Time in which he performs his
Revolution upon his own Axis or Center; but the smallness of his Planet
persuades me it is in a very short time, and then, by consequence, his Days are
very short, and his Inhabitants must see the Sun as a very great flaming
Brasier, very near their Heads, which, to their Apprehension, moves with
wonderful Rapidity; this makes them so earnestly wish for the coming Night,
which, no doubt, must be much more grateful to 'em than the Day; and during
those cooler Hours, they are enlightened by Venus, and by the Earth; which two
Planets must appear to them of considerable bigness. As for the other Planets,
since they are removed further than Mercury, toward the Firmament, his
Inhabitants must see them less than they appear to us, and receive but little
Light from 'em, it may be, none at all; the fixed Stars must appear less to 'em
also, and they lose the sight of some of 'em entirely, which, in my Opinion, is
a very great Loss; for I should be very sorry to see the vast arched Roof of
the Heavens adorned with fewer Stars, or those I do see, appear less, and not
so bright.

I am not so much concerned for that Loss, said the Marquiese, as for their
being so extremely incommoded with excessive Heat; and I wish with all my
heart, we could ease 'em of that Trouble. Let us therefore allow 'em long and
continued Rain, to refresh 'em; such as are in some of the hot Countries of our
Earth, which fall for four Months together, during the hottest Seasons. That
may be done, said I; but we may find out another Remedy, to relieve the
Inhabitants of Mercury; for there are Countries in China, which, by their
Situation, must be very hot; yet notwithstanding, the Cold is so excessive
during the Months of July and August, that the Rivers are frozen: The Reason
is, These Climates abound with Saltpeter (whose Exhalations being very cold)
the force of the Heat draws out of the Earth in great abundance. Let us
therefore suppose Mercury to be a little Planet, made of Saltpeter; and let
the Sun extract out of himself a Remedy to his Disease which he gives to the
Inhabitants. This is certain, that Nature produces no Animal, but in places
where they may live; and Custom and Use, joined with Ignorance of what is
better, supplieth all Defects, and makes Life agreeable; for ought we know, the
Inhabitants of Mercury want neither Rain, nor Exhalations of Saltpeter.

After Mercury, you know, the next Planet we find in our Journey, is the Sun;
and if we judge by the Earth (which is inhabited) that other Bodies of the same
kind may be so too, we are mistaken, and the Why not will fail us here; for the
Sun is a Body of a quite different Nature from the Earth, and other Planets: He
is the Source and Fountain of all that Light, which the other Planets do only
reflect from one to another, after having received it from him; and so they can
exchange Light one with another, but are incapable of producing it: The Sun
alone draws from it self this precious Substance, which he darts a-round him
with great Force and Violence, and which is intercepted by every Body that is
solid; so that there is reflected from one Planet to another long streams and
streaks of Light, which crossing and traversing each other in the Air, are
interwoven a thousand different Ways, and so form a Mixture of the richest
substance in Nature: For this end the Sun is placed in the Center, which is the
Situation most proper and commode; from whence he may equally dispense and
distribute his Light and Heat, for the livening and enlightening all things
round him. The Sun is therefore a Body of a particular Substance; but what kind
of Body, or what kind of Substance, is all the difficulty: Heretofore 'twas
believed, that the Sun was a pure Fire; but the Error of this Opinion was found
out in the Beginning of this Age, by Spots which were discovered upon the
Surface of the Sun; as a little after that time, there were new Planets
discovered, of which I shall speak hereafter: The learned part of the World
were full of nothing else but these new Planets; and Discourses of 'em were so
much in fashion, that they believed the Spots in the Sun were nothing else but
these new Planets, moving round 'em, which necessarily hid a part of his Body
from our sight, when their obscure Side was turned toward us. The learned Men
of the World made their Court to most Kings and Princes, with these new
discovered Planets; giving the Name of one Prince to one, and of another Prince
to another; so that they were like to quarrel, to whom they should belong.

I am not pleased with that at all, said the Marquiese: You told me the other
Night, that the Philosophers and learned Men had given Names of Philosophers,
Astronomers and Mathematicians to the several Countries of the Moon, and I was
very well satisfied, and think it but just, that since the Kings and Princes
possess the Earth, that they ought to suffer Philosophers and Astronomers to
rule in the Moon and the Stars, without incroaching upon 'em. What, said I,
Madam, Will not you allow Kings and Princes some Corner of the Moon, or some
Star, to take their part in time of need? As to the Spots in the Sun, they can
be of no manner of use to 'em; for it has been found, they are not Planets, but
Clouds of Smoke and Vapors, and, as it were, a Scum arising from the Surface
of the Sun; for sometimes they appear in great Quantities, sometimes in less,
and at other times they dis-appear; sometimes they join in one, and other times
they are dispersed and dissipated; so that it should seem, the Sun is a liquid
Substance; some say, it is of melted Gold, which boils incessantly, and produces
those Impurities; and by the force of its Motion, throws upon the Surface its
Scum and Dross; and as those consume, new ones are produced. Pray, Madam,
fancy to your self what strange Bodies these Spots of the Sun must be; there
are some of 'em full as big as the Globe of the Earth; judge then what a great
quantity there must be of this melted Gold, and of the Extent of this vast
Ocean of Light and Fire, which we call the Sun. They say, the Sun appears,
through Telescopes, to be full of great Mountains which vomit Flames, and that
it is, as it were, a Million of Mount Aetna's, joined together; but at the same
time they acknowledge that these Mountains may be altogether visionary, and
that they are nothing else but the Effects of the Glasses of the Telescopes. To
whom shall we trust then, when these very Glasses, to which we owe so many new
Discoveries, deceive us? In fine, Let the Sun be what it will, it does not at
all seem proper to be inhabited; and yet it is pity, for the Situation would be
extremely fine; its Inhabitants would be placed in the Center of the Universe,
and would see all the other Planets turn regularly round 'em, whereas we
observe infinite Irregularities in their Course; and it is only because we are
not in a proper Situation to consider 'em, as not being in the Center of their
Motion. Is it not hard, that there is but one place in the Universe, where the
Study of the Stars would be easy, and that that place alone should be
uninhabitable? You do not think, whilst you speak, said the Marquiese, were any
living Creature in the Sun, he would see neither Planets, nor fixed Stars; nor,
indeed, any thing; the brightness of the Sun would render all things else
invisible; and if there were Inhabitants in the Sun, they would be apt to
believe themselves the only People in Nature.

I confess, said I, I am mistaken, I considered only the Situation of the Sun,
without the Effects of its Light. But, pray, Madam, allow me to tell you, that
you who have corrected me so justly, may also be mistaken your self: The
Inhabitants of the Sun would not so much as see it self; for they would be
incapable to support the dazzling of his Light, or unable to receive it, by
being too near; and all things well considered, the Sun would be a Country of
blind Men only. So that, once for all, I conclude, the Sun cannot be inhabited;
and if you please, Madam, we will continue our Journey to the other Worlds: We
are now come to the Center, which is the lowest Point in all Circular Figures;
and therefore must return back again, and go upwards. In the Way, we shall find
Mercury, Venus, the Earth, and the Moon; all which Planets we have visited.

The next that presents it self to our Observation is Mars, who contains
nothing rare or curious that I know of: His Days are not a full Hour longer
than ours, but his Years are double the length of ours. Mars is less than the
Earth, and his Inhabitants see the Sun neither so big, nor so bright as we do.
In short, Mars is not worthy the pains of a longer Discourse; but it is very
curious to observe Jupiter, and his four Moons, or Guards: they are four little
Planets, which turn round Jupiter, as our Moon turns round us. But, says the
Marquiese, interrupting me, why are there some Planets attending upon others,
who, it may be, are no better than themselves? In my Opinion, it would be more
regular and uniform if all the Planets, great and small, had but one Motion
round the Sun. Ah, Madam! said I; if you understood the Tourbillions, or
Whistlings of Monsieur Des Carts, whose Name is so terrible, and Idea's so
agreeable, you would not talk at that rate. Let my Brains turn round, said she,
laughing, if they will; I long to know what these Tourbillions are; make haste
therefore to satisfy me, I Will manage my self no longer, but henceforth abandon
all my Thoughts to Philosophy, without Reserve, let the World talk what they
please; but let me understand these Whirlings. I did not think you capable of
such Transports, said I, Madam; and I am sorry they have not a fitter Object:
But to satisfy you, a Tourbillion is a heap of Matter, whose parts are
disjoined one from another, yet moving round all one way; each little part
being allowed a particular Motion of its own, provided always they do not
obstruct the general Circular Motion. As for Example; A Tourbillion of Air,
called a Whirlwind, or a Hurricain, is an infinite quantity of little
Particles of Air, turning all round together, carrying along every thing they
meet with in their way: You know that the Planets are carried round in the
Celestial Matter, which is incredibly subtle and swift; all that vast Ocean,
and Mass of Celestial Substance, which is between the Sun, and the Sphere of
the fixed Stars, turns round, and carries with it the Planets one way, from
East to West, round the Sun, which is placed in the Center; but in shorter or
longer time, as they are distant or nearer the Center, all things turn round,
even the Sun it self; but he turns round upon his own Axis: And you are to
observe thus; if the Earth were in the middle of the Celestial Matter, as the
Sun is, she would also turn round upon her own Axis, like that: This is that
great Tourbillion, of which the Sun is, as it were, Governor; but at the same
time, all the Planets have little Whirlings peculiar to themselves, in
imitation of that great one, the Sun; notwithstanding, they are all carried
round the Sun, yet every one of them turns round upon his own Axis, and sweeps
along with him a share of the Celestial Substance, which yields easily to any
Impulse of Motion it receives, provided that does not obstruct its general
Motion round the Sun; and this is called the particular Whirling, or
Tourbillion of a Planet, which extends as far as the Sphere of its Activity can
reach; and if it falls so out, that any lesser Planet than that which governs
the Tourbillion comes in its way, it is carried with it, and indispensably
forced round it; but yet that does not hinder both the greater Planet, and the
lesser, with their Whirlings, to turn round with the great Tourbillion of the
Sun. 'Twas thus that, after the Creation of the Universe, the Earth carried the
Moon round it self, because the Moon fell within the Extent or Sphere of
Activity, and forced its Obedience. Jupiter, of whom I have said somewhat
already, was happier or stronger than we; there fell four little Planets in his
Neighborhood, and he subdued 'em all four: Our Earth, which is now a chief
Planet, had it fallen within the Tourbillion of Jupiter, you may easily believe
he would have forced us to have turned round him also, Jupiter being ninety
times bigger than our Earth; and then we had been nothing but a Moon depending
upon Jupiter, whereas now the Earth has a Moon of her own turning round her: So
true it is, that Chance of Situation has decided our Fortune. Pray, what
Assurance have we, said the Marquiese, that our Earth shall always remain in
the same Situation? I am afraid we may make a Trip one Day or other, toward
some Planet as dangerous as Jupiter, who may sweep us round with it self; or
that some other stronger Planet may approach nearer to us; for I fancy, that
the violent Motions of the heavenly Matter you speak of, may agitate and shake
the Planets so irregularly, that it might sometimes bring 'em nearer together,
and at other times remove 'em farther from one another. We might gain rather
than lose by that Bargain, said I; for it may be, our Earth would be carried
near Venus and Mercury, which are little Planets, and could not resist ours:
But we have nothing either to hope or fear from such an Accident; the Planets
must remain where they are, new Conquests are forbid them, as they were
heretofore to the Kings of China. You know very well, when one mixes Oil and
Water together in a Vessel, the Oil will swim above; and if you throw any very
light thing into the Vessel, the Oil will support it, and it will not penetrate
into the Water: Throw in any other thing, somewhat heavier, of a proportionable
weight to penetrate the Oil, which is too weak to stop it; 'twill fall upon the
Water, and swim, the Water being sufficiently strong to bear it up. So that
this Vessel, full of two Liquors, which does not mingle together two Bodies of
an unequal weight, rests naturally in two different Positions, the one above
the other; so as the lightest can never descend, the heaviest can never ascend.
If you add other Liquors that will not mingle together, and throw as many
Bodies into 'em of proportionable weight, 'twill still be the same thing.
Imagine to your self, that the Celestial Substance which fills the vast
Tourbillion, or Whirling of the Sun, is composed of different Coats, wrapped
within one another, like an Onion; these Coats are of different weights and
force, as Oil and Water, and other Liquors. The Planets also are of different
weights; and by consequence, every one of the Planets must stop upon that Coat
proportionable to its weight, and which has necessary strength for supporting
it, and keeping it in an equal Balance; and you will perceive it is not
possible in Nature they can remove from thence.

I understand very well, said the Marquiese, how these different Weights are
regulated, according to their several degrees: Would to God, there were some
such Order amongst us Mortals, to confine every Man to the Station that is fit
for him. I am now no longer in fear of Jupiter; I am satisfied that he will
leave us at ease in our own little Whirling, or Tourbillion; I am easily
pleased, and do not envy Jupiter his four Moons.

You would be to blame if you should, said I; for he has no more than what is
necessary for him; considering the great distance he is from the Sun, his Moons
receive and reflect but a very faint Light. It Is true, that Jupiter turns upon
his own Axis in the space of ten Hours, his Nights are but four Hours long; and
being so short, one would think he had no great need of four Moons: But you
must consider, in our Earth, under the North and South Poles, there are six
Months of Day, and six Months of Night; because the two Poles being the two
Points of the Earth, remotest from those Countries and Places, upon which the
Sun darts his beams directly, and over which, to our Apprehensions, he seems to
perform his Course: The Moon holds, or appears to us to hold the same Road with
the Sun: So that if the Inhabitants near the South and North Poles see the Sun
during one half of his yearly Course, and then lose his Light during the other
half, it must follow, that they see the Moon during one half of her monthly
Revolution, and lose her during the other half; that is, for the space of
fifteen Days. One of Jupiter's Years is twelve of ours, and there must be two
opposite Poles in that Planet where there are Days and Nights of six Years long
apiece. A Night of six Years long is very long, and I believe these four Moons
were chiefly created for that reason: The highest of the four, as to Jupiter,
performs its Course round him in seventeen Days, the second in seven Days, the
third in three Days and an half, and the fourth in forty two Hours. These
Revolutions being thus divided by equal halves in these unhappy Climates, where
there are six Years of continued Night, one and twenty Hours cannot pass
without their seeing appear, at least, the last of the four Moons; which is a
very great satisfaction, during so long and irksome a Darkness: But upon
whatever place of Jupiter you should inhabit, these four Moons would represent
to your view one of the most agreeable Sights in Nature: Sometimes they rise
all four together, then they separate according to the inequality of their
Motions; sometimes they see 'em over their Heads, directly above one another;
at other times they see 'em appear above their Horzion, at equal distances; at
another time, two of the four are rising, when the other two are setting; but
above all, I should be pleased to see their constant Eclipsing one another, or
the Sun; for there passes no Day, without one of the two; and since Eclipses
are so familiar to that World, they must certainly be a Divertisement to them,
whereas they frighten the Inhabitants of our Earth.

And you will not fail, I hope, says the Marquiese, to bestow Inhabitants upon
these four Moons, though they be little, inferior Planets, and only made to
enlighten the Inhabitants of a greater, during their long Nights. You need not
doubt of it, said I, Madam; these four Planets are no less deserving of
Inhabitants, because they are so unhappy as to be subject to, and turn round a
more important Planet. I would, says the Marquiese, have the Inhabitants of
these four Moons to be Colonies of Jupiter, and receive their Laws and Manners
from thence, and pay Homage and Respect to Jupiter, and not to look upon that
great Planet, but with Veneration. And would you not also, said I, have these
four Moons to send Ambassadors, from time to time, to the Inhabitants of
Jupiter, and swear Fealty to him? For my part, we having no Authority over the
Inhabitants of our Moon, makes me think that Jupiter has no more over the
Inhabitants of his four; and I believe, one of the Advantages he has most
reason to brag of, is, that he frightens 'em. For Example; The Inhabitants of
that Moon next to Jupiter, see him three hundred and sixty times bigger than
our one Moon appears to us: And as I believe that little Moon to be much
nearer to Jupiter than Ours is; so his greatness must be by that considerably
augmented; and they must constantly see that monstrous Planet hanging over
their Heads, at a very small distance. And if it be true, that the Gauls of
old, apprehended the falling of the Heavens: The Inhabitants of that Moon have
more Reason to fear the falling of Jupiter. It may be, said she, they have that
fright, instead of that of the Eclipses, which you told me, they are free from;
and which must be supplied by some other piece of Folly. It must be so
infallibly, said I, Madam, for the great inventer of the third System, of which
I spoke to you the other Day, the Ticho-Brahe one of the greatest Astronomers
that ever lived, was far from fearing Eclipses as the Vulgar do; but instead of
that, he feared, if the first he met (as he went out of his House in the
Morning) were old, or if a Hare happened to cross his way, he instantly
returned home, shut himself up, and did believe that day to be unlucky; nor
would he dare to attempt Business of the smallest Consequence.

It is not just, said the Marquiese, that since that great Man was not free
from the Fear of Eclipses for nothing, that the Inhabitants of that little
Moon, should come off at an easier rate: Let us give 'em no Quarter, but force
'em to submit to the common Law of Nature, and oblige 'em to yield to some
other Folly. But since I will not trouble my self to guess at this time, what
that may be, pray solve me one difficulty, which my Fancy has just now
suggested; if the Earth be so little, in respect of Jupiter; does the
Inhabitants of Jupiter see our Earth? I am afraid we are altogether unknown to
'em. Really, I believe it to be so, said I, for the Inhabitants of Jupiter must
see the Earth ninety times less than Jupiter appears to us; which is too small
to be perceived by them; and all we can imagine for our advantage, is, to
suppose that there are Astronomers in Jupiter, who after having taken a great
deal of Pains, and fitting excellent Telescopes; and having chosen a very clear
Night for making the Observation, they at last discover in the Heavens a little
Planet, they had never seen before; and straight they set it down in the
Philosophical Transactions of that Country. The rest of the Inhabitants of
Jupiter, either never hear of it, or laugh at it if they do; the Philosophers
themselves whose Opinion that discovery destroys, resolve not to believe it;
and there are but some very rational People, that will trouble themselves with
the thoughts of it. These Astronomers make new Observations; they again look
upon this little Planet, and they begin to be assured that it is no Fancy but a
real thing; then they begin to conclude, this little Planet has a Motion round
the Sun; and after a thousand Observations, they at last find out that this
Motion or Revolution, is performed in a Years time. So that, thanks to these
learned Men, the Inhabitants of Jupiter know our Earth is a Planet and a World:
The Curious are earnest to look on it through a Telescope; tho it is so little,
it is hardly discoverable.

If it were not, said the Marquiese, very disagreeable for me to believe, that
our Earth is not to be perceived by the Inhabitants of Jupiter, but by the help
of a Telescope, I should find an Infinite Pleasure in imagining, I should see
those Telescopes pointing toward us; and ours from a mutual Curiosity are
levelled at them, whilst those two Planets gravely considering one another,
the Inhabitants of both ask at one and the same time, What World is that? What
People are those?

Don't go so fast, Madam, said I; suppose, the Inhabitants of Jupiter, could
see our Earth; yet, they could never see us, or so much as suspect our Earth to
be inhabited; or if any Body were Fool enough to imagine it, God knows, how he
would be laughed at and ridiculed by the rest of the Inhabitants. And it may
be, we are the Cause, that some Philosophers in that World have been sued and
persecuted for this Opinion: However, I believe, that the Inhabitants of
Jupiter are employed enough in the discovery of their own Planet, without
troubling themselves with the thoughts of us. And had Christopher Columbus been
of that Country, and understanding Navigation so well, he could not have wanted
employment. And the People of that World know not the hundredth part of its own
Inhabitants; whereas, in Mercury (which is a very little Planet) they are all
Neighbors one to another, and converse familiarly together; and they esteem
it, as but a Walk to go round their little World; and if the Inhabitants of
Jupiter do not see us, you may easily judge, they can far less perceive Venus
and Mercury, both which are more diminutive Worlds, and further distant from it
than we: But in lieu of this, they see Mars, and there are four Moons, and
Saturn with the five that belong to him. There are Planets enough, to perplex
all the Astronomers there: And Nature has had the goodness to hide from 'em
what remains of the Universe.

What, said the Lady Marquiese, do you look upon that as a Favor? Without
doubt, said I, Madam, there is in this great Tourbillion or whirling of the
Sun, Sixteen Planets. And Nature, who is willing to save us the labor of
studying all their Motions, has discovered to us only seven of them; and is not
that a great Favor. But we who are not sensible of this Grace, have so ordered
the matter that by our Endeavors we have found out the other nine, which
Nature had concealed from us, and we are sufficiently punished for it, by the
great Pains and Labor, which is at present requisite for the Study of
Astronomy.

I see, answered she, by the number of sixteen Planets, that Saturn must have
five Moons. He has so, said I, Madam, and two of the five are discovered very
lately, but there is yet something more remarkable in that Planet; for his Year
is as long as thirty of ours; and consequently there are Climates in that
World, where one Night lasts for fifteen Years together. Can you guess what
Nature has intended for the enlightening of Nights so long and dreadful? She was
not satisfied to bestow on Saturn five Moons; but has also given him a great
Circle or Ring, which environs him entirely, and which is elevated sufficiently
high enough to be out of the shadow of this Planet. It reflects the Light of
the Sun perpetually upon the Inhabitants of Saturn, who have the Misfortune to
live in that Climate, that is, so long a time deprived of the influence of his
Beams.

Well, said the Marquiese, (with the Air of a Person returned to herself from
some great astonishment) all that you say is contrived with wonderful Order,
and sure Nature has seen and provided for the necessity of some animate Beings;
and that the distribution of these Moons, was not a work of Chance, since they
are bestowed only upon these Planets, that are at a great distance from the
Sun, the Earth, Jupiter and Saturn; for Venus and Mercury have no need on 'em;
they enjoy but too much Light already; and their Nights are very short; and it
may be the Inhabitants of this Planet esteem Night a greater benefit of Nature,
than the Day it self. But hold, said Madam the Marquiese, it seems to me, that
Mars, who is farther distant from the Sun than the Earth, ought to have a Moon
too. I must confess, said I, Madam, he has none; but certainly, the Inhabitants
of that Planet enjoy some other advantage, which supplies that defect. You have
seen several bodies, both liquid and dry, which draw in the Light of the Sun;
and afterward shine and cast a light in the dark. It may be, that there are
great Rocks very high; which are naturally of such a kind of Substance, as to
receive great Provision of Light in the Day time from the Sun, which they
restore in the Night; and if it be so, you cannot deny, but it must be a very
pleasant Scene or Representation, to see all those Rocks from all Quarters
begin to shine, as soon as the Sun is down, and make Magnificent Illuminations
without Art or Expense. You know also that in America, there are certain Birds,
which shine so in the dark; that one may read by their Light, as well as by
that of a Candle; and who knows, but there are many of these Birds in the
Planet Mars, which fly about and enlighten that World as soon as the Sun is set?

Your Rocks, and your flying Birds, said the Marquiese, do not at all satisfy
me. I confess such objects would be very pretty; but since Nature has given so
many Moons to Saturn and Jupiter; it is a sign, that they are absolutely
necessary as well to Mars. I should have been glad that all the Worlds distant
from the Sun, could have had their Moons; and that Mars might not have been so
disagreeably excepted. Oh! Madam, said I, if you think it worth your pains to
make any further Progress in Philosophy, you must accustom your self to such
Exceptions; in the best Systems, there are always some things that agree
exactly; but there are other things, that one must adjust as well as one can,
or leave them as they are, if there be no hopes to overcome the difficulty: Let
us do so if you please with Mars; and since he is not favorable to us, say no
more of him. And tell me if it would not be strangely surprising, if we were in
the World of Saturn, to see above our Heads in the Night that great Ring in the
form of a Semicircle, going from opposite Points of the Horizon; and which
reflecting the Light of the Sun upon us, would have the effect of a continued
Moon. And shall we place no Inhabitants upon that great Ring, said the
Marquiese, laughing? I answered her, that (tho in the Humor I was in, I was
inclined to put Inhabitants every where) I confess, I dare not set any upon so
irregular a Habitation; but for the five little Moons, there is no dispensing
with them, for they must have Inhabitants. But some do imagine, that this Ring
or great Circle is composed of Moons joined very near together, having all an
equal Motion, and turning one way, and that the five little Moons I spoke of,
had only escaped out of this great Ring; what an Infinity of Worlds are there
then in the Tourbillion or whirlings of Saturn? and yet whatever is the Cause,
the Inhabitants of Saturn are miserable enough, notwithstanding the Assistance
of this great Ring. It Is true, it gives them Light, but what kind of Light?
Sure a very feeble one at that great distance from the Sun, where she her self
appears to 'em, but as a little pale Star, a very faint heat and Light, so that
if you would carry some of the Inhabitants of Saturn to our coldest Countries,
as Green-Land, or Lap-Land, you would see 'em all of a sweat, and melt away
with heat. You give me an Idea of Saturn, said the Marquiese; that makes me
shiver with cold; whereas before you warmed me as much with the descriptions
you gave me of Mercury. There is a Necessity, said I, that the two Worlds that
are at the extremity of this great Tourbillion, must be contrary one to another
in every thing. At that rate, said she, the Inhabitants of Saturn must be very
wise; for you told me the Inhabitants of Mercury were downright mad. If the
People of Saturn, said I, be not wise, they are at least in all Appearance so,
and are very phlegmatic, they know not what it is to laugh; and who take a
whole days time at least, to answer the most trifling Question: They would have
looked upon the grave Cato the Censor, as too wild and youthful for their
Conversation.

There is a thought come into my Head, said the Marquiese; all the Inhabitants
of Mercury are verly lively, and the Inhabitants of Saturn extremely dull: Now
upon our Earth, we have a mixture of both, some are very airy, and some as
insipid: Does not that proceed from our being situate in the middle, between
these two Worlds, that we participate so of the Qualities of both these
Extremes; and there is no fixed settled Character of Mankind; some resemble the
Inhabitants of Mercury, others of Saturn; and we are a mixture of all the
several kinds of People, that inhabit all the other Planets? I like that Idea
well enough, said I, we are of such an extravagant Composition, that one would
really believe, that we were collected and drawn together from all the other
Worlds. And at this rate, it is very convenient to live in ours, since here we
see an abridgement of all that can be seen in the other Worlds. At least, said
the Marquiese, Our World has one real advantage and convenience, that it is
neither so hot as Mercury or Venus, nor so cold as Jupiter and Saturn: And we
have the good luck over and above, to be born in a Climate of this Earth, that
has neither excess of heat nor cold. And if a certain Philosopher thanked
Nature for being a Man and not a Beast, a Grecian, and not a Barbarian; for my
Part, I thank her, that I inhabit the most temperate Planet of the Universe,
and the most temperate Climate of that Planet. If you will trust me, said I,
Madam, you ought to thank her for being young, and not old, young and handsome,
and not young and ugly, young, handsome, and a French Woman, and not a young
and handsome Italian. You have abundance of other Reasons of Gratitude, than
those of the Situation of your Tourbillion, or the temperate Qualities of your
Country. Good God, said she, suffer me to be grateful for every thing; even to
the very Tourbillion where I was born: The measure of the Happiness bestowed
upon us, is too little to lose any part of it; and it is good to have such a
Sense and Taste of the commonest and most inconsiderable things, as to turn all
to our Advantage and Profit. If we should look after no other Pleasure or
Satisfaction, than this World afforded, we should enjoy but very few, expect
'em long, and pay dear for 'em. If Philosophy be the Pleasure, you propose,
said I, Madam, I have the Boldness to wish, that when you remember the
Tourbillions, you would be pleased to think of me. Yes, answered she, provided
you take care your Philosophy furnishes me always with new Pleasures. At least,
for to Morrow, answered I, I hope you shall not want; for I have the fixed
Stars prepared for you, which surpass all you have hitherto heard.

The Fifth Night.
MY Lady Marquiese was very impatient to know what should become of the fixed
Stars. Can they be inhabited as the Planets are, said she to me? or are they
not inhabited? what shall we make of 'em? If you would take the Pains, you
could not fail to guess, said I, Madam, the fixed Stars cannot be less distant
from the Earth, than fifty Millions of Leagues; nay, some Astronomers make the
distance yet greater; that between the Sun and the remotest Planet is nothing
if compared to the distance between the Sun or Earth, and the fixed Stars; we
do not trouble our selves to number 'em, their Luster as you see is both clear
and bright. If the fixed Stars, receive their Light from the Sun, it must
certainly be very weak and faint before it comes to 'em, having passed through
a hundred and fifty Millions of Miles of the Celestial Substance, I spoke of
before: Then consider, the fixed Stars are obliged, to reflect this borrowed
Light upon us at the same distance, which in reason must make that Light yet
paler and more faint, it is impossible that this Light if it were borrowed from
the Sun, and not only suffered a Reflection, but passed through twice the
distance of a hundred and fifty Millions of Miles, could have that Force and
Vivacity, that we observe in the fixed Stars: Therefore I conclude they are
enlightened of themselves; and are by consequence so many Suns. Do not I deceive
my self, cried out the Marquiese, do I see whither you are going to lead me?
Are you not about to tell me the fixed Stars, are so many Suns, and that our
Sun is the Center of a great Tourbillion which turns round him; what hinders
but a fixed Star may be the Center of a Tourbillion, whirling or turning round
it? Our Sun has Planets, which he enlightens, why may not every fixed Star have
Planets also? I have nothing to answer, but what Phoedra said to Oenone, it is
you that have hit it. But said she, I see the Universe to be so vast, that I
lose my self, I know not where I am, and have conceived nothing all this while.
What is the Universe thus divided into Tourbillions, confusedly cast together?
Is every fixed Star the Center of a Tourbillion; and it may be full as big as
our Sun? Is it possible, that all this Immense space, wherein our Sun and
Planets have their Revolution, is nothing but an inconsiderable part of the
Universe? And that every fixed Star must comprehend and govern an equal space
with our Sun? This confounds, afflicts, and frightens me. And for my part, said
I, it pleases and rejoices me; when I believed the Universe to be nothing, but
this great Azure Vault of the Heavens, wherein the Stars were placed, as it
were so many golden Nails or Studs, the Universe seemed to me too little and
strait; I fansied my self to be confined and oppressed: But now when I am
persuaded, that this Azure Vault has a greater depth and a vaster Extent, and
that it is divided into a thousand and a thousand different Tourbillions or
Whirlings, I imagine I am at more Liberty, and breath a freer Air; and the
Universe appears to me to be infinitely more Magnificent. Nature has spared
nothing in her Production, and has profusely bestowed her Treasures upon a
glorious Work worthy of her: You can represent nothing so august to your self,
as this prodigious Number of Tourbillions, whose Center is possessed by a Sun,
that makes the Planets turn round him. The Inhabitants of the Planets of any of
these infinite Tourbillions, see from all sides the enlightened Center of the
Tourbillion with which they are environed; but cannot discover the Planets of
another, who enjoy but a faint Light, borrowed from their own Sun, which it
does not dart further than its own Sphere or Activity. You show me, said the
Marquiese, so vast a Prospect, that my sight cannot reach to the end of it: I
see clearly the Inhabitants of our World; and you have plainly presented to my
Reason the Inhabitants of the Moon, and other Planets of our Tourbillion or
Whirling: After this you tell me of the Inhabitants of the Planets of all the
other Tourbillions. I confess, they seem to me to be sunk into so boundless a
depth, that whatever force I put upon my Fancy, I cannot comprehend 'em; and
indeed you have annihilated 'em by the Expressions you made use of in speaking
of 'em and their Inhabitants. You must certainly call 'em the Inhabitants of
one of the Planets, of one of these infinite Tourbillions; and what shall
become of us in the middle of so many Worlds; since the Title you give to the
rest agrees to this of ours? And for my Part, I see the Earth so dreadfully
little, that hereafter I shall scorn to be concerned for any part of it. And I
admire why Mankind are so very fond of Power, so earnest after Grandeur, laying
design upon design, circumventing, betraying, flattering, and poorly lying, and
are at all this mighty Pains to grasp a part of a World they neither know nor
understand, nor any thing of these mighty Tourbillions: For me, I Will lazily
contemn it, and my carelessness shall have this Advantage by my Knowledge, that
when any Body shall reproach me with my Poverty, I will with vanity reply, Oh!
you do not know what the fixed Stars are. I do believe, said I, Madam, that
Alexander the Great himself did not know: For a certain Author who holds that
the Moon is inhabited, says very gravely, that it was impossible, but Aristotle
must be of so reasonable an Opinion (for how could such a truth escape so great
a Man as Aristotle?) but that he would never say any thing of it for fear of
displeasing Alexander; for had he known there had been a World which he could
not have conquered, it would have reduced him to certain Despair. There was yet
more Reason to conceal the Tourbillions of the fixed Stars from him; if they
had been known in those Days, he would have made his Court very ill to that
great Prince, who should but have mentioned 'em. As for me who know 'em, I am
very sorry I can draw no advantage from that Knowledge, which can cure nothing
but Ambition and Disquiet, and none of these Diseases trouble me. I confess a
kind of Weakness in Love, a kind of frailty for what is delicate and handsome,
this is my Distemper, wherein the Tourbillions are not concerned at all. The
infinite Multitude of other Worlds may render this little in your Esteem, but
they do not spoil fine Eyes, a pretty Mouth, or make the Charms of Wit ever the
less: These will still have their true Value, still bear a price in spite of
all the Worlds in the Universe.

It is a strange thing, said the Marquiese laughing, that Love saves himself
from all Dangers, and there is no Systeme or Opinion can hurt him: But tell me
frankly, are your Systemes certainly true? Do not dissemble, for I promise to
keep it secret: I fancy it is founded upon a very small bottom, a fixed Star
enlightened of it self, as the Sun is, and therefore it must be a Sun, the Soul
and Center of the World having Planets turning round it as that also has. Is
this absolutely necessary, says she? I fear, Madam, said I: Since we are always
in the humor of mixing some little Gallantries with our most serious
Discourses, give me leave to tell you, that Mathematical reasoning is in some
things near akin to Love; and you cannot allow the smallest Favor to a Lover,
but he will soon persuade you to yield another, and after that a little more,
and in the end prevails entirely; so if you grant the least Principle to a
Mathematician, he will instantly draw a consequence from it, which you must
yield also, and from that another, and then a third, and maugre all your
Resistance, in a short time, he will lead you so far, that you cannot retreat.
These two sorts of Men, The Lover and Philosopher always take more than is
given 'em. You must acknowledge that when I see two Objects alike in every
thing that I do see, I have Reason to believe them to be also alike in what I
see not; for where is the hindrance or difficulty? From thence I have argued
that the Moon is inhabited because it is like the Earth; that the other Planets
are inhabited because they are like the Moon. I find that the fixed Stars are
like our Sun as to what I see; and therefore, I conclude they are Suns, and
have Planets turning round about 'em; and every thing else we attribute to our
Suns. Now, Madam, you are too far engaged to retire; and therefore you must
generously yield. By this rule of resemblance, said she, which you make betwixt
our Sun and the fixed Stars, the Inhabitants of another Tourbillion, must only
see our Sun as a small fixed Star, which only appears to them, during their
Night. Without doubt, said I, Madam, our Sun is so near us, in respect of the
Suns of the other Tourbillions, that his Light must have infinitely greater
force upon our Sight than the Light of the other Suns; when we see our Sun, we
see nothing else, his brightness makes all other things disappear: In another
great Tourbillion, where another Sun governs, he in his turn removes and
darkens our Sun, which does not appear, but in the Night as a fixed Star
amongst the other strange Suns (that is) fixed Stars, and our Sun appears to
the Inhabitants of that Tourbillion in the great Vault of the Heavens, as a
Star of some Constellation, such as the Bear or the Bull: As to the Planets
which turn round about him (as our Earth for example) since they cannot see it
at so great a distance, they do not so much as think of it, so that all these
Suns are Suns by day for the Tourbillion which they govern, and fixed Stars by
Night; for all the other, every one of them is the only one of his kind in his
own World; but serve only to make up the Number of fixed Stars for all the
other Worlds. Notwithstanding, said she, of this Equality of Resemblance of the
Worlds, yet I cannot believe, but they differ in a thousand things, for
likeness upon the main does not hinder infinite little differences.

Most certainly, said I; but the difficulty will be, to find out those
Differences. What do I know but in one Tourbillion, there are more Planets
turning round it than in another? In one there are Inferior Planets turning
round the greater, in another there are none at all: In one Tourbillion the
Planets are gathered together, as it were a little Party, round their Sun, and
beyond them a vast Vacuity, extending to the next Tourbillion; in another, the
Planets take their Course toward the Extremity of their Tourbillion, and leave
a Void in the middle, and I do not doubt but there are Tourbillions destitute
of Planets; and others, where their Sun is not placed in the middle, and yet
has a free Motion, and carries his Planets round with him; others, where the
Planets rise and fall in respect of their Sun, according to the Changes of the
Counterpoise which balances 'em. What would you have, Madam? Have not I said
enough for a Man that was never out of his own Tourbillion?

No, said she, not for the quantity of Worlds which you say there is: What you
have described will suffice but for five or six, and I see thousands.

What would you say, Madam, said I, if I should tell you that there are
infinitely more fixed Stars than those you see, that by the help of Telescopes
an unaccountable number are discovered, which we cannot see with our Eyes
alone; and that in one Constellation, where we counted but twelve or fifteen
fixed Stars, there have been discovered more than we see with our Eyes in the
whole Heavens?

I ask your Pardon, said she; I yield and confess, you have over-charg'd me
with Worlds and Tourbillions. Madam, said I, I have still a Reserve for you:
You see that Whiteness in the Hemisphere, called The Milky Way; Can you imagine
what it is? It Is nothing but an Infinity of little fixed Stars, which cannot be
seen by our Eyes, because they are so very small, and are placed so near to one
another, that they appear to be but one continued Whiteness: I wish you could
see this Anthill or Stars, and these Seeds of Worlds; they look like the
Maldevia-Islands, or those twelve thousand little Isles, or Banks of Sand,
separate only by small Canals of the Sea, which one may over-leap with as much
Ease as a Ditch. So that these little Tourbillions of the Milky Way, being so
near one to another, may converse and shake hands with those of their
Neighboring World; at least, the Birds of one World may fly into another; and
they may teach Pigeons to carry Letters, as they do in the Levant. By which,
the Sun, in his own Tourbillion, as soon as he begins to spread his Light, he
faceth that of all other Stranger-Suns; for if you were in one of these little
Tourbillions of the Milky Way, your Sun would not be so near to you; and by
consequence, would have but little more power, force, or influence upon your
Eyes, than a hundred thousand other Suns of the neighboring Tourbillions; you
would then see your Heaven shining with an infinite number of Fires, very near
to one another, and not far distant from you; and though you should lose the
sight of your own Sun, you would still have Light enough, and your Nights would
be no less bright than your Days; at least, you would not be sensible of the
difference; or, to speak more properly, you would have no Night at all: The
Inhabitants of this World, accustomed to perpetual Day, would be strangely
surpised if one should tell 'em, that there are several People in the
Universe, who are under the Tribulation of dismal, real Nights, and who fall
into long and profound Darknesses, and who, when the Light returns, behold one
and the same Sun: They would look upon such People as the Outcasts of Nature,
and the very Thoughts of our sad Condition would sieze them with Horror.

I do not ask you, said the Marquiese, whether there be any Moons in the World
of the Milky Way; I see very well, that they would be of no use to these
Planets that have no Night; and who besides, move in too little Room to be
troubled with an Equipage of inferior Planets. But do you know that by your
multiplying upon me such a multitude of Worlds, you have started a great
Difficulty to my Fancy, which, I doubt, you will hardly satisfy: The
Tourbillions, whose Suns we see touch the Tourbillions where we are, and all
the Tourbillions are round, how is it possible that so many different Globes
can touch one single one? This I would willingly understand, but find I cannot.

There Is a great deal of Sense, said I, Madam, in your proposing of this
Difficulty, and no less in your not knowing how to salve it; for it is very
judicious in it self, and unanswerable, as you understand it; and it is an
Argument of very little Wit, to answer an Objection that is unanswerable. If
our Tourbillion were in the shape of a Die, it would have six plain Superficies,
and would be very far from being round; yet upon every one of these six
Superficies, or flat Sides, a Tourbillion might be placed, being of the same
Figure: But instead of six flat sides, suppose it had twenty, fifty, or a
thousand; then it were possible to place a thousand Tourbillions upon it, every
Side bearing one; and you easily understand, that the more Superficies, or flat
Sides any Body has, the nearer it approaches to a Globe: So a Diamond cut in
Fossets on all sides, if those Fossets were very small, that Diamond would be
as round almost as a Pearl of the same bigness; the Tourbillions are only round
in this sense, they are composed of an infinite number of flat Sides, and every
one of 'em carries another Tourbillion: The flat Superficies are very unequal;
here they are big, there they are little; the smallest Superficies of our
Tourbillion, for Example, answer to the Milky Way, and support all those little
Worlds; but if two Tourbillions, that rest upon two neighboring Sides or
Faces, have any void space below between 'em (as that must fall out very often)
Nature, who will lose nothing, and turns all her work to the best advantage,
instantly fills up that Vacuity with one, two, or it may be a thousand little
Tourbillions, which does not at all trouble or incommode the rest, and yet
every one of these may have a World in it; so that there may be more Worlds,
than our Tourbillion has flat Sides to support: And I dare say, that although
these little Worlds were only made to fill up Chinks of the Universe, which
otherwise would have been useless, and that they are altogether unknown to the
other Worlds which touch them; yet I doubt not but they are very well contented
with their own Condition, and it is they whose little Suns we discover by the
helps of Telescopes, whose number is so prodigious. In fine, all these
Tourbillions are so rightly adjusted, and joined to one another in so delicate
a Form, that every one turns round his own Sun, without changing his Situation;
every one takes that way of turning, which is most proper and commode to its
place: They are fixed to one another like the Wheels of a Watch, assisting one
another in their Motions, and yet moving contrary to one another. And it is
said, that every World is like a Balloon, or Football, which swells and fills
of it self, and which would extend farther, if it were not hindered by
neighboring Worlds, who press it, and then it shrinks to its first form; after
that, it swells anew, and is again depressed. And the Philosophers pretend,
that the fixed Stars transmit to us a trembling Light, and an unequal
Sparkling, because their Tourbillions push against ours, and ours against
theirs.

I am extremely in love, said the Marquiese, with these Idea's you give me of
the Balloons, which swell and fall every Moment; and those Worlds, which are
always justling together: But, above all, I am pleased to consider, that this
Strife amongst 'em produces a Commerce of Light, which is the only Traffic
they can have.

No, no, said I, Madam; that is not the only Traffic; the neighboring Worlds
send Envoys sometimes to us, and that with a great deal of Splendour: We have
Comets from thence too, who are always adorned with shining Hair, a venerable
Beard, and a Royal Train.

Good God! said the Marquiese, laughing; What Ambassadors are these? We could
easily dispense with their Visits, for they do nothing but fright us. They
fright only Fools and Children, Madam, said I; but of those Ignorants, I
confess, there are a great number: The Comets are nothing but Planets which
belong to some neighboring Tourbillion, who make their Course toward the
Extremity, or Outside of it: But this Tourbillion being pressed by others that
encompass it, it is rounder above than it is below, and it is from below that
they appear to us. These Planets, which have begun to move in a Circle above,
and not foreseeing that their Tourbillion will sail 'em below, because it is,
as it were, braz'd or squeezed in that part; these Planets, which we call
Comets, are necessitated, for the Continuance of their Circular Motion, to come
into another Tourbillion, which happens sometimes to be ours, making their
passage through the Extremity of it: They all appear to us highly elevated,
their Course being constantly above Saturn.

It Is very necessary for the Defense of our System (for Reasons that do not at
all relate to our present Subject) that there should be a great vast space
betwixt Saturn, and the Extremities of our Tourbillion, free from Planets. Our
Adversaries do constantly reproach us with the unusefulness of this great Void;
but let 'em not trouble their Heads with that, for we have found an Use for it;
and it is the Appartment, or Chambers of State, where we receive the Stranger
Planetary Ambassadors.

I understand you, said she, and am pleased with your Chamber of State; for we
do not permit 'em to come directly in the middle of our Tourbillion, but
receive 'em as the Grand Seignior does his Foreign Ministers; he does 'em not
the Honor to lodge 'em in Constantinople, but sends 'em to the Suburbs. Madam,
replied I, we agree with the Turks also in one thing more; that is (as they) so
we receive Ambassadors, but send none; for none of our Planets ever go to visit
other Worlds. At this rate, said the Marquiese, we are very proud, yet I know
not what to think of the matter; these Stranger-Planets, with their long Tails
and Beards, have usually but a scurvy threatening Look, and it may be they are
sent to terrify us; whereas ours, not being made of that terrible Form, would
not be so proper to frighten People, were they sent into another World. These
Tails and Beards, said I, are not real, but only Appearances, and these
Stranger-Planets differ in nothing from ours; but entering into our Tourbillion,
they take a Tail, or a Beard from a certain kind of Illumination which they
receive from the Sun; which, as yet, is not fully explained amongst us. But let
this be found out when it can, we now are sure it is nothing but a kind of
Illumination, or false Light. I wish then, said the Marquiese, that our Saturn
would take a Tail, or a Beard, and go into some other Tourbillion, to frighten
its Inhabitants; and that afterward, laying aside this terrible Equipage, he
would return, with the rest of our Planets, to his own place. 'Twill be better
for him, said I, not to go out of our Tourbillion: I have told you already of
the Encounter between two Tourbillions pushing against one another; and I
believe, upon that occasion, a poor Planet is strangely shaken, and that his
Inhabitants are not the better for it. We believe our selves very miserable
when we see a Comet appear, but it is the Comet it self that is most unhappy. I
do not believe that, said the Marquiese, for it brings its Inhabitants to us in
good health; and you know, nothing is wholsomer than Change of Air: As for us
that never go out of our own, Life languishes but dully on. If the Inhabitants
of a Comet had but the Skill to foresee their Passage into our World, those
who have already made that Voyage will tell these new Adventurers what they
will see in their way: A Planet, say they, which has a great Ring round him,
meaning Saturn; and then you will see another that has four little ones
following him, and it may be that amongst them there are People set apart, on
purpose for observing the very Minute when they should enter into our World,
and who are instantly to cry out, A new Sun! A new Sun! as our Mariners do,
Land! Land! after a long Sea-Voyage. I hope you will no longer pity the
Inhabitants of a Comet; but, no doubt, you will commiserate those who live in a
Tourbillion where the Sun comes to be extinct, and leaves them in Eternal
Night. What! cried out Madam the Marquiese, Can Suns be extinguished? Yes, said
I, without dispute. The Ancients have seen fixed Stars in the Firmament, which
we see no more; these Suns have lost their Light: A great Desolation certainly
for that Tourbillion, and a great Mortality for all the Inhabitants of its
Planets; for there is no living without a Sun. That Idea, said she, is too
mournful; Is there no way to pass it by? If you please, said I, Madam, I Will
tell you what very learned Men say; that the fixed Stars which have disappeared
are not however extinguished, but that they are Half-Suns; that is to say, they
have one side obscure, and the other englightned; and as they turn upon their
own Axis, sometimes they present their enlightened half, and then we see 'em;
and sometimes their obscure half, and then we lose 'em. To oblige you, Madam, I
shall follow this Opinion, because it is more favorable than the other; but it
must only be for certain Stars, who have regular Seasons of appearing and
disappearing, as has been discovered; otherwise these Half-Suns cannot
subsist. But what shall we say of Stars that disappear, and do not show
themselves again after the time in which they ought certainly to have performed
the Revolution upon their own Axis? You are too just, Madam, to oblige me to
believe that these Stars are Half-Suns: However, for your Satisfaction, I will
endeavor to solve this Objection another way: Those Suns shall not be
extinguished then, but shall only be sunk into the depth of the vast Heavens,
which removes 'em from our sight; and in that Case, these Suns are followed by
their Tourbillions, and all is well. It Is true, that the greatest part of the
fixed Stars have no such Motion as carry them from us; if they had, they might
as well approach more near us, and we should see 'em sometimes bigger,
sometimes less; which can never fall out: Let us therefore suppose that there
are some little Tourbillions of less Light and Activity, which slide in among
the others, and make certain Turnings; after which, they come back again,
whilst in the mean time the great Tourbillions remain where they did before;
and it is a strange Misfortune that there should be certain fixed Stars which
appear to us, and after a great deal of time of appearing and dis-appearing,
entirely vanish, and are lost. In that time the Half-Suns, I spoke of, would
appear again, and Suns that were sunk into the Heavens would dis-appear once,
and not to appear again for a long time. Resolve well what to think, Madam, and
take Courage; there is a necessity that these Stars must be Suns, which grown
obscure enough to be invisible to our sight, are afterward enlightened, and in
the end must lie extinguished. How! said the Marquiese; Can a Sun be obscured,
or entirely extinguished, who is himself the Fountain of Light? The most easily
in the World, said I, Madam: According to the Opinion of Des Carts, our Sun
has Spots; let 'em be Scum or Vapors, or what else you will, these Spots may
condense, and many of 'em may come together, and form a kind of Crust, which
may afterward augment, and then farewell the Sun and all its Light. It Is said,
we escaped once very hardly, for the Sun was grown extremely pale for several
Years together; and particularly the Year after the Death of Julius Caesar, it
was that Crust that began to gather, and the Face of the Sun brake and
dissipated it; but had it continued, we had been all undone. You make me
tremble, said the Marquiese; and now that I understand the Consequences of the
paleness of the Sun, I shall henceforth every Morning, instead of going to my
Looking-Glass to consult my own Face, go and look up to the Heavens to consider
that of the Sun. Madam, said I, be assured there goes a great deal of time to
ruin a World. Then, said she, there is nothing requisite but Time. I
acknowledge it, Madam, said I; all this vast Mass of Matter which composes the
Universe, is in perpetual Motion, from which no part of it is entirely exempt;
and therefore Changes must come sooner or later, but always in Time
proportionable to the Effect. The Ancients were foolish to imagine, that the
Celestial Bodies were of an unchangeable Nature, because they never saw any
Change in 'em; but they had neither Leisure nor Life long enough to undeceive
themselves by Experience; but the Ancients were young in respect of us. Suppose
now, Madam, that the Roses, which last but for a Day, should write Histories,
and leave Memorials from one to another; the first would have described the
Picture of their Gardener of a certain manner; and after fifteen thousand Ages
of Roses, the others that had followed 'em would have altered nothing in that
Description of the Gardener, but would have said, We have always seen the same
Gardener, since the Memory of Roses we have seen but him, he has always been as
he is, he dies not as we do; nay, he changes not, and certainly will never be
other than what he is: Would this way of arguing of the Roses be good? Yet it
would be better grounded than that of the Ancients, concerning Celestial
Bodies; and though there had never happened any Change in the Heavens to this
Day, and though they should seem to last for ever, yet I would not believe it,
but would wait for a longer Experience; nor ought we to measure the Duration of
any thing by that of our own scanty Life. Suppose a thing had a Being a hundred
thousand times longer than ours, should we therefore conclude it should last
for ever? Eternity is not so easy a matter; and some things must have passed
many Ages of Men, one after another, before any sign of Decay had appeared in
'em. I am not so unreasonable, said the Marquiese, as to consider the Worlds as
things eternal, nor will I do them the honor to compare 'em to your Gardener,
who lived so many Ages longer than the Roses: They are themselves but as a
Rose, which are produced but in a Garden, that bud one Day, and fall the next;
and as those Roses die, new ones succeed; so for some ancient Stars that
dis-appear, other new ones are born in their places, and that Defect in Nature
must be so repaired, and no Species can totally perish. Some will tell you,
they are Suns, which draw near to us after having been long lost in the depth
of Heavens: Others will say, they are Suns that have cast off the Crust which
began to cover them. If I could easily believe all this, yet I should believe
also that the Universe was made in such a manner, that new Suns have been, and
may be formed in it from time to time; and what should hinder the Substance
proper to make Suns from gathering together, and producing new Worlds? And I am
the more inclined to believe these new Productions, since they are more
correspondent to the great Idea I have of the glorious Works of Nature: And why
should not she who knows the Secret to bring forth and destroy Herbs, Plants
and Flowers, in a continued Succession, practice also the same Secret on the
Worlds, since one costs her no more Pains and Expense than the other. Indeed,
says the Marquiese, I find the Worlds, the Heavens and the Celestial Bodies so
subject to change, that I am altogether returned to my self. Let us return yet
more, said I, and if you please, make this subject no longer, that of our
Discourse; besides you are arrived at the utmost bounds of Heaven; and to tell
you, that there are any Stars beyond that, were to make my self a wiser Man
than I am, place Worlds there, or place none there, it depends upon your Will.
These vast invisible Regions, are properly the Empires of Philosophers, which
it may be are or are not, as they themselves shall fancy. It Is sufficient for
me to have carried your Understanding as far as your sight can penetrate.

What, cried out the Marquiese, have I the Systemes of all the Universe in my
Head, am I become so learned? Yes, Madam, you know enough; and with this
Advantage, that you may believe all or nothing of what I have said, as you
please. I only beg this as a Recompense for my pains, that you will never look
on the Heavens, Sun, Moon or Stars, without thinking of me.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for W. Canning.
LA Montre; or, The Lover's Watch: by Mrs. Behn. The Lucky Chance; or, An
Alderman's Bargain: A Comedy. By Mrs. Behn. The Island-Princess; or, Generous
Portuguese: A Comedy. Altered by Mr. Tate. An Historical and Geographical
Account of the Morea, Negropont, and the Maritime Places, as far as
Thessalonica: Illustrated with forty two Maps of the Countries, Plains and
Draughts of the Cities, Towns and Fortifications. Written in Italian by P. M.
Coronelli, Geographer to the Republic of Venice. Englished by R. W. Gent.
Gesta Grayorum; or, The History of the high and mighty Prince, Henry Prince of
Purpoole, Archduke of Stapulia and Bernardia, Duke of High and Nether Holborn,
Marquis of St. Giles and Tottenham, Count Palatine of Bloomsbury and
Clerkenwell, Great Lord of the Cantons of Islington, Kentish-Town, Paddington
and Knights-bridge, Knight of the most Heroical Order of the Helmet, and
Sovereign of the same: Who reigned and died, A. D. 1594. Together with a
Masque, as it was presented (by His Highness's Command) for the Entertainment
of Q. Elizabeth; who, with the Nobles of both Courts, was present thereat.
Hearing a Translation of the Plurality of Worlds, was doing by another Hand,
the Translator had not the opportunity to supervise and correct the Sheets
before they were wrought off; so that several Errata have escaped. The most
material ones are underwritten.
PAge 17. line 26. read Piraeum. p. 20. l. 21. for Beams, r. Bodies. p. 21. l.
6. f. least, r. last. p. 28. l. 1. f. Circle, r. Earth. p. 29. l. ult. f.
Circle, r. Earth. p. 30. l. 13. f. every, r. any. p. 32. l. 1. f. as, r. its.
p. 34. l. 6. f. hands, r. heads. p. 36. l. 28. for twenty, r. two or three. p.
37. l. 11. for twenty, r. two or three. p. 38. l. 17. del. to remove. p. 44. l.
20. r. Diaphanous. p. 48. l. 13. r. has day. p. 50. l. 21. f. certain, r. say
it is. p. 65. l. 17. f. Waves, r. Sea. l. 18. f. vessel is, r. waves were. p.
72. l. ult. r. irregularly. p. 76. l. 25. f. as a rounded, r. around her. p.
77. l. 2. f. Air, r. one. p. 85. l. 13. for Refections, r. Refractions. ibid.
l. 25. after I do, add not. p. 92. l. 16. f. varieties; r. vacuities. p. 100.
l. 20. f. easts, r. lasts. p. 106. l. 23. f. effects, r. defects. p. 109. l. 8.
r. or Whirlings. p. 125. l. 19. f. flying, r. shining. p. 147. l. 26. f.
braz'd, r. embarass'd. p. 154. l. 8. f. face, r. force or heat.


