THE ROMAN HISTORY OF LUCIUS J. FLORUS.

Made English.

Beginning with the LIFE and REIGN OF ROMULUS, THE FIRST King of the ROMANS,
And divided into four Books.

LONDON, Printed by T.J. for Samuel Speed, near the Inner Temple-Gate in
Fleet Street, 1669.

To his GRACE THE DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM.
I Question not but some, minding only the small distance between the
Illustrious Title at the front of this Epistle, and the obscure name at the
bottom, will presently be apt to pass this Censure, That there is no
confidence equal to that of a Dedicatory. A just reproach, I must confess, nor
should I have any thing to retort, were not the necessity and justice which
obliged me to this address, such as rendered my presumption the more
pardonable. For finding this Treatise, at its first appearance in the English
Tongue, dedicated to the glorious name of BUCKINGHAM, how just and unavoydable
a motive was it to me, only reemb^llishing a Work first communicated by
another, to recommend it to the World, under a Patronage not inferior to the
precedent, save only in point of time?

Nor does the apparent smallness of the Present, abate ought of the
encouragement I had to make it, when I consider that it is not the bulk, but
value, which gives the rarest productions of Art and Nature their admittance
into the Cabinets of Princes. As such therefore, may your Grace be pleased to
entertain this Tract, and in this Micrography of the Roman affairs, imagine the
Iliad of that vast Empire represented as it were upon a Medal. And as some
Virtuoso, attentively looking on an Antiquity, and meeting these four Letters,
S.P.Q.R. reflects on it as in Hieroglyphick of the World's greatest
Transactions, during several Centuries of years; So may it be inferred from
this obscure and remote address, that the Many, upon what account soever
recommended to your Grace's notice, amount not happily to a Square-Root of those,
who, unknown, and a^ a distance, send up their earnest wishes for your Grace's
prosperity; of which number is,

Your Grace's most humble, and most obedient Servant. Jo. DAVIES,

Advertisement, Concerning the English Editions of FLORUS.
THis Epitome of the Roman History, written by L. FLORVS, came first abroad in
English, about the year.... rendered by a Gentleman, who would not be known to
the world by any other name than that of PHILANACTOPHIL, upon what account, he
gives not any. The said Person, afterward falling upon some other
Translations, declined the former Title, and subscribed himself thereto, thus,
By the Translator of Florus, as conceiving his rendering of that Author the most
considerable of his performances.

That Edition wearing out, the Bookseller concerned therein, bethought himself
of putting forth a second. In order to the coming forth of this, Dr. Meric
Causabon took some pains, that is, he continued the first Translation, but with
some alterations here and there, where he conconceiv'd the first Translator
might have rendered the places otherwise, that is, more to the sense and design
of Florus, than he had done. He also illustrated several passages with learned
Notes and Animadversions of his own, worthy productions of so eminent a person.
This second Edition came forth during the late Troubles, that is, since the
year 1651.

The said second Edition also, in time, growing scarce, it was thought
requisite to put forth a Third, which should not only comprehend the
alterations made by Dr. Casaubon; but also be absolutely different, through the
whole Book, from the first. And this is the attempt of this third Edition; with
what success, will be obvious to those, who shall take the pains to compare
the differences between them.

J.D.
THE ROMAN HISTORY OF LUCIUS FLORUS In four Books.
The First Book.
CHAP. I.
The Birth of Romulus first King of the Romans, the actions of his youth, the
foundation of Rome, the death of his Brother Remus, the establishment of a
Sanctuary in Rome, the surprizal of the Sabine Virgin, Romulus his death, and
translation among the Gods.

WHen Romulus, being by order of Amulius, cast into the River, with his Brother
Remus, could not be drowned. For not only the Tiber checked its current, but
also a She-wolf, having left her whelps, and following the cry of the infants,
suckled them, and became a mother to them. Found thus under a tree, Faustulus
the Kings Shepherd removed them to his cottage, and brought them up. Alba was
then the Metropolis of Latium, built by Julus; for he had sligh^ed the
Lavinium, the City of his Father Aeneas. Amulius, the fourteenth of the race of
these Kings, then ruled; having expelled his Brother Numitor, of whose daughter
was born Romulus. Therefore in the first heat of his youth, he forced his Uncle
Amulius out of his Fortress, and restored his Grandfather; but he himself,
pleased with the River, and Mountains, wherein he had bin b^ought up, was
designing within himself the walls of a new City. They were Twins; and whether
of them should first enter upon the Government, they thought fit to refer to
the decision of the Gods. Remus took his station on Mount Aven^ine, the other
on Mount Palatine. The former first saw six Vulturs, but the latter, though
af^erwards, saw twelve. So having the better by augury, he laid the foundations
of his City, great with hopes, that it would be a martial one; so those birds,
accustomed to blood and prey, promised. For the securing of the new Ci^y, a
Trench seemed sufficient, the narrowness whereof while Remus derided, and
scorn^ully leaped over, he was put to death, whether by order from his Brother,
is not certainly known. He certainly proved the first victime, and consecrated
the fortification of the new City with his blood. He had framed rather the
Idaea of a City, than a City. Inhabitants were wanting. Hard by, there was a
grove; he made it a Sanctuary; and immediately great numbers of men, Latins,
some Shepherds, Tuscians, and some from beyond the seas, Phrygians, who came
[into those parts] under the conduct of Aeneas, and Arcadians, under that of
Evander, came into him. So, of diverse principles he made up one body as it
were, and was himself the founder of the Roman people. But a people of men
only could last but one age. They therefore desired to inter-marry with their
neighbors, which not obtained by fair means, was effected by force. For
pretending to show some exercises on Horseback, the Virgins who came to the
show, became a prey; and that occasioned Wars. The Veientes are defeated, and
put to flight: The City of the Caeninenses was taken and destroyed. Besides,
the King himself, with his own hands, brought the rich spoils of their King, to
Jupiter Feretrius. The gates [of Rome] were betrayed to the Sabines by a Virgin,
not fraudulently; but she had desired for her reward what they had on their
left arms; whether she meant their shields or bracelets is doubtful. They to
keep their word, and be revenged of her, overwhelmed her with their shields. So
the enemies being got to the walls, there was a sharp engagement in the very In
Foro.
Forum: so that Romulus prayed to Jupiter to put a stop to the shameful retreat
of his people. Thence came the Temple, and [name of] Jupiter Stator. At length,
the [Virgins who had been] surpised, run in between the engaged parties, with
their hair dishevelled. So a peace was made with Tatius, and a league entered
into; and a strange thing followed, [to wit] that the enemies, leaving their
own habitations, removed into the new City, and bestowed the wealth of their
Ancestors on their Sons in law, as a portion [with their Daughters.] Their
forces being in a short time increased, the most prudent King reduced the
Commonwealth to this state, that the young men, being divided into Tribes,
should be ready, with Horse and Arms, for any unexpected occasions of War;
that the counsel of the Commonwealth should be managed by the old men, who, for
their authority were called Fathers; for their age, a Senate. These things thus
settled, while he was speaking to the people, without the City, near the Pool of
Capra, he was of a sudden taken out of their sight. Some think him cut to
pieces by the Senate, for the harshnesse of his disposition; but the tempest
then rising, with an Eclipse of the Sun, were looked on as arguments of his
Apotheosis. Which [opinion] Julius Proculus soon after confirmed, affirming
that he had seen Romulus in a more Majestic form, then he had bin in before;
that he further commanded, they should honor him as a Deity; and that the Gods
would have him called in Heaven by the name of Quirinus; and that so Rome
should have the Sovereignty of the world.

CHAP. II.
Numa Pompilius succeeds Romulus; his Piety; his setlement of Religious affairs.

NVma Pompilius succeeded Romulus. They of their own accord desired this man
[for their King] for the greatness of his piety. He instructed them in
sacrifices, and ceremonies, and what ever relates to the worship of the
immortal Gods. He instituted Priests, Augurs, the Saly, and the other
sacerdoral Functions; and distributed the year into twelve months, and
appointed the days of pleading and vacation. He gave them the [sacred]
Bucklers, and the Image of Pallas, as certain secret pledges of the Empire, as
also double-fac'd Janus, the Symbol of peace and war. He first appointed fire
to be kept in by the Vestal Virgins, that in imitation of the celestial
constellations, the Guardian-flame of the Empire should be vigilantly
continued. These things [he pretended he had receiv'd] by the inspirations of
the Goddess Egeria, that his barbarous subjects might the more willingly
submit thereto. In fine, he brought that unciviliz'd people to so much
moderation, that an Empire acquired by violence and usurpation, was administered
with piety and justice.

CHAP. III.
Tullus Hostilius succeeds Numa. He instructs the Romans about military
engagements; declares a war against the people of Alba; The famous engagement
between the three Horatij and the three Curiatij; The treachery of the Latins
in the War against the Fidenates.

A.V.C 82.
NExt to Numa Pompilius came Tullus Hostilius, on whom the Kingdom was freely
bestowed, in acknowledgement of his virtue. This man introduced military
discipline, and the art of war. Having therefore trained up the young men in
these exercises, he presumed to provoke the Albani, a considerable, and for a
long time, a sovereign people. But their Forces on both sides being equal after
many engagements, to bring the war to a period, the fates of both nations were
committed to the decision of the Horatij and Curiatij, three Brethren twins,
chosen of each side. 'Twas a doubtful and noble conflict, and the issue of it
admirable. For the three on the other side being wounded, on this two slain,
the surviving Horatius, adding subtilty to valor, that he might distract the
enemy, counterfeits flight, and setting on them one after another as they were
able to pursue him, overcomes them all. Thus (a glory not easily found
elsewhere) by the hand of one man, there was gotten a victory which the Victor
soon stained with Parricide. Seeing his ^wn Sister bewailing to find about him
the spoils of one indeed betroath'd to her, but an enemy, he revenged that so
unseasonable an affection of the Virgin with his sword. The Laws would have
punished the act, but gallantry rescued the parracide, and his crime was much
below his glory. Nor was it long ere the Albane broke his faith: For coming out
as Auxiliaries to the Romans in the war against the Fidenates, according to the
league, they stood between the two Armies, expecting whether of them Fortune
would favor. But the crafty King perceiving his Auxiliaries ready to side with
the enemy, takes courage as if he had commanded them so to do; whereupon our
men were animated, the enemies cast down with fear. So the evil design of the
revolting party proved fruitless. Therefore the enemy being defeated, he
caused Metius Sufetius, the breaker of the league, to be fastened between two
Chariots, and drawn to pieces by wild Horses. Nay he demolished the City Alba
[treating it] though it had been a parent, now as a corrival [of Rome] having
first translated all the wealth of the City, and the very Inhabitants, to Rome:
that so an allied City might not seem to have been destroyed, but reunited to
its own body.

CHAP. IV.
Ancus Martius, Numa's Grandson is advanced to the Throne, after Tullus
Hostilius; he builds the Walls of Rome, and a Bridge over the Tiber, and sends
a Colony to Hostia.

Ancus Martius, Grandchild, by a daughter, to Pompilius, of a disposition like
that of his Grandfather. This Prince therefore compassed the ancient
Fortifications with a wall, and made a Bridge over the Tiber, and sent a Colony
to Ostia, seated at the falling of the River into the Sea; as it were then
foreseeing it would come to pass, that the wealth and provisions of the whole
world, would be brought to that maritime storehouse of the City.

CHAP. V.
Tarquinius Priscus, a foreigner, is for his virtue, advanced to Royalty;
heightens the glory of the Senate; would have increased the order of Knights,
but is diverted from it by the Augur Nevius; his military achievements; what
ornaments of the Empire were of his invention.

NExt Tarquinius Priscus, although a Foreigner, Corinth, he had improved the
Grecian inclinations, by the artifices of Italy. This man heightened the majesty
of the Senate, by adding to their number, and augmented the order of Knights
with three Centuries, though Actius Nevius, chief of the Augurs, opposed that
augmentation. Whom the King asked, by way of trial, whether, that which he then
thought of could be done? The other having consulted Augury answered, that it
could. Now what I thought of, said he, was, whether I could cut that whetstone
with the razor? Thou may, said the Augur, and he cut it. Hence came Augury to
be sacred among the Romans. Nor was Tarquinius less expert in war than peace;
for by frequent engagements he subdued the twelve nations of Tuscia; and thence
came the Fasces, the Robes used by Kings and Augurs, Ivory chairs, for
Senators, Rings, Ornaments for the Knights, Heralds coats, the Robes borderd
with purple [worn by children of noble families.] Thence also came triumphing
in gilt chariots, drawn by four horses, painted and triumphal garments, in
fine, all the Ensigns and Ornaments, which render imperial dignity the more
conspicuous.

CHAP. VI.
Servius Tullius comes to the Government by subtilty; He causes an estimate to
be taken ^f the Roman wealth; and distinguishes the People into several Orders
and Degrees.

Servius Tullius invades the Government of the City; nor did the meanness [of
his extraction] hinder him, though descended of a Woman-slave. For Tanaquil,
the wife of Tarquinius, had brought him up nobly, encouraged by the excellency
of his endowments; and a flame seen surrounding his head had portended his
future greatness. Therefore upon the death of Tarquinius, having by the
assistance of the Queen, gotten the Lievtenancy of the Government for a time,
he managed affairs so prudently, that he seemed lawfully possessed of a
Kingdom, into which he had crept by fraud. By this man the Roman People were
rejected in order to Taxes, distributed into several degrees, and disposed into
Courts and Companies. By this King's prudence, the Commonwealth was brought to
so good order, that all distinctions of Estates, Honors, Age, Professions, and
Offices, were put into Tables, as if the government of the greatest City,
should be as exactly regulated, as that of the meanest Family.

CHAP. VII.
Tarquin comes to the Crown by the Massacre of the horrid wickedness of his
wife Tullia; His cruelty and pride render him odious to the People; he causes
his own Son to be scourged, out of a design to abuse the Gabij; and builds a
Temple at the Capitol. Presages of Romes continuance.

TArquin, surnamed, from his deportment, the Proud, was the last of all the
Kings. He chose rather violently to possess himself of, then patiently expect,
the Kingdom of his Ancestors, held from him by Tullius: and having sent some to
murder him, he no better managed his usurped power than he had acquired it. Of
the same humor was his wife Tullia, who (to salute her Husband King) being in
a Chariot, drove the startled Horses over the bloody Corpse of her Father. But
he, grown insupportable to the Senate, by reason of the slaughters committed
among them, to all, by reason of his pride (which to good men is more
intolerable than cruelty) having glutted his inhumanity at home, at length
turns against the Enemies. Whereupon Ardea, Ocriculum, Gabij, Suessa, Pometia,
strong Cities of Latium were taken in. Nay even then his own issue felt his
cruelty. For he stuck not to beat his own Son with Rods, to the end that,
pretending himself a Renegado among the Enemies, he might be credited by them.
Who being entertained by the Gabij, as he expected, and asking counsel by
Messengers, of his Father what he would have done; the answer was (strange
pride!) that he struck off the the tops of the highest Poppies with a Wand,
intimating thereby, that the chiefest Persons among the Gabij were to be put to
be consecrated, all the other Gods complying (a thing hardly credible) only
Juventas and Terminus opposed it. The obstinacy of the Deities pleased the
Augures, as promising all things should be firm and eternal. But what was
dreadful, is, that, at the foundation of the Structure, a man's head was found;
and it was the general persuasion, that the most favorable prodigy portended
[that Rome should be] the Seat of the Empire, and supreme head of the World. So
long did the Romans endure the King's pride, while lust was kept out; that
insolency they thought intolerable in his Sons, one of whom having ravished
Lucretia, a most accomplished Lady, the Matron, to avoid the infamy killed her
self. Whereupon the Kings were deprived of their power.

CHAP. VIII.
A short account of the reign of the seven Kings, and a rehearsal of what was
most remarkably done by them, in order to the advancement of the Commonwealth.

THis is the first age, and as it were, infancy of the Roman People, while they
lived under seven Kings, [persons] through a certain design of the Fates, so
different in their inclinations as was requisite for the convenience and
advantage of the Commonwealth. For what more daring than Romulus? such a person
was nec^ssary for the usurpation of a Kingdom. What more religious than Numa?
such a one affairs required, that an unciviliz'd People might be softened by the
fear of the Gods. What a person was that Author of military discipline Tullus?
how necessary to men of warlike spirits, that valor might be guided by
conduct? What did the Architect Ancus? How fit to dilate the City by a Colony,
enlarge it by a Bridge, fortify it with a Wall. Again, what splendour acrew'd
to the supreme People [of the World] from the Ornaments and Ensigns of
Tarquinius, that is, from the very habits? What did the taxes imposed by
Servius produce, but that the Commonwealth might be assured of its own
strength? in fine, the insupportable Tyranny of the proud [Tarquin] was of
some, nay very great advantage. For so it came to pass, that a People,
e^asperated by injuries, was inflamed with a desire of Liberty.

CHAP. IX.
The Regal Dignity transferred to the Consuls, Brutus and Collatinus; the
latter of whom is deposed for his being descended from the Royal Family,
Publicola is put into his place; Brutus disscovering his own Sons siding with
the Tarquins, puts them to death.

THe Roman People therefore moved by a Brutus and Collatinus (to whom the noble
Matron had at her death recommended her revenge) of a sudden forsake their
King, spoil his goods, and consecrate the Land he was possessed of to their God
Mars, and transfer the supreme power to those assertors of their Liberty, with
an alteration only of the form Government and the Title. For where it had been
perpetual, they would have it annual; in stead of a single person, two, lest
the supremacy being in one, or too long continued [in more] might be corrupted:
and in stead of Kings they called them Consuls, that they might remember they
were obliged to consult, or procure the good of their Citizens. So excessive
was the joy conceived a^ this new [assertion of] Liberty, that they would
hardly believe that change of Government, but displaced one of the Consuls, and
forced him to leave the City, for no other reason than his name and extraction
from the [ejected] Kings. Whereupon Valerius Publicola, being put into his
place, used his utmost endeavors to advance the majesty of a free People. For
he not only caused the Fasces [the Ensigns of Consular dignity] to be bowed
before them, at a public assembly, but also ordered appeals to the People from
the Sentence of the Consuls. And that his House, built like a Citadel, might
give no offense, he caused it to be built lower, in a plain place, But Brutus
courted the City-applause, by the destruction and parricide of his own Family.
For having discovered that his Sons endeavored the restoration of the Kings,
he dragged them into the Forum, and before the whole assembly, caused them to
be scourged with Rods, and afterward cut off their heads: that he might
plainly seem, as a public Parent, in stead of his own Children, to have
adopted the People of Rome. The Roman People being thenceforth free, first took
up Arms against the Foreigners upon the account of Liberty, next about
Territories, then for their Allies, and lastly for Glory and Empire, the
neighboring Nations assaulted them of all sides. For having no Land of their
own adjoining to the City, (all but Rome belonging to the Enemies) and lying as
it were in a crossway between Latium, and the Tusci, at which Gate soever they
sallyed out, they fell among enemies, [which continu'd] till that, as it were
by a certain Contagion, they overrun all, and having possessed themselves of
all the neighboring places, they reduced all Italy under their Jurisdiction.

CHAP. X.
Porsenna King of Etruria, siding with the Tarquins, comes with a powerful Army
before Rome, reduces it to extreme necessity, and is ready to force it; but
astonished at the prodigious gallantry of Mutius, Horatius, and Clelia, he
makes an alliance with the Romans. The Combat between Brutus and Tarquin's Son,
wherein they both fell.

AFter the expulsion of the Kings, the first arms the people took up, were for
[assertion of] their Liberty. For Porsenna, King of Etruria, was in sight with
a powerful Army, and brought along with him the Tarquins. However, though he
pressed hard upon them by Arms and Famine, and having possessed himself of
Janiculum, was lodged at the entrance of the City, yet they broke his
attempts, nay beat him back; and at last put him into such amazement, that
though he had much the advantage, he entered into a friendly League with those
whom he had almost overcome. Then flourished those Roman Prodigies and
Miracles, Horatius, Mutius, Clelia, of whom did not the Annals make mention,
they would now seem Fables. For Horatius Cocles, finding himself not able alone
to remove the pressing Enemies, the Bridge being broken down behind him, swam
cross the Tiber, with his Arms about him. Mutius Scaevola attempted the Kings
person in his Tent; but finding his blow spent in vain upon one of his
Courtiers, he thrust his hand into the fire, and heightens the Kings terror by
policy: That thou may be satisfied what a person thou have escaped [know]
that three hundred of us have sworn the same thing [thy death,] when in the
mean time (a thing dreadful to relate) he [who spoke] was undaunted, the other
[the King] trembled as if his own hand had been burning. Thus the Men. But that
no sex might want its praise, see also the gallantry of Virgins! Clelia, one of
the Hostages delivered to the King, having got out of custody, crossed the
Tiber on horseback. So that the King startled at so many, and so great
Prodigies of Valor, kindly dismissed them, and set them at liberty. The
Tarquins continued the War, till Brutus killed Aruntes the Kings Son, with his
own hand, and died himself upon him, of a mutual wound he had received from his
adversary, as if he would have pursued the Adulterer even to hell.

CHAP. XI.
The Latins engage in the quarrel of the Tarquins, give battle to the Romans,
by whom they are defeated. The other neighboring Nations disturb their quiet;
The Romans fight for the dilatation of their Territories; Quinctius
Cincinnatus taken from the Plough to be Dictator; He subdues the Aequi, and
treats them as beasts.

THe Latins also, out of emulation and envy [to the Romanes] took up the
quarrel of the Tarquins; to the end, that a people who commanded abroad, might
at least be made slaves at home. Wherefore, the whole Country of Latium, under
the Conduct of Mamilius Tusculanus, courageously undertake to revenge the Kings
quarrel. They engage at the Lake Regillus, a long time with a suspense of
success, till the Dictator himself Posthumous cast one of his Ensigns among the
enemies, (a new and remarkable stratagem) that it might be recovered again by
running [upon them.] Titus. AE, E.
Titus Aebutius Elva, Master of the Horse, commanded the Bridles to be taken
off (that also was strange) that they might charge with with the greater
violence. In fine, so sharp was the engagement, that it is reported the Gods
were present at it, [particularly] two, mounted on white Horses, whom none
doubted but they were Castor and Pollux. Whereupon the General [of the Roman
Army] worshipped, and, in case he had the victory, promised them Temples; which
he afterward performed, [accounting it] as due pay to the Auxiliary Gods.
Hitherto all the wars were for Liberty. Afterward they were in perpetual
hostility with the same Latins, about their Confines. Sora (who would believe
it) and Algidum were formidable places. Satricum and Corniculum were but
Provinces. For the reduction of Veij and the Bo^illi [two wretched places]
('it is a shame to say it) but we triumphed. Tibur, which is now as it were the
Suburbs [of Rome,] and Praeneste, a pleasant Summer-walk, were not attempted,
till after Vows were made in the Capitol [for their reduction.] ^aesulae was
then what Taphra is of late; the Grove of Aricinum, what the Hyrcinian Forest
was; Fregellae, as considerable as Gesloriacum [is now in our days.] Or, as
others, Tygris: the common Edition (not so well) Tibris.
Liris then, what Euphrates now, [to wit, the limits of the Empire.] The taking
of Corioli (Oh shame) was thought so glorious, that C. Marcius Coriol^nus made
the reduction of it part of his name, as if he had subdued Numantia or Africa.
There are also to be seen the spoils taken from Antius, which C. Maenius hung
up in the most eminent place of the Forum, after he had taken the Enemies
Fleet, if that were one, for there were but six War-ships. But that number in
those beginnings [of Empire] made a considerable Naval Force. But the most
obstinate of the Latins were the Aequi and the Vosci, and, as I may say,
perpetual enemies. But these were particularly subdued by L. Quinctius, that
Dictator taken from the Plough, who by his incomparable Conduct relieved the
Camp of the Consul L. Minucius, though besieged and ready to be taken. It
happened to be then about the midst of Sowing-time, when the Lictor took the
Patrician at his work, holding the Plough. He went immediately thence to the
Army [where] that he might do nothing disconsonant from his Rural Employment,
he caused the subdued enemies, like beasts, to pass under the yoke. So the
Expedition being over, the triumphant Husbandman returned to his Oxen. Oh ye
Gods! With what diligence [was it done?] The War, from the beginning to its
period, lasted but sixteen days; as if it should seem, the Dictator hasted to
the Countrey-work he had left behind him.

CHAP. XII.
The Veientes war with the Romans; the Family of the Fabij undertake the
Engagement; they are unfortunately defeated by the Enemies; but that loss is
recompensed by many Victories obtained against the Falisci, the Fidenates, and
the Veientes.

BUt our continual Enemies (by reason of their yearly Incursions) were the
Veientes [a people] of Etruria; so that the single Family of the Fabij promised
an extraordinary Assistance, and waged a private war against them. But the
misfortune which befell them, Cremerae, three hundred and six, a Patrician Army:
and the gate, at which they went out to that Engagement is called the
Unfortunate. But that loss was retriv'd by great Victories, several strong
places being reduced by diverse other Generals, though with various success. The
Falisci came in of their own accord. The Fidenates were burnt in the fire they
had kindled themselves; the Veientes spoiled and utterly destroyed. The Falisci
being besieged, admired the integrity of the [Romane] General, and justly,
since of his own accord, he sent back bound unto them Furius Camillus, a pious
and prudent person, accounted that a true Victory, which was obtained without
breach of Faith or Honor. The Fidenates, finding themselves too weak to do
ought by open hostility, to frighten [their enemies] marched, after a dreadful
manner, with Firebrarnds [in their hands,] and Garlands of diverse colors
twisted about like Serpents; but the fatal Dress proved the forerunner of
their destruction. How powerful the Veientes were, Lartes Tolumnius, King [of
the Veientes] were brought to Jupiter F^retrius. In fine, the destruction of
that City was not sent to Pythian Apollo, and the whole Roman people was called
to participate of the pillage. Such were the Veientes then; but now, who
remembers they ever had a being? What remainders are there of them? what track?
History can hardly persuade us that there were any such people as the Veientes.

CHAP. XIII.
The Gauls overrun Italy; besiege Clusium, raise the siege and march directly
toward Rome; by the way they fight the Roman Army, and defeat it; They fire
Rome; massacre the Senators; besiege the Capitol, into which Manlius had
retreated with the choice of the Roman youth. The besieged having held out long
are at last forced to capitulate; As they are paying the sum agreed upon,
Camillus charges the Gauls, who are forced from Rome, and extirpated.

AFter this, either through the envy of the Gods, or by destiny, the swift
current of the prosperous Empire was checked a little by the incursion of the
Galli Senones, which time, whether it were more dismal in respect of the losses
[which happened to the Romans,] or more memorable for the discoveries of their
gallantry, I know not. So extraordinary was the calamity, that I think it sent
from above, as a trial, whereby the immortal Gods would discover, whether the
Roman virtue might deserve the Empire of the World. The Galli Senones, a
Nation naturally savage, utterly unacquainted with morality, besides of great
stature, and using arms proportionable thereto, were so terrible in all
respects, that they seemed born, for the destruction of men, and desolation of
Cities. These heretofore coming in great numbers from the utmost parts of Et
cingente omnia Oceano.
the Earth, and the all-surrounding Ocean, when they had wasted all lay in
their way, having planted themselves between the Alps and the River Po, and not
content there also, wandered up and down Italy, and besieged the City Clusium.
The Romans Clusium, and taking their march toward Rome, the Consul Fabius
meets them with an army, at the River Allia. The defeat at Cremera, was not
more shameful; and therefore Rome numbers that day among the unfortunate. The
[Romane] Army being defeated, they approached the Walls of the City, wherein
there was no Garrison. Then it was, or never, that the true Roman greatness of
mind appeared. First the more ancient, who had exercised the highest charges of
Magistracy, meet in the Forum, and the Priest performing there the ceremony of
devowing, they consecrate themselves to the Gods presiding over the dead; and
returning immediately thence every one to his own house, as they were then in
their long Robes, and their richest ornaments, they seated themselves in their
Ivory Chairs, that when the enemy came, they might die in their dignity. The
Priests and Flamens taking what was most sacred in the Temples, bury part in
the ground, put up in empty casks, and carry part along with them in Wagons.
The Vestal Virgins also, barefoot, follow their sacred mysteries departing
[from the City.] Then is it reported, that L. Albinius, one of the meaner sort
of people, took in the distressed Virgins into his cart, putting out of it his
wife and children. So far at that time, and amidst those extremities, did the
consideration of public devotion smother private concernments. The choice
youth (hardly amounting to the number of a thousand, as is certain) went into
the Capitol, under the command of Manlius, praying Jupiter, whom they
considered as there present, that as they were come thither to defend his
Temple, so he would protect their valor with his Deity. In the mean time, the
Gauls were approached, and finding the City open, entered it, at first with a
certain fear, lest there might be some ambush, but afterward, finding all
quiet, they rush in, with shouting and violence. They go into the houses
standing wide open, where at first having worshipped the venerable Senators
sitting in their Ivory Chairs, having on their purple Robes, as if they had
been Gods or Genii, afterward finding them to be men, and those not deigning
to answer them, they massacre them with a cruelty great as their former
veneration, burn the Houses, and with fire, sword, and help of hands lay the
whole City desolate, and even with the ground. Seven months (who would believe
it?) the Barbarians found work enough about one mount, trying all the ways they
could imagine, both day and night, to reduce it. Whom at length coming under
[the Fortresse] in the night time, Manlius, alarmed by noise of a Goose, forced
down from the top of the mount; and, to discourage the enemies, though he was
in great want of provisions, yet to express his confidence, he cast down
loaves of bread from the Fort. And on a certain day, he sent Fabius the Priest
out of the Fort, ordering him to pass through the enemies guards, to perform a
solemn sacrifice on the mount Quirinal. And he, by the protection of Religion,
returned safe through the midst of the enemies weapons, and brought word that
the Gods were appeased. At length, the Barbarians wearyed out with their own
siege selling their departure at a thousand weight of gold, yet even in that
insolent enough, when into their balance, though unequal, they also put a
sword, with this proud exprobration, Woe to the vanquished; Camillus falling of
a sudden upon the rear of them, made such a slaughter, that all tracks of the
former conflagration were defaced by a deluge of Gaulish blood. Here we have
reason to give thanks to the immortal Gods for the greatness of our
misfortune. Since that the fire took away the cottages of the Shepherds, and
that flame smothered the poverty of Romulus. For what was the effect of that
conflagration, but that a City designed to be the mansion of Men and Gods,
should not be destroyed or laid desolate, but seem rather cleansed and
expiated. Being therefore preserved by Manlius, and restored by Camillus, it
rose up against the neighboring Nations with greater earnestness and vigor.
Gauls from the walls of Rome, under the conduct of the same Camillus, it so
pursued the wretched remainders of them straggling up and down Italy, that now
there is no track of their having been in the world. Once they were put to the
slaughter Anien, where Manlius having taken away from one of the Barbarians,
(with whom he had fought hand to hand) among other spoils, a gold chain, gave
occasion for the name of the Torquati. Another time in the Field of Pontinus,
at such another combat, when M. Valerius, assisted by a sacred bird, brought
away the spoils of the pursuing Gaul, derived to his family the name of
Corvinus. And not many years after Dolabella utterly destroyed Italy near the
Lake of Vadimon, that there might not any one of that nation survive, who
should boast Rome was set on fire by it.

CHAP. XIV.
The war against the Latins, who en^y the glory of the Romans. Manlius
Torquatus put his Son to death for fighting contrary to his orders; Decius
devotes himself to death, for the safety of the Army.

MAnlius Torquatus and Decius Mas being Rome turned their arms from the Gauls,
upon the Latins, a people always indeed troublesome, out of envy to their
Empire and Magistracy, but now somewhat the more out of a contempt, upon the
burning of the City. So that they demanded to be made free Denizens of Rome,
and to participate of the Government and Magistracy, and (if they did not)
presumed they could do more than fight the Romans. But who will wonder that at
that time the enemy should give way; when one of the Consuls put his own Son to
death, though Conqueror, for fighting contrary to his orders, as preferring
Obedience before Victory? The other, as it were by an instinct of the Gods,
having covered his face, devoted himself to the Dii Manes, at the head of the
Army; whereupon rushing in among the thickest of the enemies weapons, he opened
a new way to victory by the track of his own blood.

CHAP. XV.
The war with the Sabins; the Romans waste all their Territories, under the
conduct of the Consul Curious Dentatus.

Latins, they set upon the Sabines, who, unmindful of the Alliance entered into
under Titus Talius, had, by a certain contagion of war, joined with the
Latins. But Curious Dentatus being Consul, they wasted with fire and sword all
that Tract, compassed by the Nar and the springs of Velini, as far as the
Adriatic Sea. By which victory, so great a multitude ^f people, and so great
an extent of territory was reduced under their jurisdiction, that whether were
more considerable, even he who had subdued them was not able to judge.

CHAP. XVI.
The war with the Samnites siding with those of Capua; the Soil whereof is
commended; The Romans spend fifty years in that war; they are defeated at the
straight of Arpaja; they revenge that affront upon the Samnites.

Moved at the petitions of Campania, they Samnites, nor upon their own, but,
which is most glorious, the account of their Associates; There was indeed a
league between the Romans and both those Nations; but the Camp^nians had
treated first, and confirmed what they had done, by an absolute surrender of
all they had. So that the people of Rome managed the war against the Samnites,
as if they had been themselves concerned. Campania is the noblest region, not
only of Italy, but even of the whole world. Nothing more pleasant then its
Air; in a word it produces Flowers twice a year. Nothing more fertile then its
Soil; whence it is called the Theater of Ceres and Bacchus. Nothing more
hospitable then its shores. Here are those noble harbors, Caieta, Misenus, and
Baiae, famous for its baths, Lucrinus and Avernus, which are as so many
with-drawing-rooms of the Ocean. Here the mountains are clothed with vines, as
the Gaurus, Falernus, Massicus, and the most pleasant of all Vesuvius, Aetna's
competitor in casting out fire. The maritine Cities are Formiae, Cumae,
Puteoli, Naples, Herculaneum, Pompeij, and Capua, the chiefest of all these
Cities, heretofore accounted one of the three greatest, Rome and Carthage being
the other two. For this City, for those Regions, the Roman people invaded the
Samnites, a Nation, if you enquire after its wealth, armed with gold and silver
weapons, and clad in garments of diverse colors even to excess; if you respect
their subtlety in laying ambushes, straggling in the recesses of Woods and
Mountains; if their rage and fury, exasperated for the destruction of Rome, by
horrid imprecations, and humane sacrifices; if their obstinacy, the more
enraged and irreconcilable by their misfortunes, after six breaches of the
League between them and the Romans. Yet, in the space of fifty years, the Roman
people subdued and tamed these people, by the Fabij and Papirij, the Fathers
and their Children, so far that they laid waste the very ruins of their Cities,
that at this day Samnium may be looked for even in Samnium, nor can it easily
be seen, what should give occasion for four and twenty Triumphs. But the
greatest and most remarkable overthrow we received from that Nation, was at the
straight passage near Caudium, under the Consulship of Veturius Post-humius.
For the Army being shut up by surprise within that wood, whence it could not
get out, Pon^ius, General of the enemies wondering at so fair an opportunity,
consulted his Father Herennius, who wisely, as an experienced man, advised him,
to set them all at Liberty, or put them to the Sword. He chose rather to make
them pass disarmed under the Yoke, that they might not think themselves obliged
by his kindness, but be the more eager enemies after that affront. The Consuls
therefore, by a voluntary surrender of themselves, took off the dishonor of
the Treaty, and the Soldiery crying for revenge (a thing strange to relate)
under the conduct of Papi^ius, expressed their being enraged, with their Swords
drawn all along the way, before they ^ame to engage, and the enemy himself
related, that in the engagement, the eyes of the Romans sparkled as fire. Nor
was there any end of the slaughter, till they had brought the enemies, and the
General of them under the yoke.

CHAP. XVII.
The nations of Italy conspire against Rome; Fabius Maximus defeats their Army;
His fellow Consul, Decius, following the example of his Father, devoted himself
to death.

HItherto the people of Rome warred against particular nations one after
another, but now it has to do with them combined, yet is able to deal with
all. The Etrusci, divided into twelve several people; the Vmbri, as yet
untouched, the ancientest of all Italy, the remainders of the Samnites, all
these upon a sudden conspire together the utter Etruscorum 12. populi* Vmbri in
id tempus intacti, antiquissimus Italiae populus, Samnitium reliqui, in
excidium Romani nominis repent conjur^n^. Thus V^netus* and other Editions
ruin of the Roman name. The conjunction of so many and so considerable
Nations struck a great terror. There marched up and down Etruria the Ensigns of
four hostile Armies. The Ciminian wood lying in the midst, as unpassable
before, as the Caeledonian or Hercynian Forests, was so great Fabius Maximus
without any hazard, terminate a most hazardous war. For falling upon them
surpised and in disorder, and possessing himself of the most eminent places,
he galled, as he pleased himself, those who were underneath. For the Engagement
was such, as if the Darts were thrown from the Heavens and the Clouds, at the
Giants upon earth. Yet was it not an unbloody Victory; for Decius, Dii manes,
and so purchased a Victory by that kind of Consecration which was ordinary to
those of his Family.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Tarentines affront the Romans, who arm against them. Diverse people of
Italy assist the Tarentines. Pyrrhus King of Epirus engages in their quarrel,
is victorious at the first Engagement against the Romans; and defeated at the
two ensuing Battles. At last he is forced out of Italy, and driven back into
Greece.

Tarentine war, accounted one particular war, as to the name, but containing
several, if we repeat the Victories. For this war involved the Campanians,
Apulians, and Lucanians, and the Authors of it, the Tarentines, as also the
whole Country of Italy, and with all these Pyrrhus, the most famous King of
Greece, in one and the same ruin, that the Romans might at the same time
complete the reduction of Italy, and begin their transmarine triumphs. Tarentum
also, built by the Lacedaemonians, was heretofore the Metropolis of Apulia and
all Lucania, famous for its Greatness, Walls, and Port, and admirable for its
situation; for it lies at the very entrance of the Adriatic Sea, and sends
ships into our Coasts, as also to Istria, Illiricum, E^irus, Achaia, Africa,
Sicily. Upon the Port, which has a Prospect toward the Sea, stands the
City-Theatre, which proved the occasion of all that Cities calamities. They
were celebrating some solemn Sports, when they thence see the Roman Fleet
sailing by, and taking them to be Enemies, they hurry out, and disorderly fall
upon them, not knowing either who the Romans were, or whence they came.
Whereupon an Embassy was sent from Rome with Complaints; this they violate by a
disgrace, obscene, and not decently to be mentioned. That occasioned a war.
Dreadful were the preparations, when so many Nations engaged in the quarrel of
the Tarentines, especially one more violent than all the rest, Pyrrhus, who to
defend a City half-Greek, as built by the Lacedaemonians, brought along with him
the whole strength of Epirus, Thessaly, Macedonia, and (till then unknown)
Elephants, coming upon us by Sea, by Land, and menacing us with the multitude
of Men, Horses, Arms, and moreover the dreadfulness of wild beasts.

The first fight was at Heraclea, and Siris, a Campania, Levinus being Consul;
which was so bloody, that Obsidius, Commander of a Party of Tarentines, setting
upon the King, put him into disorder, and forced him to cast away his Royal
Ensigns, and shift out of the Field. He had been clearly defeated, if the
Elephants, the Converso in spectaculum bello.
Engagement being turned into a show, had not come into play; by whose bulk and
deformity, as also by their scent and noise, the Horse being startled, and
imagining the Beast^ to them unknown, had been somewhat more than they were,
occasioned the first flight and Asculum in Apulia, we engaged with better
success, Fabricius and Aemilius being Consuls. For the terror of the Elephants
being spent* C. Minucius, a Spear-man of the fourth Legion, having cut off the
trunck of one of those beasts, made it appear they were mortal Pyrrhus, last of
all retreating was carried away armed and wounded in the Lucania, in the
Aurusinian fields, as they cal^ them, under the same Consuls. And the^ the
enemies whom it had thrown down, the damn knew it, and broke out of the rank,
as it were to revenge the injury done it. Which put the enemies Camp into
confusion; and so the same beasts which had gained the first fight, balanced
the second, made the Romans victors in the third, without any dispute. But they
fought against Pyrrhus not only by force of arms and in the open field, but
they had to do with him also in their Counsels, and at home, within the City.
For after the first victory, the crafty King, assured of the Roman valor, soon
despaired of effecting ought by arms and betook himself to artifices. He
therefore burnt those who had been slain, treated the Prisoners kindly, and
dismissed them without ransom. And afterward sending Ambassadors to Rome, he
endeavored all he could to be received into friendship. But both in war and
peace, abroad and at home, the Roman valor was remarkable upon all occasions,
nor did any thing make a greater demonstration of the Roman prowess, the
wisdom of the Senate, and the gallantry of their Generals, then the Tarentine
Victory. What brave persons were those whom we find overrun by the Elephants
at the first battle? Their wounds were all in their breasts, some found dead
upon their enemies, all swords in their hands, terror appeared in their
countenances, and a lively draught of indignation even in their death. Which
Pyrrhus so far admired, that he said, Oh how easy were it for me to possess m^
self of the Worlds Empire, having Romans t^ my Soldiers, or for the Romans to
do it, having me for their King! What expedition did they who survived use in
re-inforcing the Army? when Pyrrhus said, I see plain^y that I was born under
the Constellation of Hercules, against whom the heads of so many sl^in enemies
will start up out of their own blood, as if they issued out of the Lernaean
Serpent. But what a glorious Senate was that? When, upon the remonstrance of
Appius the Blind, the Ambassadors were sent away from the City with their
Presents, and their King asking them, wha^ they thought of the habitations of
their enemies, they acknowledged, that The City seemed to them a Temple; the
Senate, a Consistory of Kings. Moreover, what persons were the Generals either
in the Camp? When Curious sent back the Physician, who exposed the head of
Pyrrhus to sale; when Fabricius refused part of the Empire profferr'd him by
Pyrrhus. Or in peace? when Curious preferred his earthen Dishes before the Gold
of the Samnites; when Fabricius, with a gravity beseeming a Censor, condemned
Ru^inus, a Consular person, of superfluity, for having silver-plate to the
weight of ten pound. Who therefore can wonder that the people of Rome should be
victorious, being endued with such manners, so eminent in virtue, and such
exact observers of Military Discipline? And that by this very war with the
Tarentines, they should in the space of four years, bring under their
Jurisdiction the greatest part of Italy, most powerful Nations, most wealthy
Cities, and most fruitful Countries? Or what would be more incredible, if the
beginning of the war be compared with the final issue of it? Pyrrhus, victor at
the first Battle, having wasted Liris and Fregellae in Campania, T^ta t^emente
Ita^ia Campaniam, etc.
all Italy trembling, had a fight of Rome, then almost taken, from the fortress
of Praeneste, and at twenty miles distance filled the eyes of the startled City
with smoke and dust. The same Pyrrhus being afterward twice forced out of his
Camp, twice wounded, and driven by Sea and Land back into his own Country,
Greece, a deep Peace ensued, and the spoils of so many most wealthy Nations
were so great, that Rome could not contain its own Victory. Nor did ever a
nobler, or more magnificent Triumph enter Rome, when as before that day it had
seen only the Cattle of the Volsci, the Sheep of the Sabines, the Wagons of
the Gauls, and the shattered Arms of the Samnites. Then if thou had beheld
the Captives, thou might have seen Molossians, Thessalians, Macedonians,
Bruttians, Apulians, and Lucanians; if the pomp; gold, purple, statues,
pictures, the delicacies of the Tarentines. But the people of Rome was pleased
at no sight so much, as that of those beasts with towers on their backs
(whereof they had been so much afraid) which, out of a sense of their
captivity, bowing down their necks, followed the victorious Horses.

CHAP. XIX.
The Romans engage in a war against those who had favored the Tarentines;
Ascoli taken; Sempronius's vow.

NOt long after, Italy enjoyed an absolute peace. For who durst attempt any
thing after Tarentines? had it not been that the Romans thought good, of their
own accord, to make war on those who had associated themselves with their
enemies. Whereupon the Picentes were subdued, and the Metropolis of the nation,
Asculum, under the conduct of P. Sempronius, who, upon occasion of an
Earthquake, which happened during the fight, appeased the Goddess Tellus, by a
vow of building a Temple to her.

CHAP. XX.
The war with the Sallentini; Brundusium taken; a Temple vowed to Pales,
Goddess of the Shepherds.

THe Sallentini followed the fate of the Picentes, and the chief City of the
region, Brundusium, a place famous for its Port, was taken, under the conduct
of M. Attilius. And in that engagement, Pales, Goddess of Shepherds, earnestly
desired a Temple might be built to her, in acknowledgement of the victory.

CHAP. XXI.
The Vulsinians implore the assistance of the Romans, against their slaves, who
are brought to their duty by Fabius Gurges.

THe last of all the several peoples of Italy that did yield themselves into
the trust and tuition of the Romans, were the Vulsinians, the wealthiest of
Etruria, imploring assistance against some, who, having formerly been their
slaves, and set at liberty by them, had risen up against them, and assumed the
Government to themselves. But these also were chastised [for their insolence]
under the conduct of Fabius Gurges.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Seditions which happened at Rome; Posthumous General of the Roman Army
is killed with stones; The insolence of the Soldiery refusing to fight; an
insurrection of the people, who banish the chiefest of the Nobility; the
unworthy treatment of Coriolanus and Camillus; dissensions between the Senate
and the people.

THis is the second age, and as it were adolescency of the Roman people, and in
which they were freshest, warm and vigorous in the flower of their strength.
There remained yet a certain tincture of the pastoral savagenesse, which
betrayed somewhat of incivilization. Thence it came that the army raising a
mutiny in the Camp, stoned to death Posthumous the General, who denied them
that part of the prey which he had promised; that under Appius Claudius they
would not overcome the enemy, when they might; that, Valero being their Leader,
the Fasces of the Consul were broken to pieces, most refusing to enter into the
service. Thence it came, that they condemned to banishment the most eminent of
the nobility, when they opposed their desires; that they would have done the
like by Coriolanus, who ordered they should follow Husbandry. Which injury he
had as sharply revenged, had not his Mother Veturia, with her tears disarmed
her Son, when he was ready to fall upon them. The same treatment had Camillus
himself, upon pretense that he had not made an equal divident of the Veientine
prey, between the Soldiery and the Citizens. But he, a better person, provided
for the besieged, the City being taken, and soon after, at their suit avenged
them of the Gauls their enemies. They contended also with the Senate, about
equity and right, so far as, tha^ deserting their habitations, they menaced
solitude and destruction to their Country.

CHAP. XXIII.
A civil discord occasioned by the Usurers, and appeased by an Oration of
Menenius Agrippa.

THe first discord was occasioned by the tyrannical drew up in arms to the
Sacred Hill, and was with much difficulty persuaded thence by the authority of
Menemius Agrippa, an eloquent and wise man, yet not till they had got Tribunes.
There is yet extant the story of that ancient Oration which was so prevalent to
induce them to concord; wherein it is reported, that heretofore, the members of
man's body fell out among themselves, alleging, that, all of them executing
their charges, only the belly was free from any; that afterward, being ready
to perish by the difference they were reconciled to it, when they were made
sensible, that by its means, the nourishment being reduced into blood, they
were sustained and kept in vigor.

CHAP. XXIV.
Another civil discord occasioned by the insolence and tyranny of the
Decemvirs; Appius Claudius would have ravished Virginius 's daughter; who is
killed publicly by her Father. The Decemvirs displaced.

THe second discord broke forth in the midst of the City, occasioned by the
licentiousness of the Decemvirate. Ten of the most eminent of the City had, by
order from the people, written down the Laws brought out of Greece; and the
whole course of the administration of Justice was set down in twelve Tables;
which done, they would still keep the power once delivered to them in their
hands, out of an humor which betrayed somewhat of tyranny. Above any of the
rest, Appius Claudius came to that height of insolence, as to attempt the
dishonor of a Virgin nobly descended, Lucretia, and the Kings, and the Law
which himself had set down. Therefore when Virginius, her Father, saw that his
daughter was, by an unjust sentence, to be condemned to bondage, he immediately
stuck not to kill her in the midst of the Forum, with his own hands; whereupon
the bannerr of his Fellow Soldiers being displayed, he carries away those
insolent Magistrates, surrounded with arms, from Mount Aventine, and disposes
them into prisons and fetters.

CHAP. XXV.
The third civil Discord.

THe third discord was raised upon occasion of the dignity of Marriages, that
the Plebeians might inter-marry with the Patricians: which tumult broke forth
in Mount Janiculum, Canuleius a Tribune of the people, being the Author and
fomenter of it.

CHAP. XXVI.
The fourth discord occasioned by the people's desire to be admitted to
dignities; the jealousy and vigilance of the Romans in what concerns their
liberty; upon which account Spurius Cassius, Melius, and Manlius are put to
death.

AMbition of honor occasioned the fourth discord, that the Plebeians might be
admitted Fabius Ambustus, Father of two daughters, bestowed one on Sulpicius, a
person of Patrician extraction, the other, on Stolo, a plebeian, who took it as
an affront, that his wife frightened at the noise of the Lictor's rod (a thing
not known at her own house) had been scornfully laughed at by her sister. Being
therefore advanced to the Tribune-ship, he extorted from the Senate, though
against their wills, a communication of Honors and Magistracy. But in these
very seditions, a man may find sufficient reason to admire the people of the
world; in as much as one while they vindicate liberty, another, chastity, then
the nobility of extraction, and then the marks and distinctions of honors. And
among all these, they were not more vigilant in the assertion of any, than in
that of Liberty, which they could never by corruption be induced to betray,
though in a people already great and growing daily greater, there must needs be
some turbulent members. They put to present death Sp. Cassius, suspected of
affecting sovereignty, by his publishing of the Agrarian Law; and Maelius,
[charg'd with the same ambition grounding their jealousie] upon his liberality
[towards the people.] Of Spurius indeed, his own Servilius Ahala, Master of the
Horse, run the other Forum, by order from the Dictator Quinctius. Nay that
Man^ius, who had preserved the Capitol, demeaning himself more insolently and
uncivilly [than he should have done] upon this acccount, that he had freed most
of the debtors, they cast him down headlong from the Fortress which he had
defended. Such was the people of Rome at home and abroad, such were they in
peace and war. Thus did they pass through the straight of their Adolescency,
that is, the second age of their Empire, during which they by their arms
subdued all Italy, from the Alps to the Seaside.

THE ROMAN HISTORY BY L. JULIUS FLORUS.
The Second Book.
CHAP. I.
The greatness of the people of Rome; they subdue Europe, Asia, and Africa, in
the space of two hundred years.

ITaly being brought under and subdued, the people of Rome was arrived near its
five hundredth year, and to the height of its Adolescency; for if there be any
strength, if any youth can be imagined, then was it truly vigorous, young, and
in a condition to deal with all the world. That people therefore (a thing
prodigious and hardly to be credited) which has spent five hundred years in
Contestations near home, (so great a work was it to give Italy a Head) in the
ensuing two hundred years, overran Europe, Africa, Asia, nay the whole
habitable World, with their wars and victories.

CHAP. II.
The war between the Romans and Carthaginians, grounded on the relief of those
of Messina: The victories gained at Sea by the Romans, against Hieron King of
Sicily, and the Inhabitants of Carthage. The Lacedaemonians send assistance to
the Carthaginians. The Commander in chief of the Romans taken prisoner, and
unworthily treated: The destruction of Carthage.

Italy, having reduced all, quite to the Sea, met with a little check, like a
fire, which having consumed the woods lying in its way, is stopped by some
interposing river. Soon after, perceiving at no great distance a most wealthy
prey, which seemed in a manner forced and torn off from their [own Territory]
Italy, they were so extremely desirous of it, that in regard they could not
come at it by the means o^ Mo^e
Moals, or Bridges, they resolved to join it to Italy, by arms and war. But
see, the Fates themselves making way for them, there wanted not an occasion,
when Messina, an allied City of Sicily, complained of the Tyranny of the
Carthaginians, who, as well as the Romans, would gladly have been Masters of
Sicily: nay they both at the same time, with equal earnestness and force,
designed to themselves the Empire of the world. Under pretense therefore of
assisting their Allies, but indeed lured by the prey, though startled at the
strangeness of the Attempt (yet so great confidence is there where there is
courage) that simple people, descended from Shepherds, and wholly accustomed to
the Land, made it appear, that it was indifferent to Valor, whether the
Engagement were on Horseback, or in Ships, on Land, or at Sea. Appius Claudius
being Hiero, King of Syracuse, with such expedition, that he acknowledged
himself conquered before he saw any enemy. Duilius and Cornelius being Consuls,
they had another Engagement at Sea. And then indeed the expedition, used in
building the Navy was a presage of the Victory. For within sixty days after the
felling of the Timber, there was a Navy of a hundred and sixty Ships at anchor;
so that they seemed not built by Art, but that the Trees, through a certain
design of the Gods, had been turned into Ships. Now the relation of the
Engagement is admirable, when those heavy Sluggs [of ours] took the fleet Long
illis nauticae arts detergere remos, etc. So Lipsius.
Brigantines of the Enemies. Little availed their skill in Sea Fight, either to
justle a whole side of Oars, or avoid the Beak of their Enemies, by yare or
ready turning. For the Grapling-irons being fastened, and other Engines cast
into the Ships, though they scornfully laughed at them, yet were they by their
means, forced to engage as it were upon even ground. Having therefore obtained
a victory at Lyparae, the Enemies Fleet being sunk and fled, occasioned the
first Naval Triumph. Whereat how great was the Joy? when Duilus the General,
not satisfied with one days Triumph, as long as he lived had Torches lighted,
and some Music playing before him, as soon as he rose from Supper, as if he
triumphed every day. The loss at this Engagement was small, considering the Cn.
Cornelius Asina, one of the Consuls, was surpised, and, called out under
pretense of a Parley, was carried away, whereby we had an instance of the
African perfidiousness. During the Dictatorship of Calatrinus, most of the
Carthaginian Garrisons were forced out of Agrigentum, Drepanum, Panormus, Eryx,
Lilibaeum. We were once at a loss near the Camarinensian wood; but we recovered
our selves through the extraordinary Conduct of Calpurnius Flamma, a Military
Tribune, who taking a Party of three hundred choice men, possessed himself of a
small piece of Ground, where the Enemies were lodged to our annoyance, and kept
them play, till the whole Army had marched away: and so by a most happy issue
of his attempt, he gained as great a reputation, as that of Leonidas at
Thermopylae. Only in this ours is more illustrious, that he survived the
Expedition, though he made no Inscription with his blood. L. Cornelius Scipio
being Consul, when Sicily was become a Suburb-Province to Rome, the war
spreading farther, they crossed over into Sardinia, as also into Corfica, which
is adjoining to the other. The Annex^mque Corsicam tr^^siit: Olbi ^ hic,
Aleriae ibi urbis excidio incol^s terruit. Thus restored by Salm^sius.
Inhabitants of the one they terrified by the destruction of the City Olbia,
those of the other by that Oleria: and by Sea and Land so defeated the
Carthaginians, that there remained only Africa to make an absolute Conquest.
Under Marcus Attilius Regulus, the war sailed over into Africa. Yet were there
some who trembled at the very name of the Carthaginian Sea, the Tribune Mannus
adding to the fear; but the General threatening him with the naked Ax, if he
obeyed not, encouraged him to embarque, out of a fear of death. Whereupon, they
made all the haste they could with the advantage of Wind and Oars* and the
Carthaginians were so much startled at the arrival of their Enemies, that
Carthage had been almost surpised with the gates open. The first Booty gained
by that war, was the City Clypea; for, on the Carthaginian shore, that was the
first Fort and place of discovery; and so that and three hundred Fortresses
more were laid desolate. Nor had we to do with men-onely, but also with
monsters, when, as if bred for the revenge of Africa, a Serpent of
extraordinary bulk infested our Camp at Bagrada. But Regulus, whom nothing
withstood, having spread the terror of his name far and near, and either slain
a great number of their young men, and diverse of their Commanders, or made them
prisoners, and sent the Navy home before him laden with prey, and full of
triumph, had also besieged the Source of the war, Carthage it self, and lay
close to the very gates of it. Here fortune met with a check, that there might
be more demonstrations of the Roman Gallantry, the greatne^^ whereof, for the
most part, required the test of calamities. For the enemies being forced to
make use of foreign Aid, the Lacedaemonians sent them Xantippus for a General,
who being a most experienced person in Military Affairs, gave us so foul an
Overthrow, that the most valiant General [of the Romanes] fell alive into the
hands of the Enemies. But he was a man to support so great a misfortune. For
neither Imprisonment among the Carthaginians, nor the Embassy they forced him
upon, could abate his constancy. For [being come to Rome] he urged things much
different from what the Enemies had enjoined him, to wit, that no Peace should
be made with them, nor any exchange of Prisoners. Nay his voluntary return to
the enemies, nor the extremities of imprisonment and ignominious crucifixion,
took off nothing of his gallantry; but rather being the more to be admired in
all these, what may be said of him, but that being vanquished, he triumphed
over his vanquishers, and, because Carthage had not yielded, of Fortune it
self? And the people of Rome were more eager and exasperated to prosecute the
revenge of Regulus, then to obtain the victory. The Carthaginians growing so
much the more insolent, and the war being brought back into Sicily, the Consul
Metellus gave the enemies so great an overthrow at Panormus, that there was no
contestation afterward in that Island. An argument of the greatness of the
Victory, was the taking of about a hundred Elephants; which had been a great
prey, had they not been taken in war, but in hunting. P. Claudius being Consul,
the Romans were not worsted by the enemies, but by the Gods themselves, whose
auspices they M. Fabius Buteo being Consul, they defeated, in the African Sea,
near Aegyniurus, the enemies Fleet then bound for Italy. O what a great triumph
happened then! when their navy fraught with wealthy prey, being forced by
contrary winds, filled Africa, and the Syrtes, and the coasts and shores of all
nations and Islands, with their own wrack. Great was the loss, but without any
derogation from the dignity of the supreme people, that their Victory was
intercepted by a Tempest, and a wrack deprived them of their triumph. And yet,
while the Carthaginian spoils floated up and down, cast upon Promontories and
Islands, the people of Rome Lutatius Catulus being Consul, there was a period
put to the war, at the Islands called Aegates. Nor was there any greater
Sea-engagement than this; for the enemies Fleet, being over burdened with
provisions, soldiers, military engines, ammunition, as if all Carthage had been
there, it proved the occasion of its ruin. [On the contrary] the Roman Fleet
was clean, light, and nimble, and as it were resembling a Land-Camp, or an
engagement of Horse, and guided by the Oars as with reins, and directed their
beaks, here and there, as occasion served, as if they had been animate. So that
the enemies ships being shattered of a sudden, covered the whole Sea between
Sicily and Sardinia with the remainders of their wrack. In fine, so great was
the Victory, that there was no thought then of razing the walls of their
enemies, since they thought it frivolous, to express their rage against Towers
and Walls, when Carthage had been already destroyed upon the Sea.

CHAP. III.
Several Nations make incursions upon the Romans; but they are all brought
under subjection.

THe Carthaginian war being over, there ensued a short time of repose, as much
as sufficed to take breath, and as an assurance of peace, and a cessation of
arms in good earnest, then was Janus's gate first shut, ever since Numa's time.
But it was soon open again. For the Ligurians, the Insubrian Gauls, as also the
Illyrians, began to be troublesome, and with them the Nations inhabiting under
the Alps, that is, seated at the very entrance of Italy; some god or other
perpetually egging them on, to prevent the moldinesse and rusting of the Roman
arms. In fine, a sort of daily and as it were domestic enemies exercised the
young soldiery, nor did the people of Rome make any other use of them, then as
of a whetstone, to set an edge on their valor. As to the Ligurians, who were
seated on the lower parts of the Alps, between Varus and the River Macra, it
was a harder task to find them out, then to vanquish them, as being lodged
among wild thickets. They were a hardy and active people, secured from our
attempts by the places they lived in, and their convenience of flight, and
rather committed robberies, then Deceates, the Oxybii, the Euburiates, the
Ingauni [all Nations of Liguria] had a long time amused and eluded us, by the
advantages of their woods, ways, and lurking-holes, at length, Fulvius
compassed their recesses with fire, Baebius forced them into the Champian, and
Posthumous so far disarmed them, that he hardly left them a piece of iron to
till ground withal.

CHAP. IV.
Britomarus Leader of the Insubrian Gauls is overcome by Aemilius; the defeat
of Astrionicus; Marcellus kills King Virdomarus; and consecrates his arms to
Jupiter Feretrius.

THe Insubrian Gauls, and the next adjoining Alps, as to their minds, resembled
wild beasts, as to bodies exceeding the ordinary stature of men. But it was
found by experience, that as at the first onset they behaved themselves beyond
men, so at the second, their performances were below those of women. The bodies
bred about the Alps in a moist air, have somewhat in them resembling the
snows; for as soon as they are grown hot by fighting, they are all of-a-sweat,
and are spent by the least motion, as if they were melted by the Sun. Now these
(as they had often done before) commanded by Britomarus, had sworn, that they
would not put off their belts, till they had got up to the Capitol. It happened
accordingly; for being vanquished by Aemilius, Astrionicus being their Leader,
they vowed a chain out of the prey of our Soldiers to their God Mars. Jupiter
prevented the performance of their Vow; for Flaminius erected a golden Trophy
out of their chains to Jupiter. Virdumarus being their King, they had promised
the arms of the Romans to Vulcan. But their vows were performed the contrary
way; for their King being slain, Marcellus hung up the rich spoils taken from
him, to Jupiter Feretrius, being the third [offering of that kind that had been
made] since the time of Romulus the Father [and founder of the City.]

CHAP. V.
The Roman Ambassadors barbarously massacred by the Liburnians; the punishment
inflicted on them and their Prince by Cneus Fulvius.

Illyrians or Liburnians, live at the very bottom of the Alps, between the
Rivers Arsia and Titius, spreading themselves all along the Adriatic Sea.
These under their Queen Teuta, not satisfied with the incursions they made [on
the Romans] added an execrable crime to their insolences. For they put to death
our Ambassadors, calling them to account for their misdemeanors, not with a
sword, but, as victims, with an axe, and burnt the masters of our Ships; and
this was done, to heighten the dishonor of it, by the command of a Woman. But
Cn. Fulvius Centumalus

CHAP. VI.
The second Carthaginian War; Hannibal bes^eges Saguntus; the Romans to be
revenged arm against the Carthaginians; Hannibal's oversight after the great
Victory at Cannae; Fabius and Marcellus make it appear by their conduct, that
Hannibal was not invincible; the same Hannibal besieges Rome, thinking thereby
to raise the siege before Capua; Roman Armies sent into diverse Provinces; the
first Scipios, after they had been victorious in Afric, are at last defeated;
Publius Scipio undertakes the war, and comes off with success and renown.

AFter the first Carthaginian war, we had forth, less indeed, as to the space
of time, (f^^ it lasted not above eighteen years) but so far the more terrible,
in respect of the cruelty of the overthrows, that the losses of both people
being balanced, the Conquerours might be taken for the conquered. 'Twas a
shame to a gallant people [the Carthaginians] after their loss of the
sovereignty of the Sea, and their Islands forced from them, to pay tribute
where they were wont to demand it. Hereupon Hannibal, yet very young, made a
vow at the Altar, in the presence of his Father, that he would revenge [his
country,] nor did he delay i^ long. To occasion a war, Saguntus was destroyed,
an ancient and wealthy City of Spain, a great indeed, but sad monument of
fidelity toward the Romans: which City though agreed to continue in its
liberty by the common league between them, Hnnibal, seeking a pretense of new
disturbances, lays desolate with his own hands and the help of the Inhabitants,
that, having broken the league, he might open a way into Italy. Alliances were
most religiously observed by the Romans: Upon intelligence therefore that an
allied City was besieged, calling to mind the leagu^ made with the
Carthaginians, they do not presently arm, but chose rather after a legal way to
make their complaints. In the mean time the Inhabitants of Saguntus, wearied
out with famine, and all the extremities of a siege, in fine their fidelity
being heightened into exasperation, made a great pile in the midst of their
City, upon which being got, themselves, their relations, and all their wealth
perished by fire and sword. Hannibal is demanded as Author of so great a
calamity. The Carthaginians seeming at a loss what to do, What means this
delay? said Fabius, the principal person of the Roman Embassy, in this bosom,
I bring war and peace, whether do you make choice of? Take which you think
best. Whereto it being replied that he should produce which he pleased. Take
war then, says he, and thereupon letting down the forepart of his garment, in
the midst of the Councel-room, he did it with such a dreadful noise, as if he
had really brought war in his lap. The period of the war was suitable to the
beginning of it. For as if the last imprecations of the Saguntines, at their
public self-slaughter, and conflagration, had commanded such obsequies to be
performed for them, their ghosts were appeased by the desolation of Italy, the
reduction of Africa, and the destruction of those Kings and Generals, who
managed that war. When therefore that sad and dismal violence and tempest of
the Carthaginian war, had, in the fire at Saguntus, forged out the thunderbolt
long before designed against the Romans, immediately, as forced by some
whirlewind, it broke through the middle of the Alp^ and fell down upon Italy,
from those incredible heights of snow, as if it had descended from the Heavens.
The first eruptions of the storm broke forth about the Po and Ticinus. Scipi^
being then General, our Army was defeated, and he himself had fallen wounded
into the hands of the enemies, if his Son, then but young, had not relieved and
rescued his Father from death it self. This was the Scipio, who afterward grew
up for the destruction o^ Africa, and had his surname from its misfortunes.
Trebia had the same fate as Ticinus. Here raged the second tempest of the
Punick war, Sempronius being Consul. At this time, the crafty enemies, having
pitched upon a cold and snowy day, after they had warmed themselves at the
fire, and anointed themselves with oil, though people coming from the southerly
and Sunny parts of the world (a thing hardly creditable) made their advantage
of our own Winter to overcome us. Hannibal's third thunderbolt fell at the lake
Trasimanenus, Flaminius being General. There also they made use of another
knack of Punick artifice. For the Horse being shadowed by a mis^ arising from
the Lake, and the Osiars growing there abouts, fell upon the rear of us being
engaged. Nor can we complain of the Gods. For, swarms of Bees sticking to the
Ensigns, and the unwillingnesse of the Eagles to march out, and a great
Earthquake happening at the joining of the battle, had forewarned the
temerarious General of the approaching defeat; unless that Earthquake might
proceed from the trampling of Men and Horses, and the over-violent handling of
arms. The fourth, that is, in a manner the last wound of the Empire, was at
Cannae an obscure village of Apulia; Annibal, not contenting himself only with
counterfeit fugitives, who fell upon the rear of us, but the most subtle
General, having in a most spacious champion, observed the situation of the
place, as also that the Sun shined very hot, and much dust arose, and that the
East Wind blew constantly, as if it had been designed to do it, so ordered his
Forces, that the Romans were exposed to all these inconveniences, and he,
favored by Heaven, engaged them with the advantage of wind, dust, and Sun.
Whereupon ensued the slaughter of two very powerful Armies, till the enemies
were glutted with killing, and Annibal said to his Soldiers, Give over. One of
the Generals made his escape, the other was slain, whether expressed greater
courage, is doubtful. Paulus was ashamed, Varro despaired not. Demonstrations
of the great slaughter were, that the An^idus continued bloody for some time;
that by the command of the Enemy, there was a bridge of carcasses made over the
torrent Gellus; that two bushels of rings were sent to Carthage; and so, by
measure, it was known wha^ number of Roman Knights were slain. Then was it not
doubted, but that Rome was come to its period, and that within five days
Annibal might feast it in the Capitol, if (as was said by the Carthaginian
Maherbal the Son of Bomiliar,) Annibal had known as well how to use a victory
as gain it. But then (as is commonly said) either the fate of that City which
was to be Empress of the world, or his own evil Genius, or the Gods averse
from Carthage, carried him another way. When he might have pressed on his
victory to the utmost advantage, he chose rather to content himself with what
had been done, and leaving Rome, took a progress into Campania and Tarentus,
where, in a short time, both he and his army languished, so that it was truly
said, that Capua had been as fatal to Annibal, as Canna to the Romans. For, the
warmth of Campania, and the baths of Baiae (who would believe it?) overcame him
whom the Alps and arms had found unconquerable. In the mean time the Romans
took breath, and seemed as it were to rise out of their graves. Arms being
wanting, they took down those which had been set up in the Temples. There
wanted young men [to ^ear them] they set free their slaves, and give them the
military oath. The Treasury was exhausted; the Senate brought in their wealth,
reserving to themselves nothing of gold, but what was in Jewels, Belts, and
Rings. The Knights followed their example, and the Commonalty theirs. In fine
when the wealth of private persons was brought into the public stock, Levinus
and Marcellus being Fabius, who found out a new way of vanquishing Hannibal,
which was, not to fight. Thence he got that new name; so beneficial to the
Commonwealth, of Cunctator, or Temporizer. Thence that other given him by the
people, the Buckler of the Empire. Annibal, [by leading him] through the whole
Country of the Samnites, and through the woods of Falernus and Gaurus, that he,
who could not be overcom^ by valor, was broken and harassed by delay.
Afterward, Claudius Marcelius being General, the Romans ventured to engage
him: they drove him out of his [dear] Campania, and forced him to raise the
siege from before Nola. Nay Sempronius Gracchus being General, they presumed to
pursue him through Lucania, and press hard upon him in his retreat, though then
(o what shame) they fought with servile hands. For the concurrence of so many
disasters had forced them to it. Sed liberate dona i; fecerat de ser^is v^tus
Romanos.
But they were made free [afterwards] though their own valor had made them
Romans [before.] O the prodigious constancy in so many adversities! O the
extraordinary courage and gallantry of the Romans, in the midst of so many
extremities! when they were not assured of Italy, they have the confidence to
aim at other places; and when the enemies marched up and down Campania and
Apulia, ready to cut their throats, and had brought Africa into the midst of
Italy, they at the same time kept Hannibal in play, and sent Forces into
Sicily, Sardinia, Spain, and other parts of the world. Sicily was the charge of
Marcellus, nor did it hold out long; For the whole Island was reduced in one
City. ^yracuse, that great, and till then conquered Metropolis, though defended
by the skill of Archimedes, yielded at last. It was Archusa: but what avayl'd
they, save only that they occasioned the sparing of the vanquished City, for
its beauty sake? Gracchus Sardinia, nor did the savagenesse of the Inhabitants,
nor the excessive height of the Mad Mountains (so they call them) stand them in
any stead. The Cities were treated with the extremities of hostility,
especially the chiefest of all Caralis, that an obstinate Nation, which
contemned death, might be brought down by the desolation of their native soil.
Cneus, and Publius Scipio being sent into Spain, had once deprived the
Carthaginians of all hope; but, surpised by their artifices, they lost all
again; even after they had beaten the Carthaginian Forces, in very great
fights. But the Punick treachery proved so successeful, that they killed one of
them as he was encamping, and the other having escaped into a Tower, they set
it a fire about him. Therefore to revenge his Father and Uncle, there was sent
thither with an Army, Scipio, for whom the Fates reserved the great surname
derived from Africa. He recovered all Spain, that martial of the enemies Army,
and the Tutresse of Hannibal himself, all I say (though hardly to be credited)
from the Pyrenean Mountains to Hercules Pillars, and the Ocean, whether with
greater expedition, or less difficulty, is Africa, that Carthage in Spain was
so easily taken. Yet is it certain withal, that what most contributed to the
reduction of the Province, was the admirable Sanctimony and continency of the
General, who returned back to the Barbarians, young lads that had been taken,
and Virgins of extraordinary beauty, not having suffered them to be brought
into his sight, that he might not seem so much as with his eyes to have blasted
the flower of their Virginity. Thus did the Romans do in foreign Countries,
yet could they not remove Hannibal, lodged in the heart of Italy. Several
Nations had revolted to the enemy, who being exasperated against the Romans,
made his advantages Italy. Yet had we forced him out of several Cities and
regions. Tarentus was come in to us. We had also almost recovered Capua, the
seat, and mansion, and second Country of Hannibal, the loss whereof gave him
so much trouble, that he thereupon brought all his Forces against Rome. O
people worthy the world's Empire, worthy the favor and admiration of Men and
Gods! Being reduced to the greatest extremities, they desisted not from their
attempt, and while they provided for the safety of the City, they neglected not
Capua; but part of the Army being left there under the Consul Appius, part
having followed Flaccus to the City, they fought both present and absent? What
therefore do we wonder at? Hannibal, encamped within three Rome, and ready to
come on, the Gods, I say the Gods (nor is it a shame to acknowledge it) once
more prevented him; for there fell such excessive rains at every motion of his,
and such extraordinary winds, that it should seem they had been sent from
above, to remove the enemy, not from Heaven* [as the Giants sometime were] but
from the Walls of the City and the Capitol. He therefore departed, fled, and
retired to the extremities of Italy, leaving the City when he was just upon the
point of assaulting it. This is a thing hardly worth mentioning, yet a pregnant
argument of the magnanimity of the people of Rome, that during the time the
City was besieged, the ground on which Hannibal was encamped, being publicly
set to sale, met with a purchasor. On the contrary, Hannibal desirous to
imitate our confidence, proferr'd to sale the Goldsmiths shops of the City, but
found no buyer: whence it may be seen, that the destinies had also their
presages. But there had yet been nothing done answerably to so great valor,
and favor of the Gods. For Asdrubal, Hannibal's brother, was upon his march
from Spain with a fresh Army, new-raised Forces, and other requisites for the
prosecution of the war. We had, no doubt, been ruined, if he had Claudius Nero
and Livius Salinator defeat him as he was encamping his Army. Nero was employed
about the dislodging of Hannibal in the most remote part of Italy. Livius was
gone into the contrary part, so vast, that is, the whole territory of Italy,
where it is longest, lying between them. By what intelligence, with what
expedition the Consuls joined their forces, and jointly engaged the enemy, and
all without Hannibal's knowledge of any thing done, it is hard to give an
account of. This is certain, that Hannibal, being assured of it, when he saw
his Brother's head cast into his camp, said, I now see the unhappiness of
Carthage. This was the first acknowledgement of the man, not without a certain
presage of the fate hanging over him. Now it was taken for granted, that
Hannibal, even by his own confession, might be vanquished. But the people of
Rome heightened by so many prosperities, thought it a noble attempt to subdue
that most irreconcilable enemy in his own Country Africa. Scipio therefore
being Africa, began to imitate Hannibal, and to revenge the miseries of Italy
upon Africa. Good Gods! what forces of Asdrubal, what Syphax did he defeat? How
extraordinary were the two Camps which he destroyed in one night by fire? In
fine, he was not only within three miles, but shook the very gates of Carthage
with a siege. By which means he forced Hannibal out of Italy, where he Roman
Empire, when the two greatest Generals of any that ever went before them, or
came after them, one Conqueror of Italy, Spain, were disposing their Armies in
order to an engagement. But there passed a Conference between them about some
conditions of peace: They stood still a while, fixed by mutual admiration; but
not agreeing upon a peace, the signal was given. It is apparent from the
confession of both, that the Armies could not be better marshalled, nor a
battle more sharply fought. This acknowledgement Scipio made of Hannibal's
Army, Hannibal of Scipio's. But Hannibal was worsted, Africa, whose example the
Universe, soon after followed.

CHAP. VII.
The Romans enter into a war against the Macedonians who had assisted Hannibal:
The Macedonians defeated, King Philip makes a peace; the Romans give liberty to
the Grecians.

CArthage being subdued, none thought it a shame to be so. Macedonia, Greece,
Syria, and all other Nations, as if carried away with the torrent of Fortune,
followed the fate of Africa. But the first were the Macedonians, a people that
sometimes aspired to the Empire. Therefore though at that time Philip had the
Government, yet the Romans seemed to fight Alexander. The Macedonian war was
greater in name, Quam spectatione gentis.
than for any consideration of the Nation it self. It took its rise from the
League between King Philip, and Hannibal, while he lorded it in Italy: the
occasion of its prosecution was that Athens implored assistance against the
injuries done it by the King, who exceeding the limits of victory, wreaked his
rage upon Temples, Altars, and the very Sepulchers of the dead. The Senate
thought fit to relieve suppliants Rome. Under the Consulship of Levinus, the
Romans first took the Ionian Sea, and sailed by the Grecian shore, with a kind
of triumphant navy; for they had then aboard the spoils of Sicily, Sardina, and
Africa. And the Laurel growing at the stern of the Admiral promised no less
then certain victory. Attalus King of Pergameus came in to our assistance.
There Rhodians, a people well versed in Sea affairs; and these doing their work
by Sea, the Consul with his Horse and Men put all to the rout on Land. The King
was twice overcome, twice forced to fly, twice driven out of his Camp, and yet
nothing was more dreadful to the Macedonians than the very sight of the
wounds, which were not made with darts, or arrows, or any light Grecian
weapon, but with huge Javelins, and as weighty swords, forcing their way even
beyond death. Nay Flaminus being General, we made our way Chaonian Mountains,
and crossed the River Pindus, passing through abrupt places, and so got into
the bowels of Macedonia. To have got in was Cynocephalae, the Consul granted
him a peace, and left him his Kingdom. Soon after, that there might be left
nothing thereabouts to oppose us, he subdued. Thebes, and Euboea, and the
Lacedaemonians, committing insolences and depredations under their Capitain
Nabis. To Greece indeed he restored its ancient state, that it might live
according to its Quinquennial Games, in the Theater at Nemea? What an emulation
of applause was there among them? What flowers did they cast upon the Consul?
And they commanded the Crier, again and again to repeat that expression,
wherein the liberty of Achia was declared. Nor did they take less pleasure in
that sentence of the Consul, than they wnuld have done in a concert of most
pleasant music.

CHAP. VIII.
Antiochus King of Syria demands a City of Thrace of the Romans, who thereupon
take occasion to enter into a war against him. He is overcome by Aemilius
Regulus; A second defeat of Antiochus, upon which he accepts of a peace.

NExt the Macedonians and King Philip, a Antiochus, things being purposely so
disposed by Fortune, that the progress of the Empire, as it had been out of
Africa into Europe, so it should now (causes of war coming in unsought) march
out of Europe into Asia, and that the order of victories should keep on its
course according to the situation of the world. As to the report of it, there
was no war more formidable than this; to wit, when the Romans reflected how
they had to do with the Persians, the Inhabitants of the East, Xerxes and
Darius; when they heard of ways to be cut through inaccessible Mountains, and
that the Sea was covered with Ships. Besides they were terrified by celestial
menaces, when Cumaean Apollo was in a continual sweat. But that proceeded from
the fear of the deity, who had a kindness for his [dear] Asia. There is not
certainly any place better furnished with Wealth, Men, and Arms, then Syria is;
but it was fallen into the hands of a King so unactive, that Antiochus'^
greatest reputation was, his being vanquish'^ by the Romans. He was forced upon
this war, on the one side by Thoas Prince of Aetolia, dissatisfied that the
Romans had not rewarded hi^ assistance against the Macedonians: on the other
side, by Hannibal, who conquered in Africa, droven thence, and impatient of
peace, sought up and down the world to raise enemies to the people of Rome. And
how dangerous might it have been, if the King would have been guided by his
advice? If wretched Hannibal had had the management of the whole strength of
Asia? But the King relying on his own power, and priding it in the Title of
King, thought it enough to have begun a war. By this time, Europe belonged to
the Romans without any dispute. But Antiochus demanded the City Lysimachia,
seated on the Thracian shore, as his by right from his Ancestors. By the
influence of this constellation the tempest of the Asian war was raised, and
the greatest of Kings, Contentus
contenting himself, that he had gallantly declared a war, and having marched
out of Asia with a mighty noise and train, and possessed himself of the Islands
and shores of Greece, minded his divertisement^ and luxury, as if he had been
already Victor. The Euripus, by its intermissive waters, divided the Island
Eubaea from the continent only by a small space which let in a small Arm of
the Sea. Here Antiochus had his Tents of Gold and Silk, pitched within the
noise of the water, and wanted not also his music of flutes and other
instruments amidst the waves, nor his Roses, which were brought from all parts,
though it were Winter; nay that he might seem in all respects the General of an
Army, he had also companies of Virgins and young Lads. Such a King therefore,
already vanquished by his own luxury, the Romans, under the conduct of M.
Acilius Glabrio, assaulting in the very Island, forced him to forsake it upon
the first news of their approach. Thence they went immediately into Asia. The
Royal Navy was commanded by Polexenes and Hannibal; for the King himself could
not endure to look on the fight. Therefore Aemilius Regullus being General, it
was absolutely defeated by the Rhodian Galleys. Let not that Athens flatter it
self; in Antiochus we overcame Xerxes; in Aemilius, we matched Themistodes, and
in taking Ephesus, we have gained as much honor, as they in taking Salamis.
Afterward, Scipio being Consul, (whose Brother surnamed Africanus, late
Conqueror of Carthage, went along with him, voluntary, as his
Lieutenant General) it is resolved that Antiochus should be absolutely subdued:
and indeed he was already beaten out of the Sea; but we proceed further. We
encamp at the River Maeander, and the Mountain Sipylus. There the King had
taken up his post, with what Forces of his own, and A^xiliaries is incredible.
He had three hundred thousand Foot, and about the same number of Horse and
Chariots of war. Besides, he had surrounded his Army with huge Elephants,
glittering in Gold, Purple, Silver, and their own Ivory. But all these
preparations were obstructed by their own greatness: besides a sudden shower
of rain that fell, had, to our advantage, made the Persian bows useless.
First, their consternation, then flight, made way for our triumph. To Antiochus
vanquished and submitting himself, they granted peace, and part of his Kingdom;
and that the more willingly, the more easily he had been defeated.

CHAP. IX.
The Rhodians and Athenians use their mediation with the Romans on the behalf
of the Aetolians, Cephalenia and other Islands subdued by the Romans.

THe Aetolian, as it ought, succeeded the Syrian war. For Antiochus being
vanquished, the Romans pursued the incendiaries of the Asian war. The revenge
is committed to the charge of Fulvius Nobilior, who immediately with his engines
batters the Metropolis of the Nation, Ambracia, sometime the abode of K.
Pyrrhus. Whereupon it was surrendered. The Athenians and Rhodians came thither
upon the entreaty of the Aetolians: [upon their mediation] remembering the
assistance we had received from them, it was thought fit they should be
pardoned: But the war crept into the adjacent parts, and spread all over
Cephalenia, and Zacinithos; and all the Island's scattered up and down that
Sea, between the Ceraunian Mountains, and the Promontory of Malaeum, came in
occasionally by the Aetolian war.

CHAP. X.
The Istrians plunder Manlius's Camp, but afterward being surpised in the
midst of the jollity are defeated, and their King taken prisoner.

Istrians follow the Aetolians; for they had assisted them not long before in
their war: and the beginning of the fight was fortunate to the enemy, and
proved also the occasion of their ruin. For after they had plundered the Camp
of C. Manlius, and possessed themselves of a rich booty, C. Claudius Pulcher
falls upon them as they were feasting and sporting, nay many of them so
overcome with drink, that they knew not where they were. So they cast up their
surpised Victory, with their blood and breath. The King himself, named Apulo,
being set a Horseback as not able to stand through gluttony and lightness of
the head, was with much ado persuaded that he was taken, even after he had
recovered himself.

CHAP. XI.
The Gallo-grecians are subdued by the Romans; the great courage and gallantry
of a Lady, in revenging her self of a Centurion who had done her violence.

THe Gallo-grecians were also involved in the ruins of the Syrian war. They
had Antiochus. Whether Manlius were over-desirous of a triumph, or that he
maliciously charged them [with that offence] is doubtful: certain it is, that,
though a Conqueror, a triumph was denied him, because the occasion of the war
was not approved by the Senate. Now the Gallo-grecians, as appears by the very
name, is an intermixed and mongrel people, the remainders of the Galls, who
under Brennus had wasted Greece, going further Eastward, had after sometime
plant'd themselves in the midst of Asia. But as the seeds of fruits degenerate,
by change of soil, so that innate savagenesse of theirs was abated by the
delicacies of Asia. They were therefore at two fights quite broken and
defeated, though upon the approach of an enemy, forsaking their own
habitations, they had retired to the highest Mountains, which the Tolistobogii
and the Tectosagae were already possessed of. Vtrique
Both of them being galled with slings and arrows, accepted conditions of a
perpetual peace. But being bound, they gave us occasion to wonder at them, when
they proffered to bite off their chains, and offered their throats one to
another to be strangled. And yet the wife of Orgiagon, a King among them,
having been ravished by a Centurion of ours, got out of custody by a memorable
example, and brought the Soldiers head to her [injur'd] husband.

CHAP. XII.
The second Macedonian or Persian war; the alliance between the Macedonians and
the Thracians; the policy of K. Perses, who yet is overcome by P. Aemilius. The
description of a magnificent triumph; the news of the Vitory brought to Rome,
the very day of the Engagement, by the means of two young men, who were thought
to be Castor and Pollux.

Syrian war, Macedonia rose up a second time. The remembrance of their former
nobility stirred up that most valian^ people: and there had succeeded Philip,
hi^ Son Perses, who thought it a dishonor to the Nation, that Macedonia, being
overcome once, should ever continue so. The Macedonians, rise with greater
animosity under this man, than they had done under his father. For they had
drawn in the Thracians to join with them. A^qu^ ita ^dustriam Mac^donum,
vi^ibus Thracum; fero^i^m Thracum, disciplina Macedonum t^mperavere.
And so they had balanced the dexterity of the Macedonians by the robust
valor of the Thracians, and the brutality of the Thracians by the discipline
of the Mecedonians. What added to this, was the prudence of the chief
Commander, who having observed the situation of his countries, from top of
Aeonus encamping his Forces in abrupt places, had so fortified Macedonia with
Men and Arms, that he seemed not to have left the enemies any way to enter into
it, unless they should fall down from the Heavens. For Q. Martius Philippus
being Consul, the Romans, having learned out the avenues, got into that
Province, by the way of the marshes of Astrudes, through harsh and dangerous
Paulus being Consul, when the Garrison were better manned, and lay closer one
to another than Macedonia was surprised by another way, through the great
policy and industry of the General, who offering to get in at one place, and
breaking in at another, the King was so startled at his coming, that he durst
not be present, but left the war to be managed by his Commanders. Being
therefore vanquished in his absence, he escaped to Sea, and so to the Island of
Samothrace, promising himself protection from the sanctity of the place, as if
Temples and Altars could secure him, whom his own Mountains and Arms could not.
None of the Kings longer regretted his loss of Fortune. Writing to our General
as a supplyant, from the Temple into which he had fled, he set down to the
Epistle with his own name, his quality of King. But no man could express a
greater respect toward captivated Majesty then Paulus did. As soon as the
enemy came into his sight, he brought him into his Tent, and treated him with
banquets, and admonished his Sons, that they should submit to Fortune; who was
able to do so great things. Of all the most magnificent triumphs which the
Romans had seen, this from Macedonia was one of the chiefest; for the show of
it lasted three days. The first day, were brought in Images and Pictures; the
second, Arms and Money; the third, the Captives, and among them the King
himself, having not recovered out of his astonishment, as if the disaster were
but newly befallen him. But the people of Rome had received the joyful news of
the Victory, before they had it by the General's Letters. For the very day that
Perses was vanquished in Macedonia, the thing was known at Rome. Two young men
mounted on white Horses, were seen washing off dust and blood at the Lake of
Suturna. These brought the news. The common persuasion was, that they were
Castor and Pollux, because there were two of them; that they had been present
at the fight; because they were yet bloody; that they came out of Macedonia,
because they seemed as it were out of breath.

CHAP. XIII.
The Illyrians are vanquished by the Praetor Anicius; Scodra, the chief City of
their Country, laid desolate.

THe contagion of the Macedonian war drew Illyrians. They were Mercenaries
under King Perses, and should have fallen on the rear of the Romans. They are
without any trouble subdued by the Pro-praetor Anicius. It was thought
sufficient, to lay Scodra, chief City of the Nation, level with the ground.
Whereupon there ensued an absolute surrender of themselves to bondage. In fine,
this war was at an end, before it was known at Rome that it was engaged in.

CHAP. XIV.
The third Macedonian war occasioned by the usurpation of a mean person, named
Andriscus; the Praetor Juventius is overcome by him, but sufficiently revenged
by Metellus, who brings Andriscus captive to Rome.

Carthaginians and Macedonians, as if there had been some agreement between
them, that they should be a third time vanquished, by a certain disposal of
destiny, took up Arms at the same time. But the Macedonian shook off the yoke
first, and was reduced with the more difficulty, because he had been slighted.
The occasion of the war almost forces a blush; for one Andriscus, a person of
mean descent, whether a slave or free is doubtful, but certainly a Mercenary,
invades the Kingdom, and undertakes the war. But because he was commonly known
by the name of Philippus, by reason of his likeness in the face to that
Prince, he was called Pseudo-Philippus, and as he had the resemblance, and had
assumed the title of a King, so he wanted not a courage beseeming a King.
Therefore while the Romans slight these things, thinking it enough to send the
Praetor Juventius against him, they rashly engage against a man grown powerful
not only by the strength of the Macedonians, but also by the great additional
Forces of Thrace, and are with much regret worsted, not by real Kings, but by
that imaginary and personated Prince. But Metellus being Praetor, they were
fully revenged for the former loss of a Legion and the Praetor, who commanded
it. For Macedonia was made subject to bondage, and the chief Commander,
delivered up by that Prince of Thrace to whom he had fled, was brought to the
City in chains; Fortune doing him a kindness even in his disasters, that the
people of Rome made a triumph upon his account, as much as if he had really
been a King.

CHAP. XV.
The third Pudick or Carthaginian war; the deplorable destruction of the City
of Carthage, by young Scipio.

Africa, was short, both as to time (for it was completed in four years) and
in comparison of the former, of less difficulty: for our business was not so
much against men as against the City it self, but if we consider the event, it
was of great consequence: for by that means Carthage was destroyed. And if a
man consider the circumstances of former times; in the first, the war was only
begun, in the second, almost dispatched, in the third, quite ended. But the
occasion of this war was, that, contrary to the Articles of the Treaty, they
had, but once indeed, prepared a Navy and Army against the Numidians, but had
several times alarmed the territories of Masinissa. For the Romans had a
kindness for that good King, their Ally. When the war was resolved upon, it
wat proposed, what should be done after it were ended. Cato, out of an
irreconcilable animosity, gave his vote for the destruction of Carthage, even
while other things were under debate. Scipio Nasica alleged that it should be
preserved, lest the fear of the Rival-City being once taken away, the
prosperity of Rome would be apt to break forth into debauches. The Senate took
a course between both, to wit, that Carthage might be removed from the place
where it stood. For they thought it a glorious thing there should be a
Carthage, but such as should not be feared. Whereupon Manilius and Censorinus
being Consuls, the Romans set upon Carthage, and having the Navy, upon some
overture of peace, surrendered to them, they set it afire in sight of the City.
Then the chiefest among the Citizens being sent for, were commanded, if they
would save their lives, to quiet Carthage. Which command seeming too cruel, so
incensed them, that they would rather endure the greatest extremities.
Whereupon they made public lamentations, and unanimously cried out Arms: and
they were absolutely resolved to stand it out by force; not that they had any
hope left, but out of a desire that their country should be de^troy'd rather by
the enemies, than themselves. How great the fury of the discontented was, may
be inferred hence, that they pulled down their houses to build a new Fleet,
that about their Arms, gold and silver was employed in^tead of iron and brass,
and the Matrones par^ed with their hair to make cordage for the engines.
Afterward, Mancinus being Consul, the siege was closely carried on both by Sea
and Land. The Haven, and the first and second walls were already dismantled,
when the Castle notwithstanding, called the Byrsa, made such resistance, as if
it had been another City. But though the destruction of the City was in a good
forwardness, yet [was it considered, that] the name of the Scipio's was fatal
to Africa. The Commonwealth therefore, pitching upon Scipio, was desirous the sea an end of that war. He was the Son of Paulus surnamed Macedonicus, and had
been adopted by the Son of the great Scipio Africanus, presuming he would be an
ornament to his race; it being designed that the Grandchild should absolutely
lay desolate that City which the Grandfather had brought near its destruction.
But as the bitings of dying beasts are most dangerous, so we found more work
with Carthage half ruined, than when it was entire. The enemies being forced
into one Fortress, the Romans had also besieged the Port. Whereupon, the
Carthaginians made another Port, on the other side of the City, not with any
design to get away: but even from that place, whence no man imagined it
possible they should escape, a new Fleet starts up. In the mean time, no day,
no night past, but some new work, engine, or forlorn did appear, like sudden
flashes of fire out of the embers, after some conflagration. At last, things
growing desperate, forty thousand men surrendered themselves, and (what is
hardly credible,) Asdrubal being their Leader. How much more gallantly did a
Woman, and that the same Asdrubal's wife, behave her self? when taking her two
children, she cast her self down from the top of the house into the midst of
the fire, therein imitating the Queen who founded Carthage. How great a City
was destroyed, to omit other things, the very continuance of the fire makes
apparent: for during the space of seventeen days, they could hardly quench the
fire, which the enemies themselves had been the occasions of, by firing their
own houses and Temples, purposely, that since the City could not be rescued
from the triumphs of the Romans, it should first be burnt.

CHAP. XVI.
Corinth, the Metropolis of Achaia decla^ed an enemy to the people of Rome, for
the affronts done to their Ambassadors; it is destroyed, and consumed by fire.

COrinth, Metropolis of Achaia, the ornament Greece, and seated for the
delightfulness of the prospect, between the Ionian and Aegaean Seas,
immediately followed the fate of Carthage, as if that age had been designed for
the destruction of Cities. This City (^^ thing unworthy) was destroyed, before
it was certainly known to be of our enemies. Critolaus was the cause of the
war, who employed the liberty given him by the Romans against them, and
affronted the Roman Ambassadors, if not by blows, at least in words. The
revenge therefore was put upon Metellus, then settling Macedonia; and hence came
the Achaian war, whereof the first action was, that the Consul Metellus had the
slaughter of Critolaus's party, in the spacious Fields of Elis, all long the
River Alpheus. And the war was ended in one battle; and soon after the City was
besieged: but the fates so ordering things, after Metellus had fought, Mammius
came in to complete the Victory. This latter, by the advantages gained by the
other General, defeated the Achaian Army at the very entrance of the Isthmus,
and both the Ports [of Corinth] were stained with blood. At length, the
Inhabitants having forsaken the City, it was first plundered, afterward by
sound of Trumpet destroyed. What abundance of statues, what garments, what
pictures were taken, burnt, and cast about the streets? What wealth was burnt
and brought thence may be hence computed, that all the Corinthian brass, now
celebrated over the world, was only the remainders of that conflagration. Nay
the desolation of that most wealthy City enhanc'd the price of the brass, in
as much as an infinite number of Statues and Images being burnt, the Gold,
Silver, and Brass, melted together, flowed in joint veins.

CHAP. XVII.
An account of Transactions in Spain, which is set upon by the Romans, and the
Provinces of it subdued by several Commanders; the policy and valor of a
Spanish Captain, he is afterward killed by a Roman Soldier; Viriathus a
Portuguez compared to Romulus; Pompilius orders him to be murdered.

AS Corinth followed Carthage, so Numantia followed Corinth. Nor was there
afterward any part free from war all over the world. After the conflagration
of those two famous Cities; there was a general war all over, at the same time;
as if those Cities seemed, like violent winds, to have spread the
conflagrations of war into all other parts of the world. Spain never had any
design to make a general insurrection against us, never thought ^^t to unite
all its strength, nor yet to dispute the supremacy with us, or attempt a
public assertion of its liberty; which if it had, it is so fortified all about
by the Sea and the Pyrenaean Mountains, that the very situation secured i^
from an invasion. But it was straightened by the Romans before it knew it self;
and, of all the Provinces, it only knew its own strength after it was
conquered. The contestation about this Province lasted near two hundred years,
from the first Scipio's to Augustus Caesar, not by a continued war, but as
occasions started. Nor had we to do at first with the Spaniards, but the
Carthaginians. Thence proceeded the contagion, and series, and cause of the
wars. The first Roman ensigns that past over the Pyrenaean Mountains were
under the conduct of the Scipio's, Publius, and Cneus; and they, in memorable
fights, defeated Annon, and Asdrubal, Hannibal's Brother, and Spain had been
carried as it were by the first attempt, if those gallant men, supplanted in
the height of their victory, had not fallen by Punick treachery, after they had
got the better both by Sea and Land. So that Scipio, the revenger of his Father
and Uncle, who was soon after surnamed Africanus, invaded it as it were a new
and entire Province. And he in a short time, having taken Carthage and other
Cities, thinking it not enough to have forced the Carthaginians thence, made it
a tributary Province, and reduced to the Empire all on both sides of the
Iberus, and was the first of the Roman Generals who prosecuted his victory to
Gades, and the entrance of the Ocean. But it is a greater matter to retain a
Province then to make one. Generals were therefore sent into several parts,
sometime to one, sometime to another; and they, with much difficulty, and and
many bloody engagements, brought into subjection those savage Nations, which
till then were free, and impatient of bondage. Cato, the Censor, after some
fights, worsted the Celtiberians, that is, the strength of Spain. Gracchus, the
Father of the Gracchi, plagued the same people by the desolation of a hundred
and fitty Cities. Metellus ille, cui ex Macedonia cognome^ (meruerat and
Celtibericus fieri) quam Contrebiam memorabili cepisset exemplo, Vertobrigis
majori gloria pepercit.
That Metellus, who had his surname from Macedonia (he also deserved that of
Celtibericus) having, by a memorable exploit, taken Contrebia, gained more
glory by not taking Vertobrigae. Lucullus reduced the Turduli and the Vaccaei,
from whom the latter Scipio, having, upon a challenge, fought a duel with the
King, brought away rich spoils. Decimus Brutus went somewhat further, brought
in the Celtae, and the Inhabitants of Gallicia, and crossed the River of
Oblivion, so dreadful to the Soldiers; and having taken a victorious progress
all along the Ocean, he turned not back his Ensigns, till, with a certain
horror and apprehension of having committed some sacrilege, he beheld the Sun
falling into the Sea, and its torch quenched in the waves. But the sharpest
engagements were with the Lusitanians and Numantians; and justly, for they only
of all the [Spanish] Nations, had excellent Leaders. We should also have had
work enough with all the Celtiberians, if the Author of that insurrection, a
person of extraordinary subtilty and confidence, had not been killed at the
beginning of the war, I mean, that Solundicus, who brandishing a silver spear,
as if sent from Heaven, had, Prophet-like, gained the affections of all. But
presuming, out of a boldness equal to his extravagance, in the night, to
approach the Consul's Camp, he was taken off hard by the very Tent, with the
dart of the Sentinel. The Lusitanians were stirred up by Vi^iathus, a man of
incomparable subtlety, who of a Huntsman became a Robber, of a Robber, he got
to be Captain and General, and, if Fortune had favored, might have been the
Romulus of Spain. For not content to maintain the liberty of his own people,
but f^r the space of fourteen years he used all hostile ex^remities at all
places both on this side and the other of the Rivers Iberus and Tagus. Nay he
attempted the Camp and very Guard of our Praetors, he had in a manner quite
destroyed the Army under the command of Claudius Vnimanus, and had erected, in
his own Mountains, memorable Trophies made of the [Roman] Ornaments and our
Fasces. But at length the Consul Fabius Maximus had crushed him; but the
victory was soiled by his Successor Servilius Caepio, who, desirous to put a
period to the war, out of baseness and treachery, got the defeated Captain
assassinated by some of his own menial servants, even while he was contriving
how to make a surrender of himself; and did thereby the enemy so much honor,
as that it might seem he could not otherwise have been overcome.

CHAP. XVIII.
The City of Numantia opposes the Romans for many years; Hostilius Mancinus the
Roman General defeated by the Numantians, and by order of the Senate delivered
into the hands of the enemies; The constancy, and cruel resolution of Numantia
exercised on it self.

THough Numantia was inferior to Carthage, Capua, and Corinth, in point of
wealth, yet in honor and reputation of gallantry, it was equal to them all,
and, if we consider the Inhabitants of it, the greatest ornament of Spain; in
as much as being a place unwall'd, unfortify'd, and seated only upon a small
ascent, near the River Durius, it held out, for the space of fourteen years,
only with a garrison of four thousand Celtiberians, against an Army of forty
thousand men, nay did not only hold out, but sometimes also gave us great
overthrows, and forced us to dishonorable treaties. In fine, the reduction of
it was thought so far impossible, that there was a necessity of employing the
same person against it who had destroyed Carthage. To say the truth, we must
acknowledge, that happily there was no war of ours, whereof the cause was more
unjust then this. The Numantians had entertained into their City the
Segidenses, their Allies and Relations; the mediation used on their behalf
prevailed nothing; and while they would have absolutely disengaged themselves
from having ought to do with the war, they were ordered to lay down their Arms,
so to secure the Alliance desired by them. This was so heinously resented by
the Barbarians, as if their hands were to be cut off. Whereupon, Megara, a
person of great courage, being their Leader, they Arm, and having fought
Pompey, they chose rather to enter into a League, even when they might have
defeated him. They had afterward an engagement against Hostilius Mancinus; him
also they so worsted with continual overthrows, that scarce any one could
endure to look upon, or hear of an Inhabitant of Numantia: and yet they thought
fit to make a League with him also, contenting themselves with the spoils of
the Arms, when they might have put all to the sword. But the people of Rome
being no less incensed at the infamy of this Numantian Treaty, then they had
been at that of Caudium, expiated the dishonor of the present miscarriage, by
the surrender of Mancinus; and afterward under the conduct of Scipio, whom the
ruin of Carthage had improved for the desolation of Cities, they resolved to
revenge it. But then we had a harder service in our own Camp, than in the
Field, more to do with our own Soldiery, than with the Numantians. For being
orepress'd with continual, unnecessary, and for the most part, servile
employments, they of our Soldiery who knew not how to handle their arms, were
commanded to fill trenches, and they who would not be sprinkled with hostile
blood should be [ignominiously] daubed with dirt. They were moreover deprived
of their common prostitutes, the boys, and all unnecessary baggage. 'Twas
truly said, that such as the General is, such is the Army. So the Soldiery
being reduced to discipline, the Armies engaged, and that happened which no
body hoped to have seen, that the Numantians were seen to run away. Nay they
would have surrendered themselves, if things fit to be endured by men had been
enjoined them. But Scipio, desirous of a true and absolute victory, they were
reduced to the utmost extremities, so that their first resolve was to fight it
out to the last man, having beforehand glutted themselves with a kind of
funeral-banquet consisting of half-raw flesh, and a drink made of Corn, by the
natives called Caelia. The General having intelligence of their resolution,
permitted not an engagement with persons defying death: but want of provisions
so pressed upon them, being surrounded with a Trench, a Counterscarp and four
Camps, that they begged an engagement of the General, to the end they might die
like men. But that not obtained, they resolved upon a Sally, wherein many were
killed, by which means the survivers lived a while longer, the famine still
continuing. Afterward, they resolve to make an escape; but that was prevented
by their wives, who committing a heinous offense out of their affection, cut
their horse-girts. Whereupon reduced to despair, and exasperated into fury and
rage, they at last resolve upon this kind of death. They with the help of
weapons, and a general conflagration destroyed their Captains, their City, and
themselves. Well! I should Asserverim.
affirm it the most valiant, and in my judgment, the most happy City even in
its greatest calamities, since it has with so great constancy toward its
Allies, by its own strength, and for so long time, held out against a people
backed by the forces of all the world. In fine, the City being forced by the
greatest General that ever was, left the enemy nothing to satisfy his vanity;
for there was not a man of all Numantia to be brought home in chains; spoil
none, because they were poor; their Arms they had burnt themselves; and so we
had only the name of a Triumph.

CHAP. XIX.
A summary of the Roman wars for the space of two hundred years.

HItherto the Roman people seemed to express a certain Nobleness, Gallantry,
Sanctity and Magnificence in their actions. Reliqua saeculi.
The remainder of that age, as it produced achievements equally great, so did
they exceed in turbulence and infamy; vices improving with the dilatation of
the Empire. So that if any one divide this its third age, employed in foreign
acquests, he will acknowledge the former Century thereof, wherein Africa,
Macedonia, Sicily and Spain were subdued, justly to have deserved (as the Poets
speak) the name of Golden; and the ensuing Century to have been of Iron, and
sanguinary, or if any thing can be more inhumane; as comprehending the
Jugurthine, the Cimbrian, the Mithridatick, Gaulish and Germane wars (whereby
the Roman glory ascended up to the skies) together with the Gracchian and
Drusian massacres, as also the Servile wars, and, to complete our infamy, our
engagements even with the Gladiators. At last, the Commonwealth arming against
it self, by the commotions of Marius and Sylla, and in fine by the wars between
Caesar and Pompey, as if possessed with a spirit of madness and fury, became (
Per rabiem and furorem, nefas! semet, etc.
o horror!) its own executioner. Which transactions though ravell'd and
confused together, yet that they may the better appear, and that there may be a
difference between their Heinous and Heroic actions, they shall be set down a
part. And in the first place, we shall as we have already begun give an account
of those pious and just wars with foreign nations, that the continual
augmentation of the Empire may be made manifest. And then we shall return to
the horrid actions, and the foul and execrable broils of our own people.

CHAP. XX.
Attalus King of Pergamus makes the peoples of Rome his Heir; Astronicus takes
occasion thence to enter into a war against them; Crassus defeated and taken
Prisoner; Astronicus subdued and put into chains; the unworthy procedure of
Aquilius, in poisoning the springs, and by that means blasting the reputation
of the Romans.

SPain being subdued in the western part of the world, the people of Rome were
at the East; nay they not only enjoyed peace, but by an unwonted and unknown
kind of prosperity, wealth left by regal bequeasts, and whole Kingdoms came
into them. Attalus King of Pergamus, Son of King Eumenes, heretofore our Ally
and fellow-soldier, left this Will, Let the people of Rome be the Heir of my
estate. Of which these were part. Entering upon the inheritance, the Romans
became possessors of the Province, not by war, or force of Arms, but (what was
more just) in right of the Will. But it is not easy to affirm, whether they
more easily Occupaverit.
possessed themselves of, or lost that Province. Aristonicus, a fierce young
man, of the blood Royal, easily draws in some of the Cities formerly subject
to Kings, and taken some others, which stood out by force, as Mindus, Samos and
Colophon. He also defeated the Army of the Pro-consul Crassus, and took him.
But he reflecting on his Family, and the reputation of the Romans, struck out
the eye o^ his barbarous Keeper with a wand; and so he incensed him, as he
would have it, to his own destruction. Not long after, Aristonicus was subdued
and taken by Perpenna, and upon surrender of himself kept in chains. M.
Aquilius put an absolute period to the Asian war, poisoning (o wicked act!) the
springs, in order to the rendition of certain Cities. Which action as it
hastened the victory, so it rendered it infamous; in as much as, contrary to all
Religion, and the customs of our Ancestors, the Roman Arms, till then
continued sacred, were defiled by detestable compositions.

THE ROMAN HISTORY BY L. JULIUS FLORUS.
The Third Book.
CHAP. I.
Jugurth, King of Numidia, wars against the Romans; he endeavors to overcome
them by artifices and presents; At last, after several defeats, he is betrayed
into the hands of Sylla by the means of Bocchus.

THus went things in the East. But there was not the like quiet in the Southern
parts. Who would expect any war should break forth in Africa, after the
destruction of Carthage? But there was no small disturbance in Numidia, and
there was, next Hannibal, what might be feared in Jugurth. For when the Romans
were glorious, and unconquerable by the way of Arms, this most subtle Prince
engages against them by that of wealth; and yet it fell out beyond expectation,
that a King famous for his artifices should be ensnared by artifice. He being
Grandchild to Massinissa, and Son by adoption to Micipsa, designing the
murder of his Brethren, incited thereto by a desire of Sovereignty, and yet
fearing not them so much as the Senate and people of Rome, under whose tuition
and protection the Kingdom was, compassed his first mischief by treachery; and
having taken off Hiempsal's head, while he would have done the like to
Adherbal, who had fled to Rome, he with the money sent by his Ambassadors
brought even the Senate to side with him. And this was his first victory over
us. Afterward he in like manner treated those who had been sent to divide the
Kingdom between him and Adherbal, and having in the person of Scaurus [who
suffered himself to be corrupted] overcome the integrity and customs of the
Roman Empire, he prosecuted the wickedness he had begun with greater
confidence. But wicked actions lie not long concealed. The wickedness of the
corrupted Embassy [of Scaurus] came to light, and a war was resolved upon
against the Parricide. The Consul Calpurnius Bestia was the first sent into
Numidia. But the King knowing by former experience, that gold could do more
against the Romans than Iron, brought his peace. Of which heinous action being
guilty, and summoned upon a safe conduct to appear before the Senate, he with
equal confidence both came and got Massina, Grandson to Massinissa, his
competitor to the Government, assassinated. This was another cause of the war
against the said King. The ensuing revenge is recommended to Albinus. But (o
dishonor!) he in like manner so corrupted his Army, that by a voluntary flight
of ours, the Numidian overcame, and became master of our Camp: and by a
dishonorable treaty, he suffered the Army, which he had before corrupted, to
escape. About the same time, not so much to revenge the Roman Empire, as its
honor, rose up Metellus, who craftily set upon the enemy with his own
artifices, while the other eluded him one while with entreaties, another, with
threats, making also his advantage of a feigned as if it had been a real
flight. Not content with the devastation of Fields and Villages, he made
attempts against the principal Cities of Numidia, and a long time endeavored
the reduction of Zama, but without, effect. But Thala he sacked, a place well
furnished with ammunition, and where the King's treasure wa^. Afterward having
deprived the King of his Cities, he pursued him as a fugitive out of his own
territories, through Mauritania and Getulia. At last Marius, with a
considerable recruit, after he had taken into the Army persons of mean
extraction upon an oath administered to them, setting upon the King already
defeated and wounded, yet found it as hard a task to overcome him, as if his
Forces had been fresh and entire. This man with extraordinary success reduced
Capsa, a City built in honor of Hercules, seated in the midst of Africa, and
surrounded with Sands and Serpents, and by the assistance of a certain
Ligurian, forced his way to the City Mulucha, built upon a rocky Mountain, a
place in a manner inaccessible. After which he gave a signal overthrow not
only to Jugurth, but also to Bocchus King of Mauritania, siding with the
Numidian upon the score of kindred, near the City Cirta. Bocchus distrusting his
affairs, and fearing to be involved in another's ruin, made King Jugurth the
price of his agreement and friendship with the Romans. So the craftiest of
Kings was ensnared by the artifices of his Father in law, and delivered into
the hands of Sylla. And at length the people of Rome beheld Jugurth laden with
chains led in triumph; but he also, though overcome and bound, saw the City,
which he had falsely prophesied was to be sold, and should be ruined, if it met
with a buyer. But if ever saleable, it had a Chapman in him, and seeing he
escaped not, it will be an assurance that it shall never perish.

CHAP. II.
The victory obtained by the Romans beyond the Alps, over the Salii, the
Allobroges, and the Aruerni; Domitius Aenobarbus, and Fabius Maximus erect
Towers of stone, and set up Trophies on them.

THus the Romans demeaned themselves in the South. In the North the troubles
were greater and more bloody; there being nothing more insufferable than that
Coast, where the Air is very piercing, and the Inhabitants savage. All along
that quarter, an implacable Enemy broke forth on all sides, on the right, the
left, and out of the midst of the North. The first who felt our Arms beyond the
Alps were the Salii, upon complaints made of their Incursions, by the most
faithful and friendly City Massilia. Afterward, the Allobroges and Aruerni,
upon the like complaints of the Aedui, who desired our assistance and relief
against them. Varus is a witness of the victory, and Iscara, and the River
Vindelicus, and the swiftest of Rivers the Rhone. The greatest terror to the
Barbarians were the Elephants, whose bulk was answerable to that of the
Inhabitants. There was nothing so remarkable in the Triumph as the King
himself, Bituitus, in his Arms of diverse colors, and a silver Chariot, such as
he had fought in. For both which victories, how great the rejoicing was, may be
imagined hence, that Domitius Aenobarbus, and Fabius Maximus erected Towers of
stone upon the very places where they had fought, and fastened Trophies
thereon, adorned with the Arms of the Enemies, a thing not usual with our
people. For the Romans ever upbraided those whom they subdued with their
victory.

CHAP. III.
The Cimbri and Teutones design an Incursion into Italy; they defeat several
Armies of the Romans, but are at last defeated themselves by Marius; The
strange resolution of their Wives. A miraculous thing happened at Rome after
the defeat.

THe Cimbrians, the Teutones, and the Tigurians, fugitives from the extremities
of Germany, upon the Sea's overrunning their Country, sought new habitations
all the world over: and being kept out of France and Spain, as they were
returning into Italy, they sent Ambassadors to Silanus's Camp, and thence to
the Senate, desiring the martial people [of Rome] would assign them some
Country or other, by way of pay, which if granted, they should dispose of
their hands and arms. But what Lands should the Roman people give, then ready
to fall into a Civil War, about the Agragrian Laws? Being therefore repulsed,
what they could not obtain by entreaty, they resolve to get by force. For
neither could Silanus hold out against the first irruption of the Barbarians,
nor Manlius against the second, nor Caepio against the third. All had been
lost, if Marius had not lived in that age. Nor durst he presently engage them;
but kept in his men within the Camp, till that invincible rage and violence,
which the Barbarians account valor, were somewhat remitted. They therefore
retreated from ours, insulting, and (so great was their confidence of taking
the City) asking them, whether they would any thing to their wives.
Immediately, upon those threats, dividing themselves into three Bodies, they
marched over the Alps, that is, the Bars of Italy. Marius presently, with
extraordinary expedition, taking the nearer ways, prevents the Enemy, and
pursuing the foremost Body, the Teuto^es, at the descent of the Alps, at a place
called Aquae Vitae. Oh heavenly powers* what an overthrow did we give them? The
enemies were possessed of the Valley and the River, our people wanted water.
Whether the General did it purposely, or made advantage of his Error, is
doubtful. Certain it is, Valor heightened by necessity, occasioned the Victory.
For the Army calling for water. Ye are men, said he, there it is to be bad. The
Engagement was so sharp, and the slaughter of the enemies so great, that the
Roman Conqueror drunk not so much water out of the river as Barbarians blood,
which ran down with it. Nay the King himself Theutobocchus, who was wont to
vault over four or six horses, could hardly get up one, when he was to make his
escape; and being taking in an adjoining Grove, he was a remarkable Spectacle,
in as much as being a person of extraordinary stature, he was higher than the
very Trophies. The Teutones being utterly destroyed, they march toward the
Cymbrians. These had already (who would imagine it?) in the wintertime which
raises the Alps to a greater height, by the Mountains of Trent made a descent,
as if they had fallen down into Italy. They crossed over the river Athesis, not
by the help of Bridge or Boats, but upon Trees cast into it, after they had out
of a barbarous stupidity in vain attempted to stop its course, first with their
own bodies, and afterward with their hands and shields: and if they had
immedia^ly taken their march to the City, the case might have been very
dangerous. But about Venice, the most delicious part of Italy, their fierceness
was softened by the very mildness of the Air and Soil. Besides Marius
opportunely falls upon them, effeminated by the use of bread, boiled flesh, and
sweet wines. They soon desired Marius to pitch upon a day to figh^, and he
appointed the next. They metri^^ a most spacious field, called Claudius; on
their side there fell a hundred and forty thousand, on ours, not three hundred.
They had the slaughter of the Barbarians for the space of a whole day. Our
General also had helped our valor with artifice, imitating Annibal, and his
Conduct at Cannae. First having got a cloudy day, that he might charge the
enemy ere he expected it; besides a windy, that the dust raised might fly into
their eyes and faces; then having his Army drawn up toward the East, that, as
was soon known by such as were taken, the Air might seem to be on fire, by
reason of the glittering of our Helmets, and the Suns reflection on them. Nor
was the Engagement with their wives less than with them: when being surrounded
with Carts and Wagons, they fought from them as it were from Towers, with Clubs
and Lances. Their death was equally gallant with their way of fighting. For
when, upon an Embassy sent to Marius, they could attain neither liberty, nor
the privilege of celibate (which it was not lawful to grant them) having
strangled and dashed their childrens brains out, they either fell by mutual
wounds, or, with strings made of their own hair, hung themselves on trees, or
their Cart-tayls. Their King Beleus died fighting gallantly in the field, and
fell not unrevenged. The ^^ird Body was that of the Tigurians, which as a
relief to the others had possessed it self of the hills of the Alps toward
Noricium, dispersing, some basely running away, others betaking themselves to
robberies, mouldred away. The joyful and happy news of Italy's liberty, and the
Empire vindicated, came not to the people of Rome by men, as is wont, but (if
credible) by the Gods themselves. For the same day the thing was done, before
the Temple of Castor and Pollux, young men crowned wi^h Laurel, were seen
delivering Letters to the Praetor, and there was a common report in the Theater
of a happy Victory over the Cimbrians. Then which what could be more
miraculous, what more remarkable? As if Rome, raised above her mounts, had been
Spectatrix of the war, as it had been at the Duels between Gladiators; since at
the same time the Cimbrians fell in the field, the people made acclamations in
the City.

CHAP. IV.
The Thracians revolt, commit many insolences and inhumanities; Portius Cato
defeated by them; at last they a^e defeated by diverse Roman Generals; The
Victory obtained by Lucullus.

AFter the Macedonians (the Gods so pleased) the Thracians rebelled, although
heretofore Tributaries to the Macedonians; nor were they content to make
incursions only into the adjacent Provinces, but they got into Thessaly and
Dalmatia, even to the Adriatic Sea, where stopping, as if Nature interposed,
they cast their darts at the very waves. In the mean time they were so inhumane
as to leave no cruelty unexercis'd on such as they took prisoners. For they
offered man's blood in sacrifice to the Gods, they drunk in men's sculls, and by
such insolences, they aggravated their punishments, whom they put to death with
fire and Ferro.
sword; nay they forced by tortures the infants out of their mothers wombs. The
most savage of all the Thracians were the Sordisci, a people as subtle as
stout. The situation of their woods and mountains was correspondent to their
dispositions. Accordingly, the whole Army commanded by Cato, was not only
defeated by those people, and put to flight, but, what is prodigious, all cut
to pieces. Didius, finding the Thracians straggling and dispersed in prosecution
of booty, forced them back into their Country; Drusus drove them yet further,
and kept them from crossing the Dannow; Minucius destroyed all along the ^iver
Aebrus, with the loss indeed of many of his men, while the Horse passed over
the Ice of that traitorous river. Piso forced his way through the mountains of
Rhodope and Caucasus. Curio went as far as Dacia, but w Ps frightened at the
obscurity of the woods. A pius got even into Sarmatia; Lucullus, to the,
extremities of the world, the River Tanais and the Lake of Maeotis. Nor were
the most bloody of our enemies subdued by any other treatment than was suitable
to their own disposition; for such of them as were taken felt the extremities
of fire and sword. But nothing seemed more in-supportable to the Barbarians,
than that, having their hands cut off, they seemed to outlive their punishment.

CHAP. V.
Mithridates wars against the Romans, and takes Bithynia from them, and brings
all Asia into an inclination to revolt; He causes all the Roman Citizens to be
massacred in the Provinces of Asia; Sylla defeats him in two battles;
Mithridates raises a greater Army, besieges Cyzicum, and is overcome by
Lucullus; The signal Victory of Pompey over both Mithridates and Tigranes; He
over-runs all Asia, and brings it in subjection to the Romans.

THe Pontick Nations are seated Northwards, toward the Euxine Sea, which is on
the left hand, so called from the Pontick Sea. Of these Nations and Countries
the most ancient King was Atheas, afterward Artabazes, descended from the
seven Governors of Persia. After him Mithridates, the mightiest of them all;
since that whereas Pyrrhus was defeated in four years, Hannibal in seventeen,
this man stood out forty years, till that being subdued in three great Battles,
he was brought to nothing, by the happy conduct of Sylla, the gallantry of
Lucullus; and greatness of Pompey. His pretense of war, as he alleged to the
Praetor of Asia, Cassius, was, that Nicomedes King of Bithynia invaded his
Territories. But indeed being transc^dently ambitious, his design was to become
Master of Asia, and if he could, of Europe too. He derived his hope and
confidence from our vices. For we being divided by civil wars, gave him the
occasion; and Marius, Sylla, and Sertorius showed him at a distance the naked
side of the Empire. Amidst these wounds and distractions of the Commonwealth,
an opportunity being taken of a sudden, the storm of the Pontick War broke
forth, as it were out of the uttermost den of the North, upon a people then
wearied and minding other things. The first eruption of the War took away
Bithynia from us. Afterward Asia was subject to the same terror. Nor was it
long ere the Cities and Nations thereof revolted from us, to the King. He was
himself present, importuned them, and exercised cruelty in stead of valor. For
what more insupportable than that one Edict of his, whereby he commanded all
the free Denizens of Rome that were in Asia, to be put to death? Whereupon
Houses, Temples, Altars, nay all divine and humane Rights were violated. But
this terror of Asia opened the King a way into Europe. Having therefore sent
Archelaus and Neoptolemus, his Lieutenants, the Cyclados, Delos, Euboea, nay
the very ornament of Greece, Athens were taken only Rhodes remained, which
stuck closer to ^^ than any of the rest. Nay, the terror of the Kings advance
was come into Italy, nay even to the very City of Rome. Whereupon L. Sylla, an
excellent Soldier, and no less daring, gives a check to the Enemies further
advance, as if he had should him with his hand. And immediately thence (who
would believe it?) he went and pressed the City of Athens, the parent of Corn,
with a Siege and Famine, so far as that they were forced to eat man's flesh; and
afterward having destroyed the Port of Pyraeum, and Walls, to the extent of
six thousand Sex quoque and amplius M p^m^ris.
paces and more, after he had subdued the most ungratesul of men, as he said
himself, yet in honor of their deceased Ancestors, he restored them to their
Temples and Reputation. Afterward having forced away the Kings Garrisons from
Euboea and Boeotia, he defeated all his Forces in two Battles, one near
Cheronaea, the other near Orchomenos: and thereupon passing over into Asia, he
worsts him himself; and he had been absolutely ruined, if Sylla had not been
more desirous to hasten, than complete his Triumph. To this posture Sylla
reduced Asia. He made a League with the Inhabitants of Pontus. Of King
Nicomedes he received Bithynia; of Arioborzantes, Cappadocia; and so Asia
became ours, as before. Mithridates was only forced out of his Territories. So
that the Inhabitants of Pont^s were not broken by these transactions, but
incensed. For the King, as it were lured by the wealth of Asia and Europe,
endeavored the recovery of it by the Right of War, not as belonging to another,
but because he had before lost it. Therefore as fires not fully put out, break
forth into greater flame^; so Mithridates, having gotten greater Forces
together, came as it were with the whole strength of his Kingdom again into
Asia, by Land, by Sea, and by Rivers. C^zicum, a famous City, is the Ornament
of the Asian Coast, as having a Fortress, Walls, a Port, and Towers of Marble.
Against this place, as if against a second Rome, he directed all the stress of
the War. But the Citizens had the confidence to stand out, upon intelligence of
Lucullus's advance brought by a messenger, who (a thing strange to relate!)
supported by a Goat-skin under the arms, and guiding himself with his feet,
seeming to such as saw him at a distance a kind of Sea Monster, had escaped
through the midst of the enemies ships. Whereupon, the posture of affairs
changing, the besieging King being first pressed with famine, and afterward
with the pestilence, Lucullus falls upon him as he was departing thence, and
gave him so great an overthrow, that the Rivers Granius and Aesapus were all
bloody. The subtle King, and acquainted with the avarice of the Romans,
commanded baggage and money to be scattered by those that fled, whereby to
retard the pursuers. Nor was his flight by Sea more fortunate than that by
Land. For a Fleet of above a hundred Ships, well stored with Ammunition and
Provision, met with a Tempest in the Pontick Sea, and was so shattered, as if
it had been in some engagement, as if Lucullus, having a certain correspondence
with the Waves and Storms, had recommended the King to be subdued by the Winds.
By this time were all the Forces of a most powerful Kingdom spent, but the
Kings courage was heightened by his misfortunes. So that addressing himself to
the adjacent Nations, he involved in his ruin in a manner all the eastern and
northern parts. The Iberians, the Ca^pians, the Albanians, and both the
Armenia's were courted, and through all places Pompey's fortune sought him
matter of glory, reputation, and titles. He seeing Asia enflamed by new
Commotions, and that Kings sprung out of Kings, thinking it not fit to delay
things till the strengths of several Nations were united, a Bridge of Ships
being of a sudden put together, he first of any crossed the Euphrates, and
having overtaken the retreating King in the midst of Armenia (so extraordinary
was the man's success?) he utterly ruined him at one battle. The engagement
happened in the night, and the Moon seemed to take our part, in as much as she
stood behind the Enemies, and appeared in her full luster to the Romans,
whereby the Ponticks deluded by their longer shadows, made at them, as at the
bodies of their enemies. So that Mithridates was subdued in that one night. For
afterward he could do nothing, though he essayed all things, like serpents,
which having lost their heads, move their tails to the last. For having escaped
the enemy, he would by his sudden advance, have frightened Colchos, as also the
Cicilian Coasts, and our Campania; then having destroyed the Port of Pyraeum,
he would have had the Bosphorus reach to Colchos, and marching thence through
Thrace, Macedonia, and Greece, he thought to have made an unexpected invasion
into Italy. But prevented by the revolt of his subjects, and the impiety of his
son Pharnaces, he with his sword thrust out that soul, which poison could not
force out of his body. In the mean time, the great Cneus, prosecuting the
rebellious remainders of Asia, traversed diverse Nations and Provinces. For
following the Armenians eastward, having taken the Metropolis of the Country
Artaxata, he ordered Tigranes, upon his submission, to reign over them. But
toward the North, a Scythian Expedition, wherein he had, as if at Sea, no
guide but the stars, he destroyed Colchos, pardoned Iberia; spared the
Albanians; having pitched his Camp at the descent of Caucasus, he commanded
Orodes King of Colchos to come down into the plains; Artoces, who ruled over
the Iberians, to send in even his own children as Hostages; nay, he also
requited the liberality of Orodes, who had of his own accord sent him a Golden
Couch, and other presents from Albania. And turning his Forces toward the
South, having past Mount Libanus in Syria, and Damascus, he led the Roman
Ensigns through those odoriferous Forests, and Woods of Balm and Frankincense.
The Arabians were ready to obey his commands. The Jews assayed to defend
Jerusalem against him; but he forced his way into that also, that great Mystery
of an impious Nation, lying open as it were under a golden roof. Being
Arbitrator between two Brothers in competition for the Kingdom, he appointed
Hyrcanus to reign; Aristobulus, not complying, he put into chains. Thus under
the conduct of Pompey the Romans overran all Asia, where it is of greatest
extent, and made that a Middle-province of the Empire, which had been the
extremity of it. For they only excepted, who preferred a League, and the
Indians, who are not yet known to us, all Asia, between the Red Sea, the
Caspian, and the Ocean, was under our Jurisdiction, either subdued or reduced
by the Pompeian Legions.

CHAP. VI.
The Cilician Pirates scour the Seas, and hinder Commerce; Pompey's miraculous
success in the reduction of them in forty days.

IN the mean time, while the Romans are dispersed into several parts of the
world, the Cilicians invade the Seas, and taking away all Commerce by a breach
of the Bonds of humane Society, they had made the Seas as impassable by the
War, as they might have been by a Tempest. The desperate and enraged pirates
derived a confidence from the unquiet state of affairs in Asia, by reason of
the wars with Mithridates, and making their advantages of another war, and the
envy of a foreign King, they roved up and down without control. And at first,
commanded by one Isidorus, they kept within the next Seas and exercised their
piracies between Creet and Cyrenae, Pyreum, and Achaia, and Maleus, which, from
their booties, they named The Golden Gulf. And P. Servilius being employed
against them, though he worsted their light and nimble Brigantines, with his
heavy and well appointed Ships of War, yet was not the Victory without
bloodshed. Nor thought he it enough to force them out of the Sea, but he also
destroyed their strongest Cities, and such as daily Spoils had enriched, to
wit, Phaselis, and Olympus, and Isaurus, the greatest Fortress of Cilicia;
whence imagining to himself he had done a great Exploit, he assumed the surname
of Isauricus. Yet could they not keep ashore after so many defeats; but as
certain creatures, whose double nature gives them the advantage of living upon
land, or in the water, so they, upon the first retreat of an enemy, impatient
of being a shore, got into the waters, and ventured somewhat farther out, than
they had done before. So that Pompey, who had been so successful before, was
now thought worthy this Victory, and it was looked upon as an addition to what
he had done against Mithridates. He, desirous to give an absolute check to a
plague, which had spread it self over all the Sea, set upon it by a certain
divine forecast. For having a great number of Ships of our own, and our Allies
the Rhodians, he possessed himself of both sides of Pontus and the Ocean.
Gellius was to guard the Tuscian Sea; Plotius the Sicilian; Gratillius, the
Ligurian Gulf; M. Pomponius had charge of the Gallick; Torquatus, of the
Balearick; Tiberius Nero, of the Streights of Gades, which is the first
entrance of our Sea; Lentulus, the Lybian; Marcellinus, the Egyptian; the
young Pompeys, the Adriatic; Terentius Varro, the Aegean and Pontick;
Metellus, the Pamphylian; Caepio, the Asian; Portus Cat^ guarded the Entrance
of Propontis, blocking it up with Ships, as if it had been a gate. Thus all
Seaports, Gulfs, Bays, Creeks, Promontories, Streights, Peninsula's being
secured, the Pirates were surrounded as in a toil. Pompey himself took his way
toward Cilicia, the source of the war. Nor did the enemies decline an
Engagement; not that it proceeded out of any confidence, but being surprised,
they would seem to dare something, yet so as that they endured only the first
Onset. For perceiving themselves surrounded of all sides by our Ships, casting
away their Sayl^ and Oars, and giving a general shout, which is a sign of
submission, they begged quarter. We never before had a victory with less
bloodshed, nor indeed was there any Nation so faithful to us. And that was to
be attributed to the Generals prudence, who transplanted those who had been
used to the Sea, to a gr^^^ distance from it, and obliged them to cultivate the
Inland part of the Country. Thus with the same labor; he gave Ships the
freedom of Navigation, and restored to the Land its Inhabitants. What occurs to
be first admired in this Victory? the expedition of it, in that it was
completed in forty days; or the extra-ordinary success, in that it was done
without the loss of a Ship? or the perpetuity, in that they never afterward
became pirates.

CHAP. VII.
The Cretians set upon by the Romans defeat the Army of M. Antonius; Metellus
revenges the affront, and treats them most cruelly.

THe Cretian war, if we would know the truth, we our selves began, only out of
a desire to reduce that Noble Island under our Jurisdiction. It seemed to have
favored Mithridates; and we thought fit to revenge it by force of Arms. M.
Antonius first invaded the Island with a great confidence of victory, insomuch
that his Ships were better furnished with Chains, than Arms. He therefore was
punished for his presumption; for the enemies intercepted many of his Ships,
and hung up the bodies of the prisoners at the Shrouds and Tackling, as if they
returned to their Ports in Triumph. Afterward Metellus laying the whole Island
desolate with fire and sword, confined them within their Fortresses and Cities,
Gnofon, and Erythraea, and (as the Greeks are wont to call it) the Mother of
Cities, Cydonia: and so great cru^lty was used on the prisoners, that many
poisoned themselves, others sent to Pompey, then absent, an acknowledgment of
their surrendering themselves. Upon which he carrying on the affairs of Asia,
and sending Octavius to Creet, as his Lieutenant, he was derided for concerning
himself in another man's Province, and occasioned Metellus to exercise greater
cruelties on the enemies; and having overcome Lasthenes and Panares, Captains
of Cydonia, he returned Victor, yet brought home with him, after so notorious a
Victory, only the surname Greticus.

CHAP. VII.
The Inhabitants of the Balearick Islands turn Pirates, and engage with the
Roman Fleet, by which they are defeated.

THe House of Metellus Macedonicus was so accustomed to Military Surnames, that
one of his sons having obtained that of Creticus, another of them came soon
after to be called Balearicus. The Bal^ares Islands had, about that time,
infested the Seas with Piracies. One would wonder that a savage people, living
in Woods, should have the confidence so much as to look on the Sea, from their
very Rocks. On the contrary, they ventured out in Boats built without any
design, and frightened such as sailed by with their unexpected surprizals. Nay,
when they saw the Roman Fleet at a distance making toward them, conceiving it
to be purchase, they ventured to meet it, and at the first Onset, covered the
Ships with a shower of stones of all sorts. Every one had three Slings to fight
withal. That they did execution, is no wonder, when the Nation has no other
Arms, and is brought up to that exercise from their infancy. A child has no
meat from his mother, but what he strikes down from a place shown him by her.
But the Romans were not long ^^rified at that shower of stones. Upon the
close, when they felt our Beaks, and the Darts falling on them, crying out like
beasts, they made what haste they could to the shore, and having sheltered
themselves among the roc^s, they were to be sought out ere they could be
overcome.

CHAP. IX.
Cyprus sacked by the Romans, and the wealth of it brought to Rome by Porcius
Cato.

THe fate of Islands was come, and so Cyprus was taken without any war.
^tolomey had the government of this Island, a place abounding in wealth, and
for that reason dedicated to Venus; nay, the report of its wealth was so great,
and that withal true, that the very people, which subdued Nations, and was wont
to bestow Kingdoms, upon the solicitation of P. Clodius Tribune of the people,
confiscated the estate of that King, then alive, and their Ally. And he indeed
upon the report of it poisoned himself. Whereupon Porcius Cato brought the
wealth of Cyprus in small light Vessels along the Tiber; which thing filled the
Roman Treasury more than any Triumph had done.

CHAP. X.
A memorable Exploit of Caesar's among the Gauls, and in Great Britain; He
builds a Bridge over the Rhine; Vercingetorix submits to him.

ASia being subdued by the Forces of Pompey, fortune transferred what remained
to be done in Europe to Caesar. There were yet unreduced the most cruel of all
Nations, the Gauls and Germans, and Brittany, though divided from all the
world, yet met with one that conquered it. The first commotions of the Gauls
began among the Swissers, who, seated between the Rhone and the Rhine, their
Lands being too narrow for them, came to seek out other habitations, after they
had fired the walls of their Cities, and taken an oath never to return. But
time being required to consider of it, and Caesar, having in the interim, by
breaking down the Bridge over the Rhone, deprived them of all means of flight,
he drove back that most warlike Nation to their former aboads, as a Shepherd
does his Flocks into the fold. The following fight with the Belgae was far more
bloody, they being a people who fought for their liberty. Though the Roman
Soldiery did many great actions upon this occasion, yet this of Caesar himself
their General was highly remarkable, when, the Army being inclined to flight,
he took a Buckler from one that was running away, and running to the very
Front, reinforced the fight with his own hands. Afterward there was an
Engagement at Sea with the Veneti; but we had a harder task with the Sea, than
with the Ships: for these were rough, unshap'd, and soon sunk as soon as they
felt our Beak-heads. But the shallows hindered the fight, as if the Ocean
withdrawing it self by its ordinary refluxes during the Engagement seemed to
intercede in the Quarrel. He had also to do with difficulties arising from the
disposition of Nations and places. The Aquitani, a crafty people, retired into
Caves underground; he commanded them to be pent up in them. The Morini wandered
into the Woods; he ordered them to be burnt. Let not any one say the Gauls were
bruitishly simple, they manage their business with subtilty. Induciomarus
brought in the Treviri; Ambiorix, the Eburones. Having entered into a
conspiracy, in Caesar's absence, they met with his Lieutenants. But the former
was gallantly defeated by T. Labienus, who brought away the Kings head. The
latter having laid ambushes in the valley, overcome us by craft; whereupon our
Camp was plundered, and all the Gold carried away. We there lost Cotta, with
the Lieutenant Titurius Rabinus. Nor could we ever after be revenged of that
King who got over the Rhine, and could never be seen. Nor did the Rhine
therefore escape, it being not just a place that entertained and protected our
enemies should be free; but of the first Fight between Caesar and the Germans,
there were just causes of his side. For the Bequani made complaints of their
incursions. What an haughtiness was that of King Ariovistus, when the
Ambassadors of Caesar said to him, Come to Caesar, replied, But who is Caesar?
And, If he will, let him come to me; And, What does it concern him what is done
in our Germany? Do I meddle with the Roman affairs? So that there was so great
a terror of this new Nation in the Camp, that many made their Wills before they
took up their Bucklers. But those vaste Bodies, the bigger they were, the more
open did they lie to the Swords and Darts. What gallantry the Soldiery
expressed in the fight, cannot be reduced from any thing so much as from what
they did, when the Barbarians having lifted their Bucklers over their heads,
covering themselves as under a roof, the Romans leaped up on the very Bucklers,
and thence stooping down cut their throats. Afterward, the Menapii, making
their complaints to Caesar against the Germans, he thereupon crossed the
Mose^, nay the Rhine it self, upon a Bridge o^ Boats, and seeks out the enemy
in the Hercynian Forests. But all were fled into the Woods and Marshes, so
great confusion had the Roman Force brought along with it, to that side of the
river: nor was the Rhine crossed only once, but several times, and that by
Bridges. But there was a greater astonishment; for perceiving their Rhine
taken, and as it were yoaked with a Bridge, they again fled into the Woods and
Marshes, and what most troubled Caesar was, that there were not any to be
overcome. Being Master of all both at Sea and Land, he looked upon the Ocean,
and as if this world were not enough for the Romans, he bethought him of
another. Having therefore got a Fleet together, he sails toward Britain. He
crossed over with mavelous speed; for weighing from the Port of Morinum at
the third Watch, he got the next day before noon into the Island. The shores
were full of hostile tumult, and the chariots, trembling at the sight of a
strange thing, went disorderly up and down. Their fearfulness was looked on as
a presage of our victory. He received their arms and hostages from the
timorous, and he had made a further progress, had not the Ocean chastis'd his
bold Fleet with a wrack. Returned thereupon into Gaul, and having reinforced
his Fleet and Forces, he comes again into the same Ocean, and pursues the same
Britains into the Calidonian Woods, and puts Cavelianus one of their Kings
into chains. Content with these things, (for the design was not to get
Provinces, but Glory) he returned back with a greater booty than before, the
Ocean it self being also more calm and favorable, as if acknowledging it self
inferior to him. But the greatest and last conspiracy of all, was that of the
Gauls, when that Prince so dreadful for stature, martial skill, and courage,
and whose very name was made to strike a terror, Vercingetorix, brought
together into one body, the Aruerni and Biturigae, as also the Carnutae and the
Sequani. He, upon Festival days, and days of Assembly, when great numbers of
them met in the woods, heightened them by his haughty expressions, to a recovery
of their former liberty. Caesar was then absent, raising of new Forces at
Ravenna; and the Alps had so risen in the winter, that they thought his passage
stopped. But what a fortunate temerity did this Message force him upon? Over
till then unpassable crags of Mountains, through unbeaten ways and snows,
taking his march with a choice light-armed party, he comes into Gaul; he
brought together his winter Garrisons, though at great distances, and was got
into the midst of Gaul, ere it was feared he might be coming from the remotest
part of it. Then assaulting the Cities that were the causes of the War, he
destroyed the Avaricum, though defended by forty thousand men; he fired Alexia,
although maintained by two hundred and fifty thousand young men. The whole
stress of the War was about Gergovia. For that vaste City having fourscore
thousand men to defend it, with the help of its Walls, a Castle, and its
precipices, was by Caesar compassed with Works, Palizadoes, and a Trench,
through which he drew the River, besides eighteen Bastions, and a kind of huge
Counterscarp, by which means he first reduced it to a famine; afterward killed
those, who attempted to make sallies, in the very Trenches with swords and
palizadoes, and at last forced the besieged to a surrender. Nay the King
himself, the greatest Ornament of the Victory, coming as a Suppliant to the
Camp, cast his equipage and arms at Caesar's feet, saying, Thou have, O most
valiant of men, a valiant man before thee, whom thou have overcome.

CHAP. XI.
Crassus vanquished and killed by the Parthians; the indignity exercised by his
enemies upon him after his death.

WHile the Romans, by Caesar, subdue the Gauls in the northern part of the
world, they receive a grievous wound in the East from the Parthians. Nor can we
complain of Fortune, our disaster admits not that comfort. The covetousness of
this Consul Crassus, (a vice hateful to Gods and men) while he minds nothing
but Parthian Gold, was punished with the loss of eleven Legions, and that of
his own head; for that the Tribune of the people Metellus, had made horrid
imprecations against him at his departure from Rome. And when the Army was past
Zeugma, the Euphrates swallowed our Ensigns forced into it by sudden
Whirlwindes; and when he had encamped at Nicephorium, the Ambassadors from King
Orodes pressed him to call to mind the Leagues made with Pompey and Sylla. But
he, bent upon the Kings Treasures, without the least imaginary cause, made them
only this return, That he would give them his answer at Seleucia. Wherefore
the Gods, avenger of Leagues, promoted the Artifices and Valor of the Enemies.
And first, Crassus left behind him the Euphrates, the only river whereby he
could be supplied with provisions, and which served him for a Rampart. Then he
gave credit to a counterfeit Renegado, a Syrian, named Mazaras, by whose advice
the Army being brought into a spacious Champian, lay open to the enemies of all
sides. So that he was hardly got to Carrae, but the Kings Generals, Syllaces
and Surenas, displayed their Ensigns glittering with Gold and Silk. Then
without any more ado, the Parthian Horse falling on of all sides, pelted them
with Darts so fast, as if it had been showers of Hail or Rain. So the Army
received a dreadful overthrow; Crassus himself cajoll'd into a parley, had,
upon a signal given, fallen alive into the enemies hands, if the resistance of
the Tribunes had not moved the Barbarian General to prevent his escape by
killing him. So having carried away his head, the enemy made sport with it. His
son they had killed with the same weapons, in his fathers sight. The remainder
of that unfortunate Army, every one shifting for himself, was dispersed into
Armenia, Cilicia, and Syria, so that there was hardly one left to bring the
news of this defeat to Rome. His head and right hand being cut off, were
carried to the King of Parthia, who justly made sport therewith. For melted
Gold was poured into his gaping mouth, that his dead and breathless body should
be burnt with Gold, whose mind had been inflamed with an insatiable desire of
it.

CHAP. XII.
A Recapitulation, comprehending a Description of the Misfortunes of the
Romans, proceeding from plenty; and that their arming against themselves, is
to be attributed to the same cause.

THis is the third Age of the Roman people, spent in foreign parts, during
which, assuming the confidence to go out of Italy, they displayed their Ensigns
all over the world. Of which age, the former Century was sacred, just, and, as
we said, Golden, not stained with any wickedness or impiety, while there yet
remained the sincere and inno^ent integrity of that pastoral origin, and the
imminent fear of our Carthagenian enemies kept up the ancient Discipline. The
latter Century, which we have deduced from the destruction of Carthage,
Corinth, and Numantia, and the inheritance left us in Asia by King Attalus, to
him who succeeded them, Augustus, of whom we shall speak hereafter, as it was
more magnificent in respect of Military Exploits, so was it lamentable, and to
be blushed at, in respect of the domestic Disturbances that happened therein.
For as it was noble and praiseworthy to have reduced Gaul, Thrace, Cilicia,
wealthy and powerful Provinces, as also the Armenians and Britains, though not
so much for the advantage, as the greater reputation of the Empire; so to have
at the same time broke forth into civil distractions, and fought with our
Allies, our Slaves, and Gladiators, and that the Senate should be divided into
Factions, is shameful and to be lamented. And I know not whether it had not
been better for the Roman people to have contented themselves with Sicily and
Africa, or indeed to have been without them, and confined their Government to
Italy, than to arrive at so much greatness, as to be destroyed by their own
strength. For what but an excess of prosperity bred those civil Distractions?
Our first corruption proceeded from the Conquest of Syria, the next from the
Inheritance left us by the King of Pergamus in Asia. That excessive wealth
corrupted the manners of that time, and proved the destruction of the
Commonwealth, then sunk into its own vices as into a common Shore. For whence
should it proceed, that the people should desire Lands and Food, but from the
famine which luxury had occasioned? Thence therefore proceeded the first and
second Gracchane, and the third Apuleian sedi^ion. Whence came it that the
Knights dissented from the Senate, to assume to themselves the cognizance of
judgments in Law, but from avarice, that the tributes of the Commonwealth, and
the very judgments in Law might be converted to private lucre? Hence again
came both the promise of communicating the freedom of Rome to all Latium, and
by the means the wars with our Allies. What occasioned the servile wars, but
the abundance of Families? What occasioned the Gladiators to raise Armies
against their Masters, but the profuse liberality used to court the favor of
the populace, who, being excessively taken with shows, made that a profession
which was at first the punishment of our enemies? And now that we may come to
some more specious vices, did not that ambition of honors take its rise from
the same cause, Wealth? Thence also came the storms of Marius and Sylla's
times. The magnificence of entertainments, and excessive profusions, were they
not the effects of wealth, which must in time bring in want? That also made
Catiline an enemy to his Country. Lastly that insatiable desire of principality
and rule, whence came it but from excessive riches? Nay these armed Caesar and
Pompey with fatal firebrands to the destruction of the Commonwealth. We shall
in order give an account of these domestic destractions of the Roman people,
distinct from their foreign and justifiable wars.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Sedition occasioned by the power bestowed on the Tribunes.

THe power bestowed on the Tribunes was the source of all the seditions; in as
much as under pretense of asserting the rights of the people, for whose ease it
was established, they made it really their business to assume authority to
themselves, and courted the favor and applause of the people by the Agrarian,
the Frumentarian, and the Judiciarii Laws. There seemed to be in all of them a
kind of equity. For what so just as that the common people should receive their
right from the Senate; that the people which had conquered all Nations and was
possessed of the world, might not be like vagabonds without Houses or Temples?
What so just, as that a people reduced to want should live upon their own
treasury? What more conduced to the equality of freedom, than that the Senate
having the Government of Provinces, the Order of Knights, should have the
advantage of Judicial proceedings? Yet these things became pernicious, and the
wretched Commonwealth proved the reward of her own overthrow. For the
management of Judicial proceedings being transferred from the Senate to the
Knights, suppressed the tributes, that is, the patrimony of the Empire; and the
buying of corn exhausted the Treasury, the very sinews of the Commonwealth. And
could the people be put into possession of their Lands, without the ejecting of
those that were in actual possession, and themselves a part of the people? And
yet these were possessed of their habitations left them by their Ancestors, as
it were by prescription of time and right of inheritance.

CHAP. XIV.
The sedition occasioned by Tiberius Gracchus, who is opposed and killed.

THe first firebrand of sedition was kindled by Tiberius Gracchus, a person
highly eminent for his extraction, comeliness and eloquence. But this man,
whether fearful of being involved in the surrender of Manci^^^ (for he was
surely for our part of the league at Numantia) and thereupon desirous to
ingratiate himself with the people; or proceeding with a good intention, as
pitying to see the common people turned out of their Lands, that they who had
conquered Nations and were Masters of the world, might not be banished out of
their own habitations; or whatever design he had, attempted a very remarkable
thing; when that, the day for propounding the Law being come, attended by a
great number of people, he ascended the Rostra, nor wanted there on the other
side all the Nobility with armed force to oppose him, and some of the Tribunes
were also against him. But when Gracchus finds M. Octavius opposing the Laws he
would have had enacted, contrary to the dignity of Colleagueship, and the right
of his authority, he thrust his Colleague out of the Rostra, and put him into
such a fright of present death, that he was forced to quit the Magistracy. By
which means being created Triumvir for the distribution of the Lands, when to
complete what he had begun, he would, upon an assembly day, have had his
authority continued for longer time, meeting a party of the Nobility and of
those whom he had put out of their Lands, the slaughter began at the Forum. He
escaped thence to the Capitol, and putting his hand to his head, as it were to
exhort the people to endeavor his safety, he seemed as one desiring Royalty
and a Diadem: and so the people having taken up arms, by the encouragement of
Scipio Nusica, he was cut off as it were by a due course of Justice.

CHAP. XV.
Caius Gracchus attempts to prosecute the design of his Brother Tiberius; and
is murdered by Opimius upon Mount-Aventine.

Caius Gracchus attempted with no less violence to revenge the death and Laws
of his Brother. And with equal tumult and terror inviting the people to their
ancient Lands, and promising them for provisions, the newly-fallen inheritance
of Attalus, and being grown too high and powerful upon a second Tribuneship, he
was absolutely assured of popular favor. So that Minutius the Tribune
presuming to abrogate his Laws, having got together a party of his Accomplices,
he invaded the Capitol, a place fatal to his Family. Whence being forced with
the loss of his friends, he got to Mount Aventine, where met with by a party
of the Senate, he is defeated by Opimius. Nay they insulted over the dead
carcass, and the most sacred head of a Tribune of the people was sold by those
who killed him for its weight in gold.

CHAP. XVI.
Apuleius Saturninus renews the quarrel of the Grachii; he is assisted by
Marius, and commits many outrages; Marius is forced to desert him; He gets into
the Capitol, and surrenders himself to the Senate. The people tear him to
pieces.

NOtwithstanding these things, Apuleius Saturninus forbore not to assert the
Gracchane Laws. So much was he encouraged by Marius, who was always an enemy to
the Nobility, and withal presuming upon his Consulship; after he had caused
his Competitor A. Nonius, to be openly murdered, at a general Assembly,
endeavored to get into his place C. Gracchus, a person without tribe or name,
and one who had by a foisted pedigree adopted himself into the Family. Thus
while he triumphed by these affronts without any fear of punishment, he was so
earnest to have the Gracchane Laws established, that he forced the Senate to a
compliance, threa^^ing the refusers with banishment. One of them made it his
choice. Whereupon after the departure of Metellus, all the Nobility being
discouraged, Saturninus being in the third year of his Tribuneship, grew so
insufferably impudent, as to disturb the Consular Assemblies with new
slaughters. For, that Glaucias, the instrument of his fury might be made
Consul, he caused C. Memmius his Competitor to be slain; and he gladly
understood from some of his followers, that in that tumult he had been called
King. But at length, the Senate conspiring against him, and Marius the Consul
opposing, as being no longer able to defend him, armies were drawn up in the
Forum, whence being beaten he got into the Capitol. But while he was besieged
(the conduit-pipes being cut off) and by messengers would have assured the
Senate of his repentance, he came down out of the Castle, and was with the
Ringleaders of the faction received into the Curia. Being there the people
broke in, and fell upon him with stones and staves, tearing him to pieces even
as he was dying.

CHAP. XVII.
Livius Drusus would enforce the Gracchane Laws; Cepio violates the Senate; The
Consul Philippus opposing him is unworthily treated; the sudden death of Drusus.

LAstly, Livius Drusus, not only with the strength of the Tribuneship, but
also with the authority of the Senate, and the consent of all Italy, endeavors
the establishment of the same Laws, and, attempting one thing after another,
caused so great a conflagration, that the first eruptions of it could not be
endured, so that taken away by a sudden death, he left a hereditary war to his
posterity. According to the judiciary Law, C. Gracchus had divided the Roman
people, and made that a double-headed City, which was but single before. The
Roman Knights invested with so great power, as to have the fates and fortunes
of the Senators, and the lives of Princes in their power, intercepting the
tributes, robbed the Commonwealth at their pleasure. The Senate being weakened
by the exile of Metellus, and the condemnation of Rutilius, had lost all the
luster of Majesty. While things were in this posture, Servilius Caepio, and
Livius Drusus, two persons equal as to courage, wealth, and dignity (which
begat the emulation in Drusus) stood up for, one, the Knights, the other, the
Senate. The Ensigns, Standards, and Banners were ready to advance. But they
were divided in one and the same City as if they had been in two distinct
Camps. Caepio first assaulting the Senate, pitched upon Scaurus and Philippus,
chief persons of the Nobility, as chargeable with ambition. Drusus, to oppose
these commotions, by the Gracchane Laws, got the common people to join with
him, and drew in the Allies by a hope of being made free of the City. His
saying, upon this occasion, is extant, That he had not left any one ought to
give away, unless he would distribute dust or air. The day for the
promulgation of the Law was come, when of a sudden, so great a multitude came
in from all parts, that the City seemed besieged by enemies. Yet the Consul
Philippus had the boldness to oppose the enaction of the Laws; But the Viator
taking him by the throat, let him not go, till the blood gushed out his mouth
and eyes. So the Laws were enacted by force. But our Allies immediately called
for the reward of their assistance, when in the mean time death took away
Drusus, unable to keep his word, and troubled at the commotions he had rashly
caused, a seasonable death, in so great a danger: and yet the Allies ceased not
by Arms to demand of the people of Rome the performance of Drusus's promises.

CHAP. XVIII.
All Italy in a commotion; a general conspiracy, which after great destructions
of men, is at last appeased.

THe war between us and our Socy, or Allies, I may call the Social War, to make
it less odious; but the truth is, it was a Civil war. For the Roman people,
having shuffled together the Etrusci, the Latins, and the Sabines, and
deriving one blood out of them all, of several members it made up a body, and
is but one consisting of all the parts. Nor did the Allies less wickedly rebel
within Italy, than the Citizens did within Rome. The Allies therefore justly
demanded the freedom of that City, to whose greatness they had contributed, to
which hope, Drusus, out of a desire of dominion, had raised them; and he
afterward destroyed by the perfidiousnesse of his domestics, the same
firebrand that consumed him, enflamed the Allies into Arms, and a design of
besieging the City. What more lamentable than this destruction? what more
calamitious? when all Latium, and Picenum, ^ll Etruria and Campania, lastly
Italy, rose up against its Parent and Mother-City? when the flower of our most
valiant and faithful Allies had those municipal prodigies each under their
Ensigns. Popedius led the Marsians, and Latins, Afranius the Vmbri, the whole
Senate and Consuls those of Samnium, and Telesinus those of Lucania: when that
people which judged Kings and Nations could not govern it self, and that Rome
the Conqueresse of Asia and Europe might be assailed from Corfinium. The first
scene of the war was to have been upon Mount Albanus, it being resolved, that
on the Festival day of the Latins, the Consuls Julius Caesar and Martius
Philippus should have been offered up amidst the Sacrifices and Altars. But
that treachery being discovered, the whole fury broke out at Asculum, the
Ambassadors who had been sent from the City being murdered at the assembly of
their solemn sports. This was the engagement of that impious war. Popedius the
Author and Ringleader of the war posting up and down spread the insurrection
through several Nations and Cities. The desolation^ committed by Hannibal and
Pyrrhus were not so great. Behold Ocriculum, behold Grumentum, Faesulae,
Carceoli, Nuseriae, and Picentes, are wafted with slaughter, fire, and sword.
Rutilius's Forces are defeated; Coepio's defeated. Nay even Julius Caesar
himself, after the loss of the Army, being brought all bloody into the City,
the lamentable spectacle of his funeral was carried through the midst of the
City. But the great fortune of the Roman people, and ever greater in
extremities, rose up a fresh with all their Forces, and sending out several
Commanders to engage against the several Nations, Cato defeats the Etruscans;
Gabinius the Marsyans; Cardo, the Lucanians; Sylla the Samnites. But Strabo
Pompeius having laid all waste with fire and sword, never gave over destroying,
till that by the destruction of Asculum, he had appeased the Manes of so many
Consular Armies, and ransacked Cities.

CHAP. XIX.
An insurrection of the Slaves; Sicily under the Government of a Syrian, who
feigns himself a Fanatic; They are at last overcome and punished by the valor
of Rupilius; A second insurrection of the Slaves quieted by Aquilius.

THough we fought with our Allies (dishonor enough!) yet we had to do with
free persons and well educated. But who can brook that the Sovereign people of
the world should arm against their Slaves? The first ser^ile war happened at
the infancy of Rome, and ^^^y'd within the City, Herdonius Sabinus being the
Leader, when, the City being busied ^y the seditions of the Tribuneship, the
Capi^ol was besieged and taken by the Consul. But that was rather a tumult then
a war. Soon after, the Forces of the Empire being employed ^n several parts,
who would believe that Sicily was more cruelly desolated by the Servile then by
the Punick war? Being a Country plentiful in Corn, and in a manner a
Suburb-Province, was possessed by Roman Citizens who had great inheritances
there. They had there many prisons full of chained Slaves for the cultivation
of the ground, and these occasioned the war. A certain Syrian named Eunus (the
greatness of the destruction makes us remember him) counterfeiting a fanatic
destraction, while he boasts of the C^mas.
hair of the Syrian Goddess, animated the Slaves as it were by a command of
the Gods to assert their liberty, and take up Arms. And that he might prove it
done by Divine inspiration, having a nutshell in his mouth, which he had filled
with Brimstone and fire, when he breathed gently, the flames came forth with
his words. This miracle at first drew together two thousand of such as were
next met, but after breaking open the prisons, he made up an Army of above
forty thousand. And being adorned with Royal ornaments, that our miseries might
be complete, he made a lamentable desolation of Castles, Towns, and Villages.
Nay for an absolute dishonor, the Camps of the Praetors were taken, nor are we
ashamed to name them, the Camps of Manilius, Lentulus, Piso, Hypsaeus. They
therefore who should have been reduced as fugitives, pursued our Praetorian
General, whom they had defeated in fight. At length, P. Rupilius being General,
they were punished. For having overcome them, and at last besieged them at
Euna, after he had wasted them with famine, as if it had been with a
pestilence, he put the remainders of the villains into chains and fetters, and
crucified them. For his Victory over the Slaves he was content with an Ovation,
that he might not derogate from the dignity of a Triumph, by a servile
inscription. The Island had hardly taken breath ere we return from the Slaves
and the Syrian, to a Cilician. Athenio, a Shepherd, having killed his Master,
puts the Family delivered out of prison into Arms. He himself clad in a Purple
garment, and having a silver staff, and his forehead bound about after a Kingly
manner, got together an Army not inferior to that of the formentioned
Fanatic, and with greater violence, as if he would avenge him, plundring
Castles, Towns, and Villages, he exercised his cruelty upon Masters, but more
insupportably upon Slaves, as so many Renegadoes. By this fellow also were
Praetorian Armies slain, the Camps of Servilius, and Lucullus taken. But
Aquilius, following the example of P. Rupilius reduced the enemy, debarred from
provisions, to extremities, and easily destroyed by famine the Forces he had
worsted by Arms: and they had surrendered themselves, if they had not preferred
a voluntary death, to avoid torments. Nay the Ringleader of them mist the
punishment he should have had, though he came alive into our Lands, for that
while the multitude strove about the taking of him, the prey was torn to pieces
between them.

CHAP. XX.
Spartacus a Gladiator heads an Army of Slaves, and puts many affronts on the
Romans, at last Licinius Crassus vindicates the honor of Rome by the death of
the Gladiator.

A Man may support the dishonor of a war with Slaves, for though fortune has
made them subject to all things, yet are they as it were a second kind of men,
and capable of the same happiness of liberty with us. But I know not by what
name to call the war raised by Spartacus: as where the Soldiery were Slaves,
and the Commanders Gladiators, those the meanest of men by their condition,
these added to their calamity by the scorn of their profession. Spartacus,
Crixus, and Oenoma, breaking Lentulus's Fencing-school, with seaventy or more
of the same quality, got away from Capua, and having called the Slaves into
their assistance, and put them under their Ensigns, when they had got together
above ten thousand men, were not content only to have made their escape, but
would also be revenged. The Vesuvius was the first refuge these men were
pleased to pitch upon. Where being besieged by Clodius Glaber, they slipped down
the rifts of the hollow mountain with the help of cords made of vine branches,
and got down to the very foot of it, and at the same time of a sudden surpised
the General's Camp, who feared no such thing. They afterward took another
Camp. Then they wander up and down Thora, and all Campania. And not content
with the devastation of Villages and Hamlets, they destroy all in Nola and
Nuceria, and Metapont. Forces coming in daily, they became a complete Army, and
made themselves Bucklers of twiggs and the skins of beasts, and swords and
other weapons of the Iron about the prisons. And that nothing might be wanting
to complete the Army, they get horse by taming those they met with wild, and
the Ensigns and Fasces taken from our Praetors they brought to their General.
Nor did he refuse them, though a person who of a mercenary Thracian, became a
Soldier; of a Soldier, a Renegado, then a Robber, and at last upon the
presumption of his strength, a Gladiator. He also celebrated the funerals of
his Commanders killed in fight with Princely exequies, commanding such as he
had taken prisoners to fight about the funeral pile, as it were to expiate all
Praetorian dishonor, by becoming, of a Gladiator, a rewarder of those who
found him that divertisement. Afterward engaging with Consular Armies, he
defeated that of Lentulus in the Appenine, and destroyed the Camp of C. Cassius
at Mutina. Puffed up with these victories, he designed to invade the City of
Rome, which was shame enough for us. In fine, we rise with all our Forces
against this wretched Fencer, and Licinius Crassus vindicated Rome's honor, by
whom the enemies being put to flight, escaped to the extremities of Italy.
Being there shut up into a corner of Brutium, they prepared to escape into
Sicily, but wanting vessels to transport themselves, and having tried to supply
that defect with boats of hurdles and barrels fastened together with twigs, but
vainly, by reason of the swiftness of the current, at last sallying out, they
died like men, and (as was fit under the conduct of a Gladiator) fought without
reprieve. Spartacus behaving himself gallantly in the front of the battle, fell
like a General.

CHAP. XXI.
The Civil War of the Romans occasioned by the ambition of Marius and Sylla.

THis only wanted to complete the misfortunes of the Romans, that they might
have a parricidial war amongst themselves, and that Citizens should engage one
against another, like Gladiators, in the midst of the City and Forum, as in a
Theater. Yet would it grieve me the less, if the wickedness had proceeded
from Plebeian Leaders, or if from Noble persons, bad ones. But (o indignity,
what men, what Generals were they!) Marius and Sylla, the glory and ornaments
of their age, promoted that execrable evil with dignity, and it was carried on
by three different constellations, as I may say. The first was mean and slight,
and rather a tumult then a war, the cruelty being only between the Leaders:
the next was more cruel and bloody, the victory spreading through the Bowels of
the Senate: the last exceeded in point of rage, not only a civil but even a
hostile fury, when the horror of the war engaged all the Forces of Italy, the
animosities being exasp^ted so far, till there were not any to be killed. The
beginning of the war proceeded from Marius's insatiable desire of honors,
while he labored to deprive Sylla of the Province designed him. But Sylla
impatient of the injury, brought about his Legions, and deferring the war with
Mithridates, poured into the City at the Esquiline and Colline gates, with two
great bodies. Whence Sulpitius and Albinovamis opposing them with their Forces,
and as also with poles and stones, and darts cast of all sides from the walls,
Sylla also falls a throwing, and forced his passage by fire, and possessed
himself as Conqueror, of the Fortress of the Capitol, which had escaped the
Carthaginians, and the Gauls. Then by an edict of the Senate, Sylla's
adversaries being adjudg'd enemies to the State, they exercised their fury on
the present Tribune, and others of the contrary faction. Marius by a servile
flight escaped, or rather fortune reserved him for another war. Cornelius, and
Cn. Octavius being Consuls, the fire not well quenched broke forth again, and
that proceeded from their not agreeing among themselves, when it was referred
to the people, whether those whom the Senate had condemned should be recalled.
They came to that assembly with their swords about them; but they who desired
quietness prevailing, Cinna, leaving his Country, fled to the contrary party.
Marius returns from Africa grown greater by his loss, in as much as
imprisonment, chains, flight, and exile had heightened his dignity. At the name
of so great a person they flock to him from all parts; Slaves, and persons
condemned to prisons (o horror!) are put into Arms, and the unfortunate
General easily got an Army together. Whereupon returning to his Country by
force, as he had by force been driven out of it, he might seem to have
proceeded with some Justice, if he had not stained his cause with cruelty. But
returning hateful to Gods and Men, at the first eruption of his fury, Ostia, a
place under the tuition and oversight of Rome, is with a horrible destruction
pillaged. Afterward, with four Battalions he enters the City, the Forces being
commanded by Cinna, Marius, Carbo, and Sertorius. Here all the Forces of
Octavius were beaten off at the Janiculum, whereupon a signal was given for the
murdering of the Senators, which was effected with greater cruelty, than was
exercised at the sacking of Carthage, or the City of the Cimbri. The head of
the Consul Octavius is exposed on the Rostra: that of Antonius a Consular
person is served up to Marius's table. Caesar and Fimbria are murdered in
their own Houses. The two Crassus's Father and Son were killed in fight one of
the other; Baebius and Numitorius were drawn through the midst of the Forum by
hooks of the common Executioners. Catulus avoided the sport his enemies would
have made with him, by swallowing burning coals. Merula, Jupiter's Priest in
the Capitol, opening his veins made the blood gush out into Jupiter's eyes.
Ancharius was run through the body in the presence of Marius, because when he
saluted him, Marius did not reach to him that fatal hand of his. All these
massacres of the Senate happened between the Calends and Ides of January, in
the seventh Consulship of Marius. What had been done, had he completed the
year? Scipio and Norbanus being Consuls, the third tempest of that civil rage,
broke forth with greatest fury, there being of one side eight Legions, on the
other five hundred Cohorts standing to their Arms, besides Sylla returning from
Asia with a victorious Army. And certainly, Marius having been so cruel, what
cruelty must Sylla needs use to be revenged of him? The first engagement was at
Capua, near the River Vulturnus, where Norbanus's Army was soon defeated, and
soon after all Scipio's Forces, baited with a hope of peace, worsted. Whereupon
young Marius and Carbo being made Consuls, as it were despairing of the
victory, yet not to die unrevenged, celebrated their own funerals with effusion
of the blood of the Senators, brought forth, as it were out of a prison, to be
killed. What funerals were there in the Forum, in the Circus, and in the open
Temples? For Mutius Scaevola, the Priest, flying to the Altars of the Vestals,
hardly escapes burying in the same fire. Lamponius and Telesinus, the Leaders
of the Samnites, waste Campania and Etruria with greater cruelty than Pyrrhus
and Hannibal had done, and, under pretense of siding with Marius, revenged
themselves upon the Romans. At Sacriportus and the Colline-gate all the Forces
of the enemies are cut off; at the former Marius, at the latter Telesinus was
defeated: yet did not the war end with the massacres. The sword was drawn even
in the time of peace, and they punished those who had voluntarily surrendered
themselves. It is no less remarkable, that at Sacriportus and the Colline
gate, Sylla slew above seventy thousand men. Then it was a war. But he
commanded four thousand unarmed Citizens, who had surrendered themselves, to be
killed in the place called Villa Publica. Are not these a great number
considering it was in a time of peace? But who is able to compute those whom
any one that would might kill about the City? till Furfidius advising, that
some should be left alive, that there might be some over whom they should rule,
that great table was hung out, whereby two thousand out of the order of Knights
and the Senators were condemned to die. A strange kind of Edict. It grieves me
to relate after these things, the opprobrious treatment of Carbo, Soranus, the
Praetor and Venuleius after their death. Boebius died not by a sword, but was
torn to pieces as they do wild beasts. Marius, the Generals Brother, having his
eyes put out, and his hand and legs cut off; at the Sepulcher of Catulus, was
kept a while, that he might die by degrees. The punishments of particular
persons being over, the noblest municipal Cities of Italy were exposed to sale,
Spoletium, Interamnium, Praenesto, and Fluentia. But Sulmo, that ancient and
friendly City in Alliance with us, not yet reduced, Sylla (o heinous fact!)
commanded it to be utterly destroyed, as Hostages condemned by the Law of Arms
and Sentences to death, are commanded forth to execution.

CHAP. XXII.
The valor of Sertorius, banished Rome by the proscription of Sylla; He makes
an insurrection in Spain; and after many gallant exploits, is killed by
treachery.

THe Sertorian war, what was it but a consequence of Sylla's proscription?
Wheth^r I should call it Hostile or Civil I know not, as being managed by the
Lusitanians and Celtiberians, under the conduct of a Roman. That person, a man
of great but unfortunate virtue, being an exile upon the account of that fatal
table of Sylla, communicated his misfortunes to Sea and Land, and having tried
his fortune in Africa and the Balearick Island, got into the Ocean, and passed
into the Fortunate Islands. At last he put Spain into Arms; where the gallant
man easily prevailed with such as were so; nor was the vigor of the Spanish
Soldiery ever so remarkable as under this Roman Commander. Nor was he content
with Spain, but had also an eye to Mithridates, and the Inhabitants of Pontus,
and assisted the King with a Navy. And what would have sufficed so great an
enemy? The Roman affairs were not in such a posture as to be able to oppose him
with one General; Cn. Pompeius was joined with Metellus. These weakened his
Forces a long time, and with doubtful success; yet was he not overcome by
war, till he was betrayed by his own domestics. Having pursued his Forces all
over Spain, they had many, and those doubtful engagements. The first were
managed by Lieutenants, when, of one side Domitius and Thorius, and the
Herculians on the other, met as forlorns. Soon after, the latter being defeated
near Segovia, the former at the River Ana, the Generals themselves approaching
one the other had another trial near Lauro and Sucro, and the loss was equal
on both sides. Whereupon one side minding the desolation of the Country, the
other, the destruction of Cities, wretched Spain ru'd the differences of the
Roman Generals: till that Sertorius, being murdered by his servants, and
Perpenna vanquished and having surrendered himself, the Cities also
reacknowledg'd the jurisdiction of the Romans, to wit, Osea, Term, Tutia,
Valentia, Auxima, and Calaguris, after it had endured the extremities of a
famine. So Spain being restored to peace, the victorious Generals would have it
accounted rather a foreign than a civil war, that they might have the
satisfaction of a triumph.

CHAP. XXIII.
Lepidus raises new commotions; he is vanquished and dies in Sardinia.

MArcus Lepidus, and Q. Catulus being Consuls, there broke forth a civil war
which was extinguished in less time then it had been begun. But how far soever
the firebrand of that commotion spread, it was a spark arising from the
funeral pile of Sylla. For Lepides, insolently desirous to see some alteration,
would abrogate the acts of so great a person; not unjustly, could it have been
done without injury to the Commonwealth. For the Dictator Sylla having
prescribed his enemies by the Law of Arms, those who survived, to what end
should they be called together but to war? And the estates of the condemned
Citizens being bestowed by Sylla upon others, though it were a thing
unjustiable in it self, yet, done with a certain form of Justice, the
restitution thereof to the former proprietors, must no doubt disturb the
tranquillity of the City. It therefore concerned the Commonwealth now
indisposed and wounded, to rest, though upon any terms, that the wounds of it
might not be opened in order to its cure. Lepidus therefore having startled the
City with seditious remonstrances, as with an alarm, he went into Etruria, and
thence brought an Army against Rome. But Lutatius Catulus, and Cn. Pompeius,
the Captains and Promoters of Sylla's tyranny, had already possessed themselves
of Milvius bridge and mount Janiculus, with another Army. By whom being forced
back at the first onset, and declared an enemy by the Senate, he retreated
without any bloodshed to Etruria, afterward into Sardinia, and there of
sickness and grief died. The Conquerours, a thing rarely seen in any of the
other civil wars, contented themselves only with the peace.

THE ROMAN HISTORY BY L. JULIUS FLORUS.
The Fourth Book,
CHAP. I.
The detestable conspiracy of Catiline against his Country; he is assisted by
several persons of the Noblest Families in Rome; Cicero discovers the design;
the punishment of the Conspirators; Antonius gives Catiline and his Army an
absolute overthrow.

FIrst luxury, and, what is the effect of that, the want of things necessary,
and withal opportunity, in regard the Roman Armies were distant as far as the
uttermost parts of the world, forced Cataline upon these heinous designs of
oppressing his Country, murdering the Senate, killing the Consuls, firing the
City, robbing the Treasury, overturning the whole Commonwealth, and doing what
Hannibal seems not to have wished. What accomplices had he to compass that
horrid act? He himself was of the order of the Patricii, but that amounted to
little. There were engaged with him in the same design some of the Curii, the
Porcii, the Sylla's, the Cethegi, the Antronii, the Vargunteii, and Longini.
How great Families were these? What ornaments of the Senate? Nay Lentulus also,
then Praetor, had entertained all these as instruments to carry on his most
horrid attempt. The conspiracy was sealed with humane blood, which carried
about in goblets they drunk one to another, a crime the most enormous in the
world, that only excepted upon the account of which they drunk it. There had
been an end of the Noblest Empire in the World, if that conspiracy had not
happened in the time of the Consulship of Cicero and Antonius, of whom the one
discovered it by his industry, the other quashed it by force. The discovery of
so great a wickedness came from Fulvia, a common Strumpet, but not guilty of
the intended parricide. Whereupon Cicero, assembling the Senate, made an
Oration against the Parricide Catiline, present than among them; but that
proceeded no further, then that the enemy might escape, openly professing, that
he would extinguish the conflagration of the City by the utter destruction of
it. He goes to the Army raised by Manlius in Etruria, with a design to bring it
against the City. Lentulus prophesying to himself the Government designed his
Family by the Sibylline verses, disposes, at set places about the City, Men,
Firebrands, and Arms, against the day appointed by Catiline; and not content
with a civil conspiracy, he drew into Arms the Ambassadors of the Allebroges
then casually at Rome. And the fury had spread beyond the Alps, if, upon
another discovery of Vulturius, the Praetor's letters had not been intercepted
Whereupon by the order of Cicero, the Barbarians were secured. The Praetor is
openly convicted in the Senate. Being in consultation about their punishment,
Caesar would have had him spared upon the account of their quality; but Cato
would have them punished, according to the horridness of the crime. Which
opinion the rest fellowing, the Parricides were put to death in prison. Though
some part of the Conspiracy were smothered, yet Catiline persisted in his
design, and upon his march from Etruria with an army against his country, he is
defeated by Antonius. How sharply they fought, the event made appear: not one
of the enemies survived the encounter; that place which every one fought upon
proved that whereon his body reposed after death. Catiline himself was found at
a great distance from his own people among the carcasses of his enemies, a most
noble death had he so fallen for his Country.

CHAP. II.
A Relation of the War between Caesar and Pompey, which was rather an universal
one, than a civil; The league between Pompey, Crassus, and Caesar; the distrust
between Caesar and Pompey, upon which ensued an open war; Pompey flies out of
Italy; Caesar's exploits; he besieges Marseils, passes over into Spain, defeats
Pompey's Lieutenants, and follows him into Epirus. The courage and fortune of
Caesar; Pompey vanquished by him in Thessaly; his deplorable death in Egypt;
Caesar utterly destroys the Army of Pharnaces; Scipio defeated Cara and Juba;
the bloody fight against Pompey's Sons; the valor, conduct, and incomparable
fortune of Caesar; his clemency; the great honors attributed to him; he is
envied at Rome, and murdered.

THe whole world being now in a manner overcome, the Roman Empire was grown too
great to be destroyed by any foreign Forces. Fortune therefore, envying the
Sovereign people of the world, armed it to its own destruction. The rage of
Marius and Cinna had kept within the Walls of the City, as it were to make a
trial; the storm raised by Sylla spread farther, yet went not out of Italy; but
the fury of Caesar and Pompey, as it were a delug^, or genetal conflagration,
overran the City, Italy, Countries, Nations, and at last the whole Empire, so
that it cannot rightly be called a civil, nor social, nor foreign war, but
somewhat comprehending all these, and indeed more then a war. For if we
consider the Generals, the whole Senate was divided into factions; if the
Armies, we find on the one side eleven Legions, on the other, eighteen, both
consisting of the flower and strength of Italy; if the assistance of
confederates, there was on the one side the choice of the Gauls and Germans, on
the other Dejotarus, Ariobarzanes, Tarcondimotus, Cothus, the whole Force of
Thrace, Cappadocia, Cilicia, Macedonia, Greece, Italy, and all the East; if the
continuance of the war, we find four years, a small time, considering the
destructions; if the space and stage, on which it was acted, we and it begun in
Italy, and spread thence into Gaul and Spain, and returning from the West, it
seated it self with its whole burden in Epirus and Thessaly; thence it made a
sudden sally into Egypt, then returned into Asia, and stuck a while in Asia;
at last, returning into Spain, there after some time received its period. But
the animosity of the factions ended not with the war. For they rested not till
the malice of those who were conquered had satisfied it self with the murder
of the Conqueror, and that done in the very City, nay in the midst of the
Senate. The cause of this so great a calamity was the same with that of all the
rest, to wit, excessive prosperity. For Quintus Metellus, and Lucius Afranius
being Consuls when the Majesty of Rome was spread all over the world, and the
City celebrated the late-gain'd victories, and the Pontick and Armenian
triumphs of Pompey, in the Pompeain Theaters, the over great power of that
person, raised a jealousy (as it is often wont) in some busy Citizens.
Metellus, discontented at the abatement of his triumph over Creet, Cato, ever
an enemy to the powerful, calumniated Pompey, and found fault with his actions.
The grief he conceavid thereat stuck like a dart in his bosom, and forced him
to endeavor the support of his authority. As chance would, then flourished
Crassus, a person eminent for his extraction, wealth, and dignity; yet thought
he not himself wealthy enough. Caius Caesar was in great repute for his
eloquence, wit, and his being then Consul. Yet was Pompey more eminent than
either. So that Caesar being desirous to attain greater dignity, Crassus to
increase his, and Pompey to retain his, and all equally aiming at power, they
easily conspired together to invade the Commonwealth. Making therefore every
one of them his advantage of their mutual Forces, Caesar invades Gaul; Crassus,
Asia; Pompey, Spain, with three very great Armies, and so the Empire of the
World was divided among three Princes. That Government lasted ten years. They
had till then been balanced by a mutual fear of each other; but upon the death
of Crassus among the Parthians, and that of Julia, Caesar's Daughter, who,
married to Pompey, maintained concord between the Father and Son-in-law,
emulation soon discovered it self. Pomp^y was jealous of Caesar's wealth, and
Caesar could not brook Pompey's dignity; the one could not endure an equal, nor
the other a superior. O horror! they so disputed for principality, as if the
fortune of so great an Empire could not suffice two. Whereupon, having, during
the Consulship of Lentulus and Marcellus, made the first breach of the
conspiracy, the Senate, that is Pompey [by whom they were guided] moved the
appointing of a successor to Caesar; nor was Caesar himself against it, if in
the first Assembly for the election of Consuls there were a respect had of him:
which honor ten Tribunes had decreed to him though absent, and that with
Pompey's approbation, but now upon the same person's indifference, it is
denied; alledginig that he should come and demand it after the ancient form. On
the contrary Caesar was earnest for the passing of the decrees, protesting he
would not disband the Army, if they performed not their promises. Whereupon
they decree against him as an Enemy. Caesar moved at these things, resolved, by
Arms, to maintain the rewards of Arms. The first scene of the civil war was
Italy, the Fortresses whereof Pompey had supplied with slight Garrisons; but
all, upon Caesar's sudden advance, were reduced. The First encounter was at
Ariminum; Whereupon Libo was forced out of Etruria, Thermus out of Vmbria,
Domitius out of Corfinium. And the war had been at an end without any
bloodshed, if Caesar, as he had attempted it, could have surpised Pompey at
Brundusium. But he made his escape by night through the closures of the
besieged port. A shameful thing to be spoken, that he, who not long before had
been chiefest of the Senate, and the umpire of peace and war, should venture
himself in a torn and unarmed vessel into that Sea, on which he had triumphed.
Pompey had no sooner got out of Italy, but the Senate left the City, which
almost emptied by fear, Caesar entering into, makes himself Consul. He also
commanded the sacred Treasury to be broke open, because the Tribunes were
tedious in the doing of it otherwise, and violently seized the revenue and
patrimony of the people, before he assumed the soveraignety. Pompey being
forced to flight, he thought fitter to settle the Provinces, then follow him.
Sicily and Sardinia, he secured by his Lieutenants, that he might be assured of
provisions. There was no hostility among the Gauls, he himself had made a peace
there. But he passing through it against the Pompeian Armies in Spain, Massilia
presumed to shut her gates against him. Wretched Massilia, out of a fear of
war, falls into a war. But having strong walls, he ordered it to be reduced in
his absence. That half-Greek City, not so delicate as the name might intimate,
presumed to force the enemies Trenches, fire their Machines, and give them a
Sea engagement. But Brutus, who managed the war, overcame it both by Sea and
Land. At length surrendering themselves, all was taken from them, their liberty
only excepted, which they valued above all. Caesar's war in Spain with
Petreius and Afranius, Lieutenants under Cneius Pompeius was various, doubtful,
and bloody, whom having their Camp at Illerda he attemps to besiege at the
River Sicoris, and to shut up in the Town. In the mean time by the overflowing
of the River, happening commonly in the Spring, he was reduced to a want of
provisions. So his Camp began to be sensible of famine, and the besiege himself
was in a manner besieged. But the River returning within its channel, he
scowres the coasts with devastation and fighting, and fiercely plays upon
them, and pursuing them in their retreat into Celtiberia, he compassed them in
so with Trenches, that thirst forced them to a surrender. Thus the hither-part
of Spain was reduced, nor did the further stand out long. For what could one
Legion do, after the defeat of other five? Wherefore Varro submitting of his
own accord, Gades, the straight adjoining to it, the Ocean it self, all things
complied with Caesar's prosperity. Yet fortune would do somewhat in opposition
to the absent General, on this side of Illuricum and Africa, as if of purpose
to make his prosperities the more glorious by cross accidents. For Antonius
and D^labella being commanded to guard the entrance of the Adriatic, and the
one having encamped on the Illyrian shore, the other on the Corcyrean, Pompey
being then master of the Sea all thereabouts, Octavius his Lieutenant, and Libo
compass them about with a great force of Sea-soldiers, so that want of
provisions forced Antonius to a surrender. The boats sent to their relief by
Basilius for want of better vessels were taken as in a toil by a new stratagem
of the Cilicians, on Pompey's side, by fastening rops under water. Yet the Tide
got off two of them, one, wherein were the Opitergins, running a-ground wrought
an effect worthy to be transmitted to posterity. For a party of somewhat less
then a thousand young men, held out a whole day against the force of the whole
Army, surrounding them of all sides; and finding they could not extricate
themselves by their valor, to avoid a surrender, upon the encouragement of
their Commander, Vulteius, they slew one another. In Africa also, a ballancing
of success and misfortune attended Curio, who being sent to reduce the
Province, and glorying in his defeating of Varus, was not able to stand the
sudden advance of King Juba and the Mauritanian horse. The conquered had the
convenience of flight, but shame persuaded him to die with that Army, which his
temerity had lost. But fortune desirous to quit scores, Pompey had chosen
Epirus for the seat of the war. Nor did Caesar stay long behind; for having
settled all things behind him, though it were the depth of winter, he embarked
in order to the prosecution of the war: and having encamped at Oricum, and part
of the Army being left with Antonius for want of Ships and so forced to
continue at Brundusium, he was so impatient, that to get them over, though the
winds and Sea were very high, he ventured out alone at midnight in a small
scout-vessel. His saying to the Master frightened at so great danger is extant;
What art thou afraid of? said he, thou carriest Caesar. Having brought all his
Forces together, and the two Camps being near one the other, the designs of the
Generals were different. Caesar naturally daring, and desirous to complete his
work, embattell'd, challenged, provoked the enemy, one while besieging their
Camp with a trench of sixteen miles (but what injury could a siege do those who
having the Sea open, had plenty of all things?) another while by offering to
assault Dyrrachium, though in vain (as being a place by its situation
inexpugnable) and besides with daily skirmishes, as the enemy sallied out (at
which time the extraordinary valor of Scaeva the Centurion was remarkable, in
whose Buckler were the marks of a hundred and twenty darts) and at length by
plundring the Cities associated with Pompey, desolating Oricum and Gomphi, and
other Fortresses of Thessaly. On the contrary, Pompey hung off, and delayed
what he could, hoping to frighten the enemy, compassed of all sides, with want
of provisions, and that the violence of that most daring General might abate.
But he could make no longer advantage of that prudent resolution. For the
Soldiery blamed the sloth, the Associates, the tediousness, and the Senator,
the ambition of the General. So the fates hastening his misfortune, he resolved
to fight it out in Thessaly, and there in the Philippian Fields, the fates of
the City, the Empire, nay of mankind are disputed. The people of Rome never saw
so great Forces in any one place, nor fortune, persons of so great dignity
engaged. There were on both sides above three hundred thousand men, besides the
assistance of Kings and the Senate. Never were there more apparent prodigies of
an imminent destruction: victims ready to be sacrificed getting away, Examina
in signis.
swarms of Bees pitching upon the Ensigns, darkness in the day time. Pompey
himself dreamt over night that he heard the clapping hands in his own Theater
at Rome sounding like the noise made in mourning, and in the morning, he was
seen before his t^nt (unlucky fate!) in a black garment. Caesar's Army never
was more lively and cheerful. The charge came first from Pompey,'s, the darts
from Caesar's. The Javeline of Crastinus, who gave the first onset, was
observable; for he being afterward run into the mouth with a sword, and so
afterward found among the Carcasses, showed, by the strangeness of the wound,
with what earnestness and rage he had fought. Nor was the issue of the war
less admirable. For Pompey having so great a number of Horse as that he
thought to have surrounded Caesar, he himself was surrounded. For having fought
long without advantage of eitheir side, and Pompey having commanded the Horse
out of the right wing, of a sudden, upon a signal given, the German Cohorts,
gave them so fierce a charge, that they seemed to have been foot, and these
mounted on Horses. Upon that execution of the retreating Horse ensued the
overthrow of the light-armed men. Thereupon the terror spreading farther and
farther, and the whole Forces put to the rout, the remaining destruction was
completed with little trouble. Nor did any thing contribute so much to the
overthrow, as the very greatness of the Army. Caesar did nobly that day, not
only as General but also as Soldier. His speeches were heard as he rid about;
the one bloody but witty, and powerful for gaining the day, to wit, Soldier,
strick at the face; the other discovering a certain ostentation, Spare our own
Countryman, while he himself pursued them to the utmost. Yet had Pompey been
happy in his misfortunes, if the same fortune had befallen him as had his Army.
But he survived his dignity, that, being forced from Larissa, he might with
greater disgrace make his escape on Horseback over the Thessalian Tempe; that
upon a solitary rock of Cilicia he should consider whether it were best for him
to fly into Parthia, Africa, or Ae^ypt; in fine, that being upon the Pelusian
shore, he should, by order of a most unworthy King, the Counsel of his Eunuchs,
(and, to complete his misfortune) fall by the sword of his own treacherous
servant Septimius, and die in sight of his Wife and Children. Who would not
have thought the war had been ended with Pompey? But the embers of the
Thessalian conflagration broke forth again into a much more violent flame; and
in Egypt there was war, without any of Pompey's party engaged in it. For
Ptolemey, King of Alexandria, having committed the most heinous act of any
during the civil war, and assured his Alliance with Caesar by the means of
Pompey's head, fortune desiring the manes of so great a person should be
revenged, there wanted not an occasion. Cleopatra, the King's sister, falling
at Caesar's feet, demanded a restitution of one part of the Kingdom. The young
Virgin was beautiful, and what heightened her beauty was, that, being such, she
had suffered an injury; besides he could not but have a horror for the King
himself, who had murdered Pompey, not so much out of love to Caesar, as out of
compliance with the present conjuncture, and would have treated him after the
same manner, if it had been expedient. Caesar therefore having commanded that
Cleopatra should be restored to her own, was immediately besieged in the Palace
by the same persons who had murdered Pompey, and yet with a small force stood
out against the attempts of a vast Army. And first, firing the next Houses and
Ships, that were in the Port, he avoided the darts of his importunate enemies;
then he got off of a sudden into the Peninsula of Pharos; and thence being
forced into the Sea, by a strange good fortune he swam to the Navy, that lay
hard by, leaving behind him his Soldiers coat in the water, either by chance or
out of design, that that might receive the darts and stones cast by the
enemies. Being thus received by his own Fleet and Soldiers, assaulting the
enemies of all sides, he performed the last obsequies to the manes of his
Son-in-law, by being revenged on that cowardly and perfidious Nation. For not
only Theodorus, the Kings Tutor (occasioner of the whole war) but also those
men-monsters, the Eunuchs, Photinus and Ganimedes, making their escape
differently by Sea and Land were consumed by exile and death. The King's body
was found covered with slime, known only by the gaudinesse, of a golden
breast plate. In Asia also, there broke forth now Commotions in Pontus, as if
fortune had designed the period of Mithridates's Kingdom, that as the Father
was overcome by Pompey, the Son should be by Caesar. King Pharnaces presuming
more upon our distractions then his own valor, with an offensive Army invaded
Cappadocia. But Caesar engaging him defeated him at one, and (as I may say)
that not a complete Battle: taking him like a thunderbolt, which in the same
moment, comes, strikes, and is gone. So that it was no vain assertion of
Caesar's, That the enemy was overcome ere he was seen. Thus went affairs with
foreign enemies. But he had a harder task with our Countrymen in Africa then
at Pharsalia. Into these parts had some flux of fury forced the remainders of
the wracked party; not remainders, but an entire war. The Forces were rather
scattered than defeated. Nay the misfortune of their General engaged them to a
stricter prosecution of the war, nor did the succeeding Commanders degenerate
from those who had gone before them. For Cato and Scipio sounded full enough in
stead of Pompey's name. There were brought in additional Forces by Juba King of
Mauritania, to the end Caesar's conquests might spread the farther. There is
therefore no difference between Pharsalia and Thapsus, save that in the latter
the efforts of the Caesarians, were greater and more violent, as being incensed
that the war should have increased after Pompey's death. Lastly, what never
happened before, the trumpets sounded a charge, before the General gave order
for it. The overthrow began with Juba; his Elephants not accustomed to war, and
not long before brought out of the woods, were startled at the sudden noise of
the trumpets. Whereupon the Army was put to flight, and the chief Commanders
could do no otherwise then endeavor an escape, when all were cut off nobly
before them. Scipio was got away in a Ship, but the enemies having overtaken
him, he fell upon his own sword; and one asking, where he was, he himself
returned this answer, The General is well. Juba being got into his Palace, and
having magnificently treated his companion in flight Petreius, proffered
himself to be killed by him in the midst of the entertainment. Petreius
dispatched both the King and himself; and so the half-eaten meats and the
funeral messes were mixed with the blood of a King and a Roman. Cato was not in
the fight, but having encamped at Bagrada, kept Vtica, as another main Fort of
Africa. But hearing of the defeat of his party, without any further delay (as
became a Wiseman) he cheerfully hastened his own death. For having dismissed
his Son and Companions with embraces, he went to bed, and after he had, by a
light, read a while in Plato's Treatise, concerning the Immortality of the
Soul, he took a little rest: then about the first watch, having drawn his
sword, he thrust it twice into his uncovered breast. After which the Physicians
would needs by violence trouble the man with plasters. He bore with them till
they were gone, but then opened the wounds afresh, and there came forth such
abundance of blood, that his dying hands were congealed to the place. New
Armies, and parties arose, as if there yet had been no fighting, and Spain
exceeded Africa, as much as Africa had done ^h^ss^ly and wha^ gave a great
advantage to the parties, was, that there were two Brothers Generals, and
instead of one Pompey, there were two. Never was there a more cruel, and withal
a more doubtful encounter. The first engagement happened between Varus and
Didius, the Lieutenants of the several parties, at the very entrance into the
Ocean. But the opposition they both met with from the Sea was sorer than that
of the several Fleets. For as if the Ocean would chastise the fury of enraged
Country men, both Fleets were wracked. What horror must there be, when at the
same time there was a confused conflict between the Fluctus, ^raecellae, viri,
naves, armamen^a.
waves, the storm, Men, Ships, and Arms? Add to this the dreadful situation
of the place it self, the shores on the one side of Spain, on the other, of
Mauritania, as it were closing, the Mediterranean Sea and the Ocean joining
together, and Hercules Pillars hanging over; and with this all the extremities
of a fight and tempest. Afterward, both sides fell to the besieging of Cities,
which, between both, miserably smarted for their friendship with the Romans.
The last of all the engagements was at Munda. Here, not answerably to former
prosperity, there was so doubtful and lamentable a fight, as if Fortune seemed
to be in suspense what to do. Nay Caesar himself seemed dejected before the
Army, not as he was wont to be, either out of a regard of humane frailty, or a
mistrust of a too long continued prosperity, or fearing Pompey's fate, since he
began to be what Pompey was. But in the midst of the fight, there happened an
accident which no man could remember he had heard before, when the two Armies
were upon equal terms, and busied in a mutual execution, in the greatest heat
of the work, there was of a sudden a deep silence on both sides, as if it had
been by consent. This was the general conceit of it. At last happened a
misfortune which Caesar had not seen before, the choice band of Veterans gave
ground. And though that they had not fled, yet was their resistance to be
attributed rather to a certain shame, than valor. Whereupon Caesar, lighting
off his Horse, runs like a distracted person to the front of the Battle. There
he stayed such as were shrinking, encouraged them, and finally by his eyes,
hands, and voice assures the whole body. It is reported that in that
disturbance, he was thinking of killing himself, and that it was apparent in
his countenance, he would have hastened his own death, if five Cohorts of the
enemies, crossing the Battle, being sent by Labienus, to reinforce the Pompeian
Camp then in some danger, had not seemed as if they fled. Which Caesar either
really believed, or cunningly laying hold upon that occasion, and charging them
as a flying party, he both heightened the courage of his own people, and gave
the enemy an overthrow. For the Caesarians, imagining themselves Conquerors,
pursue the more eagerly; on the other side, the Pompeyans, supposing their
party ran away, began to fly. How great the slaughter of the enemies was, and
how great the fury and animosity of the victorious, may be guessed hence. When
such as had escaped out of the fight, had retreated to Munda, and Caesar had
given order that the vanquished should immediately be besieged, there was a
rampire made of the carcasses brought together which were fastened and kept in
with spears and Javelins; a spectacle would have been abominable, even amongst
Barbarians. But Pompey's Sons despairing of the victory, Cneus escaping out of
the fight, wounded in the leg, and going toward the deserts and unfrequented
places, was overtaken at the Town of Lauro by Cesennius, who there killed him
fighting, so that he had not as yet despaired. In the mean time fortune kept
Sextus undiscovered in Celtiberia, and reserved him for other wars after
Caesar's time. Caesar returns victor into his Country. His first triumph over
Gaul was brought in by a representation of the Rhine and the Rhone, and the
captive Ocean in gold. The second, the Egyptian Laurel. In that was
represented the Nile, Arsinoe, and the Pharus on fire. The third triumphal
Chariot, brought in Pharnaces and Pontus. The fourth Juba and the Mauritanians,
and exposed Spain twice subdued. Pharsalia, and Thapsus and Munda, appeared not
amongst his triumphs. And how many greater victories had he obtained, for which
he triumphed not! Here at last, arms were laid down, the rest of the peace was
without bloodshed, and Caesar's clemency made amends for the cruelties of the
war. No man was put to death by his command but Afranius, ('it was enough that he
had been pardoned once) and Faustus Sylla, (he had learnt to fear his
Sons-in-law) and the Daughter of Pompey with her Cousin-germans descended from
Sylla. This was to secure his posterity. His Citizens, not ungrateful, bestow
all honors upon this one Prince; his Images are set up in the Temples, he has
in the Theater a Crown surrounded with rays; a Chair of State in the Senate; a
Terret upon his House top, and is assigned a month in the Heavens, and withal
this is entitled, Father of his Country, and perpetual Dictator; lastly, it is
a question whether with his consent, regal ornaments were proffered him before
the Rostra by the Consul Antonius: all which honors were done him, and seemed
as the garlands set about a Victim designed to die. For the clemency of this
Prince was envied, and the great power he had to confer benefits was
insupportable to free persons. Nor did they delay it any longer; but Brutus and
Cassius, and others of the Senators conspired the Prince's death. How
inevitable is the blow of fate! The conspiracy was known to many; nay a paper,
discovering it, was presented that very day to Caesar himself, and of a hundred
victims sacrificed, not one propitious. Yet he went to the Senate thinking on
the Parthian expedition. There the Senate set upon him sitting in his Chair of
State, and laid him on the ground with three and twenty wounds. So he who had
filled the world with the blood of his Citizens, at length filled the Senate
with his own.

CHAP. III.
Sextus Pompeius demands his Father's estate, Octavius resolves to revenge
Caesar's death; Mark Antony a slave to Cleopatra.

CAesar and Pompey being slain, the people of Rome seemed to have returned to
the state of their former liberty, and had really done so, if Pompey had not
left children, and Caesar, an heir, or, what was more pernicious than either,
if Antonius, heretofore Colleague, and since a competitor of Caesar's power,
the firebrand and disturber of the ensuing age, had not survived them. For
while Sextus demands what had been his Father's, his fear spreads over all
Seas; while Octavius revenges his Fathers death, Thessaly must into arms again:
while Antonius, a person of a fickle disposition, disdains that Octavius should
be Caesar's successor, or for the love of Cleopatra would basely have
condescended to accept the title of a King; the people of Rome could not
otherwise have been safe, without returning to servitude. In so great a
disturbance we had this to rejoice at, that the Sovereign authority was
devolved to Octavius Caesar Augustus, who by his prudence and conduct reduced
to order the body of the Empire then so shaken and disturbed on all sides, that
no doubt it could never have been reunited, had it not submitted to the
authority of one Governor, as unto one and the same soul and mind. Marcus
Antonius and Publius Dolabella being Consuls; fortune transferring the Roman
Empire to the Cesars, there happened diverse commotions in the City. And as it
comes to pass in the annual revolution of the Heavens, that the motion of the
Stars cause Thunder, and discover their periods by the weather: so in the
change of the Roman Government, that is, that of mankind, the body of the
Empire in a manner shook, and was distracted with all the misfortunes
consequent to civil insurrections and wars, as well by Sea as Land.

CHAP. IV.
The quarrel between Octavius Caesar and Marcus Antonius; the siege of Mutina
raised.

THe first occasion of the civil Commotions was Caesar's Will, whose second
heir Antonius, enraged that Octavius was preferred before him, undertook an
irreconcilable war against the adoption of that most forward young man. For
seeing him not fully eighteen years of age, apt to be wrought upon, and receive
affronts, he derogated from Caesar's dignity by calumnies, and purloyn'd his
inheritance, and ceased not to persecute him with opprobrious speeches, and by
all imaginable artifices to oppose his adoption into the Julian Family. Nay at
last to oppress the young man, he broke forth into open hostility, and having
raised an Army in that part of Gaul on this side the Alps, besieged Decimus
Brutus, who opposed his designs. Octavius Caesar, favored upon the account of
his age and the injury done, him as also the Majestical title he had assumed,
got together the Veterane Bands, and though but a private person, (who would
credit it?) engages against a Consul, relieves Brutus besieged at Mutina, and
forces Antonius out of his Camp. Besides he behaved himself ver^ gallantly upon
that occasion; for being all bloody and wounded, he brought back upon his own
shoulders the Eagled Ensign, which had been delivered to him by the dying
bearer of it.

CHAP. V.
The confederacy between Octavius, M. Antonius and Lepidus; the proscriptions
and great cruelties exercised at Rome.

AS if Antonius had not been a sufficient obstructer of peace, and burden to
the Commonwealth, Lepidus, as an additional fire, must needs join with him; so
that to secure himself against two Armies, it was of necessity that Caesar
entered into that bloody association. These conflagrations proceeded from
different designs. Lepidus's thoughts were wholly bent upon wealth, which he
hoped to acquire by the disturbance of the Commonwealth; Antonius's upon his
being revenged of those who had declared him an enemy; and Caesar minded his
unrevenged Father, and his Manes unappeased by the survivance of Cassius and
Brutus. Upon this association there is a peace concluded between the three
Generals; they shake hands between Perusia and Bononia, and the Armies salute
each other, at the place where the two Rivers meet. So they enter upon the
Triumvirate against all right. The Commonwealth being oppressed by an armed
force, the Syllanian proscription is revived, the fury whereof included no
less than one hundred and forty Senators; shameful, cruel, and miserable were
the ends of those who fled into all parts of the world. For whom who can do
less, considering the heynousnesse of the thing, than condole? When Antonius,
with Caesar's consent, proscribed his Uncle, L. Caesar, and Lepidus did the
like with his own Brother L. Paulus, At Rome, to expose the heads of those who
had been killed, on the Rostra, was a thing had been usually done. But the City
could not forbear tears, when they saw the head of Cicero exposed at that very
place; and they thronged no less to see that spectacle, than they had sometime
done to hear him there. These impieties proceeded from Antonius and Lepidus.
Caesar contented himself with the murderers of his Father; the slaughters of
whom might be accounted just enough, had they not reached so great a number of
persons.

CHAP. VI.
Brutus and Cassius charged by Octavius and Antonius; the memorable fight in
Thessaly attended by prodigies; the death of Brutus and Cassius.

BRutus and Cassius imagined to themselves that they had put Caesar out of the
Government as King Tarquin had been: but that liberty which they thought to
have restored they lost by that very parricide. Being therefore afraid, after
they had committed the murder of Caesar's Veteranes, they fled out of the
Senate into the Capitol. The Soldiers had a desire to be revenged, but they
wanted a Commander. When therefore it was apparent what destruction hung over
the Commonwealth, all thoughts of revenge were laid aside, upon an act of
oblivion put out by the Consul. However to be out of the eye of public grief,
Brutus and Cassius went into Syria and Macedonia, the Provinces which had been
bestowed on them, by that Caesar, whom they had murdered. So Caesar's revenge
was rather put off for a time, than quit smothered. The Commonwealth therefore
being settled rather as it could, than as it ought, upon the Triumviri, and
Lepidus left for the defense of the City, Caesar and Antonius engage in a war
against Brutus and Cassius. They having got very great forces together, pitched
upon the same scene which had been fatal to Cneus Pompeius; nor wanted there at
this time the manifest presages of a decreed destruction: for those birds which
are wont to feed on dead carcasses were already seen flying about their Camp. A
Negro meeting them as they were going to engage, was an apparent sign of a
dismal event. And Brutus himself being retired after night, and a light brought
him according to his custom, a dreadful apparition stood before him, which
being by him asked what it was? replied, Thy evil Genius. This said, it
vanish'^ leaving him amazed. In Caesar's Camp, all the presages, the Birds, and
the Victims, promised prosperity: but nothing more remarkable, than that
Caesar's Physician was admonished in a dream, that Caesar should depart out of
his own Camp, which were in danger to be taken, as it afterward happened. For
the Armies being engaged, when they had fought some time with equal eagerness,
and though the chief Commanders were not then present, one by reason of
sickness, the other through fear and cowardice, the invincible fortune both of
the person revenging and him whom he revenged, declared which was to be the
victorious side. At first the danger was doubtful and equal on both sides, as
the event of the battle made appear; on the one side Caesar's Camp was taken,
on the other, Cassius's. But how far more prevalent is fortune then virtue? and
how true is that which Brutus said at his death, That virtue was but a name, no
real thing? The victory in this battle proceeded from a mistake. Cassius
observing a wing of his Army to give ground, and seeing his Horse retreating in
full speed, after they had taken Caesar's Camp, upon an imagination that they
were upon the rout, got to a Hillock, where the dust and noise, and the
approaching night, not permitting him to see what was done, and the scout he
had sent, to bring him an account, coming later than he expected, looking on
his party as lost, got one that was near him to strike off his head- Brutus
having lost all courage in the loss of Cassius, that he might keep his promise
with him (for so they had agreed to be equal survivors of the war) got one of
his companions to run him through the body. Who cannot but admire, that these
wise persons would not dispatch themselves with their own hands? unless it may
be out of this persuasion, that they might defile them; but that, in the
surrender of their most sacred and pious souls, the directions should be
theirs, and the crime of the execution another's.

CHAP. VII.
A commotion raised by M. Antonius, who shut up in Perusia by Octavius Caesar,
is forced to surrender it.

ANother war was occasioned by the distribution of the Lands which Caesar
assigned the Veteranes, as a reward for their service. Antonius, a person, upon
all other occasions, of a lewd disposition, was now egged on by his wife
Fulvia, who with a sword by her side served in the wars as a man. Wherefore
animating those Husbandmen, who had been forced out of their Lands, she
occasioned another war. In this case, Antonius is set upon by Caesar, not upon
any private account, but as one adjudg'd an enemy by the suffrages of the whole
Senate; and being shut up by him within the Walls of Perusia, he forced him to
the extremities of a surrender, after a famine, wherein even the filthiest
things were fed upon.

CHAP. VIII.
Young Pompey possesses himself of Sicily and Sardinia; his flight and shameful
death.

CAesar's murderers being taken out of the waY, there remained only the House
of Pompey. One of the young men died in Spain, the other had escaped by flight,
and rallying the remainders of an unfortunate war, and put Slaves into arms,
was possessed of Sicily and Sardinia. He had also a Navy at Sea, o how
different from his Father! for he had destroyed the Cilicians, but this man had
pirates under his command. With these so great preparations of war was the
young man quite overthrown in the Sicilian Sea, and he had carried along with
him into the other world the reputation of a great Captain, if he had attempted
nothing afterward; but that it argues a noble mind, ever to be in hope. Being
defeated, he fled, and set sail for Asia, where he must fall into the hands of
his enemies, and chains, and what is most insupportable to gallant men, be
adjudg'd, at the discretion of his enemies, to die by the hand of an
Executioner. There was not a more deplorable flight since that of Xerxes. For
he who ere while had three hundred and forty Ships under his command, fled
only with six or seven, having put out the light at the Admiral's stern, and
cast his rings into the Sea, trembling, and looking back, yet fearing nothing
less then that he should perish. See the remainder of this Chapter at the
beginning of the Tenth, as D.C. would have it placed.

CHAP. IX.
The incursions of the Parthians under the Conduct of young Pacorus; They are
defeated by the prudence of Ventidius; Pacorus's death.

THe Parthians, upon the defeat of Crassus, had reassumed greater courage, and
gladly received the intelligence of civil commotions among the Romans: so that
upon the first opportunity, they stuck not to break out, being withal animated
thereto by Labienus, who, sent thither by Cassius and Brutus, (how implacable
is mischief!) had importuned our enemies to their assistance, and they, under
the conduct of Pacorus their young Prince, dismantle all the garrisons of
Marcus Antonius. Saxa, Lieutenant to Antonius, to avoid falling into their
power, was obliged to his own sword. At length Syria falling off from us, the
mischief had spread still further, the enemies, under pretense of assisting
Brutus, conquering for themselves, if Ventidius, another Lieutenant of
Antonius, had not, with incredible prosperity, defeated the Forces of Labienus,
and Pacorus himself, and all the Parthian Cavalry, all along the Champian
between the Rivers Orontus and Euphrates. There fell twenty thousand men. Nor
was the work effected without the prudence of Ventidius, who pretending fear,
suffered the enemies to come up so close to his Camp, that being within reach
of our darts, they could make no advantage of their arrows. The King was slain
fighting valiantly; and his head being carried about to the Cities which had
revolted, Syria became ours again without any war. So by the death of Pacorus
we were even for the overthrow given to Crassus.

CHAP. X.
The Alliance between the Romans and the Parthians broken through the vanity of
Marcus Antonius; The inconveniences endured by the Roman Army, and the generous
resolution of the Soldiery; the insolence and brutality of Antonius.

THough in Cassius and Brutus Caesar had smothered the factions, and in Pompey
taken off the very name of them, yet had he not proceeded so far as to settle a
firm peace, in as much as the shelf, the knot, and obstacle of public
security, Antonius was still alive. Nor did he want vices to bring him to his
ruin; nay having out of ambition and luxury made trial of all things, he
delivered in the first place his enemies, then his fellow-Citizens, and at
length the age he lived in, from the terror he gave them, [by procuring his
own death.] The Parthians and Romans having made trial of each other, and
Crassus on the one side, and Pacorus on the other being testimonies of their
valor, there was a league made between them with equal reverence and absolute
friendship, and that by Antonius himself. But the excessive vanity of the man,
while out of a lust to enlarge his titles, he was desirous to have the Araxes
and the Euphrates written under his Images, made him leave Syria of a sudden,
and, without any cause, or advice, or so much as any imaginary pretense of war,
(as if it had been the part of a great Captain to steal upon his enemies) make
an unexpected incursion among the Parthians. That Nation, besides the
confidence they repose in their peculiar Arms, [is subtle] and pretends fear,
and flight, cross the Fields. Antonius, as if already victorious, immediately
pursues them, when of a sudden, an unexpected, yet no great party of the
enemies, fell upon our men wearied with marching, and in the evening, as it had
been a shower, and shooting their arrows of all sides, two Legions were in a
manner covered therewith. Yet was not this any thing in comparison of the
overthrow which was to have been the next day, if, through the clemency of the
Gods, one who had survived the defeat of Crassus, riding about the Camp in a
Parthian habit, after he had gained credit with the Commanders, acquainted them
with what was to happen; to wit, that the King himself withal his Forces was
coming upon them, that they should retreat, and get into the Mountains; and
that so doing they should not happily be to seek an enemy. And so it happened
that a smaller force of the enemies pursued them, then was designed to do it.
Yet they came on, and the remainder of our Forces had been destroyed, had it
not been, that, when the Parthian arrows fell like hail upon, the Soldiers
luckily fell on their knees, and lifting their Bucklers over their heads seemed
as if they were slain. Then the Parthians gave over shooting with the bows.
Whereupon the Romans rising up, the thing was thought so miraculous, that one
of the Barbarians said, Go and do well, oh ye Romans; justly does Fame speak
you the Conquerours of Nations, who are able to endure the darts of the
Parthians. We suffered afterward as much through want of water, as we had done
by the enemies. First the Region it self was oppressed with drought; then to
some of us the water of the River Salmacis proved more destructive; and lastly,
being drunk excessively, by such as were unhealthy, even sweet waters proved
hurtful to us. Afterward, the sultrinesse of Armenia, and the snows of
Cappadocia, and the sudden change of air from one to the other, were a kind of
pestilence: So, hardly a third part of sixteen Legions being left, Antonius,
that gallant General, after his money was cut to pieces with chizzels [by the
mutining Soldiery] and he himself had in the interval begged death at the hands
of his Gladiator, fled at length into Syria, where, out of an incredible
stupidity, he became more insolent than before, as if he who had made his
escape, had gained the victory.

CHAP. XI.
Antonius besotted with the love of Cleopatra, promises her the Roman Empire;
the preparations for the war; a Naval engagement between Octavius and Antonius,
the death of him, and Cleopatra.

LUst and Luxury put an end to Antonius's fury, though ambition could not. For
after the expedition against the Parthians, detesting war and giving himself
over to sloth, he fell in love with Cleopatra, and as if he had managed things
excellently well, he enjoyed himself in the embraces of a Princess. This
Egyptian woman, desires of the besotted General for the reward of her lust, no
less then the Roman Empire. And Antonius promised it her, as if the Romans
were more easily overcome than the Parthians. He therefore began to plot
Sovereignty, not covertly, but, having forgot his Country, Name, Habit, and
Dignity, he absolutely degenerated into that monster, (a tyrant) not only in
his thoughts, but also in his inclinations and attire. He walked with a golden
staff in his hand, had a Cimitar by his side, was clad in a purple garment,
beset with large Pearls; nay he wanted not a Diadem, that he might enjoy a
Queen as a King. Upon the first intelligence of these new commotions, Caesar
crossed the Sea at Brundusium, to prevent the approaching war; and having
encamped in Epirus, he surrounded the Island Leucades, and the Mount Leucates,
and the points of the Ambracian Bay with a powerful Fleet. We had above four
hundred Ships, the enemies about two hundred, but their Bulk made up their
number. For they had from six to nine Banks of Oars, besides being raised up
high with turrets and decks, like Castles and fortified Cities, they made the
Sea groan, and put the winds out of breath to carry them; and that excessive
Bulk proved the occasion of their destruction. Caesar's Ships had from three to
six banks of Oars, and none beyond: so that they were in readiness to take all
advantages, whether to charge, recharge, or turn about; and diverse of them at
the same assaulting those heavy and unweildy slugges, with their beaks, as also
with darts, and fire cast into them, they dispersed them as they pleased
themselves. Nor did the greatness of the enemies Forces appear in any thing so
much as after the victory. For that prodigious Fleet having been wracked in the
engagement, was scattered all over the Sea, became the spoil of the Arabians,
the Sabaeans, and a thousand other Nations of Asia, and the Waves continually
stirred by the Winds, cast up Purple and Gold upon the shores. The Queen,
beginning the flight, made to Sea with her Ship all gilt at the stern, and
purple sails, and soon after Antonius followed; but Caesar was not far behind
him. So that neither their designed escape into the Ocean, nor the two points
of Egypt, Paretonium and Pelusium, which they had fortified with Garrisons,
stood them in any stead, in as much as they were in a manner within his reach.
Antonius killed himself first. The Queen falling at Caesar's feet, endeavored
to dazzle his sight; but in vain, for her beauty prevayled not upon that
Prince's chastity. Her suit was not for her life, which was proffered her, but
to obtain part of the Kingdom. Which when she was out of all hope to obtain,
and perceived she was reserved for a triumph, taking advantage of the
negligence of her guard, she fled into the Mausoleum (so they call the
Sepulchers of their Kings.) And there having put on her most sumptuous
garments, as she was wont, and seated her self close to her Antonius, in a
Throne filled with rich perfumes, she applied Serpents to her veins, and died
as it were in a slumber.

CHAP. XII.
A war raised by the Germans in Augustus's time; his exploits in the Northern
Provinces; the valor and conduct of Drusus, who is surnamed Germanicus; his
death; Quintilius surpised by the Germans; his defeat. A war in Armenia; the
attempt of a Barbarian on the person of Caius; Augustus's conquests in Spain; a
general Peace; the most remote Nations submit to the Roman Empire; the
Parthians return the Ensigns taken from Crassus; Octavius Caesar shuts Janus-
Temple; He is named Father of the Country and Augustus.

HEre ended the civil wars, what followed were against foreign Nations, who,
du^ing the Empire's conflict with his own mise^ies, began to stir in diverse
parts of the world. For Peace was a new thing, and the necks of those proud and
insolent Nations being not accustomed to the curb of bondage, they slipped out
of the yoke not long before imposed upon them. That part of the world which is
toward the North, the Inhabitants whereof are the Noricians, the Illyrians,
Pannonians, Dalmatians, Mysians, Thracians, and Dacians, Sarmatians and
Germans, was the most violent. The Noricians were encouraged by the Alps and
snows, thinking the war could not get over them. But Augustus quieted all those
parts, to wit, the Brenni, the Senones, and the Vindelici by his Step-Son
Claudius Drusus. How strangely barbarous these Nations were, may be easily seen
by their women, who having spent their weapons, flung their grovelling infants
at our Soldiers races. The Illyrians also live under the Alps, and guard the
lower Valleys and certain passages thereof, where they are secured by impetuous
torrents. Caesar himself engaged against these, and ordered a Bridge to be made
[to get over into their Province.] Being here put to a stand by waters and the
enemy, he snatched the Buckler out of the hand of a Soldier who seemed loath to
get up on the Bridge, and marched in the front of the Forces, when Oum lubricus
multitudine pons succidisset.
the untrusty Bridge shrinking down by reason of its being o'repressed with
multitude, he was hurt in the hands and legs, yet so as that deriving Majesty
from the danger, and the blood he had lost rendering him the more amiable, he
had the pursuit of the retreating enemy. The Pannonians are compassed by two
Forests and three Rivers, Dravus, Savus and Ister. These having wasted their
neighboring Countries, retreated within the banks of their Rivers. He sent
Vibius to reduce them; and they were destroyed upon the two Rivers: the Arms of
the conquered were not burnt, according to the custom, but were taken and
thrown into the Rivers, to assure the rest, who stood out, of our victory. The
Dalmatians live for the most part in woods, and so ly most conveniently for
Robberies. Marcius, having fired the City Delminium, had already given these a
great blow. Afterward Asinius Pollio had punished them with the loss of their
Flocks, Arms, and Fields. But Augustus recommends the subduing of them to
Vibius, who forced those Savages to dig the Earth and fetch pure gold out of
its veins, which that most covetous Nation is sufficiently inclined to do it
self, as if they seemed to keep it for their own use. It Is a horrid thing to
relate how savage and inhumane the Mysians are, nay how they exceed the
barbarism of other Barbarians. One of their Commanders coming up to our Army,
desired silence, and said, Who are you? Answer was made, Romans, Masters of
Nations. Whereto they reply, It shall be so, if you overcome us. Marcus Crassus
took it for a good omen. Whereupon the Mysians offering up a Horse before the
Army, made a vow, That they would sacrifice to their Gods the entrails of such
Captains as they killed of ours, and afterward eat them. I am apt to believe
the Gods heard them: They could hardly endure the sound of the Trumpets. The
Barbarians were not a little startled at an action of the Centurion Domitius, a
person guilty of an extravagance barbarous enough, yet prevalent upon people
like himself, for having fastened a firebrand to his Helmet, the agitation of
his body caused such a flame, as if his head had been on fire. Before these,
the most mighty people of the Thracians had revolted. These Barbarians had
learnt the custom of carrying military Ensigns, understood discipline, and the
use of the Roman Arms. But being subdued by Piso, they showed their madness
even in their captivity, when, attempting to bite off their chains, they
punished their own brutality. The Dacians live in the Mountains. Under the
command of their King Cotiso, when the Dannow is frozen over, they are wont to
make incursions, and destroy the bordering Countries. Caesar Augustus thought
it the best course, that a Nation so hard to come at should be removed. To that
end, he sent Lentulus, who forced them beyond the further side of the River,
and left Garision on this side. If Dacia were not then conquered, it was at
least removed to a great distance from us. The Sarmatians ride up and down
spacious Champians; Caesar thought it enough, by the same Lentulus, to keep
these from crossing the Dannow, as having nothing but snows, and here and there
some woods. The barbarism is so great among them, that they know not what peace
is. I wish Caesar had not thought it so glorious a design to conquer Germany.
It was lost with more shame than it was subdued with honor; but in regard he
knew that his Father Caesar had twice caused Bridges to be made over the Rhine,
for the prosecution of that war, he was desirous, for his honor, to reduce it
into a Province: and it had been done, if the Barbarians could as well have
born with our vices, as submitted to our commands. Drusus being sent into this
Province first subdued the Vs^petes, then overran the Tenctheri, and the
Catti. For of the richest spoils of the Marcomanni, he made up a kind of mount
after the manner of a Trophey. Afterward ^e in like manner set upon those most
valiant Nations, the Cherusci, the Suevi, and the Sicam^tians, who having burnt
twenty of our Cen^urions, undertook the war as it were upon that engagement,
and that with so great a ^onfidence of the victory, that by agreement they
divided the prey beforehand. The Cherusci were to have the Horses, the
Suevians the Gold and Silver, and the Sycambrians, the prisoners. But all
happened quite contrary. For Drusus, being Conqueror, made a prey of their
Horses, their Cattle, their Gold-chains and themselves, and sold them. Besides
for the security of the Provinces he appointed garrisons and guards at all
places. All along the River Meuse, the Elbe, the Visurgis, and on the banks of
the Rhine, he caused to be erected above fifty Forts. At Bonna and Gelduba he
caused Bridges to be built, and secured them with Ships. He made his way
through the Hercynian Forest, till that time unpassable and inaccessible. In
fine, there was so great a peace in Germany, that the men seemed changed, the
soil different from what it was, and the air milder and calmer than it was wont
to be. At length that young Prince of incomparable valor dying there, the
Senate gave him a surname from the Province, (an honor it had never done any
other) not out of flattery, but in acknowledgement of his merit. But it is more
difficult to keep a Province than to make one: they are subdued by Arms, they
are kept by Justice. That joy was accordingly but short: the Germans, while
Drusus was General, were rather overcome than absolutely brought under
subjection, and had rather complied with our manners, than submitted to our
Arms. After his death they began to hate Varus as well upon the account of his
dissolutions and pride, as his c^uelty. Nay he apappointed them an assembly,
and would have administered Justice to them in the midst of his Camp, as if
either the Lictors rods, or the voice of the Crier could give a check to the
violence of the Barbarians. But they who were long before Moererent.
troubled to find their swords grown rusty, and their Horses foggy for want of
exercise, thinking our habits and Laws more insupportable than our Arms, break
forth into open hostility, under the conduct of Arm^nius. When in the mean time
Varus was so confident upon the peace, as not to be moved even by a previous
discovery of the conspiracy by Segestes, one of their Princes. Whereupon they
fell upon him unprovided and fearing no such thing, nay (o strange security!)
while he was citing them to appear at his Tribunal, they set upon him of all
sides, ^urprise his Camp, and three Legions are destroyed. Varus seeing all
lost, took the same ^ate and resolution, as Paulus had done after ^he fight at
Cannae. Never was there any thing more bloody than the slaughter they made
through the Woods and Marches, nothing more intolerable than the insulting of
the Barbarians, especially upon the Advocats, putting out the eyes of some, and
cutting off the hands of others. One of them had his mouth sowed up, after they
had before cut out his tongue, which one of the Barbarians holding in his
hands, said, O viper, give over hissing at length. Nay they dug up the
Consul's body, which the Soldiers had out of piety put under ground. The
Barbarians have yet in their possession the Ensigns and Eagles of two Legions;
the third was saved by the Ensign-bearer, who, to prevent its coming into the
enemies hands, took it off, and hid it within the folds of his belt, and so
escaped by skulking in that bloody march. The effect of this overthrow was,
that the Empire, which had not stopped at the Ocean, met with a check on the
banks of the Rhine. Thus went things northward. In the Southern parts, there
were rather tumults than wars. The Musulanians, and the Getulians, bordering
upon the Syrtes, were reduced by Cossus, whence he had the surname Getulicus.
Nay the Victory spread farther; Caesar ordered the Marmarides and the
Garamantes to be subdued by Furnius. He also might have returned with the
surname Marmaricus; but his modesty set not so high a value on his Victory. In
the East there was more to do with the Armenians; thither Caesar sent one of
his Nephews. They were both short-lived, but one died ere he had gained any
honor. For Lucius died of a disease at Massilia; Cajus, in Lycia, of a wound,
while he was employed about the reduction of Armenia then ready to revolt to
the Parthians. Pompey having vanquished King Tigranes had brought the Armenians
to this point of bondage, as to receive Governors from us. That right of ours
being interrupted was by this Caius reasserted, after a bloody though short
engagement. For Domnes, whom the King had made Governor of Artaxata, pretending
he would betray his Master, runs him with his Sword into the Temples while he
was earnestly perusing a scroll, which he himself had presented to him,
containing the accounts of the Treasures. But the Barbarian pursued on all
sides by the incensed Army was destroyed by a sword and a fire, into which,
being wounded, he cast himself, and so made some satisfaction to Caesar not yet
dead of his wound. In the West, all Spain was quiet, save only that part of it
which is adjacent to the rocks of the Pyrenean Mountains, and lies upon the
hither Ocean. Here were two most valiant Nations, the Cantabrians and the
Asturians, who ac^nowledg'd not jurisdiction of the Empire. The Cantabrians
were the first, the more insolent, and more obstinate in the revolt; nay not
content to maintain their own liberty, they attempted to rule over their
neighbors, and harrassed the Vaccaeans, the Curgonians, and the Autrigonians
with their frequent incursions. Against these therefore, as such as were
reported to be the most daring, Caesar did not put the expedition upon another,
but went in person. Being come to Segisama, he encamped; afterward dividing
his Army, he compassed the whole Country of Cantabria, and subdued that savage
Nation, like wild beasts taken in a toil. Nor had they any quiet at Sea, where
our Navy charged the enemies in the rear. The first engagement with the
Cantabrians was, under the Walls of Vellica. Thence they fled to the most
steepy Mountain Vindius, where they thought the Ocean would ascend sooner than
the Roman Armies. Thirdly, the City Arracillum made great resistance; but at
last was taken, by the Siege of the Edulian Mountain compassed with a trench of
fifteen miles, by which means the Romans falling on of all sides, and the
Barbarians being reduced to the utmost extremities, they anticipated their own
deaths, some by fire, some by the sword, in the midst of their banquets, and
some by poison, which is there commonly extracted out of the Yew-trees, and so
the greater part of them prevented that captivity, which they saw coming upon
them. Caesar wintring at Tarracon, a Sea-Town, received an account of these
things done by Antistius, Furnius, and Agrippa, his Lieutenants. Being come to
the Army he forced some out of the Mountains, engaged others by Hostages, and
according to martial Law exposed some to sale as slaves. The Senate thought the
expedition worthy a Laurel, worthy a triumphal Chariot. But Caesar was already
so great, as to slight Triumphs. The Asturians having about the same time got a
vast Army together were come down out of their Mountains; Nec temere sumptus,
ut Barbari, impetus.
nor was their attempt inconsiderate, as is ordinary with Barbarians; but
having encamped at the River Astura, they divided their Forces into three
bodies, and designed to set upon the three Camps of the Romans at the same
time. It had been a hazardous and a bloody bout, ( Et uticnam mutua clade
certamen.
I wish the loss on both sides had been but equal) we having to do with people
so valiant, and coming upon us so unexpectedly, and with so much deliberation,
if they had not been betrayed by the Brigaecini, by whom Carisius being
forewarned came with the Army and frustrated their designs. Yet was not that
done without much bloodshed. The remainders of that most valiant defeated Army
escaped to the City Lancia, where there was so sharp an encounter, that the
Soldiry desiring that the City, being taken, might be fired, the General with
much ado prevayl'd with them, That it should be a monument of the Roman victory
rather as it stood, than burnt. Here Augustus put a period to his warlike
exploits, and this was the last rebellion of Spain. From that time there was
constant fidelity and a continual peace, which proceeded partly from the
inclinations of the Inhabitants then more bent thereto, and partly from
Caesar's prudence, who fearing the confidence they derived from their
Mountainous habitations, into which they retreated, commanded them thence
forward to inhabit in the plains, where his Camp was. Ingentis ecce cousilii
^llud. Observa^i caepit natuae, etc.
Behold, that indeed was an act of great policy. Men began to make observations
into the nature of the Country, which was full of Goldmines, and well stored
with borax and vermilion, and other colors. He therefore commanded the ground
to be cultivated. So the Asturians began to understand the wealth they had
lying under ground, while they dug it out for others. All Nations to the
West and South being quieted, as also to the North (only within the Rhine and
the Dannow) and in like manner to the East, between Tigris.
Tigris and Euphrates, those others also which were not subject to the Empire,
were yet sensible of its greatness, and looked on the Roman people as
Conquerors of the world. For even the Scy^hians and Sarmatians sent their
Ambassadors to us, desiring our friendship. The Seres also, and the Indians,
who live under the very Sun, came with gems and precious stones, and bringing
also Elephants among their presents, complained of nothing so much as the
greatness of their journey, which they completed in four years; and yet the
very color of the men argued their coming from under another Sun. The
Parthians also, as if it repented them of the Victory, of their own accord,
returned the Ensigns at the overthrow given to Crassus. So was all mankind
reduced to a firm and uninterrupted peace, either by conquest or compact. And
Caesar Augustus, in the seven hundredth year from the first building of the
City, presumed to shut the Temple of double-fac'd Janus, which had been shut
but twice before him, under King Numa, and after the first reduction of
Carthage. Thence forward, giving his thoughts to peace, he reformed an age bent
to all enormities, and inclining to dissolution, by many prudent and severe
edicts. For these so many transcendent Actions, he was denominated Perpetual
Dictator and Father of the Country. It was debated in the Senate, whether he
should be called Romulus because he had established the Empire. But the name of
AUGUSTUS was thought more sacred and more venerable, that, even while he lives
on Earth, he might, in name and title, be ranked among the Gods.

A TABLE Of the several CHAPTERS contained in the whole Book.
The first Book,
CHAP. I. THe Birth of Romulus first King of the Romans, the actions of his
youth, the foundation of Rome, the death of his Brother Remus, the
establishment of a Sanctuary in Rome, the surprizal of the Sabine* Virgin,
Romulus his death, and translation among the Gods. Page 1. CHAP. II. Numa
Pompilius succeeds Romulus; his Piety, his setlement of Religious affairs. 5
CHAP. III. Tullus Hostilius succeeds Numa. He instructs the Romans about
military engagements; declares a war against the people of Alba; The famous
engagement between the three Horatii and the three Curiatii; The treachery of
the Latins in the War against the Fidenates. 6 CHAP. IV. Ancus Martius, Numa's
Grandson is advanced to the Throne, after Tullus Hostilius, he builds the
Walls of Rome, and a Bridge over the Tiber, and sends a Colony to Hostia. page
8 CHAP. V. Tarquinius Priscus, a foreigner, is for his virtue, advanced to
Royalty; heightens the glory of the Senate; would have increased the order of
Knights, but is diverted from it by the Augur Nevius; his military
achievements; what ornaments of the Empire were of his invention. 9 CHAP. VI.
Servius Tullius comes to the Government by subtilty; He causes an estimate to
be taken of the Roman wealth; and distinguishes the people into several Orders
and Degrees. 10 CHAP. VII. Tarquin comes to the Crown by the Massacre of
Servius; the horrid wickedness of his wife Tullia; His cruelty and pride render
him odious to the people; he causes his own Son to be scourged, out of a design
to abuse the Gabii: and builds a Temple at the Capitol. Presages of Romes
continuance. 11 CHAP. VIII. A short account of the reign of the seven Kings,
and a rehearsal of what was most remarkably done by them, in order to the
advancement of the Commonwealth. page 13 CHAP. IX. The Regal Dignity transferred
to the Consuls, Brutus and Collarinus; the later of whom is deposed for his
being descended from the Royal Family, Publicola is put into his place; Brutus
discovering his own Sons siding with the Tarquins, puts them to death. 15 CHAP.
X. Porsenna King of Etruria, siding with the Tarquins, comes with a powerful
Army before Rome, reduces it to extreme necessity, and is ready to force it;
but astonished at the prodigious gallantry of Mutius, Horatius, and Clelia, he
makes an Alliance with the Romans. The Combat between Brutus and Tarquin's Son,
wherein they both fell. 17 CHAP. XI. ^he Latins engage in the quarrel of the
Tarquins, give battle to the Romans, by whon they are defeated. The other
neighboring Nations disturb their quiet; The Romans fight for the dilatation of
their Territories; Quinctus Cincinnatus taken from the Plough to be Dictator;
He subdues the Aequi, and treats them as beasts. 19 CHAP. XII. The Veientes war
with the Romans; the Family of the Fabii undertake the Engagement; they are
unfortunately defeated by the Enemies; but that loss is recompensed by many
Victories obtained against the Falisci, the Fidenates, and the Veientes. age 22
CHAP. XIII. The Gauls overrun Italy; besiege Clusium; raise the siege and
march directly toward Rome; by the way they fight the Roman Army, and defeat
it; They fire Rome; massacre the Senators; besiege the Capitol, into which
Manlius had retreated with the choice of the Roman youth. The besieged having
held out long are at last forced to capitulate; As they are paying the sum
agreed upon, Camillus charges the Gauls, who are forced from Rome, and
extirpated. 24 CHAP. XIV. The war against the Latins, who envy the glory of
the Romans. Manlius Torquatus put his Son to death f^r fighting contrary to his
orders. Decius devotes himself to death, for the safety of the Army. CHAP. XV.
The war with the Sabins; the Romans waste all their Territories, under the
conduct of the Consul Curious Dentatus. CHAP. XVI. The war with the Samnites
siding with those of Capua; the Soil whereof is commended; The Roman spend
fifty years in that war; they are defeated at the straight of Arpaja; they
revenge that affront upon the Samnites. page 31 CHAP. XVII. The nations of
Italy conspire against Rome; Fabius Maximus defeats their Army; His fellow
Consul, Decius, following the example of his Father, devoted himself to death.
34 CHAP. XVIII. The Tarentines affront the Romans, who arm against them. Diverse
people of Italy assist the Tarentines. Pyrrhus King of Epirus engages in their
quarrel, is victorious at the first Engagement against the Romans; and d^feated
at the two ensuing Battles. At last he is forced out of Italy, and driven back
into Greece. 36 CHAP. XIX. The Romans engage in a war against those who had
favored the Tarentines; Ascoli taken; Sempronius's vow. 42 CHAP. XX. The war
with the Sallentini; Brundusium taken; a Temple vowed to Pales, Goddess of the
Shepherds. 43 CHAP. XXI. The Vulsinians implore the assistance of the Romans,
against their slaves, who are brought to their duty by Fabius Gurges. page 34
CHAP. XXII. Of the Seditions which happened at Rome; Posthumous General of the
Roman Army is killed with stones; The insolence of the Soldiery refusing to
fight; an insurrection of the people, who banish the chiefest of the Nobility;
the unworthy treatment of Coriolanus and Camillus; dissensions between the
Senate and the people. 44 CHAP. XXIII. A civil discord occasioned by the
Usurers, and appeased by an Oration of Menenius Agrippa. 45 CHAP. XXIV. Another
civil discord occasioned by the insolence and tyranny of the Decemvirs; Appius
Claudius would have ravished Virginius's daughter; who is killed publicly by
her Father. The Decemvirs displaced 46 CHAP. XXV. The third civil Discord. 48
CHAP. XXVI. The fourth discord occasioned by the people's desire to be admitted
to dignities; the jealousy and vigilance of the Romans in what concerns their
liberty; upon which account Spurius Cassius, Melius, and Manlius are put to
death. ibid.
The Second Book.
CHAP. I. THe greatness of the people of Rome; they subdue Europe, Asia, and
Africa, in the space of two hundred years. page 51 CHAP. II. The war between
the Romans and Carthaginians, grounded on the relief of those of Messina; The
victories gained at Sea by the Romans, against Hieron King of Sicily, and the
Inhabitants of Carthage. The Lacedaemonians, send assistance to the
Carthaginians. The Commander in chief of the Romans taken prisoner, and
unworthily treated: The destruction of Carthage. 52 CHAP. III. Several Nations
make incursions upon the Romans; but they are all brought under subjection. 55
CHAP. IV. Britomarus Leader of the Insubrian Gauls is overcome by Aemilius; the
defeat of Astrionicus; Marcellus kills King Virdomarus; and consecrates his
arms to Jupiter Feterius. page, 57 CHAP. V. The Roman Ambassadors barbarously
massacred by the Liburnians; the punishment inflicted on them and their Prince
by Cneus Fulvius. 58 CHAP. VI. The second Carthaginian War; Hannibal besieges
Saguntus; the Romans to be revenged arm against the Carthaginians; Hannibal's
oversight after the great Victory at Cannae; Fabius and Marcellus make it
appear by their conduct, that Hannibal was not invincible; the same Hannibal
besieges Rome, thinking thereby to raise the siege before Capua; Roman Armies
sent into diverse Provinces; the first Scipios, after they had been victorious
in Afric, are at last defeated; Publius Scipio undertakes the war, and comes
off with success and renown. 59 CHAP. VII. The Romans enter into a war against
the Macedonians who had assisted Hannibal: The Macedonians defeated, King
Philip makes a peace; the Romans give liberty to the Grecians. page 72 CHAP.
VIII. Antiochus King of Syria demands a City of Thrace of the Romans, who
thereupon take occasion to enter into a war against him. He is overcome by
Aemilius Regulus; A second defeat of Antiochus, upon which he accepts of a
peace. 75 CHAP. IX. The Rhodians and Athenians use their mediation with the
Romans on the behalf of the Aetolians, Cephalenia and other Islands subdued by
the Romans. 79 CHAP. X. The Istrians plunder Manlius's Camp, but afterward
being surpised in the midst ^f the jollity are defeated, and their King taken
prisoner. 80 CHAP. XI. The Gallo-grecians are subdued by the Romans; the great
courage and gall^ntry of a Lad^, in revenging her self of a Centurion who had
done her violence. CHAP. XII. The second Macedonian or Persian war; the
alliance between the Macedonians and the Thracians^; the policy of K. Perses,
who yet is overcome by P. Aemilius. The description of a magnificent triumph;
the news of the Victory brought to Rome, the very day of the Engagement, by the
means of two young men, who were thought to be Castor and Pollux. page, 82
CHAP. XIII. The Illyrians are vanquished by the Praetor Anicius; Scodra, the
chief City of their Country laid desolate. 85 CHAP. XIV. The third Macedonian
war occasioned by the usurpation of a mean person, named Andriscus; the Praetor
Juventius is overcome by him, but sufficiently revenged by Metellus, who brings
Andriscus captive to Rome. 86 CHAP. XV. The third Pudick or Carthaginian war:
the deplorable destruction of the City of Carthage, by young Scipio. 88 CHAP.
XVI. Corinth, the Metropolis of Achaia, declared an enemy to the people of
Rome, for the affronts done to their Ambassadors; it is destroyed, and consumed
by fire. 91 CHAP. XVII. An account of Transactions in Spain, which is set upon
by the Romans, and the Provinces of it subdued by several Commanders; the
policy and valor of a Spanish Captain, he is afterward killed by a Roman
Soldier; Viriathus a Portuguez compared to Romulus; Pompilius orders him to be
murdered. page 93 CHAP. XVIII. The City of Numantia opposes the Romans for
many years; Hostilius Mancinus the Roman General defeated by the Numantians,
and by order of the Senate delivered into the hands of the enemies; The
constancy, and cruel resolution of Numantia exercised on it self. 79 CHAP. XIX.
A summary of the Roman wars for the space of two hundred years. 101 CHAP. XX.
Attalus King of Pergamus makes the people of Rome his Heir; Astronicus takes
occasion thence to enter into a war against them; Crassus defeated and taken
Prisoner; Astronicus subdued and put into chains; the unworthy procedure of
Aquilius, in poisoning the springs, and by that means blasting the reputation
of the Romans. 103
The Third Book.
CHAP. I. Jugurth, King of Numidia, wars against the Romans; he endeavors to
overcome them by ar^ifi^es and presents; At last, after several defeats, he is
betrayed into the hands of S^lla by the mea^^ ^^ Bocchus. page 105 CHAP. II.
The victory obtain^d by the Romans beyond the Alps, over the Salii, the
Allobroges, and the Aruerni; Domitius Aenobarbus, and Fabus Maximu^ erect
Towers of stone, and set up Trophies on them. 109 CHAP. III. The Cimbri and
Tentones design an Incursion into Italy; they defeat several Armies of the
Romans, but are at last defeated themselves by Marius; The strange resolution
of their Wives. A miraculous thing happened at Rome after the defeat. 110 CHAP.
IV. The Thracians revolt, commit many insolences and ^nhumanities; Porrius Cato
defeated by them; at last they are defeated by diverse Roman Generals; The
Victory obtained by Lucullus. 115 CHAP. V. Mithridates wars against the Romans,
and takes Bithynia from them, and bring all Asia into an inclination to revolt;
He causes all the Roman Citizens to be massacred in the Provinces of Asia;
Sylla defeats him in two battles; Mithridates raises a greater Army, besieges
Cyzicum, and is overcome by Lucullus; The signal Victory of Pompey over both
Mithridates and Tigranes; He over-runs all Asia, and brings it in subjection to
the Romans. page 117 CHAP. VI. The Cilician Pirates scour the Seas, and hinder
Commerce; Pompey's miraculous success in the reduction of them in forty days.
124 CHAP. VII. The Cretians set upon by the Romans defeat the Army of M.
Antonius; Metellus revenges the affront, and treats them most cruelly. 127
CHAP. VIII. The Inhabitants of the Balearick Islands turn Pirates, and engage
with the Roman Fleet, by which they are defeated. 128 CHAP. IX. Cyprus sacked
by the Romans, and the wealth of it brought to Rome by Porcius Cato. 130 CHAP.
X. A memorable Exploit of Caesar's among the Gauls, and in Great Britain; He
builds a Bridge over the Rhine; Vercingetorix submits to him. 131 CHAP. XI.
Crassus vanquished and killed by the Parthians; the indignity exercised by his
enemies upon him after his death. CHAP. XII. A Recapitulation, comprehending a
Description of the Misfortunes of the Romans, proceeding from plenty; and that
their arming against themselves, is to be attributed to the same cause. page
139 CHAP. XIII. Of the Sedition occasioned by the power bestowed on the
Tribunes. 142 CHAP. XIV. The Sedition occasioned by Tiberius Gracchus, who is
opposed and killed. 143 CHAP. XV. Caius Graachus attempts to prosecute the
design of his Brother Tiberius; and is murdered by Opimius upon
Mount-Aventine. 145 CHAP. XVI. Apuleius Saturninus renews the quarrel of the
Grachii; he is assisted by Marius, and commits many outrages; Marius is forced
to desert him; He gets into the Capitol, and surrenders himself to the Senate.
The people tear him to pieces. 146 CHAP. XVII. Livius Drusus would enforce the
Graachane Laws; Cepio violates the Senate; The Consul Philippus opposing him is
unworthily treated; the sudden death of Drusus. 148 CHAP. XVIII. All Italy in a
commotion; a general conspiracy, which after great destructions of men, is at
last appeased. page 150 CHAP. XIX. An insurrection of the Slaves; Sicily under
the Government of a Syrian, who feigns himself a Fanatic; They are at last
overcome and punished by the valor of Rupilius; A second insurrection of the
Slaves quieted by Aquilius. 152 CHAP. XX. Spartacus a Gladiator heads an Army
of Slaves, and puts many affronts on the Romans, at last Licinius Crassus
vindicates the honor of Rome by the death of the Gladiator. 155 CHAP. XXI. The
civil War of the Romans occasioned by the ambition of Marius and Sylla. 158
CHAP. XXII. The valor of Sertorius, banished Rome by the proscription of
Sylla; He makes an insurrection in Spain; and after many gallant exploits, is
killed by treachery. 164 CHAP. XXIII. Lepidus raises new commotions; he is
vanquished and dies in Sardinia. 166
The Fourth Book.
CHAP. I. The detestable conspiracy of Catiline against his Country; he is
assisted by several persons of the Noblest Families in Rome; Cicero discovers
the design; the punishment of the Conspirators; Antonius gives Catiline and his
Army an absolute overthrow. page 168 CHAP. II. A Relation of the War between
Caesar and Pompey, which was rather an universal one, than a civil; The league
between Pompey, Crassus, and Caesar; the distrust between Caesar and Pompey,
upon which ensued an open war; Pompey flies out of Italy; Caesar's exploits; he
besieges Marseils, passes over into Spain, defeats Pompey's Lieutenants, and
follows him into Epirus. The courage and fortune of Caesar; Pompey vanquished
by him in Thessaly; his deplorable death in Egypt; Caesar utterly destroys the
Army of Pharnaces; Scipio defeated Cata and Juba; the bloody fight against
Pompey's Sons; the valor, conduct, and incomparable fortune of Caesar; his
clemency; the great honors attributed to him; he is envied at Rome, and
murdered. page 172 CHAP. III. Sextus Pompeius demands his Father's estate,
Octavius resolves to revenge Caesar's death; Mark Anthony a slave to Cleopatra.
194 CHAP. IV. The quarrel between Octavius Caesar and Marcus Antonius; the
siege of Mutina raised. 194 CHAP. V. The confedera^y between O^tavius, M.
Antonius and Lepidus; the proscriptions and great cruelties exercised at Rome.
195 CHAP. VI. Brutus and C^ssius charged by Octavius and Antonius; the
memorable fight in Thessaly attended by prodigies; the death of Brutus and
Cassius. 197 CHAP. VII. A commotion raised b^ M. Antonius, who shut up in
Perusia by Octavius Caesar, is forced to surrender it. 200 CHAP. VIII. Young
Pompey possesses himself of Sicily and Sardinia; his flight and shameful death.
201 CHAP. IX. The incursions of the Parthians under the Conduct of young
Pacorus; They are defeated by the prudence of Ventidius; Pacorus's death. page
203 CHAP. X. The Alliance between the Romans and the Parthians broken through
the vanity of Marcus Antonius; The inconveniences endured by the Roman Army,
and the generous resolution of the Soldiery; the insolence and brutality of
Antonius. 205 CHAP. XI. Antonius besotted with the love of Cleopatra, promises
her the Roman Empire; the preparations for the war; a Naval engagement between
Octavius and Antonius, the death of him, and Cleopatra. 209 CHAP. XII. A war
raised by the Germans in Augustus's time; his exploits in the Northern
Provinces; the valor and conduct of Drusus, who is surnamed Germanicus; his
death; Quintilius surpised by the Germans; his defeat. A war in Armenia; the
attempt of a Barbarian on the person of Caius; Augustus's conquests in Spain; a
general Peace; the most remote Nations submit to the Roman Empire; the
Parthians return the Ensigns taken from Crassus; Octavius Caesar shuts
Janus-Temple; He is named Father of the Country and Augustus.
An Advertisement TO ALL Gentlemen, Booksellers, or others.
WHereas Samuel Speed Bookseller, has lately undertaken a Wholesale Trade
for Books, not making any appearance of that Employment by Retailing in a Shop
as formerly he did, These are to certify, That those persons that please to
apply themselves to him for Books, shall be as well used as by any person
whatsoever; And whosoever has any Study, or Library of Books, or Copies,
either in Manuscript, or such as have been already Printed, to dispose of,
shall receive from him the full value thereof, to the said Parties ample
Satisfaction.

BOOKS Printed for Samuel Speed Bookseller, between the Two Temple Gates in
Fleet Street.
PH^ramond, the famed Romance, written by Author of those other two Eminent
Volumes, Cassandra and Cleopatra, in Folio.

Palmerin of England, in three Parts, in Quarto.

The Destruction of Troy, in three Parts, in quarto.

Quintus Curtius his life of Alexander the Great in English, in quarto.

Montelion Knight of the Oracle, in quarto.

Primaleon of Greece, in quarto.

The Jewel-House of Art and Nature by Sir Hugh Plat, in quarto.

The Woman's Lawyer by Sir John Dodridge, in quarto.

Divine Law; or the Patrons Purchaser, by Alexander Huckston, in quart.

The complete Parson, by Sir John Dodridge, in quarto.

Star Chamber Cases, in quarto.

Actions of the Case for Deeds, by William Sheppard Esquire in Folio.

The life of Henry the Great in English, written by the Bishop of Rhodes, in
Octavo.

The Villain: a Tragedy, by Tho. Porter Esquire in quarto.

Observations of the Statesmen and Favorites of England, since the Reformation,
their Rise, and Growths, Prudence, and Policies, Miscarriages, and Falls,
during the Reigns of K. Henry the Eight, K. Edward the Sixth, Qu. Mary, Qu.
Elizabeth, K. James, and K. Charles the first. By David Lloyd, A.M. in Octavo.

The Precedence of Kings, by James Howel Esquire in Folio.

The Description of Tangier, with an account of the life of Gayland the Usurper
of the Kingdom of Fez. in q.

The Golden Coast, or a Description of Guinney, in quarto.

An Abridgement of the Reports of Sir George Crooks three Volumes, in oct.

An Abridgement of the Reports of Sir Francis More, in Octavo.

The Complete Lawyer, by William Noy of Lincolnes Inn, in Octavo.

The Tenants Law, a Treatise of great use for Tenants and Farmers of all
kinds, and all other persons whatsoever. Wherein the several Natures,
Differences, and Kinds of Tenures, and Tenants are discussed, and several
Cases in the Law touching Leases, Rents, Distresses, Replevins, and other
Accidents between Landlord and Tenant, and Tenant and Tenant between
themselves, and others, especially such who have suffered by the late
Conflagration in the City of London; with Rules for Determination of
Differences, without troubling the most Honorable Court of Judicature by R.T.
Gent. in Twelves.

Memoires of the Lives, Actions, Sufferings, and Deaths, of those Noble,
Reverend, and Excellent Personages, that suffered by Death, Sequestration,
Decimation, or otherwise, for the Protestant Religion, and the great principle
thereof, Allegiance to their Sovereign, in our late intestine Wars; by David
Lloyd A.M. in Folio.

Arithmetical Recreations by W. Leybourn, in Twelves.

The Reports of Sir Henry Hobart, in Folio.

The Complete Copyholder by the Lord Cook, in quarto.

Machiavels Discourses, and Prince, in Twelves.

The Roman History of Lucius Florus, in Octavo.

The City and Country Purchaser, and Builder, with Directions for Purchasing,
Building, and improving of Lands, and Houses, in any part of England, by
Stephen Primate Gent. in Octavo.

A brief Chronicle of the late intestine War, in the three Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ir^land. From the years of our Lord 1637. to the year 1663. by
James Heath Gent. now reprinting in Folio.

The new Academy of Complements erected for Ladies, and Gentlemen, containing
Variety of Complements and Letters fitted to the occasions of all persons of
both Sexes, with an exact Collection of the Newest and Choicest Songs A la
mode, both Amorous and Jovial, in Twelves.

Systema Agriculturae: Being the whole Mystery of Husbandry, made known by J.G.
Gent. in Folio.

FINIS.

