FOR THE KING AND Both Houses of PARLIAMENT, ^ing a brief, plain and true
Relation of some of the late sad Sufferings of the People of GOD called
QUAKERS, For worshipping God, and exercising a good Conscience toward God and
Man. (...) reason whereof 89. have suffered till death, 32 of which dyed before
the King came into England, and 57 since; of which 57, by hard imprisonment and
cruel usage, 43 have dyed in this City of London and Southwark, since the Act
made against Meetings.
IT is not unknown that we have been a persecuted and suffering People for many
years, even by all the Powers that have ruled in these Kingdoms; and many hard
imprisonments, Scourgings and false Judgments we have undergone, and much evil
dealing has been exercised toward us, and all this for, and because only of
our Religion and good, Conscience to God wards, and not for any Rebellion,
Sedition, or wrong doing toward them or our Neighbor: For it has been our
only care how to walk justly and innocently in the sight of God, toward
Rulers and people, and have been peaceable toward all; and herein we have
desired to approve our hearts in much integrity and sincerity, that we might be
found blameless before the Lord, as himself does bear us witness.

YORKSHIRE.
RObert Barwick for refusing to swear, was sent to York Castle the 24 th day of
the 11 th Month, 1660. and on the 28 th day of the first Month he dyed a
prisoner.

Peter Caiph of Wyton was taken out of a peaceable Meeting by Constables,
without any Warrant; and he and several others for refusing to swear, were sent
to York Castle the 13 th of the 12 th Month, -- 60. and the second day of the
second Month -- 61. Peter dyed a Prisoner.

Robert Storr of Hilston, for the same cause was imprisoned in York Castle, and
on the 25 th of the first Month 1661. he dyed a Prisoner.

Benjamin Nicholson of Tickell, and Abraham Decow of Fishlock, being committed
upon the same account to York Castle, dyed in Prison.

And there has dyed nine more in York lately, whose Names are not as yet sent
up.

SURREY.
Thomas Patchen being sick of a Fever, was taken out of his bed, and drove 25.
Miles on foot, and in their cruelty, they over-drove him, in so much that it
was beyond his natural strength, so that in a few days after he was in the
White-Lyon Prison, he dyed.

HAMP-SHIRE
William Rutter on the 17 th of the 12 th Month 1661. was taken out of a
Meeting, and had to the Main-guard in Portsmouth, and from thence to the Mayor,
who tendered him the Oath of Allegiance, and for refusing to swear, he was
committed to the common Gaol, and falling sick on the 14 th. day of the first
Month, he dyed a prisoner.

BEDFORDSHIRE.
John Rush of Kempston Hardwick, was kept in prison about a year for not paying
Tithes to Priest Wells of Wilkhanistead, who kept him in prison until he dyed,
which was the first of the 11 th Month 1661.

HUNTINGTON-SHIRE.
Simon Sanford and Francis Lamstead, being both committed to the Gaol in
Huntington for refusing to swear, dyed in prison, Francis the 7 th day of the
first Month, and Simon the 18 th of the 12 th Month 61.

WORCESTERSHIRE.
Richard Walker a sickly weakly man, and has been so long, was (with many
more) on the first day of the 11 th Month 1662. taken out of a Meeting in
Evisham, by one Major Wild, who with the rest of his party on Horseback,
forced the poor sick man with have and rigor, to travel on foot part of the way
to Worcester, and his sick body being wearied, not being able to travel so fast
as their Horses, one of the hard-hearted Soldiers took him by the Arm, and
drew him violently along; the Mayor also rode with his Horse against him, and
struck him down with his Horse brisket, and plucked out his Pistol, and
threatened to pistol him; and when they saw he could not travel so fast as they
in haste rode their Horses, then they set him on a Horse, and one of them
whipped the Horse forward, up Hill and down Hill, without pity to his weak
condition; and the said Wild committed him to the County-Gaol in Worcester,
where being far from his tender Friends who nourished him in his weak
condition, his sickness increased, and he soon dyed.

LONDON and SOUTHWARK.
Daniel Abraham being imprisoned in Newgate with about three hundred more
Friends, for refusing to swear, in the 12 th Month 1660. fell sick and dyed.

Walter Bellamy being at the same time imprisoned in Newgate, and there being
one hundred or thereabouts, imprisoned in that room where he was, it is judged
that so many being together for want of convenient air and lodging, he fell
sick, and in the third Month 1661. he dyed a prisoner.

John Stanton having a Wife and several children, was taken out of a Meeting by
rude Soldiers, and committ^ to Newgate, and falling sick, dyed a prisoner the
21. day of the 4 th Month 1662.

Thomas ^irby a young man, a Habberdasher by trade, being newly out of his
time, was taken out of a Meeting of the people of God, and committed to prison
to Newgate, where he fell sick, and on the first day of the fifth month 1662.
he finished his Testimony by death.

Richard Hubberthorne a faithful Minister of the Lord, being declaring the
Truth at the Bull and Mouth Meeting, was taken by soldiers, and carried before
Richard Brown, who took hold of the brim of his hat, and lugged it upon his
face, and committed him to Newgate, where he and two more lay in a dark hole;
and falling sick on the 17 th of the 6 th month 1662. he laid down his life for
the testimony of truth.

Anthony Skillington being at a meeting of the Lord's people on the 13 th of
the 5 th month 1662. was by the rude Soldiers taken out of the meeting, and
brought before R. Brown, who sent him to prison with many more; and being
innocent, they demanded a free prison; and so the Jailer put them in the hole,
which is the place they put Felons in after they are condemned to dye; and
there eleven of them remained two nights, and then were had out, and put in a
stinking hole amongst the common Felons; and Anthony often complained of the
bad smell before he fell sick; and by reason of want of air, and such a
stinking smell, he and several more fell sick and dyed; and the Jewry that
viewed his body, concluded that they did believe his close imprisonment, and
the stinking smell, surfeited his body, which was the cause of his death, it
being in the heat of Summer.

John Giles a faithful Minister of the Truth, was taken out of a meeting where
he was ministering the Truth, and committed to Newgate by Richard Brown, where
falling sick the 29 th of the sixth month -- 62. he laid down his life for the
Truths sake.

William Watson of the Parish of White-Chappel, was taken from a Meeting, and
committed to the common Gaol in Newgate, where he fell sick, and on the 25 th
of the 6 th month 1662. dyed a prisoner.

William Eldridge and John Shoot, were both committed to Newgate by Richard
Brown, for meeting to worship God; and they fell sick, and the latter end of
the 6 th month 1662. both dyed, and were carried from Newgate together to be
buried.

Richard Bradley for the cause aforesaid was committed to New-prison, where he
fell sick, and on the first day of the 7 th month 1662. he laid down his life
for the Truths sake.

Henry Boreman being committed to Newgate for selling Friends Books, fell sick
and dyed in Newgate the 17 th of the 8 th month 1662. and left a Wife great
with child, and three small children besides.

Thomas Birkley, Genesis Bromly, John Witlock, William Snowk, being committed to
the White-Lyon prison for meeting to worship God, (with several others) they
fell sick for want of air and conveniences to lodge; and in the 9 th month
1662. all dyed in the prison, and gave up their lives for the Truth sake.

John Dison, John Wostenholm, and Richard Page, being committed to the
White-Lyon Prison for the cause aforesaid, with about eighty more, were kept in
three little Rooms, where by reason of the closeness of the place, they fell
sick; and in a short time, being about the 6 th. of the 10 th month, they there
finished their testimony by death.

Thomas Anstee, William Hawks, being committed to Newgate by R. Brown, for the
cause aforesaid, fell sick, and both laid down their bodies in the prison for
the Truths sake.

Thomas Rogers a young man, was taken also out of a meeting of the people
aforesaid, and committed to the common Gaol, where he fell sick about the tenth
month, and dyed in a short time a prisoner for the Truth of God.

Mark Close and Gabriel Shaller, being committed by Richard Brown for the cause
aforesaid, where they fell sick, and about the latter end of the tenth month
1662. dyed in the Common Gaol in Newgate, for the Truths sake.

John Cooper was by Richard Brown committed to the common Gaol in Newgate (for
the same cause) where he suffered the loss of his life for the Truths sake, the
30 th of the tenth month 1662.

Thomas Hancler, William Pryor and Samuel Petchet, being committed by Richard
Brown, for meeting together, about the 6 th and 7 th of the 11 th month, dyed
in the common Gaol in Newgate; William Pryor leaving a Wife and children behind
him, whose maintenance did consist on his labor; and S. Petchet was a young
man, newly come up out of the Country about business.

John Trowell being at a meeting at the Bull and Mouth, the latter end of the
sixth month, was dragged out of the meeting by rude Soldiers, and one of them
knocked him down for dead in the Street, and then trampled upon him in the
street, and he lay sick ten days, and then dyed, and his dead body was carried
to the Bull where he received his bruises and blows; and the Coroner and Jury
viewed his dead body, and many others, who judged him to be murdered, his body
being black with bruises, and even rotten and like a gelly; it cannot well be
expressed what grievous blows had fallen on his body; one of the Officers
having a Club in one hand about a yard long, which seemed to be as much as he
could well handle, for bigness and weight; with which he laid on about him
without mercy, as did the most of his party, regarding neither age nor sex: One
Friend was knocked down five times; and the blood lay in the streets, and runned
down men's faces and shoulders; and one Hanger and one other weapon were both
broken by force of blows over men's heads.

Humphrey Bache, and Humphrey Brewster, were both committed to Newgate for
meeting; and by the closeness of the prison their bodies were corrupted, so
that in a short time after they were released, they dyed.

Humphrey Leaver, Richard Davis, Robert Cross, Thomas Wingreen, John Ratcliff,
were all imprisoned in the common Gaol in Newgate, by R. Brown, for meeting to
worship God, where it is judged through the smoke and noisome smells their
bodies were corrupted; so that soon after they were released, they dyed, who we
may reckon with the rest to have sealed their Testimony with the loss of their
lives.

Edward Buroughs a faithful Labourer and Minister of the Lord, being
imprisoned in Newgate for ministering the Truth to the people at the Bull and
Mouth, he remained a Prisoner near three quarters of a year, and
notwithstanding the King sent an Order under his hand and seal to release him
yet Richard Brown would not release him: The beginning of the twelfth Month the
said Edward Buroughs fell sick, and the 14 th day of the same month he
finished his testimony by death.

And there has suffered imprisonments, stockings, whippings, loss of goods,
and other abuses, for keeping a good conscience toward God and man, before the
King came into England, 3170. persons.

And there has suffered imprisonments for refusing to swear, and for meeting
together, and refusing to go to public Worship, and for keeping a good
Conscience toward God and man since the King came into England, 5400. persons.
Notwithstanding the Kings personal endeavors at sundry times, by Letters,
Warrants and Proclamations for their delivery, and for the mitigation of the
harshness of his inferior Officers toward them in the cases abovementioned.

And there dyed by imprisonment and other hard usage, before the King came in,
32. persons.

And there have dyed by reason of imprisonment, and hard and cruel usage since
the King came in, 56. persons.

And there remains at this present in prison in England, who suffer for good
conscience sake, Five hundred persons.

From the People of God called QUAKERS.


