NEHVSHTAN: OR, JOHN ELLIOT' s Saving Grace in All Men, Proved to be No GRACE;
AND His INCREATED BEING in All, A Great Nothing. By J. F.

2 Kings XVIII. 4. Hezekiah removed the High Places, and brake the Images, and
cut down the Groves, and brake in Pieces the Brazen Serpent that Moses had
made; for unto those Days the Children of Israel did burn Incense to it, and he
called it Nehushtan.

Totus homo and anima and corpore in imagine Dei and secundum similitudinem
ejus creatus est -- Synops. purior. Theol. p. 134.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cockeril, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey, over
against the Stocks-Market, 1694.

THE PREFACE.
IT is so much contrary to my natural Genius to study politeness of Language,
or Rhetorical Flourishes of Words, that I could never be prevailed with to
print any of my poor Lucubrations in this critical and learned Age; and I had
been silent now also, as all along hitherto, had I not been highly provoked by
a Neighbor, John Elliot, who has been pleased to proclaim his own Weakness,
to say no worse, to the World, in a small Piece, entitled, The Saving Grace of
God. This he will have to be in all Men, yea, and nothing less than an
Increated Being; and, because I offered him a few Arguments to the contrary, he
has been in a great Paroxysm of furious Zeal against me, and his Spirit in so
great a Ferment, that he has represented me as grossly Erroneous, and a
notorious Blasphemer, pressing Persons most vehemently to withdraw from me, and
to discontinue their Attendance on my Ministry. I can truly say, It is not the
Vindication of mine own Honor that has prompted me thus to put Pen to Paper;
for I do really look upon my self as a poor inconsiderable Nothing, that my
Honor or Dishonor is little to be regarded; only I would not willingly hear
of this at the Great Day, that while I slept the Tares were not only sowed, but
also grew up. I could gladly be silent, so my Silence were not sinful. Happily
some of my Learned and Prudent Brethren may censure me for taking cognizance
of, or meddling with so weak an Antagonist; but I humbly take leave to acquaint
them, that they may not know all the Circumstances of this Case; therefore they
may rest satisfied, that I have not acted herein without what is unto me an
Authentic Call thereunto. Calvin speaking of Servetus, said, Fatuitas dogmatum
securum me reddidit, the foolishness of his Opinions made him regardless; but
he saw Cause afterward to awake out of his sleep and security, upon the coming
out of this crude, indigested, empty Script of J. E. There was such insulting
and triumphing among the Quakers, as if the Day had been everlastingly their
own in this Place; Copies were with great diligence scattered up and down in
most Places with us: My Ears were filled from day to day of my being so
conquered, that I must never hold up my Head any more; nothing less was
expected, than that most of our Friends would quickly be proselyted to J. E.'s
Opinion and Way. Some well meaning persons, no way inclined to Quakerism, could
not tell what to think of it; that Grace which had been so honorably spoken of
in all Ages, should be no more but a mere Creature. By these and other weighty
Considerations, I was alarmed and influenced to what I apprehended was my Duty,
willing to observe that Apostolical Canon, 1 Cor. 14.26. Let all things be done
unto edifying, I was loath to trouble the People, or pollute the Pulpit with
Replies to the Impertinencies of J. E's. Scribble, I design that as distinct
from this, which I purpose also to publish if I have any fresh Provocation: The
way I have been directed to take, was, doctrinally, and practically to discuss
this Position, That though Inherent Grace be a great Excellency, yet no
Increated Being, with some useful Inferences, Deductions, and Corollaries from
thence. The Lord has been graciously pleased so far to own and accept of this
piece of Service, as to accompany it with a Blessing from above, I know not one
of the Congregation in Fellowship with us, but what are fully satisfied in what
they have heard; and some of the most Judicious among them have, with much
importunity pressed, that this may be made as public as the other was, hoping
that others may reap the same benefit and advantage by it as they have reaped,
and that it may contribute something toward the preventing of the growth of
Quakerism in other places as well as here. O, pray, pray, pray that the Word of
the Lord may have free Course, and be glorified, 2 Thessalonians. 4.1. Paul planteth,
and Apollos waters; but it is God that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.6. This
may serve both as an Apology for my appearing thus in Print and as a Prefatory
Introduction to what ensues.

INTRODUCTION.
HAving an Eye to the Instruction, Edification, and Stablishing in the Truth
those that were my constant Auditors, I did not judge it worth while, all along
to dispute against that which is called Universal Grace in All; I only gave one
Argument to prove that to be a non entitie; there is no such thing in rerum
natura; it is not what it is called by some: But that I might approve my self a
fair Disputant, the Task I undertook was this; To prove, that That which is
Saving Grace in them that are true Believers, effectually renewed and
sanctified by the Word and Spirit of God, is no Increated Being; and therefore
a Majore ad minus; much less is that which is falsely called Grace, the Spirit,
Christ, Light, the measure of the Spirit, the Spiritual Appearance in All. This
being the principal thing to be insisted on, I dispatched the one confutatory
Argument with little more than a bare mentioning of it, without a large
Prosecution; which was this:

That which is in every Man is in Heathens and professed Pagans: But the Saving
Grace of God is not in Heathens and profes'd Pagans; therefore not in every Man.

It Is only the Assumption that is to be proved; and that I prove thus; If that
which is in Heathens, be nature, only nature, and called nature by God,
speaking in his Word, yea, and nature deeply depraved and corrupted in All,
then the Saving Grace of God is not in Heathens. The former is true, Romans 2.14.
Romans 3.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Ephesians. 2.3. and therefore also
the latter.

If Heathens and all unconverted Persons are without Christ, Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, Strangers from the Covenants of Promise, having no
Hope, and without God in the Word, then that which is in them is not Christ.
The former is true, Ephesians. 2.12. Therefore also the latter.

If Heathens, considered Antecedently to the Gospel's being preached to them,
do sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, having the Understanding
darkened, being alienated from the Life of God, through the Ignorance that is in
them, because of the blindness of their Heart; then that which is in them is
mere Darkness, and no Gospel Light, they can know nothing of Evangelical
Verities, and whatever is of supernatural Revelation from any thing within
themselves. The former is true, Luke 1.79. Ephesians. 4.18. Therefore also the
latter.

If that which is in Heathens is the Devil, and the Spirit of the Devil, then
that which is in them, is not the Spirit of God; for, what Communion has Light
with Darkness? What Concord has Christ with Belial? 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. The
former is true, Ephesians. 2.2. Act. 26.18. Col. 1.13. Joh. 8.44. 1 John 3.8.

I call this but one Argument, for it is diversified only with respect to the
several denominations which J. E. gives unto that which is in every Man,
without Restriction or Limitation: I humbly leave it to those that are
impartial, whether this alone is not of sufficient force, cogency, and
validity, utterly to overthrow the very Foundation of John's Book, and
consequently, whether the whole of the Superstructure is not also therewith
overthrown? and whether I deserved such hard words for calling, not that which
is in True Believers, and a special Work of the sanctifying Spirit of God, a
great nothing, but that which is nominally only, and equivocally called the
saving Grace of God in All, Turks and Mahometans, Heathens and Pagans, Papists
and Atheists: Where Foundation and Superstructure are both naught, these will
not be able to bear the trial by fire, 1 Cor. 3.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. But I pass
from this to the disquisition of what I have seen cause chiefly to insist on;
which you may take in this categorical Proposition, Thesis or Position.

The saving Grace of God in True Believers, is no Increated Being. That which
is Grace in those that are Christians indeed, is a Creature, a mere Creature,
and an imperfect Creature.

For methods sake, and a regular procedure herein, 1. I shall set down some
Preliminaries, tending to a right stating of the Question, or the Thing in
controversy between us, and to the clearing of some things ignorantly and
confusedly delivered by the Author of the saving Grace of God. 2. It Is needful
there should be some Definition, or Description given of Grace; otherwise, we
are like Men beating the Air, disputing of we do not know what. 3. Having given
one or two descriptive Defintions of Grace, we shall by express Scripture
Testimonies, and Arguments from thence deduced, prove the Thesis, Grace in
Believers is no Increated but a Created Being. 4. What is said of this Theme
and Subject is to be improved by us; and in order thereunto, I shall give you
some practical Inferences from all the premises.

1. Preliminary. There is no Person or positive Entitie in Heaven or Earth, but
what is Created of the Lord Jehova, Father, Son, and Spirit. Sin being no
positive Entitie but privative, properly has no efficient, but rather a
deficient Cause. This is a Principle, and the Foundation of all Religion,
therefore it is the first Lecture read from Heaven to us, by him that was the
first authorized Amanuensis of the Holy Ghost, in Penning some Part of the
Sacred Oracles. Genesis 1.1. See also Acts 17.24. God made the World and all
things therein.

If Grace be one of those things that is in Heaven or Earth, then it is to be
reckoned among the number of Created Beings; but Grace is one of those things
that is in Heaven or Earth. Therefore, --

2. Preliminary. follows upon the former. The word Increate signifies that
which is not created or made at all. Hence the Argument runs thus; If Grace be
that which is not created or made at all, it must be Self-existent,
Independent, the first Being and Creator of the Universe. But it is not
Self-existent, Independent, the first Being, nor the Creator of the Universe;
therefore it is no Increated Being: It Is a true saying in School Divinity, omne
ens est vel Primum vel a primo ortum, whence if Grace be Increate it must be
the first Being from which every other Being derive theirs.

3. Preliminary. There is a passage in my Opponents Pamphlet, page 26. which
savours so much of unsoundness, Heterodoxy, and scandalous Ignorance in this
our Goshen or Land of Light; that I cannot let it pass without some
Animadversion. His Words are, speaking of Grace in his fence, -- It is of his
divine saving nature, but yet not the only entire God, Eternal Jehova. -- Does
not this imply that Grace is God, though not Jehova, and does not this imply,
that Jehova is a divisible and compounded Being; Jehova is the entire God, and
the English of our Authors Phrase is, Grace is a piece or part of Jehova. --
This occasions my third Preliminary as an Antithesis hereunto, Deus est ens
simplicissimum, God is an uncompounded and indivisible Being, and this is one
thing that does distinguish him from all created Beings; Simplicity, says Nort.
Orthod. Evang. is God, one mere and perfect Act, without all composition, his
name is I AM, Exodus 3.14. that is, mere essence, wherein is nothing past nor to
come; from what is there more largely treated of, I contract this Argument; If
God does admit of composition, it is either a composition of Parts, which are
bounded by quantity, or of Matter and Form, or of General and Special Nature,
or of a Subject and Accident, or of an Act and Possibility, or of a Person and
Nature, or of Being and Individuation: But God does not admit of any of these
Compositions, therefore of none at all, the enumeration is full and complete,
else the defect must be showed.

4. Preliminary. The Divine Essence is incommunicable to Creatures. When some
of the Attributes and Perfections of God are said to be communicable unto Men,
all such Predications are Analogical and Equivocal. Deus and creaturae nihil
habent commune, praeter nomen.
Any resemblance that Man has unto God is very low, mean, dark, and shadowy,
notwithstanding of any likeness between God and Man. The disproportion and
distance between them is still as great as between Infinite and Finite, Perfect
and Imperfect, Perfection and Imperfection; that which is Eternal, and that
which is of Yesterday; as between that which is the Supreme Being, and that
which is only subordinate; as between that which is Independent and Dependent;
as between him that is Essentially All, and that which is Originally nothing.
Whatever it is that Man is, or whatever it is that is in Man, compared with
God, it is imperfection it self, and as nothing, Isai. 40.17. All Nations
before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him less than nothing, and
vanity. The Essence of God, says Nort. Orthod. Evang. p. is that one pure Act
of God by which he is God. Deus est necesse esse, God could never have been any
other than what he is; God cannot hereafter cease to be any other than what he
now is, and ever was. This is the Signification of Jehova, He that was, He that
is, He that is to come, Rev. 1.8. With whom is no variableness nor shadow of
turning, Jam. 1.17. Whatever Man is, or is in Man, he and it might never have
been; and considered in its own Nature and Essence, it is still capable of
Annihilation. If it be Actually perpetuated and made Eternal, a part post, it
is indebted to the Being of Beings for this, 1 Cor. 15.10. By the Grace of God
I am what I am. The Heterodoxy of some expressions of our Author, put me upon
making this a distinct Preliminary, the Essence of God is incommunicable to
Creatures, p. 27. -- Though this measure, to wit in every Man, be not the
fullness, or the whole entire Essence, yet it is of God, in a measure of his own
Spirit, which is not distinct therefrom, but it is one with it, 1 John 5.7. and
therein communicable to Men. The words of 1 John 5.7. are, There are three that
bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these
three are one, that is, God, Father, Son and Spirit are essentially one;
Therefore the Eternal Spirit, the third Person of the Trinity, and that which
is in every Man, are not distinct but essentially one. There Is Divinity for you.

5. Preliminary. It is a received Principle both in Divinity and Philosophy,
omne quod recipitur recipitur ad modum recipientis, when one thing is said to
be in another, every such inexistence is to be understood, that it is according
to the receptivity of the Receiver: When God, Christ and the Spirit are said to
be in Man, it is in a suitableness to the Essential Constitution of Man, as a
Rational Being, having Understanding, Will, and Affections. Christ and his
Spirit are in Believers to exert and put forth gracious Acts and Operations
upon them, as their respective exigencies do require, to humble them when they
want humbling; to give a check to their corruptions, and mortify them when
there is occasion; to recover them out of the snare of the evil one, when
entangled therein; to enlighten and enliven, quicken and comfort them; to
corroborate and strengthen them in and under all their Weaknesses, Infirmities,
Troubles, Trials, and Temptations. I know there are some magni nominis, and
whom I do really Reverence, who have said much for a personal Inhabitation of
the Spirit in Believers; but I humbly take leave to dissent from them in this.
Those Texts of Scripture that speak of the Spirits being or dwelling in
Believers, are not to be understood of an Hypostatical or Personal Union
between the Spirit and them, it is purely Mystical and Spiritual: What Learned
Norton, Orth. Evang p. 289. 290. says of the Union between Christ and
Believers, both negatively and positively, the same I may say of the Union
between the Spirit and them. Negatively, it is not Essential, such as is the
Union of the three Persons in one Essence in God; nor Personal, such as is the
Union of the Divine and Humane Nature in one, and that an Increated Person in
Christ. Not natural, whether Essential, as is the Union of the Form with the
matter; or by local contract, that is, natural touching one of another, as
Water is united to the Vessel; or by mixture, as Water is united to Honey; or
by the coupling together of common and special nature, as the Genus is united
to the Species; or by cohesion, as when one part of the Body cohereth with
another; or by Adhesion, as when pitch cleaves to our hands; or by Inhesion,
as when an Accident inhereth in the Subject, it is not Civil, as is the Union of
many Persons into one Body politic. Positively, it is a Spiritual Union; in
respect of the verity thereof, it is real, not imaginary; in respect of the
things united, it is substantial; in respect of its way and manner, it is
supernatural and secret; in respect of the nearness of it; it is close and
intimate. Some of the reasons of my dissent from those that Assert a personal
Inhabitation are these.

If there be a personal Inhabitation of the Spirit in Believers, there is also
a personal Inhabitation of the Father and of the Son in them, 1 John 4.15, 16.
Gal. 2.20. John 17.23* The latter is absurd, therefore also the former.

If the Person of the Spirit be in the Person of every Individual Believer,
then every Individual Believer is two Persons. The latter is absurd, therefore
the former.

If the Union between the Spirit and Believers be personal, then there are more
Hypostatical Unions than that of the Divine and Humane Nature, in Christ: The
Scripture knows no more, 1 Timothy 3.16. Joh. 1.14. therefore there are no more.

Where the Person of the Spirit is, there is the Father, Son, and Spirit, for
the Essence of God is inseparable from either of the Persons. The Essence of
Father, Son and Spirit is not in Believers, therefore not the Person of the
Spirit.

If the Personal property of the Spirit, which is Procession from the Father
and the Son, be inseparable from the Person of the Spirit, then the Person of
the Spirit is not in Believers: The former is true, therefore the latter. The
reason of the connection of the Major is this: The personality of the Spirit was
from Eternity, is at this day what it always was, and will be to all Eternity
what it has ever been. The Spirit did, does, and will invariably proceed from
the Father and the Son. Where the Person of the Spirit is, there must be the
Person of the Father and of the Son. Believers were not from Eternity, and now
they have an actual Existence, the Person of the Father, nor the Person of the
Son not being in them, from whom the Spirit does proceed, the consequence to me
is clear, that the Person of the Spirit is not in them.

The Spirit is no otherwise in Believers now, than before the Incarnation of
Christ; I have not heard of any that plead for a Personal Inhabitation of the
Spirit in Old Testament-Believers; and there is no reason appears to me why
this Privilege should be peculiarly appropriated to us more than to the other.
It Is true, that which is called, The Promise of the Father, Act. 1.4. and the
Promise of the Spirit, Joh. 16.7, 8. was not to have its Accomplishment, till
after the Ascension of Christ; but that is to be understood of the pouring out
of the Spirit in a larger measure, and on a far greater number than before,
Joel 2.28. Act. 2.17.

If the Person of the Spirit is in Believers now in the Days of the Messiah,
either he is so in all, or only in some. If in all, has he been so in all
Ages, from the Incarnation or Ascension of Christ till now, or only in some
Ages? Does he enter into them when first the Work of Regeneration is begun in
them, or afterward? Where he once comes, does he never after recede? If in
all, and at all times, how comes it that he has manifested his personal
Presence to so few all this while? If thus in all, how comes it, that there are
still, and have been so many personal Infirmities and Failings where he takes
up his constant Residence? How comes it, that some of them have, in an hour of
Temptation, grossly prevaricated, for a time, both in Principles and Practice?
If in some only, then this is a Privilege peculiar to those few, and not to
others: If so, by what Covenant or Promise is this Privilege entailed upon
them exclusive of others? or does the purchase of Christ's Death as to this,
extend to them, not to others?

The greatest Argument, for what I can perceive, for a personal inexistence of
the Spirit in Believers is, that there are so many Texts of Scripture which
speaking of this do speak of him as a Person, Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self
bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God, v. 26. Quo
efficitur ut clamemus nos.
The Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groaning, which cannot be
uttered -- All I reply hereunto at present is this; By the same Reason also
there must be a personal inexistence of the Father and the Son in them, 1 John
4.12, 13. If we love one another, God dwells in us, -- Hereby we know that we
dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit, v. 15, 16.
Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him, and
he in God -- God is Love; and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and
God in him, Gal. 2.20. Christ lives in me.

Mr. Samuel Eaton's Arguments against a Personal In-dwelling of the Spirit in
Believers, are of weight with me, Quakers confuted, p. 1. 2. We do not believe
that there is any substantial, essential, or personal Union between this
eternal Spirit and Believers; for such Unions would either make the Spirit and
Believers some Third Thing, as when Soul and Body are united, a Third Thing
which is neither Soul nor Body, but compounded of both, arises from it, which
is, called Man; or else there will be a confounding of Substance, which cannot
be; for God cannot mix with the Creature: And else such Union, if it should be
personal, as betwixt the two Natures in Christ, would make Believers God, and
equal with Christ; and consequently equal with God himself: the consequence of
which would be, that such Persons would have an Almighty Power, which they
might put forth in working as many Miracles as they please, as they may see it
make for the Glory of God; and that they would be Omniscient, and know all
things, and would have the rest of God's Attributes as Christ had, who was God,
and equal with God, and in whom this personal Union was. And though we believe
that the Spirit of Christ dwells in Saints, yet we assert the Spirit of Christ
to be distinct from the Saints, and the Saints from the Spirit; and though he
dwells in them, yet he acts not in them, but as it pleases him; neither does
he impart Wisdom, Power, Grace, and Glory, but as it pleases him, 1 Cor. 12.7,
to 12.

There are some Passages in Mr. R Sherl. Discourse of the Holy Spirit, worthy
of a Remark, p. 11, 12. It was the Error of the Macedomans and Samosatenians
of old, and of the Socinians of late, That by the Spirit of God is meant no
other, but Virtus seu efficacia, qua hommes fideles sanctificantur and divinis
usibus consecrantur; i. e. That Virtue or Efficacy, whereby faithful Men are
sanctified and consecrated to Divine Offices. And opposite to this Extreme,
many nowadays run to the other, mistaking and misterming the Efficacies and
Virtues of the Spirit for the Person of the Spirit himself: The Holy Orthodox
Truth lies betwixt these two Extremes -- And when you read in Holy Scriptures
of being filled with the Holy Ghost, or made Partakers of the Spirit of God, it
is not to be understood of the Spirit in respect of his personal Essence; for
thus he fills the World, and contains all things, being really existent and
present, in and with all things and Creatures, giving unto All their Life and
Breath, and all things; In whom we live, and move, and have our Being, Act. 17.
viz, by his inexisting Presence; and this in respect of his personal Essence.
If we should say then, That the Spirit of God is in his Saints and Servants
here upon Earth in a greater measure than other Men personally, and in respect
of his Essence, we should so divide, and consequently define and limit the
Essence of God, which is undivided, infinite, and unlimited, Jer. 23.23. Am I a
God at Hand, and not a God afar off? Can any hide himself in Secret Places,
that I should not see him; for do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord?
Thus then those Scripture-Phrases of receiving the Holy Ghost -- are not to be
understood of the Spirit, in respect of his personal Essence, but in respect of
his Impressions and Workings on the Souls of Men, in respect of his Gifts and
Graces, which are various and diverse, and carry their Name from the Cause or
Author of them, 1 Cor. 12.4. There are diversities of Gifts, but the same
Spirit; where the Spirit is plainly distinguished from his Gifts; as the Cause
from the Effect; the Workman from the Work of his Hands; or as the Body of the
Sun from the Light and Heat which is darted and displayed from it. And whereas
it is said, The Spirit is one, but his Gifts diverse, we may hence observe, That
if we should confound the Spirit of God with the Gifts and Qualifications
dispensed from him, we should be so far from worshipping the true God, which is
but One, that we should fall into that gross Idolatry of the Heathens of old,
making as many Spirits of God, as they made Gods; who Deified the moral
Virtues, and worshipped their several Virtuous Qualifications, as Gods. Hence
it is, that some being persuaded, that they have the Spirit of God personally
abiding in them, have been puffed up with such an excessive Spiritual Pride, and
self-conceited Eminence, as not only to exalt them selves above their Brethren,
but even to extol themselves above the Heavens, and most blasphemously to
profess and boast of an equality with God. There was a Testimony bore against
this Principle by a Synod in New England.

6. Preliminary. The Word Grace in the Scripture is of a double Acceptance,
there is Gratia gratum faciens; which is says Scharp. Curs. These. p. 383.
Paterna Dei benevolentia qua immerentes gratis complectitur. It is the same
with Divine Benignity, or God himself, freely willing to communicate the
Specialities of his favor even to those that are most underserving, Genesis 9.8.
Exodus 33.19. 1 Cor. 15.10. I am what I am by the Grace of God: Haec sons and
causa bonorum and donorum omnium est, and non in nobis, sed in Deo residet.
This is the Original of all the good things we have, and is not resident in us
but in God, if we may so phrase it: Quicquid est in Deo est Deus. It is God
himself freely communicating the choicest of his Blessings to those that are
less than the least of Mercies, Genesis 32.10. There is, Gratia gratis data, or,
Donum quodvis quod ex gratuito Dei amore and liberalitate in nos confertur. Any
Gift that is bestowed on us of the Love, Favor, and Bounty of God, Heb. 12.15,
28. Let us have Grace whereby we may serve God acceptably, Act. 11.23. and
13.43. Ephesians. 4.7. 2 Cor. 8.7. and 9.8. The Question is of Grace in this latter
Sense; not of Grace in the former Sense. That which is in all Men, is the
Saving Grace of God, says J. E. and an increated Being. That which is in all
Men is not Grace, say I, nor an Increated Being; yea, that which is true Saving
Grace in Believers, is not an Increated Being. Thus I have done with the
Preliminaries. It is needful in the next place, that some Definition be given
of Grace inherent in Believers; for there is nothing else in others that
deserves the Denomination of Grace, or is so to be called.

That Grace which has Man for its Subject of Inhesion may be thus described:
It is a Supernatural and Special Gift of God, bestowed upon some in and through
Christ, as Mediator of the New Covenant.

I call it a Supernatural Gift, because it proceeds not; neither can it proceed
from Nature, as now in its lapsed State. A special Gift, because not given to
all. Faith is one of these Graces; and, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2 All Men have not Faith. A
Free Gift, to show that God in dispensing inherent Grace to Sinners, is not
acted by necessity of Nature, but is a voluntary Agent; he might have chused
whether he would have bestowed it on one or another; herein he acts according
to the good Pleasure of his Will, Ephesians. 1.5. and according to the Riches of his
Grace, Ephesians. 1.7. 1 Cor. 4.7. Who makes thee to differ from another? or, What
have thou that thou have not received? When I say, bestowed upon some, this
implies, that Grace in this and the other Man, was a little while ago a n^^ens,
that which had no Existence. Hence the Argument runs thus; That which a li^^^e
while ago was a nonentity, cannot be an Increated Being; such was Grace
inherent in this and the other Man. Therefore --

When I say, bestowed in and through Christ -- it is to distinguish it from the
Blessings of a General and Common Providence, Psalm. 33.5. and 119.64. and
145.14, 15, 16. The Whole Earth is full of the Goodness of the Lord; and his
tender Mercies are over all his Works: But this is a Speciality of Divine
Favor, given only to the Elect in and through Christ, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5. and
there are none actually possessed thereof, but they that are Members of that
Mystical Body, whereof Christ is Head, Ephesians. 4.16.

Another Description of Inherent Grace, is this; It is an eminent Work of the
Spirit of God upon the Souls of Sinners, or the preaching of the Gospel,
whereby nature is so far renewed in them in respect of Qualities, that all old
things are done away, and all things are made new, in order to their being in a
Capacity to glorify God here, and their being glorified with him to all
Eternity hereafter.

It is a Work of the Holy Ghost, Joh. 3.3, 5. Tit. 3.5. Hence I argue thus,
That which has the Holy Ghost for its Efficient, is no Increated but a Created
Being: Such is Grace in Believers; Therefore --

I call it an Eminent Work of the Holy Ghost, to distinguish from other more
inferior Works of his. All the Works of Creation and Providence are the Works
of Father, Son and Spirit, according to that Saying, Opera Trinitatis ad extra
sunt indivisa, What is done by one is done by all Three. But when Grace is
wrought in the Soul of a Sinner, that is, an eminent Work. The Works of
Creation have the Father for their Efficient, 1 Cor. 8.6. Of him are all
things. The Son 1 Cor. 8.6. By him are all things, Joh. 1.10. The Holy Ghost,
Genesis 1.2. Psalm. 33.6. By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all
the Host of them by the Spirit of his Mouth.

The Works of Providence have the Father for their Efficient. He that feeds the
Ravens, and clothes the L^^^es, Matthew. 6.26. Luke 12.24. Psalm. 145.13, 14, 15,
16. The Son, Heb. 1.3. He upholds all things by the Word of his Power. Col.
1.17 -- By him all things consist. The Holy Ghost, the qualifying and
accomplishing of Zerubbabel for building and finishing the Second Temple, was a
Work of Providence, and the Holy Ghost had a Hand therein, Zech. 4.6, 7. Not by
Might, nor by Power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts. Who art thou,
great Mountain before Zerubbabel thou shall become a Plain, and he shall bring
forth the Head-stone thereof with Shoutings, crying, Grace, Grace unto it.

Upon the Souls of Sinners. This denotes the Objects on which the Grace-working
Acts and Operations of the Holy Ghost are terminated, considered antecedently
to his Working this Work in and upon them; they are Sinne^s not Saints;
whatever their Gifts and Endowments may be, natural or acquired, they are void
and destitute of Saving Grace. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the Unrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. -- Such were some of you, but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. 1 Timothy 1.13, 14. -- Who was before a
Blasphemer, and a Persecuor, and Injurious; but I obtained Mercy -- and the
Grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant with Faith and Love which is in Christ
Jesus. If they that have Grace in them to Day, had it not Yesterday, then the
Grace which is in them to Day, is no Increated, but a Created Being. But so it
is with them that are Saints to Day, and were Sinners Yesterday. Therefore --

By the preaching of the Gospel. Though Children are capable both of Grace,
Luke 1.15. and of Glory, Matthew. 19.14. and God has ways to work Grace in them
beyond what we can think of, Joh. 3.8. his Gracious Acts and Operations are
many times imperceptible, and not to be discerned by us; what I now assert, is
to be understood of them that are Adult; ordinarily the Spirit works Grace in
them by the preaching of the Gospel. 1 Pet. 1.23, 24, 25. Being born again, not
of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives and
abides for ever -- And this is the Word which by the Gospel is preached unto
you. Romans 10.14, 15, 16, 17. -- Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
Word of God. Act. 11.21, 22. and 13, 44. -- 48. and 10.33. 42, 43, 44. 1 Thessalonians.
2.13. Psalm. 110.2, 3 1 Cor. 4.15. -- In Christ Jesus I have begotten you
through the Gospel. That which is a Spiritual Procreation by the
instrumentality of Men and Means, is no Increated, but a Created Being: Such is
Grace in Believers. Therefore --

Whereby nature is so far renewed in them in respect of Qualities, that all old
things are done away, and -- This is added to show, that where Grace is
wrought, the Substance of Soul and Body remains what it was before; the
Alteration is only in respect of Qualities. The Mind that was before dark and
ignorant, is now enlightened, 2 Cor. 4.6. 1 Thessalonians. 5.4, 5, 8. The Will that was
stubborn, obstinate, and averse from that which is Good, is now made freely to
Will that which is represented to it as good, Psalm. 110.3. The Affections that
were carnal, and wholly set upon things below, are now set upon things which
are above, where Christ sits on the Right Hand of God, Col. 3, 1. Ephesians.
2.4, 5. Phil. 3 20.

2 Cor. 5.17. If any Man be in Christ he is a new Creature: old things are past
away; behold all things are become new. Here is a Periphrasis or Description of
one that is a Christian indeed, that has true Grace, in Three Particulars; and
the latter is evidential of the former. A Christian indeed is one that is in
Christ, or that has Union with Christ -- Union with Christ is evidenced by a
new Creation that passes upon the Person united to him; and the new Creation is
evidenced by the Viversality of the Change, that is wrought in them that are
new made; there is a new Heart, and a new Head; new Principles, new Practices,
new Thoughts, new Words, new Affections, new Actions, new Desires, new
Delights, new Projects, new Purposes, new Contrivances, new Counsels; old
Companions in Sin cast off, and new ones chosen in their places; new Aims,
Ends, and Intentions All that are in Christ are thus thoroughly and universally
renewed; whoever they are that are not thus thoroughly and universally renewed,
are not yet in Christ; this is true saving Grace; and whatever falls short of
this is called by a wrong name, if it is called Grace. If they that are in
Christ are new Creatures, then Grace in Believers is no increated, but a
created Being: The former is true, therefore the Latter. The connection of the
Major is evident, because they that are in Christ and Believers are Synonyma's;
and they are denominated new Creatures, from the great change that is wrought
upon 'em; when Grace is infused into their Souls by the Spirit of God: For
Grace and the new Creature are also Synonyma's, Gal. 6.15. For in Christ Jesus,
neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a new
Creature; as if he should have said, you are wholly taken up in Disputations,
about Circumcision and Uncircumcision; all your Conferences, all your Studies
run out about this; but the Truth of Grace lies not in these things, says
Burg. Spirit. Refin. p. 246. and p. 251. This Phrase a new Creature implies,
that the Work of Grace is wrought by the sole power of God, it comes only from
him; and also that this being thus wrought in us, is of a most excellent and
glorious Nature.

Ephesians. 2.10. We are his Workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good Works --
(...) ipsus opus sumus, factura: They, that in all they are, and have, are the
Workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus -- have nothing in them that is an
increated Being; such are Believers: Therefore --

Ephesians. 4.24. -- And that ye put on the New-Man, which after God is created in
Righteousness and true Holiness. If the New-Man, which Believers are to put on,
is after God, created in Righteousness and true Holiness; then the
Righteousness and true Holiness of Believers is no increated but a created
Being: The former is true, Therefore the Latter.

Col. 3.10. And have put on the New-Man, which is renewed in Knowledge, after
the Image of him that created him. If the New-Man, which Believers put on, is
renewed in Knowledge, after the Image of him that created him; then Grace in
Believers is no increated but a created Being: The former is true, therefore
the latter. The New-Man renewed in Knowledge, after the Image of God, and Grace
inherent are Identical, they are one and the same thing.

Isai. 43.1. Thus says the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and that formed
thee, O Israel. V. 6.7. I will say to the North, give up, and to the South,
keep not back: Bring my Sons from far, and my Daughters from the ends of the
Earth, even every one that is called by my name; for I have created him for my
Glory; I have formed him, yea, I have made him. If every Son and Daughter as
such is created, then there is nothing in them that is increated; the former is
true, therefore the latter. Mal. 2.10. Have we not all one Father, has not one
God created us?

Is. 65.17, 18. Behold, I create new Heavens and a new Earth, and the former
shall not be remembered nor come into mind, but be ye glad and rejoice for ever
in that which I create, for behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her
People a Joy. This (say the Engl. Annot.) being spiritually understood is
applicable to the State of the Church, in the times of the Gospel, under the
Kingdom of Christ, in regard of those plentiful endowments of spiritual Graces
that therein shall abound, -- and hereunto does the Apostle apply this
Renovation of the Church, to be inc^oated or begun in this World, 2 Cor. 5.17.
and to be consummated in the next, 2 Pet. 3.13. Rev. 21.1, 5. an thus also do
some of the Jewish Doctors expound it Isa. 66 22. As the new Heavens and the
new Earth which I will make shall remain before me, so shall your seed and your
name remain. If the Church considered, as under the Old Testament, and as under
the New Testament, as Militant and Triumphant, be a Divine Creation; then Grace
in Believers is no increated, but a created excellency: The former is true,
therefore the latter.

Having gone over the parts of the last description of Grace, and glanced at
some Arguments from thence, grounded on express Scripture testimonies, I
proceed to some other Arguments to prove this Position: That Grace in Believers
is no increated Excellency.

If there be some higher Excellencies than any thing that is in Believers,
during their Pilgrimage here; and yet they are no increated but created
Excellencies; much more must any thing that is in them be so: The former is
true, therefore also the latter. It Is the minor of this Syllogism that is to be
proved; and I prove it thus.

1. The Humane Nature of Christ, is a greater Excellency than any thing that is
in Believers: The humane Nature of Christ is no increated Being; therefore much
less is any thing that is in Believers so. They that deny any thing here must
be Pagans or Jews; not such as profess the Christian Religion. 1 Timothy 3.16.
Without controversy great is the mystery of Godliness, God was manifest in the
Flesh. He who is over all, God blessed for ever, came of the Fathers concerning
the Flesh, Romans 9.5. John 1.14. The Word was made Flesh. Verbum, says Learned
Jeans, aut est prolativum aut substantiale; the Word is either Enunciative or
Substantial. It is the Word in the latter, not in the former sense, that is
made Flesh, Joh. 1.1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was God. Rev.
19.13. His name is called, the Word of God. Romans 1.3. -- Concerning Jesus
Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the Flesh.
The Holy Ghost by a supernatural and miraculous Operation framed his Flesh in
the Womb of the Virgin Mary, without the seed of Man. Luke 1.31, 32, 35. The
Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow
thee; therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be
called the Son of God. Gal. 4.4 When the fullness of the time was come, God sent
forth his Son, made of a Woman -- Heb. 8.2. and 9.11. and 10.5. -- A Body thou
have prepared for me, (...), it signifies the Creation of it, and the
Sanctification of it. That which was made of a Woman must be a created Being:
Such is the humane Nature of Christ; Therefore -- Phil. 2.7, 8. He took upon
him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of Men; and being found
in fashion as a Man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, even
the Death of the Cross. An increated Being is impassible or incapable of
suffering; the humane Nature of Christ is capable of suffering, and did
actually suffer death; therefore it is no increated Being; and why should any
thing in Man exalt itself to move in a Sphere or Orb, above the humane Nature
of Christ? It is taken into the Unity of the second Person of the Holy Trinity;
and that is an Honor conferred upon no other Creature. By virtue of this
Hypostatical or Personal Union; He that is God-Man is the first born of every
Creature, Col. 1.15. which is not so to be understood, as if he had been
created before all other Creatures; but that the Rights and Privileges of
Primogeniture did belong to him. The Firstborn, by the Law was advanced to a
degree of super-eminent dignity above his Brethren; he had Power and Authority
over them; he was Prince of the Family, Psalm 89.27. see Ephesians. 1.21, 22, 23.
Heb. 2.7, 8. -- Thou crownedst him with glory and honor, and did set him
over the work of thy hands; thou have put all things in subjection under his
feet. When once the humane Nature was assumed into the Unity of the second
Person, that Union remained firm and indissoluble; when Death made a separation
between his Soul and Body for a time; the Union between the divine Nature and
the humane continued, Luke 23.43. Though the humane Nature as such is not
Adorable, nor to be adored; yet, he that is God-Man, is the Object of
Adoration, Psalm 22.27, 28, 29, 30. Isa. 45.23. Romans 14.10, 11. Psalm. 45.11.
Rev. 5.13. Psalm 2.10, 11, 12. Romans 11.33. 1 Pet. 2.6. Psalm 72.5, 11. Mal.
1.11. The Humane Nature of Christ, is the Organ and Instrument by, and thorough
which, is conveyed all the Grace that Men have, Ephesians. 4.16. Col. 1.19. Joh.
1.16. Ephesians. 1.23. Col. 2.19.

2 If that Grace, which was, and is in the humane Nature of Christ, be no
increated Being; Grace in Believers is not so: The former is true, therefore
the latter. If those Supernatural Divine Qualities, wherewith the humane Nature
of Christ was endowed, did not commence, or begin to exist, till the humane
Nature itself did begin to exist; they were no increated but created
Excellencies: The former is true, Therefore --

Isa. 11.1, 2, 3. -- There shall come forth a Rod out of the Stem of J^sse, and
a Branch shall grow out of his Roots, and the Spirit of the Lord shall rest
upon him; the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and
Might -- As was the Rod that was to come forth out of the Stem of Jesse, and
the Branch that was to grow out of his Roots; so was the Spirit of the Lord
that was to rest upon him: But so it was, that the Rod that was to come forth
out of the Stem of Jesse -- Was the Messiah, considered according to his humane
Nature, a created Being: Therefore, so was also the Spirit that was to rest
upon him, a created Spirit.

That which is capable of growing must needs be a created Being; such was
Habitual Grace Inherent in the humane Nature of Christ: Therefore -- Luke 2.40,
46, 52. he increased in Wisdom and Stature. What Grace was suitable to the
State of Childhood, that he had to the full; and afterward, what Grace was
suitable to a more Adult State; that also he had in such perfection as the
humane nature was capable of.

Zech. 3.9. Behold, the Stone that I have laid before Joshua, upon one Stone
shall be seven Eyes; Behold, I will engrave the graving thereof, says the Lord
of Hosts. --

The Stone is Jess Christ, the chief corner Stone: By Eyes is meant Knowledge,
Wisdom, and Providence; seven denotes Perfection and Sufficiency. By engraving
the graving thereof is signified the Beautifying, and as it were polishing the
humane Nature of Christ with all Gifts and Graces, needful for a due discharge
of the Work and Office he was called unto; probably the Prophet alludes to the
costly and curious Workmanship of the Stones of the Temple, which did in some
weak manner set forth the excellency of Christ's Gifts and Graces.

Col. 1.19. It pleased the Father, that in him all fullness should dwell. Here
is, says Jeans, an Adjunct, Grace set forth to us, by its Extent and
Excellency, expressed in two several gradations; a Fullness, an Al fullness of
Grace, its subject, in him, i. e. in Christ as Man, The Inhesion of this
Adjunct in this Subject dwells, to denote that it was in him after a
permanent and fixed manner: The cause of all this fullness dwelling in him, the
Decree of the Father; Christ owed it not to his own or others merits, but
solely to the free purpose and pleasure of Heaven.

In this Fullness of Grace that dwells in Christ, there is an All sufficiency,
and an Indeficiency. It is sufficient for himself, and for others, for All his
at all times, and in all States and Conditions: It will never fail: It is a
bottomless Ocean, that can never be exhausted or drawn dry by thousands of
Millions of Sinners or Saints; in him are unemptible Treasures, and an
overflowing redundancy of Spirit and Grace.

Orth. Er. p. 48. Norton confirms what we have said; created Habitual Grace,
which Christ received out of measure, John 3.34. was in him, in its full
Latitude in four respects; In respect of its Subject, here it is to be found in
its proper Subject, as Light in the Sun; Grace is not only in Christ, as in its
proper, but as in its superexceeding Subject. In respect of its Nature; there
is in Christ all kind of Grace: In respect of the Intenseness of it; it is in
him in the highest degree, in the utmost, as much as is possible to be in a
Creature; both negatively, it could not be exceeded; and positively, none could
be equal to it; the Soul of Christ does not only eminently contain, but exceed
all the Grace that is in Men and Angels. In regard of the Effects, that he
might be fit to derive unto his members, all that measure and fullness of Grace
that becomes such an Head.

Thus again he speaks of Christ's power as Man; as Christ received the Spirit
out of measure, so the created Power of Christ was, and is, out of measure: The
power of Working Miracles was in Christ constantly and permanently after the
manner of an habit. -- Homo Christus habet omnem potentiam, humanitas omnem
potestatem, the Man Christ is omnipotent; the Humanity has as much power as a
Creature is capable of. Hereby Christ was capable to receive that complete
Authority of executing all Power in Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 28.18. The
Knowledge that is in Christ is either Increated or Created: Increated is that
which is in him as God, whereby he knows all things, John 2.25. Created, is
that which is in him as Man, and is of three sorts, Beatifical, Infused,
Experimental Beatifical Knowledge is called the Knowledge of Vision; by it he
not only sees God face to face, as all the Blessed do; but sees also the
Manhood in personal Union with the Godhead -- John 1.18. Its Principle, the
perfect understanding of the Manhood; its medium, the Light of glory. Infused,
whereby he knows all thins that can be known by the concreated Abilities of
Angels or Men, Isa. 11.2. Its Principle is a habit infused of God; its medium,
the light of Grace. Experimental, whereby he knows all things that could be
known by practice, and rational observation of events, Luke 2.52. Its
Principle, the faculty of reason; its medium, personal experience, Heb. 5.6.
and observation of re-iterated events by the light of reason. Christ's
Beatifical Knowledge admits not increase, in respect of the Habit or Act: His
Infused Knowledge admits not increase in respect of habit, though it might in
respect of the Act: His Experimental Knowledge seems to have admitted increase,
both in respect of Habit and Act.

3. If the Angels of Heaven, with all the Grace they have, be created Beings;
then also the Sons of Men, with all the Grace they have, are created Beings:
The former is true, therefore the latter. I do not know what can be denied;
however, I proceed to the proof of what I argue for, Genesis 1.1. In the beginning
God created the Heaven and the Earth; therefore also Angels and Men in All they
are and have, Genesis 2.1. Thus the Heavens and the Earth were finished, and all
the Host of them. The Angels are called the Hosts of Heaven, Psalm 103.20, 21.
and 148.2. Luke 2.13.

Col. 1.16. By him were all things created, that are in Heaven, and that are in
Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or
Principalities or Powers --

Job 38.6, 7. Whereupon are the foundations of the Earth fastened, or who laid
the corner Stone thereof: When the morning Stars sang together, and all the
Sons of God shouted for joy. By these must be understood the Angels; for
neither the Stars in the Firmament were created, non Man, when the Foundations
of the Earth were fast'ned: They are called Stars, even as some Men of Eminency
are so called, Dan. 8.10. and 12.3. Rev. 16.20. and morning Stars, for their
excellent Luster and Glory, for which they are called Angels of Light, 2 Cor.
11.14 -- Sons of God; partly, because they had the whole of their Being from
God; and partly, because they were Partakers of his Glorious Image. They are
said to sing together -- because probably none of them having then apostatized,
they were all of them harmonious in this Heavenly Work of celebrating the
Praise of their Creator.

How Glorious soever the Angels are in respect of their Essence and Graces; and
though they are Stars of the first Magnitude, in comparison of all in this
Sublunary World, yet they are but Creatures, and there is an infinite disparity
between them and the Increated Being. Job 4.18, 19. Behold, he put no trust in
his Servants; and his Angels he charged with Folly: How much less on them that
dwell in Houses of Clay, whose Foundation is in the Dust, which are crushed
before the Moth? God did discern Vanity and Folly in them: they were liable to
Sin, and some of them being left to themselves did actually sin, 2 Pet. 2.4.
Jude 6. There are many things which they know not but by Revelation from God.
Daniel had the Knowledge of the Mystery of the Seventy Weeks from Gabriel, as
he, no doubt, had it from the Father of Lights, Dan. 9.22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
There are many things also, the Knowledge whereof they acquire by Observation
and Experience: Taking Cognizance of the Occurrences and Acts of Providence
toward the Church in her Militant State, they learn what they were sinlesly
ignorant, or nescient of before, Ephesians. 3.10. Though they are most excellent
Creatures, yet they are not Omniscient, they know not the Day of Judgment, Mark
13.32. They cannot know future Contingencies, which depend not on necessary
Causes and Agents, which keep one certain, regular, uniform Course, but upon
voluntary Agents, which are variable, tickle, and uncertain in their Actings:
The certain Knowledge of such things God reserves only to himself, Isa. 41.22,
23. and 42.8, 9. and 44.7, 8. They know not the Hearts of Men, Jer. 17.9, 10. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. and 2 Chronicles. 6.30. The Knowledge of Angels is not Intuitive and
noetical, but dianoetical, and discursive. No finite Creature, can by one
Intuitive Act see all things at once; that is proper to God. Act. 15.18. Known
unto God are all his Works from the beginning of the World.

If what Holiness Adam had in the State of Innocence was no Increated Being,
what Grace Believers have now is no Increated Being. The former is true:
Therefore -- If Grace be as to Substance, what Holiness was in Adam, then it
remains still what it always was, no Increated, but a Created Excellency --
Essentia rerum posit a est in indivisibili, The Essence of things is
unalterably the same in all Ages. Though Grace, as it is in this and the other
Subject may, recipere majus and minus, it does admit of different degrees and
measures in one more than another; yet it is in its nature the same in all.

If Adam had no Holiness in him before the Fall, but what was derived from God
the Creator, then it was no Increated, but a Created Excellency. The former is
true: Therefore -- Genesis 1.26. God said, Let us make Man in our Image, after our
Likeness. Adam, not only considered as a Man, was made of God, but also as
endued with divine Qualities. The Image of God and Grace are identical; or at
least, Grace is no small part of the Image of God. The Footsteps of the
Almighty were upon the rest of this lower Creation; but the Image of God was
impressed upon Man; by Virtue of which, he did resemble his Maker for Wisdom,
Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness, so far as such a Creature was capable
to resemble him. Ephesians. 4.24. and Col. 3.10. are as a Comment on Genesis 1.26.
They are an Exegesis, or Explication of it, to show, that it was not the
Essence of God, or any part of the Essence of God, as some do ignorantly
insinuate, that was imparted unto Men at first; but rather, that he had a
Rational and Immortal Soul, embellished with those divine Qualities, which made
him more like unto God, than the mere Animals and inanimate Creatures. Simile
non est idem. That which is like a thing is not the thing it self. Eccles.
7.29. God made Man upright. If God did not only make Man himself, but also his
Original Uprightness, then Man's Inherent Grace is no Increated, but Created
Excellency. The former is true: Therefore -- What Man is in his Essentials or
Integrals, in his Naturals or Supernaturals, in his Morals or Spirituals, he is
a Creature of God, and nothing more; and whoever say otherwise, they neither
know God nor themselves, Nature nor Grace, nor any thing else aright.

5. If the Soul of Man be no Increated, but a Created Being, much more mus^
Grace inherent be so. The former is true: Therefore -- C^n. 2.7. The Lord God
formed Man of the Dust of the Ground, and breat^^d into his N^strils the breath
or Life; and Man became a living Soul. Both the Body and Soul were originally
of God's making: There was some pre existent Matter, or which the bodily part
was framed, but in it self indisposed for the Reception of one Form more than
another. This by some is called, a Mediate Creation. There was no pre-existent
Matter of which the Soul was made: this is called Immediate Creation. God
breathed into his Nostrils the breath of Life. He breathed, i. e. immediately
from himself, or secretly -- into his Nostrils the Breath or Spirit. This
Phrase is used because the Soul's Residence in the Body is manifested by
Breathing, which ceases not till the Soul departs out of the Body Of Life,
Hebr. Lives in the plural, to express the several Faculties and Operations of
Life, exercised by the Soul, in Vegetation, Sense, and Reason, and the rest of
the Abilities subordinate thereunto; which are so far diversified in the
natures of them, that they proceed from one Fountain; yet they seem to be as so
many several Souls by the diversity of their Operations, and by some have been
conceived to be so indeed. And Man became a living Soul; i. e. The Body formed
of Dust in the shape of Man, and the Soul breathed into it by God, became one
Person, living a natural Life, exercised in Vegetation, Sense, and Reason. That
the Soul is a Created Being, is also clear from other Texts.

Eccles. 12.7 Then shall the Dust return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit
shall return unto God who gave it; to wit, in a peculiar manner, says P^^l, by
his Creating Power. Hence he is called, The Father of Spirits, Heb. 12.9. Jer.
38.16. So Zedekiah the King swear secretly unto Jeremiah, saying, As the Lord
(...), that made us this Soul, I will not put thee to death -- As the Lord
lives, that gave either of us that Life by which we live.

Isa. 57.16. I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wr^th: for
the Spirit should fail before me, and the Soul which I have made.

That the Soul is more excellent than Grace, or any Quality that is in it, or
adheres to it, is evident. The Substance is more excellent than the Accidence.
The Soul is a Substance, Grace the Accidence. The Subject is more excellent
than the Adjunct; the Soul is the Subject, Grace the Adjunct; therefore the
Soul is more excellent than Grace. Accidens est quod potest a less vel ab^^sl^
^^ne subject in^^r^eu. The Soul is Independent on the Body; it can and does
sub^^^t in a State of Separation; yea, and it can and does subsist whether it
have Grace or not; therefore Grace is only an Accidence. Accidentis esse est
inesse, the Essence of an Accident is, that it is in some Subject, and Subsists
not without it. Therefore, a primo ad ultimum, from the first to the last, if
the Soul, which is in its nature more excellent than Grace, be no Increated,
but a Created Being, much more is Grace so.

6 If the Glory which Believers are to be made Partakers of in Heaven be no
Increated, but a Created Being, much more what they have here is so. The former
is true: Therefore Grace and Glory are in their nature the same; the difference
is only gradual; Grace is Glory in the Bud; Glory is Grace in Perfection. The
Enjoyments of Saints in via and in patria are for Substance the same; only the
latter are in a far larger measure than the former. Now we see darkly, as in a
Glass, then face to face. 1 Cor. 13.12. Now we drink of the Water of Life, as
it runs in streams, and as it is in the Cisterns of Ordinances, and but a
little at a time: Then we shall have a full draught of it at the Wellhead. In
a word, the Glory of Heaven is a constant High-Tide of Grace, exercised at the
highest, and a constant High-Tide of the highest spiritual Enjoyments, that are
enjoyable by created Beings. Heb. 11.9, 10. By Faith Abraham sojourned in the
Land of Promise, as in a strange Country, dwelling in Tabernacles with Isaac
and Jacob, Heirs with him of the same Promise; for he looked for a City with
Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God.

That which has God for its Maker, is no increated Being; such is the Glory of
Heaven: Therefore, -- That which has Foundations, is no increated Being; such
is the heavenly City: Therefore, -- That which has an Architect and Builder,
is no increated Being; such is the heavenly City: Therefore, -- That which is
an Effect proceeding from some other Cause, is no increated Being; such is the
Glory of Heaven: Therefore, -- Matthew. 20.23. To sit on my right hand, and on my
left, is not mine to give; but it shall be given to them for whom it is
prepared. Matthew. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you. John. 14.2, 3. In my Father's House are many Mansions -- I go
to prepare a place for you; and if I go and prepare a place for you, I will
come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there you may be
also. That which is prepared of God for Believers after this life, is no
increated Being; such is the Glory of Heaven: Therefore, That which is given of
God as an Inheritance, is no increated Being; such is the Glory of Heaven:
Therefore -- I need say no more of this, only conclude with some Passages out
of learned Norton, as Confirmation of what has been asserted and proved:
Orthod. Evang. p. 329. The beatifical Vision is that clear sight of God wherein
consists Blessedness. It is called Vision, because of its clearness;
Beatifical, because it makes the seer blessed. It Is a created sight of the
increated Good. P. 133, 134. The light of Glory is a supernatural glorious
influx, concurring with, and enabling of the inherent Principle of the
glorified Understanding to see God. The Schoolmen say, Lumen Gloriae est
perfectio superaddita, qua intellectus fit efficax, seu confortatur ad videndum
Deum. The Light of Glory is a perfection superadded to the Understanding,
whereby it is enabled to see God. Others, Lumen Gloriae est actualis
illustratio; i. e. Influxus Dei supernaturalis elevans intellectum ad visionem
lissentiae Divinae. It is an actual Illustration; i. e. a supernatural influx
elevating the Understanding unto the Vision of the Divine Essence. Or, Lumen
Gloriae est ipse concursus supernaturalis Beatifici objecti quatenus per illum
objectum istud seipsum immediate intellectui manifesat, efficiendo cum
intellectu beatificam visionem. It is supernatural concourse of the beatifical
Object, immediately manifesting it self to the Understanding, together with the
Understanding causing a most blessed Vision.

God intending to make a Creature happy, gives it a Principle capable to
understand and enjoy himself, the Object of that Principle to be understood and
enjoyed. No Creature is capable of happiness or misery, but the reasonable
Creature: There could be neither Heaven nor Hell, the Joys of the one, nor the
Pains of the other, without understanding. A perfect union of the highest
created Principle with the increated Object, makes Blessedness.

The last Argument I shall mention, is this: If inherent Grace be an increated
Being, it is either the habit or exercise of Grace that is so; but neither of
these is an increated Being: Therefore, --

The habit of Grace is infused into the Soul by the Spirit of God; it is a Work
of the Holy Ghost; being infused into the Soul, it cannot continue its
existence there, without fresh recruits and supplies from above; it cannot put
forth it self into act, without some special assisting influences from him that
planted it there at first, John 15.5. 2 Cor. 3.5. Therefore it is not the habit
of Grace that is an increated Being.

It is not Grace in its exercise that is an increated Being; for that is only
an act of the Soul, sanctified by the Spirit of God; and as such, it has
always some imperfection attending it, till we get to Heaven; Phil. 3 12, 13,
14. I shall here omit several things that might pertinently be brought under
this head, and only speak to some particular Graces as they are acted by us,
and shall leave it to the whole religious and rational Universe to judge,
whether any thing that is acted by us, can be an increated Being.

What is the Grace of Repentance but a sanctified Soul's exercising a godly
Sorrow for all known Sins past, together with sincere, fixed purposes, and
effectual endeavors by divine assistances, to forsake sin for time to come?
Psalm. 51.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 14. Ezekiel. 36.31. Zech. 12.10. Matthew. 26.75. Luke
15.17, 18, 19.

The Grace of Faith is an act of a sanctified Soul, giving a credential assent
to every known Scripture-Truth; especially to that great fundamental Truth,
That there is no Salvation for Sinners, but by the Son of God, apprehended,
applied, and believed in; Acts 4.12. 1 Timothy 1.15. It is to receive him as our
All, and to resign up our selves to him in all we are and have; John 1.12. Col.
2.6, 7. 1 Cor. 1.30. 1 John 5.9, 10, 11, 12.

The Grace of Love is the Soul's going out after God with the most intense
Desires, after the closest Union and Communion that is attainable on this side
Heaven; Psalm. 73.25. Cant. 1.7. John 21.15.

Humility is the Soul's being exceeding low in its own eyes, and not thinking
of itself above what is meet; 1 Cor. 15.9, 10. Ephesians. 3.8.

Patience is the Soul's bearing all Afflictions, as coming from the Lord,
without murmuring or repining; 1 Samuel 3.18. Isaiah 39.8. Micah 7.9. Job 1.21.
Psalm 39.9.

Hope is a patient expectation of God's performing his gracious Promises, with
holy resolves to wait upon him, and keep his way, though for some time he delay
to make good his Word; Romans 8.24, 25. 1 Pet. 1.13. 1 John 3.^.

The Fear of God is a holy awe and dread of the divine Majesty, whereby the
Soul is restrained and deterred from Sin, chiefly because it is an offense to
God; Genesis 39.9. Hos. 3.5. Romans 6.1.

Meekness is a Grace of God, whereby the Heart and Affections of a Man, are
inclined unto a mild and loving, a kind and courteous Carriage toward others,
even when he might be provoked to anger; Numb. 12.4. Prove. 14.29. and 15.18.
and 16.32.

Zeal est indignatio de iis concepta quae indigne fiunt aut fieri praesumuntur
adversus Deum and gloriam ipsius, simulque ardens gloriae Dei promovendae and
propagandae studium. It is a holy Indignation that the Soul has against Sin,
and an ardent Affection to promote and advance the Glory of God, as he has a
Call, and in the place that Providence has set him, Psalm. 69.9. John 2.17.
Exodus 32.19, 20. Numb. 25.6, 7, 8. Psalm. 106.30.

Having sufficiently explained and confirmed this Position, The whole of Man is
a mere Creature; and there is nothing in the best of Men that is an increated
Being; I cannot contentedly pass from this, without putting All upon making
some improvement hereof.

Labor to be well grounded and thoroughly established in this, as a great
Truth of infallible certainty, and it will considerably conduce as a means, by
the Blessing of God, to keep you everlasting y low in your own eyes 1 Pet. 5.5.
Be clothed with humility, (...), quasi dicat, Arcle vobis astringite,
innodatam habete: (...) signifies a Knot; metaphora videtur sumpta a genere
vestimenti in n^dum constricti: Put on Humility, as that which ties all other
Graces together; loosen this, and all the rest are loosened. It is derived of
(...), qu^d est ^^militer de se sentire, to think meanly of ones self.
Philosophers made this a Vice; but the Apostle commands and commends it.
Bernard defines it thus: Humilitas est virtus qua homo verissima sui agnitione
sioi ipsi vilescit. Others, that it is a habit of Mind contrary to Arrogance; it
makes a Man ingenuously to acknowledge what he is, without arrogating to
himself more than is due: Romans 12.3. For, I say, through the Grace given unto
me, to every Man that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he
ought; but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every Man the
measure of Faith: (...) ne sapiat plus quam oportet sapere; i.e. ne sibi
immodice p^aceat ut super by and ambitiosi solent, qui sibi videntur plus
sapere quam revera sapiant. Let no one be immoderately tickled with a fancy
that he has more in him than really he has: Let no one think himself wiser
than really he is; but to think soberly, (...) sed sapiat ad sobrietatem; but
let him be wise to sobriety. Sobrietatem hic intelligit non corporis sed animi;
i. e. modestiam qua sibi nec arrogat quod non habet, nec de eo quod accepit
gloriatur, qua etiam vitat ea quae curiositas and stultitia scire avent. Let
every one of you think modestly of himself. Modesty will not suffer a Man to
say he has that which he has not, or to boast of what he has; and it
restrains him from seeking after, and studying such things as Curiosity and
Folly covets to know.

That this may be as a Nail driven to the head, and fastened by the great
Master of the Assemblies, I judge it neither impertinent nor unuseful to
present you with some weighty Considerations, which, by the Blessing of God,
may keep every Man low in his own eyes, as long as he lives.

I. When Man was in his best estate at first, endowed with Knowledge, Wisdom,
and true Holiness, there was even then a possibility of his Apostasy:
Impeccability was no part of his Essence; that is essential only to God. As
Adam had a posse non peccare; so also there was a posse peccare: He was not
placed so high, but he might fall, and that low enough. This should have kept
him low, and so it should us to this day.

II. As often as we call to mind that that possibility was reduced into act,
that is enough to humble us as long as the World lasts. That may remain a
standing Demonstration to the Universe, That the best of Creatures is but a
Creature at best; liable to sin, and to br^^^^nisery upon it self. Our Proto
Parents did sin in eating the forbidden fruit; and that sin of theirs did
virtually and interpretatively carry all sin in it. It was monstrous
Ingrati^^^^e; it was the Creature's lifting up it self against its Creator; it
was questioning the Truth of God's Word, and harkening unto the Dictates of the
Devil, the great Enemy of Mankind, and a Liar from the beginning, rather than
unto God, who is a great Lover of Mankind, and who is Veracity and Truth it
self. It was not only tampering with the Temptation, but also complying
therewith, and yielding thereunto. It was the hazarding the loss of all
Temporals, Spirituals, and Eternals, for a Trifle, for a matter of Nothing, for
an imaginary, not a real pleasure: It was discontent with their present
Condition, without any color or shadow of Reason; their Sin was intolerable
Pride: The Worm that was newly crept out of the Dust, aspired after a Deity;
they must forsooth be like God, knowing good and evil; but by climbing too
high, they got a fall. Curiosity was their Sin; they must pry into the Secrets
of God, and meddle with matters too high for 'em. Wantonness was their Evil;
though they had all the choice that Paradise afforded, yet their over-dainty
Palates lusted after the forbidden Fruit. Sacrilege was their Sin; the Tree of
the Knowledge of Good and Evil, was of a sacramental and significant Use; and
to alienate Things sacred to another use, than what they were instituted for,
is a great profanation of the Ordinance of God. They were guilty of Murder in
the highest degree, in murdering not only their own Bodies and Souls, but also
the Bodies and Souls of the whole Race of Mankind. Presumption was their Sin,
they ventured to violate an express divine Precept, presuming that God would
show Mercy to them when they had so done.

III. The first Man became not only guilty of eating the forbidden Fruit, but
also that act of his was imputable, and to be imputed to all that were in his
Loins by natural Generation. Romans 5.12. By one Man sin entered into the World,
and death by sin. Verse. 19. By one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners.
Muscul.
In Adamo omnes fuimus, in lumbis ejus. We were all in the Loins of offending
Adam. As Levi is said to have paid Tithes in Abraham before he was born, Heb.
9.10. So we sinned in Adam before we had a Being. Omnes in Adamo peccaverunt,
August.
quia omnes unus ille fuerunt. All were entangled in Adam's Sin, because all
were folded up in Adam's Person. Adam was one; Non tantum in individuo sed in
specie. He was not only an Individual, or single Person, but also the common
Root, Parent, Head, and Representative of Mankind. As soon as his Issue are in
a Capacity to commit sin, they do by their actings approve of what he did. The
Language of their Lives, if not of their Lips, is this: If that which Adam did
were to be done again, we would do it; and if we had been in his place, we
should have done the same as he did.

IV. As in one all sinned, and became liable to Death; so now we have sin in
our Nature by propagation from our more immediate Parents. We come now from the
Womb, not only divested of the Image of God, which we had in Adam before the
Fall, but also invested with the Image of the evil One, which Adam and all our
Parents have had ever since the Fall: No Toad is more full of Venom, nor
Serpent of Poison, than our Nature is now of Sin: O how should this cause us,
with the Leper, to cry out, Unclean, unclean; we do even loath and abhor our
selves, that our Nature is so prone to that which is evil, and so averse from
that which is good: Genesis 5.3. Genesis 6.5. Job 14.4. Psalm. 51.5. Jer. 17.9. Matthew.
15.19.

V. Nature being so deeply depraved in all, and Sin being propagated by Parents
to Children, from Generation to Generation, it must necessarily follow from
hence, That Sinners in their lapsed estate, can do nothing toward their
Restoration, or Redemption, from that unfathomable Abyss, and profound depth of
Sin and Misery, into which they have plunged themselves. When Man comes from
the Womb, he is the most helpless of all Animals, as to things of this Life,
much more as to the things of a better Life: Romans 5.6. When we were yet without
strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly: (...), Pol. Syn.
cum essemus infirmi morbo peccati, variis peccatorum languoribus detenti. When
we were sick of Sin, that was the sad spiritual Disease which had siezed om
Souls, when by reason of so many Sins that had taken hold of us, we were in a
Consumption and languishing Condition, Cum ess^mus nullis viribus,
Spiritualibus donis and viribus penitus destituti, sicut cadaver dicitur (...),
1 Cor. 15.43. when we are wholly destitute of Spiritual Gifts and Strength, as
a Carcass or dead Body is called Weak; It is sown in weakness -- for the
Ungodly, (...), denotat conditionem hominum (...) modo malocum, sed usque adeo
in malitia sua perditorum, ut nu^la illis vis supersit. qua salutem re^^^erare
p^ssint. Christ died for us not only when we were Sinners, but when we had gone
so far in Sin and Wickedness, that we could do nothing toward the Salvation of
our own Souls. Ausim vertere, Cum essemus mortui; for so the Seventy do often
in the Old Testament take (...) in this Sense, Psalm. 9.3. Dan. 11.19, 33, 41.
cum pro peccatis Justitia De^satisfacere, nosmet ab^ra Dei and mor^e vindicare
non poteramus; proinde v^^dice al^o and servatore egebamus, when we were in no
capacity to satisfy Divine Justice for our Sins, or to grapple with the Wrath
and Anger of God, or with Deash, when our Circumstances were such, that we must
eternally perish, if some other had not interposed and stepped in to act in the
capacity of a Redeemer for us. Romans 5.8. God commends his Love toward us, in
that while we were yet Sinners, Christ died for us, (...), while we were
peccatores, i. e. nondum Reconetliati; sed in statu peccati, peccata peccatis
addentes, peccatis dediti, in quibus regnat peccatum, in pecca^^s mortui, ut
vox peccatores accipitur Luc. 7.34. Joh. 9.31. 1 John 1.9 and 3.8. Christ died
for us when we were unreconciled to God, in a State of Sin, adding Sin to Sin,
when we had given up our selves to work Wickedness with greediness and delight,
when we were in Sins and Trespasses.

VI. This is not the whole of lapsed Man's Misery, that Nature is deeply
depraved in him, and that he is helpless, hopeless, irremediless, as to any
thing that himself or Creatures can do for him; but that he has no due Sense
of his Sin or Misery; he thinks that it is better with him than it is; he does
not with a due Seriousness seek unto God for Relief; he does not so much as
enquire the way to Heaven and eternal Happiness. Isa. 65.1. I am sought of them
that asked not for me; I am found of them that sought me not, H^s. 2.23. R^m.
9.25, 26. Whatever God does for any, all is only of his Free Love, and Rich
Grace, Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and 2.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 2 Timothy 1.9,
10. Tit. 3.3, 4, 5, 6.

VII. Take Man now in his lapsed Estate, and put him into some part of the
World where nothing is known or heard of Salvation for Sinners by the Son of
God, and there is nothing in him that does or can tell him of this or any such
thing. When Peter made that short, but substantial Confession, Thou are Christ
the Son of the living God, Jesus said unto him, Blessed art thou -- For Flesh
and Blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven.
Matthew. 16.13, 14, 15, 16. -- Christ, points at his Humane Nature; Son of God,
at his Divine Nature. He is God as well as Man, and equal with the Father, Joh.
19 6 Thou art, points at the Unity of his Person; the Divine and Humane Nature
united in him were but one Person. Christ being no proper, but an Appellative
Noun, points at his Office; Thou art he who art the An^inted, called and
qualified with Gifts and Graces for the Work and Office of a Mediator: Thou art
a King, Priest, and Prophet, and I do accept of thee as such to be my King,
Priest, and Prophet: If ever my Heart is subdued to thy self, thou must do that
for me as my King: If ever my Person or Performances have Acceptance with God,
it must be by that Sacrifice which the great High Priest once offered for a^l:
If ever I have any saving Knowledge of Supernatural Truths, it must be by this
Prophet. I receive him as my King in this respect, that what Laws and
Ordinances he has enjoined me to observe, I do freely and readily subject my
self thereunto, and do come unto himself for Power, whereby I may be enabled so
to do: And I make use of him as my Prophet, to teach me what are his
Ordinances, and what is that Obedience which he expects and requires: I receive
him as my King, and therefore I little value any opposition I may meet with
from Men or Devils on the account of my being a Follower of Christ; for I
expect Protection, Safeguard, and Defense from him against them, and the worst
they can do. As often as I make Addresses to God, it is only in the name of
Christ, as my Priest; and whatever he has purchased for me by his death; I
look to be put in Possession thereof by his Intercession; and I make use of him
as my Prophet still more and more, to instruct me what are the Benefits which
redound to me by his Death and Intercession, and every thing else that is
needful for me to know and believe, in order to the eternal Salvation of my
Soul; and all this by his Word, by his Ordinances, and by his Spirit,
accompanying his Word and Ordinances. All this and much more is in this short
Creed, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. Blessed art thou -- Flesh and
Blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven; i. e.
The Contents of this Creed no Man has dictated to thee; neither are they the
Product of what is in thy self: These are Principles which the Light of Nature
teach not; they are originally of a Heavenly Extract; they come from above,
from the Father of Lights, and the Father of Spirits; thou could never have
known these things concerning the Natures, Person, and Offices of Christ, thou
could never have known him to be the Messiah and Savior of Sinners, if thou
had not been told it from without.

Object. We do not say, That the Knowledge of Supernatural Truths is attainable
by the Light of Nature; but Christ being now come into the World, he has given
a Measure of his Spirit to all; and if they would but hearken thereunto, it
would teach them all things.

Answ. Notwithstanding of Christ's being come into the World, there are none
that do actually participate of his Spirit, or Spiritual Benefits by him, but
by the Gospel preached to them, by such as are called, commissioned, and
authorized thereunto. Romans 10.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Whosoever shall call upon the
Name of the Lord shall be saved. How then shall they call on him in whom they
have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not
heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? and how shall they preach
except they be sent? -- So then, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
Word of God. God does not ordinarily Work Faith, or any other Grace in them
that are adult, but by the preaching of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. 1 Cor.
1.21, 22, 23. After that in the Wisdom of God, the World by Wisdom knew not
God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe
-- 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11. The whole of Supernatural Revelation that is needful for
us to know, believe, and practice is contained in the Sacred Scripture, 2. Tim.
3.14, 15, 16, 17. -- All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for instruction in
Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
Good Works. And we have no ground to look for any gracious Acts and Operations
of the Spirit on us, but by the Scripture, Joh. 16.13, 14. When the Spirit of
Truth is come, he will guide you into all truth: For he shall not speak of
himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that he shall speak. -- He shall
glorify me, he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you -- Joh.
14.26. But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in
my Name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
Remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. The Spirit brings no new
unscriptural Revelations, only makes us to understand Scripture-Truths which we
understood not before, and as there is occasion, brings such Scripture-Truths
to our remembrance as we had forgotten.

VIII. When Man is told what God has done in order to his Recovery, and what
he is to do in order to his reaping the benefit and advantage of the Redemption
wrought for him by the Messiah, such is the blindness of his Mind, and
perverseness of his Will, that if left to himself, he chooses rather to continue
in Sin, than to be saved from it, and to rest upon his own poor Services,
Sacrifices, and Duties for Justification and Salvation, than upon the
Righteousness of Christ. Let this or some such Doctrine as this be preached to
the Apostate Posterity of Adam: Great was the Breach that Sin had made between
God and you. If you had stretched your Intellectuals to the utmost, you could
never have found out a way how an Accommodation could have been accomplished
between the Most High and you, a Law being established with a Sanction,
threatening Death, Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal to the Transgressors. He
being Just and Righteous, how could Mercy be showed to them, without
impeachment to Justice? No Created Being was able to make satisfaction for the
Wrong and Injury that was done; therefore a Sacrifice would not have been
accepted from Angels nor from Man; who having Guilt upon him, could not have
stood before the Wrath of the Almighty; who, when Angry but a little, tears in
pieces, and there is no delivering out of his Hand: And if neither Angels nor
Men can make Atonement for Sin, much less can the rest of the Creation: A
Thousand of Rams, and Ten thousand Rivers of Oil, signify nothing in this
Case: The offended Party finds out a Ransom, and accepts of the same, Romans
3.25, 26. 1 John 2.2. Matthew. 3.17. 2 Cor. 5.19. Ephesians. 1.6. Col. 1.20, 21, 22.
Tell them, that in and through Christ there is Grace and Mercy with God for the
greatest of Sinners, if they are found truly repenting of Sin, and believing on
the Lord Jesus. Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. and 55.7. 1 John 1.9. Joh. 3.16. 1 Timothy
1.15. Act. 3.19 and 10.43. and 13.38, 39. Tell them, if they say they have no
power to repent or believe, Act. 5.31. God has exalted his Son to be a Prince
and a Savior, to give Repentance and Remission of Sin; and Faith is the Gift
of God, Ephesians 2.8. Phil. 1.29. Heb. 12.2. Isa. 45.22. Look unto me all the Ends
of the Earth, and be saved. Grace is in your offer; be not so foolish as to
refuse your own Mercies; this is the accepted time, this is the day of
Salvation. 2 Cor. 6.2. Consider the things that belong to your Peace, while
your day of Grace lasts, least afterward it be too late, Luke 19.42. -- Who
would think but rational Beings, endued with immortal Souls, which will be
eternally miserable or happy, will effectually mind that which is indisputably
both their Duty and Interest, having all this and much more laid before them:
Sure they will now for ever abandon every known Sin, and resign up themselves
entirely to the Conduct of Christ: But, alas, alas, here is matter of
Lamentation; the King of Glory knocks at our Door, Rev. 3.20. but who opens for
him to come in? He stretches out his Hand all day long to a rebellious,
stiff-necked People, Isa. 65.1. Romans 10.21. Isa. 49.4. and 53.1. Cant. 5.2, 3.
Prove. 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 -- Matthew. 22.2, 3, 4, 5. Joh. 5.40. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.

IX. When Sinners are left to the Corruptions of their own Hearts, they are not
only so foolish as to slight the offers of Grace, but also so desperately
wicked, as to set themselves with all their might against the Gospel, and the
propagation of it. They will by no means admit that Christ should reign over
themselves, Luke 19.14. As far as in them lies, he shall not reign in others.
They enter not into the Kingdom of Heaven themselves; they suffer not others to
enter, Matthew. 23.13. They persecute them that preach, profess, and practice the
Gospel with any Seriousness. Act. 7.51, 52, 57, 58, 59. Act. 8.1, 2, 3. Act.
9.1. Act. 17.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 These. 2.14, 15, 16.

X. Nature is now so deeply depraved in all, that nothing short of an effectual
Work of the Holy Ghost can renew, sanctify, and change it: This is a Work too
high for Nature improved to the utmost; Nature cannot produce a Supernatural
Effect, Joh. 3.6. Art and Education can considerably accomplish Nature, but
they cannot new make it. When there is no more than mere Humane Institution and
Instruction, they cannot cause all old things to pass away, and all things to
become new. This is too high for the most refined Philosophy, ancient, or
modern, taught by Socrates, Pythagoras, Plato, or Aristotle: It is not
Academical Learning can reach this: It is not being under the most powerful and
Spiritual Ministry: It is not the most Argumentative Moral Swasions made use of
by Men: It is not a Man's own Desires, Endeavors, Resolutions, Promises, Vows,
Covenants and Engagements, to forsake all and every Sin: It is not being in the
external Practice of all Religious Duties: It is not being of this or the other
Persuasion, submitting to this or the other Ordinance, being of this or the other
Church, and receiving the Sacrament, that changes Nature: For all these things
may be, where there is no Heart-Renovation. Joh. 3.3. Verily, Verily, I say
unto thee, except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. The
Jews, especially the Pharisees, had a Notion, Vniverso Israeli est portio in
mundo futuro, hoc est, in fruitione Messiae, nec omnino necessariam esse animi
renovationem. They thought their being the Children of Abraham, without being
renewed in the Spirit of their mind, would entitle them to the Fruition of the
Messiah. Christ corrects this Mistake of theirs, and instructs them of the
necessity of Regeneration. A Soul-sanctifying Work of the Holy Ghost must pass
upon you here, if ever you hope for the Glory of Heaven hereafter. The same
Truth is reiterated ver. 5. that Nicodemus, and all others concerned, might
take the more special notice thereof, till it be impressed upon their Hearts,
and till they know it in their own Experience. Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
except a Man be born of Water and the Spirit, i. e. ex Spiritu exerente vim
Aquae, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. There is nothing short of the
Divine Power and Efficacy of the Spirit of the Lord can cleanse Souls polluted
with Sin, Ezekiel. 36.25. They that are Spiritually dead, and in an unregenerate
Estate, can no more change their Natures, than they that are in the Grave can
give themselves a Resurrection from the dead, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. There
are such Acts of Omnipotence exerted and put forth in the Work of Regeneration,
as was put forth in raising Christ from the dead, Ephesians. 1.15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20. Tit. 3.3, 4, 5.

XI. Even after the Spirit of God has been effectually at work upon the Soul,
and has infused Supernatural Habits of Saving Grace, there is that which may
still keep him humble and low in his own Eyes. Many particulars might be
mentioned under this Head; but I shall content my self with mentioning only a
few.

1. Notwithstanding the Spirit of God has been effectually at work upon the
Soul, there is not presently an utter extirpation of Sin, Grace is not without
some mixture of Nature, there is Flesh as well as Spirit, Gal. 5.17. 1 John
1.8, 10. Eccles. 7.20. Prove. 20.9. Jam. 3.2.

2. Though where true Grace is, it will make resistance against in-dwelling
Sin, yet sometimes the latter may have the better of the former; Grace may be
over-poured by Corruption, and that does often create no small disturbance to a
gracious Person. Romans 7.21, 22, 23, 24. -- I see another Law in my Members
warring against the Law of my Mind, and bringing me into captivity to the Law
of Sin -- O wretched Man that I am -- (...) cerumnosus -- i.e. perpetuis in
ista lucta angoribus divexatus; The Combats and Conflicts which I have with the
Corruptions of mine own Heart do create me a continual Vexation and Anguish of
Soul. Persistet in Metaphora Athletae, qui post gravem luctam tandem nolens
volens captivus ducitur; He persists in the Metaphor of a Wrestler, who after a
great Contest, is at last carried away captive by force, and sore against his
Will.

3. Even they that have true Grace may, in an hour of Temptation, and when left
to themselves, fall into some heinous and scandalous Sin, whereby the Spirit of
God is grieved, peace of Conscience interrupted, Communion with God lost,
Religion wounded, and all sorts, good and bad, scandalized: Noah, Lot, David,
and Peter, are sad Instances for the Exemplification of this Assertion, Genesis
6.9. with Genesis 9.21. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. with Genesis 19.30, 31, 32, 33. 2 Samuel 11. and
12. Chap. Matt. 26.69. -- to the end of the Chapter. 1 Cor. 10.12. Wherefore
let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. Romans 11.20. Because of
unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand by Faith, be not high-minded,
but fear.

4. When a Man has fallen into a scandalous Sin, it is not all the Grace he
has that will recover him to Repentance, or restore to him the Holy Joys and
Spiritual Comforts which he once had: There must be some fresh Manifestations
of Sin-pardoning Grace, together with some fresh Influences of the Spirit
accompanying the same: It will be like to cost him many a Tear and Prayer
before he re-enjoy that sweet Communion which once he had; there must be a
renewed exercise of Repentance. Read Psalm. 51. throughout: Have mercy upon me,
O Lord, according unto the multitude of thy tender Mercies, blot out my
Transgressions. Wash me thoroughly from my Iniquity, and cleanse me from my Sin:
For I acknowledge my Transgression; and my Sin is ever before me. -- Make me to
hear joy and gladness; that the Bones which thou have broken may rejoice --
Restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation; and uphold me with thy free Spirit.

5. Though some may have a great deal of Grace, yet they may be exercised with
divine Desertion to that degree, that the most comfortable Considerations that
can be suggested to them from the Scriptures, by the most Holy and Learned
Ministers, and most experienced Christians, can administer no Consolation to
their Spirits, till the Lord himself come and do it. Psalm. 77.2, 3 -- My Soul
refused to be comforted -- ver. 7, 8, 9. Psalm. 88, throughout. ver. 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 13, 14, 15, 16. Job 6.4 The Arrows of the Almighty are within me; the Poison
whereof drinks up my Spirit. The Terrors of God do set themselves in array
against me, Job 34.29. Psalm. 90.11. Isa. 50.10. and 61.1, 2, 3. Luke 4.17, 18.
Isa. 50.4. and 42.1, 2, 3. Matt. 12.18, 19, 20. Isa. 40.11. Ezekiel 34.15, 16.
John 21.15.

6. Though Grace is a great Excellence, it does not exempt persons that have it
from Afflictions; during their Pilgrimage here, the great Sovereign afflicts
the Good as well as the Bad, Job 9.22. He destroys the Perfect and the Wicked,
Jer. 18.6. Dan. 4.35. Job 9.12. Eccles. 9.1, 2. Nay, many times they that are
God's peculiar ones, his special Favorites, are afflicted more than others,
Amos 3 2. Hos. 4.17. Dan. 12.10. Hos. 14.9. Rev. 22.11. They have that in them
which may procure the Rod now and then, and it is needful they should have it,
1 Pet. 1.6, 7. It is to humble them under a Sense of some Sin or other, not
thoroughly repented of, Job 36.7, 8. Jer. 31.18. Luke 15.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
It is to purge out some peccant Humors that have been predominant in their
Souls, Isai. 27.9. and 4.4. It is to make them walk more close with God for
time to come, Psalm. 119.67, 71. and to make them partakers of his Holiness in
some further measure and degree, Heb. 12.10, 11. It is to make them pray oftener
and better than they were wont to do, Hos. 5.15. Isai. 26.16. and 38.1, 2.
Psalm. 107.5, 6, and 116.1, 2, 3 -- It is to endear the Word of the Lord to
them, to make them study the Covenant of Grace, and the Promises thereof, to
make sure their Interest therein, and that they may live the Life of Faith more
than ever, Psalm. 1 9 49, 50, 72, 92. Job 13.15. Hab. 1.17, 18, 19. 1 Pet. 1.6,
7. Afflictions of the Godly are Evidences of Divine Love, Prove. 3.11, 12. Heb.
12.6, 7, 8. Rev. 3.19. It is to wean them more from this World, to fit them for
Death, and prepare them for Eternity, 2 Cor. 4 17, 18. Romans 8.18. Jam. 1.2, 3,
4. Romans 5.3, 4, 5. Romans 8.35, 36, 37, 38, 39. 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8. Acts 14.22.
Rev. 7.14, 15, 16, 17.

7. All the Grace that Men have, does not privilege the Possessors thereof from
being obnoxious to the Assaults of Satan; yea, by Divine Permission, he may for
some time several ways prevail against them. Hence it is that we are exhorted
to be sober and vigilant, because our Adversary, the Devil, as a roaring Lion,
walks about, seeking whom he may devour, whom we are to resist, steadfast in
the Faith, 1. Pet. 5.8, 9. To be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his
Might; to put on the whole Armor of God, that we may be able to stand against
the Wiles of the Devil: For we wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but against
Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of this
World, against Spiritual Wickedness in High Places -- above all taking the
Shield of Faith, whereby we shall be able to quench all the fiery Darts of the
Wicked One, Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 12, 13-16. The Lord does for holy and wise ends
sometimes give a kind of a providential Commission to Satan against this, and
the other Servant of his; and then he will not be wanting to do his worst
against 'em; when once he receives such Power, he will instantly improve it to
their disadvantage. Job 2.8. The Lord said unto Satan, Behold all that he has
is in thy power -- and 2.6. Behold he is in thine hand -- Let me show you in
some Particulars how far by Divine permission the power of the evil One may
extend it self.

1. He may not only tempt them to Sin, but also draw them to a compliance with
the Temptation and Bait that he lays for 'em: His common Method is first to
tempt to Presumption, and then to despair, 2 Cor. 2 7, 11. He solicited our
Proto-Parents to fin, and ceased not till he accomplished his Design, Genesis 3.1,
2, 3, 4 -- He put it into the heart of David to number the People, when there
was no occasion for any such thing, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. 2 Samuel 24.1 -- for which his
own heart smote him after he had done it, 2 Samuel 24.10. and the Lord was
displeased with him for it, 1 Chronicles. 21.14. He made him sensible that he could
quickly lessen their number; and, accordingly, in Three Days time there were
70000 of them cut off by the Plague, 2 Samuel 24.15.

2. He may, for some time, hinder the Work of the Lord in the Hands of them
that are eminent for Grace and Holiness. 1 These. 2.18. We would have come unto
you, even I Paul, once and again; but Satan hindered us. He did all he could to
obstruct the Propagation of the Gospel by my Ministry; and all the Grace I had
was little enough to countermine his Contrivances, Projects, and Purposes.

3. The Devil has a great hand in sowing the Seeds of Errors; and all the
Grace, whether of Ministers or People, proves of small efficacy to hinder this
Hellish Work of his. Rev. 12.15. The Serpent cast out of his mouth Water as a
Flood, after the Woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the
Flood. After the Christians were delivered from their bloody Persecutions under
the Heathen Emperors, Arrianism came in as a Torrent upon them; and this Enemy
had a hand in it. Antichristianism is a Sink of Errors, and it had its Original
from the bottomless Pit, Rev. 9.1, 2, 3. Antichrist's coming is after the
working of Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders, and with all
deceiveableness of Unrighteousness, 2 These 2 9, 10. Though there have been many
famous both for Piety and Learning, who have bore a faithful Testimony against
the Errors of Antichrist; yet by the Devil's Adistance he has got great
Footing in the World, and has continued along time, to advance his Kingdom and
Interest among them that bear the Name of Christ. Rev. 13.3, 4, 5. All the
World wondered after the Beast, and they worshipped the Dragon which gave power
to the Beast; and they worshipped the Beast, saying, Who is like unto the
Beast? Who is able to make War with him? And there was given unto him a mouth
speaking great Things, and Blasphemies, and Power was given unto him to
continue forty and two months.

4. As the Devil is very active and industrious to sow the Seeds of Error among
the Sons of Men; so also such is his Subtilty, Cunning, Craft, and Art in
deceiving, that some that are of the Churches of Christ may be infected
therewith, 2 Cor. 11.14. He transforms himself into an Angel of Light: He
represents this or the other Error as some G^orious Truth, as some new Light not
discovered before. Gal. 1.6. I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that
called you unto the Grace of Christ unto another Gospel. Gal. 3.1. O foolish
Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the Truth -- Their
great Error was hearkening to the false Apostles, who preached the Necessity of
Circumcision, and the Observation of the Mosaic Ceremonies, as well as Faith
in Christ, in order to their Justification. 2 Cor. 11.2, 3. I am jealous over
you with a godly Jealousy -- lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve
through his Subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the Simplicity
that is in Christ. They had the Stoics and Epicuraeans among them;
Philosophers, who laughed at the Resurrection, and taught that Incest,
Adultery, and Fornication, were venial Sins, if at all unlawful: He had a holy
Jealousy lest they should be drawn away to these Errors. Rev. 2.14, 15. I have
a few things against thee, because thou have there them that hold the Doctrine
of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a Stumbling block before the Children of
Israel, to eat Things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit Fornication: So also
have thou them that hold the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate.
This Church of Pergamus had those that maintained the Lawfulness of
Fornication, and of eating things sacrificed to Idols; and did, upon the
Matter, justify the Counsel which Balaam gave to Balac, to wit, That he should
send Moabitish Women to invite them to their Idolatrous Feasts, and to allure
them to commit Uncleanness with them, Numb. 25.1 -- with 31.16 --

5. He may, by divine Permission, have power over the Goods and Possessions of
gracious Persons. Job was such a Man, that there was none like him in the
Earth, perfect and upright, one that feared God and eschewed Evil, Chap. 1. v.
8. And yet all his Grace did not secure his Substance from falling into the
hands of the Devil, and those that were acted by him. Chap. 1. v. 12, 13, 14,
15, 16, 17, 18. 19. After once the Lord had said, All that he has is in thy
power, wasting and destruction quickly followed thereupon: The Oxen and the
Asses are carried away by the Sabaeans, and the Servants that looked to them
slain: Fire from Heaven falls upon the Sheep and the Servants, and consumes
them: The Chaldaeans fell upon the Camels, and made a Prey of them; a terrible
Tempest blows down the House where his Children were, and kills them all.

6 The Devil may scare gracious Persons with frightful Dreams, nocturnal
Visions; and Apparitions. Job 7.13, 14. When I say, my Bed shall comfort me* my
Couch shall ease my Complaint; then thou scarest me with Dreams, and terrifiest
me through Visions: That is (says Pool) with sad and dreadful Dreams, arising
either from that melancholy Humor which is now so fixed in me, and predominant
over me, or from the Devil's Malice, who by thy Permission disturbs me in this
manner, that I am afraid to go to sleep, and my Remedy proves as bad as my
Disease. Thou scarest me -- The Word signifies, says Caryl, To be cast down
prostrate to the Ground with Fear. From the Disease and Sickness of Job's Body,
Satan took occasion to raise Fumes, and stir the pudled Humors of his Body up
into his Brain; out of which his Fancy formed terrible Representations to his
Mind. As Melancholy is said to be the Devil's Bath, so are other diseased
sickly Humors; in them he sports himself and vexes Man -- As before when Satan
by his Instruments took away all from him, he said, The Lord takes. So here,
when Satan vexed him with Visions, representing horrid and fearful Spectacles;
yet he says, Thou scarest me (...) as pointing still unto the Power and
Providence of God, who has all Second Causes, Satan and all, at his dispose.

7. The Devil may have Power over the Bodies of gracious Persons to move them
in a short time from one place to another. Matt. 4.1. Christ was in the
Wilderness; from thence Satan took him up into the Holy City, and set him on a
Pinnacle of the Temple: ver. 5. and from thence to an exceeding high Mountain --
ver. 8. Here was a double, if not a treble remove: And if he had so much Power
over the Body of our blessed Redeemer, much more over the Bodies of them that
belong to him.

8. He may torment the Bodies of Saints, and put them to a great deal of Pain.
Job 2.6, 7, 8. The Lord said unto Satan, Behold he is in thine hand, only save
his Life, So went Satan forth from the Presence of the Lord, and smote Job with
sore Boils, from the Sole of his Foot unto the Crown of his Head. And he took
him a Potsherd to scrape himself withal; and he sat down among the Ashes. No
sooner has he his Commission but he puts it in execution instantly without
delay. He smote Job -- The word, says Caryl, signifies to strike unto Death: It
notes both the suddenness and vehemence of the Stroke; it must at once wound
both his Mind and his Body, on a sudden, in a Moment, to be filled with Sores,
and covered with a Scab and Boils. The Word signifies Vleus ex calore ortum and
igne, inflammans corpus; he did as it were kindle a Fire in the Bowels of Job,
inflamed his Blood, and heated the humors of his Body. Vox Hebraea significat
scabiem foedissimam, qualis est Elephantiasis; He smote him with a most filthy
Scab, such as is the Leprosy, with the worst and most tormenting Boils; no
part of his Body was free, only his Tongue was untouched, that it might be at
liberty to blaspheme God.

9. All the Grace that Men have is not able to keep the Devil from entering into
their Bodies, and taking Possession of them, if he has permission from God.
Among so many Demoniacks and possessed Persons that we read of in the New
Testament, it is more than probable there were some had good in them, and were
Objects of God's special Favor. Christ not only wrought miraculous Cures on
such, but he preached the Gospel also where they were; whereby we may
understand, that he blessed them both with Temporal and Spiritual Blessings.
Matt. 4.23, 24. and 8.16, 17. with Isa. 53.4. Matt. 8.28, 29, 30, 31, 32. and
9.32, 33. and 12.22. Mark 5.18, 19, 20. Luke 8.39. Act. 8.5, 6, 7, 8. and
10.38. and 16.16, 17, 18. and 19.11, 12. Mark 1.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. We read of
few that were possessed under the old Testament: But when the Messiah came into
the World, the Devil raged more than before, and God suffered it to be so, that
all might have a Demonstration of the Divinity of Christ, of his great love to
the Souls and Bodies of the Sinners of Mankind, and that the Sadduces might be
convinced of that foolish Opinion of theirs, That there were no Spirits, Act.
23.8.

10. The Devil may have Power to kill the Bodies of them that have Grace. We
are bound to judge charitably of Job's Children; to be sure so good a Man as he
gave them Religious Education; he instilled good Principles into them in their
younger days; he prayed for a Blessing on the means made use of for begetting
Grace in them; and yet the Devil killed them all at once, Job 1.19. compared
with ver. 12. Rev. 2.10. The Devil shall cast some of you into Prison: And it
is past all peradventure, the Cruelty and inhumane Usage which some of the
imprisoned ones had there from the Agents of the Evil One, put a Period to
their Days. As he has been a Murderer from the beginning* John 8.44. so
chiefly of the Saints and Servants of God, Rev. 13.7. It was given unto the
Beast to make War with the Saints, and to overcome them -- And by whom is this
Beast acted? From whom does he receive his Commission to be in Acts of
Hostility against the Saints? ver. 2. -- The Dragon gave him his Power, and his
Seat, and his Authority.

Thus you may see, that though Grace is one of the greatest of created
Excellencies, yet it has not that in it which can secure the Proprietors and
Possessors thereof from falling under the Power of the Devil as to the
forementioned particulars.

It were easy to enlarge here, and to give you many more humbling
Considerations, but I am minded to draw toward a Close, and therefore shall
barely and briefly name a few things more, of which I may appeal to the
Experience of most Gracious Persons.

Is it not matter of humbling to you, That notwithstanding of what Grace you
have, you are still so prone to Sin upon every Temptation?

Is it not matter of humbling, That you have sinned so often without any
Temptation from without? Does not Sin within you ever and anon bubble up, when
neither the Devil nor the World eggs you on; you are apt to sin fast enough of
your own Accord?

Is it not matter of humbling, That you have so often cast your selves upon
Temptation without a Call? When Temptations have not offered themselves, you
have sought for them, and have thereby provoked the Holy One to give you up to
the Lusts of your own Hearts, and to the Power of the Evil One.

Have you not too too often quenched and grieved the Spirit of God, aster he
has been at work upon your Spirits, enlightening and enlivening you, quickening
and comforting you? After he has drawn out your Affections to be in a Holy
Flame of servent Love to the Lord Jesus, you have thrown Water upon this Fire
that he has kindled in you.

Is it not matter of humbling to you, That you have so often sinned against
light and Knowledge, That you have acted contrary to the Dictates and
Convictions of your own Consciences?

Is it not matter of humbling, That you have so often silenced Conscience, and
lulled it asleep, when it was about to lay your Sin before you in all the
Aggravations thereof? You have been but little in that All, in that necessary
Duty of Se^^-examination; and when you have gone about it, you have not been so
thorough therein as you should have been: when Conscience has been ready to
bring in an impartial Verdict as to the present State of your Souls, have ye
not flattered your selves, as if all might go well enough with you
notwithstanding of your living in the neglect and omission of some Duties, and
your taking too much Latitude as to some Sins?

It is not matter of humbling, That you Hearts have so often deceived you? Have
you not often and often thought, that such a particular Lust had been so
mortified, that you should never have heard of it any more; and yet ye have
been mistaken?

Is it not matter of humbling, That the Sin which does so easily beset you,
has given you so much disturbance, that it has taken you off from so many a
good Work, which otherwise ye would have been about? It has distracted your
Spirits when you have been in Duties; it has led you into many a sinful Snare,
out of which ye have not been able to extricate your selves without difficulty;
it has set you back in your way to Heaven, and has hindered your growing in
Grace; it has much interrupted your Communion with God, and caused an eclipse
of the Light of his Countenance; so that you have not had the bright Shinings
thereof, as otherwise you might have had.

May it not be matter of humbling, That your Humiliation has not been
proportioned to your Sins and Provocations? You have had a long time of
sinning, but your Sorrow has been of a short continuance: You have sinned
greatly, and have sorrowed but little. It is but seldom ye have offered up to
God that excellent Sacrifice of a broken Heart, and a contrite Spirit.

Is it not matter of humbling, That ye have misspent so much precious time?
Some part of it has been spent in Idleness, doing nothing; some in sinning;
some in doing that which signifies little for Soul-advantage.

Is it not matter of humbling, That ye have prosited so little by all the
Ordinances that have been administered to you time after time, and by all the
Providence of this day in general, and toward your selves in particular? Is
there not cause to say, Ab, our leanness, our leanness, notwithstanding of the
many Soul-fructifying Seasons of Grace we have had? See Luke 13.7, 8. Isa. 5.69.

Is it not matter of humbling, that you have lived so long in the World, and
have been so little serviceable to the Son of God, who gave himself unto death
for you; and that you have been so little useful unto others in the places
where you have been set?

Is it not matter of humbling, That your Ignorance of Divine things is so
great, and your Knowledge so small; that ye have been for so long a time
Learners in the School of Christ; and yet the things whereof ye are ignorant,
are more than the things you know? Heb. 5.12.

Is it not matter of humbling, That ye have manifested so much imprudence and
indiscretion in managing your secular Concerns? Have ye not in many things
leaned too much to your own Understanding, whereby your Wisdom has appeared to
be Folly? Have ye hearkened to Prove. 3.6, 7?

Is it not matter of humbling, That notwithstanding of all your Gifts and
Graces, Piety and Prudence, you cannot prevent Disappointments, Crosses,
Losses, Troubles, and Trials in the World; neither can you give Success to your
Undertakings or Actings? The Race is not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the
Strong; neither yet Bread to the Wise; nor yet Riches to Men of Understanding;
but time and chance happens to them all, Eccles. 9.11.

Is it not matter of humbling, That notwithstanding all the Grace ye have, you
are so often put to a nonplus in your own Thought that you know not what to
do? When ye have consulted your selves, considered all Circumstances, hearkened
to whatsoever that within you can suggest, yet ye find cause enough still for
your going unto others for Counsel and Advice; and when ye have been with them,
and have all they can say unto you, you come away as wise as ye went?

Is it not matter of humbling, that ye are so variable, sickle, uncertain, and
inconstant? One hour seemingly fixed in your Resolves to do so and so; next
hour unresolved again: Love to day, hate to morrow: One Week on the Mount with
the most High; If all forsake thee I never will; next Week at the Foot of the
Mount; Grace at as low an Ebb as well it can be. Psalm. 30.6, 7.

Is it not matter of humbling, That ye have so often administered occasion to
the Ignorant and Wicked to speak evil of the pure Religion which ye profess and
of those Holy Ways in which ye Walk, that ye have no more adorned the Doctrine
of God our Savior, with a Conversation in all things according to the Gospel;
and that ye have so often sadned the Spirits of those whom God would not have
sadned? Romans 2.24.

Is it not matter of humbling, That ye are no more humbled for the Sins of
others among whom ye live? God is dishonored at a high rate every where;
Profaneness is countenanced and encouraged in most places; all seriousness in
Religion is ridiculed: They whose Work it should be to take People off their
Sins, and to put them in a fair Way for Heaven and Glory, are so far from
minding the Conversion of Sinners, and the Salvation of Souls, that they do
what in them lies to obstruct whatever has a Tendency hereunto; They neither
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven themselves, nor suffer others to enter. They
that should impartially execute Justice and Righteousness between Man and Man,
do no such thing, but rather the contrary; they patronize Impiety, and are a
Terror to them that do well -- and yet, ah, How few are there who lay these
things to Heart? Ezekiel. 9.4. Psalm. 119.136. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.

Is it not matter of humbling, That there is so little of a truly public
Spirit in this day of ours, even among those that profess themselves Followers
of the Lamb, the Lord Jesus? Every one minds his own things few or none the
things of Christ, Phil. 2.21. There is little of a true Zeal for God and his
Glory and against Sin, as such.

Is it not matter of humbling, That you have so little of a true hearty Love
for all that do visibly bear the Image of Christ, That there is so little of
Love among those that have all one Father, one Redeemer, one Sanctifier, that
are all the Objects of God's special Love and Favor, that do all walk by the
same Rule, according to the measure of Light and Knowledge received, that are
all one in the Great and Fundamental Truths of the Gospel, that are all in good
earnest for Holiness here, and do hope for the same Heaven, and Glory hereafter?

Is it not matter of humbling, That you live not every day as if it were to be
your last day? That your thoughts are so little taken up about the Glory you
are going to in the other World; and that ye are not at all times like unto
them that look for the coming of the Lord? Luke 12.35, 36. -- 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3,
4. 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8

These are only Generals; I have spoke somewhat largely of these following
Particulars.

If you would admit of a due, thorough, and impartial Consideration, how much
Sin is in your Thoughts, that would humble you?

If you would take a view of all your Words, you could not but acknowledge in
many things we offend all. And If any Man offend not in word, the same is a
perfect Man, and able also to bria^e the whole Body, Jam. 3.2.

If you would call to mind the Sinfulness that adheres to your Affections, you
would see cause with the Leper under the Law, to cry out, Unclean, unclean.

If you would but as near as you can, remember all your Omissions, and how you
have left the Good undone, which ye ought, and might have done.

If you would make Reflections on that little good you have done, together with
the manifold Defects, sinful Failings and Infirmities that has attended you
therein.

If you would mind the Iniquity of your Holy things, that you have been so
little serious, sincere, and spiritual in Duties of Worship.

If you would lay to Heart the Guilt which you have contracted, and do daily
contract in managing the Duties of your Callings.

And, lastly, If you would narrowly look into your Relative Sins, as Parents,
as Children, as Husbands, as Wives, as Masters, as Servants -- you will see
enough and enough that might cause you say, as Psalm. 130.3, 4. If thou, Lord,
should mark Iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand But there is forgiveness
with thee, that thou may be feared. Psalm. 143.2. And, Enter not into
Judgment with thy Servant, for in thy sight shall no Man living be justified.
Psalm. 19.12. Who can understand his Erros? Cleanse thou me from my secret
Faults. Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable Evil^s have compassed me about; mine
Iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up; they are
more than the Hairs of my Head; therefore mine Heart fails me.

The reason why I pass over the many particulars contained under the
pre-mentioned Heads is, because I would not swell this small Piece to a greater
Price than the Purse of those that desire to be satisfied in this Point, can
conveniently reach.

Thus you have had the first Improvement of this Truth. It concerns you to be
well grounded in the Belief of this. That the Grace of God in Believers is no
Increated, but a Created Being, as that which would conduce much to the keeping
you very humble, and everlastingly low in your own Eyes.

I should now come to a second Improvement of this, which is also a very
genuine deduction from the Premises; and that is, If true Grace in Believers
be a Creature, yea, a weak and imperfect Creature, without a continued
Communication of fresh Influences every moment from the Original and Creator
thereof; then it is as clear as the Sun in the Meridian, that John Eliots must
be in a great Error, in that Piece which he has published; Called, The Saving
Grace of God -- which he asserts to be in All Men; and to be an Increated
Being, with more Confidence than strength of Reason. If that within him teaches
such false Doctrine as this; and has committed so great a mistake, as to put
him upon writing on this Subject, when so meanly qualified for this Service,
this is a Caution to all to beware of this Principle of his: It has made him
think that he was in a Capacity of confuting holy and learned Flavel. But I
have drawn up another short Tract, to demonstrate. That his pretended Answer
both to him and me, is no Answer at all: It will be his Wisdom to be silent; if
not, he must thank himself, if in the Second he have more plain Dealing than in
this. They that are of his Persuasion will see what a weak Advocate they have
to plead their Cause: And if they are not above all Advice from others, I
humbly offer it, as a thing worthy of their serious Consideration, whether this
Principle in many that have professed and Practiced it since the Year 1653,
has not been attended with many humbling Providence, which call for a deep
Humiliation before the Lord, rather than that J. E. should after all be still
over and above magnifying that within him and others, as an Increated Being. I
have been all my days a Man of a peaceable Spirit, and would fain continue at
Peace with all as much as in me lies without Sin: It is some extraordinary
provocation draws me into the Field. If he writes any more, he will know that I
am better acquainted with the Writings and Works of these Men than he is aware;
he may be like to hear of many things that may not please him: I can give him a
large Account of the Principles and Practices of G Fox, Ja. Naylor, and others;
I can tell him that the Actings of some of their Principal Leaders, have been a
practical Confutation of the Grand Principle, That every Man has that within
him, which is sufficient without any thing else, to teach, instruct, lead,
guide, and direct him. For G. Fox penned down Orders to be observed by every
one; and they that did not observe them, were censurable, and to be disowned,
as not in the Unity, to use their own Phrase. The Absolute Submission which was
required to be given to G. F. and the Body, as they called it, at
Devonshire-house, was a renouncing this Principle in the Face of the Sun, as
may be seen in The Spirit of the Hat: And in the 7th. Part of the Christian
Quaker, Page 4. There was a Paper subscribed in Barbados by 82 Persons, in
these Words; I desire to give up my whole Concern, if required, both Temporal
and Spiritual, unto the Judgment of the Spirit of God in the Men's and Women's
Meetings, as believing it to be more according to the Universal Wisdom of God,
than any particular measure in my self, or any Particulars, with which the Men
and Women's Meetings have not Unity. Is not his a giving up the Cause so hotly
contended for? He is a great Stranger in our Israel, that knows not the
Contests that were between G. Fox and John Perrot. I must let J. E. know, that
I am not ignorant of what Francis Bug has written against Fox and his Party;
as also, what Rogers of Bristol, and the Spirit of the Hat have said against
him and his Faction; and the Divisions among them in Pensilvania, and
New-Jersie, at this day, do call aloud for Humiliation, rather than the
Exaltation of this Principle, which has so demonstratively proved it self a
Great Nothing. Both Parties are high Pretenders, that they are acted by and
speak from the Spirit of the Lord within them: And the whole Universe, besides
themselves, see this to be a Spirit of Delusion, and not the Spirit of God; for
he differs not from himself: He says not Yea in one, and Nay in another. When I
have given an Epitome of some of the most memorable Matters of Fact relating to
this Principle, and what strange Practices it has led many Persons into,
partly from the Writings of professed Quakers, and partly from such Authentic
Testimonies as are of good Credit and Authority, may be he may say, that if
that within him told him, it was an Impulse from the Spirit of God that put him
upon writing against me, it has deceived him; it has trepanned him into that,
which has been more trouble to him than he thought: It has, in fine, brought
Shame and Confusion of Face upon him; and I wish this may be the ultimate
effect of All, that, for the future, he may be fixedly resolved never any more
to hearken to such Foolish Counsels, to say no worse. Solomon's Instruction is
rather to be minded, Prove. 17.14. The beginning of Strife is as when one
lets out Water; therefore leave off Contention before it be meddled with.
Avoid the Occasions, and prevent the beginnings of Cotention. Eccles. 10.12.
The Words of a wise Man's mouth are gracious; but the lips of a Fool will
swa^^ow up himself: The beginning of the Words of his mouth is Foolishness; and
the end of his Ta^k is mischievous Madness. The more he talks, the more does
his Folly appear: He proceeds from Evil to worse, and adds Wilfulness to his
Weakness. Prove. 25.8. Go not forth hastily to strive, lest thou know not what
to do in the end thereof, when thy Neighbor has put thee to shame.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey, near Stocks-Market.
FOLIO.
HIstorical Collections, the 3d Part, in 2 Volumes. Never before Printed;
containing the Principal Matters which happened from the meeting of the
Parliament, November the 3d. 1640. to the end of the year 1644. wherein is a
particular Account of the Rise and progress of the Civil War to that Period:
Impartially related. Setting forth only Matter of Fact in Order of Time,
without Observation or Reslection. By John Rushworth.

CHARNOCK's Works in 2 Vol.

A Scheme of the Sins and Duties of the Members of particular Churches; by the
late Reverend Mr. John Flavel, in a sheet of Paper.

Life, Reign and Trial of Mary, Queen of Scots; stitched.

QVARTO.
Speculum Theologiae in Christo: Or, A view of some Divine Truths; by Edward
Polhill of Burwash in Sussex, Esquire.

A Demonstration of the first Applications of the Apocalypse; together with the
consent of the Ancients concerning the fourth Beast in the 7th of Daniel; and
the Beast in the Revelation; by Drue Cressener, D. D.

The Morning Exercise at Cripplegate; or several Cases of Conscience
practically Resolved by sundry Ministers.

A Supplement to the Morning Exercise; or several more Cases of Conscience,
prasctically resolved by sundry Ministers.

A seasonable Discourse, wherein is examined what is lawful, during the
Confusions and Revolutions of Government: Stitched.

Geography rectified: Or, a Description of the World in all its Kingdoms,
Provinces, Countries, Islands, Cities, Towns, Seas, Rivers, Bays, Capes,
Names, Inhabitants, Situations, Histories, Customs, Commodities, Government.
Illustrated with about 80 Maps. Third Edition; by Robert Morden.

OCTAVO.
Instructions about Heart Work; what is to be done on God's part and ours, for
the cure and keeping of the Heart, etc. by that Eminent Gospel Minister, Mr.
Richard Alleyn. With a Preface by Dr. Annesley. The 2d Edition.

The Evidence of Things not seen: Or diverse Spiritual and Philosophical
Discourses concerning the State of Holy Men after Death: By that eminently
Learned Divine Moses Amyraldus Translated out of the French Tongue; by a
Minister of the Church of England.

Poems on several Occasions, with a Pastoral: To which is added, A Discourse of
Life; by John Tutelin.

A Succinct and Seasonable Discourse of the Occasions, Causes, Natures, Rise,
Growth and Remedies of Mental Errors. To which is added, (1) An Answer to Mr.
Carry against Infant Baptism. (2.) An Answer to some Antinomian Errors. (3) A
Sermon about Union; by John Flavel.

Mr. John Flavel's Remains; being two Sermons: The one preached at Dartmouth in
Devon, on the day of the Coronation of their Majesty's The latter intended to
be preached it a Meeting of the united Ministers of several Counties. With some
account of his Life.


