THE HISTORY OF ORACLES AND THE CHEATS OF THE Pagan Priests.

In Two Parts.

Made English.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1688 and sold by most Booksellers.

TO THE Right Honorable GEORGE Lord Jeffereys, Baron of Wem, Lord High
Chancellor of England.
MY LORD,
Though Your Quality and the Awfulness of your High Station, might very well
prevent the Ambition of an Author from making Addresses of this nature, to your
Lordship, yet I confess my self less discouraged by the grandeur of your
Titles, than I am by that of your Wit; it is that alone that brings me trembling
to your Feet with this little Tribute of my Duty. Methought when all the honest
part of the World was full of your Praise, when all that profess Loyalty were
Celebrating your never dying Name, I should have looked upon my self as unworthy
of the Honor I now aspire to, if I amongst the number, should not with all
imaginable gratitude pay my acknowledgments for the good you have rendered the
public, as well as for the Services you have rendered the Crown; which you have
more effectually done, with more noble Bravery, Fortitude and Resignation, than
any other great Statesman; you have so absolutely attached your self to the
interest of your Monarch, that it is evident you are as entirely his own, as if
after him you had no more business with the World, or even Life it self; and to
this Glory you have arrived by such difficulties as no other Parts, Wit, or
Courage could have conquered, and by it have carried your great Fame even above
Envy.

Nor can the unthinking and most malicious of your Enemies reproach your
Lordship with self-interest in any of your Services, since all the World knows,
when they were thought Criminal, nay even Punishable, (for such miserable times
we have seen) when 'twas enough to have forfeited your Fortune, and almost your
Life, then, I say, there was found in your Lordship, that undaunted Bravery,
that Spirit and fire of Loyalty, that true concern for the Royal Cause, that
you were the first destined Victim for the slaughter, the first to be
Sacrificed to the Association Rage, even when you had nothing left you but
Honor, Justice and Innocence for your Guard. And as it may be truly affirmed
that the greatness of your Resolution gave the most considerable assistance to
the turn of those Rabble-ruling times, and the reestablishing them in their
right and regular motion, it must be also confessed that the same unchangeable
resolution has continued them still (under God and our Gracious Sovereign) in
the same tranquillity we now behold them; and we, who have reaped the
advantages of so good a conduct, have now no more to do but to express our
sense of it in our several degrees; the People by their Prayers, and the Poets
by their Panegyricks. Such I would gladly offer in Immortal Songs; but oh! the
Muses have all taken Wing, and are fled to Climates more encouraging and kind,
and have scarcely left behind them one Son inspired; so that instead of Nobler
numbers, they are necessitated servilely to creep after the sense of foreign
Authors, stinting the Generous fancy to another thought.

Of this nature, my Lord, is this small Piece which I most humbly Dedicate to
your Lordship. It Is a Discourse of Religion, in a time when we have scarce any
other Theme; it is grown so general a Mode, that even the Swordmen are now
fiercer disputants than heretofore the lazier Gown-men were, while every Spark
of noise enough, (sometimes the best of the Argument) shows his Wit and
Learning on that subject. But since the stream runs that way, I believed it as
ridiculous to appear in good company dressed like Mrs. Abigail, as (at this time)
not to be arguing some points of Religion, tho never so Mal a propo. But least,
by such an undertaking I should, as many do, but the more embarass the Mystries
of it, we shall treat here only of the Pagan Religion, and of the abominable
Cheats of the Oracles and their Priests.

My Author, who is of the French Nation, has here given us a collection of many
diverting and useful remarks on the Ancient Religion of the Pagans, and a very
good account of those Oracles that once made so great a noise in the World; and
which, I believe, will not be unpleasant to the Readers. But if in the result,
it have but the Honor of being approved by your Lordship I shall, be very
happy in the occasion it gives me of begging leave to subscribe my self,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble and most obedient Servant, A. B.

THE PREFACE TO THE History of Oracles.
NOt long since there fell into my Hands a small Book written in Latin, de
Oraculis Ethnicorum, or of the Heathen Oracles, composed by Mr. Van-Dale Doctor
of Physic, and printed in Holland, in which I found that the Author has
strenuously refuted the commonly received Opinion, that the ancient Oracles
were delivered by Demons, and that they ceased wholly at the coming of Jesus
Christ. The whole Work appeared to me to be full of Knowledge in Antiquity and
profound Learning: Which gave me a great Curiosity to translate it, that the
Ladies and those Gentlemen, who do not much care to read Latin, might not be
deprived of so agreeable and useful a Discourse. But I reflected, that a
Translation of this Book (though excellent in its Original) would not be so
good if too closely turned into French: For Mr. Vandale wrote only for the
Learned, and had Reason to neglect those Ornaments and Softnesses, which they
do not esteem; he cites a great Number of Passages very faithfully, and his
Versions are wonderful exact when he translates from the Greek; he enters also
into a discussion of many Points of Criticism, which, though they are not
always necessary, yet they are always curious; and this he does, to gratify
the Learned, who care little for flourishing Reflections, Discourses of
Morality, or pleasant Wit.

Besides, Mr. Van-Dale makes no difficulty very often to interrupt the Thread
of his Discourse, and to introduce other things which present themselves: And
from one Digression he sometimes passes to another, and so perhaps to a third.
And herein he does not amiss, since those for whom he writes, are fitted for
the Fatigue of Reading, and this Learned Disorder does not at all embarass or
perplex them. But those, for whom I design this Translation, would have been
very ill accommodated, if I had taken this Method: The Ladies, and the Major
Part of the Men of this Country, are indeed more pleased with the Graces and
Turns of Expression and Thought than with the most exact Enquiries and
profoundest Arguments: And being very fond of ease, they desire to read Books
written in a facile Method, that they may be the less obliged to a troublesome
Attention. For this Reason, I laid-by the thoughts of translating, and thought
it would be better, preserving the Foundation and principal Matter of the Work,
to give it altogether another Form. And I confess, that no Man can extend this
Liberty farther than I have done; for I have changed the whole Disposition of
the Book, and have retrenched whatever appeared to me, either of too little
Profit in it self, or of too little Pleasure to make amends for that little
Profit. I have not only added all the Ornaments I could think of, but many
things which prove or clear up what is in Question upon the same Subject and
the same Passages, which Mr. Van-Dale furnished me withal. I argue sometimes in
a manner contrary to his, and I have not been scrupulous to insert many Reasons
wholly my own: In fine, I have new cast and modelled the whole Work, and have
put it into the same Order as I should have done at first (to have pleased my
particular view) had I had so much Knowledge as Mr. Van-Dale; but, since I am
far from it, I have borrowed his Learning, and ventured to make use of my own
Wit and Fancy (such as it is,) to adorn it. Nor should I have failed to have
pursued his Method, had I had to do with the same Persons as he had. And if it
shall happen that this comes to his Knowledge, I beseech him to pardon the
Liberty I have taken, since it will serve to show the Excellency of his Book:
For certainly what belongs to him will still appear extremely fine, though it
have passed through my Hands.

I have lately learned two things, which have Relation to this Book. The first
out of the Tracts called For the Month of June 1686.
Nouvelles, etc. or News from the Commonwealth of Letters, which is, that Mr.
Maebius, chief of the Professors of Divinity at Leipsick has undertaken to
confute Mr. Van-Dale. He acknowledges indeed, that Oracles did not cease at the
Coming of Jesus Christ, (which will be indisputable when we shall have examined
that Question;) but he will by no means yield, that Demons were not the
Authors of Oracles. So that he himself makes a very considerable Invasion on
the common Opinion, in allowing Oracles to extend themselves beyond the time of
the coming of Christ; and it will be a great Argument that they were not
delivered by Demons, but by the Cheats of the Priests, if the Son of God did
not silence them. It Is certain, that according to the usual Acceptance of
these two Notions, what destroys the one extremely shakes the other, or rather
quite ruins it: And this perhaps, after the reading of this Book, will be
readily acknowledged to be so.

But what is more remarkable, is, that I found in the same Book, that one of
Mr. Maebius's strongest Reasons against Mr. Van-Dale, was that God for bad the
Israelites to consult Wizards and the Spirits of Python, whence he concludes
that Python, that is to say the Demons, managed the Oracles, and that it was
by their Aid that the Ghost of Samuel was made to appear. Mr. Van-Dale may
answer what he pleases, but for my part, I declare, that under the Name of
Oracles, I do not pretend to comprehend Magic: In which it is not to be
disputed but that Demons are concerned; nor is it comprehended in what we
commonly understand by the word [Oracle] not even according to the Sense of the
ancient Heathens, who on one side regarded Oracles with Respect, as a part of
their Religion, and on the other Hand had a Horror for Magic, as well as we.
To go and consult a Necromancer, or some Witch of Thessaly, like Ericto in
Lucan, was not called, going to an Oracle; and if we mark it, this distinction
is true, even according to the common Opinion, which affirms that Oracles
ceased at the coming of Christ, and yet no Man can pretend that Magic then
ceased. So that the Objection of Mr. Maebius makes nothing against me, if he
take the word [Oracle] in its ordinary and natural Signification, as well
ancient as modern.

The second thing I have to speak of is, that I am advertised that the Reverend
Father Thomasin, a Priest of the Oratory, famous for so many excellent Books,
wherein he has joined solid Piety to Profound Learning, has taken from this
Book the Honor of first broaching this Paradox, by treating Oracles as mere
Knavery (in his Book called, The Method of Study, and of teaching the Poets to
Christian Children.) I confess I was a little troubled at this, but I pacified
my self with reading the twenty first Chapter of the eleventh Book of this
Method, where I found nothing relating to my Opinion, save only that in the
nineteenth Article, there are a very few words to the following Sense: The true
Reason (says he) why Silence was imposed on Oracles, was, because by the
Invocation of the Divine Word, truth has enlightened the World, and spread
abroad abundance of Light far different from what was before, by which Men are
emancipated from the Illusions of Augurs and Astrologers, the Observations of
the Entrails of Beasts, and the greatest part of Oracles: Which were indeed but
Impostures, whereby Men deceived one another with obscure Words that bore a
double Sense: In fine, if there were Oracles, in which the Devil spoke, the
coming of the Incarnate Truth condemned the Father of Lies to an eternal
Silence. It Is however very certain that Demons were consulted, whenever Men
had Recourse to Enchantments and Magic, as Lucan reports of Pompey the
younger, and as the Scripture assures us concerning Saul. I agree that in such
a great Treatise, which mentions Oracles but by the by (and that without any
Design of searching into the depth of the matter) it is enough to attribute the
most part of Oracles to the Contrivances and Deceits of Men, and to make a
Question whether there were any of them at all in which Demons were concerned,
and to allow the Demons no further Employment than comes within the Compass of
Incantations and Magic; and in fine to prove that Oracles ceased, not because
the Son of God imposed Silence on 'em, all of a sudden; but because the most
enlightened Wits were disabused by the Publication of the Gospel: Which still
supposes that those humane Artifices could not be detected in a little time.
However in my Opinion a Question decided in so few Words ought to be treated of
anew, and that in all its natural Extent, without any Man's being offended by
the Repetition; for it is putting in great, what the World has hitherto seen but
only in little; and so in little, that its Objects are scarce perceptible.

I know not whether it be permitted me to enlarge my Preface, by making a short
Observation upon the Style I shall use, which is familiar, and after the manner
of conversing: And I Imagine that I entertain my Reader so much the more
pleasingly, because I must, as it were, dispute with him: And the matter which
I have in Hand, being often capable enough of being turned into Ridicule,
engaged me in a Manner of Writing far different from that of Sublime; since I
am of Opinion that none ought to write loftily, but he that writes in Defense
of himself, it is so little natural. I confess, that the low Style is yet
something worse, but there is a Medium of a very great Latitude; yet it is
mighty hard to take that Pitch which is necessary, and to keep steady to it.

THE HISTORY OF ORACLES.
MY design is not to give you directly an History of Oracles; I only intend to
argue against that common Opinion which attributes 'em to Demons, and will
have 'em to cease at the coming of Jesus Christ. In doing this it is necessary
that I run through the whole History of Oracles, that I unfold their Originals,
their Progress, the different Manners in which they were delivered; and lastly
their Decay, with the same exactness as if I were in these matters pursuing the
Natural and Historical Order.

It is not at all surprising, that Philosophers should have so much trouble in
finding out the secrets of Nature, her Principles being so hidden that it is
rashness in Men to think to discover 'em. But when we have no more to do, but
to enquire whether the Oracles were a Trick and Artifice of the heathen
Priests, or not, and at what time they ceased, Where lies the difficulty?
Cannot we that are Imposed on every day, imagine how far other Men may have
been deceivers or deceived? But especially when the whole matter turns upon the
time when Oracles ceased, Where can the difficulty be? There are many Books
that treat of Oracles; let us see therefore in what time or in what Age the
last Oracles, of which we have any knowledge, were delivered.

Men are not willing to suffer the decision of things to be too easy, and
therefore they mingle their own prejudices with truths, and so create greater
perplexities than are Naturally found therein; and those scruples, which our
selves frame, give us the most pain to untangle. And in my opinion this
business of Oracles has no considerable difficulty in it, but what we our
selves have raised. It is in it is own Nature, a matter of Religion amongst the
Pagans, and become so without any necessity amongst Christians, and on both
sides it is loaded with prejudices which obscure the clearest truths.

I confess that prejudices are not in themselves common to a true as well as a
false Religion; for they Reign chiefly in the false, which is only the
contrivance of humane Wit; but in the true (which is the production of God
alone,) there would none be ever found, if humane Wit could be prevented from
Intermedling and mixing something of its own with it; for all its new
inventions are but prejudices without ground, and it is not able to add any
thing real or solid to the great work of God. Nevertheless these prejudices
that are in the true Religion are, as I may say, so closely interwoven with it,
that they have drawn that respect to themselves which is only due to the true
Religion; and we dare not find fault with the one for fear of attacking at the
same time something that is holy in the Other. I do not reproach this excess of
Religion in those that are capable of discerning, but rather praise it; yet
whatever Commendations they may deserve, we cannot but confess that a just
medium is much the safest course; and that it is more reasonable to remove
error from truth, than to venerate error because it is mixed with truth.
Christianity has been always able to stand of its self without false proofs;
but it is at present rendered more so than ever, by the pains the great Men of
this Age have taken to Establish it on true foundations with greater Power and
force than ever the Ancients did; and we ought to be filled with so just a
confidence of our Religion as to reject all false advantages, tho they may be
useful to a weaker party. Having laid this foundation I advance boldly to prove
that Oracles, of what nature soever, were not delivered by Demons and that
they did not cease at the coming of Jesus Christ. Each of which points deserves
a particular discourse.

THE FIRST DISCOURSE. That Oracles were not given by Demons.
IT is certain that there are Demons, evil Genii, and Spirits condemned to
eternal Punishment. Religion teaches us that; and if so, then our reason must
tell us that these Demons might have animated Statues, and delivered Oracles,
if God had permitted them so to do. We are therefore only to inquire whether
they had such a permission or not.

It Is only then a matter of fact which is in dispute; and this matter of fact
depending wholly on the will of God, it is certain that it would have been
revealed to us, if the knowledge thereof were necessary. But the Holy
Scriptures do not teach us any where that Oracles were delivered by Demons;
and therefore we are at liberty to choose which side we will take in this
matter; for it is of the number of those things that the Divine Wisdom has
thought fit to leave to our own decision.

Now it is agreed on by the whole World, that there was something supernatural
in Oracles; the reason of which is easily found, as to what regards the present
Age: For since it was believed in the first Ages of Christianity that Oracles
were delivered by Demons, this seems a sufficient cause for us to believe it
now; for whatever was the opinion of the Ancients, good or bad, it was always
favorably received; and what they themselves could not prove by sufficient
Reasons, is in our days proved by their Authority alone. If they foresaw this,
they did very well not to give themselves the trouble of reasoning too nicely.
But let us inquire after the reasons which obliged the Primitive Christians to
believe that Oracles had something supernatural in 'em, and we shall afterward
try whether they were sound and solid, or not.

CHAP. I. The first Reason why the Primitive Christians believed that Oracles
were delivered by Demons, and the surprising Histories that were published
concerning Oracles and Genii.
ANtiquity is full of abundance of wonderful Histories and Oracles, which, as
it is believed, must needs be attributed to spirits: I will relate some few
examples, which shall serve for a taste of what the rest were.

All the World knows what happened to the Pilot Thamus: His Ship being one
evening near certain Islands in the Aegean Sea, the Winds were hushed on a
sudden, and the Waves ceased their motion: all the Passengers were awake, and
the greatest part of 'em passing their time in drinking one with another, when
on a sudden they heard a Voice which came from the Islands, and called aloud,
Thamus. Thamus suffered himself to be called thrice before he returned an
answer, and then the Voice commanded him, that when he did arrive at a certain
place, he should cry out, That the great Pan was dead. There was not a Man in
the Ship who was not seized with fear and dread at these words, and they all
consulted whether Thamus ought to obey the Voice or not; but Thamus resolved
that if when they were arrived at the appointed Place, there were Wind enough
to Sail onwards, he would pass by without saying any thing; but if a calm
happened to keep him there, he then would acquit himself of the order he had
received. And so finding himself to be surpised with a Calm in that very
place, he cried out with all his force, That the Great Pan was dead. Scarce had
he given over speaking, but they heard from every side Groans and Complaints as
of a great multitude surpised and Afflicted at this news. All those who were
in the Ship were witnesses of this Accident; the Fame of which spread it self
in a little time, as far as Rome; and the Emperor Tiberius having a desire to
see Thamus himself, assembled a great number of Pagan Priests to know of them
who this great Pan was, and it was concluded that he was the Son of Mercury and
Penelope. Thus in Plutarch's Dialogues (where he treats of the Cessation of
Oracles) Cleombrotus tells this story, and says he had it of Epithersis his
Grammar-Master, who was in the Ship with Thamus when this wonder happened.

Thulis was a King of Egypt, Suidas.
whose Empire extended it self as far as the Ocean: It is he who (as they said)
gave the Name of Thule to the Isle now called Iseland. His Empire reaching
thither was of a large extent, and the King puffed up with Pride at his Success
and Prosperity went to the Oracle of Serapis, and thus he spoke to it: Thou
that art the God of Fire, and who governest the Course of the Heavens, tell me
the Truth: Was there ever, or will there ever be one so Puissant as my self?

The Oracle answered him thus.
First God, then the Word and Spirit, all -- uniting in one, whose Power can
never end. Go hence immediately, O Mortal, whose Life is always uncertain. And
Thulis at his going thence had his Throat cut.

Eusebius has collected from the Wrtings of Porphyrius these following Oracles.

1. Groan ye Tripodes, Apollo leaves you; he is forced to leave you by a
Celestial Light. Jupiter has been, is, and ever will be: Oh great Jupiter!
Alas! My famous Oracles are no more. 2. The Voice can return no more to the
Priestess, she is condemned to Silence. Make such Sacrifices to Apollo, as are
worthy of a God. 3. Unhappy Priest, (said Apollo to one of his Priests,)
Interrogate me no more concerning the Holy Father, his only Son, nor the Spirit
which is the Soul of all things: It is this Spirit that chases me for ever from
these Abodes.
Augustus now grown old, Suidas, Nicephorus, Cedronus.
and designing to choose a Successor, went to consult the Oracle of Delphos.
The Oracle returned no Answer, although Augustus spared no Sacrifice; but in
the End he drew from it this following:

The Hebrew Infant, to whom all the Gods pay Obedience, chases me hence and
sends me into Hell. Therefore quit this Temple without speaking any more.

It is easy to see that upon the Credit of such like Histories they ground
their Opinion, who say, that Demons employed themselves in pronouncing
Oracles. This great Pan (who died in the Reign of Tiberius, as well as Jesus
Christ) is the Master and Prince of the Demons, whose Empire was ruined by the
Death of a God so saving to the Universe: Or, if this Explanation do not please
you, (for I hope we may without Impiety give different Solutions of the same
thing, although it be of a religious concern) this great Pan was Jesus Christ
himself: Whose Death caused so general a Grief and Consternation among the
Demons, who from that time could no more exercise their Tyranny over Mankind:
Thus a way has been found out to give a double account who this great Pan was.

Could the Oracle delivered to King Thulis (an Oracle so positive concerning
the Holy Trinity) be a humane Fiction? How could the Priest of Serapis have
divined so great a Mystery, unknown then to all the World, and even to the Jews
themselves?

If these Oracles were delivered by Priests, who were Impostors, what could
oblige them to discredit themselves, and publish the Cessation of their own
gainful Oracles? Is it not visible, that God forced Demons to bear Witness to
the Truth? Besides, why did the Oracles cease; if they were only delivered
Priests?

CHAP. II. The Second Reason why the Primitive Christians believed that Oracles
were supernatural, and the Agreement of this Opinion with the System of
Christianity.
THAT there are Demons being once allowed by Christianity, it was natural and
easy enough to attribute to them the Ability of performing any thing that is
Great and Wonderful, and not to refuse them the Power of delivering Oracles,
and effecting any other Pagan Miracles, which seemed to have need of their
Assistance. And thus the Ancients saved themselves the trouble of entering into
a strict enquiry about Matters which would be tedious and difficult: For all
that was surprising and extraordinary, was without any more ado ascribed to
these Demons: And this alone they thought a sufficient Confirmation of their
Existence, and of the Religion it self that warranted it.

Moreover, it is certain, that about the time of the Birth of Jesus Christ,
there is often mention made of the Cessation of Oracles even in Profane
Authors. Now, why this time rather than any other, was destined for the
Cessation of them is very easily made out, according to the System of the
Christian Religion. God had chosen his People out of the Jewish Nation, and
left the Empire of the rest of the World to Demons till the coming of his Son;
but then, he deprived them of that Power, which before he permitted them to
have: His Will then was, that all should submit themselves to Jesus Christ; and
that nothing should hinder the Establishment of his Kingdom over all the World.
There is such a sort of Happiness in this Thought, that I do not wonder it has
made so great a Progress. This is one of those things to the truth of which we
so easily accord, and which persuaded us, because we are willing to believe.

CHAP. III. The Third Reason of the Primitive Christians, taken from the
Agreement of their Opinion with the Philosophy of Plato.
NEver any Philosophy was so ala-mode, as that of Plato during the First Ages
of the Church: The Pagans interested themselves amongst all the different Sects
of Philosophers, but the Conformity which Plato's was found to have with
Religion, made almost all the knowing Christians of that Sect. Thence came the
mighty Esteem they had of Plato: They looked upon him as a sort of Prophet who
had foretold many important Points of Christianity, especially that of the
Holy Trinity; (which we cannot deny to be clearly enough contained in his
Writings:) Nay, they went so far as to take his Works for Comments on the
Scripture; and to conceive the Nature of the Word, as he conceived it. He
represented God so elevated above his Creatures, that he did not believe that
they were immediately made by his Hands; and therefore he put between them and
him this Word, as a degree by which the Actions of God might pass down to them:
The Christians had the like Idea of Jesus Christ: And this may perhaps be the
Reason why no Heresy has been more generally received and maintained with
greater heat than Arrianism.

This Platonism then (which seems, to Honor the Christian Religion by
countenancing it) was very full of Notions about Demons: And thence they
easily passed into that Opinion which the old Christians had of Oracles.

Plato said, that Demons were of a middle Nature, between God and Man; that
they were the aerial Genii appointed to hold a Commerce, between God and us;
that although they were near us, yet we could not see them; that they penetrated
into all our Thoughts; that they had a Love for the Good, and a Hatred for the
Bad; and that it was for their Honor that such variety of Sacrifices, and so
many different Ceremonies were appointed: But it does not at all appear, that
Plato acknowledged any evil Demons, to which might be attributed the
management of the illusions of Oracles. Plutarch, notwithstanding, assures us,
that Plato was not ignorant of them; and amongst the Platonical Philosophers,
the thing is out of doubt. Dialogues of the ceasing of Oracles, Lib. 4, 5, 6.
Eusebius in his Evangelical Preparations, recites a great Number of Passages
out of Porphyrius, where that Pagan Philosopher assures us, that evil Demons
are the Authors of Enchantments, Philtres and Witch-Crafts; that they cheat our
Eyes with Specter, Fantoms, and Apparitions; that lying is Essential to their
Nature; that they raise in us the greatest part of our Passions; and that they
have an Ambition to pass with us for Gods; that their aerial and spiritual
Bodies are nourished with Suffumigations, and with the Blood and Fat of
Sacrifices; and that it is only these that employ themselves in giving Oracles,
and to whom this Task so full of Fraud is assigned: in short at the Head of
this Troop of evil Demons he places Hecate and Serapis.

Tertullian in his Apologies.
Iamblichus, another Platonist, has said as much. And the greatest part of
these things being true, the Christians received them all with Joy, and have
added to them besides a little of their own: As for Example, that the Demons
stole from the Writings of the Prophets some Knowledge of things to come; and
so got Honor by it in their Oracles.

This System of the ancient Christians had this Advantage, that it discovered
to the Pagans by their own Principles, the Original of their false Worship, and
the Source of those Errors which they always embraced. They were persuaded that
there was something supernatural in their Oracles; and the Christians, who were
always disputing against them, did not desire to confute this Opinion. Thus by
Demons (which both Parties believed to be concerned in the Oracles,) they
explicated all that was supernatural in them. They acknowledged indeed that
this sort of ordinary Miracles were wrought in the Pagan Religion; but then
they ruined this Advantage again, by imputing them to such Authors as evil
Spirits. and this way of convincing, was more short and easy, than to
contradict the Miracle is self, by a long train of Enquiries and Arguments.
Thus I have given you the manner how that Opinion which the first A^es of the
Church had of the Pagan Oracles, was grounded, I might to the three Reasons,
which I have already brought, add a fourth of no less Authority perhaps than
those: That is, That in the Supposition of Oracles being given by Demons,
there is something miraculous: And if we consider the humor of Mankind a
little, we shall find how much we are taken with any thing that is Miraculous.
But I do not intend to enlarge my self on this Reflection; for those that think
upon it, will easily believe me, and those that do not, will perhaps give it no
credit, notwithstanding all my Arguments.

Let us now examine the several Reasons which Men have had to believe Oracles
to be Supernatural.

CHAP. IV. That the surprising Histories of Oracles ought to be suspected.
IT is very difficult to give an Account of those Stories and Oracles which we
have mentioned, without having Recourse to Demons. But the Question is,
Whether they be true? Let us be assured of the Matter of Fact, before we
trouble our selves with enquiring into the Cause. It is true, that this Method
is too slow and dull for the greatest part of Mankind, who run naturally to the
Cause, and pass over the truth of the matter of Fact; but for my part, I will
not be so ridiculous as to find out a Cause for what is not.

This kind of Misfortune happened so pleasantly at the end of the last Age, to
some Learned Germans, that cannot forbear speaking of it. In the Year 1593,
there was a Report that the Teeth of a Child of Silesia of seven Years old,
dropped out, and that one of Gold came in the Place of one of his great Teeth-
Horstius, a Physician in the University of Helmstad, wrote in the Year 1595 the
History of this Tooth, and pretends that it was partly natural, and partly
miraculous, and that it was sent from God to this Infant, to comfort the
Christians who were then afflicted by the Turks. Now fancy to your self what a
Consolation this was, and what this Tooth could signify, either to the
Christians or the Turks. In the same Year (that this Tooth might not want for
Historians) one Rolandus wrote a Book of it: Two Years after, Ingolsteterus,
another Learned Man, wrote against the Opinion of Rolandus concerning this
golden Tooth; and Rolandus presently makes a Learned Reply. Another Great Man,
named Libavius, collected all that had been said of this Tooth, to which he
added his own Opinion. In fine there wanted nothing to so many famous Works,
but only the truth of its being a golden Tooth. For when a Goldsmiths had
examined it, he found, that it was only a thin Plate of Gold fixed to the Tooth
with a great deal of Art. Thus they first went about to compile Books, and
afterward they consulted the Goldsmiths.

Nothing is more natural than to do the same thing in all other cases. And I am
not so convinced of our Ignorance by the things that are, and of which the
Reasons are unknown, as by those which are not, and for which we yet find out
Reasons. That is to say, as we want those Principles that lead us to truth, so
we have those which agree exceeding well with error and falsehood.

Some Learned Physicians have found out the reason why Places under Ground are
hot in the Winter and cool in the Summer; and greater Physicians have since
discovered that they are not so.

Historical Enquiries are much more liable to this error. For when we argue
from what is said in History, what assurances have we that these Historians
have never been biased, nor credulous, nor misinformed, nor negligent? It Is
necessary therefore that we should look out for one, that has been an
Eyewitness of all those things of which he writes, unconcerned by Interest,
and diligent. But especially when Men write of such matters of Fact, as have a
Relation to Religion, it is very hard not to savor (according to the party of
which they are) a false Religion with those advantages that are not due to it;
or not to give a true one those false assistances of which it has no need* And
yet we may be assured that we can never add more truth to what is true already,
nor make that true which is false.

Some Christians in the first Age, for want of having been convinced of this,
Maxim have suffered themselves, in favor of Christianity, to introduce
suppositions bold enough, which the sounder part of Christians have been fain
afterward to disown. This Inconsiderate zeal has produced a great number of
Apocryphal Books, to which were given the Names of Pagan or Jewish Authors; for
the Church, having to do with these two sorts of Enemies, what was more
advantageous to her than to fight 'em with their own Weapons, by producing
Books, which, though made, as was pretended, by their own party were written
nevertheless very much in favor of Christianity? But whilst they strained the
point too far, to draw from those counterfeit works some very great benefit to
their Religion, they gained none at all; for the clearness of the manner in
which they were written, betrayed them; and our Mysteries are therein so
plainly unfolded, that the Prophets of the Old and New Testament understood
nothing in comparison of those Jewish and Pagan Authors. And which way soever
Men turn themselves to save the reputation of those Books, they will find in
their too great clearness a difficulty not to be surmounted. If some Christians
fathered spurious Books on Pagans and Jews, Heretics found the way of doing
the like on the Orthodox. There was nothing to be met with but false Gospels,
false Epistles of the Apostles, and false Histories of their Lives; and nothing
but an effect of the Divine Providence could have separated the truth from so
many Apocryphal Works, as confounded it.

Some great Men of the Church have sometimes been deceived either by the
spurious works of Heretics fathered upon the Orthodox, or by what the
Christians father upon the Jews; but oftenest by the latter: For they seldom
examine strictly enough that which seems favorable to Religion; the heat with
which they contest for so good a Cause, not giving them the leisure to make a
good Choice of their Weapons. This is the reason that they have happened
sometimes to make use of the Books of the Sibyls or of those of Hermes
Trismegistus King of Egypt.

We do not intend by this to weaken the Authority, or to lessen the Merit of
those great Men. For after we shall have examined all the errors, (into which
perhaps they have fallen on some certain subjects,) there will yet remain
abundance of solid Reasonings, and very curious discoveries, which are worthy
of our highest Admiration. And if, with the true proofs of our Religion, they
have left us others which may be suspected, it is our part to receive that only
which is legitimate; and to pardon their zeal, who have furnished us with more
proofs than there was any necessity for.

I am not at all surpised that this same Zeal has convinced 'em of the truth
of I know not how many Oracles, advantageous to their Religion, which passed
for current in the first Ages of the Church. The Authors of the Books of the
Sibyls, and those of Hermes Trismegistus, were also probably the Authors of
these Oracles; at least it was more easy to feign them, than to counterfeit
entire Volumes. The History of Thamus is Originally heathen, and yet Eusebius
and other great Authors have given it the Reputation of being believed. It is
immediately followed in Plutarch with a Relation so ridiculous, that it will be
sufficient wholly to discredit the other. For Demetrius says there, that the
most part of the Islands near England are desert and Consecrated to Demons and
Heroes, and that he, being sent by the Emperor to discover these Islands,
chanced to land upon one of those that were Peopled, and that, a little time
after his Arrival, there happened a Tempest and terrible claps of Thunder and
Lightning, which made the People of the Country conclude that some one of their
Principal Demons was dead; because their Death's were always attended with
something strange and horrible. To this Demetrius adds, that one of those
Islands was the Prison of Saturn who was kept there by Briareus, and was Buried
in a Profound sleep (which methinks should render the custody of the Giant very
needless) encompassed with an infinite number of Demons lying at his feet as
slaves.

Has not Demetrius made a very curious Relation of this Voyage? And is it not
pleasant to see such a Philosopher as Plutarch coldly relate to us such
Wonderful things? It is not without reason that Herodotus is esteemed the
father of History; and all the Greek Writers of that kind are on that account
his offspring, and partake of his Genius. They have somewhat of truth, but more
of wonderful and amusing stories. But let it be how it will, it were sufficient
almost to refute the History of Thamus (tho it had no other defect) to have
been found in the same Treatise with the Demons of Demetrius.

But besides this, it cannot receive a reasonable interpretation. For if the
Great God Pan were a Demon, could not the Demons have sent one another an
account of one of their Deaths, without employing Thamus to that end? Have they
no other way of informing one another of news? And, on the other side, can they
be so imprudent as to discover to Men their Misfortunes and the weakness of
their Natures? God compelled 'em, perhaps, you will say. Then God had some
design in doing so; But let us see what followed thereupon; there was no Person
that was converted from Paganism by having heard of the Death of the great God
Pan. It was declared that he was the Son of Mercury and Penelope, and that it
was not he that was acknowledged in Arcadia for supreme God of all (as his Name
imports;) and therefore though the voice had named him the great Pan, yet he was
understood to be but the little Pan, whose Death was of no great consequence,
and there did not appear any considerable regret for it.

If this great Pan were Jesus Christ, the Demons would not have told to Men
news of a death so much to their advantage, unless God had compelled 'em to it.
But what is the effect of all this? did any one understand the Name of Pan, in
its true sense? Plutarch lived in the second Age of the Church, and yet no
Person then knew that Pan was Jesus Christ, who died in Judea.

The History of Thulis is related by Suidas (an Author who heaps up a great
many things, perphaps ill enough chosen) His Oracle of Serapis is reproached
with the same fault, as the Books of the Sibyls; that is, of being too clear
concerning our Mysteries. And farther, we are certain that this Thulis King of
Egypt was not one of the Ptolomyes; and what then will become of the whole
Oracle, if Serapis were a God first brought into Egypt by a Ptolomy, who sent
for him out of Pontus, as many Learned Men pretend from very strange
probabilities? at least it is certain that Herodotus, who has written so
plentifully about old Egypt, does not mention Serapis, and that Tacitus
recounts at length how and why one of the Ptolomyes brought from Pontus the God
Serapis, that was then known no where else.

The Oracle, said to be given to Augustus concerning the Hebrew Child, is by no
means to be reciev'd. Cedrenus cites Eusebius for it; but at this day there is
no such thing to be found there. It is not impossible that Cedrenus should make
a false Citation, or should cite some work not rightly attributed to Eusebius.
He has thought fit to relate upon the credit of certain counterfeit Histories
of St. Peter, which passed for current in his time, That Simon the Magician had
at his door a great Dog, which devoured all those that his Master would not
have enter; and that St. Peter coming thither to speak with Simon, commanded
the Dog to go and tell his Master in Humane Language, That Peter the servant of
God, would speak with him: The Dog went and performed that Command, to the
great Amazement of such as were then with Simon. But Simon, to show that he
could do as much as St. Peter, bid the Dog go and tell him, That he might
Enter: which the Dog immediately did. Hence you may see what it is that the
Greeks call writing of History. Cedrenus lived in an ignorant Age, when the
liberty of writing Fables was joined with the General inclination of the Greeks
toward 'em.

But though Eusebius, in some work of his, which has not come down to us, had
effectually spoke of the Oracle of Augustus, yet we find Eusebius himself is
sometimes deceived; of which there are good proofs. The first Defenders of
Christianity, Justin, Tertullian, Theophilus, Tatian, would they have said
nothing of an Oracle so much in Favor of their Religion? Had they so little
Zeal as to neglect a thing of such Advantage? but even Credenus, Suidas, Niceph.
those that give us this Oracle, spoil it by adding, that Augustus in his
Return to Rome, built in the Capitol an Altar with this Inscription, This is
the Altar of the only Son (or Eldest Son) of God. Where had he the Idea of this
only Son of God, of which the Oracle makes no mention? In short, that which is
most observable, is, that Augustus after the Voyage he made into Greece,
nineteen Years before the Birth of Jesus Christ, never returned to Rome; but
allowing that he did, he was not then in an Humor to erect Altars to any God
but himself: For he suffered not only the Tacitus, Dion Cassius.
Asian Maids to raise Altars to him, and celebrate holy Games in his Honor;
but also at Rome they consecrated one to Fortune Returning, Fortunae reduci,
that was to say, to himself, and they were to keep the day of his happy return
as a festival.

The Oracles, which Eusebius relates out of Porphyrius, appear harder to make
out than all the rest: for Eusebius would not have charged Porphyrius with
Oracles of which he made no mention, and Porphyrius, who was so addicted to
Paganism, would not have cited false Oracles (concerning the Cessation of
Oracles themselves) to the Advantage of the Christian Religion: For in this
Case, it seems, that the Testimony of an Enemy has a great deal of Credit and
Force.

But on the other side, Porphyrius was not so unskilful a Man, as to furnish
the Christians with Weapons against Paganism, without being necessarily engaged
to it by the Consequence of some Reasons, which does not in this matter appear
to be his Case. If these Oracles had been alleged by the Christians, and
Porphyrius owning that they were effectually given, had denied the Consequences
drawn from them, it is certain that they would have then been much to be relied
on.

But it is out of Porphyrius himself that the Christians (as it appears by the
Example of Eusebius) pretend to fetch these Oracles; it seems, that Porphyrius
takes Pleasure to ruin his own Religion, and to establish another. The Truth
is, this is suspicious of it self, and yet it becomes more so, by his pushing
the thing so far; for they tell us from him of I know not how many Oracles most
clear and most positive, concerning the Person of Jesus Christ, concerning his
Resurrection and Ascension. In fine, the most resolute, and knowing amongst the
Pagans has loaded us with Proofs of Christianity; we may well suspect so great
a piece of Generosity.

Eusebius believed it a very great Advantage to be able to place Porphyrius at
the Head of a Multitude of Oracles so favorable to Religion; and he gives them
us stripped of what ever accompanies them, in the Writings of Porphyrius. How
do we know, but that he did refute them? According to the Interest of his
Cause, he ought to have done it; and if he did not do it, certainly he had some
hidden Intention.

It is to be suspected, that Porphyrius was wicked enough to frame false
Oracles, and present them to Christians, with a Design of making Sport with
their Credulity, if they should receive them for true, and endeavor to
strengthen their Religion by such like props: And then he would have drawn
thence such Consequences as would be of greater Importance than these Oracles,
and with this instance have attacked the whole Religion. However at the botom
this would have been but a frivolous Argument.

It Is very certain, that this same Porphyrius (who furnishes us with all these
Oracles) held, (as we have seen) that they were delivered by lying Spirits; it
may very well then be imagined, that he has put into Oracles all the Mysteries
of our Religion, endeavoring to destroy it by rendering it suspected of
Forgery, as depending on the Testimony of false Witnesses: I know the
Christians did not take it so; yet seeing they could never prove by any
Argument, that the Demons were sometimes forced to speak the Truth, Porphyrius
was always in a condition to make use of his Oracles against them. And
therefore (if we take the Matter right) their better way had been to have
denied, that there were ever any Oracles, as we do at this present. This
appears to me to be a sufficient Reason, why Porphyrius was so prodigal of
Oracles, that were so favorable to our Religion. But what would have been the
Success of the great debate between the Christians and Infidels, we can only
conjecture; for all the written pieces of their Disputes are not come to our
Hands. Thus in examining things a little closer than ordinary, we find that the
Oracles, which were reckoned such Wonders, never were at all; of which, I shall
not need to give any more Instances, all the rest being of the same Nature.

CHAP. V. That the common Opinion concerning Oracles does not agree so well as
it is imagined with the Christian Religion.
THE silence of the Scriptures concerning these evil Demons, (which are
Pretended to be the managers of Oracles) has not only left us at liberty to
believe nothing of 'em, but it obliges us to believe the contrary; for can it
be possible that the Scriptures should not have instructed the Jews and
Christians in a thing which it so extremely imported them to know, (and which
they could never have found out by their natural Reason) to the end that they
might not be shaken in their own Religion, by seeing things so surprising in
another. For I conceive that God spoke not to Man, but to supply the weakness
of his understanding, which of it self was not sufficient to guide him; and
that whatsoever he has not declared to him, is either of such a nature that he
may learn it by himself, or else God does not think it necessary that he should
know it. So if the Oracles had been delivered by evil Demons, God would have
made it known to us, to have prevented us from believing that he himself
delivered 'em, or that there was something Divine in false Religions.

David reproached the Infidels with Gods that had mouths and spoke not, and
wishes that their Adorers, for a punishment, might become like those they
Adored; but if these Gods had not only the use of Speech, but also the
knowledge of things to come, I see no reason David had thus to reproach the
Infidels, nor ought they to have been angry for having been resembled to their
Gods. When the Holy Fathers inveighed with so much reason against the Worship
of Idols, they always argued from the impotency of 'em; but if they had
spoken, if they had predicted things to come, then they ought not to have
treated them with such contempt on the account of their impotency, but should
rather have disabus'd the People, and have confessed the wondrous Power that
was in 'em: In fine, could they be so mightly mistaken who adored what they
believed was animated by a Divine virtue, or at least a virtue more than
humane. It Is true, you will say, that these Demons were enemies of God, but how
could the Heathens Divine that? Because Demons required ceremonies that were
Barbarous and extravagant, the Pagans themselves believed 'em fantastical and
cruel, but nevertheless they believed 'em more powerful than Men; nor did they
know that the true God offered 'em his protection against them. They did for
the most part submit themselves to their Gods as to dreaded enemies who were to
be appeased at any Price; nor had this submission and fear been quite without
Reason, if so be that in effect Demons did give some proof of their power over
nature. In fine, Paganism (tho a Worship abominable in the sight of God) would
have been but an involuntary and excusable error.

But you will say, if the crafty Priests made it their business to impose upon
the People, then Paganism was no more but a simple error into which the
credulous fell, whilst their honest and downright intention was to Honor a
superior being.

But the case is much otherwise; for it behooves Men to precaution themselves
against errors, into which other Men may lead 'em; but there is no possibility
of fore-arming themselves against those errors into which they may be led by
Genii, or Demons which are above themselves. The light of my Reason is
sufficient to examine whether a statue speaks or does not, but in the moment
that it does speak, nothing can persuade me against the Divinity which I
attribute to it. In a word, God is obliged by the Laws of his Bounty to protect
me from those surprises from which I cannot defend my self; but as for other
things, it belongs to my reason to do its office.

We see also that when God permitted the Demons to work prodigies, he at the
same time confounded them by working miracles far greater. Pharaoh might be
deceived by the Magicians, but Moses was still more powerful than the Magicians
of Pharaoh. The Demons never had more power or did more surprising things,
than in the time of Jesus Christ and the Apostles. This hinders not, but that
Paganism with justice has been always called the worship of Demons. For in
the first place the Idea which is taken therein of the Divinity, does not at
all agree with the true God, but with the reprobate and eternally unhappy Genii.

Secondly, the design of the Heathens was not so much to adore the first Being
which is the source of all good, but those ill Beings of whose anger and
caprice they stood in fear. In fine, the Demons, (who have without
contradiction the power of tempting Men and laying snares for 'em) countenanced
as much as ever they could the gross errors of the Pagans, and made 'em blind
to impostures, which were not notoriously visible. From hence it is said that
Paganism was not born up by the Miracles, but by the Artifices of Demons;
which supposes that in whatever they did there was nothing of reality or truth,
nor of such force as effectually to make a Statue speak.

Nevertheless, it may be that God has sometimes permitted the Demons to
animate Idols; but if this ever happened, God had his peculiar reasons for it,
which are always worthy of profound veneration; But generally speaking, there
has never been any such thing. God permitted the Devil to burn the Houses of
Job, and lay his Pastures desolate; to cause all his Oxen and Sheep to Die, to
strike his Body with a thousand wounds, but it must not therefore be said that
the Devil is let loose on all those to whom such misfortunes happen. When there
is a discourse about any Man's being sick or ruined we never think that the
Devil is concerned in it. The case of Job is a particular case; we argue
Independantly of it, and our general reasoning never excludes the exceptions
that the Almighty power of God can make in all things.

It Is apparent then that the common opinion concerning Oracles, does not very
well agree with the bounty of God, and that it discharges Paganism of the
greatest Part of the extravagances and Abominations which the Holy Fathers
always found in it. The Pagans might have said in their own justification,
that it was no wonder, that they should obey those which animated Statues, and
performed every day a thousand extraordinary things; and therefore the
Christians to take from them all excuse, ought never to have yielded 'em this
Point. If all the Pagan Religion were no other than the cheats of Priests,
Christians took advantage of the excess of ridiculousness into which the Pagans
fell.

Besides, is there any great appearance that the disputes between the
Christians and Pagans was in that state, seeing Porphyrius confesses with so
much willingness, that the Oracles were delivered by evil Demons? Of these
evil Demons he made a double use: He made use of 'em (as we have already seen)
to render those Oracles unprofitable and disadvantageous to the Christian
Religion, which the Christians thought were on their side; and besides he
imputed all the follies and Barbarities of an infinite number of sacrifices,
which without ceasing they reproached the Pagans withal, to these cunning and
cruel Genii. We then attack Porphyrius even in his last retrenchments, and
assert the true interest of Christianity, by undertaking to prove that Demons
were not the Authors of Oracles.

CHAP. VI. That Demons are not sufficiently established by Platonism.
IN the first Ages, Poetry and Philosophy were the same thing, and all Wisdom
was contained in Verse. Nor was Poetry more credited by this Alliance, but
Philosophy was less. Homer and Hesiod were the first Grecian Philosophers; and
thence it is that all other Philosophers, have had in very great Estimation
what ever they said, and have never cited them but with great Honor.

Homer very often confounds together the Gods and Demons: But Hesiod
distinguishes four species or kinds of reasonable Natures, viz. the Gods, the
Demons, the Demy-Gods or Heroes, and Men. Nay, he goes farther yet, and notes
the Duration of the Lives of Demons: For the Nymphs, of which he speaks in the
Place I am going to cite, are these Demons, and Plutarch understands them so.

A Crow, ( says Hesiod) lives nine times as long as a Man, a Stag four times as
long as a Crow, a Raven three times as long as a Stag, the Phoenix nine times
as long as a Raven; and in fine the Nymphs ten times as long as the Phoenix.
One would take this Calculation for no other than a mere Poetic Fancy,
unworthy the Reflections of a Philosopher, or the imitation of a Poet; for
there is in it neither agreeableness nor truth: But Plutarch is not of this
Opinion; for he finds, that supposing the Life of Man to be seventy Years,
(which is its ordinary Duration,) the Demons then ought to live six hundred
and eighty thousand, and four hundred Years: And not conceiving how any
Experiment of this so long Life of the Demons can be made, he rather believes
that Hesiod by the Age of Man, understands but one Tear. The Interpretation is
not very natural; but according to this Estimation; the Life of the Demons is
not above nine thousand, seven hundred and twenty Years, and then Plutarch had
not much Trouble to find out how Demons could live so long. And besides, he
remarks in the Number of nine thousand, seven hundred and twenty Years, certain
Pythagorean Perfections, which render it altogether worthy to design the Term
of the Lives of Demons. Such as these are the boasted reasonings of Antiquity.

From the Poems of Homer and Hesiod, the Demons passed into the Philosophy of
Plato, who can never be too much commended, since it is he of all the Greeks,
who has conceived the highest Idea of God; tho even that plunged him in false
Notions. For, because God is infinitely elevated above Men, he believed that
there ought to be placed between him and us, a kind of middle Beings, which
should cause a Communication of two Extremes so far distant, by the means of
which, the Operations of the Deity might be brought down to us. God (says he)
resembles a Triangle, which has three Sides equal, the Demons are like a
Triangle that has but two Sides equal, and Men are like a Triangle which has
all three Sides unequal.

This Idea is well enough fansied, and there is nothing wanting but something
of Solidity to support it.

But after all (may it be said) has not Plato reasoned justly? And do not we
know for certain by the Holy Scriptures, that there are Genii, Ministers of the
Will of God and his Messengers to Men? Is it not wonderful that Plato should
discover this, only by the Light of his natural Reason?

I confess, that Plato has conjectured aright; nevertheless, I blame him for
his Conjecture. Divine Revelation assures us of the Existence of Angels and
Demons, but it is not within the Sphere of humane Reason to assure us of it.
He knows not what to make of the infinite space which is between God and Man,
and therefore he fills it with Genii and Demons: But with what shall that
infinite space be filled, which is between God and these Genii or Demons
themselves? For the distance between God and any Creature whatsoever, is
infinite. And if the Actions and Will of God must traverse, as one may say,
this Infinite Vacuum to go to the Demons, they may as well reach even to Men,
since they are farther off but by very few degrees, which bear no Proportion to
the first great distance. When God treats with Men by the Ministry of Angels,
it is not to be understood that Angels are necessary for this Communication (as
Plato pretends;) God emploies them for Reasons, into which Philosophy can never
penetrate, and which can never be perfectly known but by himself.

According to that Idea, which the Comparison of the Triangle gives us, we find
that Plato framed this Notion of Demons, to the end we might mount from one
Creature, to another Creature more perfect, till at length we arrived at God
himself. So that God would have but some degrees of Perfection more than the
highest Creature; but it is visible, that as they are all infinitely Imperfect
in respect of him, because they are all infinitely distant from him; so the
Differences of Perfection, which are between the Creatures, vanish as soon as
they are compared with God; for what elevates them one above another does not
at all bear any proportion to him.

And if we consult nothing but humane Reason, there is no need of Spirits to
make the Actions of God communicable to Men, nor of placing between God and us
any thing that approaches him nearer than we do.

And perhaps Plato himself was not so sure of the Existence of his Demons, as
the Platonists have since been. That which makes me suspect this, is, That he
places Love in the Number of the Demons, (for he often mixes Gallantry with
Philosophy, and his Talent is not mean on subjects of that Nature.) He says,
that Love is the Son of the God of Riches, and the Goddess of Poverty: from his
Father he holds, his greatness of Courage, his Elevation of thought, his
Inclination to give, his Prodigality and his Confidence in his Strength, his
good Opinion of his own Merit, and Desire to have always the Preference. But,
on the otherside, he holds from his Mother that Indigence, which makes him
always asking, that Importunity with which he asks, that Timidity and
Bashfulness, which hinders him often times from daring to ask, that Disposition
which he has to Servitude, and that Fear of being despised, which he can never
lose. This, in my Opinion, is one of the prettiest Fables that was ever made.
It is pleasant to find Plato sometimes writing Amors as soft and agreeable as
Anacreon could himself have done. This Description of the Pedigree of Love
extremely well sets forth all the fantasticalness of his Nature: But we know
not what to make of Demons, if Love must pass for one.

There is no appearance that Plato understood this in a natural and
Philosophical Sense, nor that he could say, Love was a Being out of us, or
extrinsecal, which inhabits the Air: Certainly, he means this only as a
Gallantry, and then it must be permitted me to believe, that all his Demons
are of the same kind with Love. And that, since he mingles Fables with his
System, he cares not much, if the rest of his System pass for a Fable. Hitherto
we have only answered the Reasons, that made Men believe Oracles, to have had
something in them of Supernatural. Let us now begin more closely to attack this
Opinion.

CHHP. VII. That some Grand Sects of the Pagan Philosophers, did not believe
there was any thing Supernatural in Oracles.
IF in the midst of Greece it self, where all places resounded with their
Oracles, we had maintained that they were but Impostures, no one would have
been astonished with the Boldness of the Paradox; and there would have been no
need of taking any Measures, how to vend the Opinion in secret. For
Philosophers were divided about the Subject of Oracles; the Platonists and
Stoics were for them, but the Cynicks, Peripateticks and Epicureans declared
highly against them. The Wonders of the Oracles were not so great, but that
half the Wise Men of Greece, were still at Liberty to believe nothing of them;
and this, notwithstanding the common Prejudices or Bigotry of the Grecians:
Which is a very remarkable thing.

Lib. 4. of his Evang. Preparations.
Eusebius, tells us of six hundred Heathen Authors, who have writ against the
Oracles: But of all these, in my Opinion, Oenomaus, (of whom he makes mention,
and of whom he has preserved some Fragments) is one, the Loss of whose Works
are to be the most lamented. There is a great deal of Pleasure to be found in
those Fragments of his that remain, where Oenomaus, full of his Cynical
Liberty, argues upon every Oracle against the God who delivered it, and draws
up an Accusation against him. See how he treats the God of Delphos, who in his
Answer to Croesus had pronounced these Words:

Croesus, in passing the River Halis, shall destroy a great Empire.

Which fell out accordingly; for Croesus passing the River Halis attacked
Cyrus, who (as all the World knows) came thundering upon him, and divested him
of his Kingdoms.

You boast, (says Oenomaus to Apollo) in another Oracle delivered to Croesus,
that you know the Number of the Grains of the Sea Sand; and I suppose, you set
a great Value upon your self, because you saw from Delphos, the Tortoise, that
Croesus ordered to be boiled in Lydia, at that very instant; this is a precious
Knowledge to be proud of! But when you were consulted, concerning the Success
of the War between Croesus and Cyrus, there you were at a stand. If you can
divine what shall happen in time to come, to what purpose do you make use of a
manner of speaking which cannot be understood? do you not foresee your self
that they will not be understood? if you do foresee it, you then take pleasure
to make us your sport; if you do not know it, let us inform you that you ought
to speak more clearly, and that you are not understood.

I tell you also, if you have a mind to use an Equivocation, that the Greek
words by which you express, that Croesus shall destroy a great Empire, are not
well chosen, and that they can signify nothing else but a victory of Croesus
over Cyrus. If there be a necessity that things must happen, wherefore do
thou amuse us with thy Ambiguities? what do thou do at Delphos, (unhappily
employed as thou art) to sing us useless Prophecies? to what purpose do we make
thee so many Sacrifices? what fury possesses us?

But Oenomaus is yet more out of humor with the Oracle, which Apollo delivered
to the Athenians. When Xerxes fell upon Greece with all the forces of Asia, the
Pythian Oracle gave 'em for answer, That Minerva Protectress of Athens
endeavored all manner of ways (but in vain) to appease the anger of Jupiter;
but nevertheless Jupiter in favor of his Daughter, consented to suffer the
Athenians to save themselves in walls of wood; and that Salamine should see the
Destruction of many Children dear to their Mothers; either when Ceres should be
scattered abroad or when she should be gathered in.

Upon this Oenomaus wholly loses his Respect for the God of Delphos.

This combat between the Father and the Daughter, says he, is very unhandsom
for Gods. It Is very pretty there should be in Heaven such contrary interests
and inclinations? Jupiter is angry with Athens, he brings down all the forces
of Asia against it; but if he could not have ruined it without 'em, if he had
no more Thunder left, if he was reduced to borrow foreign forces, how had he it
then in his Power to make all the forces of Asia come down against this Town?
Yet after this he suffers 'em to save themselves in Walls of Wood; on whom then
was his Anger to fall? what, on the Stones? Rare Diviner! you know not whom
these Children shall be that Salamine shall see the destruction of, whether
Greeks or Persians; it cannot be avoided but they must be either one or the other
Army; and do not you at least know, that we shall soon see you know nothing?
you conceal the time of Battle under these Poetical expressions, When Ceres
shall be scattered, or when she shall be gathered in. You are willing to blind
us with this Pompous Language; but does not every body know that a Naval Battle
is never fought but either in Seed time or Harvest; doubtless it will not be in
Winter. But let what will happen you will get your self off by the means of
this Jupiter, whom Minerva endeavors to appease; if the Grecians loose the
Battle, Jupiter is then Inexorable; if they gain it, then Jupiter suffered
himself to be appeased. And (Apollo) when you say, let 'em fly to Walls of
Wood, you counsel, you do not Devine. I, who know not what Devining is, could
have said as much as this, and could have judged as well, that the fury of the
War would fall upon Athens; and that since the Athenians had Ships, the best
thing they could do, was to abandon the Town and betake themselves to the Sea.
Such was the veneration that some great sects of the Philosophers had for
Oracles, and for those very Gods they thought the Authors of 'em. It Is very
pleasant that all the Pagan Religion was no more than this one Problem of
Philosophy; it is necessary to know whether the Gods take care of Men, or not,
before the question can be answered, whether we ought to Adore 'em, or neglect
'em; the People have already decided it, and are for Adoration, and nothing is
to be seen but Temples and Sacrifices; but great Sects of the Philosophers
maintain publicly that these Sacrifices, these Temples, these Adorations, are
as so many fruitless and unprofitable things; and that the Gods are so far from
delighting in 'em, that they take no cognizance of 'em. There is scarce a Greek
who does not consult the Oracles concerning his affairs; but this does not
prevent their being treated in three great Schools of Philosophy as absolute
impostures.

Let me beg leave to carry this reflection a little farther, which may serve to
lay more open the Pagan Religion; the Grecians in general had a great deal of
Wit, but they were very light, curious, unquiet, and incapable of moderation in
any thing; and, to tell my whole opinion of 'em, they had so much Wit, that
their Reason suffered by it. The Romans had quite another Character; they were
Solid, Serious, and Industrious, they knew how to pursue a design and could
foresee at a great distance the consequences of it. I should not be surprised
that the Grecians (without thinking of the result of things) should
impertinently treat pro and con of every thing; and at the same time that they
are making Sacrifices, dispute whether or no these Sacrifices approach the
Gods; and consult Oracles without being assured whether they are mere Illusions
or not. Doubtless the Philosophers concerned themselves so little in the
Government, that they took no care not to shock Religion in their disputes; and
perhaps the People had not faith enough in the Philosophers to abandon their
Religion or change any thing in it upon their word. In fine, the predominant
passion in the Greeks was to discourse on all matters at any rate: yet
doubtless it is more astonishing to find that the Romans, and those the ablest
amongst them too, and who knew best of what consequence Religion was to
politics, durst publish works that did not only call their Religion in
question, but also turned it into ridicule. I speak of Cicero, who in his Books
of Divination has spared nothing of what was most Sacred at Rome. After he had
made it evident enough to his very adversaries, how great a folly 'twas to
consult the entrails of Beasts, he drives them at last to this answer: That the
Gods, who are Almighty, change these entrails in the very moment of the
Sacrifice, to the end that we should by them know their pleasure in things to
come. This answer was given by Chrysippus, by Antipater and Possidonius, all
great Philosophers and chief of the Party of the Stoics. Ha! what say you?
cries Cicero: the very old Women are not so credulous as you are. Can you
believe (says he) that the same Calf has the Liver well disposed, if chosen for
the Sacrifice by one, and ill disposed, if chosen by another? Can this
disposition of the Liver be changed in an instant, to accomodate it self to the
fortune of those that sacrifice? see you not, that it is chance that makes the
choice of victims? does not experience tell you so? for it oftentimes happens
that the entrails of one victim may foretell something that is unfortunate and
terrible, and those which are immediately after sacrificed foretell most happy
events. What then becomes of the menaces of these first entrails? What! are the
Gods so soon Appeased? But you will reply, that in a Bull, which Caesar was
sacrificing, there was no heart found; and since this Animal could not live
without a Heart, it must of necessity be, that the Heart vanished just in the
moment of the Sacrifice. Is it possible that you should have sense enough to
know that this Bull could not live without an Heart, and yet have not enough to
perceive that this heart could not vanish in a moment, I know not whither. And
a little after he adds; Believe me, you ruin all Physics by defending the Art
of Soothsayers: for then it is not the ordinary course of Nature that gives
Birth and Death to all things: and there are some Bodies which come from
nothing and shall return to nothing. What Naturalist ever held this opinion?

I cite this passage of Cicero's, but as an example of the extreme liberty with
which he insulted over that Religion which he himself professed. In a thousand
other places he shows no more favor to Sacred Fowls, the flights of Birds, and
all the Miracles with which the Annals of the chief Priest were filled. Why did
they not Indict him for his Impiety? Why did not all the People regard him with
horror? Why did not all the College of Priests rise up against him? But we have
reason to believe that among the Pagans, Religion was a practice, the
speculation of which was very indifferent. They did as others did, but believed
what they themselves pleased. This principle is very extravagant; but the
People who knew nothing of the impertinency of it, were content with it; and
the Philosophers submitted to it very willingly, because it gave them freedom
enough.

So that we may see that all the Pagan Religion was mere Ceremony, in which the
mind bore no part. The Gods are angry, their Thunder is ready to be discharged,
how shall they be appeased? Must we repent us of the crimes we have committed?
Must we re-enter into the paths of that natural Justice which ought to be among
all Men? Not at all; we need only take a Calf of such a color, calv'd at such
a time, and cut the Throat of it with such a knife, and this will disarm the
wrath of all the Gods: Nay farther, it is permitted you to laugh at the
Sacrifice, if you have a mind to it; 'twill go never the worse with you.

Probably 'twas so also with the Oracles: every one believed, that would;
however they ceased not to consult 'em. So great a force custom has over the
minds of Men, that there is no need of Reason to join with it.

CHAP. VIII. That other Men besides Philosophers have had little esteem for
Oracles.
HIstories are full of Oracles, which were either despised by those who
received 'em, or altered according to their fancy. Herodot. Book the first.
Pactias a Lydian, and subject of the Persians, being fled to Cumae a Greek
Town, the Persians sent to have him delivered up; the Cumaeans presently
consult the Oracles of the Branchides, to know what they ought to do with him;
the Oracle answered, that they should deliver up Pactias. Aristodicus one of
the Principal Cumeans, who was not of this mind, obtained through his credit,
that they should send a second time to the Oracle, and caused himself to be
made one of the Deputies; but the Oracle made the same answer it had done
before. Aristodicus unsatisfied with this, as he was walking about the Temple
endeavored to fright away certain little Birds which were building their Nests
there; whereupon he presently heard a voice from the Sanctuary, crying,
Detestable Mortal, how dare you fright from this place, those who are under my
protection? And yet, great God, ( replied Aristodicus) you Order us to expel
Pactias, who is under ours? Yes ( answered the God) I do order it, to the end
that you who are an Impious People, may be the sooner destroyed, and that you
may come no more hither to Importune me with your Questions. It seems by this
that the God was pressed home, since he had recourse to railing; but it appears
also that Aristodicus did not overmuch believe that it was a God who gave these
Oracles, because he went about to entrap him by the comparison of the Birds,
and after he had in effect trap'd him, it is likely that he believed him less a
God than he did before. The Cumeans themselves were not much persuaded of his
being a Deity, since they believed a second deputation might obtain a contrary
answer, or that at least the God might consider of what he had to say. By the
way I observe that Aristodicus, when he laid his snare for the God could not
but foresee that they would not let him fright away the Birds from so Holy a
Sanctuary without saying any thing to him; and that the Priests were extremely
jealous of the honor of their Temples.

The People of Egina Herodot. Lib. 5.
had ravaged the Coast of Attica, and the Athenians prepared themselves for an
Expedition against them; at what time there came an Oracle from Delphos,
threatening 'em with utter ruin in case they made War with those of Aegina,
within the compass of thirty years; but when those thirty years were past, they
were only to build a Temple to Aeacus and to undertake the War, and then all
things would succeed well. The Athenians, who burnt with a desire of Revenge,
split the Oracle in half, and took notice of that part of it only, which
related to the Temple of Aeacus, which they built out of Hand; but as to the
thirty Years, they slighted that, and applied themselves immediately to attack
the Aegineans, and obtained all the Advantages imaginable. This was not a
particular Person, who had so little Regard for the Authority of Oracles, but a
whole Commonwealth, and that a very superstitious one too.

It is not very easy, to tell what kind of regard the Pagans had for their
Religion: For we said a little while ago, that they contented themselves with
the outward Respect, which their Philosophers paid to the Oracles; but this was
not always so; for I am not certain, that Socrates refused to offer Incense to
the Gods, or behaved himself like other People at the Public Festivals; but
this I am sure of, that the Rabble accused him of Atheism, though they could
only guess at his Opinion in this Point; for he never openly explained himself.
The People knew well enough what was taught publicly in the Schools of
Philosophers; how then could they suffer Opinions, contrary to the Established
Worship (and oftentimes even against the Existence of the Gods) to be there
maintained? At least, they knew perfectly well, what was played upon the
Theaters; for those shows were made for them: and it is sure the Gods were
never treated with less Respect, than in the Comedies of Aristophanes. Mercury
in his Plutus complains that sight was restored to the God of Riches, who had
till that time been blind, and that Plutus now beginning equally to favor all
the World, the other Gods (to whom People no longer made Sacrifices to obtain
Wealth) were starved for Hunger: And Mercury carries the Humor on so far, as to
look out for some mean Employment in a Citizen's House, that he might have Meat
and Drink. The Birds of Aristophanes are also very bold. All the Comedy turns
upon this, That a certain City of Birds, which was designed to be built in the
Air, would interrupt the Trade and Correspondence that was carried on between
the Gods and Men; and by rendering the Birds Masters of all, would reduce the
Gods to the utmost Misery: I leave you to judge, if this be not mighty devout.
Yet this was the same Aristophanes, who endeavored to excite the Rabble
against the pretended Impiety of Socrates: There is therefore something, which
I know not how to express, that is often found in the Affairs of this World.
And it is apparent by these Examples, and may be made so by an Infinity of
others, if there were Occasion, that the People were sometimes in a Humor to
hear with delight their Religion rallied upon, and turned into a Jest; and if
they observed Ceremonies, it was only to free themselves from those
Inconveniences which attend an open neglect of them; but it is evident, that at
the bottom, they had not overmuch Faith in them: And they had just the same
Respect for Oracles: For most commonly, they consulted them, that they might
have no more Occasion to consult them; and if the Answers were not accommodated
to their Designs, they did not much trouble themselves to obey them; for
perhaps, it was no constant Opinion even amongst the common People, that
Oracles were delivered by a Divine Power.

After all this, it would be unnecessary to mention the Histories of those
great Captains, who thought it no Crime, to reckon themselves above both
Oracles and Auguries. And what is most remarkable, is, that this dis-esteem of
Religion was practiced even in the first Ages of the Roman Commonwealth: In
those times of happy Ignorance, when Men were so scrupulously fond of their
Religion, and when (as Titus Livius says in a Place, which I am going to cite)
Philosophy, which taught Men to despite the Gods, was not yet known.

Live. lib. 10.
Papirius made War with the Samnites, and in a certain conjuncture of time,
when the Roman Army with an extreme ardor, desired to come to a Battle, the
sacred Chickens (forsooth) must be consulted; but the earnestness to fight was
so general, that though the Chickens eat nothing at all, when they put them out
of the Coop, yet those, who were appointed to observe the Augury, reported to
the Consul, that they had eaten very well: Upon this, the Consul promised to
his Soldiers both a Battle and Victory. But however secret this Augury was
kept, the deceit broke out at last, and there arose a great Contest amongst the
Keepers of the Chickens, about the false report that was made: The noise of
which came to the ears of Papirius, who said, that for his Part, he had
received a very favorable Augury, and that he was satisfied with it, and if
what was told him were untrue, let those, whose Business it was to take the
Augury, look to it; for all the evil would fall upon their Heads. Immediately
therefore he ordered, that those unhappy People, the Keepers of the Sacred
Chickens should be placed in the first Ranks, and so before the signal of the
Battle was given, an Arrow (from whence shot none knew) pierced that poor
unlucky Keeper who had given a false account of the Augury; as soon as the
Consul heard this News, he cried out aloud -- The Gods are here present: The
Criminal is punished: They have discharged all their Anger on him, who deserved
it, and we have now all the Reason in the World to hope the best. Then
immediately, he caused the Signal to be given, and gained an entire Victory
over the Samnites.

It is very apparent, that the Gods had a less share in the Death of this Poor
Keeper than Papirius; and that the General had a Design, by his Death, to
encourage those Soldiers, whom the falsness of the Augury might have
terrified; for the Romans were acquainted with these Arts and Tricks in the
times of their greatest Simplicity.

It must be confessed then, that we should be much in the Wrong, if we should
believe these Auguries and Oracles, which the Pagans themselves did not
believe. And if we will not think as meanly of them, as some Philosophers, and
some Generals of Armies did; yet let us at least have such thoughts of them, as
the People themselves sometimes had.

But doubtless (may some object) all the Pagans did not despise Oracles: And
some particular Persons, that had no regard for them, are not sufficient
entirely to discredit them. And to the Authority of those who did not believe
them, we need do no more than oppose the Authority of those that did.

But it may be answered, that these two Authorities are not of equal Strength;
for the Testimony of those who uphold a thing that is already established,
contributes not much to the support of it; but the Testimony of those who do
not believe it, is of Force enough to destroy it; for those who do believe a
thing, may perhaps not know the Reasons, that may be given against the belief
of it; but those who do not believe it, cannot choose but know, why others
believe it.

It is quite contrary, when a new thing is to be introduced; for in that case,
the Testimony of those that believe it, carries more weight with it, than the
Testimony of those who do not believe it; for it is probably to be supposed,
that those who believe it, must needs have examined it; and those who do not
believe it, may perhaps not have considered of it.

I will not say, that either in the one or the other Case, the Authority of
those who believe, or believe not, is a final decision; but I will say, that
without a regard be had to the Reasons on which the two Parties found
themselves, sometimes the Authority of one seems more receivable, and sometimes
that of the other. Upon the whole Matter, in quitting a common Opinion, or in
receiving a new one, we make use of our Reason (whether it be good or bad;) but
there is no need of making use of any to reject a new opinion, or to take up
one that is already common; for we have need of strength to resist a torrent,
but we need none to follow it.

And it avails not to the credit of Oracles, that among those who believe, that
there is something in 'em of divine and supernatural, there should be found
some Philosophers of great name, such as the Stoics are; for when Philosophers
are once prepossessed with any thing, they are more incurable than the common
People, and are as much blinded with prejudices and false Reasons, with which
they uphold their opinion. The Stoics in particular (as proud and supercilious
a Sect as they were) held some opinions which deserved pity. How could they
choose but believe Oracles, who believed Dreams? The great Chrysippus himself
adopted some points for articles of his faith, which had been more suitable for
the belief of some silly Old Woman.

CHAP. IX. That the Ancient Christians themselves did not very firmly believe
that Oracles were delivered by Demons.
Although the Learned Christians in the first Ages, were fond enough of asserting
that Oracles were delivered by Demons, yet they would very often reproach the
Heathens with their being imposed upon by their Priests: Which thing was
undoubtedly true, since they asserted it, even with the hazard of losing this
system of Demons, which they esteemed so favorable to 'em.

Thus Clement Alexandrinus speaks in his third Book of Tapistries.

Boast, if you will, of your Oracles, full of folly and impertinence, of those
of Claros, of Apollo Pythius, of Didymus of Amphiaraus, and of Amphilocus. You
may yet add your Augurs and Interpreters of Dreams and Prodigies. Show us in
the Presence of Apollo Pythius, those Men who divined by Flower or by Barley,
and those who have been so esteemed, because they spoke out of their Bellies.
Let the Secrets of the Egyptian Temples, and of the Hetrurian Necromancers
remain still in Darkness, for they are certainly all but extravagant Impostures
and Deceits, not better than mere cheating at Dice: And the Goats which are
kept for Divination, and the Ravens which are taught to deliver Oracles, are
but as the Assistants or Zaneys of Mountebanks, who cozen all Mankind.

Eusebius, in the Beginning of his fourth Book of Evangelical Preparations,
proposes at large the best Reasons in the World to prove, that Oracles could be
no other, than Impostures: And it is upon those very Reasons, that I pretend to
support my self, when I come to treat of the cheats of Oracles in particular.

Nevertheless, I must confess, that tho Eusebius knew so very well how to
prove, that Oracles could not be supernatural, yet he attributes them to
Demons; and the Authority of a Man so well instructed with the Reasons on both
sides, is a very great encouragement to the Party which he embraces.

But it is to be noted, that after Eusebius had very well proved, that Oracles
could be no other than the Impostures of Priests, he assures us (without either
destroying or weakening those first Proofs) that for all this, they were
delivered by Demons. But he ought to have cited some unsuspected Oracle, which
had been delivered in such Circumstances, that although many others might be
imputed to the Artifices of Priests, yet that could not. But Eusebius has done
no such thing. This is, as if he should say, I clearly see, that all the
Oracles can be no other than Cheats; but yet, I will not believe them to be so,
because it serves my purpose, that the Devil should now and then enter into an
Oracle.

This is a very lamentable kind of reasoning. But I must confess, if Eusebius
(in the Circumstances of the times which he lived in) durst not have said
openly, that Oracles were not the Works of Demons, it had been excusable; but
then in seeming to maintain that they were so, he ought to have managed his
Arguments in such a way, that he might have insinuated the contrary with the
best Address he was capable of. But we are at liberty to guess at the Reasons,
that guided Eusebius in this matter, according to the Esteem we have of him:
For my own part, I believe clearly, that he asserted these Oracular Demons,
rather by way of Apology and from a forced Respect he had for the common
Opinion, than on any other Account.

There is a passage of Origin, in his Seventh Book against Celsus, which
sufficiently proves that he attributed Oracles to Demons, only to accommodate
himself to the Times, and to the Disputes, which in that Age were between the
Christians and the Pagans. I might (said he) make use of the Authority of
Aristotle, and the Peripateticks, to render the Pythian Oracle suspected: I
could draw from Epicurus and those of his Sect, an Infinity of things, that
would discredit Oracles; and I could easily make it appear, that the Greeks
themselves made no great Account of them; but conceding that they were not
fictions, nor Impostures, let us examine the Case a little more carefully, and
consider, whether there were any Necessity, that a God should have any business
there, and if it were not more reasonable to believe, that they were managed by
evil Demons and Genii, that were Enemies to Mankind.

It is sufficiently evident, that Origin was inclined to believe of Oracles, as
we do; but the Pagans, who used them for a Proof of the Divinity of their
Religion, had no Reason to consent, that they were but the Artifices of their
Priests: So, that to gain a little upon the Pagans, there was a necessity of
yielding to them, what they maintained with so much Obstinacy, and to let them
see, that tho there might be something of Supernatural in the Oracles, yet
there was no reason to say, that a true Divinity was concerned in them; and so
Demons were to be brought upon the Stage.

It Is true, that it had been much better wholly to have excluded even these
Demons from Oracles; and by that means, the greatest blow would indeed have
been given to the Pagan Religion that can be imagined. But all the World
perhaps did not enter so deep into this Matter, and they thought they had done
enough, when by the Hypothesis of Demons, (which solves the whole Business in
two words,) they disparaged all those Miracles, which the Pagans could allege
for their false Worship.

This, it is probable, was the Cause, why in the first Ages of the Church, Men
so generally embraced this Opinion concerning Oracles. For we see clearly
enough into the Darkness of remote Antiquity, to discover, that Christians did
not hold this Opinion so much for the truth, which they found in it, as for the
Advantages, which it gave them in their Disputes against Paganism: And could
they be born again in the Age wherein we live, I doubt not, but that being then
delivered, like us, from those strange Notions, that obliged them to that
Hypothesis, they would have had (almost all of them) the same disesteem of
Oracles, as we have at this time.

Hitherto, we have only taken away the Prejudices that are contrary to our
Opinion, and which are drawn, either from the System of the Christian Religion,
or else from Philosophy, with the general Consent of both Pagans and
Christians. We have answered all this, not only by making a simple Defense, but
very often by starting Objections; but now we shall make our Assaults with
greater Vigor, and demonstrate by all those particular Circumstances, which we
can remark in Oracles, that they never ought to have been attributed to Demons.

CHAP. X. That Oracles were corrupted by Bribery.
IT was so easy a matter to corrupt these Oracles, that it was very evident
that they were managed by Men. The Pythian Priestess Philipises, said
Demosthenes, when he was complaining that the Oracles of Delphos were always
conformable to the interest of Philip.

Herod. Lib. 6.
When Cleomenes King of Sparta was minded to dethrone Demaratus the former
King, on pretense that he was not the Son of Ariston his predecessor, and that
Ariston himself had complained that his Son was born a little too soon after
his Marriage, the Oracle was consulted on so difficult a question; for the
thing was of such a Nature, that it could be decided only by the Gods. But
Cleomenes himself went beforehand to engage the chief Priestess of Delphos, and
so she declared that Demaratus was not the Son of Ariston. The cheat was
sometime after discovered, and the Priestess deprived of her Dignity; for they
were bound to revenge this dishonor done to their Oracles, and to endeavor to
repair their lost credit.

Herod. Lib. 5.
During the time that Hippias was Tyrant of Athens, some Citizens whom he had
Banished, obtained of the Pythian Priestess by the force of Money, that when
the Lacedaemonians should come to consult her (no matter on what affairs) she
should always tell 'em, they must deliver Athens from Tyrany. And the
Lacedaemonians, to whom the same thing was always repeated, whatever they came
about, believed at last, that the Gods would never Pardon them, if they
contemned their so frequent Orders; and thereupon they took up Arms against
Hippias, though he were their Ally.

If the Demons delivered Oracles, they were always full of complaisance to
those Princes that were once become redoubted; and it is to be noted that Hell
had a very great regard for Alexander and Augustus. Some Historians tell us
plainly that Alexander had a mind by his absolute Authority to make himself the
Son of Jupiter Ammon, both for his interest and the Honor of his Mother, who
was suspected to have had a gallant much less considerable than Jupiter: and
they add, that before he went to the Temple, he caused the God to be advertised
of his will and pleasure; and the God very honestly obeyed his command. Other
Authors hold, that the Priests found out of themselves this way of flattering
Alexander. There is none but Plutarch that grounds this Divinity of Alexander
on a mistake of the Priest of Ammon, who saluting this King, and intending to
say to him in Greek, Oh my Son, pronounced a (...) for a (...), (...) for (...).
(for he was a Lybian, and knew not well how to pronounce the Greek;) and the
words with this change signify, Oh Son of Jupiter. And the whole Court failed
not to construe this mistake of the Priest, to the advantage of Alexander; and
without doubt the Priest himself made it pass for an Inspiration of the God who
had directed his Tongue, and so by Oracles afterward confirmed his ill
pronounciation. This last manner of relating this History pleases me extremely,
for I love to find very little Originals give rise to mighty things; this seems
to me to be probable, and a Mockery worthy of sporting fortune.

Pruden.
Augustus was so in Love with Livia, that he took her by force from her
Husband, big with Child as she was; and so impatient, was his Passion, that he
would not deferr his Marriage till she were delivered, but the action being
something extraordinary the Oracle was consulted about it; who knew well how to
make its Court to so glorious a Monarch, and was not only content to approve
the Marriage, but assured him, that Weddings never succeeded better, than when
the Bride was already with Child. This seems to me a very strange Maxim.

There were at Sparta but two families, out of which they might choose their
Kings. But Lysander, one of the greatest Men that ever Sparta bred, framed a
design to take away this distinction, too advantageous for those two Families,
and too injurious to all the rest; and to open a way to Royalty for all those
who had merit enough to pretend to it. In order to this, he contrived so
perplexed a plot, that I admire how a Man of Wit could hope to draw any success
from it. Plutarch says very well, that it was like a Mathematical
Demonstration, to which no Man arrives but by tedious methods. There was a
Woman in Pontus who pretended to be Big with Child by Apollo; Lysander cast his
thoughts upon this Son of Apollo, intending to make use of him when he should
be born; (this it was to have a very great foresight) and he causes a report to
be spread abroad, that the Priests of Delphos had in their possession very
ancient Oracles which they were not permitted to read, because Apollo had
reserved that privilege for some one that should come of his blood, and who
should come to Delphos to justify his descent. The Child of the Woman at Pontus
was to be this Son of Apollo; and it was contrived that amongst those
mysterious Oracles, so closely concealed, there should be one found out, which
should declare to the Spartans that they ought to give the Crown to Desert
only, without having any regard to Families. So that now nothing remained but
to shape up some Oracles; to get this Son of Apollo (who was called Silenus)
into the project, to make him come to Delphos, and to bribe the Priests. All
this was done, which seems to me very surprising; for what strange machines
must they have made use of, for the accomplishing so great a design? Silenus
comes to Greece and prepares to make himself known at Delphos for the Son of
Apollo; but, as ill luck would have it, one of Lysander's creatures having some
terrors upon him; at last when he found himself embarked in so dangerous an
affair, spoiled all.

There is scarce a more remarkable example to be found in all History of the
corruption of Oracles; but in reporting it, I will not dissemble a truth which
my Author says nothing of; which is, that Lysander had before endeavored to
corrupt many other Oracles, but could not accomplish it. Dodona refused to take
his money, Jupiter Ammon was inflexible, and even the Priests of the place sent
deputies to Sparta to accuse Lysander; but by the force of his credit he got
himself clear of that affair. The great Priestess of Delphos denied to sell him
her voice. And this makes me believe, that there were in Delphos two Colleges,
which held no communication with one another, the one of Priests, the other of
Priestesses; for Lysander, who could not corrupt the great Priestess, could yet
sufficiently corrupt the Priests. The Priestesses were those only who delivered
the Oracles Viva voce, and who with a thousand Antic motions and grimaces
acted the Possessed on the Tripos, and seemed to rage, with the inspirations of
the God; but in all probability the Priests had a Warehouse of Written
Prophecies, of which they were the Masters, the Dispensers, and the
Interpreters.

It is not to be doubted, but that the Priests, for the honor of their trade
would seem very nice and scrupulous to those who desired to bribe 'em,
especially when things were required wherein there was no reason to hope for
much success; such as was the novelty, which Lysander had a design to introduce
into the government of Sparta: and perhaps the faction of Agesilaus, which was
against that of Lysander, was somewhat jealous of his project, and had been
beforehand with the Oracles. Nor is it to be imagined, that the Priests of
Ammon would have taken the pains to have come from the farthest part of Libya
to Sparta, to have accused so great a Man as Lysander, if there had not been a
very good understanding between their Oracles and his Enemies, who encouraged
them to accuse him.

CHAP. XI. Of the Erection of new Oracles.
THe Oracles, which were sometimes erected anew, do as much weaken the
Hypothesis of Demons, as the Oracles that were corrupted by Bribery.

After the Death of Ephaestion, Alexander, to comfort himself, would needs have
it believed, that Ephaestion was a God; To which, all his Courtiers consented
without any Difficulty: And immediately, Temples were erected in many Cities to
Ephaestion, Festivals were instituted to his Honor, Sacrifices were made to
him, Miraculous Cures were attributed to him, and in fine (that nothing at all
might be wanting) they made him deliver Oracles. Lucian says, that Alexander,
who was at first astonished to see the Divinity of Ephaestion have such
Success, believed it himself at length to be true, and found a great deal of
Pleasure, in thinking not only, that he himself was a God, but that he had also
the Power of making Gods.

Adrian committed the same Folly for the lovely Antinous: In Honor of whose
Memory he built the City of Antinopolis, he consecrated Temples and Prophets to
him (says St. Jerome:) Now there were no Prophets, but in those Temples where
there were Oracles. And there is yet remaining this Greek Inscription: To
Antinous,


The Companion of the Gods of Egypt. M. Ulpius Apollonius, his Prophet.

After this, we need not wonder, that Augustus also delivered Oracles, as we
find it in Prudentius: And certainly Augustus was as fit to be worshipped as
Antinous or Ephaestion, who according to all likelihood, owed their Divinity
only to their Beauty.

Without doubt, these new Oracles caused even those, who were the least capable
of thinking, to make Reflections upon them. Was there not Reason to believe,
that these were of the same Nature with the Ancient ones? And to make a due
Judgment on the first beginnings of those of Amphiaraus, Trophonius, Orpheus,
and of Apollo himself, they needed no more, than to consider those of
Ephaestion, Antinous and Augustus.

It Is plain however, that they were not in like Credit with those of more
ancient Dates, and that there is a vast difference between them; for they
stinted the Gods of the new Edition to certain Answers, that were necessary for
the flattering of Princes; but for any thing else, they were not seriously
consulted.

For when Questions of Importance were to be asked, they went to Delphos. The
ancient Tripodes had been in Possession of Futurity, time out of Mind; and the
word of a good, sage, experienced God was far more authentic than that of
these Upstarts, who were less versed in the Trade. The Roman Emperors, whose
Interest it was to advance and set a value on the Divinity of their
Predecessors (since themselves claimed the same) would have endeavored to have
rendered the Oracles of the deified Emperors (such as Augustus was) more
celebrated, if it had not been that the People, accustomed to their ancient
Oracles, could not have the same Confidence in these; for I would willingly
believe, that, what Inclination soever they had to the most ridiculous
superstitions, yet they laughed at these new Oracles, and in general, at all
the Consecrations of new Gods: For how could they possibly take the Eagle,
which flew out of the flaming Funeral Pile of a Roman Emperor, to be the Soul
of that Emperor, that was taking its Flight to Heaven?

How then came it to pass, that People were deceived at the first Erection of
Gods and Oracles? Thus it was, as I conjecture. As for the Gods, Paganism had
only two principal sorts of them, either Gods who were supposed to be
essentially of a Divine Nature, or Gods which did not become so, till after
they had been of a humane Nature first. The former sort were declared Gods by
the Learned, or by the Legislators with a multitude of Mysteries; and the
People neither saw them, nor ever had seen them: The second sort (though the
whole World knew that they had been Men, yet they) were made Gods by the
Inclination of the People, in Memory of their Virtues. They framed to
themselves a very elevated Idea of the one sort, because they were above their
view; and of the other, because they loved them. But they could not have that
Devotion for a Roman Emperor, who was only made a God by the Favor and Order
of the Court, and not by the Love of the People, and who besides this, was
known so very lately to have been a Man.

As for the Oracles, their first Establishment is not difficult to unfold: For
find me but half a dozen Persons, whom I can persuade that it is not the Sun
that makes the Day, and I will not despair of prevailing with a whole Nation to
embrace the same Opinion: For however ridiculous any thing seems at first, if
you can but maintain it for some time, so that it gains the Authority of
Antiquity, it is then sufficiently proved.

There was on the top of Parnassus a hole, out of which an Exhalation came,
which was of such a Nature, that it made Goats dance and caper, by fuming into
their Heads; and perhaps some Body, whose Head was filled with this Exhalation
became an Enthusiast, fell a talking, without knowing what he said, and by
chance spoke truth. Immediately, there was something Divine fansied to be in
this Exhalation, and that it contained the Knowledge of Futurity; then, they
begin to approach this hole with Veneration, and Ceremonies are by little and
little introduced. Thus in all probability, the Oracle of Delphos was at first
erected. And as it owed its Original to an Exhalation, which infected the Head,
there was a necessity that the Pythian Priestess should be in a Fury, when she
was to prophecy; but in the greatest part of the other Oracles, Fury was not
practiced. Let but one Oracle be set up, and you need not doubt but a thousand
will follow the Example; for if the Gods can speak in one, why should they not
do so as well in others? The People struck with the Wonder of the thing, and
finding of what use it would be, and covetous of the Profit, which they
expected from it, desired nothing more than to see Oracles set up in every
place; and in time, all these Oracles got the Advantage of Antiquity, which
stood them in great stead. And it could not be expected, that the new ones
should have such Success, since they were established by Princes: whereas the
People are most willing to believe, what they make themselves.

Add to all this, that at the time of the first institution both of Gods and
Oracles, Ignorance was much greater than it was afterward. Philosophy was not
then known in the World, and the most extravagant superstitions had met with no
contradiction from thence. It Is true that those we call the People are never
mighty knowing; yet the dullness, with which they are always possessed,
receives some difference according to the Ages in which they live. But there
are some Ages wherein all the World are the People, and those times without
comparison are the most favorable for the introduction of errors. It Is no
wonder then, that the People had a less esteem for the new Oracles, than for
the Ancient ones; but this makes not the old Oracles any whit better than the
new ones. Now either a Demon went to lodge in the Statue of Ephaestion, to
deliver Oracles from thence (as soon as it pleased Alexander to erect one to
him as to a God:) or if the Statue delivered Oracles without this Demon, then
that of Apollo Pythius might do so as well. And it seems to me very strange and
surprising, that the fancy of Alexander should be able to send a Demon to take
possession of a Statue, which by that means only was to become an eternal
occasion of error to all Men.

CHAP. XII. Of the places where Oracles were.
WE shall now enter upon the History of those Artifices and cheats what the
Priests practiced: which contains many things of Antiquity very agreeable and
particular.

Countries that were Mountainous (and by consequence full of holes, and
caverns) were always fullest of Oracles; such was Boeotia, which anciently, as
Plutarch says, had a number of them. Where by the way you may observe that the
Boeotians had the repute of being the foolishest Nation of the World; and
therefore it was a fit country for Oracles, being full of blockheads and
Caverns.

I cannot believe that the first establishment of Oracles was a designed cheat;
but that the People fell into some superstition which gave 'em a beginning, and
that afterward Men of Wit made their advantages of 'em. For the weakness of
the People is oftentimes greater than could have been foreseen; and many times
those that deceive 'em, think of nothing less, until they themselves give some
opportunity for the fraud. And my opinion is, that Oracles were not therefore
placed in Boeotia, because it is Mountainous; but because the Oracle of Delphos
had by chance its beginning there, after the manner which we have related,
therefore others, that were made in imitation of that in the same country, were
situated also in the Caverns: the conveniences of which for that purpose, were
very well known to the Priests.

This custom afterward spread it self every where; for the pretense of Divine
exhalations rendered these caverns necessary: and besides caverns of themselves
affect one with a certain horror, which does not a little advance superstition;
and in things that are only to make impressions on the imaginations of Men
nothing is to be neglected. It may be also, that the situation of Delphos
contributed to the making it be esteemed as a holy Town; it was built on a
small level which was half way up the Mountain of Parnassus, and encompassed
with precipices which fortified it without the help of art. That part of the
Mountain which was above it, had the resemblance of a Theater; and the voice of
Men, and the sound of Trumpets was multiplied by the echoes of the Rocks. Do
not you believe then, that they knew how to make even these Echoes of great use
to 'em?

The advantages of the Priests, and the majesty of the Oracles, do equaly
require these caverns; for which reason there was no great number of these
prophetic Temples situated on Plains; but yet there were some, whose defects
the Priests knew well enough how to remedy, and instead of natural caverns, to
accomodate 'em with Artificial ones, that is to say, what they call
Sanctuaries, which were a sort of Caves where the Divinity perpetually resided,
and where none but the Priests ever entered.

Plutar. Dial. that Oracles are not ceased.
When the Pythian Priestess placed her self upon the Tripos, it was in her
Sanctuary, an obscure place at some distance from a certain little chamber,
wherein those who came to consult the Oracles were to stand. The entrance of
this Sanctuary was all covered over with boughs of Laurel, by whch means those
who had the liberty of approaching it, could make no discoveries.

From whence do you think, proceeds the diversity that is to be found in the
description which the Ancients give of their oracles? It is because they never
saw what passed in the most sacred recesses of their Temples.

For example, they agree not among themselves about the Oracle of Dodona, and
yet what could be better known to the Greeks? Aristotle, (as Suidas reports)
writes, that at Dodona there were two columns, upon one of which there was a
Basin of Brass, and upon the other a Statue of a Child who held a Whip, the
cords of which being also of Brass made a noise against the Basin, when they
were agitated by the Wind.

Demon (according to the same Suidas) says that the Oracle of Jupiter at Dodona
is all encompassed with Basins, of which, when any one is pushed against the
next, the motion is communicated all round to the rest, and they make a din,
which continues for some time.

Others say, that there was a resounding Oak, which shook its Branches, and
leaves together, all the while the Oracle was consulted; and its meaning was
pronounced by the Priestesses called Dodonides. It is plain from all this that
there was nothing certain but the noise, which was to be heard from without;
but not seeing the inward Sanctuary, where the Oracle resided, they only knew,
but by conjecture, and the fallacious reports of the Priests what caused this
noise. Yet we find in History, that some few had the privilege to enter into
these Sanctuaries; but they were persons of no less quality than Alexander and
Vespasian. Strabo reports from Callisthenes that Alexander entered alone with
the Priest into the Sanctuary of Ammon, and that all the rest heard the Oracle
only from without.

Tacitus also relates that Vespasian when he was at Alexandria, (having already
a design upon the Empire) would needs consult the Oracle of Serapis; but before
he entered, he made every body quit the Temple; and yet for all this, perhaps
he did not enter into the Sanctuary. But the instances of this privilege are
very rare; for my Author averrs that he never knew of any other than these two;
unless you will add what Tacitus says of Titus, to whom the Priest of Paphian
Venus discovered in secret many great things, concerning the designs which he
had then in hand. But yet this example proves less than that of Vespasian, that
the Priests allowed great Men the liberty of entering into the Sanctuary of
their Temples. Doubtless one ought to have a great deal of credit with the
Priests, to oblige 'em to discover the Arcana of their mysteries; but they did
it only to Princes, whose Interest they knew it was to keep the secret; and
who, in the circumstances which they were then in, had some particular reason
to raise and not lessen the reputation of Oracles.

In these dark Sanctuaries it was, that all the machines of the Priests lay;
and they entered into them by intricate paths under ground. Rufinus describes
to us the Temple of Serapis full of covert ways: and (to bring a testimony yet
stronger than his) do not the Holy Scriptures discover to us the impostures of
the Priests of Belus, who had a private conveyance to enter secretly into his
Temple, and to take away the meat which was there offered to him? It seems to
me that this History alone ought to decide the whole question in our favor;
for we there have an account of one of the miracles of Pagainsm, which was the
most universally believed, how that the Gods took the pains to come and Eat the
consecrated meat, themselves. Do the Scriptures attribute this prodigy to
Demons? not at all; but to the Priests, who were impostors. And it is in this
place alone that the Scriptures vouchsafe to give the description of a Pagan
miracle; and by not advertising us that the rest were not of the same nature,
they give us plainly to understand that they were. After all, how much easier
was it to persuade People that the Gods descended into Statues to speak to 'em,
and give 'em wholesome instructions, than that they came down to Eat the
members of Goats and Sheep; and therefore surely if it was the Priests that Eat
and not the Gods, by much stronger reason, it was they that pronounced the
Oracles in their stead.

The Cavities of the Sanctuary, increased the voice, and caused rebounding
Echoes, which imprinted a sort of awful terror in all that approached it: you
see also in all the Poets that the Pythian Priestesses strained their voices,
so much beyond the pitch of nature, that they appeared to be more than humane.
Perhaps too that sort of Sir Sam. Morelands speaking Trumpet.
Trumpet which multiplies the sound, was not then altogether unknown: and it
may be Sir, Samuel Moreland, has but revived this secret, which the Pagan
Priests knew before him; though they chose rather to get profit by concealing it,
than honor by publishing it. And Father Kirker assures us that Alexander had
one of these instruments, with which he made himself be heard by his whole Army
at the same time. There is one little thing which I will not forget, because it
serves to demonstrate the extreme application which the Priests had to
cheating. From the Sanctuary or bottom of the Temple there came out sometimes a
very agreeable vapor which filled all the place where the Consulters were: It
was the arrival of the God, you must know, that perfumed all. Judge then, if
Men who carried on their impostures so curiously as to descend to these
trifles, would neglect any thing that was essential.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Distinctions of days, and other Mysteries of Oracles.
THE Priests neglected not any kind of precaution; and therefore they had
certain days on which no man was permitted to consult the Oracle. This had a
mysterious Air, which is still much practiced in like matters; but yet the
chief advantage which they drew from it, was, that they could put you off with
this pretext till another time, either if they had no mind to give you any
answer at all, or if they thought fit to have this time of silence for the
taking their measures and making their preparatives.

On occasion of these pretended unlucky days, there was delivered to Alexander
one of the pleasantest Oracles that ever was. He went to Delphos to consult the
God, and the Priestess, pretending that it was not then a lawful time to
interrogate, would not enter into the Temple. Alexander, who was very rough and
impatient, took the Priestess by the Arm and led her in by force; whereupon she
cried out, Ah, my Son, you are not to be resisted. I desire no more, (says
Alexander) this Oracle is enough for me.

But the Priests had got another secret to gain time when they pleased. Before
they would consult the Oracles they must Sacrifice; and if the entrails of the
victim were not lucky, then the God was not in an humor to answer; now none
judged of the victims but the Priests: and for the most part (as it appears by
many examples) they were alone when they examined 'em: And often, to delay the
time, they would make men begin their Sacrifice a new, and bring a second
victim, though they had already offered one that had the finest Heart and Liver
in the World.

What were called the Mysteries and secret Ceremonies of the Gods, were without
doubt the best Artifices the Priests could invent to keep People in the dark:
and yet they could not so well hide the juggle, but that the cheat would be
suspected by many persons; and therefore they contrived among themselves to
establish certain Mysteries, which should engage those that were initiated into
them to an inviolable secrecy.

It Is true there were mysteries in those Temples where there were no Oracles
but there were no Oracles but what had mysteries: as for instance in that of
Delphos. Plutarch, in his Dialogues so often cited, says, that there was no
Person in the Town of Delphos, nor in all that Country, that was not initiated
into their mysteries, and so every body had his dependence on the Priests; and
if any one had dared to have opened his mouth against 'em, they presently cried
out, O the Atheist! O the impious Man! and he would have drawn upon himself by
his plain dealing such inconveniences, as he could never have got quit of. But
yet if there had been no such mysteries, the inhabitants of Delphos would have
been always obliged to have concealed the knavery of their Priests; for
Delphos was a City which had no other Revenue but that of its Temple, and was
maintained only by its Oracle; but for all that, the Priests were not contented
till they had secured the People to themselves by a double tie, and so they
annexed superstition to their interest. And without doubt a Man who had spoken
ill of their Oracles, would have been wondrous well received in such a Town.

Those, who were initiated into their mysteries, gave also further security for
their discretion; for they were obliged to make a confession to their Priests
of all the most private actions of their Lives: so that by this means they
became slaves to their Priests, that their own secrets might be kept.

It was upon this sort of confession that a Lacedaemonian, who was going to
initiate himself into the mysteries of Samothrace, spoke roundly thus to the
Priest: If I have committed any crimes, surely the Gods are not ignorant of 'em.

Another answered almost after the same manner: Is it to you or to God we ought
to confess our Crimes? It is to God, says the Priest. Well then, retire thou,
answered the Lacedaemonian, and I Will confess 'em to God. These Lacedaemonians
were not very full of the Spirit of Devotion, and I do not doubt but there
might have been some Man Wicked enough to go and make a false confession, to
get himself initiated into their mysteries, and then afterward to make a
discovery of all their Extravagancies, and publish the Cheats of the Priests.

I believe that this Misfortune may have happened, for though Priests used all
possible means to prevent such Discoveries: They observed narrowly what Persons
they were, with whom they had to do; and, I Will warrant you, the two
Lacedaemonians, whom we have mentioned, were not admitted. Besides, they
declared the Epicureans, incapable of being initiated into their Mysteries,
because they were a sort of Men, who made it their Business to laugh at them;
and I believe, they never delivered Oracles to them: Nor was it very difficult
to know them; for all those among the Greeks, who applied themselves to
Literature, made choice of some Sect of Philosophy, or other, and took their
Appellation from that Sect, almost as we do from a Country. For Example, there
were three Demetriuses, which were thus distinguished; one was Demetrius the
Cynick, the other, Demetrius the Stoic, and the third, Demetrius the
Peripatetick. This Custom of excluding the Epicureans from all Mysteries, was
so general, and so necessary for the securing of Sacred things, that it was
made use of by that Grand Cheat, whose Life Lucian describes so agreeably; I
mean that Alexander, who fooled the Greeks so long a time with his Serpents:
But he also added the Christians to the Epicureans; for he thought one no
better than the other: And before he began his Ceremonies, he always cried, Let
the Christians be put out. To whom the People answered in a kind of Chorus, Let
the Epicureans be put out also. Nay, he did far worse than all this; for seeing
himself tormented by these two sorts of People, (who, tho pushed by different
Interests, yet conspired together to turn his Ceremonies into Ridicule) he
declared that Pontus (where he then lived) was filled with wicked People, and
that the God, whose Prophet he was, would speak no more, if they did not rid
themselves of them; and upon this, they murdered all the Epicureans and the
Christians.

Daphnean Apollo, in the Suburbs of Antioch, was in the same uneasiness, when
in the time of Julian the Apostate, he answered all those, who asked him the
Cause of his silence, that they must lay the blame on certain dead People, who
were interred in the Neighborhood. These dead People were Christian Martyrs,
and amongst the rest, St. Babilas. Now the current Opinion is, that it was the
Presence of these blessed dead Bodies, which deprived the Demons of the Power
of speaking in the Oracle; but it is more probable, that the great Concourse of
Christians, which daily visited the Sepulchers of these Martyrs, incommoded the
Priests of Apollo, who did not care, that such clear-sighted Enemies should be
Witnesses of their Actions; and therefore they endeavored by this false
Oracle, to obtain of the Pagan Emperor, that he would cause these Bodies, of
which the God complained, to be cast out from thence.

But let us return to the Artifices of the Priests, of which the Oracles are
full: And to comprehend in one Reflection alone, all those that can be made
upon them, I would fain have some one tell me, why the Demons could not
predict what was to come, unless they were in holes, in Caverns and in obscure
Places? And why they did never animate a Statue, in some common Road, where
four high Ways met, exposed on all sides to the view of the World? But it may
perhaps be said, that those Oracles which were given in answer to sealed
Letters, and those that were delivered by Dreams, could not have been without
Demons; but 'twill be very easy for us to show, that they had nothing in them
more wonderful and miraculous than the rest.

CHAP. XIV. Of Oracles that were delivered in Answer to Sealed Letters.
THe Priests were not so scrupulous in that Point, as not to unseal the Letters
that were brought them. The Custom was to lay them upon the Altar: After which
the Temple was to be shut; but the Priests knew very well how to enter, without
being perceived. Or else, they put the Letters into the Hands of the Priests,
that they might sleep upon them, and receive in a Dream the Answer, which they
were to return: And in both Cases, they had the Leisure to open them privately.
For the doing this, they had many secret Arts: Some of which we see practiced
by the false Prophet of Lucian. And they are to be seen in Lucian himself by
any one, that has the Curiosity to know how the Letters of the Ancients were to
be opened, without its being perceived that they were so.

Certainly, they made use of some of these Secrets, to open those Letters, that
the Governor of Cilicia (of whom Plutarch speaks) had sent to the Oracle of
Mopsus, which was at Mallus, a City of that Province. The Governor knew not
what to think of the Gods; for he was possessed by the Epicureans with many
doubts, which they had put into his Head: So that, he was resolved, as Plutarch
pleasantly observes, to send a spy among the Deities, to learn what he could of
them: So he gave him a Letter very carefully sealed, to carry to the Oracle of
Mopsus. This Envoy came, and, as the Custom was, laid his Letter upon the
Altar, and himself slept in the Temple, where he saw in a Dream, a Man, very
well made, who said to him, Black. He carried back this Answer to the Governor
with his Letter sealed just as he sent it, to all Appearance. The Answer seemed
very ridiculous to the Epicureans, that were at Court; but himself was struck
with Astonishment and Wonder at it; and opening his Letter before them, he
showed them what he had written; which was this Question: Shall I sacrifice to
you a white or a black Bullock? After this Miracle, he was all his Life very
much devoted to the God Mopsus. We will hereafter discover to you the Mystery
of the Dream; but it is sufficient at present to tell you, that there is no
doubt, but that the Letters were opened and sealed again with great Dexterity
and Address; for what necessity was there of sending a Letter to the Temple, if
a Demon was to make the Answer? And if it sometimes happened so, that the
Priests durst not venture to open the Letters, then they endeavored by their
Cunning, to discover what Men came to the Oracle about; for they were commonly
Persons of Note, and who had some Design or Passion in their Heads, that was
not unknown to the World. And the Priests had so much Conversation with those
that came to consult, either at their Sacrifices, or during the delays, that
were made by the Oracle, before it would answer, that it was not difficult to
draw from their own Mouths (or at least to conjecture) what was the Cause of
their Voyage: They made them offer one Sacrifice after another, till they had
gotten some Light into their Affairs: They put them also into the Hands of
certain little Officers of the Temple, who, (under pretense of showing them the
Antiquities, the Statues, the Paintings, and the Offerings,) managed the matter
so well, as to pump many things out of them concerning the Business which they
came about. These Antiquaries (like those who live upon this Trade now in
Italy) were in all the Temples that were any thing considerable. They knew by
Heart all the Miracles that were done, they set forth to you the Power and
Wonders of their God, and they recounted to you a long Story of every Present
that was consecrated to him. And therefore, Lucian says very pleasantly, that
all this sort of Men lived and subsisted on Fables; and that in Greece, they
would have been very angry to have been told truth, though it had cost them
nothing. If those who came to consult the Oracle, would not tell all
themselves, yet their Servants could not hold their Peace. You must know, that
in an Oracle-Town, there were scarce any Persons but Oracle-Officers: Some were
Prophets and Priests; others, Poets (who put into Verse the Oracles, which were
delivered in Prose;) others, simple Interpreters; others, little Sacrificers,
who killed the Victims, and examined their Intrails; others, sellers of
Perfumes and Incense, or of Beasts for the Sacrifices; others, Antiquaries; and
in fine, all the rest were but In-keepers, whom the great resort of Strangers
enriched. Now all these People were for the Interest of the Oracle and the God:
And if by the means of the Servants belonging to these Strangers, they
discovered any thing worth the knowing, you need not doubt, but they soon
advertized the Priests of it.

The false Prophet, Alexander, who had set up his Oracle in Pontus, had
Correspondents even in Rome it self, who sent him an Account of the most secret
Affairs of those who went to consult him; by this means he could answer without
the trick of opening their Letters. And these Correspondencies were doubtless
not unknown to the Priests of Apollo of Claros, if it be true, that it was
sufficient only to tell them the Names of those that consulted them. Tacitus
speaks thus of them in his second Book of Annals. Germanicus went to consult
Apollo of Claros, where a Woman does not deliver the Oracles, as at Delphos;
but a Man chosen out of certain Families and who is almost always of Miletus;
you need tell him only the Number and Names of them that come to consult him;
and then he retires into a Grotto, and having taken some Water from a certain
secret Fountain there, he answers you in Verse, to whatever you have in your
thoughts, though for the most part, he is a very ignorant Fellow.

Here we may observe, that the Oracle of Delphos was committed to the
management of a Woman, because she had nothing else to do there, but to make
ridiculous and antic Gestures, and to act the being possessed and inspired;
but because that of Claros had more difficulty in it, therefore a Man only was
to be entrusted with it. We may further remark, that the Ignorance of the
Prophet, (which was indeed the greatest Wonder of the Oracle, (could not be
very easily discovered; for the Demon of the Oracle, as much a Demon as he
was, laid it down for an indispensable Rule, that they must bring him the Names
of those who consulted him. But we are not come to that yet; it is sufficient
to have shown how they could answer, not only to sealed Letters, but also to
simple thoughts. It is true, they could not answer to the thoughts of all the
World: For what the Priest of Claros did for Germanicus, he could not do for a
private Citizen of Rome.

CHAP. XV. Of Oracles delivered in Dreams.
THe Number of Oracles delivered in Dreams is very great; for this way had more
of Wonder in it than any other, and yet was not very difficult in the Practice.
The most famous of all these Oracles was that of Trophonius in Boeotia.
Trophonius was but a simple Hero, but his Oracle was delivered with more
Ceremony than those of any God.

Pausanias himself, who had been to consult it, and who had passed through all
its Ceremonies, has left us a very ample Description of it: And I believe, that
an exact Abridgment of his Relation will not be disagreeable to the Reader.

Before any Body descended into the Den of Trophonius, they were obliged to
pass a certain number of days in a kind of little Temple or Chapel called the
Chapel of good Fortune, and of the good Genius. During this time they used
expiations of all sorts; they abstained from hot bathings; they washed
themselves very often in the River Hercynas; they sacrificed to Trophonius and
all his family, to Apollo, to Jupiter, surnamed the King, to Saturn, to Juno,
to one Ceres Europa who had been Nurse to Trophonius; and they lived only upon
the flesh of the Sacrifices. It is also more than probable that the Priests
lived upon nothing else. The Entrails of all these victims were to be examined,
to see if Trophonius thought fit that the consulters should descend into his
Den; but if these had yielded all the most happy Omens in the World, yet it
would not do; for the decisive entrails were those of a certain Ram, which was
to be Sacrificed last; and if they were favorable, then the consulters were
led in the Night to the River Hercynas, where two young Lads about thirteen or
fourteen years Old rubbed all their Bodies over with Oil; then they conducted
them to the Source of the River, and there they made them drink of two sorts of
Waters; those of Lethe, which effaced out of their Minds all the profane
thoughts which before possessed 'em; and those of Mnemosyne, which had the
virtue to make them remember whatsoever they should see in the Sacred Den.
After all these preparatives, they were showed the Statue of Trophonius, to
which they made their Prayers; and then they were covered with linen vests,
which were girt about them with certain Sacred Bandlets, and so at last they
were admitted to the Oracle.

The Oracle stood upon a Mountain and was encompassed with a Wall of white
Stones, upon which Obelisks of Brass were erected: within this Cercle was a
Cavern of the figure of an Oven, cut out by Art, whose entrance was so strait,
that Men did not descend into it by Stairs but by little Ladders, and when they
were come to the bottom, they found another little Cavern, whose entrance was
yet streighter: Here they laid themselves down upon the Earth and took into
each hand certain compositions of Honey which they were obliged to carry, and
then they put their feet within the opening of the little Cavern, and
immediately they perceived themselves pulled into it with much force and
suddenness.

Then it was that things to come were declared to 'em; but not to all in the
same manner; for some heard and did not see, and those that saw were not to
hear. After this they came out of the Den, creeping upon the Earth, as they
entered in, with their feet foremost. Immediately they were put into the Chair
of Mnemosyne, where they were asked what they had seen or heard; thence they
were led into the Chapel of the good Genius, being still quite amazed and out
of their Wits; but retrieving their senses by little and little, they began to
be able to laugh; for till then the grandeur of the Mysteries, and the Divinity
with which they were filled, had prevented it; though for my part I think one
may well wonder how they could refrain so long.

Pausanias tells us that there was one Man who entered into the Den of
Trophonius and never came out again: This was a certain Spy that Demetrius sent
thither, to see if there were any thing in that Holy Place, worth the
plundering. The Body of this unhappy Man was afterward found a far off from
thence; for it is to be supposed that he was cast out of the Sacred Den by some
more secret way than he entered into it.

It is very easy for us to make reflections upon all this; for what leisure and
opportunity could the Priests want during all the Sacrifices which they obliged
Men to make, to qualify them for the entrance into this Sacred Den? For
certainly Trophonius knew how to choose his Men, and would not receive every
Body. How did all these Washings, Expiations, and Night-watchings, and these
passages into their strait and obscure Caverns, fill Men's minds with
superstition, dread and fear? How many Machines were at work in those dark
places? The History of the Spy of Demetrius assures us, that there was no
security in the Den for those who came thither with malicious intentions; and
that besides the Sacred passage into it, which was known to all the World, the
Den had another secret one, which was known only to the Priests. When Men were
drawn in by their feet, it was doubtless done by Cords, (though not perceived:)
for they could not put their hands to feel what it was that drew 'em, because
they were embarass'd with those compositions of Honey, which they were obliged
not to let go. And perhaps those Caverns were full of Perfumes and Odours which
stupefied the brain: and the Waters of Lethe and Mnemosyne were, also ('it is
probable) prepared for the same effect. To say nothing of the frightful sights
and the noises which they might be terrified withal; and when they came out
from thence little better than distracted, they talked strangely of what they
had seen or heard; so that People taking advantage of their disorder, might
collect what they pleased, and Change it as they thought fitting, and in fine,
interpret it as they listed themselves.

Add to all this, that there were some of those Oracles which were delivered in
Dreams, where one must prepare ones self by fasting, as that of Philostratus
Li. 2. Life of Apollonius.
Amphiaraus in Attica; and then if your Dream could not receive a clear
interpretation, they made you sleep again in the Temple, (at fresh charges) and
never failed to fill your Head with fancies fit to make you Dream of Gods and
extraordinary things: And for the most part, you were to sleep upon the skins
of Victims, which perhaps were rubbed with a drug which had some odd effect on
the Brain.

But when it was the Priests who sleeping upon the sealed Letters, had
themselves the Prophetic Dreams, you may easily imagine, that those Dreams
were not very difficult to unfold.

Indeed the care, that the Pagan Priests took to hide their Impostures, seems
to have been greater than it needed to have been; for if People were credulous
and stupid enough to content themselves with the Dreams of the Priests, and to
give credit to them, then there was no necessity, to suffer them to dream in
the Temples: And the Priests might have reserved this Privilege to themselves
alone, without any Contradiction. For considering what sort of People they
were, whom they had to do withal, it was too much Honor for them, to be
cheated with Precaution and Address.

There was in Achaia Pausanias.
an Oracle of Mercury, which was delivered in this manner: After many
Ceremonies, they whispered the God in the Ear, and asked him what Question they
pleased, and afterward they stopped their own ears with their hands, and the
first words which they heard after they were come out of the Temple, was taken
to be the answer of the God. And to the end that the Priests might the more
easily cause them to hear what they pleased, and the imposture not be
discovered, this Oracle was always to be consulted in the night.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Ambiguity of Oracles.
ONe of the greatest secrets of the Oracles, and one of the things which most
of all assures us that they were managed by Men, is their Ambiguity, and the
Art that was used to contrive such answers as would be suitable to any event
that was likely to happen.

Arian. Lib. 7.
When Alexander fell sick all of a sudden at Babylon, some of the Principal of
his court went to pass a Night in the Temple of Serapis, to inquire of that
God, if it were not fit for 'em to bring their King thither to be cured by him.
The God answered, that it was better for him to remain where he was. Serapis
had reason; for if he had advised the bringing Alexander thither, and he had
died by the way, or in the Temple it self, what would they not have said? But
if the King continued at Babylon and recovered his Health there, what a mighty
Glory would it have brought the Oracle? and if he Died, it might be said to be
the best that could befall him after the conquests that he had made, which if
he lived, he could neither augment nor preserve. And without doubt this last
interpretation was made for the honor of Serapis, after Alexander was Dead.

Macrobius says, that when Trajan had a Design of attacking the Parthians, he
was desired to consult the Oracle of the City Heliopolis about it, whither the
manner was only to send a sealed Letter. Now, though Trajan put no great
Confidence in Oracles, yet he sent a sealed Letter thither, in which there was
nothing written, and they sent him back a suitable Answer, that is, none at
all. So that Trajan being now convinced of the Divinity of Oracles, sends
another sealed Letter, in which he demands of the God, whether he should finish
the War, that he had undertaken, and return to Rome, or not? The God ordered,
that they should take a Vine, which was one of the Offerings of the Temple, and
cut it in pieces, and so carry it to Trajan. The Event, says Macrobius, was
conformable to the Oracle; for Trajan dying in this War, his Bones, which were
represented by the broken Vine, were carried to Rome.

All the World knew for certain that the Emperor designed to make War with the
Parthians, and that this was the Business about which he consulted the Oracle:
And, the Oracle was so cunning, as to return him an Allegorical Answer, and so
general an one, that it could not fail of being true. For if Trajan had
returned to Rome, either Victorious, but hurt, or having lost some part of his
Soldiers; or if he were overcome, and his Army put to Flight; or if any
division had been amongst his Men; or if any Mutiny had happened amongst the
Parthians; or if any had happened at Rome in the Absence of the Emperor; if the
Parthians had been wholly conquered; or if they had been but partly worsted, or
that they had been abandoned by some of their Allies, in any one of these
cases, this broken Vine miraculously had foretold all: And there was no
question, but some one of these would happen. And I believe the Bones of the
Emperor that were carried to Rome, and by which they explained the Oracle,
were, for all that, the only thing of which the Oracle never thought.

This Vine puts me in mind of a kind of Oracle that accommodated it self to
every thing, of which, as Apuleius tells us, the Priests of the Goddess of
Syria were the Inventors* They made two Verses, the Sense whereof was this: Two
Oxen yoked together cut the Earth,
And make the Fields produce a fruitful Birth.


Now there was no Question, which they could not answer with these two Verses.
For if they were consulted upon a Marriage, it was the same thing, Oxen yoked
together, and a fruitful Birth. If they were consulted about the Purchase of
any Land, again, it was yoked Oxen, and fruitful Fields. If about a Journey;
the Oxen yoked together, and so ready to go forth, and the fruitful Fields
promised a great Profit or Success by the Journey. If one went to War, these
Oxen under the Yoke, do clearly signify, that you shall put your Enemies under
the Yoke. Certainly, this Goddess of Syria did not love much tatling, and had
found out the true secret to satisfy all Questions with one single Answer.

Those, who received these ambiguous Oracles, took the pains very willingly to
justify them, by adjusting the Success and the Prediction together. And
oftentimes, that which had but one Sense (in the Intention of those who
delivered the Oracle,) was after the event, found to have two. For the
Impostors might be secure, that their Honor would be preserved with all the
Care imaginable by those very Persons whom they abused. Thus, when the false
Prophet Alexander was asked by Rutilianus, what Masters he should provide for
his Son; he answered, that he should let him have Pythagoras, and Homer.
Rutilianus took it in the plain sense, that he should study Philosophy and
Humanity. But the young Man dying within a few days after, they represented to
Rutilianus, that the Prophet was very much mistaken: But Rutilianus found out
(with a very great deal of Subtilty) that the Death of his Son was foretold by
the Oracle, because it appointed a Pythagoras and Homer, two dead Men, for his
Tutors.

CHAP. XVII. The Cheats of the Oracles manifestly discovered.
BUT there is now no need of being any further solicitous to detect the cunning
of the Priests, by Subtilties spun almost as finely as their own; for they were
fully and clearly discovered to the Eyes of the whole World, when the true
Religion triumphed entirely over Paganism, under the Christian Emperors.

Theodoret, says, that Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria, showed the Inhabitants
of that Town, the hollow Statues, into which the Priests privately crept to
deliver their Oracles.

When by the Order of Constantine, the Temple of Aesculapius, in Cilicia, was
plucked down, they chased thence, (says Eusebius, in the Life of this Emperor,)
not a God, nor a Demon, but the Cheat, that had so long deluded the People. He
adds, that in general, in the demolished Idols, they found no Gods at all, nor
Demons, nor so much as a melancholy Shade or obscure Specter; but only some
Hay, Straw, or Ordures, or the Bones of dead Men. It is from him, that we learn
the History of Theotechnus, who set up in the City of Antioch, the Statue of
Jupiter, God of Friendship; which questionless was contrived to deliver
Oracles, since Eusebius says, that there were Prophets belonging to this God.
Theotechnus, upon this Account got so great Credit, that Maximin made him
Governor of all the Province. But Licinius coming to Antioch, and suspecting
the Imposture, caused the Priests and Prophets of this new Jupiter to be
tortured with the Rack; hereupon they confessed all, and both they and their
Accomplices were put to a cruel Death, their Master Theotechnus suffering
first. The same Eusebius, in the fourth Book of his Evangelical Preparations,
says, that in his time, the most famous Prophets amongst the Pagans, and their
most celebrated Divines, of whom some were Magistrates of their Cities, were
compelled by Torments to discover the very particulars of all the Cheats of the
Oracles. If we were now to make out what the old Christians believed of them,
all these Passages of Eusebius, in my Opinion, would decide the Question. They
admitted Demons indeed in a certain general System, which served for their
Disputes; but when they came to particular matters of Fact, they spoke little
of them, or rather directly denied them.

I cannot believe, that we need any better Witnesses against the Demons, than
the Pagan Priests themselves, by whose Confessions, the thing seems to me to be
clearly made out. I will only therefore add one Chapter about their Lots; not
to discover the Imposture of them, for that is comprehended in what we have
already said of Oracles in general; and besides it will be sufficiently
apparent of its self; but that I may not omit a species of Oracles very famous
in Antiquity.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Lots.
LOts are the Effects of Chance, and, as it were, the Oracles of Fortune, by
which she decides all things: And they are the Instruments we make use of, to
know what this Decision is.

These Lots for the most part were a kind of Dice, whereon were engraven
certain Characters, or words, the Explication of which was to be sought for, in
Tables made for that purpose. The manner of using these Lots was various: In
some Temples they cast them out of their Hands, in others they threw them out
of an Vrn; from whence comes this Proverb so common with the Greeks, the Lot is
cast.

This Game of Chance was always ushered in by Sacrifices, and abundance of
Ceremonies. The Priest, as it is probable, knew how to manage the Dice; but if
they would not take that pains, they might even let 'em run as they would,
since they were always Masters of the Explanation.

Cicero de Divin. lib. 1.
The Lacedaemonians went one day to consult the Lots of Dodona, upon a War that
they were undertaking; for besides the speaking Oaks, the Doves, the Basins,
and the Oracles, there were also Lots of Dodona. After the Ceremonies were
past, just as they were going to cast the Lots, with a great deal of Respect
and Veneration, a Monkey of the King of the Molossi, being got into the Temple,
threw down the Lots and the Vrn; upon this the frighted Priestess told the
Lacedaemonians, that they ought not to think of conquering, but only how to
save themselves. And all the Writers assure us, that the Lacedaemonians never
received a more unlucky Presage.

The most famous Lots of all, were those of Praeneste and Antium, two little
Towns in Italy. At Antium, there were wonderful Statues that moved of
themselves, (according to the Testimony of Macrobius, Book 1. Chap. 23.) whose
different Motions, either served for Answers, or declared whether it was
fitting to consult the Lots, or not.

And there is a Passage in Cicero's Second Book of Divination, which tells us,
that they consulted the Lots of Praeneste, with the Consent of Fortune; which
implies that the Statue of Fortune could nod with its Head, or give some other
Signs of its will and Pleasure.

We find also, that there were other Statues, which had this very same Faculty.
Diodorus Siculus and Quintus Curtius say, that Jupiter Hammon was carried by
four-score Priests, in a kind of golden Chair of State, covered with a rich
Canopy, from which hung abundance of silver Cups that made a jangling noise,
and that he was followed by a great Number of Women and Maids, who sung Hymns
in the Language of their Country; And that this God, by some Motions or Signs
that he made, instructed the Priests that carried him, which may he would have
them go.

The God of Heliopolis in Syria, according to Macrobius, did as much: All the
difference was, that he would be carried by Men of the best Quality in the
Province, and such as had a long time lived in perfect continence, and had
their Heads shaved.

Lucian, in his Treatise of the Goddess of Syria, says, that he once saw a much
more miraculous sort of Apollo, who, being carried on the shoulders of his
Priests, took a fancy to leave them in the lurch below on the Earth, and to
take a Walk by himself in the Skies. And that all this should be done in the
sight of such a kind of Man as Lucian, is no small Wonder.

But I am so tired with discovering the Cheats of these Pagan Priests, (and am
persuaded, my Reader is as weary of it as I am my self) that I will not spend
any time in considering how it was, that they made their Puppets dance, and
played all their juggling tricks.

In the East, the Lots were Arrows, and to this day the Turks and Arabians make
use of them in the same manner. The Prophet Ezekiel says, that Nebucadonosor
mingled his Arrows against Ammon and Jerusalem, and the predicting Arrow flew
toward Jerusalem; which decided the Question, against which People he should
make War.

In Greece and Italy, they often drew the Lot from some famous Poet, as Homer
or Euripides: And what first presented it self at the opening of the Book, was
looked upon to be the Decree of Heaven. And History furnishes us with a
thousand Examples of this kind.

It Is evident, that about two hundred Years after the Death of Virgil, they set
a great Value on his Verses, and began to believe them prophetic, and to use
them in stead of the ancient Lots of Praeneste. pridius.
Lam-
Alexander Severus, in particular, (at a time, when Heliogabalus was not much
his Friend) received this Answer in the Temple of Praeneste out of Virgil.

-- Si qua fata aspera rumpas,
Tu Marcellus eris.
If you can vanquish Destiny,
The Great Marcellus you shall be.
Here my Author remembers, that Rabelais mentions the Virgilian Lot, which
Panurge consulted concerning his Marriage: And he judges that Place of the
Book, as learned, as it is agreeable and full of fancy; he says, that the
Whimsies and Follies of Rabelais are many times more to be esteemed, than the
most serious Discourses of others. I would not forget this Elogy, because it is
a thing very singular to meet with, in the midst of a Treatise of Oracles that
is full of knowledge and erudition. It Is certain that Rabelais had a great deal
of Wit and reading, and a particular Art of writing of Learned things in a
frolic and jesting way, and of relating a thousand Ridiculous and fantastical
stories without being tiresome to his Reader. And it is a misfortune that he
lived not in an Age that would have obliged him to a Style more Gentleman like
and inoffensive.

These lots were afterward in use amongst Christians; who consulted the Holy
Scriptures for that purpose, as the Pagans did their Poets. Saint Augustine, in
his 119 Epistle to Ianuarius, appears not wholly to disapprove it, unless it be
done for some wicked or vain end. Gregory of Tours tells us himself what his
practice was: He passed seven days in Fasting and Prayer, afterward he went to
the Tomb of Saint Martin, where he opened some Book of the Scripture as his
fancy led him, and took for the answer of God, the first passage which offered
its self to his view; and if this passage made nothing for his purpose, then he
opened the Bible in another place.

Others took the first thing they heard sung when they entered into the Church,
for a Divine presage.

But who would believe that the Emperor Cedrenus.
Heraclius, deliberating in what place he should Winter his Army, should
determine it by this kind of Lot? He purified his Army during three days, and
afterward opened the Book of the Evangelists, and there found that Albany was
marked out for his Winter quarters. Was that an affair of which a Man could
reasonably hope for a decision in the Scriptures?

At last indeed the Church has quite banished this superstition, but it took up
a great deal of time first: For when once our minds are possessed with an
error, it is a wonder if ever we will be undeceived.

The end of the first Discourse.

THE SECOND DISCOURSE. That Oracles did not cease at the coming of Jesus Christ.
THE greatest difficulty that regards Oracles is now surmounted, since we have
proved that Demons were not at all concerned in them. And if this be true,
then Oracles signify so little to the Christian Religion, that there will be no
necessity to maintain, that they ceased precisely at the coming of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. I. The weakness of those reasons upon which the opinion, that Oracles
ceased at the coming of Jesus Christ, is founded.
THat which made most Men believe that Oracles ceased at the coming of Jesus
Christ, was the prediction of Oracles themselves, which foretold their own
silence, and the confession of the Heathens that lived about the time of
Jesus Christ, who often speak of their cessation.

We have already shown the falsity of these pretended Oracles, in which a
Demon that was struck dumb, said himself that he was struck dumb; but these
Demons were either feigned by the over great Zeal of the Christians, or too
easily received by their credulity.

I will recite one of those Oracles upon which Eusebius supports his opinion,
that they did cease at the Birth of Jesus Christ. It Is taken from Porphyrius;
and Eusebius never fails of making all the advantage he can of the testimony of
this Enemy.

I will declare to you the truth concerning the Oracles of Delphos and Claros,
(said Apollo to his Priests.) In times past there came from the Bosom of the
Earth an infinity of Oracles and Fountains, and Exhalations, which inspired
People with Divine furies; but the Earth by the continual changes which time
makes in it, has reimbibed and caused to enter into its self, all those
Fountains, Exhalations and Oracles: and there remains now no more but the
Waters of Mycale in the Didymean fields, and the Oracles of Claros, and
Parnassus.

Upon this, Eusebius concludes in general that all Oracles were then come to an
end.

But it is certain that three of 'em at least are to be excepted, according to
this Oracle which he reports himself: But he takes notice only of those words
that make for his purpose, and troubles not himself with the rest.

But besides, does this Oracle of Porphyrius tell us, when the other Oracles
ceased? not at all; though Eusebius will by all means have it understood to be at
the time of the coming of Jesus Christ. We may commend his zeal, but his manner
of arguing does not at all deserve our Praise.

Nay suppose that Porphyrius's Oracle did speak of the coming of Jesus Christ,
would it follow therefore that all Oracles then ceased, and that none remained?
Eusebius perhaps imagined that this exception signified little, and that it is
sufficient if the greatest part of the Oracles did then cease; but he is
mistaken, for if Oracles had been delivered by Demons, who by the birth of
Jesus Christ were condemned to eternal silence, then no Demon would have been
excepted, or privileged. So that if there was but one Demon remaining after
the Birth of Jesus Christ, it would be sufficient to prove that it was not His
Birth that imposed a perpetual silence upon Oracles. This is one of those
cases, where the least exception ruins the general proposition.

But you may say perhaps, that Demons at the Birth of Jesus Christ did cease
to deliver Oracles; but that yet Oracles continued still for all that, because
the Priests counterfeited them.

This supposition is without any foundation; for I can prove that Oracles
continued four hundred years after the Death of Christ, and there is no mention
any where made of the least difference observed between those that were
delivered after the Birth of Jesus, and those that were pronounced before it.
And besides, if the Priests could so dexterously put the cheat upon People
during the space of four hundred years, why could they not continue to do it
longer?

Of all the Pagan Authors that are in request with those who would make us
believe that Oracles ceased at the coming of Jesus Christ, Plutarch is the
chief: He lived some hundreds of years after Christ, and has written a Dialogue
concerning the cessation of Oracles. Many Men upon his Authority only, have
taken up their opinions, and espoused their party; and yet Plutarch positively
excepts the Oracle of Libadia, (that is to say, of Trophonius) and that of
Delphos: where, as he says, Anciently there was employment enough for two
Priests, and sometimes for three, but in his days one served the turn.

Besides, he confesses that the Oracles were fallen to decay in Boeotia, a
Country, which had formerly been famous for producing a great number of them.

All this, it is true, proves the cessation of some Oracles, and the diminution
of the credit of others; but not the entire cessation of all, which however
there is an absolute necessity for those to prove, who maintain the common
opinion.

The Oracle of Delphos was not so mightily decayed in Plutarch's time; for he
himself tells us in another Treatise, that the Temple of Delphos was then far
more magnificent than ever it had been; that they had repaired the Ancient
Buildings which time began to ruin, and that they had added others to it, which
were altogether after the Modern mode; that there was a small Town near
Delphos, which increased daily by little and little, and had its nourishment
from the old City, like a little Tree that springs from the foot of a great
one; and that this little Town was become more considerable than it had been
for a thousand years past. But even in this Dialogue, which treats of the
cessation of Oracles, Demetrius the Cilician, one of the interlocutors, says,
that before he began his Voyage, the Oracles of Amphilochus and Mopsus were as
flourishing as ever; but that since he came from thence he knew not how things
stood with 'em. You see then what is to be found in favor of the cessation of
Oracles at the coming of Christ in this Treatise of Plutarch, to which a
Multitude of Learned Men referr you for the Proof of it.

Here my Author pretends, that we are also fallen into a gross mistake,
concerning a Passage in the second Book of Divinations: Where Cicero laughs at
the Oracle, that was delivered by Apollo in Latin to Pyrrhus, who consulted him
concerning the War, he was going to make against the Romans. This Oracle had a
double meaning, so that it could not be understood, whether Pyrrhus should
overcome the Romans, or the Romans overcome Pyrrhus. The Equivocation is so
peculiar to the Latin Phrase, that one cannot well render it into English; for
my part, I cannot translate it better than thus: I do pronounce that Rome
Pyrrhus shall overcome.


But the Words of Cicero, concerning this Oracle, are these that follow.

In the first Place, (says he,) Apollo never spoke Latin; in the second Place,
the Greeks knew nothing of this Oracle; thirdly, Apollo in the time of Pyrrhus
had left off Rhiming; in fine, although the Aeacides ( from which Family
Pyrrhus was descended,) were far from being Men of a fine Judgment, or of a
Piercing Wit, yet the Equivocation of the Oracle was so manifest, that Pyrrhus
could not choose but perceive it. But why is it so long since any Oracles were
delivered in this kind at Delphos? For this Reason it is, that now adays
nothing is more despised than they are.

It is on these last words, that the Opinion is grounded, that Oracles were not
delivered at Delphos in the time of Cicero.

But my Author says, that they are deceived, who think so, and that these
Words, Why are there no more Oracles delivered in this kind at Delphos? Plainly
show, that Cicero speaks only of Oracles in Verse: Since he is discoursing in
that Place about one wrapped up in an Hexameter.

But I know not whether we ought to be altogether of my Author's Opinion; for
observe how Cicero goes on. When the Defenders of Oracles are hard put to it;
they answer, that this Virtue in the Exhalation of the Earth, which inspired
the Pythian Priestess, is evaporated with length of time. One would think that
they were talking of some Wine that was grown flat, and that had lost its
Spirits; for what time can consume, or dry up a Virtue all Divine? And what can
be more Divine than an Exhalation from the Earth, which works such an Effect
upon the Soul, as to give it both the Knowledge of Futurity, and the Power to
express its self in Verse.

It seems to me, that Cicero means, that the whole Virtue was entirely lost:
Whereas he would have acknowledged, that a good part of it had remained, if
Oracles were still delivered at Delphos, though but in Prose. For no Man will
say, that a Prophecy is nothing at all, unless it be in Verse?

I do not think, that they are so mightily mistaken, who take this Passage for
an absolute Proof of the entire Cessation of Oracles at Delphos; but they do
ill, who pretend to draw any Argument from thence, for attributing this
Cessation to the Birth of Jesus Christ. For the Oracle ceased too soon for
that, since it appears by this very Passage, that it ceased a long time before
Cicero.

But for all this, the thing was not in Truth, as Cicero seems to understand it
in this Place. For he himself, in his First Book of Divinations, makes his
Brother Quintus, who stands up for Oracles, to speak in this manner. I rely
upon this Point, that the Oracle of Delphos had never been so famous, and had
never received so many offerings from Kings and all sorts of People, if the
Truth of its Predictions had not been acknowledged. Now indeed it is not so
famous, because its Predictions are less true: And so, on the other side, if
they had not been once extremely true, it would never have been so mighty
famous heretofore as it was. But (which is yet a stronger Proof) Cicero himself
(as Plutarch relates in his Life) did in his Youth consult the Oracle of
Delphos, concerning the Conduct he ought to keep in the World: and 'twas
answered him, that he should follow his Genius, rather than conform himself to
the Opinion of the Vulgar. Now if it were not true, that Cicero consulted the
Oracle of Delphos, yet, at least, this Story obliges us to grant, that in the
time of Cicero, it was consulted.

CHAP. II. Why the Ancient Authors contradicted each other, very often, about
the time of the Cessation of Oracles.
PErhaps, it may be objected, How comes it to pass then, that in the fifth Book
of Lucan's Pharsalia, we find this Account of the Oracle of Delphos? The Oracle
of Delphos, which has been silent ever since Great Men were afraid of what was
to come to pass, and forbid that the Gods should declare it, is the most
considerable of all those Favors of Heaven, which our Age has lost.

And a little after, Appius, who was desirous to know the Destiny of Italy, had
the Boldness, to go and interrogate this Cavern, that had been mute so long;
and to move the Tripos, that had been so long undisturbed. And that Iuvenal
says in a certain Place, Since the Oracles speak no more at Delphos --

In fine, whence comes it, that among the Authors of the same Age, we find
some, who say, the Oracle of Delphos speaks no more, and others that say, he
speaks still? And whence comes it, that the same Author sometimes contradicts
himself so often upon this Subject?

The Reason most certainly is, because Oracles were neither in their Ancient
Reputation, nor yet were they absolutely ruined: So, that one may well say,
that in Comparison of what they had formerly been, they were nothing; but yet,
for all that, they continued to be something still.

Besides, some Oracles were ruined for a certain time, and afterward came into
Credit again; for Oracles were subject to several Adventures and Misfortunes:
And we ought not to believe them annihilated from the time of their being mute;
for they might afterward assume a Voice again and speak.

Plutarch says, that in old time a Dragon came and lodged upon Parnassus and
caused the Delphick Oracle to be deserted, and that it was commonly believed,
that solitude invited the Dragon to that place; but that 'twas more probable
that he caused the solitude, Greece being filled with Cities, etc.

You see that Plutarch speaks of a time very far distant back. So the Oracle
had since its erection been once abandoned already, and we are sure that
afterward it was very well reestablished. But after this, the Temple of
Delphos underwent diverse misfortunes. It was plundered by a Thief descended
from Phlegias, by the Army of Xerxes, by the Phocenses, by Pyrrhus, by Nero;
and last of all, by the Christians under Constantine. All this did no great
good to the Oracle, for the Priests were either massacred, or dispersed, the
place was abandoned, the Sacred utensils were lost, and it must of necessity
require great charges, care, and time, to rigg out these Oracles again fit for
holy use.

All this then may be possible, that Cicero in his Youth consulted the Oracle
of Delphos, that during the War between Caesar and Pompey, and in that general
disorder of the Universe, the Oracle was mute, as Lucan will have it; and that
after the end of this War, when Cicero writ his Book of Philosophy, it might
begin to be re-established so much, as to make Quintus say it was still in the
World; and yet so little, that Cicero might suppose that it was not in being.

When Dorimachus, as Polybius reports, had burnt the Portico of the Temple of
Dodona, had quite destroyed the Sacred Place of the Oracle, and had pillaged,
or ruined all the offerings, an Author of that time might very well say that
the Oracle of Dodona spoke no more. But for all this, in the following age,
another Author might be found transmitting to posterity some of the answers,
which it gave in his time.

CHAP. III. The History of the Duration of the Oracle of Delphos, and some
other Oracles.
WE cannot better prove, that about the time of Jesus Christ, to which the
silence of the Delphick Oracle is so usually referred, it did not altogether
cease, but was only interrupted, than by setting down all the different
occasions that we find it took of speaking since.

Suetonius in the Life of Nero says that he, consulting the Oracle of Delphos,
was warned to have a care of seventy three years; and that thereupon Nero
believed, he should not Die till that Age, and never thought of old Galba, who
being seventy three years old took his Empire from him. For he was so conceited
of his long life and good fortune, that having lost in a Shipwreck things of a
very great value, he bragged that the fishes would bring 'em back to him again.

But certainly Nero either received from the Oracle of Delphos some other
answer that seemed less favorable to him, or was discontented that he was
destined to live no longer than Seventy three years, or else he would never
have took from the Priests of Delphos the Cirrhaean Fields, Dion Cassius.
Pausanias.
to give them to his Soldiers. He also took from the Temple more than five
hundred Statues, some of Men, and, some of Gods, but all of Brass; and to
profane or for ever abolish the Oracle, he caused several Men's Throats to be
cut at the very Mouth of the Sacred Cavern, where the Divine exhalation issued
forth.

That the Oracle after such an adventure as this, should be mute till the Reign
of Domitian, and, as Iuvenal says, should speak no more, is not at all to be
wondered at.

And yet it is impossible it could be altogether mute from the time of Nero to
that of Domitian; for observe what Philostratus says in the Life of Apollonius
Tyanaeus, who came to the Court of Domitian: Appollonius visited all the
Oracles of Greece, that of Dodona, that of Delphos, and that of Amphiaraus. And
in another place he speaks yet farther: You may see Apollo of Delphos made
illustrious by the Oracles which he delivers in the midst of Greece; he answers
those who consult him, as you know very well your self, in very few words, and
without accompanying his answers with prodigies; although it were very easy for
him to make Parnassus tremble, to stop the course of Cephisus, and to change
the Waters of Castalia into Wine; but he tells the truth plainly and does not
amuse himself to make an unprofitable show of his power. It Is very pleasant
that Philostratus should expect to have the greater value set upon this Apollo,
because he was no great worker of Miracles. But I think there lurks in this
place some secret Poison against the Christians.

We formerly acquainted you, that in the time of Plutarch, who lived under
Trajan, this Oracle was yet in being, but reduced to one single Priestess, though
in elder times it had two or three. Under Adrian, Dion Chrysostom says, that he
consulted the Oracle of Delphos, and relates one of its answers, which seemed
to him to be very intricate, and which was so indeed.

Under the Antonini, Lucian says, that a Priest of Tyana, went to demand of the
false Prophet Alexander, if the Oracles that were delivered then at Didymi, at
Claros, and at Delphos, were indeed the answers of Apollo, or impostures.
Alexander who had a regard for these Oracles, which were so like his own,
answered the Priest, that it was a secret not fit for him to know. But when
this wise Priest demanded what he should be after his death, he was answered
boldly, Thou shall be a Camel, then a Horse, then a Philosopher, and at last a
Prophet as great as Alexander.

After the Antonini, three Emperors disputed the Empire, Severus septimus,
Pescennius Niger, and Clodius Albinus. Delphos was consulted, says Spartianus,
to know which would be best for the Commonwealth; and the Oracle answered in
Verse, The Black is the best, the African is good, but the White is the worst
of all. By the Black was meant Pescennius Niger; by the African, Severus
Septimus, who was of Africa; and by the White, Clodius Albinus. It was asked
afterward, Who should remain Master of the Empire; and it was answered, The
blood of the White and the Black shall be spilt, and the African shall govern
the World. Then it was demanded, how long time he should govern; and it was
answered, He shall ride on the Sea of Italy with twenty Ships, though with one
Ship he may cross the Sea. By which it is meant that Severus should reign
twenty years. Here the Oracle reserved to it self an obscure meaning, to have
recourse to in time of need. But yet in the times when Delphos was most
Flourishing, there were never better or more substantial Oracles than these.

We find nevertheless, that Clemens Alexandrinus, in his Exhortations to the
Gentiles, which he composed, either under Severus, or about that time, says
very plainly, that the Fountain of Castalia, which belonged to the Oracle of
Delphos, and that of Colophon and all the other Prophetic Fountains, had at
last, tho it were late first, lost their fabulous Virtues.

Perhaps in that time, these Oracles were fallen into one of those Silences, to
which they were so subject by Intervals: Or perhaps, because they were no more
in Reputation, Clemens Alexandrinus thought fit to say, they were totally
silenced.

It Is certain, that under Constantius, the Father of Constantine, and during
the Youth of Constantine, Delphos was not yet ruined; since Eusebius writes in
the Life of Constantine, that he said, that there was then a Report, that
Apollo had delivered an Oracle, not by the Mouth of a Priestess, but from the
bottom of the obscure Cavern, which said -- That the Just Men, who were upon
Earth, were the Cause, that he could not speak Truth. A very pleasant Reason
this! Besides the Oracle of Delphos must then necessarily be in a very
miserable Condition, since it could not maintain one Priestess.

But this Oracle received a terrible Blow under Constantine, who commanded, or
suffered, that Delphos should be pillaged. Then, says Eusebius in the Life of
Constantine, they produced in the open view of all the People, in the Public
Places of Constantinople, those Statues, which the Errors of Men had caused to
be so long Time the object of Veneration and Worship; here Apollo Pythius,
there Sminthius. The Tripodes were exposed in the Circus and the Heliconian
Muses in the Palace, to the railleries of all the World.

But after all this, the Oracle of Delphos came into credit once again; for the
Emperor Theodoret.
Julian sent to enquire of it, about the Expedition, that he was designing
against the Persians. If the Oracle of Delphos did continue any longer, we
cannot however extend its History farther; for there is no more spoken of it in
any Author. But in all likelihood, that was the very time, when it became
silent, and its last Words were addressed to the Emperor Julian, who was so
zealous for Paganism. I cannot therefore well understand, how some Great Men
could put Augustus in the Place of Julian, and boldly affirm, that the Oracle
of Delphos ended with the Answer it delivered to Augustus, concerning the
Hebrew Infant. Some Melancthon. P. Peucer. Boissard Hospin.
Modern Authors, who thought Oracles worthy of a Glorious End, since they made
so great a Noise in the World, have contrived one very fit, to give them a
Reputation. They found in Sozomenus and Theodoretus, that in the time of
Julian, the Temple of Apollo, which was in the Suburbs of Antioch, called
Daphne, was set on Fire, no Body being able to discover the Author, or Cause of
it; but the Pagans accused the Christians of this Conflagration, and the
Christians attributed it to Thunder and Lightning thrown by the Hand of God.
Theodoretus indeed says, that the Lightning fell upon this Temple, but
Sozomenus says nothing at all of it. Now these Modern Authors had a Mind to
transplant this Accident to the Temple of Delphos, which was indeed far distant
from thence. And so they write, that by the just Vengeance of God, it was
destroyed by Lightning, accompanied with a mighty Earthquake. But there is no
mention made of this great trembling of the Earth, neither by Sozomenus, nor
Theodoret, in their Relation of the Fire of Daphne; though others added it, to
keep the Thunder Company, and to heighten the Prodigiousness of the Accident.

But it would be a very troublesome thing, to give you a History of the
Duration of all the Oracles, after the birth of Jesus Christ. It is sufficient
to consider in what time we find, that some of the principal Ones spoke their
last. But you must always remember, that it is not understood, that this was
the very last time they spoke, but that it was the last Occasion Authors had to
tell us that they spoke.

Dion, who did not finish his History, till the eighth Year of Alexander
Severus, that is, in the 230 Year of Jesus Christ, says, that in his time,
Amphilochus delivered Oracles in Dreams: He tells us also, that there was in
the City of Apollonia an Oracle, where things to come were foretold by
observing the manner how the Fire took hold of the Incense, that was cast upon
the Altar. But it was not permitted to ask this Oracle any Questions concerning
Death or Marriage. These peevish Restrictions were sometimes founded upon the
particular History of the God, who in his Lifetime, perhaps had an Occasion
given him of taking an Aversion to certain things: Though I am also of Opinion,
that they might sometimes come from the ill Success, which those Answers had,
that were delivered by the Oracle, concerning some particular Matters.

Zosimus.
Under Aurelius, toward the Year of Christ 272, the Palmyrenians being
revolted, consulted the Oracle of Apollo Sarpedonius in Cilicia. They consulted
likewise that of Venus of Aphaca; the Form of which was so very singular, that
it deserves to be mentioned here. Aphaca, is a Place between Heliopolis and
Biblus. Near the Temple of Venus is a Lake like a Cittern: And at certain
Assemblies, that are held there at some particular Seasons, there is to be seen
a Fire in the Form of a Globe of Lamps: And this Fire, says Zosimus, has
continued to be seen even in our Days, that is to say, about the 400 Year of
Jesus Christ. Those that offer, throw into the Lake the Present designed for
the Goddess, of what sort soever they be; if she receives them, they sink to
the bottom; if she receives them not, they swim on the Surface of the Water,
though they be of Silver, or Gold. In the Year before the Ruin of the
Palmyrenians, their Presents sunk to the bottom, but the Year following every
thing swam on the top.

Zosiim.
Licinius having a Design, to renew his War with Constantine, consulted the
Oracle of Apollo Didymaeus, and had for Answer two Verses of Homer, of which
this is the Sense: Unhappy old Man! It is not for thee to fight against Young
Men; thou have not Strength enough left, for old Age pulls thee down.

Ammian. Marcellinus.
A God, of no great Reputation, named Besas, delivered Oracles in Answer to
Letters at Abydum, a Town in the Confines of Thebais, under the Empire of
Constantius. For there were sent to this Emperor certain Letters, which had
been left upon the Altar, in the Temple of Besas; upon which, he began to make
a very rigorous Prosecution against those who had laid those Letters there; and
cast into Prison, or sent to Banishment a great Number of Persons, or else
caused them to be cruelly tormented: Because by these Letters, they enquired
after the Fate of the Empire, or concerning the Duration of the Reign of
Constantius, or the Success of some Designs, which they were framing against
him.

In fine, Macrobius, who lived under Arcadius and Honorius, Sons of Theodosius,
speaks of the God of Heliopolis in Syria, and of his Oracle, and of the Lots of
Antium, in terms which positively prove that they were all remaining in his
time.

But here we must observe, that it is of no absolute necessity to our design,
that all these Histories should be true, or that these Oracles did really
deliver those very answers which are attributed to 'em; for the very
counterfeiting of answers, implies that the Oracles were in being when those
answers were pretended to be delivered by them: and it is most plain by the
Histories, which so many Authors have written of 'em, that they did not believe
that they were wholly silenced in their days.

CHAP. IV. That Oracles for the most part were abolished at the same time with
Heathenism.
ORacles for the most part ceased when Heathenism was abolished, which was not
immediately after the coming of Jesus Christ. For Constantine himself
demolished but a few Temples, and he was fain to make the horrid Crimes that
were perpetrated there, his pretense for pulling 'em down. On this pretext he
plucked down the Temple of Zosimus
Venus Aphacitis, and that of Eusebius.
Aesculapius of Aegae in Cilicia, in both of which there were Oracles. But yet
he Theodoretus.
prohibited Sacrificing to the Heathen Gods, and by that edict began to make
their Temples of no use. The Edicts of Constantius and of Julian (when
Constantius had but newly declared him Caesar) are still extant, wherein on
pain of Death they forbid all sorts of Divination, not only Astrology,
interpretation of Dreams and Magic, but also foretelling by the flights of
Birds, and by the entrails of Beasts; which gave a mighty shock to the Religion
of the Romans. And indeed the Emperors had a particular interest in prohibiting
all kinds of fortunetelling, because one or other was always inquiring about
their Destiny, and especially to know who was to be the next Successor, who
usually, upon the flattery of the Diviner, made a revolt, and set up his own
claim to the Empire.

As there were many Oracles remaining, when Julian was proclaimed Emperor, so
he applied himself, as much as he could, to the restoration of those that had
been destroyed. For example, that of the Suburbs of Daphne was destroyed by
Adrian, Sozomen.
who when he was a private Man, having dipped a leaf-in the Castalian Spring,
(for there was one of this Name at Daphne as well as at Delphos,) found when he
took it out of the Water, a Narrative of what was to befall him, and Advice to
think of obtaining the Empire. And therefore when he was afterward made
Emperor, least the same Oracle should give the like counsel to some body else,
he caused the Sacred Spring to be choked up, by throwing a great quantity of
Stones into it. There was a great deal of ingratitude in this procedure; but
Julian Ammianus Marcellinus.
caused the spring to be opened, the Dead Bodies, which were Buried near it, to
be removed, and the place to be Purified in the same manner as the Athenians
had in former time purged the Island of Delos. But Julian went farther, and
would needs be himself the Prophet of the Didymaean Oracle; for this he thought
would be a means of bringing Prophecies into credit again, which then lay under
much contempt. As he was Emperor he was ( Pontifex Maximus, or) Chiefest
Priest; and tho the Emperors had not been accustomed to make any great use of
this Sacerdotal dignity; yet he was resolved to make it more than an empty
Title: And therefore we see that, in one of those Letters of his, which are
come to our view, in the quality of Pontifex maximus he suspends a Pagan Priest
for three years from the exercise of his Sacred function. And the Letter, which
he wrote to Arsaces, Pontifex of Galatia, acquaints us with the way which he
took to make Paganism flourish again: He congratulates in the first place his
own felicity, in that his zeal had produced such great effects in so short a
time; and then he declares his judgment to be, that the best means for the
re-establishment of Heathenism would be, to transplant the virtues of
Christianity into it, such as Charity toward Strangers, the care of Burying
the Dead decently, and that Sanctity of Life which the Christians, as he says,
counterfeited so well. He therefore commands that Pontifex to oblige the
Priests of Galatia, either by arguments or threats, to live regularly, to
abstain from the public shows and Tipling-houses; to quit all sordid and
infamous employments, to addict themselves, with all their Family, only to the
Service of the Gods, and to have a watchful eye upon the Galileans, (so he
scornfully calls the Christians,) and to suppress their impieties and
profanations. He observes, that it is a great shame, that whilst the Jews and
Galileans maintained not only their own poor, but such as were Heathens too,
the Pagans should let their poor starve, and not remember that Hospitality and
Liberality are virtues so peculiar and proper to 'em, that Homer brings in
Eumaeus speaking thus: My guest, if a Man of quality much inferior to thine,
had come hither, I must have entertained him; for all Men that are either
strangers or Poor come to us, as it were on an errand from Jupiter; and though I
have but little to give, yet I give that little with cheerfulness. Last of all,
he sets down what distributions he appoints to be made each year to the Poor of
Galatia and he bids the Pontifex take care that there be Hospitals Built in
each Town for the reception of Men of other Religions as well as Heathens. He
thinks it not befitting the dignity of the Pontifex to make frequent visits to
the Governors at their Houses, but that he rather write to 'em; nor will he
have the Priests go meet 'em, when they come into any Town; but when they come
to the Temples, the Priests may go to receive 'em as far as the Porch, but no
farther. He also forbids the Governors on such an occasion to have their Guards
Marching before them, because they are then to be considered only as private
Persons; but he gives the Soldiers leave to go in after them, if they will.

With this care, and this imitation of Christianity, it is probable that Julian
(if he had lived) would have put some stop to the ruin of his Religion; but it
pleased God to cut him off before he had reigned two years.

Iovian, who succeeded him, began to endeavor zealously the destruction of
Heathenism; but in the seven Months of his Reign it was not possible for him to
make any great progress.

Valens, who had the Eastern Empire, gave liberty of conscience to all Men to
worship what Gods they listed, and was himself more inclined to support
Arianism than Christianity. Theod. Lib. 5.
So that during his Reign Sacrifices were publicly made, and Men eat the flesh
of the Victims offered up to Idols. The Bacchanalian Mysteries were celebrated
openly; they ran up and down with their Thyrsi in their hands; they tore Dogs
in pieces, and committed all the other extravagances which are suitable to that
Devotion.

Valentinian, his Brother, who had the Western Empire, was more zealous for the
glory of Christianity; but yet his conduct was not so steady, as it should have
been. He had made a law to forbid all sorts of Nocturnal Ceremonies; whereupon
Praetextatus, the Proconsul of Greece, represented to him, that if he took away
from the Greeks those Ceremonies, to which they were so mightly addicted, they
would lead their Lives unpleasantly. This prevailed with Valentinian, and he
consented, that notwithstanding his Law, they might keep their old Customs. It
is true, that we have this account from Zosimus a Pagan Historian: and one may
say, that he invented it, to make us believe that the Pagans were still in some
credit with the Emperors; but we answer, that Zosimus considering the condition
which his Religion was in, was more likely to have been in an humor of
complaining of severities that were not acted, than of pleasing himself with
the recital of a favor that was never shown. But this is certain however, that
there are Old Inscriptions at Rome, and in other Cities of Italy, by which it
is manifest, that under the Reign of Valentinian, Persons of great quality
celebrated the Sacrifices called Taurobolia and Criobolia, that is to say, The
sprinkling of Bulls Blood and Rams Blood. Nay by the great number of those
Inscriptions one would be made to think that those Ceremonies were the
principal ones in fashion, during the time of this Valentinian, and the two
other Emperors of the same Name.

Now they being the oddest and most singular of all the Heathen Rites, I
suppose that a description of 'em will not be irksome to the Reader.
Prudentius, who perhaps had seen them, sets 'em down at length. There was a
deep Pit dug, into which the person, for whom the Ceremonies were performed,
descended with Sacred Ribons and a Crown upon his Head, and in a dress
altogether Mysterious. Over the Pit they placed a Covering made of Planks
pierced through with a great many Holes: Upon this Covering they brought a Bull
adorned with a Garland of Flowers and little plates of Gold hanging upon his
Horns and Forehead. Then his throat was Cut with a Sacred Knife, and his Blood
dropped down through the holes that were in the Planks into the Pit, whilst the
Person that stood there, received it with much devotion, catching it on his
forehead, his Cheeks, his Arms, his shoulders, and every part of his Body, and
being industrious that not one drop should fall any where but on himself. At
last out he came, a frightful spectacle, all daubed with blood, and his Hair,
Beard and Clothes still dropping with it; but his comfort was, that his Sins
were all washed away, and he was regenerated to all Eternity: For, as it
appears by the Inscriptions, this Sacrifice was to those who celebrated it, a
Mystical and Eternal Regeneration. But unless it were renewed once in twenty
years, it would lose its force, and the perpetuity of its duration. And Women,
as well as Men, were capable of this Regeneration; and those, who were not at
the Ceremony, might receive the benefit of it by Association: Nay, which is
most remarkable of all, whole Cities sometimes performed it by Proxy or
Deputation. This Sacrifice was now and then made for the Emperors health: and
the Provinces made their Court to him by sending some Person in their name to
bedawb himself with Bulls-Blood, for the obtaining of a long and happy Life for
the Emperor. All this may be proved out of the old Inscriptions.

But now we come to Theodosius and his Sons, who put a full Period to Pagan
superstitions.

Theodosius began first in Egypt, where he caused all the Temples to be shut
up: At last he went so far as to demolish the Temple of Serapis, which was the
most famous of 'em all. And as Strabo informs us, there was nothing more
Glorious in the whole Heathen Religion than the Pilgrimages which were made to
Serapis. When the time, says he, of certain Festivals was near at hand, it is
hard to believe what a multitude of People went down the River from Alexandria
to Canopus, where this Temple stood. Day and Night there was nothing to be
seen, but Boats full of Men and Women, Singing and Dancing with all the liberty
imaginable. At Canopus there were a vast number of Inns on the River side,
which were of use for the entertainment of the Passingers and accommodating
them in their divertisements. And therefore the Sophister Eunapius, who was a
Pagan, seems to have had a mighty concern for the Temple of Serapis, and with
Gall enough he describes its destruction. Men ( says he) that had never heard
the sound War, showed themselves mighty Valiant against the Stones of this
Temple, but especially against the rich Offerings, which it was full of: And in
those Holy Places they put Monks, a People ( says he) infamous and useless;
who, because they wear a black and slovenly Habit, arrogate to themselves a
Tyrannical Authority over the minds of Men; and instead of those Gods which the
light of our natural Reason discovers to us, they set up for objects of our
Adoration, the heads of Malefactors who were executed for their Crimes, which
they salt to preserve 'em from Corruption. Thus does this impious wretch treat
Monks and Relics; and certainly the Liberty of those times was very great,
when such Invectives were written against the Emperors Religion. Ruffinus
informs us, that the Temple of Serapis was found to be full of secret Passages,
and Machines contrived for the Impostures of the Priests. He tells us, amongst
other things, that on the East side of the Temple there was a little Window,
through which, on a certain day of the Year, the Sun Beams entering, fell just
upon the Mouth of Serapis: At the same time, an Image of the Sun made of Iron
was brought in, which being attracted by a great Loadstone fixed in the
Cieling, ascended up to the Image of Serapis. Then they cried out, that the Sun
saluted their God: But when the Iron Image fell down again, and the Sunbeams
went off from Serapis's Mouth, they said, that the Sun, having finished his
Complement, was retired, to go about his own Affairs.

After that Theodosius had defeated the Rebel Eugenius, he went to Rome, where
still the whole Senate stood up for Paganism. Their chiefest Reason was,
because, for twelve hundred Years, Rome had thriven well enough with its Gods,
from whom it had received all sorts of Prosperity. The Emperor made a Speech in
the Senate House, persuading them to embrace the Christian Religion; but they
replied, that by Custom and Experience, they had found Paganism to be a good
and convenient Religion: and if they should change it for that of the
Christians, they could not foresee what might be the Event. Was not this fine
Theology, for the Roman-Senate? Theodosius finding, that this was not the way
to deal with them, told them, that the public Treasury was too much exhausted
by making chargeable Sacrifices, and that he had Occasion to employ that Money
in paying his Armies. They replied, that their Sacrifices would not be
acceptable, unless they were made at the Charge of the Public. But that
inconvenience was no Argument with him: So he put an end to all Sacrifices and
old Ceremonies. And Zosimus does not let flip the Occasion of observing, that
from that time forwards all sorts of Misfortunes happened to the Roman Empire.

The same Author tells us, that when Theodosius made that Voyage to Rome,
Serena, the Wife of Stilicon, entered into the Temple of the Mother of the Gods,
to put some Affront upon her, and that she made bold to convert to her own use
a fair Neck-lace, which the Goddess wore: This an old Vestal Virgin reproved
her very sharply for, and, as she went out of the Temple, followed her, cursing
her with a thousand Imprecations. After which, says Zosimus, the poor Serena
was often frighted (both waking and sleeping) with a certain Apparition, that
threatened her with sudden Death.

But the last Efforts of Paganism were those made by Symmachus, to obtain of
the Emperors, Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius, the Reestablishment of the
Privileges of the Vestals, and of the Altar of Victory in the Capitol; but all
the World knows with what Vigor St. Ambrose opposed him. Yet it appears by the
very Proceedings in that Contention, that Rome did in those days retain a
strong Tincture of Paganism. For St. Ambrose asks Symmachus, why the Pagans are
not contented with having the Public Places, Portico's and Baths filled with
their Idols, and if nothing will serve their turns, unless the Altar of Victory
be set up in the very Capitol, which is the Place of the whole City, whither
most Christians resort; that the Christians, says he, may, whether they will or
no, have the Smoke of the Sacrifices blown in their Eyes, the Music in their
Ears, the Ashes in their Throats, and the Incense in their Noses.

Nay, even when Rome was besieged by Alaricus, in the Reign of Honorius, it was
still full of Idols. Zosimus complains, that all things conspiring to the Ruin
of that unhappy City, the Gods were not only robbed of their Ornaments, but
even some of those that were of Gold or Silver were themselves melted down; of
which Number was the Goddess of Fortitude, which from that time forward wholly
abandoned the Romans. Though this be a lucky hit, yet Zosimus will never make
it pass upon us for the true cause of the taking of that City.

I am in some suspense, whether upon the Credit of this Author, we may admit
the following Story to be true. Honorius forbad all Persons that were not of
the Christian Religion, to appear at Court, with a Shoulder-belt, or to have
any Military Command. Generidus, a Pagan and Barbarian too, but a Man of great
Courage, who commanded the Troops that lay in Dalmatia and Pannonia, came no
more into the Emperor's Presence, laid aside his Shoulder-belt, and forbore to
exercise his Charge. Honorius one day asked him, how it came to pass, that he
came not to Court in his Turn, as it was his Duty to do? To which he replied,
That there was a Law made, that dispossessed him of his Belt, and his Command.
The Emperor told him, that Law was not for such Men as he was; but he answered,
that he could not take the Benefit of any Distinction that separated him from
those who professed the same Worship with himself. In effect, he would not
undertake to act again in his Command, till the Emperor himself, compelled to
it by Necessity, repealed that Law. If this Story be true, then we may easily
judge that Honorius contributed very little to the downfall of the Heathen
Religion.

But at last all Exercise of that Religion was prohibited on Pain of Death, by
an Edict of the Emperors Valentinian the Third, and Martian, in the Year of
Christ 451. and this was the last Blow given to that Superstition. And yet we
find, that those very Emperors, who were so zealous for the Advancement of
Christianity, did, for all that, themselves retain some Relics of Heathenism,
which served to augment their Authority. As for Example, they still took upon
them the Title of Pontifex Maximus, that is to say, Chief Patriarch (as it
were) of those who divined by the Flights of Birds, and the Entrails of Beasts,
and of all the Colleges of Pagan Priests, and Supreme Head of all the ancient
Romish Idolatry.

Zosimus pretends that Constantine the Great, Valentinian and Valens willingly
accepted from the Heathen Priests both the Title and Habit of that Dignity,
which according to Custom was presented to them at their Accession to the
Empire; but that Gratian refused the Pontifical Office; which being related to
the Priests, the principal amongst them replied in a great heat: Si princeps
non vult appellari Pontifex, admodum brevi Pontifex Maximus fiet. The Sharpness
of which saying lies wholly in the Latin words, and it was grounded on the
Revolt of Maximus against Gratian at that time, with a Design to strip him of
the Empire.

But the old Inscriptions still remaining, are a Testimony of this matter, more
to be credited than Zosimus. There we see the Title of Pontifex Maximus given
to the Christian Emperors, even in the sixth Century. Two hundred years after
Christianity had ascended the Throne, the Gruterus.
Emperor Justin amongst his other Titles assumes that of Pontifex Maximus in an
Inscription, which he had caused to be made for the City of Iustinopolis in
Istria, which was called by his Name.

To be one of the Gods of a false Religion was surely much worse than to be the
Pontifex Maximus of it. Now the Heathens erected the Roman Emperors into Gods:
And well they might, seeing they made the City of Rome a Goddess. The Emperors,
Theodosius and Arcadius, though they were Christians, permitted Symmachus, that
great Defender of the Heathen Religion, to give them the Title of ( Vestra
Divinitas, or) Your Divinity: Which could be only taken in the Sense, and
according to the Custom, of the Pagans. And in some Inscriptions, which were
set up in Honor of Arcadius and Honorius, these following Words are to be
found; Devotus Numini Majestatique eorum, that is, Devoted to their Divinity
and Majesty.

But the Christian Emperors went farther than the bare receiving of those
Titles; for they gave them to themselves: As appears by the Constitutions (or
Laws) of Theodosius, Valentinian, Honorius and Arcadius; wherein they sometimes
call their Edicts, Heavenly Statutes, and Divine Oracles: And sometimes they
say expressly, The most happy Expedition of our Divinity, etc.

It may be said, that this was nothing but the Style of the Court of Chancery;
but it was certainly an unjustifiable and ridiculous Style under the Heathen
Religion its self, and a blasphemous one under the Christian. And therefore it
is very wonderful, that such like Extravagancies should become so familiar and
common a way of speaking, that they were in every Bodies Mouth.

The Truth is, that Flattery, which Subjects are so apt to bestow upon their
Sovereigns, and the natural Fondness which Princes have for Praise, made the
Custom of using these Expressions, last longer than it ought to have done. I
confess that the Flattery and the Fondness in this Case were each of them very
extraordinary in its kind: And it is no wonder, since they are things incapable
of being limited to any bounds. That a Man should be in earnest when he gives
another Man the Title of a God is hard to conceive, and yet the frequency takes
off the Wonder; but that this Man should accept the Title, and that with so
much easiness, as by Degrees to come to the giving of it to himself (and all
this while have a right Notion of what is truly called God,) This, I say, is a
thing that I know not how to give such an Account of, as will save the Honor
of Humane Nature.

As for the Title of Pontifex Maximus, I do not see what was in it, that could
flatter the Vanity of the Christian Emperors into the making it so much their
Interest to conserve it: But, perhaps, they thought that it was of some use for
the imprinting of a respectful Awe in the Minds of those that were still of the
Heathen Religion: Or, it may be, they pleased themselves with the Supremacy
over Christians, which under the Ambiguity of that Title they assumed to
themselves. In effect, upon certain Occasions they were Magisterial enough in
their use of it: And some Authors would persuade us, that the Emperors quitted
their Pretensions to this Title, out of Respect to the Pope; who, it seems,
began to be apprehensive that they might make ill uses of it.

But it is not so surprising by far, to see these Heathen remains continue for
some time in the Christian Religion, as to see what was most barbarous,
extravagant, and directly opposite to Reason and the common Interest of
Mankind, keep such firm footing, as to be the last that left the Field of all
the Pagan Superstitions, I mean, Humane Sacrifices. That Religion was certainly
very fantastical and full of Variety; for it consisted of some things extremely
frolic, and others no less mournful. In one Place, the Ladies go to the
Temples in a fit of Devotion, to offer their Favors to the first Comer: And in
another place, the same Devotion causes the throats of Men to be cut upon an
Altar. These detestable Sacrifices were practiced by all Nations: The Grecians
celebrated them, as well as the Scythians, though not so often; and the Romans
(for all that they obliged the Carthaginians, in a Treaty of Peace concluded
between them, not to sacrifice their Children to Saturn, according to the
Custom derived from their Ancestors, the Phoenicians, yet) did themselves every
Year offer up a Man to Jupiter Latialis. Eusebius cites Porphyrius for this, as
a thing still in usage in his Days. Lactantius and Prudentius, the one in the
beginning, and the other in the end of the fourth Age, are Evidences of the
same thing, each of them for his own Time. These Ceremonies, that were so full
of Horror, lasted as long as the Superstition of Oracles, which was only
liable to the Reproach of Stupidity and fond Credulity.

CHAP. V. That if Heathenism had not been abolished, yet Oracles would have
ceased; and the first particular Reason hereof.
THE downfall of Heathenism, when Christianity triumphed over it, could do no
less than involve Oracles in the common ruin with its self. But it may be
farther asserted that Christianity, even before it became the reigning
Religion, was an irresistible enemy to Oracles; for the Christians made it
their business to disabuse mankind, and discover impostures. And yet if the
Christian Religion had never been, Oracles would for other reasons have lost
their credit by degrees, and at last have quite failed.

It was observed that they began to degenerate from the very time when they
left of giving their answers in Verse. Plutarch has written a tract expressly to
enquire about the reason of this Change, wherein (according to the fashion of
Greek Authors) he sets down all that could be said on this subject, either true
or false. First he says, that the God who inspires the Pythian Priestess
proportions himself to her Capacity, and does not answer in Verse by her,
unless she have a natural faculty that way; for the prediction only belongs to
Apollo, but the manner of Expression to the Priestess. Thus, it is not the
fault of the Musician, if he cannot make as good melody with a Cittern as with
a Lute; for the property of the Instrument must be considered. Suppose, it had
been the custom for the Oracle to deliver its answers in writing, could we
reasonably deny that Apollo inspired 'em, unless the Priestess wrote 'em in a
fair hand. The Soul of the Prophetess, when united to Apollo, is like an
innocent Maid when she is first Married, who is ignorant both of the pleasure
and the duty of her new condition.

But why then did the Ancient Priestesses always answer in Verse? Were not they
as pure and Virgin Souls, contracted to Apollo? To this Plutarch replies first
of all, That even the Ancient Priestesses did now and then speak in Prose. And
besides this, in Old times all People were born Poets: so that, as he tells us,
they had no sooner drank a little freely, but they made Verses; they had no
sooner cast their eyes on a Handsome Woman, but they were all Poesy, and their
very common discourse fell naturally into Feet and Rhyme: So that their Feasts
and their Courtships were the most delectable things in the World. But now this
Poetic Genius has deserted Mankind: and though our passions be as ardent as
those of our Ancestors, and we talk as much as they did, yet Love at present
creeps in humble prose. And even all the Socrates's and Plato's, who discoursed
so much concerning that agreeable passion, had not the least skill in Poetry.

Now all this has too much fancy and too little truth in it, to deserve a
serious answer. But Plutarch gives us another reason, which has something more
of probability; which is this; that the Ancients wrote always in Verse,
whether they treated of Religion, Morality, Natural Philosophy or Astrology.
Orpheus and Hesiod, whom every body acknowledges for Poets, were Philosophers
also: and Parmenides, Xenophanes, Empedocles, Eudoxus, and Thales, whom all Men
own for Philosophers, were Poets too. It is very strange indeed that Poetry
should be elder Brother to Prose, and that Men did not at first light upon the
most natural and easy way of expressing their thoughts; but it is very
probable, that since all their writings were as so many precepts, they were
shaped into measured lines, that they might be the more easily remembered: and
therefore all their Laws and their rules of Morality were in Verse. By this we
may see that Poetry had a much more serious beginning than is usually imagined,
and that the Muses have of late days mightily deviated from their original
Gravity. Who would imagine that the Old Statutes should by right have been
written in Meter, and Chaucer's Tales in Prose? There was a necessity
therefore, says Plutarch, that Ancient Oracles should be delivered in Verses,
since all matters of importance were so; for Apollo was then willing to follow
the mode of those times, and when Prose came afterward to be in use, he was
for being in the fashion still.

I am of the same opinion my self, and believe that Oracles at first gave their
answers in Verse, both that they might be more easily remembered, and to comply
with the custom which had condemned Prose to be used only in trival discourses.
But History and Philosophy began to shake off those useless Chains about the
Reign of Cyrus. For Thales, who lived at that time, was one of the last Poetic
Philosophers; but Apollo continued to speak in Verse till about Pyrrhus's
days, as Cicero informs us, which was about two hundred and thirty years after
Cyrus. Whence it appears, that Poetry being found suitable to the dignity of
Oracles, it was retained in use at Delphos, as long as it was possible; till at
last plain Prose getting the victory banished it quite from thence.

Plutarch could hardly be in earnest, when he said, that Oracles were therefore
at last pronounced in Prose, because People began to require clearer answers,
and to be weary of the Mysterious bombast of Verses. For whether it were the
Gods or but the Priests that spoke, I would fain know how Men durst accuse 'em
of obscurity.

But he has more probability on his side, when he pretends, that prophetic
versifying fell into contempt, by being in use amongst those Fortune Tellers,
who stroling about the Highways, were consulted by the Rabble: Now, the
Priests who belonged to the Temples, scorned to use the same Customs in common
with these Gypsies; for they thought themselves to be a nobler and graver sort
of Fortune Tellers; which makes a mighty difference, I Will assure you, in this
great affair.

But Plutarch reserves his true reason till last: which is, that in former
times Men went to consult at Delphos only about matters of the highest
consequence; as Wars, Building of Cities, interest of Kings and Commonwealths;
whereas now adays, says he, every ordinary Person runs thither to ask the
Oracle, If they shall Marry, If they shall buy a slave, If they shall thrive by
their Trade; and when a City sends thither, it is only to enquire, whether their
Lands will yield a good Crop, or their Cattle increase. These questions deserve
not the trouble of an answer in Verse, for if Apollo should take that pains, he
would be like those Sophisters, who labor mightily to show their learning,
when there is no proper occasion for it.

But now I come to that which was the most effectual cause of the ruin of
Oracles. The Romans made themselves Masters of all Greece, and those Kingdoms
founded by Alexander's Successors: and as soon as the Grecians had submitted to
the Roman Yoke, from which they had no hopes of being ever free, they were no
longer agitated with the continual divisions and quarrels which had wont to
harass those petty States, whose interests were so mightily embroiled; for
their common Masters made 'em all quiet, and peace was the product of their
slavery. And I think, the Greeks had never happy days till then; for they lived
in a profound tranquillity, and in perfect ease; they passed their time in their
places of exercise, in their Theaters, and in their Schools of Philosophy. They
had public sports, Comedies, Disputations and Harangues; and for Men of their
Genius, what could be desired more? But all this afforded little business for
Oracles, and there was very seldom any occasion to importune the Delphian God.
And it is very easy to imagine, that the Priests would not give themselves the
trouble of answering in Verse, when they found their trade fell off, and the
profit of it was not worth the while.

And as the Romans did the Oracles some prejudice by the peace which they
established in Greece, so they did them more by the slight esteem which they
had of 'em themselves: for their folly did not lie that way; they addicted
themselves only to the Books of the Sibylls and to the Tuscan Divinations,
which were performed by the observations of the flights of Birds and the
entrails of Sacrificed Beasts. Now the maxims and opinions of the Victors,
easily obtain amongst the Conquered: and therefore it is no wonder that
Oracles, being a Greek invention, should follow the fate of Greece; and that as
with her they flourished in prosperity, so with her they lost their Ancient
Glory.

But for all this, we must acknowledge, that there were some Oracles in Italy.
Tiberius, as Suetonius says, went to the Oracle of Geryon near Padua; where
there was a certain Spring, if we will believe Claudian, which restored speech
to the Dumb and healed all sorts of Diseases. Suetonius says further, that
Tiberius had once a mind to destroy all the Oracles that were near Rome; but he
was prevented by the miracle of the Praenestine Lots, which, when they were
brought up to Rome in a Box well locked and sealed, were not to be found there;
but when the Box was carried back to Praeneste, then they were found in it
again.

To these Lots of Praeneste and those of Antium, we must add the Lots of the
Statius.
Temple of Hercules which was at Tibur.

Pliny the Younger thus describes the Oracle of Clitumnus the God of a certain
River in Vmbria: The Temple is Ancient and much revered; in it stands Clitumnus
in a Roman habit, and his Lots manifest his Presence and the power of his
Divinity. Round about it, there are several little Chapels, in some of which
there are fountains and Springs: for Clitumnus is, as it were, the father of
many other little Rivers which join with its Streams. There is a Bridge which
separates the Sacred part of these Waters from the profane. Above this Bridge
Men may only go in Boats; but below it they may bathe themselves in the River.
This is the only River of my acquaintance that was Oracular, for they had other
business to do than to turn Fortune Tellers.

But there were Oracles at Rome it self. Had not Aesculapius one in his Temple
which stood in an Island in the River Tibur? There has been found at Rome a
piece of a Marble Table, wherein the Miracles of Aesculapius are engraven in
Greek. One of the most considerable of which, is this that follows, translated
word for word from the Inscription. At the same time the Oracle made this
answer to a Blind Man Named Caius. He was bid go to the Sacred Altar, and kneel
down and Worship there; then to go from the Right side to the Left, and lay his
five fingers upon the Altar, and afterward clap his hand upon his Eyes. After
all this was done, the Blind Man was restored to his Sight, as all the People
were Witnesses, and testified the joy which they received in seeing such mighty
wonders wrought in the Reign of our Emperor Antoninus. The two other Cures are
less miraculous; for one was of a Pleurisy and the other of a loss of Blood;
(both of 'em very desperate Diseases without doubt,) but the God prescribed to
the Sick Persons some Pine Apples and Honey with Wine and certain Ashes; which
were things that those Men who are something incredulous, will be apt to say
are merely natural remedies.

These Inscriptions, for all that they are in Greek, were certainly done at
Rome; for the form of the Letters and the spelling, do not at all seem to be
from the hand of some Grecian Sculptor. Besides, though it be true, that the
Romans made their Inscriptions in Latin, yet they made some few in Greek,
especially when they had some particular reason for it. Now it is very
probable, that no other language but Greek was used in the Temple of
Aesculapius, because he was originally a Grecian God, and brought to Rome in
that great plague, of which every one knows the Story.

Thus we see that the Oracle of Aesculapius was not of a Roman institution: and
I doubt not, but that if it were an enquiry worth the while, most of the
Italian Oracles would be found to be of a Greek Original.

However it be, the smalness of the number of the Italian Oracles, and even of
those that were at Rome it self, makes but a very inconsiderable exception to
the generality of the notion which we propose. Aesculapius dealt only in
Physic, and concerned not himself in matters of Government: and though he had a
rare knack at making Blind Men see, yet I believe the Senate would have been
loath to have depended upon his advice in a case even of the smallest
importance. Private persons amongst the Romans might give what credit they
listed to Oracles; but the State had little faith in them. Thus the Sibylls
Books and the entrails of Beasts governed all. And so a vast number of Gods
fell into contempt, when People took notice that the Masters of the World would
not vouchsafe to consult 'em.

CHAP. VI. The second particular cause of the Cessation of Oracles.
BUT I meet with a difficulty in this business, that I will not conceal. For if
about the time of Pyrrhus, Apollo was reduced to Prose, this implies that
Oracles began then to grow into discredit, and yet the Romans were not masters
of Greece till a long time after Pyrrhus; and between the Reign of Pyrrhus and
the Romans conquest of Greece, there were as many Wars and Commotions in that
Country as ever, and by consequence as many important subjects to consult the
God of Delphos about.

This indeed is true; but we must also observe that about the time of Alexander
the Great, a little before Pyrrhus's days, there appeared in Greece certain
great Sects of Philosophers, such as the Peripateticks and Epicureans, who made
a mock of Oracles. The Epicureans especially made sport with the paltry Poetry
that came from Delphos. For the Priests hammered out their Verses as well as
they could, and they oftentimes committed faults against the common Rules of
Prosodia. Now those Fleering Philosophers were mightily concerned that Apollo,
the very God of Poetry, should come so far behind Homer, who was but a mere
mortal, and was beholding to the same Apollo for his inspirations.

It was to little purpose to excuse the matter, by saying, that the badness of
the Verses was a kind of Testimony that they were made by a God, who nobly
scorned to be tied up to rules and to be confined to the Beauty of a Style. For
this made no impression upon the Philosophers; who, to turn this answer into
ridicule, compared it to the Story of a Painter, who being hired to draw the
Picture of a Horse tumbling on his Back upon the ground, drew one running full
speed: and when he was told, that this was not such a Picture as was bespoke,
he turned it upside down, and then asked if the Horse did not tumble upon his
back now. Thus these Philosophers jeered such Persons, who by a way of arguing
that would serve both ways, could equally prove that the Verses were made by a
God, whether they were good or bad.

So that at length the Priests of Delphos being quite baffled with the
railleries of those learned Wits, renounced all Verses, at least as to the
speaking them from the Tripos; for there were still some Poets maintained in
the Temple, who at leisure turned into Verse, what the Divine fury had inspired
the Pythian Priestess withal in Prose. It was very pretty, that Men could not
be contented to take the Oracle just as it came piping hot from the Mouth of
their God. But perhaps, when they had come a great way for it, they thought it
would look silly to carry home an Oracle in Prose.

Nay the Gods, being willing to keep up the use of Verses as long as ever they
could, did now and then stoop to borrow a line or two out of Homer; whose
Poetry, it seems, was better than their own. Of this there are abundance of
Examples; but, both this borrowing of Verses, and keeping Poets at standing
wages in their Temples, may well pass for good arguments that the old natural
Poetry of Oracles had mightily lost its reputation.

But these great Sects of Philosophers, enemies to Oracles, must needs have
done them a more essential prejudice than the bare reducing them to Prose. For
questionless they opened the eyes of a great many rational persons, and even
amongst the populace they made the infallibility of those things lie under more
suspicion than it had done before. For when Oracles first crept out into the
World, Philosophy had not yet appeared.

CHAP. VII. The last particular causes of the Cessation of Oracles.
THE cheats of Oracles were so gross, that at last they were discovered by a
thousand several accidents. I suppose that Oracles were at first entertained
with greediness and joy, because that nothing could be more convenient than to
have Gods always ready at hand to answer every question that might be suggested
by uneasiness or curiosity: and I fancy that it was with a great deal of
reluctance that People parted with this supposed convenience; and that Oracles
would never have come to an end as long as Heathenism lasted, if they had not
been the most impertinent things in the World. But at last Men were forced to
yield to their own experiences and suffer themselves to be disabused.

To this the Priests gave no small help by the extreme Impudence, which they
used in the Exercise of their false Ministry; for they thought that things were
brought to such a Point, that there was no occasion for any Circumspection.

I say nothing of the Waggishness of the Oracles, which they sometimes
delivered: For Example, Athenaeus.
To a Man that came to ask of the Deity, What he should do to grow rich, he
answered very pleasantly, That he need do no more than get all the Land between
Sycione and Corinth. And sometimes the Consulter would make free with the God.
Polemon, sleeping in the Temple of Aesculapius, to learn of him how to cure his
Gout, the God appeared to him and told him: That he must abstain from cold
Drink. Polemon replied, you would be puzzled then, my good Friend, if you were
consulted about an Ox? But these were but the gayeties and frolicks of the
Priests, who would sometimes both give and take a Jest.

But it was still more remarkable, that the Gods never failed to fall in Love
with the fair Ladies; for they must come and pass away the Nights in their
Temples, tricked up for the purpose by their own Husbands, and furnished with
Presents to make the God amends for his pains. It Is not to be doubted, but that
the Doors of the Temple were shut up in the sight of the whole World, but who
could secure the Husbands against the Passages under Ground.

For my Part, I do not question, but such Intrigues were often practiced. And
Herodotus writes, that in the eighth and uppermost Story of that lofty Tower
belonging to the Temple of Belus in Babylon, there was a Magnificent Bed, where
there lay every Night a pretty Woman selected by the God. The like was done at
Thebes in Egypt: And when the Priestess of the Oracle of Patara in Lycia was to
prophecy, she must first take a Nights Lodging all alone in the Temple,
whither Apollo came (forsooth) to inspire her.

All these things were practiced during the darkest Mists of Paganism, and in
times when Heathen Ceremonies were not to be contradicted; but in the view of
the very Christians themselves Saturn of Alexandria had such Women brought in
the Night to his Temple, as he thought fit to choose by the Mouth of his Priest
Tyrannus. Many Women had received this Honor with a great deal of devout
Respect, and none of them made any Complaints of Saturn, though he was the
Oldest and the least a Gallant of all the Gods. But at last there was one, who
having had her Nights lodging in the Temple, considered with her self, that
nothing had passed there, but what mortal Man was capable of performing, and
Tyrannus could have done himself: And so she acquainted her Husband with her
Suspicion, who hereupon accused Tyrannus. The unhappy Priest confessed all; and
the Lord knows what a scandal this gave to the Inhabitants of Alexandria.

Thus the Wickedness of the Priests, their Insolence, and several Chances that
had discovered their Cheats, and the Obscurity, Uncertainty and Falseness of
their Answers would at last have quite ruined the Reputation of Oracles, and
entirely abolished them, even if Heathenism had not been come to a Period. But
the thing became more unavoidable by the Addition of other Foreign Reasons:
Such as first the Raillery of the Grecian Philosophers, then the little use the
Romans had always of them, and last of all the Christians utter detestation of
them, and putting a full end to them and Paganism together.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
The First Discourse. That Oracles were not delivered by Demons, Page 5.
Chap. 1. THE first Reason why the Primitive Christians believed that Oracles
were delivered by Demons, and the surprising Histories that were published
concerning Oracles and Genii. Page 7 Chap. 2. The second Reason why the
Primitive Christians believed, that Oracles were supernatural, and the
Agreement of this Opinion with the System of Christianity. p. 13 Chap. 3. The
third Reason of the Primitive Christians, taken from the Agreement of their
Opinion with the Philosophy of Plato. p. 15 Chap. 4. That the surprising
Histories of Oracles ought to be suspected. p. 20 Chap. 5. That the common
Opinion concerning Oracles does not agree so well as it is imagined with the
Christian Religion. p. 38. Chap. 6. That Demons are not sufficiently
established by Paganism. p. 46. Chap. 7. That some Grand Sects of the Pagan
Philosophers, did not believe there was any thing supernatural in Oracles. p.
53 Chap. 8. That other Men besides Philosophers have had little Esteem for
Oracles. p. 66 Chap. 9 That the ancient Christians themselves did not very
firmly believe that Oracles were delivered by Demons. p. 78 Chap. 10. That
Oracles were corrupted by Bribery. p. 85 Chap. 11. Of the Erection of new
Oracles. p. 93 Chap. 12. Of the Places where Oracles were. p. 101 Chap. 13. Of
the Distinctions of Days, and other Mysteries of Oracles. p. 110 Chap. 14. Of
Oracles that were delivered in Answer to Sealed Letters. p. 119 Chap. 15. Of
Oracles delivered in Dreams. p. 126 Chap. 16. Of the Ambiguity of Oracles. p.
134 Chap. 17. The Cheats of Oracles manifestly discovered. p. 140 Chap. 18. Of
Lots. p. 143
THE CONTENTS.
The Second Discourse. That Oracles did not cease at the coming of Jesus
Christ. Page 151.
Chap. 1. THE Weakness of those Reasons upon which the Opinion, that Oracles
ceased at the coming of Jesus Christ, is founded. Page 152 Chap. 2. Why the
Ancient Authors contradicted each other, very often, about the time of the
Cessation of Oracles. p. 163. Chap. 3. The History of the Duration of the
Oracle of Delphos, and some other Oracles. p. 167 Chap. 4. That Oracles for the
most part were abolished, at the same time with Heathenism. p. 180. Chap. 5.
That if Heathenism had not been abolished, yet Oracles would have ceased; and
the first particular Reason hereof. p. 205 Chap. 6. The second particular Cause
of the Cessation of Oracles. p. 218 Chap. 7. The last particular Causes of the
Cessation of Oracles. p. 223
FINIS.

