A DISCOURSE OF THE Plurality of Worlds.

Written in FRENCH, BY THE Most ingenious Author OF THE Dialogues of the Dead.

AND Translated into English BY Sir W. D. Knight.

DVBLIN, Printed by Andr. Crook and Sam. Helsham for William Norman Book-binder
to His Grace the Duke of Ormond. 16^^

TO William Molyneux Esquire
THe following Discourse I received from you in French; I will not put such a
Construction as I might upon your sending me the Entertainments of a Man in the
Dark, or at best but in Moonlight; I will only say, that as they were his
Diversion in the Country, so I made them mine. But when I considered his
Chimerical Design (let us suppose it such) of enlarging the French Monarchy
beyond the Moon, (for all Discoverys of the Subject belong to the Sovereign;) I
grew jealous of the Attempt, and concerned for the Honor of our Nation, we
have hitherto outdone the French by the Progress of our Arms in this World, why
should we fall short of them in our Discovery of others, when a Chimera will do
the business. I have therefore rectified his French Telescope the best I could
for the use of an English Eye, and recommend it first to yours as the best
Judge, that I know, of what may be performed by Optics. I was once inclined
(there being a Woman concerned in the Discourse) to have addressed it to the
Fair ones of that Sex; but when I considered, that they themselves make up the
glorious number of those Planets that influence and adorn our Globe, and that
it is the great Business of Mankind to discover their Vortices, I declined that
thought, and concluded it a Work more proper for Men. I therefore continue my
Address to you, wishing you good Success in all Discoveries of this kind, and
for my own share, oontent my self with the opportunity of discovering to our
little World the Esteem I have for you.

Yours W. D.

TO THE BOOKSELLER.
I Here recommend to your Press the following Discourse, assuring you, that I
think it worthy to appear abroad in the English Garb given it by the Ingenious
Translator. The Dialogues of the Dead that proceeded from the same French
Author were well received in the English Tongue; and how far the present
Treatise surpasses those both for Ingenuity and pleasant Fancy, will be evident
to all knowing Readers, particularly the Female Sex, that desire to become
Philosophers, and acquainted in the World they live in, must needs take great
satisfaction in these Entertainments, which indeed were chiefly designed for
their Diversion and Instruction; and therefore an ingenious Marchioness is
introduced as chiefly engaged in these Contemplations; which are delivered not
with the severe Air of Philosophy, but so interspersed with pleasant
Illustrations, and facetious instructive Remarks, that certainly he that once
sets upon them, will hardly lay the Book aside till he has run quite through
them, the whole is so very charming. How proper and apposite to the Original
the present Translation is, will appear to any one skilled in both Languages
that will compare them together; I think indeed it is as natural and agreeable
as can be.

W. M.

THE Authors Preface.
THe Case is almost the same with me as it was with Cicero, when he attempted
to discourse of Philosophy in Latin, which till then had been only treated of
in Greek He tells us, that 'twas said his Work would be in vain; for the Lovers
of Philosophy, who had taken pains in their inquiries into Greek Authors, would
not care much for it in the Latin, as not being the Original; and those who
affected not Philosophy, would esteem it alike either in Latin or Greek. To
which he answers, that it would happen quite otherwise; that those who were not
Philosophers would be invited to be so by the facility of reading Latin
Authors; and those who were such already by their study of Greek Authors, would
be well pleased to see how those things were treated of in Latin.

Cicero was in the right, the Excellency of his Genius, and the great
Reputation he had already acquired, did assure him of success in publishing
that new sort of Work. But for me, I am very far from the like cause of
confidence, though in an attempt much alike. My design is to treat of
Philosophy in a manner not Philosophical, and in a Style not too Stoical for
the airy people of the world, nor too light for the learned. But if it be
objected to me, as it was to Cicero, that such a Work will benefit neither the
learned, who will learn nothing by it, nor the people of the world, who will
not care to be taught by it, I shall not answer as he did; for it may happen
that in seeking a medium, whereby Philosophy may be made agreeable to all, I
may have found one that may render her agreeable to none, it is hard to keep a
medium, and I believe I shall hardly ever give my self the like trouble a
second time.

If this Book happen to be read, I advertise those who have already any
knowledge in Natural Philosophy, that I pretend not to instruct but to divert
them, by presenting them their solid knowledge in a more gay and delightful
dress; and I advertise those who are strangers to these kind of Notions, that I
believe I might instruct and divert them both together. The former will act
contrary to my design if they expect any benefit, and the later if they look
for any thing but diversion.

I shall not amuse my self, to say, that I made choice of a piece of Philosophy
the most capable of any to invite Curiosity. A man would think that we should
make nothing more our interest then to know how the World that we inhabit is
made, and whether there be other Worlds like it, and inhabited as it is. But
after all, let them trouble their heads that will about that; I am well
assured, that none will trouble themselves about it, to do me a kindness in
reading my Book. Such as have thoughts to throw away, may throw them away upon
such Subjects as this; but it is not indeed every one that is in a condition to
bear so unprofitable an expense.

I have introduced into these Entertainments a Woman that is to be instructed,
and who never heard speak of such things as these: I was of opinion that the
Fiction might stand me in good stead, and might render the Work more capable of
pleasing, and might encourage Ladys, by the example of a Woman, who having
nothing at all of a supernatural Character, nor exceeding the bounds of a
person wholly illiterate, yet understands well what is said to her, and digests
the Worlds and Vortices in her head without confusion. Why should there be any
Woman inferior to this imaginary Marchioness, who only apprehends what she
cannot dispense with, but must of necessity apprehend?

True it is, the Marchioness applys her self a little, but what is that
applying her self? it is not a penetrating by force of Imagination a thing that
is either obscure in it self, or obscurely explained; it is only a not reading
without apprehending what is read, and forming an Idea of it that is infallibly
clear. I require from the Ladys no more application for this System of
Philosophy, than they would allow to the Romance of the Princess of Cleves, if
they would follow the Intrigue well, and discover the whole Beauty of it. It Is
true, the Idea's of this Book are less familiar to most Women, than those of
the Princess of Cleves, but they are not more obscure,; they need think but
twice and hit right.

As I do not pretend to form a System in the Air, without any foundation; so I
have made use of real Arguments of Natural Philosophy, and have made use of as
much as was necessary; but it falls out well likewise in this Subject, that the
Idea's of Natural Philosophy are pleasant in themselves, and at the same time
that they content the Reason, they give the Imagination a prospect that
delights it, as well as if it had been made expressly for it. When I meet a
piece that is not altogether of the same Stuff, I set it out with foreign
Ornaments. It Is Virgils way in the Georgicks, where he improves the ground of
his Subject, which was dry enough, by frequent digressions which are often very
delightful. Ovid does the same in his De Art Amandi, though his Subject be
infinitely more agreeable than any thing that he could intermix. It Is certain,
he thought it tedious to discourse still of the same thing, though it were of
Gallantry. For my own share, I, who had more need of the assistance of
digressions than he, have been sparing enough of them, I have authorized them
by the natural liberty of Conversation, I use them only there where I believed
it would be satisfactory to find them, I have place'd the most of them in the
beginning of the Work; because then the Mind was not well settled to the
principal Idea's that I offer it. In fine, I have taken them from the Subject
it self, or very near it.

I have not imagined any thing of the Inhabitants of the Worlds, that is wholly
fabulous, but have endeavored to say all that might be reasonably thought of
them, and the Fancies themselves that I have added, have something of a real
foundation: true and false are intermixed, but still well enough distinguished.
I do not at all undertake to justify a Composition so extravagant; and it is
that that is the most important concern of this Work, and of which I cannot
render a just Account. The publik will teach me what I ought to believe of my
Design.

I have no more to say in this Preface, but to one sort of people, and possibly
the most difficult to be pleased; not but that good Reasons may be given them,
but because good Reasons will not satisfy them, unless they please. They are
those scrupulous sort of people who think it dangerous in respect of Religion,
to place Inhabitants any where but upon the Earth. I respect even the greatest
nicety that any one can entertain in the matter of Religion, and I should have
observed so much respect to Religion it self, as not to justle it in public,
if I found it contrary to my Opinion. But, which may possibly surprise you,
Religion is not at all concerned in this System, where I people an infinity of
Worlds; it is only to disingage your self from a little error of imagination.
When you are told that the Moon is inhabited, you presently represent to your
self men made like us, and then, if you are a Divine, you are full of
difficulties. The Posterity of Adam could not spread as far as the Moon, nor
send Colonys to those Countries, then the men of the Moon are not the Sons of
Adam; this is the thing that will puzzle the Divines, that there should be men
not descended from Adam. No more need be said of it, all the difficulties
imaginable are reduced to this, and the terms that ought to be used in a longer
explication, merit too much respect to be inserted in a Book so little serious
as this. Possibly I might answer your Objection solidly enough, would I
undertake it, but it is most certain I need not: it aims wholly at the Men of
the Moon, but it is you that place them there, not I; the Inhabitants I place
there are not Men at all. What are they then? Truly I never saw them, nor is it
because I ever saw them that I speak of them: nor would I have you suspect it
an Evasion to elude your Objection, when I say there are no men in the Moon.
You will see your self that it is impossible there should be, according to my
Idea of the infinite diversity in the works of Nature. This Idea reigns in the
whole Book, and cannot be disputed by any Philosopher. Nor indeed do I believe
I shall find this Objection started by any but such as may censure these
Discourses without having read them. But ought I from hence to think my self
secure? on the contrary I have reason to fear the Objection will be made many
ways beside.

ADVERTISEMENT Concerning the ERRATA.
THere are but two considerable Errors that corrupt the Sense, the first, Page
6. line 20. read rather then leave a vacuity, etc. the other, page 41. l. 23.
read from the moment that we have found an interior motion in the parts of the
Moon, or produced by foreign causes, etc. The following Errors are but literal,
and may be helped by the Pen; page 1. l. 19. there for then, p. 19. l. 29. dele
tle, ib. l. 30. lit for little, p. 25. l. 35. dele much, p. 30. l. 22. profer'd
for preferred. p. 31. l. 19. dele that, ib. l. 34. add my, p. 40. l. 24. dele
that, p. 48. l. 31. Cicon for Ciron.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Plurality of Worlds.
SIR,
YOU desire an exact account from me, how I spent my time in the Country with
the Marchioness de G. but you little think that that exact Account will amount
to a Book, and what is worse, a Book of Philosophy. You may possibly expect to
hear of nothing but Feasting, Gaming and Hunting, instead of which you will
find Planets, Worlds and Vortices; for we had little to do with any thing else.
Happy it is that you are a Philosopher, and therefore will not so soon deride
us as another; nay possibly you will be well satisfied, that I have drawn the
Marchioness into the Faction. I always indeed esteemed Youth and Beauty to be
things of so great value, that I think we could not well make a more
considerable purchase. Do not you think that if Wisdom her self had a design to
address her self to mortals with success, she would do well to take upon her,
as near as she could, the shape of the Marchioness? and above all, could she
but there appear as pleasing in her Conversation, most certain it is, that all
the world would make court to Wisdom. Do not expect Miracles in the Recital of
my Entertainment with that Lady; for it will require such a Wit as hers to
repeat what she said, in the same manner she expressed it. For my own part, I
take her to be learned, because of that great facility I find in her of being
so; wherein is she defective? Is it that she has not por'd much on Books? Alas,
it is nothing; many have done so all their life long, to whom yet, if I durst, I
would not allow the name of learned. As to the rest, Sir, I shall oblige you. I
know, before I enter upon the particulars of the Conversation I had with the
Marchioness, I ought to give you some description of the Castle, where that
Lady retired to pass the Autumn, (Castles have been described upon less
occasion) but you will excuse me that. It may suffice, that at my arrival
there, I found her alone, and was well pleased at it. The two first days
nothing remarkable past, they were spent in inquirys of News from Paris, from
whence I came; afterward followed the Entertainments whereof I am to give you
an Account. I shall divide them into Evenings, because indeed it was only in
the Evening that we entertained those Discourses.

The First Evening.
'TWas then in the Evening, after Supper, that we took a walk into the Park;
the Air was delicate and fresh, which made amends for the heat of the day. I
find I am falling into a Description, and I cannot well avoid it, the Subject
leads me naturally to it. The Moon was about an hour high, and her beams, which
came to us through the branches of the trees, made a pleasing mixture of a
lively white, with all that green which then appeared black; not one Cloud
appeared to rob us of, or obscure, the least Star; they were all of Gold, pure
and bright, and the appearance was yet heightened by the azure ground, in which
they were set. The prospect set me a musing, and perhaps without the
Marchioness I had long continued so, but the presence of so fair a Lady
withdrew my Admiration from the Moon and Stars. Do not you find, said I to her,
that the day it self is not so beautiful as a clear night? It Is true, said she,
the beauty of the day is like a fair Beauty that sparkles more; but the beauty
of the night is a black beauty, that has more of charm. You are very generous,
said I, to allow that advantage to the black, who have so little of it in your
self; yet it is true, that the day is the most beautiful thing in Nature, and
the Heroines of Romances, who are the greatest Beauties we can imagine, are
ever represented fair. That Is no Beauty, says she, unless it charm; you must
confess that the day never put you into so sweet a Contemplation, as you were
now fallen into at the prospect of this so bright a night. I grant you that,
said I; but yet so fair a Creature as you, would put me in a deeper
contemplation, than all the dark beauties of the most glorious night. Were that
true, said she, I should not be satisfied: I would have the day, since the fair
are concerned in it, to have the same effect. Why is it that Lovers, who are
good Judges of what is charming, ever, in all their Songs and Elegys that I
have met with, address themselves to the Night? It Is doubtless, said I; because
it most obliges them. But, says she, it has likewise all their Complaints; the
Day shares not at all in their Confidence: from whence should this proceed?
Because, said I, it is certain it creates not that unexpressable sort of sadness
and passion. In the Night all things seem in repose, we fancy the Stars more
silent in their motion than the Sun, the objects of Heaven are more pleasing,
and entertain the Eye with less trouble; and in fine, we are such fools that we
can muse better on them; because we flatter our selves that we are then the
only persons in nature that are so employed. Possibly likewise there is too
much uniformity in the prospect of the Day, it is all but one Sun, one blue
Arch, but the prospect of the Stars confusedly set, and disposed at randon in a
thousand different figures, indulges our Contemplation, and creates a certain
pleasing disorder in our thoughts. I have ever found, says she, what you tell
me; I love the Stars, and complain heartily of the Sun that robs us of them.
Oh! cried I, I cannot forgive him when he takes from me the sight of so many
Worlds. How, (says she, looking on me, and turning toward me) do you call all
those Worlds? I ask your pardon, said I, you have brought me into my folly, and
I as soon discovered it. Pray, says she, what folly is that? Faith, said I, I
find my self necessitated to acknowledge it to you, and it is this; I have had a
fancy that every Star may possibly be a World. I will not swear it is true, but
that is my opinion, because I find pleasure in believing it: It Is an Idea that
tickles, and has with delight taken possession of my thoughts; and truly, in my
opinion, delight is not amiss even in Truth it self. Well, says she, since your
Folly is so delightful, pray let me have a share in it, I Will believe what you
please of the Stars, provided I find pleasure in it. Ah! Madam, said I, it is
not a pleasure like that which you find in a Comedy of Moliere; it is a
pleasure, I know not where, in the reason, and delights only the Mind. And
pray, says she, do you think me incapable of pleasures that are only in the
Reason; bring me acquainted with your Stars, and you shall presently see the
contrary. No, said I, it shall never be laid to my charge, that in a Grove, at
ten of clock at night, I entertained the most lovely person in the World with
nothing but Philosophy, look out for such Philosophers elsewhere.

I defended my self in this manner for a time, but was forced to yield; at
least I made her promise, that for my Reputation sake she would keep my secret.
When I thus found my self so far engaged that I could not retreat, and had a
mind to speak, I knew not whence to begin my Discourse; for with such a person
that knew nothing of Natural Philosophy, it was requisite to go far about to
make her apprehend that the Earth might be a Planet, and every Star a World. So
that I e'n told her again, it were much better to talk of trifles, as every
reasonable person, were they in our place, would do. But at last, to give her a
general Notion of Philosophy, I began with her thus. All Philosophy, said I, is
grounded on these two things, the Curiosity of our Minds, and the Shortness of
our Sight: For if you could see better than you do, you would discern whether
those Stars are Worlds or not Worlds, and on the other hand, if you were less
curious, you would not care two pence to know whether they were so or not: but
we are willing to know more than we can see, and there is the difficulty. Again,
if we could rightly discern what we see, we might be said to be so far knowing;
but the mischief is, we see things otherways than they really are; so that true
Philosophers spend their days in not believing what they see, and in studying
to divine of what they see not, a condition, in my opinion, not much to be
envyed. From hence I frame an Idea to my self, that Nature is but a great show,
resembling that of an Opera; from the place where you are seated at an Opera,
you see not the Theater such as it really is; it is disposed to give a
delightful prospect at a distance, and all the Wheels and Weights that cause
the movements are not in view: nor do you much concern your self to know how
all is performed. Some Machinist might possibly lurk in the Pit, who would beat
his brains about a Turn that seemed extraordinary, and would venture absolutely
to unriddle the whole contrivance of it, and this Machinist you may well
resemble to the Philosophers; but that which among Philosophers augments the
difficulty is, that in the Machines which Nature offers to our view, the Cords
are so wholly and entirely abscond, that it has been the study of many days to
resolve, from whence proceed the motions of the Universe: For imagine with your
self all those Sages at an Opera, those Pythagorases Plato's, Aristotle's; and
all that learned crew, that at this day make so great a noise in the World,
that they were Spectators of the flight of Phaeton, born upon the Wings of the
Wind, and that they could not discover the Cords, nor know any thing how the
back part of the Theater was disposed: One of them would say; It Is some occult
quality that bears up Phaeton. Another, Phaeton is composed of certain Numbers
that make him mount. Another, Phaeton has a certain natural Propensity to the
top of the Theater, he is not at rest unless he be there. Another, Phaeton is
not made to fly, but he had rather fly than a vacuity in the top of the
Theater, and a thousand other extravagancies, that I admire have not blasted
the Reputation of Antiquity: at last comes Descartes and some other of later
days, who say, that Phaeton mounts, because he is drawn by Cords, and that a
Weight more heavy than he descends. So that it is no longer believed that a body
moves, unless it be by impulse from another body, and as it were drawn by
Cords; nor that it ascends or descends, but by some counterpoise or spring; and
he that would see Nature such as really she is, ought to look behind the
Theater. By this Account, says the Marchioness, Philosophy is become very
mechanique. So mechanique, said I, that I fear we shall e're long be ashamed of
it. Some will have it, that the Universe is in great, that which a Watch is in
little, and that all is wrought by regular movements that depend upon the
disposal of the several parts. Now confess the truth, have not you sometimes
had Notions of the Universe more sublime than this? and have you not done it
more honor than it deserved? I have met with some, who after knowing it
esteemed it less. And I, says the Marchioness, esteem it much more, since I
find it resembled to a Watch. It Is a thing to me most surprising, that the
Order of Nature, so admirable as it is, should depend upon things so simple. I
know not, said I, where you met with Notions so sound, but I assure you they
are not common; We shall daily meet with people that have in their heads a
false kind of Wonder involved in Clouds which they respect; they admire Nature
only because they believe it a kind of Magic, where nothing is understood: and
it is most certain, that whatsoever is once comprehended, is with them presently
disrespected. But, Madam said I, I find you so well disposed to enter upon what
I am about to discourse to you, that I think I need do no more than draw the
Curtain, and show you the World.

From this Earth where we are, that which we behold at the greatest distance,
is that Blue Sky, that great Arch where the Stars are set like so many nails,
they are called Fixed because they seem not to have any other motion than that
of Heaven which wheels them along with it from East to West. Between the Earth
and that Extremest Arch of the Heavens, are hung at different heights the Sun,
Moon and five other Stars which are called Planets. Mercury, Venus, Mars,
Jupiter, and Saturn. These Planets not being set in one and the same Heaven and
having unequal motions, have different regards and Aspects one toward the
other, whereas the fixed Stars have ever in respect of one another, the same
Situation. The Waign, for example, which you see is formed of those seven
Stars, has ever been and ever shall be the same it is, but the Moon is sometime
nearer, sometime farther off from the Sun so it is like wise with the other
Planets. Thus things appeared to those ancient Shepherds of Chaldea, whose
great leisure gave them the first observations, which have been the foundation
of Astronomy, for Astronomy was born in Chaldea, as Geometry was in Egypt,
where the Inundations of Nile confounding the bounds and limits of all their
Fields, was the cause that every one invented just measures to lay out his own
Field from his Neighbors. So that Astronomy derives it self from Idleness, and
Geometry from Interest, and if we make the like inquiry into Poetry, we shall
find it draws its Original from Love.

I am very well satisfied, said the Marchioness, that I have learned this
Geneology of the Sciences and I find I must keep close to Astronomy, Geometry
and Poetry, according to what you say, will require the one a more interested,
and the other a more tender soul than mine is, but I have all the leisure that
is requisite in Astronomy, and happy it is likewise that we are in the country,
where we lead a kind of Pastoral life agreeable to that study. Do not deceive
your self, Madam, said I, that is not the true pastoral life, to discourse of
Planets and fixed Stars. Do you find that the People of Astrea past their time
that way? Oh! says she, that sort of Shepherdise is too dangerous: I rather
fancy that of the Chaldeans; pray, if you please, begin and speak Chaldee to
me. When that Order and Disposition of the Heavens, which you tell me of, is
known, where is the Question? The Question is, said I, to find how all the parts
of the Universe ought to be ranged; and that is it which the Learned call
framing of a System. But before I explain to you the first System, you must
take notice, if you please, that naturally we are all like that Fool of Athens,
whom you have heard spoke of, who had a fancy that all the Ships in the Port of
Pireum were his. It Is just so our folly to persuade our selves that all Nature
was designed for our use, and when we ask our Philosophers, to what end is all
that prodigious number of fixed Stars, when a few would suffice to perform the
office of all? they will answer jejunely, that they are to delight the Eye. Upon
this principle it was believed, that the Earth rests quiet in the center of the
Universe, while all the celestial bodies, which were made for it, take the
pains to roll about and inlighten it. 'Twas then next above the the Earth that
they placed the Moon, above the Moon Mercury; next Venus, the Sun, Mars,
Jupiter and Saturn, and above all these the Orb of the fixed Stars. The Earth
was seated just in the middle of these Circles described by the Planets, and
the greater those Circles were, the more distant they were from the Earth, and
consequently the most distant Planets employed more time in performing their
Course, which is in effect true. But I know not, said the Marchioness,
interrupting me, why you should not approve of that Order of the Universe, to
me it seems as decent as intelligible; and for my own share, I declare I am
well satisfied with it. I can boast, said I, that I have much qualified that
whole System; for should I have represented it to you, such as it was at first
framed by Ptolomy the Author, it would have astonished you. The motions of the
Planets being not so regular, but that they went sometime faster, sometime
slower, sometime to one side, sometime to another, sometime farther off,
sometime near the Earth; the Ancients imagined a strange Labyrinth of Circles
to salve those extravagant Appearances. So great was the intricacy of those
Circles, that then when men knew no better, it was said by a King of Arragon, a
great Mathematician, but something irreligious, That if he had been of God
Almightys Council when he made the World, he would have advised him better.
'Twas the expression of a Libertine; but pleasant enough, that at that time the
great confusion of that System was the occasion of a sin. The Advice the King
would have given was doubtless the suppressing of all those Circles that had
caused so much intricacy in the celestial motions; and it is most certain, he
meant the same likewise of those three superfluous Heavens that are placed
beyond the fixed Stars. The Philosophers, to explicate one sort of motion of
the celestial bodies, framed, beyond the utmost Heaven that we see, a Heaven of
Crystal, which gave the first impulse of motion to the inferior Orbs. If they
discovered any thing of another motion, they had presently another Crystalline
Heaven ready at hand; for Heavens of Crystal in those days cost them little or
nothing. But why, said the Marchioness, did they still make them of Crystal?
Would not some other material have done as well? By no means, said I, it was
requisite they should be transparent, to give way to the passage of Light, and
it was absolutely necessary they should be solid; for Aristotle had found that
Solidity was a thing affixed to the Nobility of their Nature; and when he once
said it, it was no longer to be doubted. But since Comets have been observed to
rise higher than heretofore it was believed, it was feared that in their
passage they might hazard the cracking of those Crystalline Heavens, and break
the World about our ears: therefore it has been thought more convenient to make
them of a more fluid matter. In fine, it is now a thing undoubted by the
Observations of later Ages, that Venus and Mercury move about the Sun, and not
about the Earth, and that the ancient System is not at all tenable. But I am
now going to propose another to you, which will satisfy in all points, and save
the King of Arragon the trouble of his Advice; it is of a most charming
simplicity, which alone ought to give it the preference. I see, says the
Marchioness, that Philosophy is a kind of Chaffering, where they that ask
cheapest shall have your Work before another. It Is very true, said I, and
that is the only way to trace out the Works of Nature; she is hugely provident,
and whatever she can do in such a way as may cost her little or nothing, to be
sure she will do it that way, rather than another; yet this Providence agrees
well with a surprising Magnificence that is illustrious in all her actions;
that is, there is Magnificence in the Design, and a sparing Providence in the
Execution. There is nothing more commendable, than a great Design managed with
a little Charge; but we frame our Idea's wholly to the contrary, and place the
Frugality of Nature in the Design, and the Magnificence in the Execution; we
represent her carrying on a small inconsiderable Design, with ten times more
Charge than needs, which is ridiculous. I shall be very well pleased, said the
Marchioness, that the System you tell me of may be a perfect imitation of
Nature; for that Parcimony will be much in favor of my imagination, which will
have less trouble in comprehending what you tell me. You will there, said I,
meet with no unnecessary difficulties, represent only to your self a certain
German called Copernicus, who pulled down all those different Circles and solid
Heavens that were set up by Antiquity; he destroys the one, and breaks the
other in pieces, and, possessed with a noble Astronomical fury, he takes the
Earth and throws it out of the center of the World, where it had long been
fixed, and in the place of it puts the Sun, as much more deserving of that
Honor; the Planets turn no more about the Earth, nor circumscribe her in their
Circles; if they inlighten us, it is in a manner only by chance, and as we meet
them on the road. All turns now about the Sun, even the Earth it self, and to
chastise her for her long idle repose, Copernicus charges her as near as he can
with all those motions she before imposed upon the Planets and Heavens. And in
fine, of all that bright Equipage which attended and surrounded this little
spot of Earth, no more remains but the Moon which still rolls about her. Hold a
little, says the Marchioness, you are fallen into an Enthusiasm, and explain
things in so pompous a manner, that I know not whether I rightly understand
them. The Sun, you say, is in the Center of the World, and there remains
immovable; pray what follows next? It Is Mercury, says I, he turns about the
Sun, so that the Sun is the Center of that Circle described by Mercury. Above
Mercury is Venus, which likewise turns about the Sun. Next follows the Earth,
which being above Mercury and Venus, describes about the Sun a Circle greater
than theirs. Then follow Mars, Jupiter and Saturn in the order I have told you,
and you may perceive that Saturn ought to describe about the Sun the greatest
Circle of all, and he likewise is longer than any other Planet in performing
his Revolution. And what, says she, becomes of the Moon? you forget her. I Will
meet her again, said I, easy enough; she keeps close to the Earth, and forsakes
her not, but as the Earth advances daily in the Circle which she describes
about the Sun; the Moon follows in her daily course about the Earth; so that if
the Moon turn about the Sun, it is only because she will not forsake the Earth.

I understand you, says she, and I love the Moon that stays with us, when all
the rest of the Planets have forsaken us; but you must confess that if your
German could have robbed us of her too, he would have done it; for I find he had
no great kindness for the Earth. I know, says I, his design was to abate the
Vanity of men who had thrust themselves into the chief place of the Universe,
and I am very well pleased to see the Earth now in the common road of the other
Planets. Very well, says she, do you think the Vanity of men extends to
Astronomy? or that I am more troubled because I understand that the Earth moves
about the Sun? I profess, I do not at all esteem my self less. Madam, said I, I
know well that no man will be so scrupulous of taking place in the Universe, as
in a Chamber, nor will the precedence of two Planets be a matter of so great
dispute as that of two Ambassadors. But in the mean time, the same inclination
that moves a man to affect the chief place in a Ceremony, moves a Philosopher
in his System to set himself, if he can in the Center of the World. He is well
enough pleased that all should be done for him, he supposes the Principle that
flatters him, and his Heart cannot forbear a self-interest, though in a matter
of mere speculation. Oh! says she, this is a downright scandal that you raise
against all mankind. At this rate then, since Copernicus's System is so humble,
no man would ever admit of it. Truly, said I, Copernicus himself was very
diffident of the success of his Opinion, and was long before he would publish
it; at last he was persuaded, but the day that the first printed Copy of his
Book was brought to him, do you know what he did? Faith he died; He had no mind
to withstand all the Contradiction he knew it would meet with, and therefore
wisely withdrew. But hark you, said the Marchioness, we must do justice to all
the World: it is certainly very difficult to believe that we turn; for I cannot
see that we change place, and we find our selves in the morning where we lay
down at night. I find, methinks, in your face that you are going to tell me,
that as the whole body of the Earth moves -- Most true, said I, interrupting
her, it is the same thing as if you slept upon the River in a Boat, you would
find your self at waking in the same place and same situation in respect of
the parts of the Boat. Allowed, says she, but here is the difference, I should
find at waking the Banks of the River changed, and from thence I should find
that my Boat had changed place. But it is not so with the Earth, I find all
things there just as I left them. No, no, Madam, said I, the Banks change also.
You know that beyond all those Circles of the Planets are the fixed Stars,
those are our Banks. I am upon the Earth, and the Earth describes a great
Circle about the Sun. I look toward the center of that Circle, and see there
the Sun: if the Stars were then to be seen, in looking on in a straight line
beyond the Sun, I must needs see which of the fixed Stars answered to him; but
I easily see in the night, which of the Stars answered to him in the day, which
is exactly the same thing. If the Earth did not change place in the Circle
where she is, I should see the Sun every day answering the same fixed Stars;
but since she changes place, I must needs find him answer to others. There Is
the Bank that changes every day, and as the Earth performs her Circle in one
year, I see the Sun in the space of one year answer a whole Circle of fixed
Stars. That Circle is called the Zodiac; if you please, I Will draw you a Figure
here in the dust. No, no, says she, I shall do well enough without it: besides
it will give my Park an Air of Philosophy, which I have no mind to. Have not I
heard of a Philosopher that was cast by shipwreck upon an unknown Island, and
finding a trace of Mathematical Figures upon the Strand, cried out, Courage,
Companions, the Island is inhabited, s^e here the footsteps of men. You know
well, it is not for my credit to make such steps here, nor that any one should
see them.

It were more proper indeed, said I, that no footsteps should be seen here but
those of Lovers, that is to say, your Name and Characters engraven upon the
Barks of Trees by the hands of your Adorers. Pray, says she, leave off your
Adorers, and let us talk of the Sun; I understand well how we imagine he
describes the Circle, that we describe our selves: but that Course is not
performed but in a year, and that which he makes every day over our heads, how
is that performed? Have you observed, said I, that a Bowl running upon the
earth has two motions? it moves toward the end of its course where it is
directed, and at the same time turns it self many times about, so that the
upper parts descend and those below ascend; the Earth does the like: While she
advances in her annual Circle about the Sun, she turns about her self in four
and twenty hours; so that in four and twenty hours every part of the Earth
loses and recovers the Sun; and as we turn toward that side where the Sun is,
he seems to rise, and as we begin to remove from him, he seems to descend.
This, says she, is pleasant enough, the Earth takes all upon it self, and the
Sun does nothing, and when the Moon and the other Planets, and the fixed Stars
roll about our heads, is that likewise imagination? Nothing else, says I, but
pure imagination, from the same cause: the Planets only make their revolutions
about the Sun in unequal times, according to their unequal distances, and that
which to day we see answering to a certain point of the Zodiac, or of that
Circle of fixed Stars, to morrow we shall find answering to another point, both
because it has advanced in its own Circle, and we have advanced likewise in
ours: it is that that puts us in different points of sight in respect of them,
and makes us seem to be in their course of extravagance, of which it is not
necessary to tell you: it may suffice you to know, that all that seems
irregular in the Planets, proceeds only from the different manner of our
meeting them in our motion, when really they are all extremely regular. I
agree, said the Marchioness, that they may be so; but I would willingly that
their Regularity should be less troublesome to the Earth. She is not easily
movable, and for a great lump so weighty as she is, it will require a good
proportion of Agility. But, says I, would you rather that the Sun and all the
Stars, which are vastly greater Bodies, should make every day in four and
twenty hours an immense circuit of an infinite number of Leagues about the
Earth? for so they must needs do, unless the Earth move about her self in four
and twenty hours.

Oh, says she, the Sun and Stars consist of fire, their motion costs them
little; but the Earth seems not easily manageable. And would you believe, said
I, if you did not know it by experience, that a great Ship mounted with an
hundred and fifty pieces of Artilery, manned with above three thousand men, and
well laden with Merchandise, would be a thing easily portative? in the mean
time a little puff of Wind suffices to drive it upon the Water; because the
Water being liquid, is easily divided, and makes no resistance to the motion of
the Ship; so the Earth, though an unweildy mass, is easily carried through the
celestial matter, which is ten thousand times more fluid than Water, and fills
all that vast space where the Planets swim. And where is it necessary that the
Earth should be riveted to resist the motion of that Celestial matter? It Is as
if a little Boul of Wood could be able not to follow the Current of a River.

But, says she again, how is the Earth with all its weight supported in your
Celestial matter, which being so fluid must needs be very light? That Is not to
be allowed, said I, that what is more fluid is more light. What do you say to
your great Vessel; which with all its weight must needs be lighter than the
Water, because it swims upon it. I Will say no more to you, says she, as though
angry, as long as you have that great Vessel. But can you assure me that
there is nothing to be feared upon such a Shuttlecock or Whirligigg, as you make
the Earth? Well, says I, let us carry the Earth upon four Elephants, as the
Indians do. See, says she, another kind of System; yet truly, I like those
people that provide for their security, and lay a good foundation; whereas we
Copernicans in my opinion are rash enough to attempt to swim at a venture in
that Celestial matter. I Will hold a Wager, that if the Indians knew the Earth
were in the least danger in the world of being moved, they would double their
Elephants 'Twill be worth the while, said I, laughing at her Fancy, never spare
an Elephant to sleep in security, and if you have occasion for them this night,
we will put as many in our System as you please, and afterward take them out again
by little and little, as you begin to be more and more assured. Seriously, says
she, I believe from this time forward I shall not much need them; for I find my
self courageous enough to turn. You shall presently, says I, go yet farther,
and have delightful Idea's of this System. Sometimes, for example, I fancy with
my self that I hang in the Air, and continue there without motion while the
Earth turns under me four and twenty hours, and I see pass under me all these
different appearances, some white, some black, some swarthy, others tawny, now
Hats, then Turbants, some Heads with Hair, others bald, by and by Towns with
Steeples, then Towns with long Spires and Crescents, next Towns with Towers of
Porcelain, then a large Country that has nothing but Cabins, here a vast Sea,
there a frightful Desert, and in fine, all the infinite variety upon the face
of the Earth.

Truly, says she, it would be four and twenty hours well spent to see all this;
so that in the same place where we are, I do not mean in this Park, but in the
same place in the Air, other people are continually passing, and take our
place, and in four and twenty hours we return here again.

Copernicus himself, says I, could not apprehend it better; by and by you will see
some English men pass this way debating some point of Policy, but not so airily
as we do our Philosophy; then comes a great Sea, where you will see a Ship that
possibly will not be so much at case as we are; afterward appear the Irroquoi's
eating alive some Prisoner of War, who seems not much to heed it; then Women of
the Land of Iesso, who spend their whole time in preparing Food for their
Husbands, and painting their Lips and Eyebrows blue, to please the most
villainous sort of men in the world; next Tartars going in Pilgrimage with great
Devotion to that great Priest, who lives always shut up in a Hole where he has
no Light, but a Lamp, by which they adore him; then come the fair Cir^^^sians,
who make no scruple of granting all at first sight* only what they think
belongs essentially to their Husbands. Then the little Tartars, who steal Women
for the Turks and Persians; and lastly, we who possibly shall yet find other
extravagant Inventions.

It Is pleasant enough, says the Marchioness, to imagine all this you tell me;
but if I saw it all from an height, I should wish to have the liberty to hasten
or stop the motion of the Earth, according as the Objects pleased or displeased
me; and, I assure you, I should presently turn away those that trouble their
Heads with Policy, or eat their Enemies; but for some others I should have a
curiosity; particularly for those fair Circassians, they have a custom which
methinks is very particular. It Is, says I, because they are so fair that their
Husbands find in their favors a superfluity, which they allow to strangers.
Then the Women of this Country, says the Marchioness, are very ugly, compared
with them, for the Husbands here give no liberty at all. That Is the reason,
says I, they take more, whereas -- Hold your peace, says she, I Will talk no more
follies; besides I have a serious difficulty come in my head, If the Earth
turn, we change Air every moment, and breath that of another Contry. Not at
all, Madam, says I, the Air which surrounds the Earth extends but to a certain
height, it may be twenty leagues or so, and it follows and turns along with us.
You have a thousand times seen the Work of a Silkworm, or those Cods of Silk
which those little Animals work with so much Art for their own Prison, they are
of a close wrought Silk, but are covered with a certain Down very light and
loose. Just so the Earth. which is solid enough, is covered from the surface
about twenty leagues high at most, with a kind of Down, which is the Air; This
and all the other Cod of the Silkworm turns at the same time. Beyond the Air is
the Celestial matter incomparably more pure, more subtle, and likewise more in
motion than it. You give me, said the Marchioness, Idea's of the Earth
contemptible enough; is it then upon this shell of a Silkworm that we labor
and toil, and fight, and make such a noise on all hands as we do? It Is even so,
said I, and in the mean time Nature that takes no notice of those little tle
particular motions, carrys us altogether with one general movement, and sports
her self with the lit-Ball. To me, says she, it seems something ridiculous to
be seated upon a thing that turns* and torment ones self so much; but the
mischief is, we are not fully assured that we turn; for to tell you truth*
notwithstanding all those precautions you have used, that a man should not
perceive the motion of the Earth, I am still very doubtful. Is it possible it
should not be discovered by some little mark or other? The most natural
motions, said I, and the most ordinary, are those which are least perceived,
and this is true even in Morality it self. The motion of Self-love is so
natural to us, that most commonly we are not at all sensible of it, and think
that we are acted by some other principle. Ah! says she, when there is a
Question in Natural Philosophy, you begin to moralize, and that is called
Bantring. Let us now retire, for this is enough for once. To morrow we will come
here again, you with your Systems, and I with my Ignorance.

In our return to the Castle, I told her, to carry on the business of Systems,
that there was a third sort invented by Tycho Brahe, who being absolutely of
opinion that the Earth was immovable, placed it in the Center of the World, and
made the Sun turn about it, and all the Planets about the Sun; because since
the new Discoveries, there was no way left to make the Planets turn about the
Earth. But the Marchioness, who is of a quick and lively Judgment, was of
opinion that it was too much Affectation to exempt the Earth from turning about
the Sun, since so many other great Bodies could not be exempted; That it was
not so proper for the Sun to turn about the Earth, since all the Planets turned
about him. That that System was at best only propet to maintain the Immobility
of the Earth, when any one had a mind to maintain it, but not at all to
persuade it. In fine, we resolved to hold to that of Copernicus, which is more
uniform, and more delightful, and has no mixture of prejudice* In effect the
Simplicity of it persuades, and the Boldness delights.

THE Second Evening.
NExt Morning, as soon as the Marchioness could be seen, I sent to know how she
did, and to ask her if she could sleep well turning? She sent me word, that she
was so well accustomed to that sort of motion of the Earth, that she passed the
night as quietly as Copernicus himself could have done. Soon after she had
Company came to her, who, according to the troublesome Custom in the Country,
stayed with her till Evening; and they were obliging in that too; for by the
Custom in the Country they had a right to continue their Visits till next
morning if they pleased; but they were so honest as to be gone. So that the
Marchioness and I found our selves at liberty in the Evening. We took our Walk
again into the Park, and our Conversation failed not to return presently to our
Systems. She had apprehended them so well, that she disdained to discourse of
them a second time, but would needs have me lead her to some new matter.

Well then, said I, since the Sun, that is now immovable, is no more a Planet,
and that the Earth, that moves about him, has begun to be one, you will not be
so surpised to hear that the Moon is an Earth like this, and that apparently
she is inhabited. Truly, says she, I never yet heard speak of the Moon's being
inhabited, but only as a Folly and a Vision. Possibly it is such, said I. I do
not engage in things of that nature, but as men engage in a Civil War, where
the incertainty of the event makes them still hold inteligence with the
opposite Party, and maintain an Intrigue with the very Enemy. For my part,
though I should see the Moon inhabited, yet I would still live civilly with
those that do not believe it, and I preserve my self in such a condition, that
I may with Honor subscribe to their Opinion, if it prevail. But in the mean
while, till they get some considerable advantages over us, see what it is has
drawn me to side with the Inhabitants of the Moon.

Let us suppose that there was never any Commerce between Paris and St. Denis
(a Town about three miles from Paris) and that a Burgess of Paris, who never
stirred out of the Town, should from the the top of Nostre Dame see Saint Denis
at a distance, the question is put him, whether he believes that Saint Denis is
inhabited as Paris is or not, he will confidently say no; for, says he, I see
plainly the Inhabitants of Paris, but those of Saint Denis I do not see at all,
nor ever heard speak of them. Some standerby may tell him, that it is true
indeed that from the top of Nostre Dame the Inhabitants of Saint Denis are not
seen, but that it is the distance is the cause, that all that can be seen of
Saint Denis is very like Paris, that Saint Denis has Steeples, and Houses and
Walls, and possibly may likewise resemble Paris in being inhabited, all this
will not prevail with my honest Burgess, he is still obstinate that Saint Denis
cannot be inhabited, because he sees not a man in it. Our Saint Denis is the
Moon, and every one of us is just such a Burgess of Paris that never stirred
out of the Town.

Oh! said the Marchioness, you do us wrong, we are not so dull as your Burgess;
he that sees Saint Denis wholly made like Paris, must needs have lost his
Reason, not to believe that it is inhabited; but the Moon is not at all made
like the Earth. Have a care, Madam, said I, for if I prove that the Moon must
resemble the Earth, you are then downright obliged to believe that the Moon is
inhabited. I acknowledge, says she, there will be no way to avoid it; and I
observe in your looks an air of confidence that makes me half afraid. The two
motions of the Earth, of which I shall never make any doubt, make me timorous
in all the rest; but however, is it possible that the Earth should be luminous
as the Moon is? for that must be to make up the resemblance. Alas, Madam, said
I, to be luminous is not so a great matter as you imagine; there is only the
Sun in which that quality is considerable; he is luminous in himself, by virtue
of a nature peculiar to him, but the Planets give no Light, but as they are
inlighten'd by him. He sends his Light to the Moon, she returns it to us, and
it must needs be likewise, that the Earth sends the Light of the Sun to the
Moon; for it is no farther from the Earth to the Moon, than from the Moon to the
Earth.

But, says the Marchioness, is the Earth as proper as the Moon to reflect the
Light of the Sun? I observe, said I, that you have still a good thought for the
Moon, which you cannot part with. The Light is composed of little Balls, that
rebound from any thing that is solid, whereas they pass in a straight line
through any thing that opens to them, as the Air, or Glass. So that hence it is
that the Moon gives us Light, because she is a hard solid body that reflects
those little Balls upon us. Now I believe you will not at all contest the
solidity of the Earth. Admire then what it is to be advantagiously placed. The
Moon being so far distant from us, we only behold it as a luminous body, and
know not that it is a great mass like the Earth. On the contrary, because the
Earth has the ill luck to be seen by us near at hand, she appears to us a great
mass fit for nothing but to feed Cattle, and cannot discern that she is
luminous, because we cannot set our selves at distance enough from her. Just
so, said she, we are dazzled with the luster of Conditions more elevated than
our own, and never discern that in the bottom they are extremely alike.

It Is even so, said I we would judge of all, but are still ill placed to take
our view; in judging of our selves we are too near, and in judging of others
too far off. The middle place between the Moon and the Earth is the best to
take a right prospect of both; and better it would be, to be simply a Spectator
of the World than an Inhabitant. I shall never be comforted, says she, for the
Injustice we do the Earth, and our too much partiality to the Moon, unless you
assure me that the people of the Moon, have no more knowledge of their
Advantages than we have of ours, and that they take our Earth for a Star,
without knowing that their own Habitation is so likewise. I Will warrant you for
that, said I, we appear to them to perform our function of a Star regularly
enough: it is true they do not see us describe a Circle about them; but it is no
matter, the thing is this; The half of the Moon which was turned toward us at
the beginning of the World, has continued so ever since, she still shows the
same Eyes, the same Mouth, and all the rest of the Face, which those Spots we
discern in her, frame in our Imagination; if we saw the other half, other kind
of Spots, in different posture, would doubtless create in our Imagination other
kind of Figures. It Is not that the Moon does not turn about her self, it is
certain she turns in just so much time as she turns about the Earth, that is,
in a month. But when she has made one part of that turn about her self, and
that she ought to hide, for example, one Cheek of that pretended Face from us,
and appear some other thing, she makes the like part of her Circle about the
Earth, and putting her self in a new point of sight, shows us still the same
Cheek. So that the Moon, that in respect of the Sun and other Stars, turns
about her self, in respect of us turns not all. She sees them all rise and set
in the space of fifteen days, but our Earth she sees daily hanging in the same
place of Heaven. This seeming Immobility agrees not well with a body which
ought to pass for a Star; but it is true likewise that she her self is not
perfect. The Moon has a certain wavering motion (motus libratorius) which is
the cause that a little corner of her Face is sometimes hid, and a little
corner of the opposite side appears. Now I Will undertake, that she imputes that
wavering to us, and imagines that we have a movement to and fro in the Heavens
like a Pendulum.

All these Planets, says the Marchioness, I find are made like us, who are
still charging others with what is in our selves; the Earth says, It Is not I
that turn, it is the Sun: The Moon says, It Is not I that waver, it is the Earth:
there is faults enough every where. I would not advise you, said I, to attempt a
Reformation: It Is better that you fully convince your self of the perfect
resemblance of the Earth and Moon. Represent to your self those two great Bouls
hanging in the Heavens. You know that the Sun always enlightens one half of a
Spherical body, and that the other half is in the Shadow. Then the Sun daily
enlightens one half both of the Earth and the Moon, viz. in one half it is day,
in the other night. Observe moreover, that as a Ball loses its force when
reverberated from a Wall, so likewise the light grows weak when reflected from
another body. That pale Light which we receive from the Moon, is the very Light
of the Sun* but it cannot come to us but by Reflection. It must therefore lose
much much of the force and vivacity it had when it fell directly upon the Moon.
So that glittering Light which we receive directly from the Sun, and is
reflected from the Earth to the Moon, must needs be but a pale Light when it
reaches thither. So that which appears to us luminous in the Moon, and which
enlightens us in our nights, is the parts of the Moon where it is then day, and
the parts of the Earth where it is day being turned toward the parts of the
Moon where it is night, inlightens them likewise; all depends upon the manner
of the Moon and Earths regarding one another. In the first days of a month,
when the Moon is not seen, she is then between the Sun and us, and moves by day
along with the Sun. It must needs be, that the half of her where it is day is
turned toward the Sun, and her other half that is benighted is turned toward
us. We do not look to see that half that has no Light to show it self, but that
half of the Moon that is benighted being turned toward the half of the Earth
where it is day, sees us without being seen, and sees us in the same figure as
we see the full Moon. It Is then, with the Inhabitants of the Moon, full Earth,
if I may be permitted the expression. Afterward the Moon, which advances in her
monthly Circle, disingages from under the Sun, and begins to show us a little
corner of her inlighten'd half; and that is the Crescent: and then likewise the
parts of the Moon that are benighted begin not to see all the half of the Earth
that is inlighten'd, and we are running from them.

It Is enough, said the Marchioness briskly, I shall know all the rest when I
please, I need but think on it a moment and walk the Moon about her monthly
Circuit. I see in general that in the Moon they have a month reverse to ours,
and I Will hold a Wager, that when it is full Moon with us, it is the inlighten'd
half of the Moon turned toward the obscure part of the Earth, and it is then
they see us not at all, and count it New Earth. I would not be reproch'd to
have required so minute an explication of a thing so easy. But pray how happen
the Ecclipses? That, said I, belongs to you to judge. When it is New Moon, that
she is between us and the Sun, and that all her obscure part is turned toward
us in our day time; you see well that the Shadow of that obscure half is cast
toward us. If the Moon be directly under the Sun, that Shadow hides him from
us, and at the same time darkens all that luminous part of the Earth that was
seen by the obscure part of the Moon. See there an Eclipse of the Sun for us in
our day time, and an Eclipse of the Earth for the Moon in their night. When the
Moon is full the Earth is between her and the Sun, and all the obscure half of
the Earth is turned toward the inlighten'd half of the Moon; The Shadow of the
Earth is then cast toward the Moon, and if it fall upon the body of the Moon
it darkens that luminous half waich we saw, and hides the Sun from that
luminous half in the Moon where it was day. See there an Eclipse of the Moon
for us in our night, and an Eclipse of the Sun for the Moon in her day The
reason why Eclipses do not happen every time that the Moon is between the Sun
and the Earth, or the Earth between the Sun and the Moon, is because those
three bodies are not always in a right line one to the other, and by
consequence that Body that ought to make the Eclipse casts its Shadow a little
on one side of that which should be obscured by it.

I am very much astonished, said the Marchioness, that there should be so
little Mystery in Eclipses, and yet all the World so ignorant of their Causes.
Ah! said I, there are enough in the World, that as they go to work, will never
understand them. The East Indians believe that when the Sun and Moon are in
Eclipse^, it is a certain Demon that with his black Paws stretched out toward
those Stars, endeavors to lay hold on them, and you shall see at that time the
Rivers covered with Heads of Indians, who plunge themselves up to the neck in
Water, as the most devout posture, in their opinion, to prevail with the Sun
and Moon to protect them from the Paws of the Demon. The Americans think the
Sun and Moon are angry with them when they are eclipsed, and God knows what
they do not, to reconcile themselves with them. The Greeks, who were so
refined, did they not believe a long while that the Moon was then enchanted,
and that she was brought down from Heaven by Magicians, to cast a malignant
froth upon Herbs? And we our selves were we not very fairly frightened at an
Eclipse of the Sun not above thirty years since? When an infinite number of
people shut themselves up in Caves, and the Philosophers that employed their
Pens to encourage us, writ in vain.

Truly, says she, all this is very much to the shame of Men; there ought to be
a general Edict prohibiting, That none should ever speak of an Eclipse, for
fear of preserving the memory of those Follies that have been said and done
upon that account. Then 'twill be likewise necessary, said I, by the same Edict
to abolish the memory of all things, and forbid ever speaking of any thing; for
I know nothing in the World that is not a monument of the Folly of mankind.

Pray tell me one thing, says the Marchioness, are they as much afraid of an
Eclipse in the Moon as we are here? It would seem to me a mere Burlesque, that
the Indians of that Country should plunge themselves into the Water as ours do,
and that the Americans there should think our Earth angry with them, or the
Greeks imagine that we are enchanted and go down to spoil their Herbs, or that
we should put them in such a consternation as they put us here. I do not at all
doubt it, said I, I would very fain know why the Gentlemen of the Moon should
have more Wit than we, or what right have they to scare us, more than we have
to scare them? And I believe* said I laughing, that as there have been and are
an infinite number of Fools that adore the Moon, so there are likewise in the
Moon people that adore the Earth, and we are upon our knees one to another:
After all this, says she, we may well pretend to send Influences to the Moon,
and give the Crises to their Diseases. But as but very little Wit and Ability
is sufficient in the people of that Country, to destroy all those Honors we
flatter our selves withal; I must confess, I am still afraid we have somewhat
the disadvantage.

Fear not, said I, it does not appear that we are the only foolish Species in
the World. Ignorance is a certain Good proper to be generally diffused; and tho
I only guess at that of the people of the Moon, yet I no more doubt it, than
the most certain news that comes from thence.

And what certain news is that, says she? It Is that, said I, that is daily
brought us from thence by the learned, who travel thither with their long
Perspectives; they will tell you what Discoveries they have made of Lands, Seas,
Lakes, mighty Mountains and profound Abysses.

You surprise me, says she, I apprehend well that they may discover in the Moon
Mountains and Abysses, that is apparent in her inequalitys; but how can they
distinguish Sea and Land? Thus, says I; because the Waters that let part of the
Light pass through them and reflect less, appear at a distance obscure Spots,
and the Land, which by its solidity reflects all the Light, is the brighter
part. All those parts are so well known, that they have all Names given them,
and generally they are Names of learned Men. One place is called Copernicus,
another Archim^des, another Gallileo, there is a Caspian Sea, Porphi^ian
Mountains, a black L^ke, and in fine the Description of the Moon is so exact
that should a learned man be now there, he would no more lose his Way than I should
do in the Streets of ^ar^s.

But, says she, I should be very much pleased to know more in particula^ how
the more inland part of the Country is made. It is not po^^ible, said I, that
the Gentlemen of the Observatory should inform you; you must inquire of
Astolphus, who was conducted thither by St. John, it is one of the most pleasant
follys of Ariosio, and I am sure you will be well pleased to hear it. I
confess, he had done better not to have introduced St. John, a Name worthy of
Veneration, but it is a Poetical License, that may pass for only too much Gayty.
The whole Poem is dedicated to a Cardinal, and a great Pope has honored it
with a glorious Approbation, which is to be seen before some Editions. The
Story is thus, Roland Nephew to Charlemain was (...) mad because the Fair
Angelica had profer'd Medor before him: Astolphus the brave Paladin found
himself one day in the Terrestrial Paradise upon the top of a very high
Mountain, whither he had been carried by his Hippogriff, he met there with St.
John, who told him, that to cure Roland's Madness it was necessary they should
both together take a journey to the Moon. Astholphus, who desired nothing more
than to see Countries, needed not much solicitation, and they had presently at
hand a Chariot of Fire that mounted the Apostle and the Paladin up into the
Air. Astolphus, who was no great Philosopher, admired to see the Moon much
bigger than she had appeared to him from the Earth, and he was yet more
surpised to find other Rivers, other Lakes, Mountains, Towns and Forests, and
(which would have surpised me as much) Nymphs hunting in those Forests: But
that which he found most rare in the Moon was a great Vale, where was to be
found all that was ever lost upon the Earth, of what kind soever, Crowns,
Riches, Renown, an infinity of Hopes, Time lost at Play, Alms appointed after
Death, Verses presented to Princes and the Sighs of Lovers.

As for the Sighs of Lovers, said the Marchioness, interrupting me, I know not
whether in the days of Ariosto they were lost or not, but now adays I know none
that go to the Moon. Were there none but you, Madam, said I, all those that
have been addressed to you, are fled thither, and they are enough to make a
considerable body. In fine, the Moon is so exact in collecting all that is lost
here below, that all is to be found there, even to the Donation of Constantine,
but this Ariosto tells you in your ear. The thing is, the Popes that have
pretended themselves Masters of Rome and Italy by virtue of a Donation from the
Emperor Constantine, and the truth is, no man knows what is become of it. But
guess you what sort of thing is to be found in the Moon. Folly. All that has
ever been upon the face of the Earth, is there carefully preserved. It is not
credible how many lost Wits are in the Moon. They are so many Phiols full of a
most subtle Liquor, which easily evaporates, unless the Phiol be close stopped,
and upon every Phiol is written the Name of him to whom the Wit belongs.
Ariosto sets them altogether: but I choose rather to represent to my self, that
they are ranged in good order in a long Gallery. Astolphus was much amazed to
find that the Phiols of many, whom he always thought very wise, were very full;
and for own part, I believe that my own is grown pretty full since I
entertained you with Visions, sometime Philosophical, sometime Poetical; but
that which comforts me, is, that it is not impossible but that in all that I say
to you, I shall procure you likewise a little Phiol in the Moon e're it be
long. The good Paladin failed not to find his own there among the rest, and
presently laying hold on it, with permission of St. John, he snuffed it up at
his nose, like the Queen of Hungaries Water, but Ariosto says that he carried
it not far, but let it return again to the Moon by a Folly he committed
sometime after. However he forgot not the Phiol of Roland, which was the
business of his journey, and he had trouble enough in carrying it; for the Wit
of that Hero was very heavy, and there was not a drop wanting. In fine,
Ariosto, according to his laudable custom of saying what he pleases, makes this
Apostrophe to his Mistress, in excellent Verse. Who, my Fair one, shall mount
up to Heaven to bring back my Wits lost by your Charms? I should not lament the
loss, provided they were gone no further; but if matters continue as they have
begun, I must expect to become even such as I have discrib'd Roland. Yet I
hardly belive that to recover my Wits, it will be necessary that I travel
through the Air to the Moon; my Wits are not fled so high, they are still
hovering about your eyes and mouth; and if you desire I should recover them,
give me leave to take them with my Lips. Is not his pretty? For my part, to
argue like Ariosto, I would advise that none should ever lose their Wits but
for Love; for you see they go not far, and there needs no more than a pair of
Lips to recover them; but when they are lost by other means, as we, for
example, lose them now in Philosophizing, they fly to the Moon, and are not to
be recovered at pleasure. To make amends, said the Marchioness, our Phiols
shall be honorably set in the quarter of Philosophical Phiols; whereas
otherwise perhaps our Wits might run astray here to somebody unworthy of them.
But to make an end of losing mine, pray tell me, and tell me very seriously,
whether you think that there are Men in the Moon or not; for hitherto you have
not discoursed to me of of any thing positively enough. Who I? says I, I do not
at all believe there are Men in the Moon. Do but observe how the face of Nature
is changed in the distance between this and China; you find other Faces, other
Figures, other Manners and almost other principles of Reason; and certainly in
such a distance as between this and the Moon, the change ought to be much more
considerable. When we go to some Lands newly discovered, we find the
Inhabitants scarce Men; they are a sort of Animals in humane shape, and
sometime imperfect enough, but almost wholly without reason: therefore surely
he that should go on to the Moon, would not find them Men at all.

What sort of people would they be then, said the Marchioness, with some
impatience? In good Faith, Madam, said I, I cannot resolve you. If it were
possible that we had Reason, and yet were not Men, and that we were the
Inhabitants of the Moon, could we well imagine that there were such Creatures
here below as we call Mankind? Could we represent to our selves a thing in
Passions so foolish and so wise in reflection, of so short a duration and so
long a foresight, so much knowledge in things unprofitable and so much
ignorance in the most important, so great a desire of liberty, and so much
inclination to Servitude; so much desire to be happy, and so great an
incapacity of being so? the People of the Moon must have a great deal of sense
to divine all this. We see our selves daily, and yet are to seek to know how we
are made. It made some say, that the Gods were full of Nectar when they made
Man, and when they came to look upon their Work in a sober temper, they could
not forbear laughing.

Well then, said the Marchioness, I see we are secure of the people of the
Moon, they will not discover us; but I should be very glad we could know them:
for, to tell you truth, it much disquiets me to know that they are there above
in that Moon that we now see, and that we cannot at all represent to our selves
how they are made. And why, said I, are you not concerned too for the
Inhabitants of that great Terra Australis, which is hitherto utterly unknown to
us? both they and we are carried in one Vessel, they in the Proe and we in the
Poup; you see there is no Communication between the Proe and the Poup, and that
at one end of the Ship it is not known what sort of people are in the other; yet
you would know what is done in the Moon, that other Vessel that sails in the
Heavens at so great a distanee from us.

Oh! says she I reckon the Inhabitants of the Terra Australis as known; for
it is certain they must needs resemble us very much, and in fine, we may know
them when ever we take the pains to go see them, there they are and cannot
avoid us; but the people of the Moon, we shall never know, it is that I despair
of. If I should answer you seriously, said I, that we know not what may come to
pass, you would laugh at me, and I should well deserve it, but in the mean time
I could defend my self well enough if I pleased. I have a thought in my head
that is very ridiculous, which yet (I know not how I got it, being so
impertinent as it is) has some appearance of truth. I Will hold a Wager, that
I Will bring you to acknowledge against all reason, that there may be in time a
Commerce between the Moon and the Earth. Consider with your self the
Circumstances of America, before it was discovered by Christopher Columbus, the
Inhabitants lived in the extremest Ignorance, so great strangers to knowledge,
that they knew not the most simple and most necessary Arts, they went naked,
had no Arms but the Bow, and could never imagine that Men could be carried by
Animals; they looked upon the Sea as a great space prohibited to Men, that it
was joined to the Heavens, and that beyond it was nothing. It Is true, after
spending whole years in making hollow the Trunk of a great Tree with sharp
stones, they put to Sea in that Trunk, and coasted the Shore with Wind and
Tide; but as that Vessel was often subject to overset they were as often put to
swim to recover it; and, to speak properly, they constantly swam, only then
when they took breath in their Boats. Whoever should have told them that there
was another sort of Navigation incomparably more perfect, that men could
traverse that vast extent of Waters where and how they pleased, that they could
stop without motion in the midst of the rolling Waves, and command the
swiftness of their Course; and in fine, that the Sea, vast as it is, was no
obstacle to the Communication of people, provided there were people on the
other side, you may well imagine they would never have believed it. Yet you see
the time came, that the strangest Spectacle in the World, and the least
expected by them, appeared before them, huge enormous Bodies that seemed to fly
upon Sea with white Wings that vomited fire on all sides, and cast upon their
Shoars an unknown sort of people clad with Iron, governing those Monsters that
ran upon the Sea, as they pleased, and bearing Thunder in their Hands that beat
down all before them. From whence come they? Who could bring them over Sea? Who
put the Fire in their power? Are they Gods? Are they Children of the Sun? For
certainly these are not Men. I know not, Madam, whether you conceive, as I do,
the great surprise of the Americans, but certainly never any equaled it. After
all this, I will no more swear that there will not be in time a Commerce
between the Moon and the Earth. Could the Americans believe that ever there
should be any between America and Europe, and that they alone should not know
it? It Is true, there is a great space of of Air and Heaven to be traversed
between the Earth and the Moon, but did those great Seas appear to the
Americans any more fit for passage? Seriously and truly, says the Marchioness,
looking upon me, you are a Fool. Who says the contrary, said I? But, says she,
I Am not content with your Confession, I Will prove it to you. The Americans were
so ignorant that they never minded whether those vast Seas could be passed or
not, but we that are so knowing would needs imagine a passage through the Air,
if it were possible to go there. A thing possible, said I, is more than
imagination; Men begin already to fly a little, several persons have found the
secret of fi^ting themselves with Wings, that support and give them motion in
the Air, and they can fly over Rivers, and from Steeple to Steeple. It Is true,
it is not the flight of an Eagle, and it has cost those new Birds sometimes a
Leg or an Arm; but that in the mean time does but represent the first Planks
that were set a sloat, and were the beginning of Navigation. There was a great
distance or difference between those Planks and a great Ship that could make a
Circuit about the World, yet by little and little they are grown up to a great
Ship. So the Art of Flying is yet in its infancy; it will daily grow toward
perfection, and sometime or other we shall get up to the Moon, Can we pretend
to have discovered all things, or to have proceeded so far that nothing is to
be added? Ah! we must needs allow that there is something yet to do for the
Ages to come. I will never allow, says she, that any man can fly, without
breaking his neck. Well, said I, if you will have it that they fly so ill here,
they will fly better in the Moon; the people there are fitter for the Art than we,
and it is no matter whether we go to them or they come to us, just so the
Americans could not dream of the Art of Navigation, when at the other end of
the World it was well understood. Why then, says she, almost angry, the people
of the Moon should be already come. The Europeans, said I, ready to laugh, did
not discover America till after 6000 years, so long was requisite to bring
Navigation to that perfection, as to venture to pass the Ocean, the people of
the Moon can possibly make little voyages in the Air, and at this hour they are
exercising when they are grown more knowing and expert, we shall see them, and
God knows what a surprise 'twill be. You are insufferable, said she, to
conclude me with such empty Arguments. If you provoke me, said I, I know what I
can yet add to confirm them. Observe that the World discloses it self by little
and little; the Ancients held it for certain that the torrid and frozen Zones
were not habitable, and in the time of the Romans the general Map of the Earth
was not much bigger than the Map of the Empire, which had much of Greatness in
one sense and Ignorance in another; in the mean time Men have been found to
inhabit both in the hot and cold Climates. See there the World enlarged: So
likewise it was thought that the Ocean covered all the Earth, but what was then
known, and that there was no Antipodet; for they were never heard of; and also
could they have had their Feet upward and their Head downward? After so
pleasant a reasoning, the Antipodes are discovered, and there is a new
Reformation of the Map, and a new half of the World. Understand me well, Madam;
Those Antipodes so discovered beyond all expectation, ought to instruct us to
be wary in our Judgment. The Discovery of the World will possibly be finished
by us, and we shall know all as far as the Moon: We have not yet attained so
far; because as yet all the Earth is not discovered, and because all must be
done in order. When we know our own habitation well, it will be allowed us to
make acquaintance with our Neighbors without lying, said the Marchioness
looking attentively on me, you are so serious in this thing, that doubtless you
must needs believe all you say, I should be sorry for that, said I, I would
only let you see, that a Chimerical opinion may be maintained well enough to
confound a person of wit, but not enough to persuade it is only truth that
persuades, and that even not without producing all its proofs, it insinuates so
naturally into the mind, that we seem only to remember it, though it be the
first time we heard of it. Ah! says the Marchioness, you now give me some
comfort; your fallacious reasoning made me sick. I am now in a better condition
to go to bed and sleep quietly, if you think fit that we retire.

THE Third Evening.
THe Marcioness would have engaged me to prosecute our Entertainments in the
day time; but I told her, that we ought not to trust our Chimerical Notions to
any but the Moon and Stars; for they were the Object of them, We failed not
then in the Evening to take our Walk into the Park, which was now become a
place consecrated to our learned Conversation.

I have News to tell you, said I. The Moon, which I told you yesterday was
according to all appearance inhabited, may possibly not be so; I have thought
of a thing that indangers the Inhabitants. I cannot suffer that, says she;
Yesterday you made me expect to see them soon here, and now there is no such
people in the World. You shall not delude me so. You made me believe the
Inhabitants of the Moon. I have overcome the difficulty of doing so, and I will
believe it. Not so fast, said I, you ought to yield your self but by halves in
things that are to be believed, and to reserve one half free where the contrary
may be admitted, if occasion be. I Am not to be satisfied, said she, with
Sentences; let us go to the matter: Are we not to argue of the Moon, as of St.
Denis? No, said I, the Moon is not so like the Earth, as St. Denis is to Paris.
The Sun raises from the Earth and Waters Exhalations and Vapors which mount in
the Air to a certain height, where they gather and form the Clouds. Those
Clouds hanging there, fly irregularly about our Globe, and shadow sometime one
Country, sometime another. Whoever should see the Earth at a distance, would
often observe great changes upon the surface; for a large Country covered with
Clouds would appear an obscure part, and would become luminous as the Clouds
removed. The Spots would appear to change place, or gather in diverse manners,
or wholly disappear: So likewise we should see the same changes in the face of
the Moon, if she had Clouds about her: but on the contrary all her Spots are
fixed, her parts always luminous, and there is the mischief on it. By this
account the Sun raises no Vapors nor Exhalations about the Moon. It must
therefore be a body infinitely more hard and solid than our Earth, and the more
subtle parts of it easlly disingage themselves from the others, and mount on
high as soon as they are put in motion by the Heat: So that it must be a mass
of Rocks and Marble where there are no Evaporations: For they are so naturally
and necessarily raised where there are Waters, that there must needs be no
Water where there is no Vapor. What are then the Inhabitants of those Rocks,
which can produce nothing, and of that Country that has no Water? How now!
cried she, have you forgot that you assured me there were Seas in the Moon to
be seen from hence? That Is but a conjecture, said I, I am sorry for it; those
obscure parts which are taken for Seas, perhaps are but great Cavities: at this
distance it may be allowed not to guess exactly right. But, says she, is that
sufficient to make us renounce the Inhabitants of the Moon? Not wholly, Madam,
said I, we will neither conclude for them nor against them. I must confess my
Weakness, says she, I am not capable of so perfect an irresolution; I must
believe. Fix me presently in some one opinion concerning the Inhabitants of the
Moon; let us preserve them or annihilate them for ever, that they may be no
more spoken of; but rather let us preserve them, if possible; for I have
entertained an inclination for them which I can hardly quit. Why then, said I,
I will not leave the Moon a Desert, let us people it again to satisfy you. In
truth, since the Appearance of the Spots of the Moon do not change, it cannot
be believed that that there are Clouds about her that darken sometimes one
part, sometime another; but yet that does not argue that she does not send out
Vapors and Exhalations. Our Clouds which we see carried in the Air are but
Exhalations and Vapors, which at their rising from the Earth are separated in
particles too small to be seen, and which when mounted a little higher meet a
Cold that condenses them, and renders them visible by the union of their parts,
after which they become gross Clouds that float in the Air, where their bodies
are strangers till they fall in Rain: But those very Vapors and Exhalations
are sometimes dispersed enough to become invisible, and do not reunite, but
when they form a subtle Dew, which is not seen to fall from any Cloud. It may
be likewise that the Vapors which rise from the Moon; (for it must needs be
that some do arise from her. It is not credible that the Moon should be a body
of so equal a solidity in its parts, all equally in repose one after the other,
and all incapable of receiving any change by the action of the Sun upon them:
We do not know any such body in nature. Marble it self is not so; Whatever is
most solid changes and alters, either by a secret and invisible motion in it
self, or by some that it receives from without;) it may be then that those
Vapors that rise from the Moon, do not gather about her in Clouds, nor fall
back upon her in Rain, but only in Dew: and for that, it is sufficient that the
Air, with which the Moon is apparently surrounded, as our Earth is with hers,
is somewhat different from our Air, and the Vapors of the Moon somewhat
different from the Vapors of the Earth, which is a thing more than probable.
Upon this account it will follow, that the matter being otherwise disposed in
the Moon than upon the Earth, the effects must be different; but it matters
not. From the moment that we have an interior motion in the parts of the Moon,
or produced found by foreign causes, the Inhabitants of the Moon are restored,
and we have a fund necessary for their subsistence. This will furnish us with
Fruit, Corn, Water, and all that we desire. I mean Fruit, Corn and Water, such
as are in the Moon; for I profess not to know of what sort they are, all fit
for the use of the Inhabitants, whom I know as little.

That is to say, says the Marchioness, that you only know all is well there,
but know not how: it is indeed a great deal of ignorance with a little
knowledge, but we must be content; I am but too happy that you have restored to
the Moon her Inhabitants, I am likewise well pleased that you allow her Air to
cover her; for otherwise I should think a Planet too naked.

Those two different Airs, said I, do much contribute to hinder the
Communication of the two Planets. If there were no more than flying in the
matter, who knows, as I told you yesterday, but that in time we may fly well
enough. Yet I confess there is no great appearance of it, the great distance of
the Moon from the Earth would be one difficulty to overcome, which is certainly
considerable; but were there no such difficulty, and that the two Planets were
very near, it would not be possible to pass from the Air of one to the Air of
the other. Water is the Air of Fishes, they never pass into the Air of Birds,
nor Birds into the Air of Fishes, not that the distance hinders them, but
because each of them is confined to his own Air. We find that ours is mixed with
Vapors more thick and gross than that of the Moon, therefore should an
Inhabitant of the Moon venture upon the Confines of our World, he would be drowned
in our Air at his first arrival, and we should see him tumble down dead before
us.

Oh! cried the Marchioness, how I should rejoice at a Shipwreck that would lay
before us a good number of those people. We might then consider those
extraordinary Figures at our leisure. But, said I, if they were expert enough
to sail upon the exterior surface of our Air, and should lay Nets and Hooks
for us as we do for Fishes, would that please you? Why not, says she, laughing?
for my part I would willingly put my self into their Nets, only to have the
satisfaction of seeing them that caught me.

But bethink your self, said I, that you may be ill when you arrive at the top
of our Air, we cannot breath in all its extent, it must needs be so, for we
cannot breath upon the tops of some Mountains; and I much wonder that those
that have the folly to believe that certain corporeal Genii inhabit the purest
Air, do not likewise say, that the reason why those Genii come so seldom to us,
and make such short Visits, is because few among them are expert in Diving, and
those that are, cannot dive to the bottom of our thick Air, to stay any long
time. So that here you see three natural Barricades to prevent our going out of
our World or entering that of the Moon. Yet let us try for our satisfaction, to
guess what we can of that World. I believe, for example, that we might see the
Heaven, Sun and Stars of another color than we see them here. We behold all
those Objects here through a kind of natural Perspective which shows them
otherwise than they are, that Perspective is our Air, mixed as it is with
Vapors and Exhalations, which extend not very high. Some Moderns pretend that
in it self it is of a blue color, as well as the Sea, and that that color
appears not either in the one or the other, but in a great depth. The Heaven of
the fixed Stars, say they, has of it self no light, and consequently it would
appear black; but we see it through the Air which is blue, and represents it
blue to us. If that be so, the Rays of the Sun and Stars cannot pass through
the Air. without receiving a little tincture of that color, and losing some of
their own; but were it so that the Air had no color of its own, it is certain
that the Light of a Flambeau seen through a thick mist appears red, though it
be not its natural color, and our Air is no more than a thick mist that
changes the color of the Heaven, Sun and Stars. So that the Air of the Moon
being of another nature than our Air, or having in it self a tincture of
another color, or at least being another mist that causes that change of
color in the celestial bodies, the Perspective through which all is seen, in
respect of the people of the Moon is changed.

That, says the Marchioness, makes me prefer our abode before that of the Moon;
sor I cannot believe that the Appearance of the celestial colors is so
pleasant there as here. Let us suppose a red Sky and green Stars, they will not
agree so well together as Stars of a pure Gold-colour upon blue. Any that heard
you, says I, would think you were dressing up a Suit of Clothes, or furnishing
a Room; but believe me, Nature understands well enough what she does, leave it
to her to invent a mixture of Colors for the Moon, and I Will undertake it shall
be well approved. She failed not to work variety of Prospects in the Universe
at every turn of the eye, and yet the variety is still pleasing.

I know her Artifice, said the Marchioness, she spared her self the pains of
making variety of Objects, and only changed the Perspectives; so that she has
the Honor of that great Diversity without being at the Expense. With a blue
Air she gives us a blue Sky, and possibly with a red Air she gives the
Inhabitants of the Moon a red Sky, but still it is the same Sky. In my opinion
she has likewise placed in our imagination certain Perspectives, through which
we see all, and which change the Objects in respect of every particular man.
Alexander saw the Earth a fair place fit for the Seat of a great Empire;
Celadon sees it only as the abode of his Astrea, and a Philosopher sees it only
as a great Planet moving in the Heavens and thronged with Fools. I do not
believe that the prospect is more different between the Earth and the Moon,
than between Imagination and Imagination.

The change of the Prospect, says I, is more surprising in our Imaginations,
for they are but the same Objects which we see differently; but in the Moon
other Objects are to be seen, or none of those that are seen here, possibly in
that Country they know not Aurora nor the Twilight, before the Sun rises and
after he sets; the Air that surrounds us and is raised above us, receives Rays
which cannot fall upon the Earth, and being very thick, it stops some of them
and reflects them upon us, tho they were not naturally designed for us. So that
Aurora and the Twilight is a particular favor of Nature, a Light which
regularly we ought not to have, and which she gives us over and above our due.
But it may not be so proper in ^he (...), where the Air is apparently more pure
to beat down the Rays of the Sun before he rises or after he is set. You have
not there that favorable Light, which growing upon you by degrees prepares you
easily for the Arrival of the Sun, and ^^^ch by the same degrees declining
prepares you for his absence. You are in a profound Darkness, and all or a
sudden, as though a Curtain were d^^^^, you find your eyes struck with the
Light of the Sun; again you are in a bright and vigorous Light, and all on a
sudden you drop into a profound Darkness, the day and night are not joined
with a middle light that participates both of the one and the other. The
Rainbow is likewise a thing wanting to the people of the Moon; for as the
Aurora is an effect of the grossness of the Air and Vapors; so the Rainbow is
formed in Clouds from whence falls the Rain, so that we are obliged for the
most beautiful thing in the World, to that which is the least so. Since then
there are no gross Vapors about the Moon, nor rainy Clouds, farewell Rainbow,
farewell Aurora, to what now must we resemble fhe fair ones of that Country?
What a fource of comparisons is there lost! I am not much concerned, said the
Marchioness, for those comparisons, and I find recompense enough in the Moon
for the want of the Rainbow and Aurora; for by the same reason there is neither
Thunder nor Lightning, both which are formed in the Clouds, the days are still
fair and serene, and the Sun in the day time never out of sight, the Stars are
visible all night, no Storm or Tempest is ever known, nor any thing that is an
effect of an angry Heaven. What reason do you find then of Complaint? You
represent the Moon to me, said I, as an enchanted abode, but in the mean time I
know not whether it be so pleasant to have daily a scorching Sun over a man's
head, and not a Cloud to moderate the Heat, it may be likewise it is therefore
Nature has made certain kind of Pits in the Moon big enough to be discerned by
our Glasses; for they are not mountains* but hollow places which appear in the
midst of certain plains. How do we know but the Inhabitants of the Moon shelter
themselves there from the extremity of the Heat? possibly they live no where
else but there, and it is there they build their Towns. We see here that the
Subterranean Rome was almost as big as Rome above the Earth; there needs no
more than to take away this, the rest will be a Town like those in the Moon; a
whole Populace is together in one of those Cavities, and from one to another
they communicate by subterraneous ways. You laugh now at this Vision, and I
heartily agree you should, but in the mean time to tell you seriously, you may
be deceived sooner than I. You think the people of the Moon ought to inhabit
upon the surface of their Planet as we do upon ours. It Is quite contrary;
though we live upon the surface of our Planet, they may not at all live upon
the surface of theirs, all things ought to be very different here from what
they are there.

It Is no matter, said the Marchioness, I cannot resolve to let the Inhabitants
of the Moon live in perpetual obscurity. But you would be yet more concerned,
said I, if you knew that an ancient and great Philosopher has made the Moon the
abode of blessed Souls. All their Happiness consists in hearing there the
Harmony which the celestial bodies make in their motions; but he pretends that
when the Moon falls in the Shadow of the Earth, they cannot then hear that
Harmony, and it is then those poor Souls cry out desperately, and the Moon makes
what haste she can to deliver them out of that trouble. We may then, says she,
expect to see the happy Souls of the Moon here; for it is certain they are sent
likewise to us, as to their Paradise, and between those two Planets, the Moon
and Earth, it is thought sufficient provision is made for the happiness of Souls
by mutually transporting them into each others World. Seriously, said I, it
would be no small pleasure to see many diffetent Worlds; it is a pleasure to
make the Voyage in imagination only, 'twould surely be much more so in effect.
It would be much better than to go from hence to Iapan, that is to say, than to
take the pains to run from one corner of the Earth to another, and all to see
nothing else but men. Well, says she, let us take a Voyage about the Planets,
as well as we can. What should hinder us? Let us place our selves in all those
different points of sight, and from thence consider the World. Have we no more
to see in the Moon? I think not, said I, at least I have shown you all that is
within my knowledge. Leaving the Moon and bending our Course toward the Sun, we
meet Venus, and in Venus I return again to Saint Denis. Venus turns about her
self and about the Sun, as the Moon does; and it is found by the Telescope that
Venus, as well as the Moon, has her Increases and Decreases, and is full,
according to her diverse situation in respect of the Earth.

The Moon according to all appearance is inhabited, why not Venus as well? But,
says she, in saying still, Why not, you seem to design Inhabitants for all the
Planets. Doubt it not, said I, that Why has a virtue in it sufficient to people
all. We see that the Planets are all of the same nature, all opaque bodies that
receive no Light but the Suns, which they reflect from one to another, and have
all the same motions; thus far all are equal. In the mean time we must conceive
that those great bodies are made to be uninhabited, that that is their natural
Condition, and that the Earth only was exempted from it. He that will believe
so, let him believe; for my part I cannot concur with him. I find, says she,
that you are very very much confirmed in your opinion within this little while;
it is not long since the Moon was made a Desert, and you were not much
concerned at it, and now should any one venture to tell you that all the
Planets are not inhabited as the Earth is, I find you would be angry. It Is
true, said I, at that moment when you surpised me, had you contradicted me
about the Inhabitants of the Planets, I should not only have maintained them
against you, but I believe I should have told you how they are all made. There
are moments for believing, and I never believed it so much as at that moment.
But now in a cooler Judgment, I think it would be very strange that the Earth
should be so well inhabited as it is, and the other Planets not at all; for I
would not have you think that we see all that inhabits the Earth, there are as
many species of Animals invisible as visible. We see down from the Elephant to
the Mite and the Cicon, there our sight terminates; but from the Mite and the
Cicon begins an infinite multitude of Animals to which the Mite is an Elephant,
and which are not discernable to our plain sight. Glasses have discovered to us
many Liquors full of little Animals, which we should never have suspected to
have been there; and it is not improbable that the Taste and Relish of those
Liquors proceeds from the biting or sting of those Animals upon the tongue and
palate. Do but mix some things with some of those Liquors, or expose them to
the Sun, or let them corrupt, and you shall presently see a new species of
little Animals.

Many bodies that seem solid, are only a heap of those indiscernable Animals,
which find as much liberty for motion there, as they need. The Leaf of a Tree
is a little World, inhabited by invisible Worms, to whom it seems a place of
immense extent, there they find Mountains and Abysses, and the Worms that
inhabit on one side of the Leaf, have no more communication with those on the
other side, than we have with the Antipodes. With much more reason, in my
opinion, a great Planet may be a World inhabited. There has been found even in
some kind of exceeding hard Stones innumerable little Worms lodged in all parts
in insensible vacuities, and were only nourished with the substance of the
stone; imagine with your self how many little Worms there might be, and how
many years they subsisted upon a bit no bigger than a grain of Sand; and
according to this example, were the Moon only an heap of Rocks, rather than
there should be no Inhabitants, I would make them gnaw upon those Rocks. In
fine, all things have Life, all are animated; take you all those species of
Animals newly discovered, and those that we may easily judge are yet to be
discovered, together with those that we daily see, and you will certainly find
that the Earth is well peopled, and that Nature has been so liberal in Animals,
that she never took care that half of them should be seen: do you bel^eve then,
that having been so fruitful in her Productions here even to excess, she has
been so barren in the other Planets, as to produce nothing living?

I am convinced, said the Marchioness, in my reason; but my imagination is
overwhelmed with that infinite multitude of Inhabitants in all the Planets, and
confounded with the diversity that must needs be among them; for I well see
that Nature, as she is an enemy of repetitions, has made them all different,
but how shall we represent it? The Imagination, said I, cannot pretend to
represent it, she can go no farther than the Eyes lead her: one certain general
view may give a prospect of that diversity that Nature has wrought in all those
Worlds. All Faces in general are wrought according to one and the same model,
but those of two great Nations, of the Europeans, for example, and Africans
seem to be framed to two particular models, and we may yet find a particular
model in the Faces of every Family. What secret should Nature have in framing
such variety in one only thing so simple as a Face? We are in the Universe but
as one little Family, where all the Faces resemble; another Planet is another
Family, where the Faces have another Air.

It Is most certain that the differences increase in proportion to the
distances, and whoever should see an Inhabitant of the Moon and an Inhabitant
of the Earth, would easily observe that they were of two Worlds nearer
Neighbors than an Inhabitant of the Earth and an Inhabitant of Saturn; here
for example we use the Voice, in another place they speak but by Signs, and
farther off they speak not at all: Here Reason is wholly formed by Experience,
there Experience contributes little, and farther off old men know no more than
children: Here we perplex our selves more for the future than what is past,
farther off they concern themselves neither for the one nor the other, and
those perhaps are not the most unhappy. It has been thought that we want a
sixth natural Sense, by which we might know many things more than we do; that
sixth Sense is doubtless in some other World, where possibly they want some one
of our five: Nay, perhaps there are really a great number of natural Senses;
but in the Distribution made with the Inhabitants of other Planets, only five
fell to our share, wherewith we content our selves, because we know no other.
Our Knowledge has certain bounds and limits which the Mind of Man cannot
exceed, there is a certain point where it wholly fails us, and the rest is for
some other World, where likewise something that we know is unknown: This Planet
enjoys the Sweets of Love, but in many parts is laid desolate by the fury of
War: In another Planet they enjoy perpetual Peace, but know nothing of Love,
and are uneasy. In fine, what Nature has done in little among men in her
distribution of Happiness or other Talents, she has doubtless done in great
among the several Worlds, and did not at all forget that wonderful secret of
hers in working a variety in all things, and yet at the same time making them
equal by Compensations.

Well, Madam, said I, laying aside my serious tone, are you now satisfied? Have
I given you Chimera's enough? Truly, says she, I have now less trouble methinks
to find out the difference of all those Worlds, my Imagination is now busy
about the Plain you have given me. I represent to my self, as well as I can,
extraordinary Characters and Customs for the Inhabitants of the Planets, and I
frame strange and extravagant figures for them. I cannot well describe them to
you, but I see something. As for those figures, says I, I advise you to remit
them to the Dreams you will have this night, we shall see to morrow whether
they assisted you well in it, and informed you of the Shape of the Inhabitants
of any Planet.

THE Fourth Evening.
OUr Dreams were not successful, they only represented something resembling
what we had seen, and I had opportunity of reproching the Marchioness, as those
people who never draw any thing but what is extravagant and grotesque reproach
us at the sight of our Pictures. Very well, say they, those are men to the
life, there is nothing there of fancy, We were fain then to be still ignorant of
the Figures of the Inhabitants of the Planets, and content our selves with
guessing at them as well as we could, continuing the Voyage we had began about
the World: we were in Venus. It Is certain, said I to the Marchioness, that
Venus turns about her self, but it is not well known in what time, nor
consequently how long her days are; as for her years, they are but eight
months, for in so much time she turns about the Sun. She is forty time less
than the Earth, therefore the Earth in Venus seems a Planet forty times bigger
than Venus appears to us from hence: and as the Moon is likewise forty times
less than the Earth, she seems in Venus very near about the same bigness that
Venus appears to us from hence.

You vex me, said the Marchioness, I see well that the Earth is not for Venus,
the Star of Shepherds and Mother of Love, as V^nus is to the Earth; for the
Earth in Venus appears too big, but the Moon that appears the^e of the same
bigness that Venus does to us from hence, is of a just proportion to be the
Mother of Love and Star of Shepherds; those names are only fit for a little
Planet that is brisk, clear, sparkling, and of a gallant Air. It Is certainly a
destiny very pleasing to our Moon, to influence the Loves of the Inhabitants of
Venus; those people must needs understand Gallantry well. Oh! no question on it,
said I, the little people of Venus are made up of none but Celadons, and
Sylvanders, and their most ordinary Conversation is beyond the most polite of
Clelia, the Climate is extremely favorable for Love; Venus is nearer the Sun
than we, and she receives from him a Light more lively and hot.

I now see, said the Marchioness, interrupting me, how the Inhabitants of Venus
are made, they are like the Moors of Granada, a little black people, Sunburned,
full of spirit and fire, always amorous, given to Poetry and Music, and every
day Feasting, Dancing and Tilting. Let me tell you, Madam, said I, you know but
little of the Inhabitants of Venus; our Moors of Granada for the coldness and
stupidity of their Temper would be to them but as people of Lapland or
Groenland.

But what are the Inhabitants of Mercury? they are yet nearer the Sun, and
therefore certainly must needs be fools with too much vivacity. I believe they
have no memory no more than the greatest part of Negro's and that they never
consider on any thing, nor act but by chance, and sudden motions; and in fine,
that Mercury is the Bedlam of the Universe. They see the Sun much bigger than
we do, because they are much nearer, and he gives them so strong a light, that
were they here, they would esteem our fairest days but as weak twilight, and
perhaps would not be able to distinguish Objects by it, and they are used to so
excessive a Heat, that they would freez in the midst of Africa; their year is
but three months, the length of their day is yet unknown to us; for Mercury is
so little and so near the Sun, in whose Rays he is almost continually lost,
that he escapes all observation of Astronomers, and they cannot yet lay hold on
him so much as to observe what motion he makes about his Center: but his
smalness makes them believe that he performs that Course in a little time, and
that therefore the days in Mercury are short, and that the Inhabitants see the
Sun like a great burning Stove ot Kettle not far above their heads, and moving
with a prodigious rapidity. It is well for them, for it is certain they are very
desirous of the night, during which time they are enlightened by Venus and the
Earth, which ought to appear very big to them. As for the other Planets, they
being beyond the Earth toward the Firmament, seem less to them than they do to
us, and they receive but little or perhaps no Light at all from thence. The
fixed Stars likewise seem less to them, and many are not seen at all, which in
my opinion is a loss. I am not well pleased to see that great Arch adorned with
lesser Stars, and not to see the rest but in a less proportion and a duller
color.

I am not, said the Marchioness, so much concerned at that loss of the
Inhabitants of Mercury, as at the inconveniences they suffer by the extremity
of Heat. I wish we could procure their ease; therefore pray let us allow in
Mercury long and abundant Rain to refresh them, as it is said it falls here in
hot Countries for four months together just in the hottest Seasons.

That may be, said I, and we may likewise refresh Mercury another way. Some
parts of China, which by their situation ought to be very hot, are yet so
extreme cold in the months of July and August, that the Rivers are frozen: The
cause is, those Countries are full of Saltpeter, the Exhalations whereof are
very cold, and the great Heats exhale them from the Earth in great abundance.
Mercury, if you please, shall be a little Planet all of Saltpeter, and the Sun
shall produce from it self a remedy for the evil that it caused. Most certain
it is, that Nature cannot make people live any where but where they can live,
and that Custom joined with Ignorance of what is better, makes them live there
well enough. So in Mercury they may live well enough without Saltpeter or Rain.

Next after Mercury you know is the Sun, there is no way of making him
habitable, the cause is clear. We judge by the Earth that is inhabited, that
other bodies of the same species may be so likewise, but the Sun is not a body
of the same species with the Earth, nor with the other Planets; he is the
Fountain of that Light, which the other Planets only reflect from one to
another, after having received it from him. They may exchange it, as we may
say, among themselves, but they cannot produce it: he only extracts from
himself that precious substance, and emits it with vigor on all sides: where
ever it meets with any thing that is solid, it reflects, and from one Planet to
another long and vast trains of Light cross and traverse one another in a
thousand ways, and form an admirable Tissue of the richest material in the
World. The Sun likewise is seated in the Center, as a place the most
convenient, from whence he may equally distribute his Heat and animate all
things with it. The Sun then is a particular, body, but what sort of body, is
hard to say. It was ever believed to be a most refined fire, but that opinion
vanished in the beginning of this Age, when the Spots upon his surface were
dicover'd. When the new Planets, whereof I shall tell you more, were discovered
not long before* and all the Philosophic World busied their Brains about
nothing else, it was presently judged that those Spots were the new Planets,
that they had a motion about the Sun, and that necessarily they hid some part
of him from us, in turning their obscure half toward us. Presently the
Virtuoso's began their Flattery with these pretended Planets to all the Princes
of Europe, some gave them the name of one Prince, some of another, and perhaps
there was a quarrel among them what Prince should be Godfather to the chief of
those Spots.

I do not approve of that, said the Marchioness, you told me the other day,
that the different parts of the Moon were called by the names of Virtuoso's and
Astronomers, and I was well satisfied. For since Princes have the Earth to
themselves, it is but just the Virtuoso's should reserve the Heavens to
themselves, and govern there without admitting any Rivals. You may allow them,
said I, in case of necessity, to engage a Star or part of the Moon to a Prince;
as for the Spots of the Sun, they can make no use of them. It has been found
that they are not Planets, but Clouds, or Fumes, or Froth that rises upon the
Face of the Sun: sometimes they are many, sometimes few, sometimes they wholly
disappear, sometimes many of them crowd together, sometimes they separate,
sometimes they appear more clear and sometimes more obscure, sometimes many of
them are seen, and at other times for a long while together none appear at all.
The Sun seems to be some liquid matter, some think melted Gold that boyls
incessantly, and produces those impurities, which by the force of his motion
are thrown out upon his surface, where they consume, and he afterward produces
more. Imagine with your self what strange bodies those are, some of them are,
it may be, as big as the Earth, judge from thence how great is the quantity of
that melted Gold, and how large that Sea of Light and Fire which we call the
Sun. Others say that the Sun appears in the Telescope full of Mountains that
vomit Flame, and it seems a million of Aetna's put together, but they say
likewise that those mountains are a mere appearance, caused by some accident in
the Telescope. But what then shall we trust to, if we must distrust the
Telescope, to which we owe the knowledge of so many new Objects? In fine,
whatever the Sun be, it appears not at all fit to be inhabited, which certainly
is a great loss; for it would be a delicate Habitation: We should be in the
Center of all, and should see the Planets move regularly about him, whereas now
we see an infinite extravagance in their motions, because we are not in a place
proper to judge of them, that is in the Center, is not that a pity? There is
but one place in the World where the study of the Stars would be extreme easy,
and in that very place there is not a man. You never consider, said the
Marchioness, that whoever should be in the Sun would see nothing at all,
neither Planets nor fixed Stars. Does not the Sun hide all? So it would be with
his Inhabitants, who would indeed have good reason to believe themselves the
only Creatures in Nature.

I confess, said I. I was mistaken, I only considered the Situation of the
Sun, and not the effect of his Light; but you that correct me so aptly, must
give me leave to tell you, that you are as much mistaken as my self, the
Inhabitants of the Sun would not see him at all. Either they would not be able
to suffer the force of his Light, or they could not receive it being not placed
at a distance from it; all which being well considered, the Sun would be only
an abode of Blind people: But to prevent all that, it is not made to be
inhabited. Will you then that we prosecute our Voyage about the Worlds? We are
come to the Center, which is always the lowest place in any thing that is
round, we must now return and ascend again, and shall meet in our way Mercury,
Venus, the Earth and the Moon, Planets that we have already visited. The next
that offers is Mars, who has nothing curious in him, that I know, his days a^e
not a whole hour longer than ours, but his years a^e as long as two of ours: he
is less than the Earth, and sees the Sun neither so big nor so bright as we. In
fine, Mars has nothing in him worth the while to detain us. But the jolly
Jupiter with his four Moons or Satellits is worth a Visit. They are four little
Planets that turn about him as the M^on turns about as. But, says the
Marchioness, inter^upting me, why! are there Planets that turn about other
Planets no better than themselves? Seriously it would seem to me more regular
and uniform that all Planets both great and small should have but one and the
same motion about the Sun.

Ah! Madam, said I, did you but know what the Vortices of Descartes are,
Vortices whose name is so terrible and Idea so agreeable, you would not talk as
you do. What, says she laughing, must my Head turn round? 'twill be pleasant to
know what these Vortices are; pray make an end of fooling me, I can no longer
govern my self, nor muse longer upon Philosophy, let us leave talking of the
World, and begin with these Vortices. I never knew you so transported, said I,
it is pity there is any other Objects than Vortices. A Vortex is a mass of
matter whose parts are lose one from the other, and move all in conformity to
themselves; but in the mean time you must allow them some little particular
motions, provided they still follow the general motion. So a Whirlwind is an
infinity of little parts of Air, that turn round altogether and enclose all
they meet. You know the Planets are carried in the celestial matter, which is
of a prodigious subtilty and agitation. All that great mass of celestial matter
from the Sun to the fixed Stars turns round and carrying the Planets with it,
makes them turn all uniformly about the Sun, which possesses the Center, but in
more or less time, according as their distances are more or less from him. All
even to the Sun it self turn* but he turns only about himself, because he is
just in the Center of that celestial matter, and you must observe by the way,
that were the Earth in the Center it could do no less than turn upon its own
Axis.

You see there what is the great Vortex whereof the Sun is Master, but at the
same time the Planets make little particular ^^rtices in imitation of that of
the Sun. Each of them in turning about the Sun, turns likewise about it self,
and turns together with it a certain quantity of the celestial matter, which is
apt to comply with any motion that is given it, if they do not divert it from
its general motion. This is the particular Vortex of a Planet, and the Planet
pushes it forward as far as the force of its motion can extend. If in that
little Vortex a Planet less than that which rules there, do incroach, it is
carried on by the greater, and forced indispensibly to turn about it: yet
nevertheless the great and little Planet, and the Vortex that incloses them,
turn about the Sun. So at the beginning of the World, we made the Moon follow
us, because she was placed within the limits and extent of our Vortex, and
wholly at our devotion. Jupiter, of whom I began to tell you, was more happy or
more powerful than we, there were four little Planets in his Neighborhood, and
he subdued them all; don't you think he would have subdued us likewise, who are
a principal Planet, had we been his Neighbors? He is ninety times bigger than
us, and would doubtless with ease have swallowed us up in his Vortex, and we
should have been no more than a Moon attending on him: whereas we now have one
of our own attending on us, So true it is, that the chance only of place and
situation often decides the whole fortune of a man.

And what assurance, said the Marchioness, have we of continuing always where
we are? I begin so fear we may commit the folly of approaching too near so bold
a Planet as Jupiter, or that he may draw toward us to swallow us up; for it
seems to me that that great motion of the celestial matter ought to move the
Planets irregularly, and draw them sometime nearer, sometime further off from
one another. We should as soon gain as lose by that, said I, perhaps we should
bring Mercury and Venus, little Planets which could not resist us, into
subjection to us. But we need neither hope nor fear, the Planets still keep
their old stations and are forbidden to make new Conquests, as heretofore the
Kings of China were. You know that in mixing Oil and Water, the Oil swims
above, and if you lay upon those two liquors a body extremely light, the Oil
will support it that it shall not touch the Water; but if you add another body
more heavy of a certain weight, it will pass through the Oil which will be too
weak to support it, and will press till it meets the Water, which will be
strong enough to bear it. So in that liquor composed of two liquors that do not
intermix, two bodies of unequal weight do naturally put themselves in two
dif,+ferent places, and the one will never ascend, nor the other descend.
Again, put together other liquors that shall continue separate and unmixed, and
put in other bodies, it will be still the same. Represent to your self that the
celestial matter that fills this great Vortex has several lays that infold one
another, and whereof the Weights are different, as those of Oil and Water, and
other liquors. The Planets have likewise different Weights, and consequently
every one of them floats upon the lay, which has exactly a strength necessary
to support it, and makes it of such equal poise, that it is not possible it
should ever remove from thence.

I understand very well* said the Marchioness, that those weights do well
regulate those lays, I wish to God we had some such Regulation among us, that
might fix people in the places that are naturally fit for them. You see me now
well satisfied as to Jupiter, and very well pleased that he will let us alone
in our little Vortex with our one only Moon; for I am of a humor that easily
confine my self, and do not envy him his four.

You would do him wrong to envy him, says I, he has no more than he has need
of, at the distance he is from the Sun his Moons receive and reflect upon him a
very weak Light. It Is true that he turning about himself in ten hours, his
nights, which continue but five, are very short, and it may seem that he has no
nece^^ity of four Moons; but there are other things to be considered, here
under the Poles we have six months day and six night; for the Poles are the two
extremities of the Earth farthest distant from those places through which the
Sun seems to make his course. The Moon holds or seems to hold the same course
very near that the Sun does, and as the Inhabitants of the Pole see the Sun for
one half of his annual course, and the other half see him not at all; so they
likewise see the Moon during one half of her monthly course, that is, for
fifteen days, and see her not the other fi^teen. The years of Jupiter are
twelve of ours, and there ought to be in that Planet two opposite extremities,
where the days and nights are of six years continuance: Nights of six years are
very long, therefore I believe it was for their sakes that those four Moons
were designed. That which in respect of Jupiter is the highest, makes its
course round him in seventeen days, the second in seven, the third in three
days and a half, and the fourth in forty hours; their courses being cut just in
half for the unhappy people of that Country, who have six years night, they
cannot pass one and twenty hours, without seeing at least the last of those
Moons It Is a Consolation during a Darkness of so tedious a continuance: but in
whatever place of Jupiter you inhabit* those four Moons will give you the most
pleasant Spectacle in the World. Sometimes they rise all at once, and then
separate themselves according to (...) inequality of their motions, sometimes
they are all in their Meridian ranged the one above the other, sometimes they
appear all four above the Horizon at equal distances, sometimes when two of
them rise, the other two set, but above all, I should delight to see their
Eclipses, for there is not a day passes but they eclipse one another or eclipse
the Sun, and certainly Eclipses being so samiliar in that World, they are a
great subject of Divertisement, and not of Fear as they are here.

And you will not fail, said the Marchioness, to people those four Moons
likewise, though they are but little subalternate Planets, designed only to
inlighten the nights of another. No doubt on it, said I, those Planets are not
at all less worthy to be inhabited for being subjected to turn about another
more imporrant. I would then, says she, have it, that the Inhabitants of the
four Moons of Jupiter, should be Colonies drawn from him, and that they should
receive from bim, if possible, their Laws and Customs, and consequently should
render him some sort of Homage, and never look upon the great Planet without
Respect. And must it not be likewise, said I, that the four Moons should from
time to time send their Deputies to Jupiter, to make their Oath of Fidelity?
for my part, I assure you that the little Superiority we have over the people
of our Moon, makes me doubt whether Jupiter has much over the Inhabitants of
his, and I believe the advantage he can most reasonably pretend to, is to
frighten them; for example, in that which is nearest to him, he appears to them
three hundred and sixty times bigger than our Moon appears to us; for he is so
much bigger than she is: he is, I believe, nearer to them than she is to us,
which still increases the bigness. They have then that monstrous Planet daily
hanging over their heads at a very little distance, and truly if the Gauls of
old were afraid the Heavens would fall upon them, the Inhabitants of that Moon
have much more cause to fear the fall of Jupiter. That is, possibly, says she,
the fear they have instead of that of Eclipses, which you tell me they are free
from, but must pay for it by some other folly. That is of absolute necessity,
said I; the Inventor of the third System, whom I told you of the other day, the
famous Tycho Brahe, the greatest Astronomer that ever was, he feared not
Eclipses as the vulgar do; for his daily Conversation was with them; but would
you believe what he feared instead of them? When he went at any time out of his
Lodging, if the first person he met were an old Woman, or if a Hare crossed his
way, he believed it would be an unlucky day to him, and would presently return
and shut himself up, and not dare to take in hand the least matter.

It would not be just, said she, since that Man could not deliver himself from
the fear of Eclipses, without paying for it by some folly, that the Inhabitants
of that Moon of Jupiter, which we speak of, should free themselves with less
trouble, we will give them no Quarter, they shall undergo the Common Law, and fall
into some other Error, but-how, I trouble not my head to guess. Therefore pray
explain to me another difficulty has possessed me within this little while, if
the Earth be so little in respect of Jupiter, does Jupiter see us? I fear we
are unknown to him.

Truly, says I, I believe that, he must needs see the Earth ninety times less
than we see him, that is too little, he sees it not all: But here is that which
we may better believe for our advantage, there may be Astronomers in Jupiter,
who having taken pains to make excellent Telescopes, and choosing the fairest
nights for Observation, may at last have discovered in the Heavens a little
Planet which they never saw before, presently the Iournal des Scivans of that
Country speaks of it; the people of Jupiter either hear nothing of it, or only
laugh at it. The Philosophers, whose Opinions it destroys, are resolved not to
believe it; none but the most reasonable doubt of it Observations are repeated,
and the little Planet is reviewed; people are certain that it is no Vision, and
begin to suspect that it moves about the Sun, after a thousand Observations
it is discovered that that motion is annual, and at last, thanks to the pains
and studies of the Virtuoso's, it is known in Jupiter that our Earth is a World,
the curious run to gaze on it with their Telescopes, and scarcely is it
discernable.

If it were not, said the Marchioness, that it is not very satisfactory to know
that from Jupiter they cannot discover us without a Telescope. I should take
pleasure in representing to my self those Telescopes of Jupiter planted toward
us as ours are to behold him, and that mutual curiosity of the two Planets in
considering one another, and asking What World is this? What People inhabit
here?

Hold* said I, that is not so soon done as you imagine: should the Inhabitants
of Jupiter see our Earth, and know it, yet our Earth is not our selves; there
would not be the least suspicion that it is inhabited: and should any one chance
to entertain such a thought, God knows how the whole World of Jupiter would
mock him. Nay possibly we have already been the cause of arraigning some of
their Philosophers for holding that we have a Being in Nature. In the mean time
I rather believe, that the Inhabitants of Jupiter hvae employment enough in
making discoveries in their own Planet, without ever dreaming of us; it is so
big, that if they have the Art of Navigation, their Christopher Columba's have
most certainly employment enough. It must needs be that the people of that
World do not know the hundredth part of it; whereas in Mercury, which is very
little, they are all Neighbors, live very familiarly together, and count it
but a Walk, to make a turn about their World. If they do not see us from
Jupiter, you will easily judge that the people of that Planet do much less see
Venus and Mercury, which are both lesser Worlds, and more distant from him. But
to make amends, his inhabitants see Mars, and their own four Moons, and Saturn
with his. These are Planets enough to perplex their Astronomers, and Nature has
been so kind to conceal the rest of the Universe from them.

How, said the Marchioness, do you count that a kindness? Without doubt it is,
said I, there are in all this great Vortex sixteen Planets. Nature, who would
save us the trouble of studying all their motions, has let us see but seven of
them, is not that a great kindness? But we, who know not how to value it, have
taken a course to find out the other nine that were concealed, and are punished
for our pains by the great labor that Astronomy at present requires.

I find, says she, by that number of sixteen Planets, that Saturn ought to have
five Moons. He has so, says I, and of those five, two are but lately
discovered; but there is a thing yet much more remarkable, one of his years
being thirty of ours, and by consequence there being Countries in him, whose
night is of fifteen years continuance, guess you what Nature has invented to
inlighten such terrible nights. She was not satisfied with bestowing five Moons
upon Saturn, but she has also enclosed him with a great Circle or Ring, which
is high enough raised to be out of the Shadow of the Body of that Planet, and
continually reflects the Light of the Sun upon those places that do not see him.

Seriously and truly, says the Marchioness, with an Air of one astonished, all
this is a work of great Order, it is very visible that Nature had in her eye
the Necessities of every living Being, and that the Distribution of Moons was
not a thing done at random. There Is none share in it but the Planets farthest
distant from the Sun, viz. the Earth, Jupiter and Saturn; for it was not worth
the while to give them to Venus and Mercury, who receive but too much Light,
whose Nights are short, and which they esteem a much greater benefit of Nature
than their Days.

But stay, says she, methinks Mars, who is father removed from the Sun than the
Earth is, has no Moon. It cannot be denied, said I, he has none, and therefore
he must have some other refuge in his nights than we know of. You have seen
those Phosphores, of either dry or liquid matter, which receiving the Light of
the Sun, imbibe it, and diffusing it in the dark, give a considerable light.
Perhaps Mars has great Rocks high raised, which are natural Phosphores, and
which in the day time make a provision of Light, which they disburse in the
night. You cannot deny that it would be a delightful spectacle to see all those
Rocks lighted at Sunset, and make magnificent Illuminations without any Art.
You know likewise that there are in America certain Birds so luminous, that
they give light enough to read by in the dark. How do we know but Mars has a
great many of those Birds, which at nightfall disperse themselves every where,
and create a new day?

I am not satisfied, says she, neither with your Rocks nor your Birds; not but
that it may be very pretty; but since Nature has given so many Moons to Saturn
and Jupiter, it is a sign there is occasion for them. I should have been glad
that all the Worlds far distant from the Sun had them likewise, but Mars I find
makes a disagreeable exception. Ah! says I, if you looked more into Philosophy
than you do, you would accustom your self to find exceptions in the best
Systems. There is ever something that agrees very well, and something that we
make agree as well as we can, or else we let it alone, if we despair of
succeeding well in it. Let us deal so with Mars: since he does not favor us,
let us even say no more of him. We should be sufficiently astonished if we were
in Saturn, to see over our heads in the night that great Ring, which moving in
form of a Semicircle from one end of the Horizon to the other, reflects the
Light of the Sun, and performs the office of a perpetual Moon. And, says the
Marchioness, laughing, must we not likewise have Inhabitants in that great
Ring? Truly said I, however I may be bold enough to plant them every where
else, I must confess, I dare not place any there, that Ring seems an habitation
too irregular. But as for the five little Moons, I think we cannot well
dispense with peopling them; if in the mean time that Ring be, as some suspect,
no more than a circle of Moons that follow one another very close with an equal
motion, and that the five little Moons are such as have made their escape from
the great Circle, what an infinity of Worlds shall we have in that Vortex of
Saturn? however it be, the people of Saturn, with all the help of that Ring,
are miserable enough. It gives them light, but what sort of a light at that
distance from the Sun? the Sun it self is to them but a small Star, pale and
wan, and has only a little glittering and a feeble heat. Were they brought into
the coldest of our Countries, as Groenland or Lapland, you would see them melt
and expire with heat. You give me, says the Marchioness, an Idea of Saturn that
freezes me, as just now you heated me in your discourse of Mercury. It must
needs be, says I, that two Worlds that are in the extermities of this great
Vortex, should be opposite in all things.

So then, says she, they must be wise in Saturn; for you told me, they are all
fools in Mercury. If they are not wise in Saturn, said I, they are, at least in
all appearance `very phlegmatic: they are people that know not what it is to
laugh, that require a whole day to answer to the least Question, and would look
upon Cato of Vitica as a Buffoon or a Jack-pudding. I have a thought in my
head, says she; all the Inhabitants of Mercury are lively, and all those of
Saturn are dull; among us some are lively and some are dull, does not this
proceed from hence, that we being just in the middle between those other
Worlds, participate of the extremities? There is no fixed and determinate
Character for Man, some are framed like the Inhabitants of Mercury, others like
those of Saturn, and we are a mixture of all species that are in the other
Planets. I like that idea, said I, well enough, we make up so odd a kind of
likeness, that it may be thought we are a Collection out of several different
Worlds; and therefore it is convenient enough to be here, where we see all the
other Worlds in compendium.

At least, said the Marchioness, our World has one real convenience by the
Situation, that it is neither so hot as Mercury or Venus, nor so cold as
Jupiter or Saturn; and moreover we are seated just in a part of the Earth where
we find excess neither of Heat nor Cold. Seriously, if a certain Philosopher
gave thanks to Nature for making him a Man and not a Beast, a Greek and not a
Barbarian, I for my share give her thanks for placing me in the most temperate
Planet of the Universe, and in the most temperate place of that Planet. Believe
me, Madam, said I, you may give her thanks that you are young and not old,
young and fair, and not young and ugly; a young and fair French-woman, and not
a young and fair Italian: these are things to be acknowledged as advantages as
well as those you receive by the Situation of your Vortex and the Temperature
of your Country.

Good God! said the Marchioness, let me acknowledge all, even to the Vortex
where I am placed, the proportion of Happiness that has been measured out to us
is very small, and we ought to be chary of it and lose none, and it is good to
entertain such a relish and sense of even the most common and inconsiderable
things, as may render them useful to us. If we desire only lively pleasures, we
shall have few, stay long and pay dear for them. You will promise me then, said
I, if I propose lively pleasures to you, you will remember me and my Vortices,
and will be of our side. I will, said she, but you must provide that Philosophy
still supply me with new pleasures. At least, said I, to morrow, I hope, you
shall not fail of them. I have fixed Stars that will go beyond all that you
have seen yet.

THE Fifth Evening.
THe Marchioness was sensibly impatient to know what would become of the fixed
Stars. Shall they be inhabited, says she, as the Planets are, or shall they
not? or what shall we do with them? Perhaps, said I, you might guess, if you
would; the fixed Stars cannot be less distant from the Earth than some fifty
millions of Leagues, and if you vex an Astronomer, he will put them a great way
further. The distance of the Sun from the most distant Planet, is nothing in
comparison of the distance of the Sun or of the Earth from the fixed Stars, men
do not take the pains to compute it. Their Light, as you see, is bright and
lively enough. If they receive it from the Sun, they must needs receive it in a
weak condition after a passage of fifty millions of Leagues, and they must
return it to us through the same distance by a Reflection, that must yet much
more impair the strength of it. It may seem impossible that a Light that is
made by Reflection, and has travailed twice fifty millions of Leagues, should
retain that force and vivacity which we find in the fixed Stars. You see then
they are all luminous in themselves, and in a word, are so many Suns.

I am not out of the way, cried the Marchioness, whether I go, or whether you
lead me, you are going to tell me, That the fixed Stars are so many Suns, our
Sun is the Center of a Vortex that turns about him, why should not every fixed
Star be the Center of a Vortex that has likewise a motion about it? Our Sun has
Planets which it inlightens, why should not every fixed Star have the like? I
have no Answer, said I, but that of Phedra to Enone, It Is you have said it.

But, says she, why there is the Universe so big that I am lost in it, I know
not where I am, I Am nothing. What, shall all be divided into Vortices
confusedly thrown one among another? Shall evero Star be the Center of a Vortex
as big perhaps as that wherein we are? Shall all the immense space that
comprehends our Sun and our Planets be no more than a little Spot of the
Universe? This confounds, perplexes and astonishes me. And, said I, for my
share, I am wholly at ease. Were Heaven no more than that blue Vault where the
Stars are nailed, the Universe would seem small and narrow to me, and I should
find my self straighten'd and oppressed. But now that this Vault is of infinite
more extent and profundity, in dividing it into a thousand thousand Vortices,
methinks I breath with more liberty, and am in a more open Air; and most
assuredly the Universe has wholly another Magnificence. Nature spared nothing
in making it, but made a profusion of her Riches wholly worthy of her. Nothing
can be represented so beautiful as that prodigious number of Vortices in the
Center whereof is seated the Sun turning the Planets about him. The Inhabitants
of a Planet of one of those infinite Vortices, see on all sides the luminous
centers of those Vortices which surround them, but they see not the Planets,
which having but a feeble light borrowed from their Sun, do not propagate it
beyond their World.

You offer me, said she, a kind of Perspective so long, that my eye cannot
reach the end of it. I clearly see the Inhabitants of the Earth, and afterward
you show me those of the Moon and the other Planets of our Vortex, truly
clearly enough, but less than those of the Earth, and after them come the
Inhabitants of the Planets of other Vortices. I protest to you they are wholly
drowned, and with all that I can do to see them, they are still almost wholly
indiscernable. And in effect, are they not almost annihilated by the expression
you are fain to make use of in speaking of them, you are fain to call them the
Inhabitants of one of the Planets of one of those infinite Vortices. You must
confess that you hardly know how to disingage us our selves, to whom the same
expression agrees, from the midst of so many Worlds. For my share, I begin to
see the Earth so fearfully little, that from hence forward I shall have no
value for any thing in it. Certainly men are so earnest in the pursuit of
Greatness, form Design upon Design, and turmoile themselves so much, only
because they are ignorant of these Vortices. These new Lights I intend shall
apologize for me; and when any blame me for an unactive negligence, my Answer
shall be, Ah! if you did but know what the fixed Stars are! Alexander, says, I,
certainly knew nothing of them; for a certain Author, who holds that the Moon
is inhabited, says seriously, that it was not possible that Aristotle should
not be of an opinion so reasonable (for how could a Truth escape Aristotle?)
but that he would say nothing of it for fear of displeasing Alexander, who
would have fallen into despair to have seen a World that he could not conquer.
The truth is, should any one have made a Mystery of the Vortices and fixed
Stars, had they been known in those days, it had been an ill Complement to have
told him of them. I my self, that know them, am not a little concerned that I
can make no profit by the Knowledge. They at best, in your opinion, cure only
an unquiet and ambitious mind, which I am not troubled with; a little foolish
inclination for the thing that is fair, is all my malady, and I doubt the
Vortices can do me little kindness in that. The other Worlds, you say, make
this seem little to you, but yet they obscure not the Luster of your Eyes, nor
spoil that pretty Mouth, those have still the same value in spite of all the
Worlds.

This Love, said the Marchioness, laughing, is a strange thing, it has a Salvo
for all things and there is no System can do it harm. But tell me pray, and tell
me freely, is your System true? Hide nothing from me, I promise you secrecy. To
me it seems grounded only on a little Convenience superficial enough. A Star
fixed and luminous in it self like the Sun, ought consequently to be as the Sun
is, the Center and Soul of a World, and to have Planets turning about him. Is
not this of absolute necessity?

Hark you, Madam, said I, since it is our humor to mix the Folly of Gallantry
with our most serious Discourse, the Reasonings of Mathematics are like those
of Love; grant but a Lover the least thing, and you are presently engaged to
make a farther Concession, and then another, and so to the Worlds end. In like
manner grant a Mathematician the least Principle, he will deduce a Consequence
that you must likewise grant, and from that another, and whether you will or
not he will carry you so far as you hardly believe. These two sort of people take
more than is given them. You allow, that when two things are alike in what
appears to me, I may believe they are also alike in what appears not to me, if
nothing otherways hinders me. From hence I concluded that the Moon is
inhabited, because she resembles the Earth, and that the Planets are, because
they resemble Moon. I find that the fixed Stars resemble our Sun, and I
attribute to them all that is in him. You are now too far engaged to retire,
you must even go on. But, says she, according to this Resemblance you make
between the fixed Stars and our Sun, it must needs be that the people of
another great Vortex do not see him but as a little fixed Star, which appears
to them only in their night.

No doubt on it, said I, our Sun is so near us, in comparison of the Suns of
other Vortices, that his Light must have infinitely more of force upon our Eyes
than theirs: so that we see him, and him only, when we see him; for he dazles
all else. But in another great Vortex, another Sun prevails, and he takes his
turn and dazles ours, which appears there only in the night with the other
foreign Suns, that is, the fixed Stars, The people there seat him with them in
the great Arch of Heaven, and there he makes a part perhaps of some Bull or
Bear. As for the Planets that move about him, as our Earth, for example, they
are not discerned so far off, and no body dreams of them. So all the Suns are
Day Suns for the Vortices where they are placed, and Night Suns for all the
other Vortices. In their World they are the only ones of their kind, every
where else they serve only to make up the number of Stars.

But yet, says she, notwithstanding this Equality, may not these Worlds differ
in a thousand things? for a Resemblance in the main may admit of infinite
varieties.

Most certain, said I, but the difficulty is to guess what or how. What know I?
one Vortex has more Planets that turn about his Sun, another has fewer. In the
one there are subordinate Planets, which move about others that are bigger, in
another there is no such thing. Here they all crowd together about their Sun, and
make, as it were, a little Ball, beyond which a great void space extends as far
as the neighboring Vortices. In another place they take their course toward
the extremities of the Vortex, and leave the middle void. I doubt not likewise
but there may be some Vortices desert, and without Planets; and others, whose
Sun not being exactly in the Center, has a true motion, and carrys his Planets
with him. Others that rise or fall in respect of their Sun, according to the
change of the poise that sustains them. In fine, what more would you have?
There Is even enough for a man that was never out of his own Vortex.

That Is not much, says she, for the Quantity of Worlds; what you say is not
enough for above five or six, and I see here a million.

What would it be then, said I, if I should tell you that there are many more
fixed Stars than those that you see, and that wirh a Telescope an infinite
number are discovered that did not appear to the eye, and that in one sole
Constellation, where we usually reckon perhaps twelve, or fifteen, there are
found to be as many as were seen before in the whole Heaven.

Oh! cried the Marchioness, give me Quarter, I yield, you overwhelm me with
Worlds and Vortices.

I know, said I, what I have in store for you yet. You see that White, commonly
called the Milky way. Can you imagine what it is? It Is an infinity of little
Stars invisible to the eye, because of their smalness, and so thick set one by
the other that they seem to form that continued Whiteness. I wish you saw with
a Telescope that crowd of Stars, like Ants in their Hillock, that Grainery of
Worlds (if I may be permitted the expression) they resemble in some sort the
Maldivian Isles, those twelve thousand little Isles or Banks of Sand, separated
only by little Channels of the Sea, that a man may leap over as easy as so many
Ditches. So the little Vortices of the Milky way are so close one to the other,
that methinks from one World to the other they may hold discourse, and even
shake hands; at least, I believe, the Birds of one World pass easily to
another; and Pigeons that are taught to carry Letters, may be as useful there
as here in the Levant.

Those little Worlds are evidently an exception from the general Rule by which
one Sun* when he appears in his Vortex, extinguishes all foreign Suns. If you
are in one of those little Vortices of the Milky way, your Sun is hardly nearer
to you, and consequently has not sensibly more of force upon your Eyes than an
hundred thousand other Suns of the neigbouring Vortices. You see then your
Heaven glittering with an infinite number of Fires, very near one to the other,
and not far distant from you. When you have lost sight of your Sun, you have
still enough remain, and your Night is as clear as the Day, or at least the
difference is not sensible, and to speak better, you have no Night at all. The
people of those Worlds, used as they are to a perpetual Light, would be much
astonished to hear that there are unhappy people that have real Nights, that
are buried in profound Darkness, and when they enjoy the Light, it is only of
one Sun: They would look on us as Beings cursed by Nature, and would tremble
with Horror at our Condition.

I do not ask you, said the Marchioness, if there be Moons in those Worlds in
the Milky way. I well see they would be of no use to the principal Planets,
that have no Night, and which moreover move in spaces too straight to incumber
themselves with that attendance of subordinate Planets. But do you know, that
your profuse multiplying of Worlds upon me, has raised in me a real difficulty?
The Vortices, where we see the Suns, touch the Vortex where we are. The
Vortices are round, are they not? How then can so many Bowls touch one? I would
imagine this, but I am sensible I cannot.

There Is a great deal of Wit and Judgment, said I, in having that difficulty,
and likewise in not being able to resolve it. For it is good in it self, and in
the manner you conceive it, it is unanswerable, and there is but little Wit in
finding an Answer for what has none. If our Vortex were of the figure of a Die,
it would have six flat faces, and would be very far from being round, but upon
every one of those faces might be put a Vortex of the same figure; if in stead
of six flat faces, it had 20, 50, 1000, there might be 1000 Vortices laid on
it, every one on a particular face, and you apprehend that the more flat faces
a body has, the nearer it comes to a round figure, so as a Diamond cut into
flats, if the flats be very small, will be almost as round as a Pearl of the
same bigness. The Vortices are not round, but after that manner; they have an
infinity of flats on their outside, each of which carrys another Vortex. These
flats are very unequal, some great, some small. The lesser of our Vortex, for
example, correspond with the Milky way, and sustain all those little Worlds:
and whereas two Vortices that rest upon two adjoining flats, leave a void space
between them underneath. Nature, in that case, who knows well how to manage the
matter, fills up those void spaces with a little Vortex or two, perhaps with a
thousand, which do not at all disturb the rest, and are only an addition of one
or two or a thousand Worlds more; so that we may see many more Worlds than our
Vortex has flats to carry. I Will hold a wager that though those little Worlds
were only made to be thrown into a corner of the Universe, what would otherwise
have remained useless, although they are unknown to the other Worlds that touch
them, they are yet well content in themselves. They are doubtless those whose
Suns are not to be seen without the Telescope, and which are progidious in
number. In fine, all these Vortices agree one with another the best they can:
and whereas each of them must turn about his Sun without changing place, every
one takes the way of turning that is most convenient and easy in his
situation. They ingrain one within another like the Wheels of a Watch, and
mutually help each others motion. Yet it is true, they likewise act one against
another. Every World, it is said, is like a Bladder that swells it self, and
would extend it self, if it were let alone; but it is repressed by the
neighboring Worlds, and contracts it self, and then swells again, and so on.
And it is thought that the fixed Stars give us a trembling Light, and seem to
twinkle only, because their Vortices perpetually press upon ours, and are
pressed by it.

I have a great kindness, said the Marchioness, for these Idea's, I love these
Bladders that swell and fall again every moment, and these Worlds that combat
one another, and above all, I am pleased to see that the Combat produces an
intercourse of Light between them, which is certainly the only Commerce they
can have.

No, no, said I, that is not the only Correspondence; the neighboring Worlds
send sometimes to visit us, and that with Magnificence enough: there come
Comets to us from thence, which are ever adorned, either with a bright shining
Perriwig, or a venerable Beard, or a Majestic Tail.

Ah! says she, laughing, what kind of Ambassadors are those? We might well
excuse their Visit, for they serve only to scare people.

They scare none but Children, said I, because of their extraordinary Equipage,
but those Children indeed are many. Comets are only Planets that belong to a
neighboring Vortex. They had their motion toward the extremities, but that
Vortex being perhaps differently pressed by those that are round about it, is
more round above and flatter below, and it is the part below that looks toward
us. Those Planets that began their circular motion above, did not foresee that
below the Vortex failed them; because it is there as it were pressed flat, and
to continue their circular motion, they of necessity incroach upon another
Vortex, which I suppose to be ours, and cut the extremities of it. They are
ever very high, in respect of us, and move far above Saturn. It is necessary in
our System, for reasons that are nothing to our present subject that from
Saturn to the two extremities of our Vortex, there should be a great void space
and without Planets. Our enemies still charge us with the unusefulness of that
space; but let them not trouble their Heads, we have found the use of it; it is
the Appartment of foreign Planets that come to our World.

I understand you well, said she, we suffer them not to enter into the heart of
our Vortex, and with our own Planets; but we receive them as the Grand
Seignior, receives Ambassadors; He does not honor them with Lodgings in
Constantinople, but only in the Suburbs of he Town.

We have this likewise, said I, in common with the Ottomans, that as they
receive Ambassadors, but send none; so we send none of our Planets to the
neighboring Worlds.

To speak my Opinion, said she, upon the whole matter, we are very rude: in the
mean time I know not well that I ought to believe. These foreign Planets have a
very menacing Air with their Tails and Beards, and perhaps they are sent to
insult us; whereas ours, that are not made after the same manner, are not so
proper to cause Fear, should they be sent into other Worlds.

Those Tails and Beards, said I, are mere Appearances, those foreign Planets
differ nothing from ours, but at their entrance into our Vortex, they take the
Tail and Beard by a certain strong Illumination of the Sun, which has not yet
been well explained between us; but yet we are sure it acts only by a kind of
Illumination; we will judge more certainly of it when we can.

I should be very willing then, said she, that Saturn would take a Tail or a
Beard in some other Vortex, and spread a Fear there, and having laid aside his
terrible Equipage, return and range himself with the other Planets in his
ordinary Function.

It Is better, said I, for him, that he should not stir at all out of our
Vortex; I have told you what a shock two Vortices make when they push against
one another, I believe the poor Planet is then handled rudely enough, and the
Inhabitants are not much more at ease. We believe we are unhappy when a Comet
appears, whereas it is the Comet it self that is unhappy.

I do not believe so, said the Marchioness, it brings us all its Inhabitants in
good health. Nothing is so diverting as that change of Vortex; We who never
stir out of ours, lead a life uneasy enough. If the Inhabitants of a Comet
have wit enough to foresee the time of their passage into our World, those who
have already made the Voyage, discover to the others beforehand, what they
shall see there. You will presently see a Planet with a great Ring about it,
say they, perhaps speaking of Saturn, you will see another that has four little
ones following it: perhaps likewise there are people appointed to observe the
very moment of their entrance into our World, who cry A new Sun, a new Sun, as
the Seamen cry Land, land.

I need not then, continued I, think any more of persuading you to pity the
Inhabitants of a Comet, but I hope, at least, you will compassionate those that
live in a Vortex where the Sun is extinct. How! cried she, Suns extinct? Yes,
doubtless, said I, the Ancients saw fixed Stars in the Heavens which we do not
see now, those Suns have lost their Light. A great desolation most certainly in
the whole Vortex, a general mortality among all the Planets for what is to be
done without a Sun? That Idea, said he, is too sad, can you no way excuse me
that? I Will tell you, if you please, says I, what knowing men say; That those
fixed Stars which have disappeared, are not therefore extinct, but that they
are Demi Suns, that is to say, which have the one half obscure and the other
luminous; and as they turn upon their own Axis they sometimes present us the
luminous side, and then we see them, sometimes the obscure side, and then we
see them not. I would, to oblige you, hold this Opinion, which is more moderate
than the other; but I can hold it only in respect of certain Stars which have
regulated times of appearing and disappearing, as is begun to be discovered in
some, otherwise the Demi Suns could not subsist. But what shall we say of those
Stars that have disappeared, and were never seen since; though in all this time
they might most certainly have performed their Course upon their Axis. You are
too just to oblige me to believe that they are Demi Suns, but yet I Will make
another Essay in your favor. Those Suns shall not be extinct, they shall be
only sunk into the immense profundity of Heaven, beyond the reach of our eye.
In such case, the Vortex followed its Sun, and all is well. It Is true that the
greatest part of the fixed Stars have not that motion, by which they remove
themselves from us; for then at other times they ought to return to us, and we
should see them sometimes bigger, sometimes less, which does not happen. But
we will suppose that there are only some little Vortices lighter, and more agil,
that slip in among the other, and having taken certain turns at the end of
their Course they return, while the great Vortices remain immovable. But here is
the mischief, there are fixed Stars, which come and show themselves to us, and
continue long in only appearing and disappearing, and at last wholly disappear.
Demi Suns would appear again at regular times. Suns that sunk into the depth of
Heaven would disappear but once for a long time. Now resolve, Madam,
courageously, those Stars must be Suns that obscure themselves enough not to be
visible to our eyes, and they afterward take light again, and at last are
wholly extinct. How can a Sun, says the Marchioness, obscure and extinguish it
self, a Sun that is in it self a Source and Spring of Light? The most easily in
the world, says I, according to Des Carts. Our Sun has Spots, which are Froth,
or Scum, or Mists, or what ever you please, those Spots may condense, many of
them gather together and close one with another; at last they may go so far as
to form a kind of a Crust about the Sun, and then farewell Sun. We have already
fairly escaped it, they say. The Sun has been very pale for some whole years
together, as for example, the year after the death of Caesar; it was the Crust
that began then to grow upon the Sun, but by the force of the Sun it was
dissipated, had it continued we had been undone.

You make me tremble, said the Marchioness, I know now the Consequences of the
paleness of the Sun, I believe in stead of going to see in my Glass in a
morning if I am pale, I shall look toward Heaven, to see if the Sun be so.

Ah! Madam, said I, take courage, 'twill require time to ruin a World. But
still, says she, time will do it. I confess it, said I, all this immense heap
of matter, which makes up the Universe, is in perpetual motion, and no part of
it wholly exempt; since then there is a motion in every part, trust it not,
there must be a change, be it slow or be it swift, but still in time
proportionable to the effect. The Ancients had a pleasant fancy that the
celestial bodies were unchangeable, because they never saw a change in them;
but had they time enough to confirm their Opinion by experience? the Ancients
were young in respect of us. Should the Roses, which live but a day, write
their own Story, and leave their Memoirs from one to another, the first would
make a Description of their Gardener after one certain fashion, and for more
than fifteen thousand Ages of Roses, those that should leave their Story to
Posterity would make no alteration; from whence they would reason thus, We have
ever seen the same Gardin^r; our History tells us of no other, he was ever made
as he is; certainly he dies not as we do, nor ever changes. Would this be good
Reasoning of the Roses? and yet they would have better ground for it, than the
Ancients had for their Opinion of the Celestial bodies. And were it so that the
Heavens had suffered no change to this day, had they in themselves any Sign or
Character of an eternal duration without change, yet I should not believe it,
but wait for farther satisfaction from a longer experience. Ought we to
establish our Duration, which is but of a moment, by the measures of another?
Can we argue that what has continued a hundred thousand times longer than we,
will endure for ever? Eternity is not so easily acquired. A thing must have
outlived many Ages of Man, to begin only to give a sign of its Immortality.

Truly, said the Marchioness, I find the World's very far from any reason of
pretending to it; I would not do them the honor so much as to compare them to
the Gardener that survives so many Roses, they are but even as the Roses
themselves that spring up and perish in the same Garden one after another; for
I observe that if some ancient Stars have disappeared, new ones have succeeded,
and still there must be a reparation of the Species.

There is no fear of their perishing, said I; some will tell you they are only
Suns that return after a long time being lost to us in the profundity of
Heaven, others will say, they are Suns that have disengaged themselves from
that obscure Crust that began to enclose them. This I easily believe may be,
but I believe likewise that the Universe is so made that new Suns may be formed
in it from time to time, why may not the matter proper to make a Sun, after
having been long dispersed in several places, at last congregate it self in one
certain place, and lay the foundations of a new World? I am the rather inclined
to believe these new productions, because they agree better with those great
Ideas I have of the works of Nature. Has not she the secret of causing Herbs
and Plants to spring and dye in a continual Revolution? I am persuaded, and you
are so likewise, that the practices the same secret in the Worlds, and it costs
her no more to do it.

In good Faith, says the Marchioness, I find the Worlds, the Heavens and
Celestial bodies so subject to change, that I have even left them.

Let us leave them more yet, said I, if you will be persuaded by me, and talk no
more of them; for you are now come to the highest Roof of Heaven, and to tell
you whether there be Stars beyond that or not, will require more knowledge than
I have. Place Worlds there, or place them not, 'twill depend upon your self.
The Empire of Philosophers is properly in those great invisible Country's,
which may be or not be, according as they please, and be such as they please to
make them. To me it suffises that I have led your thoughts as far as you can
reach with your eyes.

So, says she, I have now the whole System of the Universe in my Head; I am now
a knowing Woman.

You are, said I, reasonable enough, and you are so with this convenience, that
you may believe nothing of all that I have said to you, till you please your
self. I only request, as a Recompense for my pains, that you will never look
upon the Sun, Heaven or Stars without thinking on me.

FINIS.

