THE Passion-Flower: A SERMON Preached on the 30th day of January, BEING The
Day of the MARTYRDOM OF King Charles the I.

(...), Of whom the World was not worthy, Heb. 11. 38. By CHRISTOPHER FLOVVER,
M. A. and Rector of St. Margarets Lothbury, LONDON.

London, Printed for Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in Cornhill. 1666.

Academiae Gantabrigiensis Liber.


To the truly Worthy His Honored Friend Dr. BALDWIN HAMEY Doctor of Physic.
SIR,
OFten and seriously considering my manifold obligations, owing even my very
life (next under God) to your care and cure, as having not seldom prolonged it,
when twinkling on the socket; I determined rather to run the Gantlop of Censure
from this capricious and overcurious age, than merit the sordid Epithet of
Ungrateful. And yet, if the gale of your Clemency drive me clear off that
Scylla, I fear I shall split upon Charibdis, incurr the supicion, at lest, of
pride and vainglory, while I only wish my Meditations immortal, whereby my
thanks may run parallel with them. I must ingenuously acknowledge, this
Discourse has nothing to commend it to your accomplished self, but the sincere
loyalty of the Author, and the weightiness of the Subject; comprising some of
the Unjust Sufferings of the Lord of Glory; in which, as in a mirror, you may
also view the Sufferings of our glorious Lord, King CHARLES the first of ever
blessed memory; whose Anniversary merits (maugre all malice) a sable Monument
of solemn mourning to bear date with the utmost length of Time; that so the
Enemies of his Regality. and Virtues may see the guilt and greatness of their
Vices, and those of our Nation and Religion may discern our Reallity and
Innocence. Now would you deign to inquire what flegg'd this Discourse of mine
to fly (tho with black wings) farther than your habitation, suffer me to tell
you (which I cannot without a sigh) the supine negligence of some and the
irreligion of others, which obstructs a religious ingress into the sacred place
of God's special Presence on the annual approach of this dismal day? So that,
by an happy Providence, this Sermon may reach some of their houses and perch on
some of their hands, who make little, or no conscience of frequenting God's
House on this solemn day. That I have made a good Choice in putting this weak
child of my weaker brain, under your Patronage, none will or can deny; you
having obtained one of the chiefest places among those (...), breathing Gods;
who enrich daily the world with wonders, in raising infirm mortals from
sickness to health, and as it were from death it self. I may add, whose
loyalty, learning, candor, integrity of life, and exemplary Charity, are as so
many specifics against the Pestilential breath of detraction. If you shall
vouchsafe (Noble Sir) to stick in the vernant Eden of your Study this
Passion-Flower (which you are much more able than my self to read a Lecture on)
you will very much oblige him, whose highest Ambition it is humbly to subscribe
himself

Your devoted Servant, and witness of your merit, CHR. FLOVVER.

THE Passion-Flower.
John 18. part of the 40th. Verse. -- Not this Man, but Barabbas.
The whole verse has it thus, Then cried they all saying, Not this Man, but
Barabbas.



THAT I may speak from this holy Mount to your greater benefit, and better
bringing to pass of my pious design, which is (as much as in me lies) to melt
your Hearts into a temper becoming the Solemnity of this day. I shall desire
your Christian attention may accompany me to some preceding passages. In the
beginning of this Chapter you may read Judas to betray Jesus: in which bold and
impious Attempt the Soldiers fall to the ground, verse. 6. Jesus is taken and
led to Annas and Caiphas, v. 12. and in the 15. verse begins Peter's Denial of
him. v. 19. according to the Contents of some of your Bibles, Jesus is examined
before Caiphas. v. 18. you may read him arraigned before Pilat, who accosteth
them that brought him before him, first with this Interrogation, What
Accusation bring you against this Man? v. 29. they reply, If he were not a
Malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto thee.

It is time now, I conceive, as early as it is, by way of Preface to my Text to
take them to Task, and to examine the weight of their words, for all was not
Gospel they said, though it be mentioned in the Gospel. If he were not a
Malefactor, as if they should have said, his Crime is so manifest that he
needs no Accusation; what, do you doubt of the Righteousness of our
Proceedings who have done all things with deliberation? and have found him
worthy of Death, and we exspect that you should proceed to give Sentence: Depth
of Hypocrisy! Madness! and Malice! as if being a Prisoner, bound, and in
Fetters only, was Crime enough, and deserved Death as a Malefactor? This was
handsome indeed, high equity; sure! who cannot perceive that they distrusted
their Cause, and therefore cunningly by way of Anticipation spoke what they did,
least they should have been compelled to prove him so, a Criminal, a
Malefactor, as they pronounced him to be? He that runs may read their
Hypocrisy, they would by all means be thought to be Consoientious, as if they
never attempted any thing, but what was just, and had never sought the Death of
any but of Malefactors; when it stands upon sacred Record as a base blot in
their Escutcheon, that they unjustly slew all the Prophets that went before
them.

O the perfrict brazen Forehead! the Impudence of this Rout, to style Him a
Malefactor, who had done Nothing but Good to their Nation. They should have
asked the Blind to whom he restored Sight: The Lepers whom he had cleansed: The
Lame to whom he gave Limbs, whether he was a Malefactor: But thus it was
prophesyed, Psalm. 35. 12. They rewarded Me Evil for Good to the Despoyling of
my Soul, and Hatred for my Love. Yet Pilat, as bad as he was, being startled at
their unjust Proceedings seemed to rid his Hands of him, with Accipite eum,
Take ye him and judge him according to your Law. The Roman Law forbidding to
Condemn any before he be heard. Now do but see how they elude this, It is not
lawful for us to put any one to Death: No, Then the Death of Stephen, lies at
your doors, your present judgments confute your former practices: besides,
what was it other then to be the Death of Christ, so violently to beg it, with
open Mouth thus to go against Him, and like so many Bloodhounds to cry him
down. It seems by their Law he should only have been stoned, by the Roman Law
he must be Crucified; it was their intent then, not only that he should Die, but
with the greatest ignominy, pain, and shame that might be. Neither is Pilat
yet satisfied, for being entered into the Judgment-Hall again, and having
convened Jesus; he asks Him, Art Thou the King of the Jews? In this he
thought to have struck the Nail on the Head: as if Christ would (upon that
Demand of his) have confessed Himself guilty of Treason against Caesar, and of
disturbing the Peace of the Nation.

But what said our Savior? Say thou this of thyself, or did others tell it
thee of Me? As if he should have said, Little do thou think what thou say,
the Mystery that those few words contain in them. For how could thou style
Me King, since no Man can say Jesus is the Lord but by the spirit? Have it
whence thou will, it is of weighty concernment, what thou have said, did thou
but understand it. Or we may suppose this Interrogation to be a Reproof of
Pilat; as if our Savior should have said, if this proceeds from thy own
Suspicion, it is but an injust part thou do Act, for that is not the Star a
Judge should be led by, he ought not to be both the Judge and the Witness: If
some others told thee so, why are not my Accusers brought forth? If to Accuse
be enough to make a man Guilty, none will be Innocent, Judges are to proceed,
secundum allegata and probata, according to what is alleged and proved: Our
Savior probably said this, to give him an occasion to speak what followed, Am
I a Jew? This Pilat may be said to ask in Scorn to that Nation, hateful to the
Heathens for their Difference from them in Religion: as if he should have said,
How can I speak this of my self who am not a Jew, but an Ethnic, and what have
we Heathens to do with your Rites? The Chief Priests of your Nation delivered
You to Me, and for This accused Thee to Me: they are the men that lay it to thy
Charge, I neither Apprehended Thee; neither did I Accuse Thee. Certainly he
would not, had he been a Jew, and Christ his King; yet, as his Place empowered
him, he examins him, Quid fecisti? What have thou done? Our Savior thought
that Question answered it self, and therefore was not sollicitous to Reply to
it, having done nothing worthy such usage. A Kingdom he dreads not to tell him
that he had, but it was not of this World, v. 36. of this Chap. Therefore he
need not be thought to stand in their Light who had Kingdoms, they might have
room enough to Sway their Scepters in for all him. Yet it is very observable,
He does not say his Kingdom was not In this World, but not Of this World;
whence it follows, That there is another world, which Pilat, it is probable,
dreamed not of; In which he that suffers the loss of never so many Kingdoms
here, may be riehly rewarded there. This could not but cure Pilat of that
shaking Palsy which Fear had put him into, our Savior talking of a Kingdom.
Now this our Savior proceeds to make more manifest thus, If my Kingdom were of
this World, then would my Servants fight that I should not be delivered to the
Jews; as if he should have said, I would not be so imprudent as to go only with
a few un-armed Disciples, I would then be a little better Guarded, my
Attendants should be many and mighty, such as know how to use their weapons,
and to acquit themselves like Men: Smiling, as it were, at the Vanity, and
Impotence of worldly Potentates, who of themselves signify little, but depend
on the strength of external power, which if it fail, they fall: but having that
they can do any thing, bring Others to their Bent or Bow at pleasure, have
their Persons at Command, as they had his; Yet Pilat cannot but harp on that
String, witness his Language, Art thou a King then? This could make but harsh
Music in his ears, who could not but envy him that Title howsoever, wherever
his Kingdom was: He was loath to ask where his Kingdom was, least he should not
be far from Happiness; sure: No, take heed of that, Methinks I see him tremble
at what our Savior answered: Thou say that I am a King; as if he should
have said, What need I say it, when you your self say as much, your own Mouth
has pronounced it; and yet least the Man should be too much dejected at it,
our Savior adds, To this end was I born, and for this Cause came I into the
world; what? to reign like other Kings? No, but to walk Antipodes to them
rather; as if he should have said, It Is an Error to think that I am Ambitious
of any Mundan Reign, any worldly Sovereignty; It Is thus, That my Kingdom is
Spiritual, I cannot, I will not deny: but will aver it either before thee, or
any Caesar on Earth: Only know this, That it is the lest of my Intention to
molest other Kings, or pompously like them to Reign. But to be a witness to the
truth am I come: At this Pilat seems to be pretty well pleased, and asks him,
What is Truth? But alas! it was more out of Derision and Contempt, then to be
Informed: As indeed profane Spirits cannot endure to hear savoury words, but
they turn them off with Scorn: as if he should have said, I hope you will
produce no other truth then your High Priests do teach, you will not seem wiser
then they; will you? If you do, it is folly to declare it, I must interrupt you,
for it is other Business that we are about, Your Life is in Question: He would
not stay for an Answer, but, went out, says the Text, because he thought
Caesar's Laws sufficient, and the knowledge of any other Truth needless:
Besides, he saw the Cloud to thicken; The Jews it is likely bandying together,
so that it was no time to hold conference any longer with him: and the Jews
feared, least Christ having obtained Liberty to speak for himself, he might so
work upon the Judge, and melt the hearts of the rest on the Bench, as to
frustrat their Design. Well, for all this, He that before went out to hear his
Accusation, now goes out to excuse him to the People, to his Accusers. Behold
him seemingly to heap Civility upon Civility upon our Savior, even in the
midst of his Severity.

For first, Tho on the one side were Persons of great Rank and Quality, from
whom he might expect a Becoming reward for his Injustice, or dread their
Displeasure if he did not act as they would have him: And on the other side
Christ, who was mean and contemptible, in outward appearance, forlorn and
forfaken, yet he gives it for him against the Jews, casting their Malice, as it
were, in their Teeth.

Secondly, He stands not only up for Christ, maugre all their eager expectation
of the contrary, but Confounds his Adversaries pronouncing Him innocent: and
that not without an Emphasis, I find in him no Fault at all. And yet this
Vulpone, this Fox, least their teeth so sharp set, should (for want of a Prey)
fasten on himself, he tells them, you have a Custom; an ungodly one it was,
what ever was the ground of it: Some think it was in memory of Jonathan,
rescued by the People from Death, which his Father had threatened him with.
Others, that the Feast might be celebrated with the more Joy and Gladness.
Others more probably say, it was in remembrance of their Deliverance from the
Egyptick Bondage. But if so, one would think the Paschal Lamb should have been
Memorial enough for that, but they must do somewhat additional, though not
commanded by God: Thus Hypocrisy is always busy in preferring its own
Figments before God's Commands; yet I verily believe the World would have been
more happy then it is, had it not had worse Judges then Pilat was in some
respects: For do but see how Industrious he seems to be for Christ's Release.
For this end he rubs up a Custom of theirs, to capacitate them to Release him:
he did not pervert an Old Law, or establish a New one: Setting up a High Court
of Justice to try him by. Then he propounds them two, None is in Competition
with him but Barabbas, a notorious Miscreant, whom he thought none would be
for; Nay more, he seems to Beg him, or at lest to bid them choose him, saying,
Will ye that I release to you the King of the Jews? scorning to mention
Barabbas, whom our Evangelist styles a Robber, and another a Murderer, which
served as a Foil for their malice, if that needed any, to prefer such a one
before Christ. But Pilat, it seems, was deceived, for the great ones before had
been at the People to ask Barabbas, and to leave Jesus to undergo Death. The
Multitude, which not long before was for Him, now unanimously bandy against
him. For they cried all again, say the words immediately preceding my Text:
Envy, you see cannot be quiet till it has made the person it strikes at
perfectly miserable: But why again? They cried all again: You may remember they
before cried, if he were not a Malefactor, we would not have delivered him unto
thee. That which they cried again, was that which I cannot, it being my Text,
but repeat again, Not this Man, but Barrabbas. Thus Beloved, having presented
you with that Preface, which can be styled no less then Necessary. Come we to
some Division of their words, whom it is a wonder, being so many as they were,
to hear not Divided: Yet thus it was, Here was no crying some one thing, and
some another, as at that uproar we read of Acts 19. The Wind and Tide, Priest
and People, both went one way, great and small, honorable and ignoble, young
and old, male and female, they cried all not once, but again Non Hunc, sed
Barrabam, Not this Man, but Barrabas. In which words you have the Peoples
Election, and Reprobation, or if you will in Terms less offensive, less to be
excepted against, the Peoples Negative, and Affirmative Choice, such as it was:
Negative, Not this Man: Affirmative, but Barrabas. To scan each by it self
briefly, and to come to some suitable Application of both.

And first of their Negative Vote, or Choice. Not this Man. And pray, why not
He, O ye Jews? What harm did he ever do you, or could ye ever find in Him? How
justly might it have been said to them concerning Him, I mean our Savior, as
Themistocles said to the Athenians, Are ye weary of receiving so many Benefits
by one Man? If ye go to that, what good did he not do you? How could ye so soon
forget the Evils that he cured? The empty Bellys among you, which He often
filled; and fed? What house did he ever enter into, but Salvation entered with
Him? Some always were the better for Him: Not this Man? What! after so many
Miracles wrought among you by his Divine power? Is he but a Man in your
judgments? I had thought the inspired Magi, that fell down devoutly at his
feet, when newly infanted, which you could not but hear of: The water of the
neighboring Flood turned by Him into Wine, for the pleasuring of the Gallilean
Youth, being with them at a Marriage, His forty days fasting, His feasting the
Multitude with Bread that increased betwixt the Dispensers hands, when more
then All remained: His wonderful checking the boistrous Waves of the Sea with a
word: His walking on that watery Plain with unsinking feet: Those damned
infernal Spirits, Rebels to God, and the Light, which hearing his Voice forsook
their fleshly Habitations, The blind by Birth, who to Him owed his Day; The
Dumb that never spoke till he loosned their Toungs. I thought these would have
proved as so many Heralds to proclaim him more then Man: No, for all this, it is
only* Not this Man, they were loath sure to believe Him to be God, lest the
thoughts of it should have endangered their Conversion, or melted them into a
better temyer. (...), non istum, so some render it, by way of diminution, and
vilifying: not this worthless person. No, whom then? (...), But Barabbas, which
is their positive Choice, or affirmative Vote, and comes next to be handled, I
fear I shall not do it so roughly as it deserves. But Barabbas, an excellent
Choice indeed! a special, lovely dish this, to be served in at such a Feast:
Now this Fellow (to turn the istum upon him, which they undeservedly fixed on
our Savior.) He was notorious, I. For Robbery, he was a Robber, says our
Evangelist. II. For Sedition, he troubled the whole City, says S. Luke. III.
For Murder, says the same Evangelist, cap. 23. 19. This was the Idol they
cried up; the Miscreant they put into the balance with Christ, the Son of God:
a very nointed Villain he was, to have whom executed every man's appetite but a
little before was up: yet rather then Jesus shall live, Barabbas shall be
released, more Insurrections, more Murders, more Seditions, more any thing
rather then to be in danger of having Christ their King, He that was born King
of the Jews: Do but see how S. Peter sets them out in their Colors,
characterizeth them to their Heads, Acts 3. 14. But ye denied the Holy one, and
the just, and desired a Murderer to be given unto you, and killed the Prince
of Life. This was he that was thought only worth naming with them; Christ out
of contempt, being branded with the Appellation of This Man: they had rather
celebrate their Passover with that wretch, then with Jesus. And no marvel, for
they knew this Fellow would prove no eyesore them, would patiently permit them
to do what they would, give them Liberty of Conscience, and so would be
exellent company for them; alas, he was not for their Tooth, who came from
Heaven upon Errands of Holiness, and Reformation, whose Example would put Vice
out of countenance, and upbraid their madness. No, they had too much of Him
already, Not this Man, but Barabbas, what more intense blindness, madness, and
malice could betray it self? What was this but to say, what I think, you cannot
hear without trembling, Occidatur qui suscitat Mortuos, and dimittatur qui
Occidit vivos, as one has it; Let him die, who raised the Dead, and him be
released whose Trade it is to destroy the Living: Let Life depart, and Darkness
remain. The Peacemaker be dispatched, and the Seditious repriv'd. How by this
Action, or Election of theirs, did the Jews in the saddest sense, forsake the
Fountain of Living waters, and betake themselves to a muddy, bloody, dirty
puddle of water: They did not set free the Nocent only instead of the Innocent,
but put to death Him, who was a constant, and faithful Benefactor to them. And
thus my Discourse all along (if you have observed it) respects the business of
this Day, which is to be humbled for the horrid Murder of an innocent Person,
a good Benefactor to this Nation, under whom it had flourisht many years. First
then, in this the Jews betrayed superlative ingratitude, and high Baseness to
prefer so vile a person before Him, who chose them from among all Nations, to
be His peculiar People, his choice Enclosure. Secondly, here was their Malice,
who cared not how things went, so as in this they had their wills. Thirdly,
this argues them Blind, (indeed Malice is blind) asking what they should have
been against the death of their Savior, and the Release of a Thief: and as
they passionately desired, so it came to pass, hugging their Bane in Him, whom
they were so hot to have released. For the Vengeance, which such a Choice
merited, did not long sleep, neither would it, If they had not made use of that
Cabell, His Blood be upon us and our Children, to pull it down more speedily
upon them: For Titus (says Josephus) besieging Jerusalem, when the Jews
(pincht with Famine) came forth in Multitudes to seek food for their famisht
Souls, he daily caused a number of them to be Crucified, in so much that at
length, says the Historian There was scarce any place to erect Crosses on, nor
Crosses enough to fasten their Bodiesto. This, this was the Crop of severity,
which their sinful choice yielded them. And how justly were they punished with
death, who refused the Lord of life! so pl^^gid by that Tyrant, who cried
again, Non hune, Not this man, but Barabbas: But what? had not Pilate a Finger
at lest in this, from the guilt of which he cleared himself, would have been
thought to do so by washing of his hands? as if he should have said by that
action, I am innocent, therefore look ye to it; that I condemn this man, O ye
Jews, I do it not voluntarily, but being compelled. I am innocent, I call
Heaven to witness, it is you that are Nocent, and guilty of his Blood. This
Hypocrite he was as Scarlet, or Purple within as without, in Heart as in Habit,
notwithstanding all that Formality of washing his hands: accessory he was to
the Death of the Lord of Life in a high degree, being a faint-hearted Judge,
afraid to give Innocence its Reward. Had he bore up valiantly against the
stream of the multitude, he had approved himself an honest man, and a good
Judge. What could be more base and dirty, and sinful, then to confess he found
no fault at all in Him, and yet not to find in his heart to acquit him, but to
curry favor with the people adjudges him to be Crucified. Thus, Non raro
bonorum virorism Capitibus, ut Talis aut Tesseris Ludunt, says one; It Is the
Old Game of the world for the Heads, and Lives of good men to be played with
like Dice, or Chess-men, by Great men, that they might ingratiate themselves
with each other. I have read of an Apologue to this purpose, it run's thus; The
Wolf, the Fox, and the Ass on a time came together to Shrift. The Wolf confessed,
and was dismissed, the Fox did likewise, and was absolved, but the Ass confessed,
and his fault was this; that being hungry he took one straw out of the sheaf of
a poor Pilgrim traveling to Rome, for which he was severely punished; the Fox,
and the Wolf straight fall upon him, and devour him, maintaining that the poor
Asses Crime was so great as to deserve it. The Fable applys it self; To be sure
where Pilat is Judge Barabbas shall be loosed, and the Innocent condemned. I do
believe unjust Sysamnes whom Cambises flead, and of his Skin made a Cushion for
all succeeding Judges to lean, and look on, was a Saint to this Judge, as
subtely as he carried it; And yet as madd, and malicious as the People were,
they could not hinder their Prisoner from evading a Glorious King, though
nothing but unworthy, base usage came from them. Glorious in his personal
virtues, Glorious in his Divine Graces, but most Glorious in his Constancy, and
perseverance, in his Charity even amidst all his Sufferings, which nothing
could more magnify then this Choice of theirs, Electing Barabbas, and
rejecting Jesus, not before they had done either good or evil; but after One
had done all the Evil, and the Other for diverse years together all the Good
imaginable, then to elect the Robber, and reject the Savior, what could more
make against them, and for Him? Here again how plainly through the Sufferings
of the King of Saints, may one see the Sufferings of that Saint of Kings
Charles the first, whose Murder we are this Day to lament, and be humbled for.
I shall now descend to some suitable application. I. From the Competition
precedaneous, to the Choice presumed here, but expressed in Saint Matthew,
(...), which of the two will ye that I release unto you, for so run the words,
Math. 27. 17. Let us learn, that there is no office so sacred, or weighty but
some either through favor or fear, will abuse it. whom will ye that I release?
Corrupt wretch! to bring that in Question, Which it was in his power to put out
of Question: and sure would have done, had he acted according to the Dictate
either of his Wife by his side, or of that Scold his Conscience within him. For
he knew that for Envy they they had dedeliver'd him. Matthew. 27. 18. Knew, yet
would not do what he should have done, but did forbear to acquit Christ,
exposing him to the mercy of the Multitude, whose tenderest mercies are cruel.
Not to save a Man, if it be in ones power, is to destroy him, so says our
Savior, Mark 3. 4. Job brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the Prey out
of his Teeth, it is said.

I have read that Sir George Blage, if I mistake not his Name, one of King
Henry the 8ths. Privy Chamber, being condemned for a Heretic, was yet pardoned
by the King, he coming afterward into the Kings presence, Ah my Pig, said the
King, for so he was wont to call him) yea, said he, If your Majesty had not
been better to me then my Judges were, your Pig had been roasted e're this
time, for certain, there is no such unsavory Salt, and more becoming a
Dunghill, than a Pilate, or a Bradshaw, an unjust Judge. Envy not the pomp of
such a one, whenever your eyes shall behold him, (which I wish may never be)
no more then thou would a dead Corpse its Garnish, and Gaiety.

II. Let this Competition mind us of that we are so much concerned in. Tho God
has left the Heathen without excuse, yet he has not left us without a choice,
our Salvation is elective, both on God's part and ours, I would, but ye would
not, it is God's own language. Hence likewise it is no less true, then a right
saying, he that made thee without thy self, will not save thee without thy
self; Indeed, were there but one Object within our reach presented to the
Faculty of election in man as one Christ, one Holiness, our receiving of him
could not be called choice, but it might be styled necessity rather. But since
there are many Christ's, as well as Antichrists, and diverse sorts of holiness, it
will behove us to be wary what choice we make. To see that we have not so much
Faith for the Alcoran, as for the Bible; and as much obedience for the Devil,
as for God, for the Law in our members, as for that of our mind. It must need's
be more obliging not to say meritorious, for a Joseph to be chaste at Court,
than for another to be so in a Cottage, or in a Cell. For a Soldier to be
temperat in the Camp, where he is beleagured with Temptations to the contrary,
than for another to be so at home. To be a Christian in Nero's house than at a
greater distance from danger. Thou art virtuous because thou can not easily be
otherwise, this is a Commendation that leav's but a flat farewell behind it.
It Is an Act, not only of Wisdom, but of God's great Goodness thus to order it,
to leav the Christian (...) as it were in the Confines of two most distant
people, improvable unto Good, and capable of Evil. For Righteousness to go for
thy refuge, and not for thy choice, as it does where there is no Rival Sin, is
to be content that should be without its Crown, and thy self without thy
Reward: which conducts me from the Competition, to the Competitors, Christ,
and Barabbas. From whence learn we,

1. Not to build on the multitudes vogue or choice, to esteem no otherwise of
its Applau, or Approbation than of a whiff of Smoke, the best Emblem of its
base inconstancy. But now they cried Hosannah. Now they are all for Crucify
him, Crucify him. Vox populi was not here Vox Dei, but Mors Dei. The voice of
the people was not the voice of God, but the death of God rather. Follow not a
multitude to do evil (says the Holy Ghost) as if it did little, or nothing
else, but do so. We must then get a preservative against the Infection of the
multitude (as well as that of the Plague) or else it is like to go ill with us.
It is the worlds guize to elect what is evil, and to reject what is gaod; It is
the nature of that ugly Ape to hug its Brats, as most lovely, and Beautiful.
What more lively example of this is there, than the carriage of these Jews at
this time? How unworthily did they write all those Benefits our Savior
conferred on them, in water, witness their Praeteritition, or passing him by,
and their Choosing a bloody Thief and Seditious, preferring such a one before
him! This is that foul Sin St. Peter makes bold to tax them home with in his
Sermon, laid it to their Hearts, and were Converted. I do verily believ there
is not a person that hears of this, but hate's this Action in the Jews,
Condemning it in their Thoughts, and were he asked, would say he did so. And yet
how many are there who knowing the Judgment of God inflicted on them for it,
do not only do the same thing in effect, but have pleasure in them that do it,
to use that of S. Paul's language, Romans 1. 32. There is no Sin but is as base
as Barabbas, nay wors, for he had not been so vile, and base without it. How
loudly does the Swearer make one with these, Larding his Discourse with Oaths,
damnably confronting that strict Command, Swear not at all, for he will do
nothing at all but swear, and so by consequence cry's, Non hunc, Not this man,
but Barabbas. I shall only desire of such a Sinner, that he would tell me what
fruit he can exspect, or ever any did reap from that Bramble, besides Gods
Curs? Hellfire is the punishment of such, whose toungs are so set on fire of
Hell. Neither can the Hypocrit excuse himself, who seems to be for Christ,
wearing his Livery on his back, but Barabbas his Favor in his Bosom, who was a
Thief, and a Robber; so is he in his Shop, it may be, though not on the Road.
What should I say of the unclean person, who is one of this Rout, of this
Rabble too? How by making the Members of Christ, the Members of a Harlot, does
he day and night cry, Non hunc, Not this Man, but Barabbas. My advise to such a
one shall only be this, to labor for a saving inversion of these words, as
thus, to turn, when tempted, this Hunc into hanc, I mean, (upon Choice) to say,
Not this Woman, this Strumpet, were she more beutiful then she is, but Christ.
You would wonder now, if I should prove it possible for you to be crying up of
Barabbas, even while you are hearing of Christ preached. Beloved, he that gives
way to wanton, lustful looks, or wordly thoughts at a Sermon, suffering them to
take up his Mind, crie's with the Jews, Non hunc, Not this Man, but Barabbas.
But see that ye refuse not Him that speaks, to speak in S. Paul's words, Heb.
12. 25. For if they escape not, that refused him that spoke on earth, much more
shall we not escape, if we turn away from him that thus speaks from heaven. The
Jews paid for their Nolumus hunc, We will not have this Man to reign over us,
And for their Non hunc, Not this Man, but such a one: And so shall we too, if
we repent not in time of our Recusancy. Let those then that hate and abhor the
Jews for this, indeed, to be lamented Choice, descend into themselves by
Examination, and see they be not guilty of the same. What is there so base, and
so vile but a corrupt mind will prefer before Christ.

II. Hence as in a Mirror we may see the Prevalency of the Actions of Great
Men, the attractiveness of them. If Herod; and Caiphas do begin, Christ shall
have fists enough abought his ears; there will not be wanting that will smite
him with Tongue, as well as with the Hand: Fly blow and blister his Fame to
purpose. With Inferiors example does more then precept, and like men in a
Crowd they do not go, but are carried rather. Do any of the Rulers believ in
him? This Question deterred many of the Vulgar, from adhering to our Savior:
The weightiest Drops of whose blood, I do believ, fell (in the saddest Sens) on
the Wisest of them: For had not They first preached Him down in their Synagogs,
the People had never cried Him down in the Judgment-Hall: with a Non hune, Not
This Man, but Barabbas.

III. Here is matter of Comfort, in our vilified, reproacht Condition here
below, As thus. I. That we cannot be lower than our Savior was in the World's
Repute. II. That his Disreputation has Sanctified Ours. If such a one who had
don so much Good could not procure a Good word from those he did it to, why
should such Unprofitable Servants, as we are at best, be troubled if we be
awarded with frowns for our Favors; with Cruelty from others from our kindness
to them. I Am sure this Lamb of God opened not his Mouth repiningly, was dumb
before the Shearers, who, as much as in them lay, robbed him of the whole Fleece
of his Reputation; yet that which at first sight seems to make for his
ignominy, realy conduced much for his Glory; For his Father would not have him
ransomed at such a rate, as to be beholding to the people's Favor for his
Repriev and live under the Notion of a Malefactor, who being innocent would be
Condemned and Die with more Honor, as he did to the stigmatizing of them, who
were his Judges, and Persecutors with the Brand of perpetual infamy. In short,
here is matter as of Comfort; so of Caution: least at any time we make our
Teeth to meet in the rigid Censure of that Penson that die's not a Natural, but
a violent Death. What is this but to condemn the Generation of the Righteous? I
remember, Lam. 4. 20. there is a passage to this purpose. The breath of our
Nostrils, the Anointed of the Iord is taken in their pits. Which was this that
fell as a Morsel into his enemies Mouths, but a good King, one, under whose
Government they pronoun't themselves Happy, as it follows in the same verse.
Beloved, it is unchristian to judge temporal punishments to be judgments due
unto Sin. Suffer me to speak it, Thy wickedness is too triumphant, who will not
acknowledge that some afflictions are for Trials, and in order to the increas of
Grace, and Glory unto God's dear Children. It Is as much as to say, Christ could
not be the Sun of Righteousness, because he did set in such a Cloud of
wretchedness (at his Death) as to outward appearance, dying on the Cross in the
midst of two Thieves, as if the chiefest Malefactor. It Is not it the manner of
one's Death, but the Course of one's Life that makes really wretched, or happy.
To think otherwise is to pronounce thy self as much out in thy judgment, as
these Jews were in their Choice, when they all cried, Non hunc, Not this Man,
but Barabbas. I have now done with my Text, and it may be exspected I should
speak somewhat of the Occasion; For this is not only a Fast Day, but a Funeral,
which we Solemnize: The Funeral of as pious a King as ever England had to sway
its Scepter: That little that is to be found in Bad men the holy Ghost has
thought good to Register. David penned Readiness Epicedium, which runs thus, Saul,
and Jonathan were lovely, and pleasant in their Lives, and in their Death they
were not Divided, ye Daughters of Israel weep over Saul, who clothed you in
Scarlet, and other Delights, who put Ornaments of Gold upon your Apparel, 2.
Sam. 1. 23, 24. Which gives a sufficient warrant to mention, and not only so,
but to commend the Dead: which I intend not to do at this time. His
incomparable worth want's not the varnish of my Watercolors to set him off.
Neither shall I blister the air of this sacred place with mentioning of any of
those who had a hand in his Death: since Justice is in pursuit of them, and its
Ironhand will recompens the Slowness of its Leaden feet. But because some were
eminently instrumental to bring to pass the Death of that just Man, shall We
think our selves Innocent? God forbid. There are none of us of mature years,
but by our Sins gave earnest for that fatal Stroke, which made three Kingdoms
Miserable at once. So that well may We assume that passionat wish of the
Prophet Jeremy, O that our Heads were Waters, and our Eyes Fountains of Tears,
that we may lament Day and Night for the shedding of the Innocent Blood of
that good King, The Top-branch of which Royal Ceder, (to the root of which Envy
and implacable Malice laid the Ax) the Lord preserv.

Bless him O Lord, in his Body, and bless him in his Soul, bless him in his
Going out, and bless him in his Coming in. Bless him whenever he shall
adventure upon the Water that dangerous, deceitful Element, be thou his Pilot:
Bless him when he shall journey on the Land, be thou his Conduct: Bless the
Guard of his Body with Courage, and Fidelity; bless the Guides of his Soul with
Sincerity of Life, and soundness Doctrine. May all the blessings on Mount
Gerezim in this Life, and in the next all the blessings, Christ preached upon
the Mount, be multiplied upon him. And to this Prayer I doubt not but every
Loyal Subject will from his heart, say, Amen: Specialy when he does remember
and resent (Horresco referens) this sad trilinguous Hexastich.

MAP (...)
(...) Ter Deno JanI Labens rex soLe CaDente
Carolus eXutus soLio sCeptorqVe seCure.


CHARLES, best of Kings, for God's Laws and the Land's Was Martyred, murdered by
UNHALLOWED hands.

Dei Gratia and Regis Oblatio qualis-qualis EHMAMP.
FINIS.

