A PLURALITY OF Worlds.

Written in French by the Author of the Dialogues of the Dead. Translated into
English By Mr. GLANVILL.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and S. Magnes, in Russel Street, in
Covent Garden, MDCLXXXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
MY Case is much like Cicero's, when he undertook to write of Philosophy, in
Latin; there being then no Books upon that Subject, but what were written in
Greek: When some told Cicero, that he would take pains to no purpose, because
such as studied Philosophy, would make use of Greek Authors, and not read
Latin Books, which treated of it but at second hand; and others, who were no
admirers of the Science, would never trouble their Heads, with either Greek or
Latin. Cicero replied, they were much mistaken; for, said he, the great ease
People will find in reading Latin Books, will tempt those to be Philosophers
who are none; and they who already are Philosophers, by reading Greek Books,
will be very glad to see how Philosophy is handled in Latin.

Cicero might with good reason answer as he did, because the excellency of his
Genius, and the great Reputation he had acquired, warranted the success of all
he wrote: But in a Design, not much unlike his, I am far from having those
grounds of Confidence which he had. My purpose is to discourse of Philosophy,
but not in a Philosophical manner; and to raise it to such a pitch, that it
shall not be too dry and insipid a Subject to please Gentlemen; nor too mean
and trifling to entertain Scholars. Should I be told, (as Cicero was) that such
a Discourse as this, would not please the Learned, because it can teach them
nothing, nor the Illiterate, because they will have no mind to learn; I will
not answer as he did, It may be endeavoring to please every Body, I have
pleased no Body; to keep the middle betwixt two Extremes, is difficult; and I
believe I shall never desire to put my self a second time to the like trouble.

If this Book have the luck to be read, I declare to those who have any
knowledge of natural Philosophy, that I do not pretend to instruct, but only to
divert them, by presenting to their view, in a gay and pleasing Dress, that
which they already know; but they to whom the Subject is new, may be both
diverted and instructed: the first will act contrary to my intention, if they
look for Profit, and the second if they seek for nothing but Pleasure.

I have chosen that part of Philosophy which is most like to excite Curiosity;
for what can more concern us, than to know how this World which we inhabit, is
made; and whether there be any other Worlds like it, which are also inhabited
as this is? They who have any thoughts to lose, may throw them away upon such
Subjects as this; but I suppose they who can spend their time better, will not
be at so vain and fruitless an expense.

In these Discourses, I have introduced a Woman, to be instructed in things of
which she never heard; and I have made use of this Fiction, to render the Book
the more acceptable, and to give encouragement to Ladies, by the Example of one
of their own Sex, who without any supernatural parts, or tincture of Learning,
understands what is said to her; and without any confusion, rightly apprehends
what Vortex's and other Worlds are: And why may not there be a Woman like this
imaginary Countess? since her Conceptions are no other than such as she could
not choose but have?

To penetrate into things either obscure in themselves, or but darkly
expressed, requires deep Meditation, and earnest Application of the Mind; but
here, nothing more is requisite than to read, and to print an Idea of what is
read, in the Fancy, which will certainly be clear enough. I shall desire no
more of the fair Ladies, than that they will read this System of Philosophy,
with the same application that they do a Romance or a Novel. It Is true, that
the Ideas of this Book are less familiar to most Ladies, than those of Romances
are, but they are not more obscure; for at most, twice or thrice thinking, will
render 'em very perspicuous.

I have not composed an aerie System, which has no foundation at all: I have
made use of some true Philosophical Arguments, and of as many as I thought
necessary; but it falls out very luckily in this Subject, that the Physical
Ideas are in themselves very diverting; and as they convince and satisfy
Reason, so at the same time they present to the Imagination a Spectacle, which
looks as if it were made on purpose to please it.

When I meet with any Fragments which are not of this kind, I put them into
some pretty strange dress; Virgil has done the like in his Georgicks, when his
Subject is very dry, he adorns it with pleasant digressions: Ovid has done the
same in his Art of Loving; and though his Subject be of it self very pleasing,
yet he thought it tedious to talk of nothing but Love. My Subject has more
need of digressions than his, yet I have made use of 'em very sparingly, and of
such only, as the natural liberty of conversation allows; the greatest part of
'em are in the beginning of the Book, because the Mind cannot at first be so
well acquainted with the principal Ideas which are presented to it; they are
taken from the Subject it self, or are as near to it as is possible.

I have fancied nothing concerning the Inhabitants of the many Worlds, which is
wholly fabulous; I have said all that can be reasonably thought of them, and
the Visions which I have added, have some real foundation; what is true, and
what is false, are mingled together, but so as to be easily distinguished: I
will not undertake to justify so fantastical and odd a Composition, that is
the principal point of the work, and for which I can give no very good reason.

There remains no more to be said in this Preface; but to a sort of People who
perhaps will not be easily satisfied; not but that I have good reasons to give
'em, but because the best that can be given, will not content 'em; they are
those scrupulous Persons, who imagine, that the placing Inhabitants any where,
but upon the Earth, will prove dangerous to Religion: I know how excessively
tender some are in Religious Matters, and therefore I am very unwilling to give
any offense in what I publish to People, whose opinion is contrary to that I
maintain: But Religion can receive no prejudice by my System, which fills an
infinity of Worlds with Inhabitants, if a little error of the Imagination be
but rectified. When it is said the Moon is inhabited, some presently fancy that
there are such Men there, as we are; and Church Men, without any more ado,
think him an Atheist, who is of that opinion. None of Adam's Posterity ever
traveled so far as the Moon, nor were any Colonies ever sent thither; the Men
then that are in the Moon, are not the Sons of Adam: And here again Theology
would be puzzled, if there should be Men any where, that never descended from
him: To say no more, this is the great difficulty to which all others may be
reduced, to clear it by a larger explanation, I must make use of terms which
deserve greater respect, than to be put into a Pamphlet, so trivial, and so far
from being serious as this is; but perhaps there is no need of answering the
Objection, for it concerns no body but the Men in the Moon; and I never yet
said there are Men there; if any ask, what the Inhabitants there are, if they
be not Men? all I can say, is, that I never saw them; and it is not because I
have seen 'em, that I speak of 'em: Let none now think that I say there are no
Men in the Moon, purposely to avoid the Objection made against me; for it
appears it is impossible there should be any Men there, according to that Idea I
have framed of that infinite diversity and variety, which is to be observed in
the works of Nature; This Idea runs through the whole Book, and cannot be
contradicted by any Philosopher: And to think there may be more Worlds than
one, is neither against Reason, or Scripture. If God glorified himself in
making one World, the more Worlds he made, the greater must be his Glory: But I
do not declare these Ideas to be Articles of my Faith; when I do, I hope I
shall have the same Liberty as the rest of my Neighbors.

A PLURALITY OF Worlds.
YOU would have me, Sir, give you an exact account, how I passed my time in the
Country, at the Countess of D -- s, Are you sensible such an exact Account will
amount to a Volume? Nay (what is worse,) a Volume of Philosophy? I know you
expect another kind of Entertainment, Dancing, Gaming, Hunting, etc. but you
must take up with Vortex's, Planets, and New Worlds, these were the Subject of
our Conversation. And by good luck you are a Philosopher, so that it will be no
great disappointment, nay, I fancy, you will be pleased, that I have brought
over the Countess to our Party, we could not have gained a more considerable
Person, for Youth and Beauty are ever inestimable; If Wisdom would appear with
success to Mankind, Do you think she would not do well to take upon her the
Person of the Countess? And yet was her Company but half so agreeable, all the
World would run mad after Wisdom: But though I tell you all the Discourse I had
with the Lady, you must not expect Miracles from me. It is impossible without
her Wit, to express but what she said, in the same manner she spoke it: For my
part, I think her very Learned, from the great disposition she has to
Learning. Is it a poring upon Books that makes a man of understanding? I know
many that have done nothing else, and yet I fancy are not one tittle the Wiser:
But perhaps you expect, before I enter upon my Subject, I should describe the
Ladys house, with all its Situation, many great Palaces have been turned inside
outward upon far less occasion: But I intend to save you and my self that
labor, let it suffice, that I tell you, I found no Company with the Countess,
and I was not at all displeased with it; the two first days drained me of all
the News I brought from London, what I now send you is the rest of our
Conversation, which I will divide into so many parts, as we were Evenings
together.

The First Evening.
WE went one Evening after Supper, to walk in the Park, the Air was extremely
refreshing, because that day had been very hot; the Moon had been up about an
hour, and as she shone between the Trees, made an agreeble mixture of Light and
Darkness; the Stars were in all their Glory, and not a Cloud appeared on the
Azure Sky; I was musing on this awful Prospect, but who can think long of the
Moon and Stars, in the Company of a Pretty Woman! I am much mistaken if that is
a time for Contemplation: Well Madam, said I to the Countess, is not the Night
as pleasant as the Day? The Day, said she, like a fair Beauty, is clear and
dazzling; but the Night, like a brown Beauty, more soft and moving. You are
Generous, Madam, I replied, to prefer the Brown. You that have all the Charms
that belong to the Fair: But is there any thing more Beautiful in Nature than
the Day? The Heroines of Romances are generally fair, and that Beauty must be
perfect, which has all the advantages of imagination. Tell not me, said she,
of perfect Beauty, nothing can be so that is not moving. But since you talk of
Romances, why do Lovers in their Songs and Elegies address themselves to the
Night? It Is the Night, Madam, said I, that crowns their Joys, and therefore
deserves their thanks. But it is the Night, said she, that hears their
Complaints, and how comes it to pass, the day is so little trusted with their
secrets? I confess, Madam, said I, the night has somewhat a more melancholy
Air, than the day; we fancy the Stars march more silently than the Sun, and our
thoughts wander with the more liberty, whilst we think all the world at rest
but our selves: Besides, the day is more uniform, we see nothing but the Sun,
and light in the Firmament; whilst the night gives us variety of Objects, and
shows us ten thousand Stars, which inspire us with as many pleasant Ideas. What
you say is true, said she, I love the Stars, there is somewhat charming in
them, and I could almost be angry with the Sun for effacing 'em. I can never
pardon him, I cried, for keeping all those Worlds from my sight: What Worlds,
said she, looking earnestly upon me, what Worlds do you mean?

I beg your Pardon, Madam, said I, you have put me upon my folly, and I begin
to rave: what Folly, said she, I discover none? Alas, said I, I am ashamed, I
must own it, I have had a strong Fancy every Star is a World. I will not swear
it is true, but must think so, because it is so pleasant to believe it; It Is a
fancy come into my head, and is very diverting. If your folly be so diverting,
said the Countess, Pray make me sensible of it; provided the Pleasure be so
great, I will believe of the Stars all you would have me. It is, said I, a
diversion, Madam, I fear you will not relish, it is not like one of Moliere's
Plays, it is a Pleasure rather of the fancy than of the Judgment. I hope,
replied she, you do not think me incapable of it; teach me your Stars, I will
show you the contrary. No, no, I replied, it shall never be said I was talking
Philosophy at ten of the Clock at Night, to the most amiable Creature in the
World, find your Philosophers somewhere else.

But in vain I excused my self, who could resist so many Charms? I was forced
to yield, and yet I knew not where to begin; for to a Person who understood
nothing of Natural Philosophy you must go a great way about to prove that the
Earth may be a Planet, the Planets so many Earths, and all the Stars worlds;
however to give her a general Notion of Philosophy, I at last resolved on this
Method. All Philososophy, said I, Madam, is founded upon two things, either
that we are too short sighted, or that we are too curious; for if our eyes were
better than they are, we should soon see whether the Stars were worlds or not;
and if on the other side we were less curious, we should not care whether the
Stars are Worlds or not, which I think is much to the same purpose. But the
business is, we have a mind to know more than we see: And again, if we could
discern well what we do see, it would be so much known to us: But we see things
quite otherwise than they are. So that your true Philosopher will not believe
what he does see, and is always conjecturing at what he does not, which is a
Life I think not much to be envied: Upon this I fancy to my self, that Nature
very much resembles an Opera, where you stand, you do not see the Stage as
really it is; but it is placed with advantage, and all the Wheels and Movements
are hid, to make the Representation the more agreeable: Nor do you trouble your
self how, or by what means the Machines are moved, though certainly an Engineer
in the Pit is affected with what does not touch you; he is pleased with the
motion, and is demonstrating to himself on what it depends, and how it comes to
pass. This Engineer then is like a Philosopher, though the difficulty is greater
on the Philosophers part, the Machines of the Theater being nothing so curious
as those of Nature, which disposes her Wheels and Springs so out of sight,
that we have been long a guessing at the movement of the Universe. Suppose then
the Sages at an Opera, the Pithagoras's, the Plato's, the Aristotle's, and all
the Wise Men who have made such a noise in the World, for these many Ages: We
will suppose 'em at the Representation of Phaeton, where they see the aspiring
Youth lifted up by the Winds, but do not discover the Wires by which he mounts,
nor know they any thing of what is done behind the Scenes. Would you have all
these Philosophers own themselves to be stark Fools, and confess ingenuously
they know not how it comes to pass: No, no, they are not called Wise Men for
nothing; though, let me tell you, most of their Wisdom depends upon the ignorance
of their Neighbors. Every man presently gives his Opinion, and how improbable
so ever, there are Fools enough of all sorts to believe 'em: One tells you
Phaeton is drawn up by a hidden Magnetic Virtue, no matter where it lies; and
perhaps the grave Gentleman will take pet, if you ask him the Question. Another
says, Phaeton is composed of certain Numbers that make him mount; and after
all, the Philosopher knows no more of those numbers than a sucking Child of
Algebra: A third tells you, Phaeton has a secret love for the top of the
Theater, and like a true Lover cannot be at rest out of his Mistresses Company,
with an hundred such extravagant fancies, that a Man must conclude the Old
Sages were very good Banterers: But now comes Monsieur Descartes, with some of
the Moderns, and they tell you Phaeton ascends because a greater weight than he
descends; so that now we do not believe a Body can move without it is pushed
and forced by another body, and as it were drawn by Cords, so that nothing can
rise or fall but by the means of a Counterpoise; he then that will see Nature
really as she is, must stand behind the Scenes at the Opera. I perceive, said
the Countess, Philosophy is now become very Mechanical. So mechanical, said I,
that I fear we shall quickly be ashamed of it; they will have the World to be
in great, what a Watch is in little; which is very regular, and depends only
upon the just disposing of the several parts of the movement. But pray tell me,
Madam, had you not formerly a more sublime Idea of the Universe? Do you not
think you did then honor it more than it deserved? For most have the less
esteem of it since they have pretended to know it. I am not of their opinion,
said she, I value it the more since I know it resembles a Watch, and the whole
order of Nature the more plain and easy it is, to me it appears the more
admirable.

I know not, said I, who has inspired you with these solid Notions, but I am
certain there are few that have them besides your self, People generally admire
what they do not comprehend, they have a Veneration for Obscurity, and look
upon Nature while they do not understand her, as a kind of Magic, and despise
her below Legerdemain, when once they are acquainted with her; but I find you,
Madam, so much better disposed, that I have nothing to do but to draw the
Curtain, and show you the World. That then which appears farthest from the
Earth, (where we reside) is called the Heavens, that Azure Firmament where the
Stars are fastened like so many Nails, and are called fixed, because they seem
to have no other Motion than that of their Heaven, which carries them with it
self from East to West. Between the Earth and this great Vault (as I may call
it) hang at different heights the Sun, and the Moon, with the other Stars,
Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, which we call the Planets; these
Planets, not being fastened to the same Heaven, and having very unequal Motions,
have diverse Aspects and Positions. Whereas the fixed Stars in respect to one
another, are always in the same Situation: for Example, Charles's Wain which is
composed of those seven Stars, has been and ever will be as it now is, though
the Moon is sometimes nearer to the Sun, and sometimes farther from it, and so
it is with the rest of the Planets. Thus things appeared to the old Caldoean
Shepherds, whose great leisure did produce these first Observations, which have
since been the foundation of Astronomy, for Astronomy had its Birth in Caldoea,
as Geometry was born in Egypt, where the Inundation of the Nile confounding the
bounds of their Fields, was an occasion of their inventing exacter Measures to
distinguish every ones Land from that of his Neighbor: So that Astronomy was
the Daughter of Idleness, Geometry the Daughter of Interest; and if we did but
examine Poetry, we should certainly find her the Daughter of Love.

I am glad, said the Lady, I have learnt the Genealogy of the Sciences, and am
convinced I must stick to Astronomy, my Soul is not mercenary enough for
Geometry, nor is it tender enough for Poetry; but I have as much time to spare
as Astronomy requires, beside, we are now in the Country, and lead a kind of
Pastoral life, all which suits best with Astronomy. Do not deceive your self,
Madam, said I, it is not a true Shepherds life to talk of the Stars and Planets:
See if they pass their time so in Astrea. That sort of Shepherds Craft, replied
she, is too dangerous for me to learn: I love the honest Caldaeans, and you
must teach me their Rules, if you would have me improve in their Science. But
let us proceed, When they had ranked the Heavens in that manner you tell me,
pray, what is the next Question? The next, said I, is the disposing the several
parts of the Universe, which the Learned call making a Systeme; but before I
expound the first Systeme, I would have you observe, we are all naturally like
that Mad man at Athens, who fancied all the Ships were his that came into the
Port Pyroeum: Nor is our Folly less extravagant, we believe all things in
Nature designed for our use; and do but ask a Philosopher, to what purpose
there is that prodigious company of fixed Stars, when a far less number would
perform the service they do us? He answers coldly, they were made to please our
Sight. Upon this Principle they imagined the Earth rested in the Center of the
Universe, while all the Celestial Bodies (which were made for it) took the
pains to turn round to give light to it. They placed the Moon above the Earth,
Mercury above the Moon, after Venus the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, above all
these they set the Heaven of fixed Stars, the Earth was just in the middle of
those Circles which contain the Planets, and the greater the Circles were, they
were the farther distant from the Earth, and by consequence the farthest
Planets took up the most time in finishing their course, which in effect is
true: But why, said the Countess, interrupting me, do you dislike this Systeme?
It seems to me very Clear and Intelligible. However, Madam, said I, I will make
it plainer; for should I give it you as it came from Ptolomy its Author, or
from some who have since studied it, I should fright you, I fancy, instead of
diverting you. Since the Motions of the Planets are not so regular, but that
sometimes they go faster, sometimes slower, sometimes are nearer the Earth, and
sometimes farther from it; the Ancients did invent I do not know how many Orbs
or Circles involved one within another, which they thought would salve all
Objections; this confusion of Circles was so great, that at that time when they
knew no better, a certain King of Arragon, a great Mathematician, but not much
troubled with Religion, said, That had God consulted him when he made the
World, he would have told him how to have framed it better. The fancy was very
Atheistical, and no doubt the Instructions he would have given the Almighty,
was the suppressing those Circles with which they had clogged the Celestial
Motions, and the taking away two or three superfluous Heavens which they had
placed above the fixed Stars; for these Philosophers to explain the Motion of
the Celestial Bodies, had above the uppermost Heaven (which we see,) found
another of Crystal, to influence and give Motion to the inferior Heavens; and
wherever they heard of another Motion, they presently clapped up a Crystal
Heaven which cost 'em nothing. But why must their Heaven be of Crystal, said
the Countess, would nothing else serve as well? No, no, I replied, nothing so
well; for the Light was to come through them, and yet they were to be solid.
Aristotle would have it so, he had found Solidity to be one of their
Excellencies, and when he had once said it, no body would be so rude as to
question it. But it seems there were Comets much higher than the Philosophers
expected, which as they passed along brake the Crystal Heavens, and confounded
the Universe. But to make the best of a bad Market, they presently melt down
their broken Glass, and to Aristotle's Confusion, made the heavens fluid; and by
the observations of these latter Ages it is now out of doubt, that Venus and
Mercury turn round the Sun, and not round the Earth, according to the Ancient
Systeme, which is now every where exploded, and all the Ipse Dixits not worth a
rush. But that which I am going to lay down, will salve all, and is so clear,
that the King of Arragon himself may spare his Advice. Methinks, says the
Countess, your Philosophy is a kind of Outcry, where he that offers to do the
work cheapest, carries it from all the rest. It Is very true, said I, Nature is
a great Huswife, she always makes use of what costs least, let the difference
be never so inconsiderable; and yet this frugality is accompanied with an
extraordinary magnificence, which shines through all her works; that is, she is
magnificent in the design, but frugal in the Execution; and what can be more
praise worthy, than a great design accomplished with a little Expense? But in
our Ideas we turn things topsy-turvy, we place our thrift in the design, and
are at ten times more charge in Workmanship than it requires, which is very
ridiculous: Imitate Nature then, says she, in your Systeme, and give me as
little trouble as you can to comprehend you. Fear it not, Madam, said I, we
have done with our ^mpertinencies: Imagine then a German ^all'd Copernicus
confounding every thing, ^earing in pieces the beloved Circles of Antiquity,
and shattering their Crystal Heavens like so many Glass Windows, seized with
the noble Rage of Astronomy, he snatcheth up the Earth from the Center of the
Universe, sends her packing, and places the Sun in the Center to which it did
more justly belong, the Planets no longer turn round the Earth, and do not
enclose it in the Circles they describe; if they give us light, it is but by
chance, and as they meet us in their way. All now turns round the Sun, the
Earth her self goes round the Sun, and Copernicus to punish the Earth for her
former Lazyness, makes her contribute all he can to the motion of the Planets
and Heavens, and now stripped of all the heavenly Equipage with which she was
so gloriously attended, she has nothing left her but the Moon, which still
turns round about her: Fair and softly, says the Countess, I fancy you your
self are seized with the Noble Fury of Astronomy; a little less Rapture, and I
shall understand you the better. The Sun You say is in the Center of the
Universe, and is immovable; what follows next? It is Mercury, said I, he turns
round the Sun, so that the Sun is the Center of the Circle wherein Mercury
moves; above Mercury is Venus, who turns also round the Sun; after comes the
Earth, which being placed higher than Mercury and Venus, makes a greater circle
round the Sun than either of them; at last come Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, in the
same order I name 'em, so that Saturn has the greatest circle round the Sun,
which is the reason he is a longer time in making his Revolution than any of
the other Planets. And the Moon, you have forgot her, said she: We shall
quickly find her again, said I; the Moon turns round the Earth, and does not
leave her, but as the Earth advances in the Circle, which she describes about
the Sun, and if the Moon turns round the Sun, it is because she will not quit
the Earth; I understand you, said she, and I love the Moon for staying with us
when all the other Planets do abandon us; nay, I fear your German would have
willingly taken her away too if he could, for in all his proceedings, I find he
had a great spite to the Earth. 'Twas well done of him, said I, to abate the
Vanity of Mankind, who had taken up the best place in the Universe, and it
pleases me to see the Earth in the crowd of the Planets. Sure, said she, you
do not think their Vanity extends it self as far as Astronomy! Do you believe
you have humbled me, in telling me the Earth goes round the Sun? For my part I
do not think my self at all the worse for it. I confess, said I, Madam, I
believe a Fair Lady would be much more concerned for her place at a Ball, than
for her rank in the Universe; and the Precedence of two Planets will not make
half such a noise in the World, as that of two Ambassadors; however the same
inclination which reigns at a Ceremony, governs in a Systeme, and if you love
the uppermost place in the one, the Philosopher desires the Center in the
other; he flatters himself that all things were made for him, and insensibly
believes a matter of pure speculation to be a point of Interest. This is a
Calumny, said she, you have invented against Mankind; why did they receive this
Systeme if it was so abasing? I know not, said I, but I am sure Copernicus
himself distrusted the success of his Opinion, he was a long time before he
would venture to publish it, nor had he done it then without the importunity of
his Friends. But do you know what became of him? the very day they brought him
the first Proof of his Book, he died; he foresaw he should never be able to
clear all the contradictions, and very wisely slipped out of the way. I would be
just to all the World, said the Countess; but it is hard to fancy we move and
yet see we do not change our place; we find our selves in the Morning where we
lay down at Night: Perhaps you will tell me the whole Earth moves -- Yes
certainly, said I, it is the same case as if you fell asleep in a Boat upon the
River, when you awake you find your self in the same place, and the same
situation in respect of all the parts of the Boat. It Is true, she replied, but
here is a great difference when I awake I find another shore, and that shows me,
my Boat has changed place. But it is not the same with the Earth, I find all
things as I left 'em. No, no, said I, there is another Shore too; You know that
beyond the circles of the Planets are fixed Stars, there is our Shore. I am
upon the Earth, and the Earh makes a great circle round the Sun, I look for the
center of the circle and see the Sun there, I then direct my sight beyond the
Sun in a right Line, and should certainly discover the fixed Stars which answer
to the Sun, but that the light of the Sun effaceth 'em: But at Night I easily
perceive the Stars which corresponded with him in the day, which is exactly the
same thing; if the Earth did not change its place in the Circle where it is, I
should see the Sun always against the same fixed Stars, but when the Earth does
change its place, the Sun must answer to other Stars and there again is your
Shore, which is always changing. And seeing the Earth makes her circle in a
year, I see the Sun likewise in the space of a year answer successively to the
whole Circle of the fixed Stars, which Circle is called the Zodiac: I will
draw you the Figure of it, if you please, on the Sand? It Is no matter, said
she, I can do well enough without it; beside, it will give an Air of Learning
to my Park which I would not have in it: For I have heard of a certain
Philosopher, who being Shipwrack'd, and cast upon an unknown Island, seeing
several Mathematical Figures traced on the Seashore, cried out to those that
followed him, Courage, Courage, my Companions, the Isle is inhabited, behold
the Footsteps of Men; But you may spare your Figures, such Footsteps are not
decent here.

I confess, said I, Madam, the footsteps of Lovers would better become this
Place; that is, your Name and Cipher engraved on the Trees by your Adorers. Tell
not me, said she, of Lovers and Adorers, I am for my beloved Sun and Planets.
But how comes it to pass that the Sun as to the fixed Stars compleats his
course but in a year, and yet goes over our Heads every day? Did you never, I
replied, observe a Bowl on a Bowling-green? It runs toward the Block, and at
the same time turns very often round it self, so that the Parts which were
above are below, and those which were below are above; just so it is with the
Earth, at the same time that she advances on the Circle which in a years space
she makes round the Sun, in twenty four hours she turns round her self; so that
in twenty four hours every part of the Earth loses the Sun, and recovers him
again, and as it turns toward the Sun, it seems to rise, and as it turns from
him, it seems to fall. It is very pleasant, said she, that the Earth must take
all upon her self, and the Sun do nothing. And when the Moon, the other
Planets, and the fixed Stars seem to go over our Heads every twenty four hours,
you will say that too is only Fancy? Pure Fancy, said I, which proceeds from the
same cause, for the Planets complete their courses round the Sun at unequal
times, according to their unequal distances, and that which we see to day
answer to a certain Point in the Zodiac or Circle of the fixed Stars, to
morrow we see answer to another Point, because it is advanced on its own Circle
as well as we are advanced upon ours. We move, and the Planets move too, which
must make a great alteration; so that what seems irregular in the Planets,
proceeds only from our motion, when in truth they are all very regular: I will
suppose 'em so, said the Countess, but I would not have their Regularity put
the Earth to so great trouble; methinks you exact too much Activity from so
ponderous a Mass. But, said I, had you rather that the Sun and all the Stars,
which are vast great Bodies, should in twenty four hours travel such an
infinity of Miles, and make so prodigious a Tour as they needs must, if the
Earth did not turn round it self every twenty four hours? Oh, said she, the Sun
and the Stars are all Fire, their Motion is not very difficult; but the Earth,
I fancy, is a little unweildy: That signifies nothing, I replied, for what do
you think of a first rate Ship, which carries near an hundred Guns, and a
thousand Men, beside her Provisions and other Furniture? you see one puff of
Wind makes it sail on the Water, because the Water is liquid, and being easily
separated does very little resist the motion of the Ship: So the Earth though
never so Massive is as easily born up by the Celestial Matter, which is a
thousand times more fluid than the Water, and fills all that great Space where
the Planets float; for where would you the Earth should be fastened to resist
the motion of the Celestial Matter, and not be driven by it? You may as well
fancy a little block of Wood can withstand the current of a River. But pray,
said she, how can the Earth with all its weight be born up by your Celestial
Matter, which must be very light, because it is so fluid? It does not argue,
said I, that what is most fluid is most light: for what think you of the great
Vessel I mentioned but now, which with all its Burden is yet lighter than the
Water it floats on? I will have nothing to do with that great Vessel, said she,
and I begin to apprehend my self in some danger on such a whirlegigg as you
have made of the Earth: There is no danger, I replied; but Madam, if you are
afraid, we will have the Earth supported by four Elephants, as the Indians
believe it. Hey day, cried she, here is another Systeme; however I love those
People for taking care of themselves, they have a good Foundation to trust to,
while you Copernicans are a little too venturous with the Celestial Matter; and
yet I fancy if the Indians thought the Earth in the least danger of sinking,
they would double their number of Elephants. They do well, said I, laughing at
her fancy, who would sleep in Fear? and if you have occasion for 'em to night,
we will put as many as you please in our Systeme, we can take 'em away again by
degrees as you grow better confirmed. I do not think 'em very necessary, said
she, I have courage enough to turn. You shall turn with pleasure, Madam, said
I, and shall find delightful Ideas in this Systeme. For Example, sometimes I
fancy my self suspended in the Air, without any motion, while the Earth turns
round me in twenty four hours; I see I know not how many different Faces pass
under me, some white, some black, and some tauny; sometimes I see Hats, and
sometimes Turbants, now Heads with Hair, and then shaved Heads; here I see
Cities with Steeples, others with Spires and Crescents, others with Towers of
Purcelain, and anon great Countries with nothing but Cottages; here. I see vast
Oceans, and there most horrible Deserts; in short, I discover the infinite
variety which is upon the surface of the Earth. I confess, said she, twenty
four hours would thus be very well bestowed, so that in the same Place where we
are now, I do not mean in the Park, but we will suppose our selves in the Air,
other People continually pass by who take up our Place, and at the end of
twenty four hours we return to it again.

Copernicus himself, said I, could not have comprehended it better: First then,
we see some of our Neighbors passing by us, up to the Ears in Politics, yet
settling their Nation no better than we do the World in the Moon; then follows
a great Sea, perhaps a Fleet of Ships, perhaps a Makrel-Boat, no matter
whether; then come some of the Iroquois going to eat a Prisoner for their
Breakfast, who seems as little concerned as his Devourers: After appear the
Women of the Land of Jesso, who spend all their time in dressing their Husbands
Dinners and Suppers, and painting their Lips and Eyebrows blue, only to please
the greatest Villains in the World: Then the fair Circassians, who are very
free of their Favors, and grant all to the first Comer, except a little they
reserve for their Husbands; then the Tartars going to steal Concubines for the
Turks and Persians; and at last our own dear Countrymen, it may be in some
points as ridiculous as the best of 'em. It is very pleasant, said the
Countess, but to imagine what you tell me, though if I was above, and saw all
this, I would have the Liberty to hasten or retard the motion of the Earth,
according as the Objects pleased me more or less, and I assure you I should
quickly send packing the Politicians and Maneaters, but should have a great
curiosity for the Fair Circassians, for methinks they have a custom very
particular. They are so extremely Beautiful, said I, that their Husbands have
enough, and to spare to a Stranger. I fear then, said she, the Women of our
Country are very ugly, in respect of those Fair Ladies, for the Husbands part
with nothing here, but keep all to themselves. It Is because they make more use,
I replied, of -- Hold your peace, said she, and no more of your Fooleries, I
have a difficulty to clear, and you must be serious. As the Earth moves, the
Air changes every moment, so we breathe the Air of another Country: Not at
all, I replied, for the Air which encompasseth the Earth, does not extend above
a certain height, perhaps 20 leagues it follows us and turns with us: Have you
not seen the work of a Silkworm, the Shells which those little Animals
imprison themselves in, and weave with so much Art; they are made of a Silk
very close, but are covered with a Down very slack and soft: So the Earth which
is solid, is covered from the surface 20 Leagues upwards, with a kind of Down,
which is the Air, and all the Shell of the Silkworm turns at the same time:
Beyond the Air is the Celestial Matter, incomparably more pure and subtle, and
much more agitated than the Air: Your comparison, said, she, is somewhat mean,
and yet what wonders are wrought, what Wars, what Changes in this little Shell?
It Is true, I replied, but Nature takes no notice of such little particular
Motions, but drives us along with the general motion, as if she were at Bouls.
Methinks, said she, it is very ridiculous to be upon a thing that turns, and yet
not be well assured that it does turn; and to tell you the Truth, I begin to
distrust the Reasons you give, why we should not be sensible of the Motion of
the Earth; for is it possible there should not some little mark be left, by
which we might perceive it?

All Motions, said I, the more common and Natural they are, are the less
perceptible, and this holds true even in Morality; the motion of self Love is
so natural to us, that for the most part we are not sensible of it, and we
believe we act by other Principles: You are Moralizing, said she, to a question
of Natural Philosophy: But it is enough for the first time, let us now go home,
and meet here again to Morrow; you with your Systemes, and I with my ignorance.

In returning back to the Castle, that I might say all I could on the Subject,
I told her of a third Systeme, invented by Ticho Brahe, who had fixed the Earth
in the Center of the World, turned the Sun round the Earth, and the rest of the
Planets round the Sun; for since the new discoveries, there was no way left to
have the Planets turn round the Earth. But the Countess, who had a quick
apprehension, said, she thought it was too affected, among so many great
Bodies, to exempt the Earth only from turning round the Sun; that it was
improper to make the Sun turn round the Earth, when all the Planets turn round
the Sun; and that though this Systeme was to prove the immobility of the Earth,
yet she thought it very improbable: So we resolved to stick to Copernicus,
whose opinion we thought most Uniform, Probable, and Diverting.

The Second Evening.
IN the Morning, I sent to the Countess's Apartment, to know how she had
rested, and whether the Motion of the Earth had not disturbed her? she
answered, she began to be accustomed to it, and that she had slept as well as
Copernicus himself: Soon after there came some Neighbors to dine with her, but
they went away in the Evening; so that after Supper we walked again into the
Park, and immediately fell upon our Systemes. She so well conceived what I told
her the night before, that she desired I would proceed without any repetition.
Well, Madam, said I, Since the Sun, which is now immovable, has left off
being a Planet; and the Earth, which turns round him, is now become one, you
will not be surprised when you hear that the Moon is an Earth too, and that she
is inhabited as ours is. I confess, said she, I have often heard talk of the
World in the Moon, but I always looked upon it as Visionary and mere Fancy. And
it may be so still, said I. I am in this case as People in a Civil War, where
the uncertainty of what may happen makes 'em hold intelligence with the
opposite Party; for though I verily believe the Moon is inhabited, I live civilly
with those who do not believe it; and I am (as some honest Gentlemen in point
of Religion) still ready to embrace the prevailing Opinion, but till the
Unbelievers have a more considerable Advantage, I am for the People in the Moon.

Suppose there had never been any Communication between London and Greenwich,
and a Cockney, who was never beyond the Walls of London, saw Greenwich from the
top of the Pyramid; you ask him if he believes Greenwich is inhabited as London
is? He presently answers, No; for, says he, I see People at London, but none
at Greenwich; nor did I ever hear of any there: It Is true, you tell him, that
from the Pyramid he cannot perceive any Inhabitants at Greenwich, because of
the distance; but all that he does discover of Greenwich very much resembles
what he sees at London, the Steeples, Houses, Walls; so that it may very well
be inhabited as London is; all this signifies nothing, my Cockney still
persists Greenwich is not inhabited, because he sees no body there. The Moon is
our Greenwich, and every one of us as mere Cockneys as he that never was out of
the sound of Bow-Bell. You are too severe, said she, upon your Fellow-Citizens;
we are not all sure so silly as your Cockney; since Greenwich is just as London
is, he is a Fool if he does not think it inhabited: But the Moon is not at all
like the Earth. Have a care what you say, I replied, for if the Moon resembles
the Earth, you are under a necessity to believe it inhabited. If it be so, said
she, I own I cannot be dispensed from believing it, and you seem so confident
of it, that I fear I must, whether I will or no. It Is true, the two Motions of
the Earth (which I could never imagine till now) do a little stagger me as to
all the rest: But yet how is it possible the Earth should enlighten as the Moon
does, without which they cannot be alike? If that be all, said I, the
difference is not great, for it is the Sun which is the sole Fountain of Light;
that Quality proceeds only from him, and if the Planets give Light to us, it is
because they first receive it from the Sun; the Sun sends Light to the Moon,
and she reflects it back on the Earth; the Earth in the same manner receives
Light from the Sun, and sends it to the Moon; for the Distance is the same
between the Earth and the Moon, as between the Moon and the Earth. But is the
Earth, said the Countess, as fit to send back the Light of the Sun as the Moon
is? You are altogether for the Moon, said I, she is much obliged to you; but
you must know that Light is made up of certain little Balls, which rebound from
what is solid, but pass through what admits of an entrance in a right Line, as
Air or Glass: So that, that which makes the Moon enlighten us, is that she is a
Firm and Solid Body, from which the little Balls rebound; and we must deny our
Senses, if we will not allow the Earth the same Solidity; in short, the
Difference is how we are seated, for the Moon being at so vast a Distance from
us, we can only discover her to be a Body of Light, and do not perceive that
she is a great Mass, altogether like the Earth: Whereas on the contrary,
because we are so near the Earth, we know her to be a great Mass, but do not
discover her to be a Body of Light, for want of the due distance: It is just so
with us all, said the Countess, we are dazzled with the Quality and Fortune of
those who are above us, when, do but look to the Bottom, and we are all alike.

Very true, said I, we would judge of all things, but still stand in the wrong
place; we are too near to judge of our selves, and too far off to know others:
So that the true way to see things as they are, is to be between the Moon and
the Earth, to be purely a Spectator of this World, and not an Inhabitant. I
shall never be satisfied, said she, for the Injustice we do the Earth, and the
too favorable opinion we have of the Moon, till you assure me that the People
in the Moon are as little acquainted with their Advantages, as we are with
ours, and that they take our Earth for a Planet, without knowing theirs is one
too. Do not doubt it, said I, we appear to them to perform very regularly our
function of a Planet: It Is true, they do not see us make a Circle round them,
but that is no great matter. That half of the Moon which was turned toward us
at the beginning of the World, has been turned toward us ever since; the
Eyes, Mouth, and Face which we have fancied of the Spots in her, are still the
same, and if the other opposite half should appear to us, we should no doubt
fancy another Figure from the different Spots that are in it: Not but that the
Moon turns upon her self, and in the same time that she turns round the Earth,
that is in a Month; but while she is making that turn upon her self, and that
she should hide a cheek for Example, and appear somewhat else to us, she makes
a like part of her Circle round the Earth, and still presents to us the same
Cheek; so that the Moon, who in respect of the Sun and Stars turns round her
self, in respect of us does not turn at all; they seem to her to rise and set
in the space of fifteen Days; but for our Earth, it appears to her to be held
up in the same place of the Heavens: It Is true, this apparent Immobility is not
very agreeable for a Body which should pass for a Planet, but it is not
altogether perfect, the Moon has a kind of trembling, which causes a little
corner of her Face to be sometimes hid from us, and a little corner of the
opposite half appears; but then upon my word, she attributes that trembling to
us, and fancies that we have in the Heavens the motion of a Pendulum, which
vibrates to and fro.

I find, says the Countess, the Planets are just like us; we cast that upon
others which is in our selves; the Earth says, It Is not I that turn, it is the
Sun; the Moon says, it is not I that shake, it is the Earth; there is a great
deal of error every where. But I would not advise you, said I, to undertake
the reforming it; you had better convince your self of the entire resemblance
of the Earth and the Moon: Imagine then these two great Bowls held up in the
Heavens, you know that the Sun always enlightens the one half of a Body that is
round, and the other half is in the Shadow; there is then one half of the Earth
and one half of the Moon which is enlightened by the Sun; that is, which has
Day, and the other half which is Night. Observe also, that as a Ball has less
force after it has been struck against a Wall which sends it to the other
side, so Light is weakened when it is reflected. This pale Light which comes to
us from the Moon, is the very Light of the Sun, but it cannot come to us from
the Moon but by reflection; it has lost much of the Force and Luster it had
when it came directly from the Sun upon the Moon; and that bright Light which
shines directly upon us from the Sun, and which the Earth reflects upon the
Moon, is as pale and weak when it arrives there; so that the Light which
appears to us in the Moon, and which enlightens our Nights, is the parts of the
Moon which have Day, and that part of the Earth which has Day, when it is
opposite to the part of the Moon which has Night, gives Light to it: All
depends upon how the Moon and the Earth behold one another. At the beginning of
the Month we do not see the Moon, because she is between the Sun and us; that
half of her which has Day, is then turned toward the Sun, and that half which
has Night, turned toward us; we cannot see it then, because it has no Light
upon it; but that half of the Moon which has Night, being turned to the half
of the Earth which has Day, sees us without being perceived, and we then
appear to them just as the full Moon does to us; so that, as I may say, the
People of the Moon have then a full Earth; but the Moon being advanced upon her
Circle of a Month, comes from under the Sun, and begins to turn toward us a
little corner of the half which is Light, there is the Crescent; then those
parts of the Moon which have Night do not see all the half of the Earth which
has Day, and we are then in the Wayn to them.

I comprehend you very well, said the Countess, the People in the Moon have a
Month quite contrary to us; when we have a full Moon, their half of the Moon
which is light, is turned to our half of the Earth which is dark; they do not
see us at all, and they have then a new Earth, this is plain. But now tell me
how come the Eclipses? You may easily guess that, said I, when it is new Moon,
that she is between the Sun and us, and all her dark half is turned toward us
who have Light, that obscure shadow is cast upon us, if the Moon be directly
under the Sun, that shadow hides him from us, and at the same time obscures a
part of that half of the Earth which is light, which was seen by that half of
the Moon which was dark, here then is an Eclipse of the Sun to us during our
Day, and an Eclipse of the Earth to the Moon during her Night. When it is full
Moon, the Earth is between her and the Sun, and all the dark half of the Earth
is turned toward all the light half of the Moon; the shadow then of the Earth
casts it self toward the Moon, and if it falls on the Moon, it obscures that
light half which we see, which has then Day, and hinders the Sun from shining
on it: Here then is an Eclipse of the Moon to us during our Night, and an
Eclipse of the Sun to the Moon during her Day: But the reason that we have not
Eclipses every time that the Moon is between the Sun and the Earth, or the
Earth between the Sun and the Moon, is, because these three Bodies are not
exactly placed in a right Line, and by Consequence that that should make the
Eclipse, casts its shadow a little beside that which should be obscured.

I am surpised, said the Countess, that there should be so little mystery in
Eclipses, and that the whole World should not know the Cause of 'em. Nor never
will, said I, as some People go about it. In the East Indies, when the Sun and
the Moon are in Eclipse, they believe a certain Devil who has black Claws is
seizing on those Planets with his Talons, and during that time the Rivers are
covered with the Heads of Indians, who are up to the Neck in Water, because
they esteem it a very devout Posture, to implore the Sun and the Moon to defend
themselves against the Devil. In America they are persuaded that the Sun and
the Moon, when Eclipsed, are angry, and what is it they will not do to be
reconciled with them? The Greeks, who were so refined, did they not believe the
Moon was enchanted, and that the Magicians forced her to descend from Heaven,
and shed a dangerous juice on the Plants? Nay, in what a pannick Fear were we
in above thirty years ago at an Eclipse of the Sun? How many People hid
themselves in their Cellars, and all the Philosophers of Gresham could not
persuade them to come out till the Eclipse was over?

Methinks, said she, it is scandalous for Men to be such Cowards; there ought to
be a general Law of Mankind to prohibit the discoursing of Eclipses, that we
might not call to mind the Follies that have been said and done upon that
Subject. Your Law then, said I, must abolish even the Memory of all things, and
forbid us to speak at all, for I know nothing in the World which is not a
Monument of the Folly of Man.

But what do you think, said she, of the People in the Moon, are they as afraid
of an Eclipse as we are? It would be very burlesque for the Indians there to be
up to the Neck in Water; that the Americans should believe the Earth angry with
them; the Greeks fancy we were bewitched, and would destroy their Plants; in
short, that we should cause the same Consternation among them, as they do here.
And why not, said I? I do not doubt it at all; for why should the People of the
Moon have more Wit than we? What right have they to affright us, and not we
them? For my part, I believe that since a prodigious company of Men have been
and still are such Fools to adore the Moon, there are People in the Moon that
worship the Earth, and that we are upon our knees the one to the other. But
sure, said she, we don't pretend to send any Influences to the Moon, and to
give a Crisis to her sick; if the People have any Wit in those Parts, they will
soon destroy the Honor we flatter our selves with, and I fear, we shall have
the disadvantage.

Fear it not Madam, said I; do you think we are the only Fools of the Universe?
Is it not consistent with Ignorance to spread it self every where? It Is true,
we can only guess at the Folly of the People in the Moon, but I no more doubt
it, than I do the most authentic News that comes from thence. What News comes
from thence, said she? That which the Learned bring us, I replied, who travel
thither every day with their Tubes and Tellescopes: they will tell you of their
Discoveries there, of Lands, Seas, Lakes, high Mountains, and deep Abysses.

I fancy indeed, said she, they may discover Mountains and Abysses, because of
the remarkable inequality; but how do they distinguish Lands and Seas? Very
easily, said I, for the Waters letting part of the Light pass through them, send
back but a very little, so that they appear afar off like so many dark Spots;
whereas the Lands being solid, reflect the whole Light, and appear to be more
bright and shining: Nay, they pretend to be so well acquainted with the several
parts that they have given them all Names; one place they call Copernicus,
another Archimedes, another Galileus; there is the Caspian Sea, the Black Lake,
the Porphirite Mountains; in short, they have published such exact descriptions
of the Moon, that a very Almanack-maker will be no more to seek there, than I
am in London.

I must own then, said the Countess, they are very exact; but what do they say
to the inside of the Country? I would very fain know that. It Is impossible, I
replied, Mr. Flamsted himself, (one of the most Learned Astronomers of our Age)
cannot inform you. You must ask that of Astolfo, who was carried into the Moon
by St. John. I am going to tell you one of the agreeable Follies of Ariosto,
and I am confident you will be well pleased to hear it: I must confess he had
better have let alone St. John, whose Name is so worthy of Respect, but it is a
Poetical License, and must be allowed. The Poem is dedicated to a Cardinal, and
a great Pope has honored it with his Approbation, which is prefixed to
several of the Editions; this is the Argument, Rowland Nephew to Charlemagne,
falls mad because the fair Angelica prefers Medore before him. Astolfo a Knight
Errant, finding himself one day in the terrestrial Paradise, which was upon the
top of a very high Mountain, whereto he was carried by his flying Horse, meets
St. John there, who tells him, if he would have Rowland cured, he must make a
Voyage with him into the Moon. Astolfo, who had a great mind to see Countries,
did not stand much upon entreaty, and immediately there came a fiery Chariot
which carried the Apostle and the Knight up into the Air; Astolfo being no
great Philosopher, was surpised to find the Moon so much bigger than it
appeared to him when he was upon the Earth; to see Rivers, Seas, Mountains,
Cities, Forests, nay, what would have surpised me too, Nymphs hunting in
those Forests; but that which was most remarkable, was a Valley where you
might find any thing that was lost in our World, of what nature soever; Crowns,
Riches, Fame, and an infinity of Hopes, the time we spend in Play, and in
searching for the Philosophers Stone, the Alms we give after our Death, the
Verses we present to great Men and Princes, and the Sighs of Lovers. I know
not, said she, what became of the Sighs of Lovers in the time of Ariosto, but I
fancy there are very few of 'em ascend to the Moon in our days. Ah Madam, I
replied, how many does the Countess of D -- r send thither every day? those
that are addressed to her, will make a considerable Heap; and I assure you the
Moon keeps all safe that is lost here below. Yet I must tell you Ariosto does
but whisper it, though every thing is there, even to the donation of Constantine,
(i. e.) the Popes have pretended to be Masters of Rome and Italy by Virtue of a
Donation which the Emperor Constantine made Silvester; and the truth is, no
body knows what is become of it; but what do you think is not to be found in
the Moon? Folly, all that ever was upon the Earth is kept there still, but in
lieu of it, it is not to be imagined how many Wits (if I may so call 'em) that
are lost here, are got up into the Moon, they are so many Vials full of a very
subtle Liquor, which evaporates immediately if it be not well stopped; and
upon every one of these Vials the Names are written to whom the Wits belong; I
think Ariosto has heaped 'em upon one another a little confusedly, but for
order sake we will fancy 'em placed upon Shelves in a long Gallery; Astolfo
wondered to see several Vials full inscribed with the Names of the most
considerable Statsemen, Divines, Lawyers, etc. Bless me, said he, is my Lord --
and my Lord -- here! Sir Tho. Sir Jo. nay, Doctor -- and Father -- too? Why, in
my Country, we look upon 'em as Oracles; and after all, it seems, they are but
little better than mad Men, if not stark Fools. I find now the poor Rogue was
in the right, though he was soundly whipped for it, who told the Judge that he had
seen an Ass clothed in Scarlet; and a right Worshipful Alderman, that he knew
not which was the greatest Bruit of the two, the Beast that bore the Furr, or
the Beast that wore it; but had I been there, I should have told Astolfo the
saucy Knave was well enough served, for we are not to look upon the Man, but
the Place he fills; we are to reverence a Magistrate when and wheresoever we
meet him, and to suppose his Merit was the sole cause of his Preferment, though
we are certain it came by Bribery or Pimping; but enough of this, let us return
to our Vials. To confess the truth, I begin to fear, since I have entertained
you with these Philosophical and Poetical Visions, mine there is not very
empty; however, it is some consolation to me, that while you are so attentive,
you have a little Glass full as well as your Servant: The good Knight found his
own wits among the rest, and with the Apostles leave snuff'd it all up his
Nose, like so much Queen of Hungary's Water; but Ariosto said, he did not carry
it far, it returned again to the Moon a little after.

-- The love of one fair Northern Lass,
Sent up his wit unto the Place it was.
Well, he did not forget Orlando's Vial, which was the occasion of his Voyage,
but he was cursedly plagued to carry it, for Hero's wits are naturally very
heavy, and there did not want one drop of it; in conclusion Ariosto, according
to his laudable custom, addresseth himself to his Mistress in this manner,

Fair Mistress, who for me to Heaven shall fly,
To bring again from thence my wandering wit?
Which I still lose, since from that piercing eye
The Dart came forth that first my Heart did hit:
Nor of my loss at all complain would I,
Might I but keep that which remains yet:
But if it still decrease, within short space,
I doubt I shall be in Orlando's case;
Yet, well I wot where to recover mine,
Though not in Paradise, nor Cynthia's Sphere,
Yet doubtless in a Place no less divine,
In that sweet Face of yours, in that fair Hair,
That ruby Lip, in those two starlike eyn,
There is my wit, I know it wanders there,
And with my Lips, if you would give me leave,
I there would search, I thence would it receive.
Is not this very fine? To reason like Ariosto, the safest way of losing our
wits, is to be in love; for you see they do not go far from us, we may recover
'em again at our Lips: but when we lose 'em by other means, as for Example, by
Philosophizing, whip, they are gone into the Moon, and there is no coming at
'em again when we would. However, said the Countess, our Vials have an
honorable Station among the Philosophers, when it is forty to one, but Love
fixes our Wits on an Object we cannot but be ashamed of. But to take away mine
entirely, pray tell me, but tell me seriously, if you believe there are any Men
in the Moon? for methinks hitherto you have not been very positive. For my
part, said I, I do not believe there are Men in the Moon, for do but observe
how much the Face of Nature is changed between this and China; other Visages,
Shapes, Manners, nay, almost other Principles of Reason; and therefore, between
us and the Moon the alteration must be much more considerable. In the Lands
that have been lately discovered, we can scarce call the Inhabitants Men, they
are rather Animals of humane Shape, and that too sometimes very Imperfect,
almost without humane Reason; he therefore that will travel to the Moon, must
not expect to find Men there.

What sort of People will they be then, said the Countess? Troth, Madam, said
I, I know not; for put the case that we our selves inhabited the Moon, and were
not Men, but rational Creatures; could we imagine, do you think, such
fantastical People upon the Earth, as Mankind is? Is it possible we should have
an Idea of so strange a Composition, a Creature of such foolish Passions, and
such wise Reflections? So Learned in things of no use, and so stupidly Ignorant
of what most concerns him? So much concern for Liberty, and yet such great
inclinations to Servitude? So desirous of Happiness, and yet so very incapable
of being so? the People in the Moon must be wise indeed to suppose all this of
us. But do we not see our selves continually, and cannot so much as guess how
we were made? So that we are forced to say, the Gods when they created us were
drunk with Nectar, and when they were sober again, could not choose but laugh at
their own handiwork. Well, well, said the Countess, we are safe enough then,
they in the Moon know nothing of us; but I could wish we were a little better
acquainted with them, for it troubles me that we should see the Moon above us,
and yet not know what is done there. Why, said I, are you not as much concerned
for that part of the Earth which is not yet discovered? What Creatures inhabit
it, and what they do there? for we and they are carried in the same Vessel;
they possess the Prow, and we the Poop, and yet there is no manner of
Communication between us; they do not know at one end of the Ship who lives or
what is done at the other end; and you would know what passes in the Moon,
which is another great Vessel, sailing in the Heavens at a vast distance from
us.

Oh, said she, for the Earth, I reckon it all as good as discovered, and can
guess at the People, though I never heard a word of 'em; for certainly they all
resemble us very much, and we may know 'em better when we have a mind to it;
they will stay where they are, and it is no more but going to see 'em; but we
cannot get into the Moon if we would, so that I despair of knowing what they do
there. You would laugh at me, said I, if I should answer you seriously, perhaps
I may deserve it, and yet, I fancy, I can say a great deal to justify a
ridiculous thought that is just now come into my Head; nay to use the Fools
best Argument, I Will lay a wager I make you own (in spite of Reason) that one of
these days there may be a Communication between the Earth and the Moon, and who
knows what great Advantages we may procure by it? Do but consider America
before it was discovered by Columbus, how profoundly ignorant were those
People, they knew nothing at all of Arts or Sciences, they went naked, had no
other Arms but a Bow and Arrows, and did not conceive they might be carried by
Animals; they looked upon the Sea as a wide Space, forbidden to Man, that it
was joined to the Heavens, and that beyond it was nothing: It Is true, after
having spent whole years in making hollow the trunks of great Trees with sharp
stones, they put themselves to Sea in these Trunks, and floated from Land to
Land, as the Wind and Waves drove 'em; but how often was their Trough overset,
and they forced to recover it again by swimming? So that (except when they were
on the Land) it might be said they were continually swimming: And yet had any
one but told 'em of another kind of Navigation incomparably more perfect and
useful than their own, that they might easily pass over that infinite Space of
Water, that they might stop in the middle of the Waves, and in some sense
command the Winds, and make their Vessel go fast or slow as they pleased; in
short, that this impassable Ocean should be no obstacle to their conversing
with another different People; do you think they would have believed you? and
yet at last that day is come; the unheard of and most surprising Sight appears,
vast great Bodies, with white Wings, are seen to fly upon the Sea, to vomit
Fire from all Parts, and to cast on their Shoars an unknown People, all scaled
with Iron, who dispose and govern Monsters as they please; carry Thunder in
their Hands, and overthrow and destroy whoever resists 'em: From whence came
they? Who brought 'em over the Sea? Who gave to 'em the Disposal of the Fire of
Heaven? Are they Gods? Are they Sons of the Sun? for certainly they are not
Men. Do but consider, Madam, the surprise of the Americans, there can be
nothing greater; and after this, shall any one say there shall never be a
Communication between the Moon and the Earth. Did the Americans believe there
would ever be any between them and Europe, till it came to pass? It Is true, you
must pass this great Space of Air and Heaven which is between the Earth and the
Moon; but did not those vast Seas seem at first as impassable to the Americans?
You rave, I think, said she, did you not own the Americans were so ignorant,
that they had not the least conception of crossing the Sea; but we who know a
great deal more then they, can imagine and fancy the going through the Air,
though we are assured it is not to be done. There is somewhat more than Fancy, I
replied, when it has been already practiced, for several have found the secret
of fastening Wings, which bear them up in the Air, to move them as they please,
and to fly over Rivers, and from Steeple to Steeple; I cannot say indeed they
have yet made an Eagles Flight, or that it does not cost now and then a Leg or
an Arm to one of these new Birds; but this may serve to represent the first
Planks that were launched on the Water, and which were the very beginning of
Navigation; there were no Vessels then thought of to sail round the World, and
yet you see what great Ships are grown by little and little from those first
Planks. The Art of Flying is but newly invented, it will improve by degrees,
and in time grow perfect; then we may fly as far as the Moon. We do not yet
pretend to have discovered all things, or that what we have discovered can
receive no addition; and therefore, pray let us agree, there are yet many
things to be done in the Ages to come. Were you to live a thousand Ages, said
the Countess, I can never believe you will fly, but you must endanger your
Neck. I will not, I replied, be so unmannerly as to contradict a fair Lady, but
though we cannot learn the Art here, I hope you will allow they may fly better in
the Moon; it is no great matter whether we go to them, or they come to us, we
shall then be the Americans, who knew nothing of Navigation, and yet there were
very good Ships at to other end of the World. Were it so, said she, the People
in the Moon would have been here before now. All in good time, said I, the
Europians were not in America till at the end of some thousands of years, they
were so long in improving Navigation to the point of crossing the Ocean. The
People in the Moon have already made some short Voyages in the Air; they are
exercising continually, and by degrees will be more expert, then we shall see
'em, and God knows how we shall be surpised. It is unsufferable, said she, you
should banter me at this rate, and justify your ridiculous Fancy by such false
reasoning. I am going to demonstrate, said I, you reproach me very unjustly:
Consider, Madam, that the World is unfolded by degrees; for the Ancients were
very positive, that the Torrid and Frigid Zones were not inhabitable, by reason
of their excessive Heat and Cold; and in the time of the Romans, the general
Map of the World was but very little extended beyond that of their Empire;
which though in one sense, expressed much Grandeur, in another sense, was a sign
of as great Ignorance; however, there were Men found both in very hot and in
very cold Countries; so that you see the World is already increased after that
it was thought that the Ocean covered the whole Earth, except what was then
discovered; there was no talk then of the Antipodes, not so much as a thought
of 'em, for who could fancy their Heels at top, and their Heads at bottom; and
yet after all their fine reasoning, the Antipodes were discovered; here is now
another half of the World starts up, and a new Reformation of the Map; methinks
this, Madam, should restrain us, and teach us not to be so positive in our
Opinions, the World will unfold it self more to us hereafter; then we shall
know the People in the Moon as well as we do now the Antipodes; but all things
must be done in order, the whole Earth must be first discovered, and till we
are perfectly acquainted with our own Habitation, we shall never know that of
our Neighbors. Without fooling, said the Countess, you are so very profoud in
this Point, that I begin to think, you are in earnest, and believe what you
say. Not so neither, said I, but I would show you how easy it is to maintain a
chymerical Notion, that may (like some opinions in Religion,) perplex a Man of
understanding, but never persuade him; there is nothing persuades but Truth, it
has no need of all its proofs, but enters naturally into our Understanding;
and when once we have learned it, we do nothing but think of it. I think you
then, said she, for imposing on me no longer; for I confess your false
reasoning disturbed me, but now I shall sleep very quietly, if you think fit to
go home.

The Third Evening.
THE Countess was so intent upon her Notions, that she would fain have engaged
me next day, to go on where I left off; but I told her, since the Moon and
Stars were become the Subject of our Discourse, we would trust our Chymaeras
with no body else: At Night we went again into the Park, which was now
dedicated to our Learned Conversation.

Well, Madam, said I, I have great News for you; that which I told you last
Night, of the Moon's being inhabited, may not be so now: There is a new Fancy
got into my Head, which puts those People in great Danger. I cannot suffer it,
said she; yesterday you were preparing me to receive a Visit from 'em, and now
there are no such People in Nature: Once you would have me believe the Moon was
inhabited; I surmounted the Difficulty I had, and will now believe it. You are
a little too nimble, I replied; did I not advise you never to be entirely
convinced in things of this nature, but to reserve half of your understanding
free and disengaged, that you may admit of the contrary opinion, if there be
any occasion. I care not for your Sentences, said she, let us come to matter of
Fact. Are we not to consider the Moon as Greenwhich? No, said I, the Moon does
not so much resemble the Earth, as Greenwich does London: The Sun draws from
the Earth and Water, Exhalations and Vapors, which mounting to a certain
height in the Air, do there assemble, and form the Clouds; these uncertain
Clouds are driven irregularly round the Globe, sometimes shadowing one
Country, and sometimes another; he then who beholds the Earth from a-far off,
will see frequent alterations upon its surface, because a great Country
overcast with Clouds, will appear dark or light, as the Clouds stay, or pass
over it; he will see the Spots on the Earth often change their Place, and
appear, or disappear as the Clouds remove; but we see none of these changes
wrought upon the Moon, which would certainly be the same, were there but Clouds
about her; but on the contrary, all her Spots are fixed and certain, and her
light parts continue where they were at first, which truly is a great
misfortune; for by this reason, the Sun draws no Exhalations or Vapors above
the Moon; so that it appears she is a Body infinitely more hard, and solid than
the Earth, whose subtle parts are easily separated from the rest, and mount
upwards as soon as Heat puts them in Motion: But it must be a heap of Rock and
Marble, where there is no Evaporation; besides, Exhalations are so natural and
necessary where there is Water, that there can be no Water at all, where there
is no Exhalation; and what sort of Inhabitants must those be, whose Country
affords no Water, is all Rock, and produces nothing? Very fine, said she, you
have forgot since, you assured me, we might from hence distinguish Seas in the
Moon; nay, You or your Friends were Godfathers to some of 'em. Pray, what is
become of your Caspian Sea, and your Black Lake? All Conjecture, Madam, I
replied, though for your Ladyships sake, I am very sorry for it; for those dark
places we took to be Seas, may perhaps be nothing but large Cavities; it is hard
to guess aright at so great a distance. But will this suffice then, said she,
to extirpate the People in the Moon? Not altogether, I replied, we will neither
determine for, nor against them. I must own my weakness (if it be one) said
she, I cannot be so perfectly undetermined as you would have me to be, but must
believe one way, or the other; therefore pray fix me quickly in my opinion; as
to the Inhabitants of the Moon; preserve or annihilate them, as you shall think
fit; and yet methinks I have a strange inclination for 'em, and would not have
'em destroyed, if it were possible to save 'em. You know, Madam, said I, I can
deny you nothing; the Moon shall be no longer a Defart, but to do you service,
we will repeople her. Since to all appearance, the Spots in the Moon do not
change, I cannot conceive there are any Clouds about her, that sometimes
obscure one part, and sometimes another; yet this does not hinder, but that the
Moon sends forth Exhalations, and Vapors. Our Clouds which we see in the Air,
are nothing but Exhalations and Vapors, which at their coming out of the
Earth, were separated into such minute Particles, that they could not be
discerned; but as they ascend higher, they are condensed by the Cold, and by
the reunion of their Parts, are rendered visible; after which they become
great Clouds, which fluctuate in the Air, till they return back again in Rain;
however these Exhalations and Vapors do sometimes keep themselves so
dispersed, that they are imperceptible; or if they do assemble, it is in
forming such subtle Dews, that they cannot be discerned to fall from any
Cloud. It may likewise happen, that the Vapors which go out of the Moon (for
it is incredible that the Moon is such a Mass, that all its Parts are of an
equal Solidity, all at rest one with another, and all incapable of any
alteration from the efficacy of the Sun; I am sure we are yet unacquainted with
such a Body: Marble it self is of another Nature, and even that which is most
Solid, is subject to Change and Alteration; either from the secret and
invisible motion it has within it self, or from that which it receives from
without) it may so happen then, that the Vapors which issue from the Moon, may
not assemble round her in Clouds, and may not fall back again in Rain, but only
in Dews. It is sufficient for this, that the Air with which the Moon is
environed, (for it is certain that the Moon is encompassed with Air as well as
the Earth) be a little different from our Air, and the Vapors of the Moon a
little different from those of the Earth, which is very probable. Hereupon the
matter being otherwise disposed in the Moon than on the Earth, the Effects must
be different; though it is of no great consequence whether they are or no; for
from the moment we have found an inward motion in the parts of the Moon, or
produced by foreign Causes, here is enough for the new birth of its
Inhabitants, and a sufficient and necessary fund for their Subsistence. This
will furnish us with Corn, Fruit, Water, according to the custom or manner of
the Moon, which I do not pretend to know; and all proportioned to the wants and
use of the Inhabitants, with whom I pretend to be as little acquainted. That is
to say, replied the Countess, you know all is very well, without knowing how it
is so, which is a great deal of Ignorance upon a very little Knowledge; however
I comfort my self, that you have given the Moon her Inhabitants again, and have
wrapped her in an Air of her own, without which a Planet would seem but very
naked.

It Is these two different Airs, said I, that hinder the Communication of the
two Planets; if it was only flying, as I told you yesterday, who knows but we
may improve it to perfection, though I confess there is but little hopes of it;
the great distance between the Moon and the Earth is a difficulty not easily to
be surmounted, yet were the distance but inconsiderable, and the two Planets
almost contiguous, it would be still impossible to pass from the Air of the
one, into the Air of the other: The Water is the Air of Fishes, they never pass
into the Air of the Birds, nor the Birds into the Air of the Fish; and yet it is
not the distance that hinders them, but both are emprison'd by the Air they
breath in; we find our Air consists of thicker and grosser Vapors than the Air
of the Moon. So that one of her Inhabitants arriving at the Confines of our
World, as soon as he enters our Air will inevitably drown himself, and we shall
see him fall dead on the Earth.

I should rejoice at a Wreck, said the Countess, as much as my Neighbors on
the Coast of Sussex; how pleasant would it be to see 'em lie scattered on the
ground, where we might consider at our ease, their extraordinary Figures? But
what, said I, if they could swim on the outward surface of our Air, and be as
curious to see us, as you are to see them; should they Angle or cast a Net for
us, as for so many Fish, would that please you? why not? said the Countess; For
my part I would go into their Nets of mine own accord, were it but for the
pleasure to see such strange Fishermen.

You would be very Sick, said I, when you were drawn to the top of our Air, for
it is not respirable in all its extent, as may be seen on the tops of some very
high Mountains; and I admire that they who have the folly to believe that our
Faries, whom they allow to be Corporeal, and to inhabit the most pure and
refined Air, do not tell us that the reason why they give us such short and
seldom visits, is that there are very few among them that can dive, and those
that can, if it be possible to get through the thick Air where we are, cannot
stay half so long in it, as one of the worst of Sir Harry Blount's
Sponge-gatherers. Here then are natural Barricades, which defend the passage
out of our World, as well as the Entry into that of the Moon; so that since we
can only guess at that World, let us fancy all we can of it. For Example, I
will suppose that we may see there the Firmament, the Sun, and the Stars, of
another color than what they are here; all these apear to us through a kind of
Natural Spectacles, which change and alter the Objects. These Spectacles are
our Air, mixed as it is with Vapors and Exhalations, and which does not extend
it self very high. Some of our Modern Philosophers pretend, of it self it is
blue, as well as the Water of the Sea, and that this color neither appears in
the one nor in the other, but at a great depth; the Firmament, say they, where
the fixed Stars are fastened, has no peculiar light of its own, and by
consequence must appear black, but we see it through the Air which is blue, and
therefore to us it appears blue; which if so, the Beams of the Sun and Stars
cannot pass through the Air without being tinged a little with its color, and
losing as much of their own; yet were the Air of no color, it is very certain,
that through a great Mist the light of a Flambeau at some distance appears
reddish, though it be not its true natural color. Our Air is nothing but a
great Mist, which changes the true color of the Sky, of the Sun, and of the
Stars; it belongs only to the Celestial Matter to bring us the Light and
Colors as they really are in all the purity; so that since the Air of the Moon
is of another nature than our Air, or is stained of another color, or at least
is another kind of Mist, which causes other alterations to the Colors of the
Celestial Bodies; in short, as to the People of the Moon, their Spectacles
through which they see every thing are changed.

If it be so, said the Countess, I prefer my abode before that of the Moon; for
I cannot believe the Celestial Colors are so well suited as they are here; for
if you will let us put green Stars on a red Sky, they cannot be so agreeable as
Stars of Gold on an Azure Firmament. To hear you, said I, one would think you
was choosing a Petticoat, or a suit of Knots; but believe me, Nature has as
good a Fancy as Mrs. Harrison; leave it to her to choose Colors for the Moon,
and I Will engage they shall be well sorted; she will not fail to vary the
Prospect of the Universe, at every different point of Sight, and always the
Alteration shall be very agreeable. I know very well, said the Countess, her
Skill in this Point; she is not at the charge of changing the Objects, but only
the Spectacles, and has the credit of this great variety, without being at any
expense; with a blue Air, she gives us a blue Firmament; and perhaps with a red
Air, she gives to the Inhabitants of the Moon a red Firmament; and yet still it
is but the same Firmament; nay, I am of opinion, she has placed a sort of
Spectacles in our Imagination, through which we see all things, and which to
every particular Man change the Objects. Alexander looked on the Earth as a fit
place to establish a great Empire, it seemed to Celadon a proper residence for
Astraea, and it appeared to a Philosopher, a great Planet in the Heavens,
covered with Fools: I do not believe the Sights vary more between the Earth and
the Moon, than they do between one Man's Fancy and another.

This change in our Imaginations, said I, is very surprising; for they are
still the same Objects, though they appear different; when in the Moon, we may
see other Objects we do not see here, or at least, not see all there we do see
here; perhaps in that Country they know nothing of the Dawn and the Twilight,
before the Sun rises, and after the Sun sets; the Air which encompasseth, and
is elevated above us, receives the Rays, so that they cannot strike on the
Earth; and being gross, stops some of them, and sends 'em to us, though indeed
they were never naturally designed us; so that the Daybreak and the Twilight
are a favor which Nature bestows on us; they are a Light which regularly we
should not have, and which she gives us over and above our due; but in the
Moon, where apparently the Air is more pure, and therefore not so proper to
send down the Beams it receives from the Sun before his rising, and after his
setting; you have not that Light of Grace (as I may call it) which growing
greater by degrees, does more agreably prepare you for the arrival of the Sun,
and which growing weaker, and diminishing by degrees, does insensibly prepare
you for the Sun's departure: But you are in a profound darkness, where a
Curtain (as it were) is drawn all on a sudden, your Eyes are immediately dazzled
with the whole light of the Sun, in all its glory and brightness; so likewise,
you are on a sudden surpised with utter Darkness; the Night and the Day have
no medium between them, but you fall in a moment from one extreme into the
other. The Rainbow likewise is not known to them in the Moon; for if the Dawn
is an effect of the grossness of the Air and Vapors, the Rainbow is formed in
the Clouds, from whence the Rain falls; so that the most beautiful things in
the World, are produced by those things which have no beauty at all. Since then
there are no Vapors thick enough, nor no Clouds of Rain about the Moon,
farewell Dawn, adieu Rainbow: What must Lovers do for Similies in that
Country, when such an inexhaustible Magazine of Comparisons is taken from them?

I doubt not, said the Countess, but there are those in the Moon as good at
Simily as the greatest Beau in Covent Garden; and had they neither Sun nor
Stars, Pearls nor Rubies, Roses nor Lillies, yet could say as many fine things
to a Visor-Mask, as the pertest Wit at the Puppet Show; and they are well
enough recompensed for the loss of our Dawn and Rainbow; for by the same
reason, they have neither Thunder nor Lightning, both which are formed in the
Clouds; how glorious are their days, the Sun continually shining? How pleasant
their Nights, not the least Star is hid from them? They never hear of Storms or
Tempests, which certainly are an effect of the wrath of Heaven: Do you think
then they stand in need of our pity? You are describing the Moon, I replied,
like an enchanted Palace; but do you think it is so pleasant to have a
scorching Sun always over our Heads, and not the least Cloud to moderate its
Heat? Though I fancy it is for this reason that Nature has made great Cavities in
the Moon; we can discern 'em easily with our Tellescopes, for they are not
Mountains, but so many Wells or Vaults in the middle of a Plain; and what do we
know but the Inhabitants of the Moon, being continually broiled by the
excessive heat of the Sun, do retire into those great Wells; perhaps they live
no where else, and it is there they build 'em Cities; for we still see in the
Ruins of old Rome, that that part of the City which was under ground, was
almost as large as that which was above ground. I fancy, during the late siege
of Buda, they lived there as they do in the Moon, or it is but going to the
Fountain Tavern Cellar, where the several Vaults are as so many high Streets,
the Vats, Pipes, Hogsheads, so many different Edifices, and the Drawers and
Coopers, like so many Troglodites. I perceive you laugh at me, yet if I may be
so free with a fair Lady, you deserve it much better than I; for you believe
the People in the Moon must live upon the surface of their Planet, because we
do so upon ours; but quite contrary, since we dwell upon the Superficies of our
Planet, they should not dwell upon the superficies of their Planet; if things
differ so much in this World, what must they do in another?

It Is no matter, said the Countess, I can never suffer the Inhabitants of the
Moon to live in perpetual darkness. You will be more concerned for 'em, I
replied, when I tell you that one of the ancient Philosophers did long since
discover the Moon to be the abode of the blessed Souls departed out of this
Life, and that all their Happiness consisted in hearing the Harmony of the
Spheres; that is, the Music (I had like to have said Noise) which is made by
the motion of the Celestial Bodies; if you have seen a Raree Show, you will
easily comprehend it: But because the Philosopher pretends to know exactly all
they do there, he tells you, that when the Moon is obscured by the shadow of
the Earth, they no longer hear the Heavenly Music, but howl like so many Souls
in Purgatory; so that the Moon taking pity of 'em, makes all the haste she can
to get into the Light again. Methinks then, says she, we should now and then
see some of the Blessed Souls arrive here from the Moon, for certainly they are
sent to us. I confess indeed, said I, it would be very pleasant to see
different Worlds; such a Voyage, though but in Imagination, is very delightful;
what would it be in effect? It would be much better certainly than to go to
Japan, which at best, is but crawling from one end of the World to to other,
and after all to see nothing but Men. Well then, says she, let us travel over
the Planets, as fast as we can; what should hinder us? Let us place our selves
at all the different Prospects, and from thence consider the Universe. But
first, have we any thing more to see in the Moon? I believe not, I replied; at
least, you have seen all I can show you. Coming out of the Moon, toward the
Sun, we see Venus, which puts me again in mind of Greenwich. Venus turns upon
her self, and round the Sun, as well as the Moon; they likewise discover by
their Tellescopes, that Venus like the Moon, (if I may speak after the same
manner) is sometimes new, sometimes full, and sometimes in the wain, according
to the diverse situations she is in, in respect of the Earth.

The Moon, to all appearance, is inhabited, why should no Venus be so too? You
are so full of your Whys, and your Wherefores, says she, interrupting me, that
I fancy you are sending Colonies to all the Planets. You may be certain, so I
will, I replied, for I see no reason to the contrary; we find that all the
Planets are of the same nature, all obscure Bodies, which receive no light but
from the Sun, and then send it to one another; their motions are the same, so
that hitherto they are alike; and yet if we are to believe that these vast
Bodies are not inhabited, I think they were made but to little purpose; why
should Nature be so partial, as to except only the Earth? But let who will say
the contrary, I must believe the Planets are peopled as well as the Earth. I
find, says the Countess, with some concern, a Philosopher will never make a
good Martyr, you can so quickly shift your Opinion, 'twas not many minutes
since the Moon was a perfect Desert, now the rest of the Planets are inhabited.
Why truly, Madam, said I, there is a time for all things, and your true
Philosopher believes any thing, or nothing, as the Maggot bites. Had you taken
me in the skeptical Vein, I would have as soon granted a Nation in a Mustard
Ball, as a living Creature in the Moon; but the tide is turned, and all the
Planets are Peopled like an Anthill; yet, Raillery apart, this is not so very
improbable as you think it; for do you believe we discover, (as I may say) all
the Inhabitants of the Earth? there be as many kinds of invisible as visible
Creatures; we see from the Elephant to the very Hand-worm, beyond which our
Sight fails us, and yet counting from that minute Creature, there are an
infinity of lesser Animals, which were they perceptible, would be as little in
comparison with a Mite, as a Mite is of an Ox. How lately have our Virtuoso's
found out the Pepper Worms, which in the least drop of Water appear like so
many Dolphins, sporting in the Ocean; nay, they tell you that the sharpness of
Vinegar consists in the fierceness of the little Animals that bite you by the
Tongue; not to name the blue on Plums, and twenty Experiments of the like
nature.

Nay, to show you that they can see as far into a Millstone as Descartes
himself, they have discovered that several, even of the most solid Bodies, are
nothing but an immense swarm of imperceptible Animals: Do but consider this
little Leaf; why it is a great World, of a vast extent, what Mountains, what
Abysses are there in it? the Insects of one side, know no more of their fellow
Creatures on to other side, then you and I can tell what they are now doing at
the Antipodes; is it not reason then that a great Planet should be inhabited?
In the hardest Stones, for Example, in Marble, there are an infinity of Worms,
which fill up the vacuums, and feed upon the substance of the Stone; fancy then
millions of living Creatures to subsist; many years on a grain of Sand; so that
were the Moon but one continued Rock, she should be gnawed by these invisible
Mites, (as if she were a green Cheese) rather than not be inhabited: In short,
every thing is animated, and the Stones upon Salisbury Plain are as much alive,
as a Hive of Bees; imagine then those Animals which are yet undiscovered, and
add them and those which are but lately discovered, to those we have always
seen, you will find the Earth swarms with Inhabitants. Why then should Nature,
which is fruitful to an excess here, be so very barren in the rest of the
Planets? I must own, said the Countess, you have convinced my Reason, but you
have confounded my Fancy, with such variety, that I cannot imagine how Nature,
which hates Repetitions, should produce so many different kinds. There is no
need of Fancy, I replied, do but trust your Eyes, and you will easily perceive
how Nature diversifies in these several Worlds.

All humane Faces, in general, are of the same Model, and yet the Europeans and
the Africans have two particular Moulds; nay, commonly every Family have a
different Form; what secret then has Nature to show so much variety in the
single Face? Our World, in respect of the Universe, is but a little Family; all
whose Faces have some resemblance; in another Place, there is another Family,
whose Faces have a different Air and Fashion; the difference too increases
with the distance, for whosoever should see an Inhabitant of the Moon, and an
Inhabitant of the Earth, would soon perceive they were nearer Neighbors than
one of the Earth, and one of Saturn; here, for Example, we have the use of
Voice, in another World, they speak by Signs, and at a greater distance they do
not speak at all; here our Reason is formed by Experience, in the next World,
Experience contributes little toward it; and in the next to that, old Men know
no more than Children; here we are troubled more with what is to come, than
with what is past; further off, they are not concerned with either, which by
the way, I think, is much the better: Here, 'tisthought we want a sixth Sense,
which would teach us many things, of which we are now ignorant; this sixth
Sense, is apparently in another World, where they want one of the five which we
enjoy; nay, perhaps there is a much greater number of Senses, but in the
Partition we have made of 'em with the Inhabitants of the other Planets, there
are but five fallen to our share, with which we are well contented, for want of
being acquainted with the rest: Our Sciences have bounds, which the wit of Man
could never pass; there is a point where they fail us on a sudden, the rest is
reserved for other Worlds, where somewhat which we know, is unknown to them.
This Planet enjoys the pleasures of Love, but lies desolate in several places
by the fury of War; in another Planet, they enjoy a perpetual Peace, yet in the
midst of that Peace, know nothing of Love, and time lies on their hands; in a
word, that which Nature practices here in little, in distributing her Gifts
among Mankind; she does at large in other Worlds, where she makes use of that
admirable secret she has to diversifie all things, and at the same time makes
'em equal, by compensating for the inequality; this I confess is on the Borders
of Nonsense, but a Man is never the less a Philosopher for being a little
obscure, if not unintelligible.

But is it not time, Madam, to be serious, how will you dispose of all these
Notions? Trouble not your self, says she, Fancy is a great Traveller; I already
comprehend these several Worlds, and represent to my self their different
Characters and Customs; some of 'em, I assure you, are very extraordinary; I
see at this moment, a thousand different Figures, though I cannot well describe
'em. Oh leave 'em, I replied, to your Dreams, they will represent 'em very
faithfully.

The Fourth Evening.
I Have been told of a Physician that makes his Patients dream as he pleases,
by prescribing such a Specific for their Supper, as works those impressions he
would have on the Fancy; of what use he may be to the modern Poets, I leave to
the curious; and return to the Countess, who either did not dream at all, or
nothing to the purpose; so that continuing our Voyage to the other Worlds, we
could only guess at their Inhabitants. We were come to Venus, and I told her,
that Venus certainly turned on it self, though no body could tell in what time,
and consequently were ignorant how long her Day lasted; but her Year was
composed of eight Months, because it is in that time she turns round the Sun:
And seeing Venus is forty times less than the Earth, the Earth appears (to them
in Venus) to be a Planet, forty times bigger than Venus appears to us on the
Earth; and as the Moon is forty times lesser than the Earth, so she seems to be
just of the same magnitude, to the Inhabitants of Venus, as here Venus seems to
us.

I see then, says the Countess, that the Earth is not to Venus, what Venus is
to the Earth; I mean, that the Earth is too bigg to be the Mother of Love, or
the Shepherd's Star to Venus; but the Moon, which appears to Venus, of the same
bigness that Venus appears to us, is assigned to be the Mother of Love, and
Shepherds Star to Venus; for such names are only proper for a little brisk airy
Planet, bright, and shining as the Goddess her self. Oh, blessed Moon, how
happy art thou, to preside over the Amors of those gallant People, where all
they say, is soft and moving, and perfectly refined from the dross of our Wits,
who are fitter for a Bear-Garden than a Circle? How gross is their Courtship?
how mean their Raillery? without any distinction of time, place, or person;
they make Love, (as they call it) but one way, and the form is the same, at a
Farce, or Funeral. Be not so very severe, I replied, if some of our Beaux speak
plain English, some of your Belles, like 'em never the worse for it: The art of
Love is as much improved as the art of War, the Generals of this Age take a
Town in two days, which in the last, held out as many years; and the Roses,
Lillies, Pearls, and Rubies, (a whining Lovers train of Artillery) are grown as
useless as Bows and Arrows: though after all, I must own they have another
Standard in the Planet Venus; there Clelia and Parthenissa, is below the
language of Grooms and Chamber Maids; and every Porter and Car-Man a perfect
Sir Courtly; but then consider the difference of Climats; Venus is much nearer
than the Earth is to the Sun, from whence she receives a more vigorous and
active influence.

I find, says the Countess, it is easy enough to guess at the Inhabitants of
Venus; they resemble what I have read of the Moors of Granada, who were a
little black People, scorched with the Sun, witty, full of Fire, very Amorous,
much inclined to Music and Poetry, and ever inventing Masks and Tournaments
in honor of their Mistresses. Pardon me, Madam, said I, you are little
acquainted with the Planet; Granada in all its Glory, was a perfect Greenland
to it; and your gallant Moors, in comparison with that People, were as stupid
as so many Laplanders.

But what do you think then of the Inhabitants of Mercury? They are yet nearer
to the Sun, and are so full of Fire, that they are absolutely mad; I fancy,
they have no memory at all, like most of the Negroes, that they make no
reflections, and what they do is by sudden starts, and perfect hap-hazard; in
short, Mercury is the Bedlam of the Universe; the Sun appears to them much
greater than it does to us, because they are much nearer to it than we; it
sends them so vast and strong a light, that the most glorious day here, would
be no more with them than a declining twilight: I know not if they can
distinguish Objects, but the heat to which they are accustomed, is so
excessive, that they would be starved with cold in the Torrid Zone; their year
is but three Months, but we know not the exact length of their Day, because
Mercury is so little, and so near the Sun; it is, (as it were) lost in his
Rays, and is very hardly discovered by the Astronomers; so that they cannot
observe how it moves on its Center, but because it is so little, fancy it
compleats its motion in a little time; so that by consequence, the day there is
very short, and the Sun appears to them like a vast fiery Furnace at a little
distance, whose motion is prodigiously swift and rapid; and during their Night,
Venus and the Earth (which must appear considerably big) give light to them; as
for the other Planets which are beyond the Earth, toward the Firmament, they
appear less to them in Mercury, than they do to us here, and they receive but
little light from them, perhaps none at all; the fixed Stars likewise seem less
to them, and some of 'em totally disappear, which were I there, I should esteem
a very great loss.

What signifies the loss of a few fixed Stars, says the Countess? I pity 'em
for the excessive heat they endure; let us give 'em some relief, and send
Mercury a few of the refreshing Showers they have sometimes four Months
together in the hottest Countries during their greatest extremity. Your Fancy
is good, Madam, I replied, but we will relieve 'em another way; In China there
are Countries which are extremely hot by their Situation: yet in July and
August are so cold, that the Rivers are Frozen; the reason is, they are full of
Saltpeter, which being exhaled in great abundance by the excessive heat of the
Sun, makes a perfect Winter at Midsummer. We will fill the little Planet with
Saltpeter, and let the Sun shine as hot as he pleases. And yet after all, who
knows but the Inhabitants of Mercury may have no occasion either for Rain, or
Saltpeter. If it is a certain truth, that Nature never gives life to any
Creature, but where that Creature may live; then through Custom, and ignorance of
a better Life, those People may live happily.

After Mercury comes the Sun, but there is no possibility of peopling it, nor
no room left for a wherefore. By the Earth which is inhabited, we judge that
other Bodies of the same Nature may be likewise inhabited; but the Sun is a
Body not like the Earth or any of the Planets, the Sun is the source or
Fountain of Light, which though it is sent from one Planet to another, and
receives several alterations by the way, yet all originally proceeds from the
Sun, he draws from himself that precious substance which he emits from all
sides, and which reflects when it meets with a solid Body, and spreads from one
Planet to another those long and vast trains of Light which cross, strike
through, and intermingle in a thousand different fashions, and make (if I may so
say,) the Richest Tissu's in the World. The Sun likewise is placed in the
Center, from whence with most convenience, he may equally distribute and
animate by his heat; it is then a particular Body, but what sort of Body has
often puzzled better heads than mine. It was thought formerly a Body of pure
Fire, and that Opinion passed current till the beginning of this Age; when they
perceived several spots on its surface. A little after they had discovered new
Planets, (of which, hereafter) which some said were those Spots; for those
Planets moving round the Sun, when they turned their dark half to us, must
necessarily hide part of it; and had not the Learned with these pretended
Planets made their Court before to most of the Princes in Europe, giving the
name of this Prince to one, and of that Prince to another Planet; I believe
they would have quarreled who should be Master of these spots, that they might
have named them as they pleased.

'Twas but the other day, says the Countess, you were describing the Moon, and
called several places by the names of the most famous Astronomers. I was
pleased with the fancy; for since the Princes have seized on the Earth; it is
fit the Philosophers [who are as proud as the best of 'em] should reserve the
Heavens for themselves without any Competitors. Oh! trouble not your self, said
I, the Philosophers make the best advantage of their Territories; and if they
part with the least Star, it is on very good terms; let me tell you, an Acre of
Land in England, is worth ten thousand in the Moon, but the spots on the Sun
are fallen to nothing; the actions of Pensilvania are not half so low, it is now
discovered that they are not Planets, but Clouds, Steams, or Dross, which rise
upon the Sun, sometimes in great quantity, sometimes in less; sometimes they
are dark, sometimes clear, sometimes they continue a great while, and sometimes
they disappear as long. It seems the Sun is a Liquid Matter, some think of
melted Gold, which boils over (as it were) continually, and by the force of its
motion casts the Scum or dross on its surface, where it is consumed, and others
arise. Imagine then what strange Bodies these are, when some of 'em are as big
as the Earth; What a vast quantity must there be of this melted Gold, and what
must be the extent of this great Sea of Light and Fire which they call the Sun?
Others say, the Sun appears through their Tellescopes, [which are the
Astronomers Spectacles] full of Mountains which vomit Fire continually, and are
joined together like millions of Etna's. Yet there are those who say these
burning Mountains are pure Vision, caused by a fault in the Spectacles; but
what shall we trust, if we must distrust our Tellescopes to which we owe the
knowledge of so many new Objects? But let the Sun be what it will, it cannot be
at all proper for habitation; and what pity it is not, for how pleasant would it
be? You might then be at the Center of the Universe, where you would see all
the Planets turn regularly about you; but now we know nothing but extravagant
fancies, because we do not stand in the proper place; there is but one place in
the World where the study or knowledge of the Stars is easily obtained, and
what pity it is there is no body there. You forget your self sure, says she,
were you in the Sun you would see nothing, neither Planets nor fixed Stars,
does not the Sun efface all? so that could there be any Inhabitants there, they
might justly think themselves the only people in Nature.

I own said I, my mistake; I was thinking of the Situation of the Sun, and not
of the effect of its Light: I thank you for your correction, but must take the
boldness to tell you, that you are in an error, as well as my self; for were
there Inhabitants in the Sun, they would not see at all, either they could not
bear the strength of its light, or for want of a due distance, they could not
receive it; so that things well considered, all the People there must be stark
blind, which is another reason why the Sun cannot be inhabited; but let us
pursue our Voyage. We are now arrived at the Center, which is always the
bottom, or lowest place of what is round; if we go on, we must ascend; we shall
find Mercury, Venus, the Earth, the Moon, all the Planets we have already
visited; the next is Mars: Mars has nothing curious that I know of, his Day is
not quite an hour longer than ours, but his Year is twice as much as our Year;
he is a little less than the Earth; and the Sun seems not altogether so large
and so bright to him, as it appears to us? but let us leave Mars, he is not
worth our stay: But what a pretty thing is Jupiter, with his four Moons, or
Yeomen of the Guard; they are four little Planets that turn round him, as our
Moon turns round us. But why, says she, interrupting me, must there be Planets
to turn round other Planets, that are no better than themselves? I should think
it would be more regular and uniform, that all the Planets, little and great,
without any distinction, should have one and the same motion round the Sun.

Ah, Madam, said I, if you knew what were Descartes's Whirlpools or Vortex's,
(whose Name is terrible, but their Idea pleasant) you would not talk as you do.
Must my Head, says she, smiling, turn round to comprehend 'em, or must I become
a perfect Fool to understand the mysteries of Philosophy? Well, let the World
say what it will, go on with your Whirlpools. I will, said I, and you shall see
the Whirlpools are worthy of these transports: That then which we call a
Whirlpool, or Vortex, is a Mass of Matter, whose parts are separated or
detached one from another, yet have all one uniform motion, and at the same
time, every one is allowed, or has a particular Motion of its own, provided if
follows the general Motion: Thus a Vortex of Wind, or Whirlwind, is an infinity
of little particles of Air, which turn round all together, and involve what
ever they meet with. You know the Planets are born up by the Celestial Matter,
which is prodigiously subtle and active; so that this great Mass, or Ocean of
Celestial Matter, which flows as far as from the Sun to the fixed Stars, turns
round, and bears the Planets along with it, making them all turn after the same
manner round the Sun, who possesses the Center, but in a longer or shorter
time, according as they are farther or nearer in distance to it; there is
nothing to the very Sun, which does not turn, but he turns on himself because
he is just in the middle of this Celestial Matter; and you must know by the
way, that were the Earth in his place, it must turn on it self, as the Sun
does. This is the great Vortex, of which the Sun is Lord; yet at the same time,
the Planets make little particular Vortex's, in imitation of that of the Sun,
each of 'em in turning round the Sun, does at the same time turn round it self,
and makes a certain quantity of Celestial Matter turn round it likewise, which
is always prepared to follow the Motion the Planet gives it, provided it is not
diverted from its general Motion; this then is the particular Vortex of the
Planet, which pushes it as far as the strength of its Motion reaches; and if by
chance, a lesser Planet falls into the Vortex of a greater Planet, it is
immediately born away by the greater, and is indispensably forced to turn round
it, though at the same time, the great Planet, the little Planet, and the Vortex
which encloses 'em, all turn round the Sun: 'Twas thus at the beginning of the
World, when we made the Moon follow us, because she was within the reach of our
Vortex, and therefore wholly at our dispose: Jupiter was stronger, or more
fortunate than we, he had four little Planets in his neighborhood, and he
brought 'em all four under his subjection; and no doubt, we, though a principal
Planet, had had the same Fate, had we been within the Sphere of his Activity;
he is ninety times bigger than the Earth, and would certainly have swallowed us
into his Vortex; we had then been no more than a Moon in his Family, when now
we have one to wait on us; so that you see the advantage of Situation, decides
often all our good Fortune.

But pray, says she, who can assure us we shall still continue as we do now? if
we should be such Fools as to go near Jupiter, or he so ambitious as to
approach us, what will become of us? for if (as you say) the Celestial Matter
is continually under this great Motion, it must needs agitate the Planets
irregularly; sometimes drive 'em together, and sometimes separate 'em. Luck is
all, said I; we may win as well as lose, and who knows, but we should bring
Mercury and Venus under our Government; they are little Planets, and cannot
resist us; but in this particular, Madam, we need not hope or fear; the Planets
keep within their own bounds, and are obliged (as formerly the Kings of China
were) not to undertake new Conquests. Have you not seen when you put Water and
Oil together, the Oil swims a top; and if to these two Liquors, you add a very
light Liquor, the Oil bears it up, and it will not sink to the Water: But put
an heavier Liquor, of a just weight, and it will pass through the Oil, which is
too weak to sustain it, and sink till it comes to the Water, which is strong
enough to bear it up; so that in this Liquor, composed of two Liquors, which do
not mingle, two Bodies of an unequal weight, will naturally assume two
different Places; the one will never ascend, the other will never descend:
Fancy then that the Celestial Matter which fills this great Vortex, has
several resting places, one by another, whose weight are different, like that
of Oil, Water, and other Liquors; the Planets too are of a different weight,
and consequently, every Planet settles in that place which has a just strength
to sustain and keep it equilibrate, so you see it is impossible it should ever
go beyond.

Would to God, says the Countess, our World were as well regulated, and every
one among us knew their proper Place. I am now in no fear of being overrun by
Jupiter; and since he lets us alone in our Vortex, with our Moon, I do not envy
him the four which he has. Did you envy him, I replied, you would do him
wrong, for he has no more than what he has occasion for; at the distance he is
from the Sun, his Moons receive, and send him but a very weak light; it is
true, that as he turns upon himself in ten hours, his nights, by consequence,
are but five hours long; so one would think there is no great occasion for four
Moons; but there are other things to be considered. Here under the Poles, they
have six Months Day, and six Months Night, because the Poles are the two
extremities of the Earth, the farthest removed from those places where the Sun
is over 'em in a perpendicular line. The Moon seems to keep almost the same
course as the Sun, and if the Inhabitants of the Poles see the Sun during one
half of his course of a Year, and during the other half, do not see him at all;
they see the Moon likewise during one half of her course of a Month; that is,
she appears to 'em fifteen days, but they do not see her during the other half.
Jupiter's Year is as much as twelve of ours, so that there must be two opposite
extremities in that Planet, where their Night and their Day are six Years each.
A Night six Years long, is a little disconsolate, and it is for that reason, I
suppose, they have four Moons; that which (in regard to Jupiter) is uppermost,
finisheth its course about him in seventeen days, the second in seven, the
third in three days and an half, and the fourth in two and forty hours; and
though they are so unfortunate as to have six years Night, yet their course being
exactly divided into halves, they never pass above one and twenty hours,
wherein they do not see at least the last Moon, which is a great comfort in so
tedious a darkness; so that be where you will, these four Moons are sometimes
the prettiest sight imaginable; sometimes they rise all four together, and then
separate according to the inequality of their course; sometimes they are all in
their Meridian, ranged one above another, sometimes you see 'em at equal
distances on the Horizon, sometimes when two rise, the other two go down. Oh,
how I should love to see this pleasant sport of Eclipses; for there is not a
Day passes but they Eclipse the Sun, or one another; and they are so accustomed
to this diversion in Jupiter, that the late Duke of B -- m in his Rehearsal,
brought the dance of Eclipses from that Planet, as now most of our modish
Dances come out of France.

Well, says the Countess, I hope you will People these four Moons, though you say
they are but little secondary Planets, appointed to give light to another
Planet during its Night. Do not doubt it, I replied; these Planets are not a
jot the worse to be inhabited, for being forced to turn round another Planet of
greater consequence. I would have then, says she, the People of these four
Moons, to be so many Colonies under Jupiter's Government; they should receive
their Laws and Customs from him. Would it not be convenient too, said I, that
they should send Deputies with Addresses to him; for he has cetainly a more
absolute command over his Moon, than we have over ours; though his Power after
all, is but imaginary, and consists chiefly in making 'em afraid; for that Moon
which is nearest to him, sees that he is three hundred and sixty times bigger
than our Moon appears to us; for in truth, he is so much bigger than she; he is
also much nearer to them, than our Moon is to us, the which makes him appear
the greater, so that this formidable Planet hangs continually ove^ their Heads,
at a very little distance and if the Gauls were afraid heretofore that the
Heavens would fall on 'em, I think the Inhabitants of that Moon may well be
apprehensive that Jupiter will at some time or other overwhelm 'em. They are,
says she, I fancy, possessed with that fear, because they are not concerned at
Eclipses: Every one has their due folly; we are afraid of an Eclipse, and they,
that Jupiter will fall on their Heads. It is very true, said I, the Inventer of
the third Systeme, I told you the other night, the famous Ticho Brahe, (one of
the greatest Astronomers that ever was,) did not apprehend the least danger
from an Eclipse, when every body else was under the greatest consternation; yet
this great Man had as an unaccountable a fear, did a hare cross him, or were
the first Person he met in a morning an old Woman, home presently went Ticho
Brahe, he shut himself up for that day, and would not meddle with the least
Business.

Let us go on with ours though, says the Countess, and leave Ticho Brahe to
defend his Superstition. Pray tell me, if the Earth be so little in comparison
of Jupiter, whether his Inhabitants do discover us? Indeed, said I, I believe
not; for if we appear to him ninety times less than he appears to us; judge you
if there be any possibility: Yet this we may reasonably conjecture, that there
are Astronomers in Jupiter, that after they have made the most curious
Telescopes, and taken the clearest Night for their observations, they may have
discovered a little Planet in the Heavens, which they never saw before; if they
publish their discovery, most People know not what they mean, or laugh at 'em
for Fools; nay, the Philosophers themselves will not believe 'em, for fear of
destroying their own opinions; yet some few may be a little curious; they
continue their observations, discover the little Planet again, and are now
assured it is no Vision; then they conclude it has a motion round the Sun,
which it compleats in a year, and at last, (thanks to the Learned,) they know
in Jupiter our Earth is a World, every body runs to see it at the end of the
Telescope, though it is so little, it is hardly discovered.

It must be pleasant, says she, to see the Astronomers of both Planets,
levelling their Tubes at one another, like two files of Musketeers, and
mutually asking, What World is that? What People inhabit it? Not so fast
neither, I replied, for though they may from Jupiter discover our Earth, yet they
may not know us; that is, they may not have the least suspicion it is
inhabited; and should any one there chance to have such a fancy, he might be
sufficiently ridiculed, if not prosecuted for it; for my part, I believe they
have work enough to make discoveries on their own Planet, not to trouble their
Heads with ours; and had Sir Francis Drake and Columbus been in Jupiter, they
might have had good employments; why, I warrant you, they have not yet
discovered the hundredth part of their Planet; when Mercury is so little, they
are all (as it were) near Neighbors, and it is but taking a walk, to go round
that Planet. But if we do not appear to 'em in Jupiter, they cannot certainly
discover Venus and Mercury, which are much less than the Earth, and at a
greater distance; but in lieu of it, they see Mars, their own four Moons, and
Saturn, with his; this I think is work enough for their Astronomers; and Nature
has been so kind to conceal from 'em the rest of the Universe. Do you think it
a favor then, says she? Yes, certainly, said I, for there are sixteen Planets
in this great Vortex: Nature saves us the trouble of studying the Motions of
'em all, and shows us but seven, which I think is very obliging, though we know
not how to value the kindness, for we have recovered the other nine which were
hid from us, and so rendered the Science of Astronomy much more difficult than
Nature designed it.

If there are sixteen Planets, says she, Saturn must have five Moons. It Is very
true, said I, and two of these five, are but lately discovered; but there is
somewhat that is more remarkable, since his Year is thirty of ours, there are
consequently in him some Countries, where their Night is fifteen years long;
and what can you imagine Nature has invented to give light, during so dreadful
a Night? Why, she has not only given Saturn five Moons, but she has
encompassed him round with a great Circle or Ring, the which being placed
beyond the reach of the shadow which the Body of that Planet casts, reflects
the light of the Sun continually on those places where they cannot see the Sun
at all.

I protest, says the Countess, this is very surprising, and yet all is
contrived in such great order, that it is impossible not to think but Nature
took time to consider the necessities of all animate Beings, and that the
disposing of these Moons was not a work of Chance, for they are only divided
among those Planets which are farthest distant from the Sun, the Earth,
Jupiter, Saturn; indeed it was not worth while to give any to Mercury or Venus,
they have too much light already; and they account their nights (as short as
they are) a greater blessing than their day. But pray, why has not Mars a Moon
too? It seems he has none, though he is much further than the Earth from the Sun.
It is very true, said I; no doubt but he has other helps, though we do not know
'em: You have seen the Phosphorus, both liquid and dry, how it receives and
imbibes the rays of the Sun, and what a great light it will cast in a dark
Place: Perhaps Mars has many great high Rocks, which are so many natural
Phosphorus's, which in the day take in a certain provision of light, and return
it again at night. What think you, Madam, is it not very pleasant when the Sun
is down to see those lighted Rocks, like so many Illuminations at a Birth day
night? Besides, there is a kind of Bird in America, that yields such a light,
you may read by it in the darkest night; and who knows but Mars may have great
flocks of these Birds, that as soon as it is night, disperse themselves into
all parts, and spread from their wings another day.

I am not at all contented, says she, with your Rocks, or your Birds; it is a
pretty fancy indeed, but it is a sign that there should be Moons in Mars, since
Nature has given so many to Saturn, and Jupiter; and if all the other Worlds
that are distant from the Sun, have Moons, why should Mars only be excepted?
Ah, Madam, said I, when you are a little more dipped in Philosophy, you will
find exceptions in the very best Systemes; there are always some things that
agree extreme well, but then there are others that do not accord at all; those
you must leave as you found 'em, if ever you intend to make an end: We will do
so by Mars, if you please, and say no more of him; but return to Saturn. What
do you think of his great Ring, in the form of a semy Circle, that reaches from
one end of the Horizon to the other, which reflecting the light of the Sun,
performs the office of a continual Moon. And must we not inhabit this Ring too,
says she? I confess, said I, in the humor I am in, I could almost send
Colonies every where; and yet I cannot well plant any there, it seems so
irregular an habitation; but for the five little Moons, they cannot choose but
be inhabited; though some think this Ring is a Circle of Moons, which follow
close to one another, and have one equal Motion; and that the five little Moons
fell out of this Circle; how many Worlds are there then in the Vortex of
Saturn? But let it be how it will, the People in Saturn live very miserably:
It Is true, this Ring gives light to 'em, but it must be a very poor one, when
the Sun seems to 'em but a little pale Star, whose light and heat cannot but be
very weak at so great a distance; they say Greenland is a perfect Bagnio in
comparison of that Planet, and that they would expire with heat in our coldest
Countries.

You give me, says she, such an Idea of Saturn, that makes me shake with cold,
and that of Mercury, puts me into a fever. It cannot be otherwise, I replied,
for the two Worlds, which are the extremities of this great Vortex, must be
opposite in all things. They must then, says she, be very wise in Saturn, for
you told me they were all Fools in Mercury. If they are not wise, said I, yet
they have all the appearances of being very Phlegmatic: They are People that
know not what it is to laugh, they take a days time to answer the least question
you can ask 'em; and are so very grave, that were Cato living among 'em, they
would think him a merry Andrew.

It is odd to consider, says she, that the Inhabitants of Mercury are all life,
and the Inhabitants of Saturn quite contrary; but among us, some are brisk, and
some are dull; it is, I suppose, because our Earth is placed in the middle of
the other Worlds, and so we participate of both extremes, there is no fixed or
determined Character; some are made like the Inhabitants of Mercury, some like
those of Saturn; we are a mixture of the several kinds that are found in the
rest of the Planets. Why, said I, do you not approve of the Idea? Methinks it
is pleasant to be composed of such a fantastical Assembly, that one would think
we were collected out of different Worlds; we need not travel, when we see the
other Worlds in Epitome at home.

I am sure, says the Countess, we have one great convenience in the situation
of our World; it is not so hot as Mercury or Venus, nor so cold as Jupiter or
Saturn; and our Country is so justly placed, that we have no excess either of
Heat or Cold. I have heard of a Philosopher, who gave thanks to Nature that he
was born a Man, and not a Beast, a Greek, and not a Barbarian; and for my part,
I render thanks that I am seated in the most temperate Planet of the Universe,
and in one of the most temperate Regions of that Planet. You have more reason,
said I, to give thanks that you are Young, and not Old; that you are Young and
Handsome, and not Young and Ugly; that you are Young, Handsome, and an English
Woman, and not Young, Handsome, and a Spaniard, or an Italian; these are other
guess Subjects for your thanks, than the Situation of your Vortex, or the
Temperature of your Country.

Pray Sir, says she, let me give thanks for all things, to the very Vortex in
which I am planted: Our proportion of Happiness is so very small, that we
should lose none, but improve continually what we have, and be grateful for
every thing, though never so common or inconsiderable. If nothing but exquisite
pleasure will serve us, we must wait a long time, and be sure to pay too dear
for it at last. I wish, said I, that Philosophy was the pleasure you propose,
that when you think of Vortex's, you would not forget an humble Servant of your
Ladyships. I esteem it a pleasure, says she, while it diverts innocently, but
no longer. I will engage for it till to morrow, I replied, for the fixed Stars
are beyond what you have yet seen.

The Fifth Evening.
THE Countess was very impatient to know what would become of the fixed Stars;
are they inhabited, says she, as the Planets are, or are they not inhabited?
What shall we do with 'em? You may soon guess, said I; the fixed Stars cannot
be less distant from the Earth than fifty millions of leagues; nay, if you
anger an Astronomer, he will set 'em further. The distance from the Sun to the
farthest Planet, is nothing in comparison of the distance from the Sun, or from
the Earth, to the fixed Stars, it is almost beyond Arithmetic. You see their
light is bright and shining, and did they receive it from the Sun, it must
needs be very weak after a passage of fifty millions of leagues; then judge how
much it is wasted by reflection; for it comes back again as far to us; so that
forwards and backwards, here are an hundred millions of leagues for it to pass;
and it is impossible it should be so clear and strong as the light of a fixed
Star, which cannot but proceed from it self; so that in a word, all the fixed
Stars are so many Suns.

I perceive, says the Countess, where you would carry me; you are going to tell
me, that if the fixed Stars are so many Suns, and our Sun the center of a
Vortex that turns round him, why may not every fixed Star be the center of a
Vortex that turns round the fixed Star? Our Sun enlightens the Planets; why may
not every fixed Star have Planets to which they give light? You have said it, I
replied, and I will not contradict you.

You have made the Universe so large, says she, that I know not where I am, or
what will become of me; what is it all to be divided into heaps confusedly, one
among another? Is every Star the center of a Vortex, as big as ours? Is that
vast space which comprehends our Sun and Planets, but an inconsiderable part of
the Universe? and are there as many such spaces, as there are fixed Stars? I
protest it is dreadful. Dreadful, Madam, said I; I think it very pleasant, when
the Heavens were a little blue Arch, stuck with Stars; methought the Universe
was too strait and close, I was almost stifled for want of Air; but now it is
enlarged in height and breadth, and a thousand and a thousand Vortex's taken
in; I begin to breath with more freedom, and think the Universe to be
incomparably more magnificent than it was before. Nature has spared no cost,
even to profuseness, and nothing can be so glorious, as to see such a
prodigious number of Vortex's, whose several centres are possessed by a
particular Sun, which makes the Planets turn round it. The Inhabitants of a
Planet of one of these innumerable Vortex's, see on all sides these luminous
centres of the Vortex, with which they are encompassed; but perhaps they do not
see the Planets, who receiving but a faint light from their Sun, cannot send it
beyond their own World.

You present me with a kind of Perspective of so vast a length, that no Eye can
reach to the end of it: I plainly see the Inhabitants of the Earth, and you
have made me discover those that dwell in the Moon, and in other Planets of our
Vortex; but these indeed I do not see so clearly as those of the Earth; after
these, we come to the Inhabitants of the Planets which are in other Vortex's,
but they are sunk into so great a depth, that though I do all I can to see them,
yet I must confess I can hardly perceive 'em; by the expression you use in
speaking of 'em, they seem to be almost annihilated; you ought then to call 'em
the Inhabitants of one of those innumerable Vortex's: We our selves, for whom
the same expression serves, must confess, that we scarce know where we are, in
the midst of so many Worlds; for my own part, I begin to see the Earth so
fearfully little, that I believe from henceforth, I shall never be concerned at
all for any thing: That we so eagerly desire to make our selves great, that we
are always designing, always troubling and harassing our selves, is certainly
because we are ignorant what these Vortex's are; but now I hope my new lights
will in part justify my laziness, and when any one reproaches me with my
carelessness, I will answer, Ah did you but know what the fixed Stars are! It
was not fit, said I, that Alexander should know what they were; for a certain
Author who maintains that the Moon is inhabited, very gravely tells us, that
Aristotle, (from whom no truth could be long concealed) must necessarily be of
an opinion, backed with so much reason; but yet he would never acquaint
Alexander with the secret, fearing he might run mad with despair, when he knew
there was another World, which he could not conquer; with much more reason then
was this mystery of Vortex's, and fixed Stars kept secret in Alexander's time;
for though they had been known in those days, yet a Man would have been a great
Fool, to have said any thing of 'em to Alexander; it had been but an ill way of
making his court to that ambitious Prince; for my part, I that know 'em, am not
a little troubled to find my self not one jot the wiser for all the knowledge I
have of 'em; the most they can do, according to your way of reasoning, is but
to cure People of their ambition, and their unquiet restless humor, which are
diseases I am not at all troubled with; I confess, I am guilty of so much
weakness, as to be in love with what is beautiful; that is my distemper, and I
am confident, the Vortex's can never cure it: what if the other Worlds render
ours so very little? they cannot spoil fine Eyes, or a pretty Mouth; their
value is still the same, in spite of all the Worlds that can possibly exist.

This Love, replied the Countess, smiling, is a strange thing; let the World go
how 'twill, it is never in danger; there is no System can do it any harm. But
tell me freely, is your System true? Pray conceal nothing from me; I will keep
your secret very faithfully; it seems to have for its foundation, but a slight
probability; which is, that if a fixed Star be in it self a luminous Body, like
the Sun, then by consequence, it must as the Sun is, be the Center and Soul of
a World; and have its Planets turning round about it: But is there an absolute
necessity it must be so? Madam, said I, since we are in the humor of mingling
amorous Follies with our most serious Discourses, I must tell you, that in Love
and the Mathematics People reason alike: Allow never so little to a Lover, yet
presently after you must grant him more; nay more and more, which will at last
go a great way: In like manner, grant but a Mathematician one little Principle,
he immediately draws a consequence from it, to which you must necessarily
assent; and from this consequence another, till he leads you so far (whether
you will or no) that you have much ado to believe him. These two sorts of
People, Lovers and Mathematicians, will always take more than you give 'em. You
grant that when two things are like one another in all those things that appear
to you, it is possible they may be like one another in those things that are
not visible, if you have not some good reason to believe otherwise: Now this
way of arguing have I made use of. The Moon, say I, is inhabited, because she
is like the Earth; and the other Planets are inhabited, because they are like
the Moon; I find the fixed Stars to be like our Sun, therefore I attribute to
them what is proper to that: You are now gone too far to be able to retreat,
therefore you must go forward with a good grace. But, says the Countess, if you
build upon this resemblance or likeness which is between our Sun and the fixed
Stars, then, to the People of another great Vortex, our Sun must appear no
bigger than a small fixed Star, and can be seen only when it is Night with them.
Without doubt, Madam, said I, it must be so: Our Sun is much nearer to us, than
the Suns of other Vortex's, and therefore its Light makes a much greater
impression on our Eyes, than theirs do: We see nothing but the light of our own
Sun, and when we see that, it darkens and hinders us from seeing any other
light: but in another great Vortex, there is another Sun, which rules and
governs, and, in its turn, extinguisheth the light of our Sun, which is never
seen there, but in the Night, with the rest of the other Suns, that is the
fixed Stars; with them our Sun is fastened to the great arched roof of Heaven,
where it makes a part of some Bear or Bull: For the Planets which turn round
about it, (our Earth for Example) as they are not seen at so vast a distance,
so no body does so much as dream of 'em: All the Suns then are Day Suns in
their own Vortex's, but Night Suns in other Vortex's: In his own World or
Sphere every Sun is single, and there is but one to be seen; but every where
else, they serve only to make a number. May not the Worlds, replied the
Countess, notwithstanding this great resemblance between 'em, differ in a
thousand other things; for though they may be alike in one particular, they may
differ infinitely in others.

It is certainly true, said I; but the difficulty is to know wherein they
differ. One Vortex has many Planets that turn round about its Sun; another
Vortex has but a few: In one Vortex, there are inferior or less Planets,
which turn about those that are greater; in another perhaps, there are no
inferior Planets; here, all the Planets are got round about their Sun, in form
of a little Squadron; beyond which, is a great void space, which reaches to
the neighboring Vortex's: In another place, the Planets take their course
toward the out side of their Vortex, and leave the middle void. There may be
Vortex's also quite void, without any Planets at all; others may have their Sun
not exactly in their Center; and that Sun may so move, as to carry its Planets
along with it: others may have Planets which in regard of their Sun, ascend and
descend, according to the change of their Equilibration, which keeps them
suspended. But I think I have said enough for a Man that was never out of his
own Vortex.

It is not so much, replied the Countess, considering what a multitude of
Worlds there are; what you have said is sufficient but for five or six, and
from hence I see thousands.

What, Madam, would you say, if I should tell you, there are many more fixed
Stars than those you see? and that an infinite number are discovered with
Glasses, which never showed themselves to our Eyes: In only one Constellation,
where it may be, we count twelve or fifteen, there are as many to be found as
usually appear in the whole Hemisphere.

I submit, says the Countess, and beg your pardon: You quite confound me with
Worlds and Vortex's. I have yet more to tell you, Madam, said I: You see that
whiteness in the Sky, which some call the milky way; Can you imagine what that
is? It Is nothing but an infinity of small Stars, not to be seen by our Eyes,
because they are so very little; and they are sown so thick, one by another,
that they seem to be one cotinu'd whiteness: I wish you had a Glass, to see
this Ant-hill of Stars, and this Cluster of Worlds, if I may so call 'em: They
are in some sort, like the Maldivian Islands: those twelve thousand banks of
Sand, separated by narrow Channels of the Sea, which a Man may leap as easily,
as over a Ditch: So near together are the Vortex's of the Milky way, that the
People in one World, may talk, and shake Hands with those of another; at least
I believe, the Birds of one World, may easily fly into another; and that
Pigeons may be trained up to carry Letters, as they do in the Levant. These
little Worlds are excepted out of that general Rule, by which one Sun in his
own Vortex, as soon as he appears, effaceth the light of all other foreign
Suns: If you were in one of these little Vortex's of the Milky way, your Sun
would not be much nearer to you, and consequently, would not make any much
greater sensible impression on your Eyes, than a hundred thousand other Suns of
the neighboring Vortex's: You would then see your Heaven shine bright with an
infinite number of Fires, close to one another, and but a little distant from
you; so that though you should lose the light of your own particular Sun, yet
there would still remain visible Suns enough beside your own, to make your
Night as light as Day, at least, the difference would hardly be perceived, for
the truth is, you would never have any Night at all: The Inhabitants of these
Worlds accustomed to perpetual Brightness, would be strangely astonished, if
they should be told that there are a miserable sort of People, who where they
live, have very dark Nights, and when it is Day with them, they never see more
than one Sun; certainly they would think Nature had very little kindness for
us, and would tremble with horror, to think what a sad condition we are in.

I do not ask you, said the Countess, whether in those Worlds of the Milkyway,
there be any Moons; I see they would be of no use to those principal Planets
which have no Night, and move in spaces too strait and narrow to cumber
themselves with the baggage of inferior Planets: Yet pray take notice, that by
your liberal multiplication of Worlds, you have started an objection, not
easily answered: The Vortex's whose Suns we see, touch the Vortex in which we
are, and if it be true, that Vortex's are round, how then can so many Bowls or
Globes all touch one single one? I would fain imagine how this may be done, but
cannot think which way.

You show a great deal of Wit, Madam, said I, in raising this doubt, and
likewise in not being able to resolve it; for in it self the thing is extreme
difficult, and in the manner you conceive it, no answer can be given to it; and
he must be a Fool who goes about to find Answers to Objections which are
unanswerable. If our Vortex had the form of a Die, it would have six squares or
flat faces, and would be far from being round, and upon every of these Squares,
might be placed a Vortex of the same Figure, but if in stead of these six
Square faces, it had twenty, fifty, or a thousand; then might a thousand
Vortex's be placed upon it, one upon every flat; and you know very well, that
the more flat faces any body has on its outside, the nearer it approaches to
roundness, just as a Diamond cut facet-wise on every side, if the facets be
very many and little, it will look as round as a Pearl of the same bigness:
It Is in this manner that the Vortex's are round; they have an infinite number
of facets on their outside, and every one of 'em has upon it another Vortex;
these faces are not all equal and alike; but here, some are greater, and there,
some less; The least facets of our Vortex, for Example, answer to the Milky
way, and sustain all those little Worlds. When two Vortex's are supported by
the two next flats on which they stand, if they leave beneath any void space
between them, as it must often happen, Nature, who is an excellent Huswife, and
suffers nothing to be useless, presently fills up this void space with a little
Vortex or two, perhaps with a thousand, which never in commode the others, and
become one, two, or a thousand Worlds more; so that there may be many more
Worlds than our Vortex has flat faces to bear 'em: I will lay a good wager,
that though these little Worlds were made only to be thrown into the corners of
the Universe, which otherwise would have been void and useless; and though they
are unknown to other Worlds which they touch, yet they are well satisfied with
their being where they are: These are the little Worlds, whose Suns are not to
be discovered but with a Tellescope, and whose number is prodigious: to
conclude, all these Vortex's are joined to one another in so admirable a
manner, that every one turns round about his Sun, without changing place; every
one has such a turn as is most easy, and agreeable to its own situation: they
take hold of one another, like the wheels of a Watch, and mutually help one
another motion: And yet it is true, that they act contrary to one another.
Every World, as some say, is like a Football, made of a Bladder, covered with
Leather, which sometimes swells of its own accord, and would extend it self, if
it were not hindered. But this swelling World being pressed by the next to it,
returns to its first Figure; then swells again, and is again deprest; and some
affirm that the reason why the fixed Stars give a twinkling and trembling
light, and sometimes seem not to shine at all, is because their Vortex's
perpetually push and press our Vortex, and ours again continually repulseth
theirs.

I am in love with these Fancies, said the Countess; I am pleased with these
Foot-balls, which swell every moment, and sink again, and with these Worlds,
which are continually striving and pushing one another: But above all, I am
pleased to see how this justling keeps up the trade of Light, which is
certainly the only correspondence that is between them.

No, no, Madam, said I; Light is not their sole commerce; the Neighboring
Worlds sometimes send visits to us, and that in a very magnificent and splendid
manner: There come Comets to us from thence, adorned with bright shining Hair,
Venerable Beards, or Majestic Tails; these said the Countess are Ambassadors,
whose Visits may be well spared, since they serve only to affright us. They
scare only Children, said I, with their extraordinary train; but indeed, the
number of such Children is now a days very great. Comets are nothing but
Planets, which belong to a Neighboring Vortex, they move toward the outside
of it; but perhaps this Vortex being differently pressed by those Vortex's
which encompass it, it is rounder above than it is below, and it is the lower
part that is still toward us. These Planets which have begun to move in a
Circle above, are not aware that below their Vortex will fail 'em, because it
is as it were broken. Therefore to continue the Circular Motion, it is
necessary that they enter into another Vortex, which we will suppose is ours,
and that they cut through the outsides of it. They appear to us very high, and
are much higher than Saturn, and according to our System, it is absolutely
necessary they should be so high, for Reasons that signify nothing to our
present subject. From Saturn downwards to the outsides of our Vortex, there is
a great void space without any Planets. Our Adversaries often ask us, to what
purpose this void space serves? but let them not trouble themselves any more, I
have found an use for it. It Is the Apartment of those strange Planets, which
come into our World.

I understand you, says she, we do not suffer them to come into the heart of
our Vortex, among our own Planets, but we receive them as the Grand Signior
does the Ambassadors that are sent to him; he will not show them so much
respect as to let 'em Lodge in Constantinople, but Quarters 'em in one of the
Suburbs of the City: Madam, said I, we, and the Ottomans agree likewise in
this, that as they receive Ambassadors, but never send any, so we never send
any of our Planets into the Worlds that are next us.

By this, says she, it appears that we are very proud, however I do not yet
very well know what I am to believe. These foreign Planets with they Tails and
their Beards have a terrible Countenance, it may be they are sent to affront
us; but ours that are of another make, if they should get into other Worlds,
are not so proper to make people afraid.

Their Beards and their Tails Madam, said I, are not real, they are Phenomenon,
and but mere Appearances. These foreign Planets differ in nothing from ours,
but entering into our Vortex, they seem to us to have Tails or Beards, by a
certain sort of Illumination which they receive from the Sun, and which has
not been yet well explained. But certain it is, that it is but a kind of
illumination, and when I am able I will tell you how it is done. I wish then,
says she, that our Saturn would go take a Tail or a Beard in another Vortex,
and affright all the Inhabitants of it. That done, I would have him come back
again, leaving his terrible Accoutrements behind him, and taking his usual
place amongst our other Planets, fall to his ordinary business. It Is better for
him, said I, not to go out of our Vortex. I have told you how rude and violent
the Shock is, when two Vortex's justle one another, a poor Planet must needs be
terribly shaken, and its Inhabitants in no better condition. We think our
selves very unhappy when a Comet appears, but it is the Comet that is in an ill
case. I do not believe that, say she, it brings all its Inhabitants with it in
very good health; there can be nothing so diverting as to change Vortex's. We
that never go out of our own, lead but a dull Life; if the Inhabitants of a
Comet had but the wit to foresee the time when they are to come into our world,
they that had already made the Voyage, would tell their Neighbors beforehand
what they should see, they would tell them, that they would discover a Planet
with a great Ring about it, meaning our Saturn, they would also say, you shall
see another Planet which has four little ones to wait on it; and perhaps some
of them, resolved to observe the very Moment of their entering into our World,
would presently cry out A New Sun, a New Sun, as Sailors use to cry Land, Land.

You have no reason then, said I, to pity the Inhabitants of a Comet, yet I
suppose you will think their Condition lamentable, who inhabit a Vortex whose
Sun comes in time to be quite extinguished, and consequently live in Eternal
Night. How? cried the Countess, can Suns be put out? Yes, without doubt said I,
for People some thousand years ago saw fixed Stars in the Sky, which are now no
more to be seen; these were Suns which have lost their Light, and certainly
there must be strange Desolation in their Vortex's, and a general Mortality
over all the Planets, for what can People do without a Sun? This is a dismal
Fancy, said the Countess, I would not if I could help it, let it come into my
head. I will tell you if you please, I replied, what in this particular is the
Opinion of Learned Astronomers. They think that the fixed Stars which have
disappeared, are not quite extinguished, but that they are half Suns, that is,
they have one half Dark, and the other half Light, and turning round upon their
own Axis or Center, they sometimes show us their Light side, and afterward
turning to us their Dark side, we see them no more. To oblige you Madam, I will
be of this Opinion, because it is not so harsh as the other, but I cannot make
it good, but in relation to some certain Stars, because as some have lately
observed, those Stars have their Regulated times of appearing, and
disappearing, otherwise there could be no such thing as half Suns. But what
shall we say of Stars, which totally disappear, and never show themselves again
after they have finished their Course of turning round upon their own Axis? you
are too just Madam to oblige me to believe that such Stars are half Suns.
However I will try once more what I can do in favor of your Opinion; the Suns
are not extinct, they are only sunk so low into the immense depth of Heaven,
that we cannot possibly see them, in this Case the Vortex follows his Sun and
all is well again. It Is true, that the greatest part of the fixed Stars have not
this motion, by which they remove themselves so far from us, because at other
times they might return again nearer to us, and we should see them sometimes
greater, and sometimes less, which never happens. But we will suppose that none
but the Little, Light, and most Active Vortex's which slip between the others
make certain voyages, after which they return again, while the main body of
Vortex's remain unmoved. It Is likewise very strange that some fixed Stars show
themselves to us, spending a great deal of time in appearing, and disappearing,
and at last, totally and entirely disappear. Half Suns would appear again at
their set and regulated time. Now Madam, boldly declare your Opinion; Must not
these Stars of necessity be Suns which are so much darkened as not to be visible
to us, yet afterward shine again, and at last are wholly extinct? How can a
Sun said the Countess, be darkened, and quite extinguished, when it is in its
own Nature a Fountain of Light? It may be done Madam, said I, with all the ease
in the world, if Descartes Opinion be true, that our Sun has Spots; now
whether these Spots be Scum or thick Mists, or what you please, they may
thicken and unite, till at last they cover the Sun with a Crust, which daily
grows thicker, and then Farewell Sun. We have hitherto escaped pretty well; but
it is said, that the Sun for some whole years together has looked very pale;
for Example, the year after Caesar's death; it was this Crust that then began
to grow, but the force of the Sun broke and dissipated it; had it continued, we
had been all lost People. You make me tremble, replied the Countess; and now I
know the fatal consequences of the Sun's paleness, I believe, instead of going
every morning to my Glass, to see how I look, I shall cast my Eyes up to
Heaven, to see whether or no the Sun looks pale. Oh, Madam, said I, there is a
great deal of time required to ruin a World. Grant it, said she, yet it is but
time that is required. I confess it, said I; all this immense mass of Matter
that composes the Universe, is in perpetual motion, no part of it excepted; and
since every part is moved, you may be sure that changes must happen sooner or
later; but still in times proportioned to the Effect. The Ancients were
pleasant Gentlemen, to imagine that the celestial Bodies were in their own
nature unchangeable, because they observed no change in them; but they did not
live long enough to confirm their opinion by their own experience; they were
Boys in comparison of us. Give me leave, Madam, to explain my self by an
Allegory: If Roses, which last but a day, could write Histories, and leave
Memoirs one to another; and if the first Rose should draw an exact Picture of
their Gardener, and after fifteen thousand Rose-Ages, it should be left to
other Roses, and so left still to those that should succeed, without any change
in it; should the Roses hereupon say, we have every day seen the same Gardener,
and in the memory of Roses, none ever saw any Gardener but this; he is still
the same he was, and therefore certainly he will never die, as we do; for there
is no change at all in him. Would not these Roses, Madam, talk very foolishly?
and yet there would be more reason in their discourse, than there was in what
the Ancients said concerning celestial Bodies; and though even to this very day
there should appear no visible change in the Heavens, and the matter of which
they are made, should have all the signs of an eternal duration without any
change; yet I would not believe 'em unchangeable, till I had the experience of
many more Ages. Ought we, who last but a moment, make our continuance the
measure of any other things duration; it is not so easy a matter to be eternal.
To have lasted many Ages of Men, one after another, is no sign of Immortality.
Truly, says the Countess, I find the Worlds are far from being able to pretend
to it; I will not do 'em so much honor, as to ompare 'em to the Gardener that
lived so much longer than the Roses: I begin to think 'em like the Roses
themselves, which blow one day, and die the next: For now I understand, that if
old Stars disappear, new ones will come in their room, because every species
must preserve it self. No species, Madam, said I, can totally perish; some
perhaps will tell you, that such new Stars are Suns, which return to our sight
again, after they have been a long time hid from us, in the profundity of
Heaven: Others may tell you, they are Suns cleared from that thick crust, which
once covered them: If I should think all this possible, yet I likewise believe
that the Universe may be framed in such a manner, that from time to time it may
produce new Suns; why may not that matter which is proper to make a Sun, be
dispersed here and there, and gather it self again at long run, into one
certain place, and lay the foundation of a new World? I am very much inclined
to believe such new productions, because they suit with that glorious and
admirable Idea which I have of the works of Nature. Can we think that wise
Nature knows no more than the secret of making Herbs and Plants live and die by
a continual revolution? I am verily persuaded, and are not you so too, Madam?
that Nature, without much cost or pains can put the same secret in practice,
upon the Worlds. I now find, says the Countess, the Worlds, the Heaven, and
celestial Bodies so subject to change, that I am come to my self again. To come
the better again to our selves, I replied, let us say no more of these Matters.
We are arrived at the very roof and top of all the Heavens; and to tell you
whether there be any Stars beyond it, you must have an abler Man than I am; you
may place Worlds there, or no Worlds, as you please: It Is the Philosopher's
Empire to describe those vast invisible Countries, which are, and are not, or
are such as he pleases to make 'em: It is enough for me, to have carried your
mind as far as you can see with your Eyes.

Well, says the Countess, I have now in my Head, the System of the Universe:
How learned am I become? Indeed, Madam, said I, you are pretty knowing, and you
are so with the advantage of believing, or not believing any thing I have said:
For all my pains, I only beg this favor, that when ever you see the Sun, the
Heaven, or the Stars, you will think of me.

FINIS.

