A VINDICATION OF CHEMISTRY, AND Chemical Medicines.
Courteous and Candid Reader,
CHEMISTRY, is an ART that does both teach and enable us (for our exceeding
good and benefit) to separate Purity from Impurity; Exalt and advance what God
and Nature has given us, to a farther and higher Perfection than we receive it
indewed with. For all Bodies, more or less, partake of the Grossness and
Terrestriety of their Matrixes: But after their essential purities are
separated from that Terrestriety adhering, which they drew from their Matrixes,
they make it plain enough by their powerful effects, that it is to this state
they ought to be reduced, before they work with Efficacy; and yet they still
retain their Character and Internal Idea.

Now if we shall well and truly consider it; what have we in this curious Nice
Age, either for Back or Belly, Pleasure or Necessity, that has not in some
kind or other been oblidged to Chemistry, and its beneficial Operations, for
that perfection we receive it in? What Calling may be said to have attained to
the perfection and hight it now Glories in, without its help in some one or
other of its (more sublime or trivial Operation.

Consider our Bread our Beer, Wine, Meat, etc. Or whatever can render our lives
happy or satisfactory: And you will find it in one degree or other to pass
under the hand of Chemistry, and its various Operations, or Preparations. And
can we then be thus Insensibly led to admit its daily help and assistance in
things of smallest value; and can we be so stupid, dull, ignorant and blind, as
to neglect its assistance in things of greater moment and concern? And not only
neglect its friendly advice, but deny its profitable hand in those things,
which above all others we most need its help in? Nay, we do not only deny it
makes us happy; but we seek by all means possible to disgrace, slander, and
make it (and its Professors) contemptible and odious to the whole world.
Doubtless these are great follies, and we declare our selves either very
ignorant, or else very Malicious and selfended.

Can we with ease and content, admit and allow its favors, (and greedily seek
after them) to improve and maintain our Purses and Pleasure, and cannot we
admit and embrace its help for the preservation of our Health; without which
the other will be of little benefit, and less pleasure? Consider, if Nature be
weakened and oppressed, that she cannot accept of her usual and accostomed Food;
so as she would, and ought to dispose of it for the supply of her Spirits, and
maintaining of her Habitation; and if she cannot in her ordinary course, so
play the Chemist, as usual: Doubtless, she is less able to do it, in that which
the very name, as well as the nature of it, makes her utterly to abhor, and
reject; and if she be not strong enough to separate the Essenses of her daily
and accustomed Food, how shall she Extract any thing from her Physic (if given
gross) that may give her that rerelief, which her present condition requires
and calls for? She [viz. Nature] has a double work to perform: First, to
Extract the Essential part (and to make use of it) and secondly to cast off the
Gross as an enemy.

It would doubtless, therefore (in this ease) be far better to save her the
labor of separation in this her weakened condition: For although Nature her
self when in health, can digest her Food (when Dressed) and separate the
Alimental parts to her self, (and make use of it for Sustentation) and cast off
the Gross as useless: Yet her Medicines must be Pure, Digested and separated,
and fited for her use: for if she cannot Digest her Food, then not Gross
Medicines; her Food when in health may be Gross, because she can dispose of it
to advantage; but when Diseased, her Physic must be pure, separated and fit
for her use, viz. To Join with the Spirit, or Natural life in man. And in this
the Physician is rightly styled, Natures Handmaid; but not for loading her with
more Impurities, but in assistng and helping her to cast off Impurities, by
that which is Pure. For of Necessity, either the Physician or Nature must
officiate, or act as Chemist, before she can have, or receive what she calls
for, and requires for her help and assistance. Who therefore not drowned in
Ignorance and Envy, would so strongly oppose so great a Good as Chemistry is
Author of?

For this is the only Art (which by supplying us out of the light of Nature,
with Convenient means and particular Natures to separate the pure from the
impure) will teach us: First, to heal all Diseases of the Macrocosmical
substances, and afterward by examples and experiments deduced from those
exterior Cures, will show us the right and infallible Cure of Diseases in our
own Bodies. He that knows not how to purge and heal Metals, how can he restore
the decayed, or weakened Radical Balsom in Man, and repair it by Comfortable and
Concordant Medicines, to perform perfectly all its appointed functions; which
must necessarily be put into action, before any Disease can be expelled: He
that knew not what that is in, which purges Gold, how can be come by an
effectual and Wholesome Medicine that will purge and cast out those Extrarious
peccant causes that afflict and destroy the Body of Man? He that knows not how
to fix Arsenick, or to take away the Corrosive nature of a Sublimate, or to
Coagulate Sulphureons Spirits; and by a convenient Specifical Medium to break
and dissolve Stones in the greater World, will never in the body of man allay
and tame the Arsenical Spirits of the Microcosmic Salt, nor take away the
Venomous indispositions of Sulphur, nor dissolve the Stone in the Bladder, and
drive it out being dissolved. Now as the Ancient Philosophers; who knew Nature
indeed, obtained their noble Medicines by the strict and exact observation of
Nature in her own path; how that kind was multiplied by kind, and without
putrefaction there could be no Generation: And as they found excellent
Medicines, by doing all things in the Metallic Kingdom according to the
possibility of Nature: So if you would have a Medicine indeed, although
inferior to theirs, whether of the Mineral, Animal, or vegetable kingdom, you
must proceed in the same method; for as kind is multiplied by kind, and not
without putrefaction; so if you will exalt any concrete to make it a friendly
Medicine, it must be in Natures path; Kind with kind, and that by putrefaction.
For the absolute things requisite to one that would conscionably undertake the
Sick; are first to know how to unlock those Medicinal Bodies which the Almighty
has created, and how to prepare them, and when, and to whom to apply them; and
also how to order and dispose the Patient, so as that he may reap that good
from them, which by careful administration of them is expected. And thus will
a little quantity of such a well prepared Medicine, manifest it self in the
powerful operating and friendly assisting of Nature, to cast off her Enemies
(viz. Diseases) with speed and safety. But on the contrary, how loathsome is
the very name of (gross and ill prepared Physic unto debilitated Nature! And
what is the reason? Doubtless, the hard task she has had put upon her by it,
and even when she is least able to perform it, and has more need of succor,
than of a farther trouble.

Alas, how shall she receive so great a portion of loathsome Medicines, being
weak when even in the greatest of her strength she would (not only) be troubled
to take (but also at the sight of) it! and this from a secret sense and
antipathy, her natural life or spirit has against its nausceating, and dull
Quality, as well as the greatness of its Quantity.

Then certainly Nature has no greater help, nor better remedy, then that true
and friendly Spagerick Art or seperater of the Impure, from the Pure and
Medicinal part, that so renders it apt, and fit, for her more easy and
friendly Reception. Why then should any so Obstinately oppose so clear a truth,
and so great a Good as this Excellent Art of Chemistry, in the preparation of
Medicines (if compared with the other gross, sluggish and ineffectual
foundation of Physic) or why do the Galenists cry out against others in things
they understand not? Or why do they Envy us, and speak against our Art, (by
which we prepare Pure and harmless Medicines) and yet make use of those
unnatural Chemical Medicines, prepared by the power of violent corrosive Fires,
Destructive to Nature.

Our way of preparing vegetable specificks, is by friendly Dissolvents as are
in themselves agreeable to the Nature of the thing acted upon, so that in
separation the whole Essence of the Concrete is preserved both volatile and
fixed, in Odor, Taste and Color, and the Drossy gross part cast away.

I say why do they make use of Oil of Vitrial Salt Brimstone, and that
dangerous Vomit Vitae prepared of that high Exalted Poison, viz. Oil, or
Butter of also why do they use, Crocus Metallorum, prepared Steel, Crocus
Martis, Flos Sulph. Lapis Infernalis, Dulcis (falsely so called) Sacharum,
Tarbith Minerals (that hellish fluxing Preparation of Mercury) with many other
of those churlish unnatural in the London Dispensatory: Also why do they use
Chemical Oils, and Salts of Herbs, Seeds, Berries, Spices, Bark, Woods, Wax,
Rozins, Minerals and Stones* with their Compound and simple Distilled Waters,
all unnaturally separated from their other parts, or principles, as their late
learned unlearned W. calls them.

Does Nature use these Fires in producting these Natural subjects they thus
work upon? (No) Neither must her Children in their Art of Melioration. She uses
Fire it is true, but it is her own, and it is she that furnishes the true Son of
Art with his Fire, which is Gentle. Does she separate the Salt Sulphur and
Mercury, (in her Acts of Generation) and afterward join them again. No, she
Ferments, Putrifies, Digests, Vivifies and performs all her work and acts of
Generation, with one only Fire which Varies the Species according to the
Matrix, etc. What can you Gentlemen say for your selves, that have followed the
subtle Doctrine of the Athenians, rather then the plain path of Nature, but do
you glory in the Art of your Masters. We will rejoice in the works of our
Tutress Nature, whose Excellency will appear as well by reason, as daily
Experience.

Consider, what is it that gives Eminency and Perfection, to any one thing we
esteem as Excellent; we shall find that it is the Purity of it, and that either
in the Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral Nature: If we consider then what we are
speaking of, viz. Medicines prepared Chymically; we must also conclude its
Efficacy and Excellency to proceed from its Purity, or Purified Nature. Let us
(I say) consider what it is for, it is to help and restore decayed Nature and
her languishing Spirit. Now this Spirit is the most subtle part of Man (I mean
not the Rational Soul) therefore no way to be assisted, but by that which is of
Purity and likeness with it (viz. Medicines of a subtle penetrating Nature.)

The Consideration of Nature will tell you, what her Medicines ought to be, and
a true consideration of such Medicines, will teach and tell you, what Nature
is, so that the quality of the one will inform you what the Nature and Essence
of the other ought to be; for the Physician must (if he will Cure a Disease)
Administer his Medicines to the Spirit, because the Spirit is the sole
Dispencer of Gifts to all the parts and faculties of the body; now as to the
Quality of the Midicines you ought to use for Natures relief, and assistance,
is, that they ought to be of most subtle and thin parts. Therein lies the
excellency of Chemical Medicines, above others, this Art being able to Exalt
the most dull and inactive Medicines, to the greatest of subtility, and far
beyond what nature presents them to us in. Nor does it thus Exalt their Purity
and Efficacy, as to Cure all Diseases both inward and outward only, but Renders
the Medicine it self Incorruptible also: whilst the best of Galenical
(Mixtures) will hardly keep a year. How then should these poor Dirty, Drossy
Medlies, answer those great Ends they Administer them for? And how shall they
root out inveterate, fixed and Chronick Diseases? How shall they purify the
Impure, or help the Infirm, who are not Cured of their own Crude, corrupt and
infirm condition?

If any shall here object, that the Galenick Medicines are safe and the
Chemical quickly Cure, or quickly Kill: Let such objecters know, that they
grant, and add more to the praise of Chemistry and Chemical Medicines then they
are aware of; for nothing can quickly Cure but what is Efficacious, and fitted
for so great a good, which nothing can be, that is not in some measure pure and
like unto the nature it shall so assist. Herein do they unawares affirm the
Excellency of such Medicines: and then to those that suggest, they as suddenly
Kill, I must thus answer them, that they cannot Kill, if administered by skilful
Operators (as those must be that know their true preparation) for as Fire will
warm at a fit distance; yet if any man shall (to warm another) apply a red hot
Iron to his flesh, it will burn him* So water will wash a man clean, (if
dirtied) and he therefore unadvisedly leap into a deep Well, he may be Drowned.
Wine will cheer the heart, if moderately taken, yet many by excess have Killed
themselves; but this cannot be attributed to the dangerous, or Killing quality
of the Wine, as Wine. So these Medicines we know, use and extol, if
administered, or taken by Pints, may destroy Life: But if taken by Drops, Drams,
or Spoonfulls, in their Vehicles, they Enliven and help nature to Conquer her
Enemies, viz. Diseases. When other Gross, Sluggish and ill prepared Nauseating
Mixtures, serve only to stuff up the body (already too much obstructed) with
such quantities, which rather hinder then further her own operation, and also
to rob Nature of that praise due to her (and the Author ofher) when she has
overcome, both the evil of the Disease, and such Medicines.

Now having briefly (and I hope to the satisfaction of every unbyased and
candid Reader) vindicated Chemistry, and true Chemical Medicines;

I shall also with the like brevity, give the Reader an account of some
Excellent Useful Chemical Medicines prepared by me; which may be of great
benefit to all Honest Physicians, Chyrurgions, Apothecaries, Midwives, and
others who design good, and desire to be serviceable to their Generation.

A Catalogue of Chemical Medicines prepared by Richard Fletcher, Living at the
Sun in Gutter-lane near Cheap Side London.
Essence of Southernwood, resists Poison, kills Worms, provokes Urine,
strengthens the Stomach, and Cures Surfets. Essence of Wormwood does the same.
Essence of Agrimony, helps infirmities of the Liver, Pissing of Blood, and
Inward Wounds. Essence of M. Mallows, eases pains of the Store. Essence of
Marjoram, Cures Diseases of the Brain. Essence of Angelica, resists Poison,
cheers the Heart. Essence of Dill and Fenel, Breeds Milk, stays Vomiting.
Essence of Magwort, appropriated to Women; as also, is Essence of Arrach,
Germander, and Peneroyal. Essence of Betony, Dissolves the Stone. Essence of
Briony, Cures Dropsies, and Falling Sickness: so does Dwarf Elder. Essence of
Centaury, Cures the Yellow Jaundice; the same does Succory and Endive. Essence
of Comfry, and Clery, Strengthens Weak Backs. Essence of Couslip-flowers, Cures
Palsies. Essence of Arsmart, is wonderful in the Stone. Essence of of Hysop,
Cures Coughs and Soar-throats. Essence of St. John's Wort, Cures all Cureable
Wounds, both Inward and Outward to Admiration. Essence of Lavender, Cures
Falling Sickness, and eases all Pains in the Head, Cures Deafness. Essence of
Laurel and Bay Berries, Cures Diseases of the Womb and Bladder, Expels Wind,
Cures Plurisies. Essence of Featherfew, is a singular Womb Remedy. Essence of
Melilot, a wonderful friendly Dissolver of the Stone, and Cleanser of the Reins
and Bladder. Essence of Bame, Mints, and Rosemary, are wonderful renovating
Medicines. Essence of Tobacco, is excellent to Cure old Soars. Essence of Rue
and Savin, Kills Worms, Cures Pleurisies, Expels Birth, and Afterbirth.
Essence of Sage, is an excellent Medicine for Women to help them to go out
their full time. Also Essence of Tansie is the same. Essence of Coltsfoot,
Cures Coughs, Shortness of Breath. Essence of Scurvy Grass, Horse-Redish,
Watercresses, and Broom, Cures the Scurvy and Dropsy. Essence of Chamomel,
Cures Pleurisies and Stone. Essence of Saffron, powerfully corrects and expels
Poison, Cures Fevers, Consumptions, and drives out all offensive matter by
Sweat and Urine; and is excellent in the Smallpox, Measles, and all
Pestilential Diseases, and is a very great Cordial. The same is Essence of
Clove-Gilliflowers. Essence of Elder-flowers, Cures Dropsies, the Stone, and
opens Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen and Womb. Essence of Walnuts, kills
Worms, resists the Pestilence, Cures Convulsions. Essence of Nutmegs, Cloves,
Mace, and Cinnamon, Strengthens the Brain. Essence of Barberries, Quench Thirst.
Essence of Corriander, Gramwell, Cardamom-seeds, kills Worms, expels Wind,
provokes Urine. Essence of Benjamin, and Stirax, helps Coughs, Hoarseness and
want of Voice, and clears the Skin. Essence of Pearl, Coral, Amber, and
Amber-grees, are wonderful Restoratives; and Cures all Diseases incident in
Women. Antiscorbutick Powder and Essence. Antivenerial Powder and Essence.
Stone Dissolving Powder and Essence. A Powder which causes Speedy Delivery in
Women, a Womb Essence.
These Excellent Specificks, are all prepared by proper Dissolvents, by which
the Volatile and fixed parts are presverved with their Odor, Tincture and
Color, so that what Nature is best pleased with, is here fitted for her
reception, that she may dispose of them, for those great uses and ends they
were designed, etc.

Reader,
I have not given you a full relation of the uses and Virtues of those before
mentioned Essences. Therefore I add this;

Whatever is, or may be attributed to any Vegetable, the same and more may be
attributed to the Essence of that Vegetable, for by how much it is exalted in
Purity; by so much it ecceeds in Virtue and Excellency.

And as these noble Remedies are Purer, (then the other common Gross Mixtures,
which are usually given in great quantities) so must their Dose, viz. 5. 10.
15. or 20 Drops in Wine, Beer, Ale, Sider.

Tee, Coffee, or Broth, 3 or 4 times a day, that the active penetrating subtle
parts of the Medicine, may expel the Evil, Obnoxious Diseasy Matter, and so
restore decayed strength, and bring Nature again into her true Path, by which
she may preserve the whole man in health.

Thus having hinted unto you the Excellencies of true prepared Vegetable
Essences, and their safety above others: I shall also speak a little to Mineral
Preparation, and so conclude the first part.

Mineral Medicines have a more universal tendency then Vegetables, they being
higher graduated in Nature, and more fixed, and more locked up, and harder to
come at, for prudent Nature has put Bolts and Bars upon her best Jewels, and
has made strong Fences about them lest strangers should espay them, and steal
them away, and make an ill use of them, and cry they are ours, and Nature shall
obey us, she is our servant, and we will do what we please with her. Therefore
she keeps the Keys of her Treasuries her self, but she will vouchsafe to lend
them to such of her Children as are willing to be instructed by her, and will
promise always to walk in her path, and perform whatever she commands; I say,
such a one, and no other, will she fet into her Chambers of Beauty and Riches,
but he that has her Keys, which are friendly Adjuncts, may open Mineral
bodies, and extract that solar tincture, which she has planted in them; for it
is this solar Tincture, which is so amicable to Nature; and Cures the most
Radicated Diseases, by Enlightening and Enlivening the natural spirit, by which
Nature comes both to see her Errors, and amend her Ways; being thus enabled,
not only to cast off all offending Matter formed in the body, but also changing
those Venoms, the cause of such Matter^, and wiping off the Character of the
same.

And such a Medicine as this, is my well known and often tried Powder, called
the Eagle of Metals: As also my little Powder viz. the Solar Dove, with which
Medicines I have Cured many Diseases, accounted by the Proud Persecuting
College Incurable, as hundreds can witness (for me) in this City that I have
Cured for Nothing; when they had Spent all they had to satisfy the
unreasonable demands of those Physicians they then had made use of (by whom
they were rendered more miserable then before) A further account of which I
shall give you in my Bock of Cures, which God willing will speedily be Printed.

Now having attained to the Knowledge and Preparation of such Medicines; is it
not good reason I should have the liberty to use them (without Molestation) for
the good of the Poor, and the Glory of God, the giver of every good and perfect
Gift, to whom be Glory, Amen.

Whatever I administer to another, I dare be oblidged to take the same Dose
every day for a year, to prove the safety of my Medicines, and let every
Physician do the like, if he dare trust to the safety of his, etc.

POSTSCRIPT To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
SUch is the Envy, Ignorance and Clandestine Art, and Subtle practice of many
of the Professors of Physic, Apothecaries, Chyrurgions and others of their
friends and fond lovers of the blind Galenical Tribe, to instill into the minds
of men a more then ordinary prejudice against Chemistry, and the Professors
thereof: Exclaiming against the Art (because they understand it not) and
branding the Artists with such marks of Infamy, (as if right took place) they
themselves ought to bear; and only because they are Painful, Studious and
Industrious men, who labor in the field of Medicine with admirable Success:
Hence it is, that they persecute us, and consulting with Demetrius, find cause
thus to reason. If this Sect prevail, our Craft by which we get our Wealth,
will come to nothing; here lies the stress of the matter: Wealth is that which
they seek; and the Health of the Sick is sought by Chemical Physicians. Thus
Friendly Reader have I in brief stated the difference between a Mercenary
Doctor, and a true Son of Art; that people may no longer mistake Shadows for
Substances, and through that error may no longer be rendered willing to be
deceived. I was willing to sustain this Labor and Charge; not in the least
doubting, but that these Lines (if read without prejudice) may be of good
effect to clear the understandings of most men: So, as henceforth they will be
able better to judge of the common practice of Galenical Physicians, and
consequently for the future be less prejudiced against Chemical Practicioners,
then heretofore they have been, etc.

I intend (God willing) hereafter to publish more small Pieces of the same
Subject.

From my house at the Sun in Gutter-lane near Cheap Side London, October. 29.
1676.
FINIS.

