Rectius Instruendum Or A REVIEW and EXAMINATION Of the doctrine presented by
one assuming the Name of ane Informer, in three dialogues with a certain
Doubter, upon the controverted points of Episcopacy, the Covenants against
Episcopacy, and Separation.

Wherein The unsoundnes, and (in many things) the inconsistency of the
Informers principles, arguments, and answers, upon these points, the violence
which he has offered unto the holy scripture, and to diverse authors ancient
and modern, is demonstrat and made appear. And that truth which is after
godliness, owned by the true protestant Presbyterian Church of Scotland,
asserted and vindicated.

Prove 19. 27 Cease, myson, to hear the instruction that causes to err from
the words of knowledge.

Printed in the Year, 1684.

THE PREFACE to the reader
Christian reader
THat which the wiseman long since offered to their consideration who observe
the revolving course of providence, is there any thing whereof it may be said,
this is new, has its signal accomplishment, in the renewed collisions of
opinions and debeats. The conflicts betwixt truth and error or not of
yesterday, but as early as the morning of time, when he who is a liar from the
beginning assaulted with a horrid calumny the truth and faithfulness of God, and
having by a lie mad a breach in our first parents integrity, by inducing them
to believe it, instilld his poison into our nature, a love of darkness rather
then light. The eye of the understanding (like natures bodily organ when its
cristalin humor is vitiat) cannot see and receive the impression of its object,
(truth and duty) in its lively colors and nat^ simplicity; and if sometimes
the clear beams of truth force a passage for it self, and make some impression
upon the perverse and dark mind of man, O how quickly is that little Victory
lost, this begun signature obliterat, by the rebellious will and affections.
The carnal mind is not subject to the Law of God nor can be, hence truth is
detaind in unrightiousness, convictions stiffled, and the convincing spirit of
God counteracted and grieved. Hence all the renewed pleadings for, and
discoveries of truth, begets in most men (by a woeful antiperistasis) nothing
but renewed contradiction and spurnings against it, While (as the suns vigorus
influence upon the vapors of this dull earth) by its irradiations it attracts,
and condenses thick foggs, dark clouds of perverse disputings the more to
obscure it self. Yet a holy seed there is and has been in all generations,
children of light and of the day, whose work; and honorable badge it is to
contend and be valiant for the truth; who under the conduct of Michael that
great prince who stands up for his people (truths sincere lovers and asserters)
have from the beginning warred this good warfare against that old apostat, and
his followers. So that the war which John saw in heaven, betwixt Michael and
the Dragon, was not then only begun, but a new battle and encounter of that old
war proclaimd in paradise betwixt the seed of the woman and the serpent. All
men are enrolled in one of these two armies, imbarques in one of these
interests according as they are regenerat, or unregenerat, as they have the
seed of God in them or not; and discovries of truth have various effects
accordingly, either of more intense love, or violent hatred, as the sun shining
upon the flowers and dunghill, draws equally forth a sweet and stinking savor.
The erecting of this royal stand art of Zions King and lawgiver ingadges his
faithful witnesses to flow unto it, and come under it, and excits such who
have but the spirit of that world in them, to a counter-muster against it. Who
would not have thought, that the longed for appearances of that Immanuel, and
desire of all nations, that eternal word and wisdom of God in the flesh, should
have put an end to all rebellion of wretched sinners aga^ him; but it never
grew more, then by his convincing discovries of himself. Eternal truth and
holiness suffered contradiction of sinners against himself, he often silenced
enemies reasonings, not their malice, and the most admirable actings of his
effectionat condescending love to men, the giving of himself to death for them,
was entertained with the most virulent and hellish eruptions of their wrath
against him, in murthring him. The rulers opposed this great ruler of Israel,
the learned scribes and rabbis with all their literal knowledge of Moses and
the Prophets, could not yea would not see and acknowledge this great Prophet,
the covenanted people would not receive this great messenger of the Covenant;
and they who boasted to be Abraham's seed, rejected this promised seed, could
not see him when among them, but hated him, whom Abraham saw a far off, and
rejoiced in the discovery. Yet this wisdom of God was then, and still is,
justified of all children of God, and such as are of the truth will see its
beauty throw all the mists of men's calumnies and contendings against it.

The angry cloud wherewith God has now of a considerable time covered the
daughter of Zion in our land, challenges in this as much as in any thing else,
our mournful observation, and simpathizing compassion, that men have taken the
boldness, with perverse disputings to infest her true sons and children, to
assault her precius ordinances and privileges, and with a barefaced impudence
to endeavor the removal of the ancient land marks which our fathers have set,
nay which the great God has established. Yea to cajoll us with poor sophistry
into a carless disregard and abandoning of the magnalia Dei, the great things
of gods Law (important truths and duties) as if they were mere trifles and
indifferencies; to cast the aspersions of supercilius scrupulositie upon true
zeal for God, of rebellion, upon true loyalti and faithfulness to the King of
saints, of devisive humor, upon sincer endeavors after the union and true
order of the house of God, is it not to put light for darkness and darkness for
light, bitter for wee^t, and sweet for bitter, yea cru^ percilius mockrie. Yet
at this rate are we treated by our prelatick pamphleters. The authority of the
second great moral precept anent the receiving and maintaining of all gods
ordinances, the doct. worsh. disc. and governm. of his house, the weight and
importance of the third anent the observation of most sacred solemn oaths and
vows to him for this great end, weighes but light in these men's balances; but
he whose hand holds the plummet and line judges otherwise, their balances are
false, not the balances of the sanctuary. Their new plagiary divinity
depending in a great measure upon the camelion-rule of worldly wisdom, and
steering its course by the versatil rule of human laws, is calculat for any
meridian, but that of canaan and immanuels land, where all must go to his Law
and testimony, and is pronounced base metal, which is reprobat by that
touchston, where every pin of the tabernacle must have its samplar from the
holy mount, ere it get his approbation, and have the cloud of his glorious
presence created upon it. The golden, preface giving a luster and beauty unto
the prophets message was, thus says the lord, but these men's ordinary Anthem
is thus says the Law, presenting their dishes under that leaden cover. Our new
Ashodits have lost the language of Canaan, or at best do but (like those
mungrels mentioned by Nehemia) speak half the Jews language, half of ashdod,
debasing thus the golden rule, by a heterogenens mixtur of human testimonies
and principles. O How is our wine mixed with Water, the beauty of the virgin
Daughter of Zion defaced. That Gebal, Ammon, Amalek and such like do in^est and
take crafty council against Gods Church, is nothing so amazing or dangerous as
when there is a conspiracy of her prophets within her walls. It Is a great
question whither these men's malice in wounding our Church, and taking away her
vail, while pretending to act the guardians and watchmen, or their treachery in
superficial flight healing of her wound, will be found the deepest challenge
when the great shepherd comes to plead with them. But sure, both the one and
the other will make make up a dreadful impeacement. Who ever saw this house of
God in our married land, in its pristine glory and integrity, can but mourn
over the present desolation. These gates once called praise, have now
desolation set upon their threshold. These walls once called salvation, are
laid in dust and rubbish. The joyful sound and voice of the turtle (echoed
with the singing of birds, and vigorus heart motions toward the glorious
bridgroom) are turned into the harsh sound of enemies roarings, and direful
threats, crying raze it raze it to the foundation. To see Bethel turned
Bethaven, and men, yea pretended builders, lifting up axes not upon the thick
trees to advance the building of the house, but upon the carved work, to
destroy it, may make ane impression of sorrow upon any heart, but that of
adamant. Israel wept at the sad news of Gods refusing to go with them unto the
promised land, but especialy when they were brought back from the very borders
of Canaan for their disobedience and unbelief, and doomed to return and die in
the wilderness, spending the remainder of their days and years in vanity and
trouble. It Is long since the glorious cloud is withdrawn to the threshold of
our sanctuary, and the dark, not the auspicius light some side, turned unto
us, yet who are following the glory, who are found crying out a penitent
[Ichabod] over its departing. The building was so far advanced, that we were
ex^pecting to see the headston brought forth with shoutings and acclamations of
grace grace, to see the glorius accomplishment of a work of reformation in
Britain and Ireland, but ah! we are brought back from the borders of this
great hope of a completed reformation, into this wilderness of the must
dismal desolation that ever the work of God has been exposed unto since the
foundation thereof was laid. What means the heat of this great anger, and where
will it issue? Afire is kindled in his anger, afire of angry Jealousy, but
shall it burn for ever, is there none to make up the breach and stand in the
gap.

Ezekiel saw the healing waters issuing from the temple, and upon a desirable
auspicius advanc, first to the ankles, then the knees: then to the loins, and
at la^ (...) great river. But now the waters of ou^ Mara, the Serpents flood of
error ca^ out after the fleeing Woman, and of prophanity flowing from our
defiled sanctuary, have been long flowing apace, and are become of a prodigious
grouth. Our Presbyterian Church-judicatories, are not straitnedonly
bytheinvasion of the ancient Prostasie, or fixed moderator, (which cost K.
James some pains to effectuat) but their root must be plucked up, either as
Presbyterian, or as Ecclesiastic courts; all their decisive power contracted
into a Prelates ipse dixit; and all his pretended spiritual authority, resolving
into the sic volo of a civil papacy, regulable by it self only, no superior
rule. How deeply we have drunk of the whoors cup; and what a deluge of
monstrous wickedness, has overwelmd us since this idol of jealousiewas set
up, ought rather to be weept over then written. Thenameof our Church is no more
Iehova Shamma, the Lord is there, nay that glorious motto is turned unto the
doleful inscription of Lo-ammi Lo-ruhama not any people, not having obtained
mercy And, which is strange, this monstrous Dagon of Erastian Prelacy like a
Medusa has charmd the generation into ane amazing stupidity, yea the most unto
an adoration of it, though it has oftener then once fallen before Gods Ark, and
its head and hands have been cut off upon the threshold of the sanctuary, a
convincing proof that it is not a God. But that it might not want the
dedication and adoration of its fellow set up in the plain of Dura, it has
been attended with the menacing Heralds voice -- to you it is commanded- and
who Worships not etc,- And the melodious Harmony of charming musicians. The
quills of our Prelatick pleaders and Pamphleters have struke up their best
notes and measures to gain the design. But the Menaces, and the Idols golden
metal have far ut done the musicians in persuading, whose treeples of old and
of late, have met with such baffling Contra's that the sagacius ear is not
fond of there shril sounds. Which have long since krakt the strings of our sound
Protestant principles.

For this late Pamphleter, who has dressed up minc't-meat of soom old fragmens
to please childish Pallats, I suppose few or none who have pierced into the
bowels of our present controversies, have judged him so considerable, as to
deserve a formal encounter, there being nothing which he or any of our late
Scriblers has offered, but what is already sufficiently answered. So that
these little toying mean Dialogues, were like to pass along as securely in
their own want of worth, as Bessus in the Comedy. Yet in one point or two I
cannot but commend him, first that the substance of this book answers its
inscription of the differences of the time, these 3 points being indeed the
chief cardines of our present differences, in which had he satisfied all the
Presbyterian ararguments he had done much to cut the sinnews of their cause.
But how far are we at a loss in this Expectation, when the book is looked over,
not one of these great questions fairly stated, scarce one Argument of
Presbyterians so much as fairly proposed, but enfeebled by silly disguises, and
the answers to them such poor and ridiculous evasions, as if he had intended in
this discovry of the weakness of his cause to proselyt his Readers into
Presbyterians, if they were not such before, in stead of weakening that party by
this new assault; the great point of Erastianism not so much as once touched:
And so notwithstanding of all his defense of the Diocesian Bishop, the Erastian
Bishop Lying opene to all the weapons, and wounds of such as have impugned
those principles. And upon the debate about the Covenants, and Separation, the
only presents us with soomwhat of their old musty store, who have appeared in
this cause of late, whose notions are more crude after all this man's recocting,
a convincing proof that there was in the first con^oction, ane indigestible
error. Next I find some what more of a seren temper, less of the sarcastick
scolding strain, then what has tinctured his fellew-actors upon this sceen,
who have bravely scolded it out against the Presbyterians, even to a non ultra
of that Thersites - artifice, although now and then he puts out his little sting
too this way. In soom things also his Ingenuity deserves its praise, in
advancing Prelacy so near the popes miter, both in his pleadings from the
Jewish Priesthood, and from antiquity, wherein he has purtrayed the beast in
exacter lineaments, then soom moresmooth pleaders. His Character of the term
[Curat] viz on that serves the cure though not the Minister of the place, and
of their preaching upon shorter texts, that it is a racking of the Text and of
their brains to find out matter, is honest and apposit, for which the
Presbyterians do owe him thanks; but thereby their doubts in the point of
Prelacy, and the present Separation, are so strengthened, and like to grow, and
especially by his feeble resolutions, that they verily judge he shall never
prove the Aedipus, but is in extreme hasart to be devouted in this encounter,
and Actaeon-like, to be torn in pieces by the kennell of his own pretended
resolutions and Arguings, retorted and hunted back upon him. They do also look
upon the Dialogizing Method, so much pleasing him and some of his fellows, as
a cover (but now very dilucid and transparent) to hide the childish sophistry,
of disguising the true state of questions, and the strength of Presbyterian
Arguments, while they must fight with no weapons, but of their adversaries
choice and measuring: When the Knight enters the lists with a huge invincible
giant, the encounter looks very unequal, and fatal like to the sprightly
little Combatant; but the Romance maker can so order the seen, that he shall be
sure to lay his adversary all a long, and come off victorious. Our Adversaries
have too long ridiculed our serious Theological debates, with their
play-bookes; wherein they do but render themselves ridiculous. what has the
chaff to do with the wheat? When will they offer a fair and formal enucleation
of this controversy, and discuss our Arguments long since offered unto them,
which do stand to this day unanswered? How long will they beg Principles, beg
concessions, and rear up soaring like Arguments upon a Chimaericall fundation,
and then Accost their credulous hearers or readers with Thrasonik boasts and
Rhetorical Rhodomontadoes, which are as insipid and tastlesse to the
discerning, as the Artificial fruit to the hungry pallat.

Reader, for the design of this undertaking, I have this to say, that although
I have as little as many men coveted such appearances, yet have been persuaded
to be thus public upon this occasion, that having casually met with this
Pamphlet, after it had for a considerable time traveled up and down, I judged
it expedient to employ upon it some solitary hours, wherein I was taken
offfrom other employments, both to prevent languishing, and to satisfy the
desire of a friend, whom I highly esteem; as likewayes to undeceive some
simpler and less discerning readers, who seemed to be taken with this piece;
which essay after a considerable times lurking coming into the hands of some
welwishers to our Zion. I did at last yield to their importunity in reference
to the publication. Whatever entertainment this may meet with, and how keen
soever the darts of malicious reproach may prove which are levelled at me, Hic
murus Aheneus esto, I have this shield, that I can say it before the heart
searcher, without heart condemning, that as I intended herein a vindication of
Truth and duty, and according to my measure and capacity to give this testimony
for it, to the strengthening of a poor afflicted remnant contending for the
same, so in writing these sheets, I had an eye upon the father of lights for
his help and presence, and dare not deny but that this was found in some good
measure accordingly. And in the perusal of what is here offered unto public
view (which was not at first directly my intention) I would have thee looking
after these with other emprovements.

First, thou may discover what a honorable cause we now contend for, even the
Crown dignity and Royal prerogative of Jesus Christ, his glorious supremacy
over his own house, in appointing its officers, laws, ordinantes; for the true
frame of his tabernacle according to the pattern showed upon the mount, for
that Government of his house delivered in his perfect and glorious testament,
sealed with his blood, for fealty and loyalty to this King of Kings, in keeping
his Covenant into which this nation and Church so solemnly entered; for the
walls and bulwarks of this City of God in opposition to antichristian
underminers and invaders thereof, for these solemn Assemblies of his saints
upon the ancient grounds and principles of our Reformation (so much now
aspersed by devouring tongues) the ceasing whereof in our Zion ought to engage
to sorrow, and a lamenting after our provoked Lord, now hiding himself from us.
Enemies have often invaded him upon his his throne of grace, and professed
friends have not sincerely aproach'd unto it.

Next, As to our adversaries pleading against us in this quarrel, thou may
discover first, that they are snared, as by the works of their hands, so by the
Words of their lips, and fall before the rebound of their our Arguments; this
man's pleadings against us, especially upon the point of separation, levelling
so clearly against himself, that such who impartially read him upon his point
may straight entertain this reflection, It is hard for thee to kick against the
pricks, and that its easy to pull this Egyptians spear out of his hand and kill
him with his own spear. Secondly, thou may see, what monstrous issues they are
driven unto in the defense of their cause, what a chain of contradictions and
absurdities they have twisted to wind themselves out of their inextricable
Labirinth, that they hatch cockatric eggs; obstinat maintaining of one
absurdity begets a hundred; so true is that saying and prophecy, evil men shall
wax worse and worse deceiving, and being deceived. How palpably have they
wrested the holy Scriptures to shift the convictions thereof, and make some
shift of answer? How laxe and absurd are their new principles in point of
Oaths, resolving their strength into the Magistrates arbitriment and Laws;
besides other odd posterns which they have opened to escape allobligations
thereby, if their matter be not indispensably necessary, which with them is in
a great measure determined by the Law. What a monstrous Chaos of more then
Infidel-barbarity and confusion shall this world become, if these men's
faith-banishing principles be once admitted. Thirdly, to evince, that our
Prelates puppets and new pleaders are Babe^ true brood and builders, thou may
see, how sweetly they join with the Papists in their glosses upon these
Scirptures, pleaded against them. Whenc it is evident, even to a demonstrative
certainty, that the cause of popry and prelacy, are of ane inseparable
affinity, and stand or fall together. If this man's glosses whereby he shifts
off our Scripture Arguments, striking at the Bishops mitre, be once admitted,
the popes triple crown is equally shielded against the weapons of all
Protestants. Our learned Protestant divines in confuting the popish evasions do
so manage their dispute, as if they were directly pleading against this
Informer in defending our Prelacy. And who hears his glossings, pleadings and
answers, would imagine that by some Metempsuchosis, Bellarmine or Eccius were
now acting the Informer to proselyt the Presbyterians to our Prelacy or a
papacy rather. Besides, it is clear he embarques, with the Papists in his
endeavor to bring in antiquity and the Churches practice, as the infallible
comment upon the Scripture in the Episcopal debate, consequently in all debats
in Theology. Nay we must measure the Temple and the Altar, mould our Arguments
in this point of truth by Scripture standard; but for the utter court of
Antiquity, we leave it out, for its given to the Gentiles. Its many soul
principles and practices will not be gotten within the Holy Scripture verge.
This man in his Scripture pleadings is very sparing, for a few pages measure
will do it. But for Antiquity ware he mets us out large and full, to the great
part of all the book; and in this he deals honestly giving the courser stuff
the larger yard.

In fine, thou may see these men discovered beyond all their hiding pretenses
of love, peace and unity; their large spacious charity (extended to the
dimensions of a Metropolitans palace) has fine entertaining rooms for
Papists, Quakers, Arminians, etc. but the poor Presbyterians will scarce get
such a room in it as Bishop Bonners colehouse wherein he lodged the martyrs;
they cry out one Presbyterian Ministers as refusing all Christian fellowship
with them in worship: but when shall we see them open their pulpits to our
Ministers, after they have banished them from their own flocks? They vili^ all
our differences unto mere punctilioes; yet they contend about them tanquam pro
aris and focis, and had rather all Presbyterians were harassed and persecuted,
even to a consuming desolation, then one fringe of their Garments, (As Bishop
Lighton called the points debated) were cut off and let go. They declame
zealously in their pulpits and Pamphlets against sanguinary Principles. How can
these cruel men, say they, look up to the God of love? But now after they
have drunk pretty largely for many years of Presbyterian blood, and are gaping
for more as fast as the bloody whore of Rome who in a great measure influences
them, these devout Burrio's, can wipe their mouths, and pretend they have peace
offerings with them. Mystery Babylon! Mystery Prelacy! What ane abyss of
deceit is here.

In the third place, thou may see, that the cause we contend for, as it has
the first and pure Scripture Antiquity, so the next ensuing Antiquity also, and
the patrociny of the purer ages, and the auspiciously Harmonious consent of
reformed Churches and divines; So that our present Testimony is the same with
that of the witnesses against the beast, and our adversaries stand arranged
under Antichrists banner, in the whole series at least and complex farrago of
their principles. A Diocesian Erastian Prelacy, underprop't by blood and
Perjury, headed by a civil papacy, embracing in its bosom all foul errors,
is a hideous Monster, a bowing wall, a tottering sense, and looks in face and
feature so unlike to Christ's bride, held out and pourtrayed in Scripture, and
once gloriously shining in this land, that no disciple of Christ no friend of
the Bridegroom, can mistake the one for the other; So that our adversaries
charge of novell heterodoxy is a new minted calumny, a frighting buk bear and
scar-cnow. fit to fright children in knowledge, to be the derision of the
knowing, and for nothing else.

Fourthly, thou have here set before thee, a looking glass representing our
sin and punishment in these later days. We have not suitably emproven a
faithful Ministry (once our Churches crown and glory) now that crown is
falling apace, how many stars has the dragon cast from heaven to earth. We
have not not studied personal reformation, while public National reformation
was owned; therefore the holy Jealous God has given us up to an avowed
disouning of that reformation. We endeavored not, while Gods candle shined
upon our tabernacle, to get our case discovered and searched, our hearts
sprinkled from an evil Conscience, therefore most of us are given up to
Conscience - Wasting sins. We have not drawn with joy, from our wells of
salvation, while they were open and running in a plenty of powerful and pure
ordinances; now God has suffered Philistines to stop these Wells; and while
we endeavor to dig them again, such are the counter endeavors of this man
and his fellows by their pleading and practices, that they are called Ezekiel and
Sitna, strife and contention. We are like to dig and strive long ere we get
the well called Rehoboth, and faithful Ambassadors of Christ shall find their
old rooms again in the house of God. We ^ave not keept up a due impression of
the (...) ^lidging force of our National and solemn Covenants with God; who of
us have endeavored to perform our vows to God therein? Therefore God has
given most of us up to a palpable disowning and shameless renunciation and
abjuration of these great and sacred Oaths. We hid our selves from discoveries
of our practical breaches and many whorish departings from God pointed at by
our faithful Seers; now he has given us up to a legal avowed departing. The
accursed thing which was before secretly with us, is now pleaded for, disputed
for, by pretended Seers and wathmen; even the remnanm have dealt treacherously
with God; therefore he has given them up to treacherous dealers, who have
dealt very treacherously with them. We were wearied of reformation, wearied of
God, and said to our faithful seers, see not, prophecy not right things, but
deceits, get you out of the way, cause the holy one of Israel to cease from
before us. Ourwhorish hearts lusted after a sinful liberty and Egypts
fleshpots, neither were we thoroughly ^ged from our old sins our iniquities of
(...) Therefore God has answered us (...) cording to the Idols of our heart,
an^ has said to us (after we have set up ou^ Calves) go to Bethel,
transgress at Gi^ gall, etc. He has given us our desire and sent leanness
into our soul. Our noble Vine, because so dreadfully degenerat, is now
whithered and wasted, plukt up in fury, planted in the wilderness and fire
going out of it self to devour its own fruit. This is a lamentation and shall
be for a lamentation.

Fifthly, Thou may in the perusal of this reply, discover something also of
light arising in darkness, the strength and solidity of our principles
demonstrate in the plain and easy repulse of these assalliants. The indigested
chattered congeries of their new notions do appear but mere vanity, a
deceitful nothing, when levelled against these great truths which we contend
for, notwithstanding of all their clamorous boasting; as the threatening
billows having made a waterish battery upon the rock fall off again in empty
froath; so that we may see it accompli^ of our cause and principles which (...)
Jobs hope as to the issue of his troubles ^en they are tried they come forth as
^ld. And our adversaries light empty ^akets cannot by thousands of degrees
counterpoise them, when both are laid together in the even Scripture Balances.
Truth under all strokes Virescit Vulnere the bruising of it by dispures
diffuses it scent and makes it (as the breaking of that Alabaster box did the
ointment) the more fragrant. Thus our holy wise God brings meat out of the
eater; its the Privilege of Truth, in relation to perverse disputes against
it, which was promised to Zion, when enemies were gathered together, that it
does arise and thresh them The Horns of this honorable cause are found horns
of Iron and its hooves brass: it can thresh (as it has done before) even the
mountains: (For what are they before Zerubbabel) and sift and fann themas dust.
This is a signal token for good in the dark and cloudy day, that these great
truths, which are now become the Shibboleth, the special object of our
Testimony, and adherence thereunto, the chara^ stick of the Lambs followers,
are co^ firmed and shining in a heart engad^ ing beauty: if we hold fast this
Testimo^ we are sure to come off victorious, to g^ the white stone and the new
name: If we quit and cast off this fortifying girdle of Truth, we will
succumb, and be written in the dust, not among the living in Jerusalem.

For the manner and Method of this reply, it will, I suppose be found very
suitable to the scope. The language is plain and accommodat to polemicks, which
do reject all extravagant ornaments of speech. The Informers Arguments are
proposed vivida, vegeta, ad amissim often times verbatim, and nothing of seeming
strength or nerves in his reasoning declined, but fully weighed and examined.
The Presbyterian Arguments, which he has disguised, are presented and offered
in their genuine strength, and fully improven against him; Wherein this trifler
is called to the orders, and his tergiversation checked and made appear. The
state of every one of these questions is likewayes proposed, and Arguments
drawn ^th thereupon, which do abundantly ^tify the Presbyterian cause and
Princi^s, and in a great measure obviat all his Exceptions, and this in the
beginning of every Dialogue before any formal encounter with him. So that if
any shall endeavor again to underprop this tottering wall and to draw this saw
back again, they must be tied to the same Method; weighing all that is offered
in the sound balances of Scripture and reason, and not in such a faint,
superficial, dispute-deserting Method as the Answer to the Dialogues betwixt
the Conformist and Non-conformists has been plied with; whose replyer does but
(like the dogs at Nilus) leap here and there superficially thus measuring out
the dimensions of the whole book with little or nothing of a formal encounter
with the Answerer his Arguments and reasons.

Some things there are, that do require a little touch of Apology; if any
quarrel the prolixity, it is easily granted that a sufficient answer might have
been contracted into far less bounds; yet as every writers head or hand is not
so skilful as to put ane Iliad into a nut, so every rea^ has not the tooth to
crack that nut; man row is nauseating rather then nourishing to many stomaks.
And as the stronger co^ densed light of the Sun, whither in its direct, or
refracted beams, hurts weaker eyes; so all eyes are not for the small print of
the Laconick style, nor can every judgment readily digest too much epitomized
arguings, especially in such subjects wherein the spissitude and variety of the
matter, requires a more dilated style and method. The fair stating of these
great points (now the axletree, about which our religious differences are
turned) the giving of light unto them by solid Arguments may well bear the
charge of some little pains in reading in order to satisfaction therein; and
the man is a wretched miser who would b^ scant as to the affording of time and
diligence in this endeavor.

If any desiderat a more particular Examen of the Testimonies of the Fathers
and some other Authors cited by the Informer; there are several grounds which
may take off this exception. First, since, upon both sides it is professedly
agreed at the scripture is the only judge in this ^bate, and since both parties
now con^nding (as also the fathers themselves and all sound Christians) have
professed to subscribe ane absolute appeal to this judge in matters of religion
(whatever deviations from this rule and profession, this man and his fellows
are guilty of in their arguings and pleadings, especially in this point)
matters, I say, standing thus in this debate among professed Protestants, who
are disputing from scripture, certainly a critical scanning of, or litigiouscon
test about the sense ofevery humanewriter, they must in their principles
acknowledge to be but a digladiation de lana cap^ina, a spending of money for
that which is not bread. When any disputant has with much critical travel
among the fathers, brought home their suffrage to his cause, or by the same
diligence taken it out of an adversaryes hand as it were with his sword and
this bow, what is all the victory? a humane testimony brought to fortify a
divine truth (which was before strong and impregnable in its own light and
authority and a testimony apt to a wired^ by a subtiler Critic to a different
or contrary sense. Next, the scriptures decision in this debat, being (as it is
hoped) convincingly made appear, and the chief testimonies of fathers for our
cause vindicated against this adversary, no rational or ingenuous reader will
judge it expedient, after the scripture decision is made appear and the
testimonies of eminent fathers also, and the adversaryes contrary humane
testimonies, as to the main, dispelled, to pursue every straggling citation.
Thirdly, it is evinced that as upon the one hand all his testimonies upon the
point of Prelacy, though admitted, do but amount to demonstrat the factum,
which is not the question, and not all the Ius, which only is, so upon the
other hand they are as far short of reaching any patrociny to the present
Diocesian Erastian Prelat as the Pigmees arm is to fetch down Ulysses helmet.
Now what superfluous wast of time were it to insist in scanning of testimonies
adduced to prove that which is not the question? the disputant has but a mean
labor in trying whether his adversaryes conclusion is deducd according (...)
rules, and follows on the premises, when the conclusion it self is a long
days journey out of the lists and ranges of the question, and not the negatum
or the principle which the adversary undertakes to prove. If any man will from
this Informers testimonies draw out our Diocesian Erastian Prelat, in the
nature and extent of the power now exercised by him, he may give a defy to all
the Virtuosi to match him in chemical extractions, and may have the chief chair
for invention. All the fathers cited by this disputant are as ambiguous as the
Delphick Oracles in our debate. In fine, this piece is chiefly addressed to the
plain simple searcher for truth, to furnish him with stones from mount Zions
brook (with plain scripture Arguments) to encounter and overcome our Philistine
braggards: not to charge his unskilful weak shoulders and arms with Saul's
unwieldy armor. How tastlesse and useless to the unlearned, a dispute about
the sense of humane writers is, when the inquiry and debate is about a divine
truth, wherein the conscience must he satisfied upon divine warrant, need^ not
my pains to prove, it being obvious to the meanest reflection. If any shall yet
except upon the want of a full examination of some Commentators upon scripture,
whom the Informer appeals unto, it is answered, that if the sense of
controverted texts be evinced from parallels, and the scope and contexture, and
the Adversaryes argument repelled, the humane testimony or sense of some
Interpreters must vail to this in the judgment of all Protestants; and besides,
neither the suffrage of Commentators is wanting to our sense of these
scriptures we plead, nor can this man's glosses be reconciled to the sense of
sound Protestants. Which we suppose the reader will find abundantly clear in
the Perusal. The learned do know that we might muster up as many commentators
suffrages to patronise our sense of text controverted, as would spatio
conficere immensum aequor. The truth is, that with some, we will need an
Apology, in that, this piece is swelled to such a bulk upon this ground, and
that so much of it is taken up in presenting and scanning the sense of authors;
besides, the many testimonies of reformed Churches and divines for Presby^erian
Government which we have presented in a short view in the last Chapter upon
the first Dialogue, do, consequently give sentence for us, as to the sense of
the texts scanned in this controversy, and more then counterballance any whom
this man appealls unto.

Some, it is probable, may think strange, that the Informer has so far got the
start of this corrector, and traveled so long before this appeared; but such
may be quickly satisfied as to this punctilio of a time-ceremony, when they are
made to understand that as this piece was a long time abroad ere ever I did see
it, so after some sight of it, it was a considerabletime before I had the least
intention of imparting my thoughts of it, and after I had this imparted them
much more time did interveen before my intention did fully correspond with the
press motions, and access where it could be had. But however, the knowing
reader will not so much value who replied, or when; as what and how. Satcito si
sat been, is a sound proverb: although (if this matter did deserve any more
Apology) it might be truly averred that the substance of this reply, all to a
very little was written in the months of June and July in the Year 1681. since
which time these sheets were much lurking and out of my hands. And but little
opportunity offered for boring them through exactly after the writing thereof.
Yet upon some renewed desires, as to the publication I did again hastily look
them over amidst many avocations, dividing the whole into Chapters for Methods
sake, with suitable inscriptions containing the sum and series of the chief
points treated of; having also access to peruse some Authors which were not by
me at first writing, some inlargements were made which have much increased it
to this bulk, and it is probable may make it prove rugged in several places, and
not so intelligible to the plainunlearned reader, for whom at first writing it
was principally, if not only, intended; yet for his advantage the Citations of
Authors are all Englished, and some times rendered only in English, and often
upon repeating some few of the Authors words, the sentence is broken off and
the rest presented in our own language: which if it seem strange to any other;
as the ground assigned will, I hope, satisfy, so a view of the Authors will be
my vindication as to the truth of the testimonies themselves.

Upon the point of Separation (which is a difficult and comprehensive question)
I have not undertaken any large scrutiny into its nature and degrees, nor to
scann the several incident cases and subordinat questions, which the full
discussing of that great point would require; desiring only to maintain the
antithesis of the Informers principle and fundamental Topic in the third
Dialogue, and in so far only to enquire into this point as to vindicat this
practice of presbyterian Ministers and professors their owning and following
their respective duties, from his imputation of a sinful and Schismatic
separation; and therefore have not directly spoken to these cases, viz. what
may be said for, or against Conformists Ministerial mission? What difference is
in this our case betwixt a fixed or stated, and ane occasional hearing. In what
cases it might be abstracted from a formal ow^ ing of Curats as Ministers of
this Church? Whether a protestation at first hearing might be a sufficient
salvo to free the practic from that compliance which is pleaded from the
narratives and declared design of the Acts which do enjoin it? And upon the
affirmative solution of this case, what might be the nature, extent and
circumstances of such a protestation? Whither the diverse cases and
dispensations of several places of our land, will import such a difference as
to sin or duty in this point, as there might be a diversity of practice and
union kept thereupon? These and several such like cases I have not taken upon
me formally to state and clear (whatever light about them may follow upon what
is here asserted) not finding it necessary in order to the scope of this
defense, as the question with this Informer is stated and limited, norbeing
desirous to render this reply of too great a bulk, or to be forward and
presuming in difficult points. If the learned and Judicious desiderat here many
things both as to matter and manner, as I doubt not, they will, let not the
Presbyterian ^ause and interest fall under the worse Character with them; this
being but ane essay upon these great questions offered by a very mean person of
that number, and not their joint - polities and formed thoughts; addressed also
mainly to the plain and unlearned readers. Yet for its scope and substance, I
doubt not, but it will be found such as is able to speak with the Enemy in the
gate, and succsesfully to undergo their assaults, if any such be made upon it.
One thing is indeed to be regrated, whereof I could not but acquaint the reader
in this place, that Because of many difficulties which the overseer of the
first part, in Answer to the first Dialogue, at the press, did labor under,
Both in respect of the Copy and several other ways, there are some
considerable Tipographical errors which have creept into it, and several
Latin and Greeck words misrepresented; of which errors, such as do
considerably mar the sense are noted among the Errata. The other parts it is
hoped will not be so bad, and create the Reader such difficulty.

I shall also here acquaint the Reader that I have seen a manuscript entitled
Positions relating to public worship maintained by Presbyterians In former
times, and contradicted by the practice of many in these days, driving the
same design with this Informer in his third Di. alogue, and upon the same
grounds, whereof I had written a considerable time since a full Examen, but
cannot here present it: both, because that pasquil is not extant; and
especially, because it is for substance fullyanswered in this reply. The Author
upon these general acknowledged grounds of the obligation, lying upon all
Church Members to attend the ordinances: the unlawfulness of separating from
public worship for the sins of Ministers or fellow-worshippers; the condemning
of the Brounists in England by the old Non-conformists there, because of a
total Separation, though themselves did separat in part: their acknowledging
of the lawfulness of Episcopal ordination for substance, etc. draws out a
strange and remote conclusion against Presbyterian Ministers of this Church,
their officiating in their present case and circumstances, and peoples adhering
to them in the exercise of their Ministry. The absurdity of which inference,
and what a sand-rope connection it is, needs not any renewed discovery here,
which were but Actum agere. The impertinent and groundless suppositions upon
which this inference is founded, and the confused shufling together of
thatwhich in this question is to be distinguished, being abundantly above
evinced, and also the apparent inconsistency of this way and Method of Arguing:
since from all these grounds a destroying conclusion may be drawn out against
this pasquiller, in reference to the owning of Presbyterian Ministers in their
Ministry: since the ordinances administered by them are really ordinances of
Christ, their mission and ordination warrantable, the worship not corrupted by
their supposed scandals, and consequently they are highly guilty who disown
their Ministry, or plead for it; or else to evite the deadly rebound of his own
weapons and Arguing, he must state the question of new, and restrict and limit
to the particular state and circumstances of this Church; but then he must
confess his arguing upon these general positions, to be but beating of the
air and poor childish babbling. It were not unpleasant to trace the many gross
contradictions incident to this way of arguing and apparent to men of an
ordinary reach who have read this paper. First, [attending of ordinances] add
[receiving them from Conformists] are all one and identified with them, yea
tied with adamantine chains; yet in the case of Presbyterian Ministers, these
two are as far separat, as east and West. Secondly nothing but a substantial
corruption of ordinances administered by Conformists can warrant a withdrawing
from them, and this principle says the Author has strong Scripture grounds to
warrant it, But take this principle over to Presbyterian Ministers, and then it
loses all its virtue, and he will find grounds of separating from them, were
ordinances never so pure, and this is no strange thing, the sharpest sighted
eye cannot see it self. Thirdly, a man can never be reconciled to himself, who
confesses the Episcopal ordination lawful, and yet disowns Conformists. But
once turn the Tables, and the game runs cross; a man may acknowledge the
Presbyterian Ministers have a lawful ordination, and never cross that
principle; though he totally disown them. There are also several gross
inadvertencies, besides these that are common with his fellows in this way of
arguing, which are peculiar to the Author of that Pasquil. Such as, his cutting
the sinews and overturning the fundation of his arguing, in granting all to be
true which Nonconformists charge prelatists with, id est, that they are
Schismatics etc. So in the second position. Yet holding, that this position
viz. That ordinances are not polluted by their Scandalls, will infer a
conclusion of hearing them hic and nunc; Whereas this very ground of Schism is
that upon which he mainly pleads for disowning Presbyterian Ministers, his
confounding in the matter of Aerius his supposed censure by the ancient Church
our acknowledgment of the factum and of the Ius. His denying in answer to the
objection anent the Covenant, that any act under a General head of duty,
considered Physically or materially, may become hic and nunc, and in its
present circumstances sinful exaccidente, yet walking all along upon this very
ground, in condemning the preaching of Presbyterian Ministers and peoples
hearing them: In calling (in answer to another objection) the Prelatick party
the Church of Scotland as now constitute; Yet in the premised concession
acknowledging them Schismatics from this Church: Thus stealing back a
principle to make shift of answer, which he has already given away to his
adversary in this debate. In granting to the Presbyterians that this frame of
prelacy is worse then the former, and gives more to the Magistrate then Gods
Word allows, yet calling this establishment of it, the prerogatives of
Authority and the commands of submission thereunto lawful commands. These and
many such like absurdities are obvious to any that have read that chattered
Pasquil: which might be made further convincingly appear if we could dilate
upon it and present the pasquil it self. But this little toutch may abundantly
discover its vanity and insufficiency in the present dispute, and that the
cause, which our Prelates puppets are pleading for, is so desperate and tottering
that it needs many concessions of its adversaryes and begged sup. positions to
under-prop it withal, and yet sorotten is this fabric and bowing wall, that it
must notwithstanding fall to the ground.

Reader, I shall detain thee no longer from the persual of these sheets, save
only to tell thee that as the strengthening of the hearts of the Lords remnant
in following their duty and amidst their present sufferings, is the intendment
of this appearance, so there is no patrociny intended, nor can be drawn by the
most remote consequence from what is here pleaded upon the point of separation,
unto these dreadfullly presaging anti-^ nisterial principles and practices,
tha^ several in this land are sadly precipitating themselves into; which we
hop^ will be abundantly clear to the understanding peruser of what I have
offered upon that head, and the state of the question as It is exhibited: how
clear and full our confessions and principles are in asserting the due right of
Magistracy, as well as of a true Gospel Ministry, and how harmoniously we join
to the confessions of all the Reformed Churches herein, is sufficiently notour
to the unbyassed and judicious; and consequently, that no precipitations or
strayings from the scripture path upon these heads, can be charged upon our
cause and principles. Great and manifold have been the assaults of Satan upon
this poor Church, and reproaches of that grand accuser of the brethren upon our
Reformation and the faithful promoters thereof. And the plowers have long
plowed upon her back, and enemies of all sorts have many time afflicted her
from her youth. O that our provoked jealous God would show us, wherefore he
contends, and give both Ministers and People a heart-affecting sight and sense
of the true grounds of this controversy, and show unto us our transgressions,
wherein we have exceeded and provoked him thus to lengthen out our desolation;
that he would excite Ministers to make full proof of their ministry, and open
up to them an effectual door and engadge his people to a due and suitable
subjection to their Ministry that this word might run swiftly and this sword of
the Lord eut the cords of the wicked, that we were all excited to encompase
his throne with strong crying and tears in order to the returning of the
Ecclipsed departing glory that this great Shepherd* Israel, would show himself
the only wise of God and the only Potentate in dissappointing and crushing the
crafty, cruel stratagems and designs of Satan (now acting both the roaring
lion and subtle old Serpent) and of his grand Lieutenant Antichrist and his
Artizans. That this our Isle, upon which, the ^ay-spring from on high did early
shin^ and which did early wait for his Law^ who is Zions great Lawgiver, was
rec^ vered from Popish darkness, and from decays after the times of
Reformation, may have a restoring healing visit and being made a married land
may be upon this ground a land of desires. That Christ's Tabernacle, now fallen
down, may be reared up according to the pattern, and planted among us until
his glotious appearance to accomplish his Churches warfare and to make up his
jewels. This is the Expectation of the prisoners of hope, and in this
expectation let us turn in to the strong hold, even to his name which is a
strong tower and go on in his strentgh keeping his good way which has always
been strenth unto the upright. Let us contend for the faith once delivered to
the saints and be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, since he comes quickly, who is our head and judge and his reward is with
him so that neither our labor nor suffering shall be in vain in the Lord.

The Contents
FIRST PART.
Chap. 1. page 2.
THat the prelat now established in this Church is both Diocesian and Erastian
cleared. By the present standing acts hereanent page 2, 3. A twofold state of
the question proponed accordingly, Arguments from Scripture against the
Diocesian Prelat as a pretended Church officer such as 1. appropriating the
term Episcopus common to all Pastors, to a Prelat. The absu di^y of this
discovered Calvines remarkable Testimony on Titus 1: 7. page 4. 2 making it
relate to Pastors which has the flock for its immediate object. Cleared from 1
Pet. 5: 3. Invading and nulling the Authority allowed to Presbyters. The matter
of fact cleared from the principles of Prelatists and the absurdity hereof from
several Scripture grounds page 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 4. Impeaching Christ's
Kingly office as head of his Church and the perfection of his word in obtruding
an officer on his Church of a different mould from those described and allowed
by him cleared from the nature of the prelates office and some Scripture grounds
page 13, 14, 15.

Chap. 2. page 16.
Some more Arguments against the Diocesian Prelat. that his office debases the
acts and exercise of the power of order, cleared from the matter of fact and
Several Scripture grounds page 16, 17, 18. It maimes and diversifies the
Pastoral office, by Anti-Scripturall new invented degrees thereof cleared at
large page 19, (...) His office many ways contrare to thevery nature (...) the
gospel Church Government, cleard also at larg^ from the nature of the Prelates
office and several Scripture grounds page 21, 22, 23, 24.

Cap. 3, page 25.
The Diocesian Bishops office debases extraordinary offices, in consounding
them with ordinary, cleared from the Scripture-account of these extraordinary
offices, and the nature of the Prelates office, according to the principles and
pleading of the Episcopal party. Page 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. 30. The derivation of
the Prelates office from the Apostolical Authority and the power of Timothy and
Titus, loaded with absurdities. ibid.

Chap. 4. page 30.
The Diocesian Prelates office takes away the peoples right to call their
Pastor. This right proved from Scripture and divine reason page 31, 32, 33. It
excludes the office of the ruling elder proved from the practice of Prelatists
as likewayes the preceding charge the divine right of this office proved from
several Scripture grounds, especially 1 Timothy 5: 17. And some chief exceptions
of the prelatick party examined Page 34, 35, 36, 37, 38.

Chap. 5. page 39.
That the present Prelacy is gross Erastianisme, proved, from the matter of
fact, some Arguments against it under that notion. It excludes and denies all
Church Government in the hands of Church officers distinct from the civil;
contrary to the Churches privilege both under the Old and New Testament, which
is demonstrat at large. Page 41, 42, 43, 44, Is in many points ane incroachment
upon the liberties of the gospel Church and upon Christ's mediatory Authority
over the same; which is cleared page 45, 46.

Chap. 6: page 47.
Erastianisme denies the complete constitution of the Apostolic Church in
point of Government. Removes the Scripture land marks, set to distinguish the
civil and Ecclesiastic powers, which is cleared in several points page 47, 48,
49, 50. It is liable to great absurdities ibid.

Chap. 7. page 51.
The Informers shifting and obscuring the true state of the question anent
Episcopacy, and flinching from the point debateable discovered several ways
page 52, 53 He declines a direct pleading for the Prelates civil offices, yet
offers some arguments in defense thereof wherein his prevarication and
contradiction to himself is made appear. His pretended Scripture Arguments from
the Instances of Eli and Samuel, and the Priests concurrence in that Court 11
Numb. to fortify the Prelates civil state offices, ad examined page 54, 55, 56,
57, 58, 59. He is contradicted by interpreters in this point, Antiquity full
and clear against him. The grounds of the Assembly 1638 Sess. 25. Against the
civil offices of Ministers page 63, 64. The Informers endeavors to bring in
the Diocesian Bishop under that command of decency and order as lawful though
not commanded and necessary. That the Bishop cannot he warranted on this ground
but must as a supposed Church officer, instruct his institution: and mission
from Scripture, cleared from several Scripture grounds and the acknowledgment
of some adversaries page 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73.

Chap. 8. page 73. misprinted Chap. 9.
The Informer undertakes to answer the Arguments of Presbyterians against
Episcopacy, his answers to our Arguments from Matthew. 22: 25, 26. Wherein having
misrepresented it, he is notwithstanding forced to embrace the evasions of
Papists, falls in diverse inconsistencies, and walks cross to the sense of
sound divines upon this Text: Yea of some of the ancients which cleard at large
page 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82. his answer to our Argument from 1 Pet.
5: 3. Wherein he also offers violence to the text and joines issue with the
Papists, his evasions examined and this Text (as also the preceding) Improven
against him page 84, 85, 86, 87, 88.

Chap. 9. misprinted Chap. 10. page 88.
The Informers Answers to our Argument from acts 20. and Titus 1: 5, 7. These
Texts emproven against him, and his answers fully examined page 89, 90, 91, 92,
93, 94, 95, 96. His answers to our Argument from Philip. 1: 1. His absurd and
inconsistent shifts discovered and confuted page 98, 99, 100, 101, 102.
Arnoldus and Chamier do class him with the Papists in his answers to this
text, he walks cross to the Dutch, and English Annotations, and to Calvin.
page 103, 104, 105. His answers to our Argument from Ephesians. 4: (...). Examined
page 106, 107, 108.

Chap. 10. misprinted Chap. 12. page 109.
The Informer offers Scripture warrant for Bishops. His Argument from the
Government of the Church under the old Testament, the subordination of the
Priests and Levites. The remoteness and absurdity of his consequence anent the
lawfulness of the present diocesian Erastian Prelates office, asit is deduced
from this principle, discovered several ways, page 110, 111, 112. That there
is no image of our Prelacy in the Jewish Church Government, cleared, The
Informer walks cross to Iunius, yea Bishop Bilson himself, and in the series
of his reasoning, introduces a pope into the Christian Church, page 113, 114,
115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120. His Argument from the Apostles superiority to the
70 disciples, examined. He begs the question in supposing Prelates to succeed
the Apostles immediately, and Pastors the 70 Disciples, and from a superiority
among officers of different kinds, groundlesly concludes a superiority among
officers of the same kind. No Image of our prelacy in the Apostles superiority
over other Church officers, page 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126.

Chap. 11. misprinted Chap. 10. page 127.
The Informers great Argument for Prelacy from the pretended Episcopacy of
Timothy and Titus. Their Episcopal office disproved, from the office of
Evangelist, ascribed expressly to the one, and by good consequence to the other,
from many circumstances of the sacred text, and the judgment of interpreters.
page 128 129, (misprinted 127,) 130 (misprinted 128) 131. (misprinted 129.) The
Informers answers anent the strict and large sense of an Evangelist, his
reasons of deny (...) to Timothy, the Evangelistick office in a strict sense,
(...) amined: and found inconsistent with themselves, a^ contrare to Scripture,
132, (misprinted 130) 13^ misprinted 131, (134 misprinted 132) 135 (misprinted
133,) 136, misprinted 134, 137 misprinted 135, 138 (misprinted 136) he denies
the power in ordination and Jurisdiction to be the proper work of an
Evangelist. How absurdly and inconsistently page 139, 140 (misprinted 137, 138)
his contradiction to Saravia discovered in several points page 141, 142
(misprinted 139, 140) 143 (misprinted 151). His answer to the Doubters Argument
anent Timotheus his not being fixed at Ephesus, but occasionally left there
examined, as also his answer to that Exception of the Doubter [anent Paul's
giving the Episcopal charge to the elders of Ephesus, not to Timothy] our
Informer pityfully bruilied with this Text, page 144, 145, 146, 147, 148
(misprinted 142, 143, 144, 145, 146) he walks cross to Bishop Hal, Dounham and
Hooker, to Chrysostom, Jerome, Theodorus. His grounds upon which he pleads for
Timothy and Titus their Episcopal power, particularly examined. the first taken
from Paul's giving direction to Timothy and Titus, how to carry in ordination and
Jurisdiction, generally examined page 149, 150, (misprinted 146, 147) his
arguing from these directions particularly examined anent their not laying on
of hands suddenly, anent rebuke and censures. page 151, 152 (misprinted 148,
149) the Informers next Argument, from the concernment of after ages in these
rulers. That neither this, nor the adressing of these rulers to the Evangelists
will afford any help unto him, cleared. The London Ministers vindicat. That
Timothy and Titus power at Ephesus and Crete, was not voided after some elders
were ordained there, a sandy foundation to support their Episcopacy. The
Informer is pityfully in the briars, in answering his Doub^ers exception anent
Timothies ordination, by the laying on (...) the hands of the Presbytery. The
practice of after ages a ground to support the Episcopacy of Timothy and Titus
153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168,
169. (misprinted 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161,
162, 163, 164, 165, 166.)

Chap. 12. misprinted Chap. 11. according to the misprinted Method (which shall
be followed hereafter except in some few pages) page 167.
The Informers pleadings for Prelacy from the seven Asian Angels, discussed.
That the style of prophetic, writings and of this book do strongly conclude a
collectivesense in the term, Angel, proved by several Arguments page 168, 169,
170. Whatever he can allege is the Characteristick of this angel, proved to be
in Scripture apropriat to Ministers. page 171. Many divines ancient and modern
for the collective sense of the Word (Angel), yea some episcopal men
themselves, page 172, 173. The admitting of the Angel to be one single person
will nothing help the Informer, page 173, 174. His answer to the exception from
Rev. 2: 24. examined. Ibid. His Argument from the pretended Testimonies of the
ancients and the Catalogues of succeeding Bishops. examined. Page 175, 176,
177, 178. The addressing of the Epistle to the Angel. Will not help him* as
neither Doctor Reynolds, nor Beza their taking the Angel for a single person.
Page 178, 179, 180, 181, The Informers new Argument for prelacy [taken for
Diotrephes his love of preheminence] wherein he embraces Bellarmines evasions,
and offers violence to this, and parallel texts page 181, 182, 183, 184, 185,
186, 187.

Chap 13. misprinted Chap. 12. page 187.
The Informers appeal to Antiquity in the point of Episcopacy. That Antiquity
is not the Judge in this debate, although he could instruct the matter of fact,
proved. Page 188, 189, 190, 191. The Scripture (even by the Confession of the
Fathers) the only judge in matters of faith and practice, not Custom and
Antiquity. Ibid. The Informers reasoning on this head reduced to a formal
syllogism. The Major proposition, the Informer though oblidged offers no proof
of. It is scannd, and likewayes the assumption; and the unsoundnesse of both
discovered. Page 192, 193, 194, 195, 196. The Informers Arguments from the
Catalogues of Bishops, largely scannd, and the insufficicy thereof discovered,
in the Judgment of sound divines. Several things do invalidat Eusebius
Testimony. page 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202. That the first purest Church was
governed by Presbyters without Bishops. Jeroms Testimony in his commentary upon
Titus, and the Epistle to Evagrius, for the Identity of [Bishop] and
[Presbyter], and a Presbyteriall Government in the Apostolic times, largely
vindicated from the exceptions of this Informer, which are discovered to offer
violence to Jeromes Words, to be inconsistentent with themselves, and contrary
to that sense of Jeromes Testimony which is exhibit by learned Protestant
divines, yea some adversarys themselves. Page 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209,
210, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 316, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222,

Chap. 14, misprinted Chap. 13 page 223.
The difference betwixt our present Prelacy, and the ancient Episcopacy, stated
and evinced in many points. Such as 1: The power of ordination and Jurisdiction
above Presbyters, cleared in several particulars. And from the Testimony of the
Ancients, and eminent Protestant divines. Chrysostomes Testimony on 1 Timothy I.
Homely II. explaind. 2. That they were set up by the Presbyters free choice and
election. Proved from Antiquity 3. In referen^ to the peoples Interest in their
choice. 4. That they could not, ordain alone. 5. That they did not invade
Presbyters decisive suffrage. Cleared also from Antiquity, page 223, 224, 225,
226, 227, 228, 229, 230, 231. 6. In the point of their civil state-offices;
which is proved to be contrary to the canons called Apostolic, and other
canons of ancient Councills. 7. That metropolitan Primacy is a stranger to
antiquity, also cleared. 8. So likewayes Erastian Prelacy, page 232, 233, 234.
9. Our Prelates exclusion of the ruling elder from Church Indicatories crosses
Antiquity. 10. Their large and Provincial inspection. 11. Their laying aside
the preaching of the Gospel, renders them Monsters to pure Antiquity, and
exposes them to the censure of Ancient Canons page 235, 236, 237, 238, 239,
240, 241, 242. 12. In their fastuous pomp and sumptuous grandeur ibid.

Chap. 15, misprinted Chap. 14. page 243
The Informers pretended Testimonies out of Calvin, Beza, Blondell etc. For
Episcopacy, examined. Their Anti-episcopall Judgment cleard from their ings,
particularly Calvines, from his Commentari^ upon the controverted Scriptures in
this point, several passages of his Institutions and Commentaries vindicated.
page 243, 244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 250, 251. As also of some Epistles page
252, 253, 254. As also of Beza page 255, 256, 257, 258, 259, 360. The Informers
two absurdities which by way of (...) Dilemma he offers unto us from our
assertion of the unalterablenesse of Presbyterian Government, and our
concession of a Pro^stos early brought in, scannd and retorted upon himself.
Page 260, 261, 262, 263. Some passages of Blondel vindicated, and of Chamier,
and Moulin, page 264, 265, 266, 267, 268. (misprinted 236) the Authors of jus
divinum Ministerii anglicani vindicated at some length, and in special from
imputations of a contradiction imposed upon them by the Informer, page 269,
270, 271, 272, 273, 274 (misprinted 237, 238, 262, 263, 264) a passage of Bucer
vindicate ibid.

Chap. 16. misprinted 15. page 275. (misprinted 265.
Several Testimonies of the fathers offered by Mr Durham in his commentary
upon the revelation, for evincing the identity of Angel, Bishop and Presbyter,
vindicated from the exceptions of the Informer his Exception to Mr Durhames
testimony of Augustine examined, as likewayes to that of Ambrose and
Chrysostom. Page 275, 276, 277, 278, 279, 280, 281, (misprinted 265, 266, 267,
268, 269, 270, 271) the Informers inconsistences noted, page 281, 282, 283
(misprinted 271, 272, 273.)

Chap. 17. misprinted 16. page 284. (misprinted 274.)
The Harmonious consent of ancient fathers, modern divines and confessions of
reformed Churches, for Presbyterian Government in its essential points of
difference from Prelacy, exhibit. 1. That there is no diffence betwixt a bishop
and Presbyter Iure divino. Page 285, 286, 287 (misprinted 275, 276, 277. 2. In
their point of ordination and jurisdiction that these are not in the hand of a
single prelat, but that Presbyters have essential joint-interest therein page
288, 289, 290 (misprinted 278, 279, 280.) 3. In point of the peoples interest
in the election and call of Ministers. Page 290, 291 (misprinted 280, 281) 4.
In relation to the ruling elder, as appointed by Christ. Page 292 (misprinted
282) 5. As it stands in opposition to Erastian principles and the present
prelacy in that respect, and maintains a spiritual Authority in the hands of
Church officers, distinct from, and independent upon, the civil powers of the
world, ibid.

SECOND PART.
Chap. 1. page 2.
A Twofold state of the question proposed, the one touching the abjuration of
this Prelacy in either or both Covenants, the other concerning the obligation
of these Oaths against it. That prelacy is abjured in the national Covenant,
proved from several clauses of it, page 3, 4, 5, 6, That it is also abjured in
the solemn league and Covenant, proved from several passages thereof, and the
then state of our Church. page page 7, 8, 9, 10. The standing force of these
Oaths upon the present and succeeding generations proved. 1. from their nature
and essenc, page 11, 12, 13. 2. From the subject they affect. 3. Their matter
and object. 4. Their end and scope, and even as to Presbyterian Government,
page 13, 14.

Chap. 2. page 16,
The Informers Arguments against abjuration of Prelacy in the National
Covenant. Some reasons of his against an Oath in general, or this Oaths
obligation upon the posterity, weighed, page 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 Mr Croftons
Testimony (in his Analepsis) for the obligation of the Covenant upon the
posterity, page 21, 22. The Informers reasons against the abjuration of prelacy
in the National Covenant, examined. The Author of the Apologetical relation
vindicated, together with the Assembly 1638. page 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41.

Chap. 3. page 42.
The Abjuration of Prelacy in the solemn league and Covenant vindicat from the
exceptions of the Informer. The Informer alleges it is only the English
Prelacy that the Covenant oblidges against, how im pertinently, cleared. page
43, 44, 45. That Timorcus affords no help to him in this answer, cleard ibid.
Nor Mr Crofton, which is also cleard; page 46, 47, 48, 49, 50. From several
passages of Mr Crofton in his Analepsis. The Covenant excludes our Prelacy, and
oblidges to Presbyterian Government in his principles, proved ibid. His
objection anent [the sense of the 2 Article offered by the Parliament of
England] Answered. As also his Exceptions to our Argument taken from our
obligation [to preserve the Government of the Church of Scotland] page 52, 53,
54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59. His fancied contradiction which he imputes to us as to
the sense of the first and second article, refuted. The Informer stands in
opposition to Mr Crofton. The sense of the English Presbyterians as to the
first Article not different from our own, ibid. That the English Presbyterians
did look upon themselves, as oblidged to reform according to our pattern,
which is the Scripture pattern, proved at large from several passages of Mr
Crofton page 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, The Informers allegiance [that the first
Article is ambiguous, and that our Church and state being but a part of the
imposers of the Oath, their sense cannot determine its meaning] vain and
impertinent. page 65, 66, 67.

Chap. 4. page 67.
The grounds upon which the Informer undertakes to prove that the obligation of
the Covenant cease, although its oblidging force for the time past, were
supposed, examined. He begs a supposition of the indifferency of prelacy, how
poorly and impertinently cleard, page 68, 69, 70. His first ground taken from
[the command and authority of Rulers] generally considered, and found
impertinent to support his conclusion, though his supposition were granted.
page 71, 72. His 2d ground touching [the alteration of the matter sworn] as
also his third taken from [the hinderance of a greater good, by the
performance] resolving (in his sense) wholly upon the Magistrates command,
absurd when applied, to our case which is fully cleared. page 73, 74, 75, 76,
77, 78. His absurd and inconsistent reasoning about a [greater command
overruling the lesse] and our obligation to obey the rulers, as prior to that
of the Covenant. page 7. ibid. also page 79, 80. His Argument taken from Number:
30. examined at large he contradicts Casuists, and the text has manifold
incosistencies in his reasoning, while resolving all his rules into the
Magistrates laws, the Informers rules pleaded against him, and according to
the mould of his ple ding does cast dirt upon the Magistrate, page 80, 81, 82,
83, 84, 85, 86. His impertinent repetitions, some further absurdities wherewith
his Explication of the second rule in reference to the Magistrate is liable.
page 87, 88. His Argument from Eccles. 8: 20. weighed. page 89, 90. His
limitations of the third rule anent the Oaths hindering a greatergood,
resolving still upon the command of the powers, absurd, and contradicted by
Casuists, and many ways crosses his design and pleading, cleared at large,
page 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96. His reflection upon Ministers in leaving their
charge, examined, as also his Arguments from the Rechabites. page 97, 98, 99.

Chap. 5, page 99.
The Informers answer to our Argument for the Covenant obligation taken from
the Oath to the Gibeonites. His trifling way of moulding our Argument. And in
what sense we plead this passage. page 100, 101. The Informers absurdity which
he endeavors to fasten upon us in this Argument viz: [that an Oath can bind
against a command of God, impertinent to the point, and such as the Informer
himself stands oblidged to answer, in maintaining the Authority of the sacred
text. page 102, 103. he is contradicted by Jacksonand, inconsistent with
himself in this point. Page 104, 105, the violence which he offers to that
passage Deuteronomy. 20: 10* discovered and cleared from Interpreters, and many
circumstances of the sacred text and parallel Scriptures. page 106, 107, 108,
109, 110. His gross and foolish distinguishing in this transaction of Joshua.
the league and the peace discovered. page ibid. as also his opposition to
learned interpreters here. He supposes, but does not prove a limitation in Gods
command to cut of the Canaanites. His absurd supposition that Joshua brake his
league with them when he know them to be such. page 111, 112. his instance
anent Rahab to prove the limitation of Gods command to destroy the Canaanites
considered and emproven against him. As also his Argument from the 11 of Joshua
19 examined. And Solomon's imposing bond servants upon these nations pleads
nothing for him. page 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119. The manyfold
inconsistencies of his answers upon this point observed. page 120, 121, 122,
123, 124. The impertinency of all he answersup^ this point though granted. His
answers to our Arguments from Zedekiahs Oath to the King of Babylon, examined.
As also to the Argument taken from Psalm. 15: 4, Page 125, 126, 127, 128. His
reflection on the Assembly 1638. In declaring the nullity of the Oaths of the
Intrants under Prelates, groundless and impertinent to the point, ibid. His
argument offered by way of retorsion [Comissaries though abjured in the
Covenant are owned by us, and why may not also Bishops without hazard of
perjury] largely scannd. The vast difference betwixt the one and the other
practice cleared in several points, both in respect of the officers owned and
of the manner of owning them page 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136.

THIRD PART
Chap. 1, page 2.
THe question stated and cleared, from our Churches state before, and since the
introduction of prelacy; and the different condition of Presbyterian Ministers
and Conformists page 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. The different grounds which the
presbyterian and prelatick party (and this man particularly) plead upon, for
the peoples adherence exhibited. [Separation] in many cases not [Schism.] The
many groundless suppositions that this charge of [Schisme] is founded upon,
exhibit, and cleared page 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. The state of the question
largely drawn forth upon a true account of the matter of fact, and of our
principles, a^ Arguments offered to acquit this practice of the charge of
[Schisme], such as 1 That the Presbyterian party are this true Church. 2. That
they are under no obligation to join to the prelatick interest. 3. They have a
ground of retorsion of all that is pleaded by the prelatick party on this
point. 4. The Covenant obligation engadges to the practice controverted; which
is cleared in several particulars, page 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. 5. It falls under
Scripture obligations, which is cleared in several particulars page 18 19, 20,
21. 6. That the Prelatick party will be found in their persecution, the grand
renters and dividers of this Church. 7. This practice controverted has nothing
of the ingredients of a sinful separation from this Church which is cleared in
7 particulars at large, page 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Finally this practice
cannot be that [Schisme] abjured in the Covenant. The Informers Argument
hereanent emproven against him and that the disowning of presbyterian Ministers
falls under the imputation of such a Schism, cleared page 27, 28, 29.

Chap. 2, page 29.
The Informers charge of [internall Schisme] upon non conformists, his Elogies
of Schism, and Testimony of Cyprian considered, and this charge [retorted upon
him page 30, 31, 32, 33. His charge of condemning all Churches for a thousand
years who have own Bishops, liturgies etc.] examined, found groundless, and
impertinent to the point. His Argument from Rom 14. Examined and retorted upon
him. His charge of [Externall Schsme] in separating in acts of Worship,
fortified by that passage Heb. 10: 25, Examined, page 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39,
40, 41, 42. The doubters argument from 1 Cor. 12: v. 31. [that we ought to
seek the best and most edifying gifts] advantageously for himself, but
fraudulently proposd by the Informer. Considerations to clear and enforce this
Argument. The Informers answers examined at large page 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48,
49, 50, 51, 42, His Argument for adhering to Conformists taken from the
reciprocal tie betwixt a Minister and people Ezekiel. 33: 8. Heb. 13: 17. Mal. 2,
7. 1 Thessalonians. 5: 11, 12. As also from Mr Durham on the revelation page 105, 106.
examined at large, page 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59. the premised texts impro^en
against Conformists plea from this supposed tie and relation. ibid.

Chap. 3, page 58.
The doubters argument from Curats not entering by a call from the people, and
that passage Acts 14: 23. cleared and emproven. page 59, 60, 61, 62, 63. The
Informers first answer, that several whom we refused to own, entered by this
call. ibid. his exception upon the term (...) examined. his first answer
touching the use of the word, to express the action of onesingle person,
proved from Acts 10: 41. examined. the use of the word cleared from parallels,
critics and Interpreters. page 64, 65, 66. His second Answer, that Greek
writers use this Word to signify ordination without suffrages, and that this
was the action of Paul and Barnabas, examined. The granting that this was the
action of Paul and Barnabas, distinct from the Churches suffrage, will not help
the Informer. Page 67, 68, 69. He walks cross to interpreters in this answer
page. 70, 71, 72. His third answer [that we will thus give advantage to
independants for popular election of Ministers] examined, wherein the
difference betwixt the independents and us in this point is cleared, from the
Judgment and principles of Presbyterian writers. page 73, 74, 75, 76, 77. His
last answer is that if we disown Conformists for want of this call we null the
Ministry of the Christian world for above a thousand years and upward, and the
Ministry of this Church to the year 1649. examined, even the later Antiquity
clear for this call, by the testimony of Marcus Antonius de Dominis the Council
of Paris anno 559, the examples of Eradius, Ambrose etc. Yea of Bishop Bilsone.
page 78, 79, 80, 81. That patronages are abjured in the Covenant, cleared
against the Informer, and his exception an^ our Churches perjury, because of
the use of patronages after the Covenant, repelled. In what sense the prelatick
ordination is pleaded by us in disowning conformists. of the term, Curat. The
Informer honestly grants that it signifyes one who serves the cure, though not
the Minister of the place, but the substitute of another. page 82, 83, 84, 85.
His answer anent the charge of Perjury, and reasoning anent the lawfulness of
disowning Ministers, because of Scandals, who are not censured, examined. His
reasoning found frivolous, and retorted upon him. page 86, 87, 88. his great
argument from Math. 23. Anent the supposed command of hearing the Scribes and
Pharisees, examined. Several circumstances of the sacred text offered to
discover how very difficult, it is to prove that there is a command of hearing
them, as Church officers. The consequence from hearing of them, though granted,
to the hearing of them, denied upon five grounds: As also his reasoning from
Simeon and Anna, Joseph and Mary their attending the Temple-Worship, examined.
page 89, 90, 91, 92, 93. Mr Durham on Revel. 3. pleads nothing for the Informer
in this point. page 94, 95, 96. His reasons to prove there is a command of
hearing Matthew. 23. as above described, examined and repelled. page ^7 several
answers of the Informer to our charge of intrusion and the queries that he
propones thereupon; as also his retorsion upon this charge, examined and found
vain and frivolous. page 98, 99, 100, 101, 102. His answers to the doubters
Argument anent the abjuration of Episcopal Ministers in the Covenant as
dependent upon the hierarchy confuted. His retorsion [that we were bound upon
this ground to disown all the Ministers at the taking of the Covenant, who had
been ordained by Prelates, unless they renounced their ordination] ane empty
knack, reflecting on the reformed Churches, and justifying the popes plea
against them; page 103, 104, 105.

Chap. 4, page 105,
The Informers answer to the doubters Argument anent [separation from a corrupt
Church.] In what respects and how far this separation is owned. His answer
anent [the not separating from the Churches of Corinth and Galatia, and the
asian Churches Rev. 2: 3. Though tainted with most gross corruptions etc:]
examined. The discrepancy of our case from theirs in this point cleard in some
particulars, and our cause fortified from Scripture directions to these
Churches, page 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113. The impertinency of
these instances to our case, cleared from hence several ways, ibid. The
Informers answer to these Scriptures 2 Cor. 6: 14, 15, 16. 1 Cor. 5: 11, 2 Thessalonians. 3: 6. Rev. 1^: 3. Examined, and found contradictory to his concession
anent [a necessary separation from a corrupt Church], when highly corrupted]
page 114, 115, 116, 117. His answer to the retorted charge of Schism upon
Conformists [for seperating from this Church, examined, and found naught: He
therein cuts the sinnewes of his arguing against us, page 118, 119, 120. His
answer and reasoning concerning lecturing examined. God never appointed a dumb
reading, the Levites gave the sense of the Law etc. the exceptions anent [the
disuse of our first Method of lecturing] and [the want of Circumcision and the
passover for a considerable time in the Jewish Church] help him not in this
point, page 121, 122, 123, 124, 125.

Chap: 5. page 126.
The Informers answer and reasoning upon the point of scandal and offense, in
reference to the owning of Conformists considered. The Informers groundless
supposition anent the duty of hearing Conformists. Our Orthodox sense of Rom
14. and 1 Cor. 8. in the point of Scandal, cleard at large from the exposition
of Chrysostom on the first text, and Pareus on the second. page 126, 127, 128,
129; 130, 131, 132, 133. The Informer upon supposition that a practice is
lawful, and offense flows from it, holds that the command of the powers will
loose the giver of offense from guilt; and remove this liberty of the practice
and the nature of offense, how absurdly, cleared in fyve points. page 134, 135,
136, 138. He is herein contradicted by Amesius. The instances of the Brazen
serpent, and Gideons ephod improven against him, ibid. His absurd gloss upon
Acts 15: 28, [that the things before indifferent were made necessary by the
mere determination of the Council,] largely repelled. Calvin classes him with
the Papists herein. His manifold inconsistencies observed, and absurd
exposition of [scandalum acccptum] and [datum] which do destroy that
distinctione. Mr Gillespie (Eng: Pop: Cerem:) Ames: (Consc: Lib: 5. Cap. 11.)
Mr Durham (on Scandal part 3. Chap 1) discover the futility of his doctrine on
this head. page 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144. The Doubters Argument for
presbyterian Ministers preaching in the manner contraverted, taken from [Christ
and his Apostles preaching in the fields and houses.] The Informers general
answer [anent Christ's not separating people from the Synagogue] weighed and
found frivolous. page 145, 146, 147. Some special reasons wherefore our Lord
did not separate the people from the Synagogue, ibid. The special grounds of
our Lords practice, offered by him to enervat our Argument, considered and
Answered. Such as his bringing in the doctrine of the Gospel as the Messiah,
his being head of the whole Church page 148, 149, 150, 151. What actions of our
Lord were mitable. Rules hereanent (allowed by sound divines) applied to the
case and practice controverted. [That the law allows the gospel to be
preached purely, and faithfully by some] though granted to the Informer, will
help him nothing. ibid. The Informers answers and exceptions to our argument
from Acts 14: 19. examined. His answer from the Apostles extraordinary
callfrilous, as also from the tendency of the rulers prohibition to silence
gospel page 152, 153, 154, 155. His reasoning upon Solomon's thrusting out
Abiathar from the priesthood, examined; as also his citation of Bezaes letter
to the Non-Conformists in England. Page 156, 157.

Chap: 6. page 159.
The nature of Presbyterian Ministers relation to this Church, and their call
to officiate therein, vindicat from the Informers simple cavils. Mr Rutherfoord
and Mr Durhames acknowledgement that a Minister isnotmade a Catholic Minister
of the Catholic Church but by his ordination restricted to a flock, will not
help the Informer, which is cleard in six points: page 159, 160, 161, 162 His
Dilemma which he offers to us viz. that our call to preach, is either ordinary
or extraorninary answered and retorted upon him. His Cavills in relationall to
the Acts of Councils condemning this encroachment (as he calls it) and the
Doctors of Aberdeen their charging Presbyterian Ministers therewith, repelled.
ibid. His charge anent [our ordaining others to perpetuat our Schisme] a
manifest groundless calumny. page 163, 164. His passage cited out of Mr
Baxters preface to the cure of Church divisions, answered, page 165, as also
his 5 healing advices to his half-proselyted Doubter. page 65, 166, 167, 168,
169, 170. Mr Baxters rules in his cure of Church divisions which he after
commends unto us, shortly viewed, and their impertinency to his purpose
discovered. page 171, 172, 173. 174. his testimonies out of the jus divinum
Ministerii anglicani, and of Mr Rutherfoord in his due right of Presbytery
anent unwarrantable separation, in sufficient to bear the weight of his
conclusion. The difference between the case they speak to, and our case
cleared in 4. Considerations, page 175, 176, 177. His citations from the first
author particularly considered, and their insufficiency to bear the weight of
his conclusion discovered. page 178, 179, 180, 181, The citations of Mr
Rutherford particularly examined in so fa^ relating to his scope. page 182,
183, 184, 185 186, 187. In his citations from both these authors, and arguing
therefrom, he is found inconsistent with himself, to walk upon groundless
suppositions, and liable to a manifest retorsion. ibid. The Informer draws out
no conclusion upon these citations, save this general one at the close viz:
That real, much less supposed corruptions in the Worship, or administrators
will not warrant separation. The impertinency of this position to help him
cleard, ibid. He pleads for retractions, and presents at the close a character
of Schism, which is retorted against him page 187, 188.

Chap: 7. misprinted Chap: 6. page 189.
Animadversions upon the Informers preface and title page, prefixed to this
Pamphlet. He pretendes conscience and a design of union in this undertaking,
how unsoundly, discovered. page 189, 190. 191. His Testimonies out of Zanchy
and Blondel to evince their approbation of Prelacy, left by him untranslated,
(though he pretends for the advantadge of the English reader to translate all
other testimonies) answered.


A Confutation Of the First DIALOGUE, Upon the point Of EPISCOPACIE.
Wherein it is demonstrat, that the Episcopacie now existent, both in its
Diocesian and Erastian cut, is contrare to the Scripture, to the first and
purer Antiquity, the Doctrine and Confessions of Reformed Churches and sound
Divines. And the Informers Reasonings for it, from Scripture and Antiquity,
are weighed, and found wanting.

CHAP. I.
That the Prelat, now established in this Church, is both Diocesian and
Erastian, cleared. The Informer is engaged to defend both. A twofold State of
the Question propounded accordingly. Some Arguments from Scripture against the
Diocesian Prelat, as a pretended Church Officer. Such as, 1. Perverting the
Scriptural term, Episcopus, commune to all Pastors; in appropriating it to a
Prelat. 2. Making it relate to Pastors, which has the flock for its immediate
object. 3. Invading and nulling the Authority allowed unto Presbyters, which is
demonstrat at large. 4. Impeaching Christ's Kingly office, as Head of his
Church, and the perfection of his Word, in obtruding ane Officer upon the
Church, of a different moold from those described and allowed by him.

THE state of the first Question in the first Conference is, whither the
Episcopacie now established by Law in Scotland, be warranted or condemned by
the Word of God. For clearing this, it must be understood, what that Prelacie
is, which is now existent, and which this Author pretends is consonant to
Scripture and Antiquity. As to matter of fact, it is undeniable. 1. That the
Parliament 1662. did expressly raze Presbyterian government, in all its
preexistent Courts, Judicatories and Privileges, declaring it void and
expired. 2. They did Redintegrat the Bishops [to their Episcopal function,
presidencie in the Church, power of ordination and censures, and all Church
discipline to be performed by them, with advice (only) and of such of the
Clergy (only) as they shall find, (they themselves being judges) of known
Loyalty and prudence.] And they redintegrat them to all the pretended
Privileges possessed be them in Anno 1637. What time their power was at the
greatest height. Since, of themselves they framed the Book of Canons, which
does establish their sole power and dominion over all Church Judicatories,
razing classical Presbyteries and Parochial Sessions, and drew up the Liturgy
and Book of Ordination without the least shadow of advice from this Church;
Threatening even excommunication against the opposers of that course. 3. It is
also evident, that all this Power and Authority of our Prelates, is fountained
in, derived from, and referable unto the Supremacy; As is evident by the Act
restoring Prelacie, after the declaration of the Supremacy, as his Majesty's
Commissioners in the exercise of his Ecclesiastic Government, and, in the
administration of all their pretended spiritual Authority, as accountable to
him, their Head and supreme Legislator in all Church matters. Hence, it is
evident, that this Author is obliged (if he would answer his undertaking in
pleading for the present Prelacie) not only to evince the warrantablenes of the
Diocesian Bishop in all his pretended spiritual power over Church Judicatories;
But likewaves of the Erastianbishop, deriving all his Authority from the Civil
Magistrate.

We shall then (before we come to examine his pleading upon this Head) offer,
I. Some Arguments against our Diocesian Prelat, as a pretended Church Officer,
and shall show his office to be contrare to Scripture. 2. As ane Erastian
Prelat deryving all his spiritual power from the Magistrate. I. As a pretended
Church officer, the Diocesian Bishop is contrare to Scripture, in many respects.

I. In narrowing and restricting the Scripture term (...) to ane office and
officer, distinct from, and Superior to, a Presbyter or Pastor. For since the
Spirit of God in Scripture appropriats this term to Presbyters, and
consequently the work and office therein imported, Tit. 1: 5, 7. Act. 20: 28. 1
Pet. 5: 2. 3. Sure it must be ane anti-Scriptural and Sacrilegius robbing of
Presbyters of their right and due designation, to make this proper and peculiar
to a Diocesian Bishop only, as the Characteristick of his office. Episcopal
men themselves (and this Author particularely) do acknowledge this term to be
in Scripture applied to Presbyters. Let them then show a reason why they have
made it peculiar to a Prelat as distinct from Presbyters; Or, let them show
where the word (...) denots such ane officer as they have shappen out (viz.) A
diocesian Prelat having sole power of ordination and jurisdiction over a wholl
diocese, with a negative voice and a sole decisive suffrage in the Church
Judicatories thereof. Should they appropriat the term Pastor, or Minister, to a
diocesian Prelat only? Who would not call this ane Anti-scriptural usurpation
of the Presbyters due? And why also, shall it not be thought such ane
usurpation when they appropriat the term Episcopus or Bishop, to such a
pretended distinct officer: Since this term is as much given to Presbyters in
Scripture, as the term of Pastor or Minister. Judicious Calvin has some
remarkable passages to this purpose in his Comentaries. On Tit 1: 7. Having
observed that Bishops and Presbyters are all one, He calls the appropriating of
the name, Bishop, to the Prelat, a profane boldness and ane abrogating of the
holy Ghosts language Abrogato Spiritus Sansti sermon usus hominum arbitrio
inductus praevaluit -- nomen officii quod Deus in commune omnibus dederat in
unum transferri reliquis spoliatis and injurium est and absurdum. Deinde sic
pervertere Spiritus sancti linguam -- nimis profana audaciae est. Act. 20: 28.
He collects the identitie of the name and office of Bishop and Presbiter, from
the elders being called Bishops, And having observed the same on Philip. 1. And
that after, the name [Bishop] became peculiare to one. He adds, id tamen ex
hominum consuetudine natum est, Scripturae autoritate minime nititur. Telling
us that under this pretext of giving the name to one, ane unlawful dominion was
brought in. But of this again.

II. The office hereby designed, does always relate to the Flock, and has
them for its immediate object and Correlat, as much as the word Pastor. The
Bishops of Ephesus were made by the holy Ghost (...) over the flock of God whom
they were to feed. Whereas our supposed Diocesian Episcopus, or Bishop, His
office and inscection relates immediately to the wholl Pastores of his diocese,
who are alse much, his flock and the object of his oversight, care, direction,
correction and censure, as the (...) or layetie. Peter, bids the Episcopountes
feed the flock and act the Bishops over them; But our diocesian Prelat,
pretends to feed and rule the Pastores themselves. The Scripture Bishop is
Populi Pastor but the Diocesian Prelat is Pastor Pastorum, Presbiter
Presbiterorum, And therefore is ane Antiscriptural Monster.

III. The Diocesian Prelat usurpes and takes from Presbiters that authority
allowed them of God in his Word. For both power of ordination and jurisdiction
is soly and properly in the Diocesian Prelat according to Episcopal men, and
likewise according to our Laws, As we saw above in the act anent Prelacy. For
according thereto the Prelat is a Superior ordinar Church officer above
Presbyters, he is sole as to ordination, may do it alone, and assumes
Presbiters only proforma. Which no more lessens his Principality and
Supereminencie in this point, then a Prince in assumeing Counselors (says
Dounam, Def. lib 5, Cap. 7.) weakens his princely power and authority.
Presbyters exercise all their Acts of the power of order in a dependence upon
him, he only is the proper Pastor of the diocese (as shall be afterward
cleared) Presbiters are but his substitutes and helpers. They are likwayes
Subject to him as their proper Sole judge and censurer by Ecclesiastic
censures of suspension, deposition, excommunication, the decisive power in
Church judicatories is properly his. For the most unanimous Acts and
conclusions of the diocesian Synod falls unders his cognizance, to be ratified
or Cassat at his pleasure. He is the Sine quo non, and has a Negative voice in
the judicatories: the law allowing his Presbiters only to give him advice, Nay
and not that either, unles he judge them of known layaltie and prudence. Now,
in all these, he usurps over Presbiters authority allowed them of God. For I.
We find the Scripture atributes the power of order and jurisdiction, equalie
to all Presbiters, who have both keys of doctrine and discipline given them
immediately by Christ. In that I. They are command (...) and (...) 1 Pet. 5.
28. Act. 20. 2. which comprehends the authority and exercise of both the keys
of doctrine and discipline. 2. In all commands relating to the exercise of this
power, there is not the least hint of ane equality among them, which were very
cross to the Lords Scope, if the Diocesian Prelates Superiority were allowed
and appointed. The Presbiters or Bishops of Ephesus, and those of the Churches
which Peter writs unto, are commanded to feed and rule jointlie, equally, and
with the same authority, but non of them in dependence upon, and deryving a
precarious authority from another, in feeding and ruleing. 3. In all the
commands relating to peoples Subjection and obedience to Church Rulers in the
exercise of their power, their is not the least hint of disparitie among these
Rulers. 1 Thessalonians. 5: 12. People are commanded to obey them that labor among
them, and are over them in the Lord, and to esteem them highly. And Hebr. 13:
17. They are commanded to obey them who have the rule over them and watch for
their Souls: but nothing of a special degrie of obedience to this supposed
highest and supereminent watch man is heard of in these or any such like
precepts. And no wonder, for these simple Gospel times knew no Bishops who
watched not over Souls, and labored in the word and doctrine. When the
Apostle Peter commands Christians to obey civil Rulers: He distinguishs the
King as Supeream, and Governors sent by him, that a Chief subjection may be
yielded to the one, and a subordinat to the other. But nothing of this is heard
of, in enjoining peoples subjection to Ministers. Ane honor must be allowed by
Timothey (by the people of God consequently) to elders that rule weil, yea and
a double honor, but (...), especialy, to those that labor in the Word and
Doctrine. The Apostle in stating a distinction in the degries of honor allowed
to elders, and in this different character of the one from the other,
diversifies elders higher and lower. Now by the same reason, upon which Divines
do rationaly build this conclusion, it must be granted, that the enjoining
obedience to all Pastores promiscuusly and without any Note of distinction,
will infer their equal office and authority. And by the same reason that the
Apostle added this (...) or especialy, in this place, he should have added, in
these, or some such comands relating to the peoples obedience, a (...) or
especialy, to distinguish the Diocesian Prelat from other Pastores, and
expressed it thus, esteem them all highly obey them, be subject to them that
teach and watch over you, All your Pastors, but especially the Supereminent
Pastor or Bishop who has the cheifinspection, and from whom all the rest
derive their authority. Likwayes in enjoining the pastoral duties, he should
have been especially noticed, who had the chief hand and authority therein
(which is a Topic improven by this informer) but nothing of this is seen in
Scripture, as shall be after, more fully cleared. 4. We find accordingly, A
practical Equality, among Pastores or Bishops in the exercise of this
governing power, abundantly held out and exemplified in Scripture. The judging
and censuring of the incestuous man, is by the Apostle enjoined to the Church
Officers or Ministers of Corinth joyntlie. 1 Cor. 5. Chap. compared with 2 Cor.
2. Chap. The Apostle all along supposes ane inherent authority in these
Ministers to put forth this grand juridical Forensical Act; ^ydes them for so
long neglecting it, and shows its object (viz.) This person under the formalis
ratio of wicked or scandalus. Again he shows its nature to be Ajudging, or
putting from among them, and delivering to Satan, upon this judging previous
thereunto: He also shows, that this authority touches, all Church Members, not
them that are without, whom God judges, but those that are within. Now, as he
supposes (I say) ane authority of this Nature and extent inherent in these
Church officers, so he speaks to them indefinitly and universally all along,
which were very cross to his Scope, If he had set up or allowed, the Diocesian
Prelat whose sole prerogative this were: And the inflicted Censur he calls,
with the samine indefinitnes, A punishment inflicted by many, who accordingly
are commanded with the same indefinitnes or universality of expression, To
receave and absolve him upon his repentance. The exercise of the binding and
^owsing power, being in the representative juridicall (...) or Church, to whom
scandales must be delated, and to whom the promise of ratification of her
juricall Acts in Heaven, is made. Matthew. 18: 17. Besides we find the exercise of
ordination in a Presbitry, 1 Timothy 4: 14. And that even in relation to ane
Evangelist Timothy. The Presbitry here, must be a juridicall Senate and meeting,
for the Office can lay on no hands: And ordination is ane hie authoritative
juridicall Act. Paul's presence and laying on of hands together with them,
confirms their authority, as being cumulative thereto, not privative thereof,
even as his countenanceing of, or concurring, with, our Adversaries pretended
Diocesian Prelat (let us suppose it in his Act of ordination) would not
infringe his pretended right herein. Ergo. By their own Confession, and by
paritie of reason, it cannot infringe or Impeach this power which is attributed
to the Presbitery. Had the Apostle in stead of Presbytery, put in Pr^at and
expressed it, thus, By the laying on of the hands of A Bishop, or
Diecesian-Bishop: I suppose our Adversaries would have thought the Episcopal
power of ordination invincibly demonstrat there from, notwithstanding of Paul's
saying, 2 Timothy 1: 6. By the laying on of my hands, (viz) together with the
Bishop. Paul's extraordinare Apostolical imposition of hands, being no white
derogatorie unto the supposed Episcopal ordinary power, now, verte tabulas,
the Apostle says, by the laying on of the hands of the Presbitry, Ergo, the
ordinary and equal power of Pastores, and its equal exercise in ordination, is
herin convincingly made out.

Nixt, The Prelates monopolizing thus in himself, the decisive suffrage of
Judicatories, is cross many ways to Scripture. For, I Its a stepping up (in a
piece of Diotrephese-lik, or rather papal-pride) above the Apostles themselves,
who in Churches constitut, did always take along with them, the advice,
consent and authoritative concurrence of ordinary Ministers and Elders in
Government: As is evinced in the premised Scriptures, wherein it is
convinceingly clear, that Paul, though ane Apostle of all the Churches, indewed
with extraordinary unconfined inspection over the same, and Pastor thereof, in
actu exercito, having extraordinary Miracolous-gifts, and being the Master
Builder and Spiritual Father, who by the Gospel had begotten both Pastores and
flocks of many Churches, Yet would neither excommunicat the incestuous
Corinthian alone, but put it upon the Church Officers as their duty to do it
by a judicial, decisive, joint suffrage: Nor yet did he exclud the presbyters
in ordaining even ane Evangilist, but took in their judicial and presbyterial
concurrence. And in Act. 15. In that meeting or Counsel at Jerusalem, where was
a wholl College or Presbitery of Apostles, and met about ane Act or decision
of a high Nature, wherein was put forth both Adegmatick, critic and diatactick
authority or power, in relation to the clearing of that great point of truth,
anent the abrogation of the Mosaicall ceremonies, and censuring the opposers of
Paul and Barnabas herin, who had disturbed the Churches and belied the Apostles
Doctrine: And accordingly in order to the restoring and establishing truth and
order in these disturbed Churches: The ordinary Ministers or elders concur
with the Apostles in every step: viz, In the conferrence and disquisition, the
authoritative decision, the drawing forth of the sentence and decree, the
sending out of the decreeing and censuring Epistle, the imposeing of the decrie
upon the Churches to observe and keep the same etc. 2. This cutts the throat
of that juridical forensical joint decision of Church Judicatories, which the
Scriptur does so clearly hold forth. Where is the (...) the censureing
juridiall court, drawing sorth a joint decision or censure? Where is the
Presbiteries forensicall Act in ordination of Timothy? To what end must the
Corinth Church Officers Meet together, and authoritatively and joyntlie punish
or censur the incestuous man? Where is that pleasing of the Apostles and elders
as the foundation of the Synodical decree and letter, together with, it seemed
good to the HolyGhost, and to us, And to us, Met with one accord. Where is, I
say, this joint decisive power of Church Judicatories, thus clearly held out in
the premised Scriptures, if the Act and Ecclesiastic decision thereof, be soly
the Prelates, sic ^olo, sie jubeo, masked with advice of Presbyters, of whose
advice he may make what use he pleases, and with a simple nego. make their
judgment and suffrage evanish into smoke. 3. This power of the Prelates cuts of
from Ministers one half of their authority and commission received in their
ordination. They are made therein (as is clear in Scripture, and our
adversaries grant it) Rulers, Governors, Overseers, Pastors and Stewards in
the Church; Have both the Shepherds bagg and staff, the key of doctrine and the
key of discipline entrusted to them. By what warrant then must they give up all
their power in government and their decisive suffrage in Church Judicatories,
unto the domineering Prelat, and as to spiritual power in Church Judicarories,
become mere Ciphers? They watch and rule as they that must give account of all
their administration to Christ. Peter exhorts the Elders suteablie to exercise
their Episcopal Authority over the flock, that they may get the Crown from the
chief Shepherd. Stewards (of God especially) must be faithful, and employ well
all their Talents received from the great Master, that they may get his
approbation and reward as faithful Servants. The Elders of Ephesus were
obtested by Paul to take heed to themselves, and to all the flock over which
they were made Bishops by the Holy Ghost, to feed and rule the Church which God
has purchased with his blood. Now all these exhortations directed to Ministers,
are to no purpose, if they have no inherent immediate Rule, essentially included
in their office, And to be exercised accordingly, but must only preach as a
Diocesian Prelates Deputes, and be in the exercise of their ruling governing
power, absolutely subject to him and at his disposal. Finally, This usurped
authority in the Prelat sets him above the reach of all censure by Church
Indicatories; So that though Ministers are absolutely and at his beck,
censurable by, and subject to him, both as to their doctrine, conversation and
discipline (and every one of them thus censurable and jointly) yet this hie
Pop, who judges All, will be judged by none himself, Either as to his Doctrine,
Life or Government. Some have said of the Prince, that though major singulis,
yet he is minor universis, less then the whole body of the people, though
greater then every one aparte. But the Prelat exercises a greater principality
in Church Judicatories, and is therein major universis, greater then the whole
meeting, so that though he can stop the Votes and Censures of the whole Synod,
yet they cannot either by suffrage or censure in the least put a check to him,
in any of His most wicked Acts or Antichristian Exorbitances. Now, how contrary
this is to Scriptur, any may judge. The Prophets after their prophesying must
be judged by the rest, as to their doctrine, 1 Cor. 14: 29, Ergo, a fortiori,
much more as to their conversation and government, are liable to be judged, and
consequently censured if deserving it: For he were a great Critic, that would
distinguish these, so as those who have power to judge, have no power to
censure or pass sentence upon their judging: And this is founded upon a general
comprehensive ground, viz. the Spirits of the Prophets (that is the gifts and
exercises of the Ministry in all Church Officers without exception) are
subject to the Prophets, viz. to their disquisition, and censure in any piece
of their work or official Acts. Now unles our Prelates would deny themselves to
be Prophets and Ministers, or the Presbyters to be Prophets, they must
acknowledge this subjection to their censure enjoined in the Scripture
premised, and consequently, that their exeeming themselves from the same, is an
anti-scriptural usurpation. I remember, while a writting, that proposing once
this Argument to ane Episcopal Clergy man, I enquired to what Church
Judicatorie in Scotland was Mr Sharp subject, as to either his life or
doctrine? He answered that he was subject to a general Counsel, and this was
very apposit and consequenter to their principles: So that our Prelates (at
least the two Arch-) are in no fear, but of a general Council if the Court
froune not. In our Act of Parliament touching the mould of our National Synod,
the Primat is the essential President, and sine quo non, and so is sure enough,
from being censured there; so are the rest of the Prelates as to all their
Synods, according to our Laws. But what think these exleges Episcopi, or hie
Court Prelates, of such a humble Bishop as the Apostle Paul, who had hands laid
upon him, and was authoritativelie sent out by that Presbitery of Prophets and
teachers at Antioch. Act. 13. together with Barnabas, (about ane eminent
Gospel-Legation) and was by the same Church and Presbytery sent (together with
Barnabas and certain other commissioners of the Churches) to that Synod at
Jerusalem, Act. 15. Why did not Paul make use of his Negative voice and command
them all silence in this debate? How comes it, that his hie Bishop subjects
himself to the authoritative blessing and mission of some petty Prophets and
teachers. Ane amazeing looking glass, this is, (no doubt) to our aspyreing
Prelates.

4. The holding of the Diocesian Prelat, and obtruding him upon the Church, as
ane ordinary Church officer, distinct from, and superior to Presbiters, does
many ways Impeach Christ's Kingly office as head and law give^ of his Church:
whose faithfulness above that of Moses (who ordered, according to the Pattern
showed upon the Mount, the least pine of the Tabernacle) must needs reach the
appointment of the officers, offices, qualifications, work and gifts of these
officers, who are to officiat in his house, as our Confession of Faith and
Catechisim do assert. For according to our Prelatical Clergy, and according
to the Laws, the Prelat has a distinct Work from that of a Presbiter (viz.)
to govern a diocese, he has the Actus primus of a State ruler, to sit in
Council or Parliament. Nixt, he has a distinct solemn Consecration or
inauguration to his Office. And 3. Must needs be supposed to have likewise
distinct qualifications and Gifts from those of a preaching Presbiter,
conferred by this solemn imposition of hands and blessing at his Consecration,
whereby he must be supposed to have a superior distinct mission, and to be in
all the forementioned particulars, distinct from, and superior to a Presbiter.
Now, if non of all these points of his superiority can be found in Scripture,
this Officer patched up thereof, must either be unwarrantable, or, Christ the
Churches head and lawgiver, his Laws and rules in point of Church Government,
and in relation to the duties, gifts, ordination, and work of Church Officers,
are not full and perfect, but mank and deficient as to such ane eminent Church
Officer. And where is then the perfection of his word and Testament, to make
not only the ordinary Christian but even the man of God, the Minister of God,
perfect and thoroughly furnished to every good work. That non of all the
formentioned particulars as to this Officer distinct from and superior to a
Presbiter, can be found in Scripture, but are contrary thereunto. I prove thus
1. The Scriptur mentions no name, qualification, work, duty or ordination of
any or dinary Church Officer superior to presbiters, and which are not
likewayes appropriat to them, who are called Rulers, Governors, Bishops; and
both ordination and Jurisdiction ar apropriat to them in a perfect paritie 1 Thessalonians. 5: 12. with 17. v. and 1 Timothy 5: 17. Hebr. 13. v. 7, 17. 1 Cor. 5: 13. 1 Timothy 4: 14. 3 Epist. Ioh. 9. v. -- 2. In all the Holy Ghost his purposed
recitalls of ordinary Church officers, and purposed declaration of their gifts
and duties, there is not the least hint of the premised ingredients of the
office of this supposed Diocesian Bishop, as thus distinct from and Superior to
Presbiters, (1 Cor. 12: 28. Ephesians. 4: 11, 12. Romans 12. 7, 8. In these places we
have besyds the Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists (whose Office, as
extraordinaire, is ceased) Pastores, Elders, Deacons; But no hint of the
Office, name, qualifications or Mission, of ane ordinary Church Officer
Superior to the Pastor, is either heir or in any Scripture else, which
notwithstanding is express as to the Office and qualifications even of the
Deacon, the lowest Officer. Strange! the server of Tables his Office and
ordination clearlie set down in Scriptur: And yet Altum silentium, as to
either, name, Office or ordination, of the Diocesian Bishop. If the argument of
our divines be good from hence against the Pope, because not mentioned in these
Catalogues of Church Officers, Ergo, a pari, It must hold good against the
Prelat. And as to that, that the Prelat has the Actus Signatus of a State
Ruler, how cross this is to Scripture, we may after show. Sure, since Christ
set all these his Officers in the Church, and commands them diligently to wait
upon, and attend their work and Ministry therein; He never made or allowed
them to be State Rulers

CHAP. II.
Some more Arguments against the Diecesian Prelat. That his office debases the
Acts and exercise, of the power of order, cleared. It maims and diversisies the
Pastoral office, by anti-scriptural now invented degrees thereof. His office,
many ways contrare to the very nature of the Gospel-Church-Government.

THe Diocesian Bishop, his office is in this contrare to the Word of God.

V. In that it Debases the highest Acts and exercise of the power of order, in
a Gospel Ministry. For all do grant preaching of the Word and the
Administration of the Sacraments and Seals of the Covenant of grace to be such:
So that he who can do these Acts, has the badge of the highest Ministerial
Authority as ane ordinary Church Officer, these being among the most emnient
Acts of the Apostles there office and Authority -- Go teach, baptize, etc.
They must have some to serve Tables that they may give themselves continually
to the Ministry of the Word. Timothy, our prelatical men's Supposed-Bishop,
must preach the Word, and be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke,
exhort with all long suffering and Doctrine 2 Timothy 4: 1, 2. The great Apostle
of the Gentiles who had the care of all the Churches coming upon him, and
therein a great ruleing work, Yet pronunces a woe upon himself, if he preach not
the Gospel 1 Cor. 9: 28. -- And he tells us this was a special trust committed
to him: In this he admires the rich grace of God that he was putt into the
Ministry, and honored to preach the unsearchable riches of Christ. Peter,
that great Apostle of the circumcision, when by the Lord restored to his
office, and encouraged to its exercise, by a Threefold renovation of his
Mission; is thryce enjoined (as the great badge of his love to his Master) to
feed his Lambs and Sheep. Accordingly, the Scripture Bishop must be (...) Apt
to teach; and he that teaches (by office scilicet) must wait upon teaching,
and the wise and faithful Steward appointed by the Lord to give the children
their meat in dew Season, must be found So doing when the Lord comes to reckon
with him; and not lay up this noble Talent in a Napkine. To this, the key of
diseiplin is inferior and Subordinat, as themean to its end. the higher honor
above ruleing only being allowed to the labourer in the word and doctrine, 1 Timothy 5: 17. This being clear, I say the office of the Diocesian Bishop debases
and tramples upon, these high and noble Acts of a Pastor, and consequently
upon the premised Scriptures asserting the same, and that in these ways. I. In
that the quondam Presbyter only, when made a Prelat, leaves off, The feeding of
the flock, and lays by the preaching talent, the Church where he did preach or
officiat, it may be, shall never see or hear him again, but is ipso facto,
void to be possed by another, nor by his now-office is he oblidged to preach
or Minister the Sacraments any more at all, these petty pieces of work being
below his new Lordship. True, he may preach if he please, and at the Church
where he reseeds, but that is per accidens ex abundanti, and out of courtesy:
but by his office, Qua Prelat, he is bound to preach no more to any frock, nor
is he in the least judged faulty or deficient in his Episcopal office if he be
wholly silent. Nay, in England preaching Prelates have been highely upbraided
and reproached by their fellows, and called preaching Cox Combs. We all
know, what ane odd piece of work Mr Lightoun's preaching was esteemed by the
generality of the Prelatick party when he turned Prelat. Now, let any of
commune Reason or ingenuity judge, what ane office that must be, which putts a
Minister entrusted with the Lords great commission to preach the Gospel, under
pretense of advancement to a higher Sphere in the Ministry, to lay by this
work which is the noblest and highest of the Ministerial Authority, wherein the
Apostles themselves mainely labored and gloried, as the most noble mean of
the conversion of Sonles: and consequently of the glory of Christ therein;
Nay, to lay by this noble work under pretense of new burdene of Government.
Whereas the Apostles who had the wholl Churches to plant and Govern, most
enixely plied this work still. If this man become not a dumb dog and a
sloathfull unprofiteable servant, let any judge. 2. The Diocesian Prelat
debases and tramples upon this noble work, in that be makes it in all the
Pastores of the Dioces, to depend upon his Lordly disposal, and the authority
thereof to be deryved from him as the sole proper Pastor of all the Diocese,
whose deputs the preachers are in this work, although himself is obleiged to
feed no flock. 3 He maks these high and noble Acts of the power of order,
[preaching and administration of Sacraments] a lower and subordinat work and
office, to the work and office of ruleing only, which is his Characteristick
whereby he holds himself Superior to all the preachers of the Diocese? whereas
the Scriptur does (as we heard) appropriat the highest honor to the labourer
in the word and doctrine as the nobler employment and office, above the Ruler
only.

6. In this the Diocesian Prelates office is contrare unto, and reprobat by the
Scriptur, in that by Apocriphal, Antiscriptural, new invented, Degrees and
orders. It diversities and cutts asunder what God hes made one and the same, I
mean the Pastoral Office, and by consequence other offices mentioned in
Scripture, as that of Prophets, Evangelists, Deacons; non of which offices
admites of Subordinat Spheeres and degrees, but all the persons that are
Entrusted with these offices, are of the same degree and authority therein by
the Word of God. No Evangelist, Prophet, or Apostle is found of a Superior
office or order to other Apostles, Evangelists, etc. Whence comes this
diversity then in the Pastoral office, that one Pastor must have a Lordly
Dominion over some hundreds of his fellows? If it be said, that the Episcopal
office succeeds that of the Apostles or Evangelists? besides that we shall
disprove this afterward, and show that these offices taken formaliter as
superior to that of the Pastor, are expyred, as sound Divines do almost
universally grant; I answer that most, if not all Prelatists ancient and
modern, do hold the Diocesian Prelat to be no officer Specifially distinct
from the Presbyter or Pastor, but only gradually distinct, as being a Pastor
with a more amply extended authority for order of Government. Mr Burnet, in his
pretended vindication of the present Prelacie, 4t. Conference, page 310, 311.
tells us, that he is not clear anent the notion (as he calls it) of the
distinct offices of Bishop and Presbyter and akonowledges the Presbyter to be
of the hiest office in the Church, telling us that the Prelat is but a
different degree in the same office. Although in this he and the rest do speak
most inconsequently, the forementioned ingredients of the Prelatical function,
being such, as do certanly amount to make up a new species of ane office, such
as a different work, consecration or ordination, the actus primus of a State
Ruler, different qualifications (by consequence) above and beyond these of a
Presbyter. The diversity of these distinguishes the Scripture offices of
Apostles, Evangelists, etc. which Paul setts in several Classes, as, first, and
second. 1 Cor. 12: 28. Mr Burnet his reason is the same with that of others
herine (viz) the Pastors authority to administer the word and Sacraments which
are the highest acts of the power of order. He tells us [that since the
Sacramental actions are the highest of sacred performances: he cannot but
acknowledge that such as are empowered for them, must be of the hiest office, in
the Church] now I say, since they will needs have the Diocesian Bishop to be
only a different degree of the Presbyterat or Pastoral office, they cannot with
any shadow of reason make him Successor to the Evangelists or Apostles in
their formal office, which they will not dare to affirm to be only a different
degree of the Presbyterat or Pastores office, and will affirm it to have been
specifically distinct from the same. The Ancients and Schoolmen held that the
Pastor in his ordination received the same Power of Government that the Prelat
has, but that the Prelat is the [primus Presbyter,] who has the raines of all
the exercise, in his hand. But how cross is this to Scripture, that any Church
officer has a power and authoriritie which he cannot exercise? To whomsoever
God has given the power, he has certainly commanded the exercise of it; and
particularly Pastores or Presbyters are (as we have heard) enixely commanded to
exercise all their Pastoral authority and power, as they shall answer to their
great Master. Besyds, if the Pastoral office, or its official power of order
and jurisdiction, may be warrantably thus divided and cut out in Shreeds and
parcells, and divyded among different recipients, then it were lawful to divyde
preaching and administration of the Sacraments, so as one Presbyter
(notwithstanding of his authority and mission, in relation to both word and
Sacraments, received in his ordination) might have preaching only allowed to
him, but no administration of Sacraments: Another might be allowed to
administer Sacraments, but not to preach. One Presbyter upon the pretense of
order or union (pretenses are never wanting to humane inventions) might be set
a part and authorized to Baptize all the Children in a wholl Province, doing
nothing else of the Pastoral Office, And this power by the same authority might
be taken from all the Pastoures of the Province, Sure all would acknowledge
this to be a most wicked divyding and diversifieing what God the conjoined. And
such is this Prelatical divyding of the Pastoral charge in relation to order
and jurisdiction, or the keys of Doctrine and Government? the power whereof, the
Pastor receaves entirely in his ordination, as well as the Authority of
administrating Sacraments.

7. In this the Diocesian Bishop is contrare to Scripture. In that his Office
is in many respects cross to the very nature of the Gospel Church Government,
and is ane Office which the man that exercises, cannot but in so far cease to
be a Gospel Church-ruler, Which I prove thus. 1. Since all authority in the
Diocese, as to either the Word or Discipline, is deryved from the Bishop, as its
proper fountain and subject, this power of the Bishop is properly and of its
own nature, not a Gospel Ministry, But a dominion and principality,
discharged to Church Officers of what ever sort, whose authority is not a
despotick, nomothetick, or architectonick power, but a Ministerial Stewardship
only. Matthew. 20: v, 25, 26. 2 Cor. 1: 24. 1 Cor. 4: D. 1 Pet. 5: 2, 3. 3 Epist.
John. 9. The work of all Church Officers, is called a Ministry, Pastors,
Doctores, yea Apostles, Evangelists were appointed (...) for the work of the
Ministry, Ephesians. 4: 12. 2 Cor. 4: v. 5. Paul calls himself a fellow servant
with Epaphras, Collos. 17. with Tichicus Collos. 4: 7. And calls Ministers his
fellow soldiers and fellow-labores Philip. 4. 3.-2. 25-Romans 16: 3.-2. The
Bishops power inverts Christ's rule, as to the gradation in point of censures
and appealls, which is from one one to more, from the lesser number to the
greater, from the Presbytery to the Synod, as from the Presbytery at Antioch,
to the Synod at Jerusalem: Not to any one Apostle, Pop, or Prelat; Whereas the
last appeal and reference in this Diocesian Mould, is to the Bishop. Our Lords
rule is this in relation to the removeing of Scandales. First, tell the
offending Brother Alone, then take two or three more, then if he be farther
contumacious, tell the Church, the greater embodied court or Judicatorie, who
have the official power of binding or lowseing. He bidds not toll it, uni, to
one, but unitati, a multitud gathered into one, for so the Greek word does
necessarly Import, whereas in the Diocesian sea, the gradation is from many to
one Prelat, whose sole prerogative this highest censure, is. And with
Prelatists the rule runns thus, tell two, or three, lastly and finally one
Lord-Bishop: Which is point blank contrare to the Scripture rule. 3. The
Diocesion Bishops power, and Ministerial Pastoral pretended duties, as
Diocesian Bishop are such as falls within he compass of no command, and which
it is impossible to perform according to Scripture rules, which I prove thus.
1. The Prelat according to their principles is the proper Pastor of the whole
Diocese, for he being peculiarly Bishop of it, and consecrat in order to his
Episcopal inspection over the same (for to the participation of his power and
office, denoted by this term [Bishop of Edinburgh] etc. He admitts non in the
diocese, it being the characteristick of his Superiority over Presbyters) and
withal, it including the wholl Ecclesiastic Authority both of order and
Jurisdiction with in the Diocese; It follows of necessity that he is the sole
and proper Pastor thereof according to this mould of Government. Now it being
so, let it be considered. 1. That the true Scripture etimon of Episcopus or
Bishop, imports all the Pastoral duties of feeding and ruling, and lays a^e
obligation upon the person under this relation and clothed with this Office,
to perform all these duties accordingly to these to whom he stands in that
relation. 2 That its impossible the Bishop can feed, Rule, Oversee, and perform
the Pastoral duties unto, and watch for the souls of all that large flock, in
which, some hundereds of painful* Pastores will find their hands full of work.
So that the Bishop assumes a charge, which it is impossible he can dischag or
perform. 3. The Scripture allows no Derivation or Deputation of the Pastores
work and Office to which he is called of God, unto other subserviant Officers.
Because God intrusts no man with any piece of Stewardship in his Family, but
what he must both oversie and execut immediately by himself, and is likewayes
disposed and enabled to manage and overtake. God still conjoyneing the Office,
gifts, and call together, for every piece of his work: Which the man that is
entrusted with; and called unto, must himself immediately wait upon and attend
Romans 12. 7. and not entrust it to others for him. Hence 4. By clear
consequence, it follows, that the Diocesian Bishopes work qua talis, is such,
as he can neither manage nor has warrant from the great Shepherd to exercise
or assume. In the 4t. Place, the present Diocesian Bishop is a Person who is
authorized to sit in Parliament, Council, and other civil Judicatories, as a
constituent member thereof: For they are restored to their places in Parliament
and civil pretended dignities, which places they a^ by there Office bound to
manage, as civil Rulers. But so it is that all civil dominion, and
Magistraticall Rule, is expressly prohibit to Church Rulers, so that the Church
Officer who is installed in these Offices, falls from Heaven to Earth. The
Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, and they that are great
exercise authotie upon them, but it shall not be so among you. Matthew. 20: 25,
26. This charge our Lord gave to his Apostles and their Successors Pastores or
Bishops, who are here forbidden all civil rule or Magistracy, the nature
whereof is properly a Dominion, and thus distinct toto coelo from the nature of
Ecclesiastic Offices which is a Ministerial service or stewardship only. All
our divines impugn from this text the popes civil Dominion and the amphibius
civily ruleing or domineering Prelat falls under the lash thereof. Non who go
Christ's errands and his warrfare must be in^angled with these things that are
temporal. The Minister must wait upon his Ministry. So the civil Magistrate is
Gods Minister in civiles, attending Continually upon this employment Romans 13:
4, 6. Now, those being in their nature so disparat employments, and both
requireing a constant waiting and attendance, he is a strange man, That can be
called and sufficient for both: Who is sufficient for these things said the
great and highly gifted Paul, speaking of his Ministerial employments: Are our
Prelates beyond his sufficiency, who can act the Pastor of a wholl Diocese and
guide State affairs too? Christ's Kingdom is not of this World, and so are not
its Officers, the weapons of whose warrfare must not be carnal. Who made me a
judge, said the great Shepherd himself, when desired but to give a deciding
advice in a civil cause Luk, 12: 14. Where is there any thing like the work or
qualifications of the Magistrate in all the New Testament Rules and instructions
anent the work, Office and call of Church Officers.

CHAP. III.
The Diocesian Bishops Office debases extraoadinarie Offices, in confounding
them with the ordinary. That Timothy and Titus power lays no foundation for
Prelacy, cleared at large. The derivation of Prelacie from them, loaded with
gross absurdites.

VIII. THe Diocesian Bishops Office, is in this contrare unto the word, in that
It debases the Apostolical and Euangelistick Offices, and confounds the
ordinary and extraordinary functions and administrations, which Scripture,
Reason, and all sound Divines do diversifie and distinguish. The Prelates
Advocats, and this new informer particularly, pleads for and derives the
Episcopal pre-eminence from the office and inspection of the Apstles and
Evangelists, whom they affirm to have been properly and formally Bishops, in
the sense they take the Diocesian Bishop, and that the formal power and
offices, which they exercised are to be continued still in the Church. That
Timothy was formally constitut Bishop of Ephesus, Titus of Crete, James of
Jerusalem. And that the Prelates office, is the same, and properly Succeeds
them, and is as it were, A continuation of their office in a formal sense.
Timothy's authority is is one maine ground which the Episcopal men at the Isle
of Wight, and this Auther also do plead to legittimat the Prelates office. This
being clear, I say, this pretended Mould of the Diocesian Bishops Office and
Authority, is liable to the charge and censure of debasing these holy
extraordinary functions, and confounding them with the ordinary, which I
prove, thus. 1. All sound protestant Divines do harmoniously assert the
extraordinary nature of the Apostolic office as such, and likewayes of the
Evangelists, reckening the Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists as the
extraordinary New Testament Officers, whose proper formal Office, died with
them, and admits of no succession: for thus they ordinarily defyne the
Apostles, that they were Christ's immediately called and extraornarily gifted
universal Ambassadors, sent out, to lay every where the foundation of the
Gospel Church, and to plant the Gospel government therein: Particularly Polanus
in his Syntagma reckens up these as their extraordinary expired prerogatives
(to which we will find this Informer in part give assent.) 1. Their immediate
institution by Christ. 2. Their immediate mission to teach, (Paul had his from
heaven.) 3. Their universal legation to found and plant Churches throw the
world. 2 Cor. 11: 28. -- 4. Its visible badge, (viz.) the conferring of the
Spirit by the laying on of hands. 5. Their extraordinary authority beyond any
of their Successors, as being set over the whole Church etc. Hence all the
ingredients of their formal Office, as such, must needs be expired, And no
Church Officer can be said to succeed them therein. Their Call was immediate,
sure, non can succeed them in that. Their special or proper work, was to plant
Churches and the Gospel-government in them, and set up their Officers, of all
which Churches they were Ministers in actu exercits, sure no Church Officer
could succeed them in this. Their Qualifications as such Ambassadors, were
correspondent to this great work, (viz.) their gifts of miracles, gifts of
tongues, Prophecy, infallibility in Doctrine; Sure now can pretend to succeed
them in this. Nixt, for the Evangelists, their Office was equally
extraordinary, it consisting in a planetary motion, from place to place, to
water where the Apostles planted, to bring reports of the Churches state to the
Apostles, and commissions from the Apostles to them. Their various motions, pro
re nata, upon and down, even after these Epistles (wherein they are supposed to
have received their Episcopal charge) were written to them; and the Scriptures
absolut silence as to their ever returning to these Churches again, besides
the Apostle Paul's showing expressly in these Epistles, their occasional
transient employment in this places, and express recalling of them therefrom,
to the further prosecution of their extraordinary employment, and in these very
Epistles identifying the Office of the Bishop and Elder: All these clear
grounds, I say, do evidently demonstrat that the work and office of Timothy and
Titus as Evangelists, is expired, and cannot be pretended unto by any ordinary
Church Officer, it being an appendix as it were of the Apostolic charge, and
supposing its exercise and existance, and the Churches then - infant state and
condition. Now, to make these high and extraordinary functions, ordinary, and
thus confound the two together, must be a very gross usurpation. 2. Hence it is
manifest, that the Episcopal function (as above described in the quality, and
mould of the Diocesian Bishop) will never be found in these extraordinary
functions, either formaliter, or eminenter, and consequently it must be a gross
belying of the Spirit of God, to pretend this in the assuming of this usurped
Office. First, The Episcopal Office will not be found in that of the Apostles
or Evangelists formaliter. For these were universal unfixed Officers, set over
no particular Church or Diocese: But were pro re nata to officiat to the whole
Church as being (the Apostles especially) Officers thereof in actu exercito.
Nixt, the Episcopal function is not included in these Offices eminenter, or in
the ordinary power whi^ the Apostles or Evangelists exercised, or transmitte
(...) the Church. And that for these Reasons. 1. Neit^ the Apostles nor
Evangelists in respect of their perpet^ ordinary Ministerial authority
transmitted by them in (...) Church, did exercise Superiority Episcopal over
other Ministers, but as to the perpetual Pastoral Charge, they held them their
equals, and in the ordinary power of government, as we saw above in the
Apostles practice in ordination and Jurisdiction amongst Churches constitut,
and far less can we suppose that the Evangelists were in such Churches to
exercise any single or Episcopal pre-eminence in government. For it were
strange if Timothy who was ordained by a Presbytrye wherein Paul himself was
present, should notwithstanding usurp pre-eminence over a Presbytery though
inferior to ane Apostle. And that whereas Presbyters did concur pari passu
with a whole Presbytery of Apostles in every piece of a judicial Act and
decree, yet that ane Evangelist inferior to any of the Apostles, should take
Episcopal pre-eminence over a Presbytery. 2. The Apostles planted no such
ordinary Officers in the Church, as had that Episcopal Power, therefore the
Episcopal Power was not transmitted by them in the Church: And by further
consequence it is not included in their Office eminenter. For it is evident,
that in the first plantation of the Churches they fixed Presbyters, or Pastors,
as their immediate Successor's in the Ministerial power, and likewise in their
last farewel's into Churches, they committed unto these Pastors the ordinary
power of government, without the least hint of a Super-institution of any
officer of a higher order. Act. 20: 28, 29. Compared with 25. 1 Pet. 5: 2, 3.
with 2 Pet. 1: 14 -- 3. It was in respect of Paul's ordinary Ministerial power,
and in that Capacity, that he had hands laid upon him by that Presbytety at
Antioch, and was sent out with other commissioners to that Synod at Jerusalem
by them, which looked like a humble submission pro tanto, unto them, and is far
from the Episcopal pre-eminence: since the Prelates dissoune all Subjection to
the Prophes in greater or lesser assemblies. 4. The Prelates authority is this,
he is upon the matter the only proper Pastor of the Diocese, whose Episcopal
inspection reaches Pastores and flocks both, as is above cleared. He is the
fountain from whom the power of order and Jurisdiction in the wholl Diocese,
is deryved, and the exercise of both depends upon his Lordly disposal. Now,
this is contrare both to the Apostles and Evangelists their ordinary and
extraordinary power, contrare to its very nature in universum, their office
being a declarative executive Ministry only: And Dominion or Lordship being
discharged to all Apostles, and all Church Officers whatsoever.

Hence in the 3d. place, This Episcopal pretense, a^nt the derivation of their
Lordly grandour, from the Apostolic Office, fastens a gross charge of
unfaithfulness upon them. 1. In assuming a power in its nature distinct from
what there Lord allowed and enjoined them (viz.) a Lordly dominion, not a
ministerial Stewardshipe and service only, and such a dominion as Princes of
the gentiles exercise, even to have the actus primus of a civil Lord-peer, yea
Chieff-peer, or Parliament man. 2. In debaseing and Straitening their
Apostolic Inspection, and carrying ane Office incompatible with it, and thus
unfaithfully tearing out a part of their commission. For, in becoming
Diocesian Bishops, they should be fixed to particular diocesses, and therein
exercise ane ordinary fixed poever, whereas their commission was to exercise ane
extraordinary unfixed ministry toward all the Churches, planted, and to be
planted. 3. In setting up up no such ordinare officers to succeed them in this
so necessary a work, but committing the wholl government to mere presbyters
as is said. 4. In ommiting in all their rules and prescriptions anent Church
government, and the offices and officers thereof, the least intimation of this
officer, and giving no rules for either the qualifications or ordination of any
higher officer then a mere presbyter, 5. In express dischargeing of Lordly
dominion and pre-eminence among ordinary Church officers. Now, if this be not a
debasing of, and hie reflection upon, these eminent extraordinary Church
officers, both to make them carry ane office contrare and inferior unto, and
inconsistent with there holy functions, entrusted to them by the Lord, and
likewayes in their practice to contradict their doctrine in relation to Church
government, yea and in both their Doctrine and practice, to contradict and
cross the Lords great commission and instructions, If this be not, I say, a
horrid reflection upon their faithfullnes, Let any judge.

CHAP. IV.
The diocesian Prelates office, taks away the peoples right, to Call there
Pastor. This right proved from Scriptur and divine Reason. It excludes the
office of the Ruleing elder. Some Cheiff exceptions of the prelatick party to
that 1. Tim. 5. 17. Ansuered.

IN the 9^. place. The Episcopal government is in this contrare unto the word;
In that it cutts off Congtegations from all interest and right, in Calling
there Pastor. For in this government, the Ministers mission, Call, Ordination,
and Relation to such a people, over whom he is to officiat, flows all from the
Prelat. The Congregationall eldership have not the Least interestin it. Hence
this power of calling Pastores was ranversed by our Parliament when prelacie
was set up, and the old popish Custom of patronages was restored. The Prelat
sends a man to the poor people as their Minister, whom possibly they never saw
in the face. Now, this is contrare both to Scriptur and reason, contrare, to
the practice of the apostolic Church. For 1. Even the deacons were looked out,
and chosen by the people. Act. 6. 3. That the Apostles might ordain and lay
their hands upon them, and install them in their office with a public
blessing: And if the people were to have so great ane Interest in choosing
these men (though even the Apostles, who had infallible knouledge of
qualifications, were present to ordain them) that this trust of disburseing
their Alms or charity, might be committed to non but upon their consent and
choice. Ergo, a fortiori, People have a far greater Interest as to their
Consent and choice of the man, To whom they are to Entrust their Souls conduct
unto another world, which is of infinite more worth then all the Earthes
treasures, And while the are no such infalible discerners of fit persons to
officiat, as the Apostles were. If the Apostles would not set apart men for
this meanest employment, without the Peoples-Consent and looking them out, How
absurd is it, that the highest ordinary officer [the Pastor] should be sent to
officiat in that eminent office with out there knowledge or Consent.

2 We find the chooseing and sending out of Church officers in this hie
ministerial employment, To have been upon the peoples consent and choice: for
Act. 14. The Elders or Ministers who were ordained (...) or Church by Church,
were thus ordained and set apart to their office, Compared with Tit. I. 5.
Berause (not to stand here upon the import of the greek word (...), which
imports a hand suffrage, and consent of the people, as shale be made good upon
the Third Dialogue and the exceptions of this pamphleter, upon that passage,
examined) this is clear, that this ordination was to be performed in the
Church, Ergo, of necessity, with the peoples Consent and choice: And Nixt, If
the Apostles would not ordain the Deacons, but after this manner, much less
Ministers unto such a weighty employment, since in there faithfullnes the people
are (as is said) infinitely more concerned. Besides, the very Intimation, and
litte, of the men out of whom a Successor to the Apostleshipe in the place of
Judas, was by God immediately to be chosen, was with the peoples Consent,
Therefore much more ought this to be in the ordination and admission of ane
ordinary officer whose call is mediat and ordinary. 3. The Scripture does
clearly hold forth a congregational Church and juridical eldership,
representing that Church. Which (besyes many other reasons add^cible, and
accordingly pleaded by our writ^ers) is evident in this, That as the Scripture
makes mention of greater Churches, such as that of Corinth, Jerusalem etc, Who
were certanly presbyterial, because, (...) they are found, though consisting of
many officers and Rulers, and of lesser Societies, yet to be all poynted cut as
one Church, which must needs Import a Classical or presbiterial unity of
these lesseSocieties. So the Spirit of God does also^all these lesser Societies
Churches, in the plural. Let the Woman beep Silence (...) in the Churches 1.
Cor. 14. 34. Which must needs Import the Single Congregations of that one
Church of Corinth. And moreover, through these Churches Rulers, Elders, and
Gouvernours were set and established (...) Church by Church, that is, throw
all particular Churches Act. 14. 23. With Tit. I. 5. For if the Church is found
to have had both ruleing and teaching Elders, Romans 12. 8. 1. Cor 12. 28. 1.
Tim. 5. 17. And upon the other hand, if these lesser Societies are called
[Churches] It certanly follows that they had ane eldership and rule in them.
If ane eldership, and rulers, be allowed to rule and represent the Congregation
in matters Ecclesiastical, then by necessary consequence it follows, that the
Call of the Pastor and Chieff elder and his choice, as most suitable to their
condition, must fall within the compass ofther Spiritual authority.

Finally, the denying of this unto Congregations, and the Episcopal arbitrarie
obtruding of Ministers upon them without their call and consent, is in two
great points, contrare unto divine Reason. 1. Unto that spiritual and near
relation, which is betwixt a Minister and his flock, (which we will find this
pamphleter after plead) which is certainly marriage like and very strait. And
there being many peculiarduties, which they owe unto him beside others
Ministers, all flowing from this relation, particularly a special reverence,
obedience, and subjection; These must certanely suppose a voluntary consent
and call, and cannot be bottomed upon the mere will and pleasure of another,
which cannot make up this relation 2, This denying of the peoples right to call
their Pastor, is contrare unto that Judgment of discretion, that spiritual
discerning, and trying of the Spirits, which is allowed, yea and enjoined to
the people of God; If in any thing a spiritual discerning must take place,
surely in this especially, to whom a people do entrust their souls direction
and guidance; If in any thing a Christian must Act in Faith, and not give up
his persuasion to ane implicit conduct, and thus become a servant of men, sure
it must be, in a matter ofso great weight as this is? If Christ's sheep have this
for their Character, that they know the voice of the true Shepherd from the
voice of the hyreling and stranger, from whom they will fly, Joh. 10: 4, 5.
Sure their knowledge and consent must interveen, in order to their acceptance
of, and subjecton to their Shepherd? If they must not belive every Spirit,
buttry the Spirits, sure this caution and trial must be especially allowed in
this case, that they admit not a false Prophet instead of a true? So then the
Episcopal Government, is in this, as in other points, chargeable with
antichristian and anti-scriptural tyranny over Christ's flocks.

10. The Episcopal Government is in this contrare unto the Word of God (viz.)
In denying, and cutting off from his administration, and the total laying
aside of a singularely useful Church officer appointed by Christ in his House
(viz) the ruleing elder. That Government which denies and lays aside, any of
the great Master of the vine yeard, his servants and officers whom he has
authorized and appointed, must needs be highly derogatorie to his glory and
contrare to his word; But such is Prelacie. The Prelates are like that
sloathfull wicked servant who smites and beats away there fellowservants, while
they eat and drink with the drunken. That Prelates disoun and exclude this
officer, is evident both from their principles and practice. They all deny the
divine warrant of this Church officer: And where Prelacy is established, he is
excluded from Presbyteries and Synodes, and upon the matter also, from the
congregation: For they deny and exclude all decisive suffrage there, and take
away all Authority of congregational elderships, as we seen. Now that this
ruleing elder, distinct from both the preaching Presbyter, and Deacon, Is
appointed by God, our Divines have made good from several Scriptur grounds.
Such as 1. From Romans 12: 6, 7. Where among several other Church officers which
the Apostle does enumerat, there is a (...), or he that rules. Here is ane
ordinary Ruler, distinct from all other Rulers, and Church officers, the word
(...) signifies Rule and authoritative power. Again, he is ranked among
ordinary Officers, and so must needs be ane ordinary standing officer, yet
stands distinguished from other ordinary officers, having both a distinct name
from all the rest, likewayes a distinct work, as being diversified from the
teacher, the exhorter, and the giver. And moreover, a peculiar direction, as
have likewise all the rest. So that from the circumstances of this place, the
divine right of this officer, is clearly demonstrate. Nixt, That passage is
pertinently improven for this purpose, 1 Cor. 12: 28. Where we read of helps,
Governments, under distinct paragraphes, clearly pointing out ordinary
Governing Church officers, distinct from the elders that preach, and the
Deacon, and all other Church Governoures whatsoever. They cannot be Governoures
in the General, for what does this among a particula enumeration of officers*
These are distinct from helps, distinct from the teaching elder, for he is
already mentioned in this same verse. So here is a Rule, and Government,
distinct from all governoures either civil or ecclesiastic, except this
ruleing elder, yet set by God in the Church under the new Testament. But the
third and most pregnant passage from which our divines do demonstrat the
divine right of this Church officer is that of the 1* Tim. 5: 17. Let the
elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who
labor in the word and Doctrine. Here is a ruleing Church officer, distinct
from the preaching elder: For here is a general, elders, Nixt, we have two
distinct branches of these elders (viz) the ruleing elder, and the elder that
both rules and labors in the word and Doctrine, in the word as the Pastor, In
the Doctrine as the teacher. Again they are diversified in two distinct
participles and epithets, [ruling] is made the mark and characterick of the
one (viz) Ruling only: And [both Ruleing and teaching] is made the mark of the
other, whereby they are distinguished in their nature and office. But in the
3d. place, the forementioned distinction eminently appears in the discretive
[(...) especially] which is set betwixt these two kynds of elders, intimating
that as there were some of these ruling elders who did labor in the word and
Doctrine, so there were others who did Rule and not labor in the Word: Both
were worthy of double honor, but especially the labourer in the word, over and
above this ruling. And to this purpose it is well observed, that the word (...)
especially, is always in the new Testament made use of to distinguish one
thing from another. As when it is said Gal. 6: 10. Let us do good to all men,
but (...) expecially, to these of the household of faith, hereby distinguishing
soom that were of the household of faith, and some that were not. In which sense
it is also used Phil. 4: 22. and 1 Timothy 5: 8, This precept, says P^scator
(Anal: in Locum) he first illustrats by a distribution and comparison of things
different and unlike; for he distinguishes elders into those who were set over
Ecclesiastic Discipline, yet so asthey did not publicly teach, and those who
did teach also: Wherein he clearly gives sentence for us against the Prelatick
party, in this point. We may hence Collect, that there were two sorts of
elders at that time (says Calvin, on 1 Timothy 5: 17.) For all were not ordained
to teach; for the words doc manifestly hold forth that some had governed well
and faithfully, to whom notwithstanding, the office of teaching was not
committed. And trewly from among the people their were grave and good men
chosen and approved, who did together with Pastores, by commune Council and
authority administer Church Government, and were in some sort, censors for
correcting of manners, which oustome Ambrose compleans to have worm out of
use, by the negligence, or rather the pride of teachers while they covet to
rule alone. The pregnancy of this Scripture tramples into the dust the pitiful
evasiones of all the Prelatists in denying the divine right of this officer:
Some of which we shall here take notice of, and the confutation of the same,
offered by our divines upon this point. Some, by Ruleing well will have living
well, to be understood: But the Apostle is speaking of the office of ruling in
a Church officer, ruling over others, not of ruling over a man's ^eif in a
private capacity. Neither is the Churches Honorarium. double honor, double
maintinance, due to living well, as here it is allowed to [ruling well] And
this will say that the Minister that preaches not, is worthy of double honor
for living well, which will make very harsh sense. Some understand this ruleing
elder, of the [Deacon,] but the Deacon is no where called (...) or elder, his
work being to help, to distribut, not to rule. 1 Cor. 12, 28. Romans 12, 8 Some
would being in under this [Ruler,] The ancient Superannuat Bishop; But this
gloss will in honor prefer unto him, the diligent preaching Minister, which
will wound their cause to death. Some, by the [Ruler] will have such understood
as did administer Sacraments, but preached not: But Paul knew non of these non
preaching or seldom-preaching Ministers, far less would he allow them a double
honor, who rather deserved the contrary. Paul will have all Ministers apt to
teach, and able to convince. Some by the [ruling elder,] would have Inferior
Magistrates understood, who were appointed for ending civil Striffes; but the
Apostle is here prescrybing rules to Church office bearers, not civil rulers,
and teaching Timothy how to carry in the Church. Again, they had then no
Christian civil Magistrates, as all do grant, and for their going to Heathens
to compose their civil differences, Paul himself dissallowes it 1 Cor 6. Some
again will have the laboring in the word and doctrine to be nothing else but
ane explanation of rulcing well; but this inadvertant gloss will set aside My
Lord Bishop as no good ruler. Again, as is said, the (...) here, or the word
[especially] is discriminating, and discretive, distinguishing one thing from
another, not explaining one thing by another. If (...) were thus sensed, what
odd work would it make in other places. 1 Timothy 4: 10. Who is the Savior of all
men, especially [(...)] of them that believe. This gloss will sense it thus,
the Savior of all men greatly believing Others yet, by [labouring in the word
and doctrine] will have a higher degree of laboring as to diligence,
understood, yet so as both branches speak of laboring in the word and doctrine;
But (as the Leyden Professoures do well answer) this will allow double honor
to the less-labouring or lazy elder, who deserves rather a double rebuke, the
Lord requiring the the utmost faithful diligence, of all laborers in his
vineyarde. Besides that this gloss justles out, and makes Superfluous, that
clause of the verse viz in the word and doctrine, which according to this
exposition, should either have been totally omitted, or added unto both the
branches of this sentence. Some, to escape the dint of this text, invent yet
another Shift [all Sort of Rulers; whither civil, ecclesiastic, or domestical,
are worthy of double honor; so they sense the first branch, and say they, this
General proposition the Apostle might premise to enforce the honor he enjoins
to the labourer in the word, etc.] But the context fully rejects this gloss,
since the Apostle speaks not generally of Rulers, but of elders that rule well,
and of such elders and rulers to all which he allows double honor. So that
this gloss will make pitiful work, both in allowing the Churches honorarium,
double honor, or honorable maintinance, to domestic Rulers; and likewayes
will allow more honorable maintinance to Ministers then Magistrates. Some
would, by the labourer in word and Doctrine, as distinct from the ruling
elder, take in transient visiting Presbyters, distinct from fixed preaches; but
where will they show us any such who were not Evangelists? We find that mere
ordinary Presbyters, were ordained for several cities and places as there
peculiar charges, whom they were fixedly to feed, Act. 14: 23. Tit. 1: 5. Act.
20: 28. But where find they such Presbyters as had no fixed charge. Neither can
Evangelists be meaned (as Dr Burnet would gladely shift it in his first
Dialogues) the Apostle all along speaking of ordinary preaching Presbyters.
These, and several such like exceptions, the evidence of this text has long
since refuted; So that we may conclude solidely from what is said the divine
right of this Church officer, and by consequence the horride Sacrilege and
usurpation of Prelacie, in robbing Christ's Church of the same: And likewise the
Babilonish confusion, which this Antichristian Hierarchy has introduced into
our Church: both in divyding and maiming the Pastoral office, in bringing in
offices which the Great Shepherd has not allowed, and in excluding and
thursting our offices and officers which the has ordained; upon which grounds,
and upon all the preceding, we hope we may now safely conclude the Diocesian
Prelat, existing among us, to be a plant which the father never planted, and
consequently as a poisonus weed, to be rooted up.

CHAP. V.
That the present Prelacie is gross Erastianisme. Some Arguments against it,
under that notion. It excludes and denies all Church Government in the hands of
Church officers, distinct from the civil; contrar to the Churches privilege,
both under the Old and New Testament, which is demonstrat at large. Is in many
points ane Incroachment upon the liberties of the Gospel Church, and upon
Christ's mediatorie authority over the same.

HAving thus far impugned the Diocesian Prelat, as a pretended Church officer.
We shall nixt, offer some Arguments against him in his Erastian Mould, as
deriving all his power from the civil Magistrate. Although the office of the
Diocesian Bishop were acknowledged warrantable, yet this will help nothing the
Erastian Prelat, these being very distinct theams and questions. [What is that
Species of Church Government, allowed and commanded in Scriptnre]? and [whither
there be any inherent Church Government, allowed her, distinct from that of the
Civil Magistrate?] and whither Church officers, or the Civil Magistrate, be the
proper Subject thereof? that the Present Prelacie is gross Erastianisme, is
manifest; for after all Church Judicatories were in Anno 16 62. discharged
until they were authorized by the Bishops nominat by his Majesty -- the
disposal of the Government is declared to be the Crownright, and inherent
p^rpetual prerogative: and thereupon the Bishops are restored, not only to
their civil dignities, but to their Episcopal function, presidencie in the
Church and over all Church discipline, etc. And it is expressly declared, that
there is no Church power, jurisdiction or Government, in the Church office
bearers or meetings, but what depends upon, and is subordinat unto the
Supremacy, and is authorized by the Bishops, who are declared accountable to
his Majesty for their administration. In the Act for the National Synod, the
constituent members thereof, the matters to be treated of, the authorizing of
the constitutions as Church Canons, is soly in the Civil Magistrate, there work
being only to give advice to him, without any decisive inherent suffrage. By
vertew of which Ecclesiastic Supremacy, his Majesty puts excommunication and
Spiritual censures, and consequently the power of the keys, into the hands of
persons merely civil, in the Act for the high commission. Hence it is aparent,
that his Majesty as the fountain of all Church Government, impartes this
Authority to such as he pleases, and the Bishops are nothing else but his
Majesty's Commisioners in the exercise of that Ecclesiastic Power, which is
originally in himself. Now, that this Erastian Prelacie, or Church Government,
is a stranger to the Scripture, is many ways evident.

1. This Erastian Prelacie, Denies all Church Government in the hands of Church
officers, distinct from civil Magistrace: which is ane error fully confuted and
largely bafled by all who have written against Erastus and his followers, and
is contrare many ways to Scripture. I. To that distinction betwixt the
Ecclesiastic and civil Sanbedrin under the Old Testameet, asserted and cleared
by many Scripture Arguments by our divines, paraicularly Mr Gillespie in the
Aarons rode. I. From the institution of that Court of elders, supposed in Exodus
24. Who were not those elders chosen for the government of the Commonwealth,
Numb. 11. For this was done at Sinai shortly after they came out of Egypt But
on the 20 day Of the 2d. Month in the 2d. Year they took their journey from
Sinai to the ^dernes of Paran Numbr. 10. 11, 12. And there pitched, when the
Seventie elders were chosen to relieve Moses. They were not the judges chosen
by advyce of Iethro, for he came not to Moses till the end of the first year,
or the beginning of the Second after they came out of Egypt; Nor could they be
judges, who judged before he came; for he observed that the burdine lay upon
Moses alone. So they must needs have been Ecclesiastic Rulers under the
presidencie of Aarone and Hur. verse. 14. Who were called up as the
representatives of the Church of Israel, after the Judicial laws were given,
Chap. 22. 23. In this 24. Chapter there is a transition to the Ceremonial
laws, concerning the worship of God, and the Structur of the Tabernacle.
Deutr. 17. 8, 9, 10. All grant there a Supreme Court of judges, therefore also
the text must be granted to hold forth a Supreme Ecclesiastic Court: For it
caryes the authority and sentence of the priests, as hie as the authority and
sentence of the judges, and that in adisjunctive way as Two distinct powers,
each binding respective in their oun proper Sphere. 3. From these judges and
officers 1. Chr. 23. 4, and 26: 29. Supposed, and set to their work when the
Levits were divyded to there Charge, who were not tied to service and
attendances in the Temple, but to judge and give sentence concerning the law
and its meaning: and this says the text, over Israel, coming to them from any
of the cities of the land. 4. From Jehoshaphats reformation. 2. Chron. 19. 8,
10, 11. Who restoring the government of the Church, did set in Jerusalem
levits, priests, Chieff of the Fathers of Israel for the judgment of the Lord,
and for controversies Here is 1. A Court of priests and Levits with power of
Suffrage and thus consisting of Ecclesiastic members. 2. In Ecclesiastic
matters, Matters of the Lord, distinct from Matters of the King 3. For ane
Ecclesiastic end (viz.) to warn that they trespass not, not only against one
another, but against the Lord. 4. All causes of their Brethren that dwelt in
the Cities, were to come to them unto Jerusalem. 5. They have Ane Ecclesiastic
Moderator, or president, Amariah the chieff priest, over them in all Matters of
the Lord, ^istinct (as is said) from Matters of the King. These and many such
Arguments are made use of by him and others, To clear this point of the Two
distinct Sanhedrins, which fully overthrowes this Erastian Confusion of these
two powers and governments. 2. This fountaining of all Church power in the
civil, and denying of Church government in the hands of Church officers,
distinct from the Civil government, is Cross to that distinction of the Gospel
Church her government, from that of the Civil power, which is clearly held out
in the new Testament. Wherein it is evident 1. That the visible Church is Christ
the Mediator his visible kingdom as Mediator. And so its Officers, Laws, and
Censures falls with in the compass of his Mediatorie appointment and
inspection. Matthew. 16. 19. -- and 28. 29. Joh. 18. 36. 1. Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4.
11, 12. -- 2. That the gospel Church was Completed in her being and essence,
both as to Rulers and Ruled, Members and officers, and in rules and directions
for the exercise of her government accordingly, when no Magistrate was so much
as a member of her. -- 3 That in all the precepts anent the exercise of this
power, it is enjoined to the Church, and to these Church officers, as such,
with the same freedom and independancy upon the Civil power, as at the first,
and without the least restriction and limitation, in case of the Magistrates
becoming Christian; All the grounds made use of in pressing the exercise of
this power, being moral and perpetual, and respecting the Church her condition
as a Church, whither the Magistrate be friend or enemy.

In the 2d. Place, This Erastian prelatick mould of government brings in many
gross encroachments upon the liberties of the gospel Church. As 1. Denying
her liberty to exercise her power and Key of Censure without the Magistrate:
Contrare to all the New Testament instances of the exercise thereof with out
him. 2. Introduceing a dominion, and arbitrary power upon all her government;
Contrare to her liberty and the very nature of her government, which is a
Ministerial Stewardship, not a dominion; for thus the Church is the proper
object of the Magistrates dominion that being the Nature of his power Romans 13.
And the present prelatick Church ounes the Supreme Civil governoure as her
Chieff Church officerer. -- 3. Giving to the Magistrate qua talis (for this
power in Church matters, is by Prelates and their adherents aknowledged to be a
perpetual Croun-right) the proper and Sole decisive suffrage in all causes
falling under Ecclesiastic cognizance: for Prelatists only meet to advise him
in there Suprem Court or national Synod, according to the forementioned Act.
Now, this Cutts off all Church judicatories there decisive suffrage as Church
judicatories, which (as is cleared above) they did fully at first exercise of
themselves, without the Magistrate. 4. This mould will make the Civil Magistrate
the proper immediate subject of the Keys, and Impartes all Church government to
One, who, as such, is not so much as a Church member, and impowers him to give
out this supposed fountain power to no Church members, or to here enemies at
his pleasure, As his Majesty gives to persons Civil the power of
excomunication? Yea it gives him a power, by his oun proper clicite acts, to
dispense all her [external government] as the law terms it, which (if we look
upon it as including all external ordinances contradistinct from the internal
government of the inward man, and the Church invisible) will necessarely import
and include the exercise of both the Keys, and all the external dogmaticke,
diatactick, and Critic authority and power, entrusted to the Church
representative: Which is a mere Civil papacy and the grossest of usurpations
which the Church can be exposed unto, as shall be afterward touched. Finally,
This will infer, that Children, Heathens, yea women, may be chieff Church
officers and heads of the Church too, since they may possess the Crown of
these Kingdoms, to which this Headship and Supremacy is annexed. But of this
also again.

3. This Erastian government is a gross encroachment upon Christ's prerogative
over his Church. And that in these ways. 1. In assumeing a power over the
Church which is proper to Christ only, I mean a Magisterial, architectonick
power. That this is assumed by this Erastian mould of government, is evident?
He who can dispose of government, and governoures of the Church arbitrarly, and
dispose of all Church meetings, and Church matters, as he pleases and thinks
fit, Has certanly this power; but that this Magisterial, architectonick,
power and dominion over the Church, is Christ's Sole prerogative, is abundantly
clear by manifold plain, positive, Scripture assertions. To Christ is all
power given in Heaven and Earth, Matthew. 28. 18. And he, as Mediator, is given
to be head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1. 21, 22. To him is all
judgment (over her) committed, John. 5. 22. He it is also who possesses these
high tittles, to be the Governoure (over his Church) by way of eminency,
Matthew. 2. 6. That great shepherd of the sheep. Hebr. 13. 20. the shepherd and
Bishop of Souls. 1. Pet. 2. 25. He is that one Master over all Church
officers, who are but Brethren, Matthew. 23. 8, 10. To us there is but One Lord
Jesus. 1. Cor. 8. 6. He it is, to whom only the imperial acts of power are
ascribed: as, the giving of laws to his Church, the gospel precepts are his
law. Gal. 6. 2. He it is who gave commandments to his Apostles, Act. 1. 2.
there is but one law giver who can save and destroy. Jam. 4. 12. The Lord is
our judge, the Lord is our lawgiver or Statute maker, the Lord is our King, I
say. 33 22. He it is who Constitutes her ordinances, preaching of the word
Matthew. 10. 7. 1. Cor. 1. 17. administration of the Sacraments, as of baptism,
John. 1. 33. the Lords Supper, 1. Cor. 11. 20. dispensing of Censures, Matthew.
16. 29. He it is who appointes his Officers, Prophets, Pastores, Teachers,
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. 1. Cor. 12, 28. In his name only all ordinances are
dispensed: Not in the name of Magistrates, or of any Mortal. The Apostles spoke
and taught in the name of Jesus. Act. 4. 17, 18. In his name we are to Ask Joh.
14. 13, 14. In his name only Ministers are to preach and baptize, Matthew. 28.
18, 19. 2. Cor. 5. 20. In his name only they are to Censure, to deliver to
Satan. 1 Cor. 5. 4. In his name only Church assemblies are to be gathered,
which seems the Smallest Act. Matthew. 18, 20. (See jus divinum Regim: Eccles:
Appollon: Revius. etc. -- 2. This Erastian government incroaches upon Christ's
prerogatives, In taking and using the Keys against Christ's donation and
authority Christ is the only Lord giver of both the Keys, and all their power.
But, in this Usurped power, the Kevs are 1. Divyded, against his prescription,
who gave both the Keys of Doctrine and Discipline jointly to the proper
recipients the^of (viz.) Church officers. Matthew. 16. 19. This Erastian
government ^ches away One Key (viz. of government) from such to whom Christ the
great Master of the House, has Entrusted both. Christ in this donation of the
Keys, making no mention of the Civil Rulers, but only of Church Officers then
appointed, who were distinct from the Magistrate. Hence 2. The Key of discipline
is taken and used against his mind, by these to whom he has not Entrusted it,
which is a great encroachement upon his authority. In the 3d. place, this
Erastian government encroaches upon Christ's authority over his Church, In
superadding Ane officer to theseChurch officers institut and appointed by him.
For in all the Scripture rolls of Christ's Church officers, the Civil Rulers are
not found. Ephesians. 4. 10, 11. 1. Cor. 12. 28. Romans 6. 7, 8. -- 4. This
encroachment appears in making Church officers, as such, imediatly subject to
the Magistrate in all their Spiritual administration, which is a hie Censure of
the Primitive exercise of this power independantly, as we shall show. 5* In
exeeming him from all Spiritual subjection unto, and censure by, Church Rulers.
For where, ^pray, shall we find the Magistrate excepted, and the hi^herCivil
powers, if within the Church, from Christ's laws and rules anent subjection to
Church censures and to his Spiritual office bearers entrusted therewith?

CHAP. VI.
Erastianism denies the complete constitution of the Apostolic Church in point
of Government. Removes the Scriptur Land-markes, set to distinguish the Civil
and Ecclesiastic Powers, which is cleared in several points. It is liable to
great absurdities.

IN the 4th place: This Erastian Government presumes to impeach the primitive
Apostolic Church, her complete constitution and faithfulness of Administration
in relation to Government, and makes here to have had but a defective maimed
constitution and authority thereanent, while the exercise of the civil power in
her, was wanting. Which charges a gross deficiency upon Christ's prescriptions
in relation to her Laws and Officers: Which are found in Scripture, very full,
and suited to her state and condition in all times until all the Elect be made
up, and here warfare is accomplished; and consequently, it impeaches Christ's
saithfulness and authority as Mediator, whose proper work this holy
constitution is

5. This Erastian Prelacy takes away all the Scripture Landmarks and Limits,
which are fixed therien by God, to distinguish the Civil and Ecclesiastic
Powers and Governments, and makes them every way the same, in all things
wherein Scripture and Reason do distinguish them, both as to their Nature and
Acts, and likewayes as to their Causes.

1. As to their Nature, this Erastian Government does confound them. 1. In that
it makes the Church and Commonwealth, the Political and Ecclesiastical
Societies, one and the same, which are formally distinct. It being a visible
profession that make a Church member, and outward habitation and subjection to
the civil power, that makes a Subject; Which may be where there is no
profession, and consequently no Church Membership. For in this mould, the Kings
Government Civil, is Church Government, for it is his Government as King, in
which capacity this Ecclesiastic Supremacy is his prerogative, and his
Ecclesiastic Government is also Civil Government, for it is his Government as
the Supreme Civil Magistrate: And thus the Church, respected by his government,
is the Commonwealth, and vice versa. 2. This confounds the Officers of Church
and State, which the Scriptur does abundantly distinguish. For, as is said,
The Church had all her Officers of Christ's appointment, when no Magistrate was a
Member thereof; and on the other hand, Commonwealths had all their civil
Rulers, before they became Churches; But in this Erastian Prelacy, this order
is confounded, The chief Officers of this Church are the Magistrates
Commissioners to Church and State; whereas Church Officers are given by Christ
as Mediator to his Church as a Church, 1 Cor. 12: Ver. 28. -- 3. The actings
of civil and Ecclesiastic authority are thus confounded, Spiritual church
Rulers Act only in Spiritual matters by Gods appointment, and civil Rulers
there immediate proper Acts are only in matters Civil. But here Church Officers
are Parliament Commissioners, and civil Rulers in the high commission do
excommunicat.

Again in the 2. place: This Erastian Prelacy confounds these two powers in
their causes, which are wholly diverse. 1. The efficient cause is diverse, God
as Creator, is Author of Magistracy, Romans 13. But Christ as Mediator appoints
Church Government, Matt. 28: 18. But here, the Magistrate qua talis, is a suprem
Church Ruler? And thus is supposed to have his power from Christ as Mediator
and Head of his Church: Which is ane opinion fully confuted by those who
havewritten against Erastus, particularly Mr Gillespie in the Aarons Rod. 2.
They differ in the material cause, the matter on which the two powers do act,
are diverse: Ecclesiastic power does act in the exercise of the Keys, the
administration of the Word and Sacraments, having this for its proper Object
and matter. The civil power consists in the civil and secular Sword; the one
reaches the inward, the othere the outward man. But in this Erastian Prelacye,
the, Sword and Keys, are made one, promiscuously used, and put into the same
hands. 3. The two powers differ in their formal cause: the civil power is put
forth in political punishments, the Ecclesiastic in spiritual censures. But
here, the same power is the first Radix and Fountain of Spiritual Censures,
and Civil punishments, and gives them their formal essence and being, as such.
Finalie. The proper immediate end of Civil power is the Temporal, External,
political peace of the commonwealth. Romans 13. 1, 2. 3. But the proper end
ofEcclesiastick power, Is the Churches Spiriual good and edification as such,
Matthew. 18. 15. 1 Cor. 5. 5. 2. Cor. 10. 8. and 13. 10. But here, the Magistrate
quatalis, being the Churches head, these ends are Confounded. These and several
such like arguments are made use of by our writers against Erastus, which do
fully evince the unlawfulnes of this Erastian prelacie. Whosoever shall peruse
Apollonius His jus Majest: Circ: Sacr: the jus Div: regim: Eccles: the Aarons
rod, wallaeus against Vtenbog: and such like, will find this abundantly clear.

To sh^t up all with One word more. There are these 3. horride absurdities, in
relation to Church government, which the premised mould of this Erastian
prelacie will necessarly infer. 1. That a man may be borne, not only a Church
member, but a Chief Church Ruler: Nay, that a Heathen, and a man that never
professed the true religion, but lives and dies ane ingraind enemy to it, and
so has neither matter nor form, of Church membership, may be a Chieff Church
officer. For his Majesty's present authority herine (acknowledged by our
prelates, and which is the Fountain of their power) is the proper Croune
dignity of all that ever shall possess and wear it: and so here is a
monstrous Church officer, who 1. has no qualifications of any Church officer
whom ever Christ appointed. 2. A Church officer who is not Set in the Church
(which is the essential mark of all Church officers 1. Cor. 12 28.) for that
supposes he must be a Church member A 2d. absurdity is this, That Children and
women (who may have a lawful lineal right to the Croun) may be Church
officers, Yea the Fountain of our prelates authority, and of all their
Under^ings, and the chieff governoure of this Church; and thus, they who are
forbidden so much as to speak in the Church, shall be Chieff Church Rulers, and
likewayes such as have not the use of Reason. 1. Tim. 3 5. 1. Cor. 14. 34, 35.
-- A 3d. absurdity is, That the Church government upon earth may be
Monarchical, and that One man may be her Supreme head, legislator, And
architectonick Monarch and Ruler, for aquatenus, ad omne, valet consequentia.
Upon the same ground that the Suprem Civil Ruler is Chieff head and Ruler over
the Church in his dominions, the Church in all other places, being a body of
the same nature, Should the Christian Church be contracted within his
dominions, he were her Supreme universal head? And it were so, if his Civil
dominion should be extended over all the Churches: By this same reason of his
headship over One, he may be head over all, and exercise ane arbitrary at least
a legislative power over all her ordinances and officers. And if this will not
Clearly set the popes Treeple Croun upon his head, and disowne all that ever
the protestant Churches have written and acted against his blasphemous
Supremacy, let common discretion judge, Ambrose (Epist: 33. ad valentinianum
imperatorem) Says, noli gravare imperator, ut putes in ea quae divina sunt,
aliquod imperiale jus habere, opliticorum tibi munerum jus concessum est, non
Sacrorum. Grieve not O Emperor, so as to think that you have any Imperial
authority over these things which are divine, the right or authority of
political offices is committed unto thee, but not of Sacred.

CHAP. VII.
The Informers deceitful shifting and obscuring the true State of the Question
anent Episcopacie, and flinching from the point debatable, discovered Several
ways. He declines a direct pleading for prelates civil offices, Yet offers some
arguments defense thereof: Wherein his prevarication, and Contradiction to
himself, is made appear.

TO come now to examine what this new Dialogist, has produced in defense of
the present prelacie established amongst us, And to examine his answers to our
plea against it; We shall not stand upon the trifling debate about the personal
good qualities of some that have been prelates, with which He prefaces this
Dialogue, it being altogether extrinsick to the Question anent the lawfulnes of
the office it self, And would be no argument in our case against him, as this
man cannot but acknowledge, else He must give up the cause, upon his
concession of the Unquestionable eminent piety, and integrity, of many
burning and Shining lights, who have been the Lords Constant witnesses against
prelacie. That which is here mainely considerable, Is his prevarication in
Stating the Question anent prelacie, (viz.) [Whither the ancient Bishopes had a
Superiority over other Ministers] wherein he utterly ^ches away from the point
debeatable. 1. In making this the State of the Question [what Bishopes were in
the primitive Church] whereas the true State of our Question, is, whither the
prelat now existent in this Church, be a Scripture Bishop and consonant
thereunto, Or, ane officer appointed by Christ in his house, Yea or not. And not
whither there have been Bishops, or such as we now have, in the ancient Church.
The Question is not of the matter of fact, but of the right, yea and the divine
right of the present prelates in relation to their power. 2. In stating the
difference betwixt the Bishop he pleads for, and the Pastor, He Smoothes it
over in this general, [whither there have been such Bishopes, as have had a
Superiority over ordinary Ministers] but does not explain what that
Superiority is which he pleads for, whither of order or jurisdiction, or both;
whither specificall, or graduall; Whither a Superiority of mere presidencie, or
of principality; The [Episcopus preses, and princeps] sharing in this general
name. Dolus latet in generalibus: Since there have been various Superiorities,
de facto, He should have particularized that Superiority which He undertaks to
defend. 3. His Doubter suggesting [that they were not Lord Bishopes] He must
needs make him referr to 1. Pet. 5. 3. Discharging to Lord it over Gods
heritage; But how poor is his evasion from and solution of this difficulty, in
starting this notion [whither there have been, De facto, Bishops with a
Superiority over Presbiters, Or Bishops who had Civil dignities in ancient
times?] The pinch of this debate lying in this, whither the [(...). Or Lorship]
discharged in that Scripture, will not stryke against such a Superiority or
dominion, whither in Ecclesiastic, or Civil rule, as our prelates now assume?
and not what sort of Superiority in Ecclesiastic, or Civil government,
prelates have formerly had. The present prelat existent in Scotland, having such
a dominion over Church Judicatories, and likwayes in Civils, as is above
expressed, and derving all his power from the Magistrate in Ecclesiastic, as well
as in Civil rule, He should have Stated his Question thus distinctly, and then
fenced for his great Diana. But the man probably found this a task which be
durst not undertake: which appears immediately after, in his declining the
debate anent the Bishopes Civil rule, telling us, [That he will make it none of
his work to debate with us, their acting in Civil affairs, Sometimes] But 1.
Since he undertaks the patrocinie and defense of Episcopacie now established
among us, And in his preface professes it his design to prove it lawful, and
thereby to take off one of our arguments for withdrawing from Conformists, And
it being likewayes Certain that the present prelates are Civil rulers. He must
either undertake this debate, or acknowledge them unlawful pro tanto at least?
And that he proves but a maimed pleader for their present office, and falls
short of a great part of his design in this pamphlet. 2. He pitifully Snakes
away from this debate also, in min^hing their State-medling, thus, (viz.) Their
acting in Civil affairs Sometimes, which may be said of any man or Minister,
His rare transient, occasional, accidental or private actings, and even in
domestic affairs. But cannot this man distinguish betuixt this, and a Stated
official acting, (...) constituent and constant members of Civil judicatories,
as prelates are according to our laws, and that even ex natura officij as they
are prelates; Sure, he cannot distinguish the Mountain from the Molchill, that
cannot see a difference betuixt these. Either this Informer must account the
prelates present State actings lawful, or not? If He account them lawful, then
He falls under a Three fold praemunire in this point. 1. In de^lyning the
defense of one of the prelates Unquestionable legal privileges (disouned by
presbyterians, and by him esteemed lawful) notwithstanding of his undertakeing
to plead for them. 2. In Undertaking only tos plead for their acting Sometimes,
which (as I said) i far from the point and matter of fact, which he must
defend. 3. In confessing at the foot of the page [That Church men should not
needlesslie, or of Choice, entangle themselves in these incumberances] wherein
he palpablie contradicts himself as to his Scope. For do not our prelates of
most free choice and deliberatly assume State Employments? Or are their
shoulders burdened against their will with these State honors? Besides, He
cites 2. Tim. 2. 4. In acknowledging this intanglement in wordly affairs, to
be unlawful in Church men; The text says, no man that warreth entangleth
himself in affairs of this life. Now, if this text discharge universally, and
absolutely, a Ministers intanglement in wordly affairs, How comes he to foist
in his limitation of [needlesly, or of Choice] where is this limitation in the
text? If all intanglements or in cumberances, as such, be unlawful, as is here
expressly asserted, as being inconsistant with the nature and importance of the
Ministers Spiritual function, which requires the greatest abstractednes from
all worldly things, and the man's constant waiting upon, and giving himself
wholly unto the things of God; Then surely whither he entangle himself by
choice, or not, it is still ane intanglement, and consequently sinful; his
acting deliberatly is butane agravation. Again, since He maks ane intanglement
Of choice, to be a needles intanglement, and consequently sinful, He must needs
acknowledge that such is the present prelatick meddling, which, as is said, He
cannot deny to be most deliberat and of choice. But nixt, If He account our
prelates State-actings unlawful? Then 1. Why does He not interminis acknowledge
so much, and not lisp it half out? 2. Why does He allege something from
Scripture precedents to prove it warrantable? But Let us hear his Scripture
arguments whereby He would prove this State acting lawful. His first Reason is
[That the jewish Sanhedrin made up of the Sevinty elders, Moses assistants in
Civil government, did consist partly of priests] where 1. We see He
overstraines his point, and overstretches himself in his pretended proof, for
the These he undertaks to prove, is, [That Church men may act in State matters,
though not of Choice, and so that it be Sometimes only] which he cannot but
distinguish from a Constant official meddling, if he speak sense. And to prove
this, He brings ane instance of priests under the old Testament-dispensation,
their being constituent members of a civil court? Now, how do these quadrat?
Were not these priests to act deliberatly and of Choice? If this prove any
thing at all it will prove that Ministers (as being such members) may
deliberatly and of choice involve themselves in Civil affairs, which this man
holds to be discharged 2. Tim. 2. 4. And so this Reason, because proving too
much, and beyond his assertion, proves just nothing. 2. As we cleared above,
the difference betuixt the Civil and Ecclesiastic Sanhedrin, and that those
Sevinty, mentioned in the 11. Numbr. who were chosen for the government of the
Commonwealth, are distinct from those mentioned Exodus 24. Who were
Ecclesiastic and not Civil officers; So it is more then this Informer has
offered proof of, that there were priests in that Civil Court, since as is
said, the Two Sanhedrins Civil and Ecclesiastic, did consist of distinct
members, and there was not one Sanhedrin only, as this man seems to suppose.
But 3. Though the concurrence of some priests in that Civil Court, were
granted, Our writers have abundantly cleared the inconsequence of any argument
drawn from that instance as to this point, In that though the Civil and
Ecclesiastic Sanhedrin, were distinct originaly, Yet the judicial Civil law
being given immediately by God to the jews, as well as the Moral and
Ceremonial, the priests by consequence, under that dispensation, had a most
necessary interest as to its interpretation and decision in many cases, for the
law was to be sought at their mouth. The difference of which condition of the
jewish, from that of the Christian Church (Spread over the world, and in
Countries where are different moulds of Civil government and laws, and which
are not tied to that judicial law) does cast the balances and overthrow his
argument. As for that of deutr. 17. We have seen how it holds out a Twofold
Sanhedrin which had distinct members, acts, and objects. In a word, if his
argument from this instance were good (upon his supposition that priests were
members in that Court) it would prove that Christians could not have a lawful
civil Supreme Judicatorie, unles Ministers were constituent members thereof?
And that Ministers were essentially and necessarly ex natura officii (as these
priests) constituent members of civil Judicatories? which is more then he dare
assert, and the absurdity thereof is above cleared. His 2d. Ground is drawn
from [the examples and instances of Eli the Priest who judged Israel forty
years, and of Samuel the Prophet, who, though lent to the Lord from his birth,
yet went in circuit yearly judging the people] But 1. The force of this reason
leaning upon ane example merely, of Church officers under the old dispensation,
and the gratis supposed imitablenes thereof, it is (like the other argument)
very unsound and lax. He will not dare to averr that every deduction a facto ad
jus, is sound; All scripture examples, are for our improvement, but not for our
imitation. Even good and laudable Acts of the Saints, are of this nature, many
of them. Some were heroical, as Elias bringing fire from heaven, which the Lord
discharged James and John to imitat. Phinehas his Act, he will say with his
Master the surveyer, was of this nature. Some Acts did flow from ane
extraordinary emergent of Providence, and a call flowing therefrom, as
Abraham's attempt to offer his Son, Isreal's borrowing from the Egyptians and not
paying. Some Acts had their issue from a ^ansient and occasional junctur,
procuring a necessity pro tunc, as Paul's preaching gratis, and working with his
hands. Some acts were to confirm a special extraordinary call, So our Lords
forty days fast, and that of Moses his tipe. Now, to conclud from the
premised instances, the lawfulness of these Acts (viz) Sacrificing Children,
borrowing and not paying, the popish quadrantum etc, This Informer will grant
to be very poor and childish Sophristrie, yet such is his reasoning here. 2.
Divines do tell us that these examples only are imitable, whose ground and
scope are of a moral nature, which the persons did, as saints or Christians:
such are all examples of moral standing duties enjoined in the commands. They
tell us. 3. That there are two Rules necessarly to be observed (and which this
Informer must of necessity grant) as to a conclusion, ab exemplo ad factum, or
a facto ad jus, which cutts the sinnews of his argument here. 1. No example
which crosses a moral precept can ground a Rule, for this would make the Rule
cross it self. And to bring this near the point in hand, I will show, that
this Informer fights against himself, and must needs admit this answer, from
the very mould of his argument: For he thinks to imforce the Instance from
Samuel his civil actings, by telling us that he was lent to the Lord from his
mothers womb: Which will say, according to his pleading, That a man though
singularly devoted to God in the sacred Ministry, yet may deliberatly and of
choice become a civil judge, yea a supreme civil judge; and then I would know,
how he will reconcile this with the great gospel precept 2 Timothy 2: 4. Which
himself pleads as discharging deliberat meddling in civil affairs, because the
sacred Ministry is a warfare, or a dedication of the Minister to the service
of Christ? And what will he say if one shall argue thus, if a Minister, though
dedicat to the Lord from his mothers womb, may notwithstanding become a civil
judge, then the Ministry its being a warrfare under Christ, cannot hinder a
man's meddling by choice in civil affairs, which notwithstanding he denies: So
that either he must disown this Instance, or his sense of that Gospel precept.
But of this again. 2. No examples of Acts done from ane extraordinary calling
and gifts, are to be imitated by such as have neither the one, nor the other.
We will find our Informer afterward grant this in relation to the Apostles,
and that there are many things depending upon special emergents that are not
imitable in them. And if he should deny this Rule, as he will contradict
himself, so he will not evite a great inconvenience from the fact of Phinehas,
from Ehud, etc. Incase some person of a boistrous heart, and unruly hand,
should plead these instances to offer violence unto him. Be side, if this rule
be not admitted, he will brangle the boundarie and limits of different ordinary
callings, (and relations by consequence) which the God of order has fixed. The
examples of Magistratical or Ministerial duties, obliges not private persons to
ane imitation; The Apostolic Acts of working Miracles, giving the Spirit by
laying one of hands, universal unfixed preaching (he will grant) are not
imitable (as neither the peculiar duties of Relations among private persons, do
obleige every one) because these extraordinary gifts and callings are now gone:
And so say I of these examples of Eli, and Samuel, who are by all sound divines
ranked among the judges whose call and office is acknowledged to have been
extraordinary; God keeping at that time the regal rights in his own hand.,
before he set up any fixed ordinary Rulers and Kings, and creating, and calling
extraordinarly, his own deputies in the Government, sometimes out of one
tribe, and sometimes out of another, whose authority died with themselves and
admitted of no succession. Wherefore Gideon told the people that God was their
King, and refused that office when offered; and the peoples guilt in wearing of
this holy immediate Government of God himself, and desiring a King, is
aggravated from this, That they had rejected God who was their King. So that
his argument from these extraordinary instances, is wholly inconcludent; it
being from ane extraordinary, to ane ordinary calling, from ane extraordinary
factum, to ane ordinary jus; which is consequence we will find himself
afterward disown. And if he strain these instances, they will prove too much,
(viz.) That Ministers may be Kings, or supreme civil judges; which I believe he
will not adventure to plead for, since what ever thanks he may merit for this
from the Pope, yet Royalists will allow him none.

If, in a matter so plain and evident, it were needful to adduc testimonies of
writers and commentators (as this informer does to no purpose) how harmonious
would their consent appear unto this truth. The English Annot: in their preface
upon the book of judges, will tell him that the judges were not ordinary
Magistrates, but extraordinarly called of God in times of great extremity etc.
And in their preface on the first book of Samuel, they show, that it contains
the History of the two last judges, Eli, and Samuel, and of Saul the first King
of Israel. And upon that place, Chap. 7: 15, 16. Anent Samuels judging of
Israel, notwithstanding of his being lent to the Lord from his birth, 1 Chap.
28. They will Inform this informer [thatas thiswas the jurisdictionof a judge,
whichGod called him unto all the time of saul, -- so, he was quo bound by his
Mothers vow, Chap. 1. Whereby he was devoted to the service of the sanctuary,
to continue his residence there, both because God had forsaken it for the sins
of the Priests, and also, because the Lord himselfhad taken him off from that
levitical service, and called him to another employment, namely, to be a holy
Prophet and a judge over his people, which places he could not discharge, if he
had been confined to a settled place.] The du chapter Annot: in the argument of the
book of judges, describe them [to be such persons, not (who administered the
ordinary function of judges among the people, as the Word is other where taken,
but) whom God now and then as the state of Israel required, sometimes out of on
tribe, sometimes out of another, extraordinarly raised, called, and with his
Spirit of wisdom and couradge endewed etc. In the argument, of the first book
of Samuel, they show that therein is described the Government of Samuel as judge
over Israel etc] So that until our Informer shall instruct the Prelates
extraordinary call from God, and also their extraordinary enduements for civil
Government, these instances of Eli and Samuel, will not [in the Judgment of
these divines] afford them the least shadow of warrant for there civil
offices. So this man may be ashamed that he ever mentioned such an argument.

Finally, That He is in the breers of a contradiction here, is (as is hinted)
evident, in that to prove that Church men should not ofChoice meddle inCivil
affairs, he gives this reason, for, no man that warreth intangleth himself
with the affairs of this life. 2. Tim. 2. 4. Now, if this [for] or illative
here, signify any thing, and be not nonsense, this He must be supposed to
hold, that, this text forbids Church men all deliberat meddling in Civil
affairs. But will He dare to say that Samuel and Eli their judging of Israel
was not deliberat and of Choice, Ergo, It was sinful by this rule; Yet he
pleads for its imitablenes as lawful; though a deliberat involving themselves
in Civil government, yea a Supreme rule; and thus holds it not cross to this
gospel precept. So that to escape this Scylla or Charybdis, He has no
imaginable refuge but one; (viz.) To assert with us, their extraordinary
Calling for what they did, and that singular old Testament-dispensation under
which they stood. But then He must quit his plea for prelates civil Employments
from this Instance, and confess it to be inconcludent.

But for the new Testament times, he tells us. How much Bishops were employed
in Civil affairs, when Emperors became Christian, as Smectymnuus confesses.
But 1. Since he pretends Scripture Instances under the old Testament, his new
Testament Instance is very apochryphal and heterogeneus thereunto, being of
Bishops meddling three or four hundred years, after the Canon of the Scripture
was closed. Humano Capiti cervicem pingere equinam. But his new Testament
precept 2. Tim. 2. 4. Chased away the Instance of Bishops meddling in civil
affairs, Three or four Hundred years forward. Nixt, I would know whither our
Informer holds these Bishops meddling in Secular affairs, to be lawful or
unlawful? Iflawfull, and consisting with their Calling (which He would seem to
insinuat in telling us, that Saravia defends at large, (even simply and
absolutely) Church men's meddling in state affairs) Why then does he tell us in
the nixt page That the fathers compleaned of this as aburden? Sure they were
very froward to fret under a piece of lawful employment. If it was unlawful,
or a deliberat sinful intanglement, why obtruds he it upon us as a regular
precedent? And what will Smectymnuus acknowledgment of the factum import, to
infert His, or Our acknowledgment of the jus. He tells us likwayes, That
ancient Counsels [upon the ground mentioned, 2. Tim. 2. 4. of a Ministers
sinful intanglement] discharged them to follow Military employments, or to
take ferms etc. Hence I infer, then these Councels held, that deliberat
meddling in state affairs, ^or worldly incumberances, is inconsistent with a
Ministers calling, and a sinful intanglement discharged in that text; for
since they discharged Military employments and ferms upon this ground, they
do consequently discharge all such Intanglement. For, a quatenus, ad omne,
etc. This he cannot but grant. And from hence I infer, two things against him.
1. He setts these Councils by the ears with his Scriptur instances. For since
they condemn these formentioned civil employments upon that ground, 2 Timothy 2:
4. As a sinful intanglement in a Church officer 3 he must either say, that they
condemned these Old Testament Instances of the Priests, of Samuel and Eli, as
sinful: Or else acknowledge, that they held them (with us) to be extraordinary,
and no regular precedents. 2. It will hence follow, that these Councils do
condemn Saravia, who (he tells us) does at some length defind Church men's
acting in State assaires. And Saravia condemns and disputs against these
Councils; and then, it will be a pussing problem to him, to which of them he
will adhere in this contest; since he holds, with these councels, upon that
ground, 2 Timothy 2: v. 4. the unlawfulness of Ministers deliberat involving
themselves in civil affairs, it seems be quites there great Advocat Saravia,
and all his pleading upon this point; For he tells us of no limitation in
Saravia his pleading for Ministers meddling in State affairs. As for what
follows in this page, he obscures and shifts the point here inquestion, in
saying, That it is hard to call it simply unlawful, and in every case, to meddle
in these things. We know there is a lawful Concional meddling, and also in way
of Ministerial advice, unto the Magistrate in order to the satisfaction of his
conscience, the Ministerial direction whereof is the Pastors work, at whose
mouth Gods mind must be sought, and likewayes by way of ministerial testimony
against what is sinful in state Rulers, which is all that our principles do own
as to Ministers interposing in state affairs in our late times; but he that
cannot distinguish this, from accnstant official meddling as a civil Judge, and
constituent Member in civil Indicatories, is very blind; And as stupid that
man were, who could not distinguish this from the private domestic care
mentioned, 1 Timothy 5: 8. Which is a part of that Eiconomie founded uonp the Law
of nature, and competent to a Minister as a Master of the Family, who is to
govern and rule his house under that notion. Yet we must here tell him, that
Gods allowing the Minister his honorarium, or maintenance, is for this very
end, that he may not by any overstretch of the domestic case, be taken off
from his holy employment.

Here, we shall offer to this Informers grave judgment, the Reasons of the
Assembly 1638. Sess 25. against the civil Offices of Ministers. [1. Christ's
notable example Luke 12: 14. Refusing to deal in a civil cause; Ministers are
his Ambassadors sent by him, as he was by the Father, Joh. 20: 21. Joh. 8. He
would not sentence that woman who deserved death. 2. Civil Rule is discharged
to Apostles, Matthew. 20: v. 25, 26. not only Supreme which is competent to
Princes, but subordinat also: Citing that passage of Bernard to Eugenius, Lib
2. Apostolis interdicitur dominatus, ergo, tu tihi usurpare aude, aut dominans,
Apostolatum aut Apostolicus, dominatum Dominion is discharged to Apostles, Go
thou therefore and dare to usurp to thy self, whither the Apostleship, if
holding a civil dominion, or being Apostolic a civil dominion. Where
theyrefute the ordinary Episcopal and Popish evasion as to (...) and (...). 3.
That Ministers having given up their names to this holy warfare, they ought not
to be involved in things of this life, as the law denies this to soldiers. C.
d. Lib: 2. Tit 13, So the Apostolic law, 2 Timothy 2: 04. This work tobe heavier
then that any man can be sufficient for it alone 2 Cor. 2: 16. Hence Ministers
are called watchmen, laborers, soldiers, fishers, etc. 4. The Apostles, for
all their extraordinary gifts, were not fit for serving tables and preaching
the word both, Act 6. although these were both ecclesiastic functiones;
therefore far less can any Minister now assume both ecclesiastic and civil
offices. Gregory the 1. (cited by Gratianin Decreto did: 89 -- Cap. Singula.)
proves that two ecclesiastic offices are not to be committed to one, from that
place of the Apostle Romans 12: 6: 7. As it is unbeseeming that in man's body,
one member should Act the part of another. The 6th. of the Canons called
Apostolic, appoints that the Bishop or Presbyter assuming civil places, be
deposed (which will make fearful Mass^cre among our Prelates, that day the
Parliament rides) so Can. 81: and 83. Cyprian. lib: 1, Epist. 9. says, that
long before, It was appointed in a Council of Bishopes, that none appoint in
his Testament, one of the Clergy, a Tutor or Curator, Quando singuli divino
sacerdotio honorati, non nisi altari and sacrificiis, precibus and orationi
vacare debent. Since every one honored with the divine priesthood, ought not
to attend but to the Altar and Sacrifices, to prayer and preaching, for its
written, no man that wars etc. Clemens the 1. (whom many make Bishop of Rome,
and out of whose writings, the defect of ecclesiastic history after the Acts
of the Apostles, they affirm, must be made up) in the Epistle to James the
brother of the Lord, whom they make a Bishop, has these words, neque judicem*
aut cognitorem secularium negotiorum, te ordinare vult Christus, ne praefocatus
presentibus hominum curis, non possis verbo Dei vacare, and secundum veritatis
regulam, secernere bonos a malis. impietatis tibi crimen est, neglectis verbi
Dei studiis, sollicitudines suscipere seculares. That is, neither will Christ
ordain thee a judge and arbiter of civil affairs, lest being involved in the
present cares of men, thou be not able to attend the word of God, and according
to the rule of verity, to separat the good from the evil; It blotts thee with
the Crime of impiety to take up secular cares, neglecting the Studjes of the
word of God. Synesius, Bishop of Ptolemais, cited by lipsius in politicis,
said, that it is unlawful to join the Civil power with the priesthood-nam
hoc esset miscere non miscenda, hoc est Sacris civiliaconfu^dere. For this were
to mix together things which cannot be mixed, that is, to confound Civil
matters with Sacred. See several others cited by the assembly, and recorded in
the Historiamotuum, page 283, 284. Where there is ane Answer to the objection
drawn from Augustins practice, and from that of 1. Cor. 6. 4.

The informer comes nixt (page 5.) to his defense of the Episcopal office it
self, But still goes on in the mist of confused generals, never condescending
upon the nature, power, and extent of the diocesian Bishopes office, as it is
now established by law. However, let us remember that our present prelat is,
according to our law [Ane ordinary Church officer, assuming the government of
some Hundereds of Congregations, as monopolized in him, and conveyed according
to his pleasur, unto the Ministers thereof; Having sole power in ordination, and
jurisdiction, and a negative voice in Church judicatories, and whose proper
work is Ruleing only, not feeding by doctrine] This is the Bishop which all
his pleading must be commensurat unto, else He but beats the Air. 1. The
Doubter alleages [The unlawfullnes of the Episcopal office for want of ane
express warrant for it in the word] To which He answers [By granting that this
will prove it to be not simply necessare, but not unlawfall, since it may be
lawful and expedient as falling under some general; as the command of
decency and order, will war and a Moderator and Clerk, although this be no
where commanded. That many learned men have thought prelacie lawful, though
not commanded, nor warranted by any particular Scripture precedent, nor yet
prohibited, but left to Christian prudence at it is found expedient and
conduceing to the good of the Church.] To which I answer. 1. He grossly mistaks
the Import of these relatives, a command, and the necessity of a thing flowing
therefrom, when restricting it to ane express warrant or command: there being
many things necessary, necessitate precepti, which have no express warrant or
command. Divines do tell us, that Scripture commands are either immediate, or
mediat; the immediate, are either explicit, or in express terms, enjoining a
thing: as [honour thy father and thy mother] or implicit, holding out, either
that which is comprehended in the command, as suetable midses leading to the
duties enjoined, or deduced by consequence from what is expressed; As
Ministers preaching is deduced by consequence from the command thereanent which
the Apostles got^: the Circumstances of the command pointing out this to be a
perpetual duty of Church officers. Again 2. There are divine commands which
are mediat, coming mediatly from God, but immediately from men, by a
determination of the general divine principle, and ane application thereof to
particulares: which they illustrat by that passage where Paul says, to the
rest speak I, not the Lord, applying Gods general command anent divorce, to
the Corinthians particular case. There are likewise [mediat accidental
commands,] deduced from Gods general Rule, upon rare transient occasiones, yet
necessitating to such a determination: So the abstaining from blood and things
strangled, was enjoined (Act. 15.) to the gentiles, and as necessary upon the
ground of Charity when the use grew scandalus, although the law hereanent was
abrogat, as being originallie Ceremonial. Hence we may Infer, that this
Informer in denying the necessity of what is commanded only under some
general head, Cutts of from the Categorie of things necessary, all the duties
in the decalogue, which are subserviant to the duties expressly named: and thus
destroys the Spirituality and extent of the law, acknowledged by all divines;
yea Cuts off all necessary Scripture consequences, and duties founded
thereupon: as Ministers preaching the gospel, administering the Seals, Infant
baptism, women's receaving the Sacrament, the Christian Sabbath etc. But (to
come nearer him) in the Nixt place, I suppose this man will not deny, That
there are many things sufficiently discharged, and consequently unlawful by
Scripture rule, because theyare not commanded either mediatly or immediately,
and that all ordinances of worship, Sacraments, and the substantialls of
government also, do require clear divine commands and institutions, by the
acknowledgement of all protestant divines; So that the not commanding of any
part or supposed ingredient thereof, is a sufficient discharge, discovering the
thing superadded to be sinful. Not that which seems good unto thee, shall
thoudoe to the Lord thy God but what He has commanded, thou shall add nothing
thereunto, nor diminish from it. add thou not to his words lest He reprove
thee, and thou be found a liar. In vain they do worship me teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men. See, deuteronomy. 4. 2. prove: 30. 6. rev: 22. 18.
deuteronomy: 12. 32. Isay. 29: 13. These Scriptures do clearly fortify this
principle: Otherwise if he deny this, He will open a door to all popish
superstition, yea and deny the very definition of it assigned by all sound
divines, in calling it, ane opposite extrem (in the excess) to true religion,
adding to Gods worship beyond what is commanded. Our Lord reprehended the
pharisees their washing of hands before dinner (a decent ceremony in it self)
as simply unlawful, when they made it a point of Religion, Because it was
beyond the command. That text Isay. 29: 13. In vain they worhsip me, teaching
for doctrines the commandments of men] is applied in this case unto them. Our
answer to the Papists demand [Where find we their bastardSacraments, and other
Superstitiones discharged] is, That they are discharged as sinful in Gods
worship, because not commanded: Should they rejoyne with this man, that this
will prove them to be not simpy necessary, but not unlawful, upon the ground
which He alleages, let him conjectur what his answer would be, and correct
himself. For the substantials of government, He cannot but grant that they fall
under the same consideration; It being most certain, and universally
acknowleged, that the Scripture lays down rules as to the exercise of both
Keys of Order and jurisdiction, the officers and censures of the Church. Nay,
himself asserts page. 118. That the substantials of government and policy of
the Church are utterly necessary and unalterable. Now it being thus, the
Question is [whither the diocesian Bishop, or Episcopal government, be among
those things which must either have a clear Scripture institution or warrant,
or else is to be rejected as sinful and unlawfull] That the diocesian Bishop
is such, I prove it thus: the Bishop which He pleads for, is supposed by him to
be a Church officer distinct from, and Superior to a Pastor or presbyter,
having a distinct work, ordination, and qualifications; Therefore, say I, He
must either have clear warrant or institution in the word, or He is unlawful.
The consequence leans upon these clear Scripture grounds. 1. This officer
cannot but fall in among the substantials of government, wherein the Scripture
is full and perfect (as himself acknowleges) So as to make even the man of God,
perfect: It is full in setting down all administrations relating so the Key of
order, as prayer and thanksgiveing, 1. Tim. 2. 1, 2. 1. Cor. 14. 14, 15.
Singing of Psalms, preaching of the word, public reading of it, and
Cathechiseing, falls within the compass of Christ's commands and regulations,
Collos. 3. 16. 1. Cor. 14. 15, 16. Ephesians. 5. 19. 2. Cor. 3. 14. Matthew. 28. 19,
20. 2. Tim. 4. 2. Hebr. 6. 1, 2. So does the administration of Sacraments,
Baptism and the Lords Supper, Matthew. 28. 18, 19. 1. Cor. 11. 23. And as these
administrations of the Key of Order, so all the administrations relating to the
Key of jurisdiction or discipline, falls under Christ's clear institutions. Such
as Ordination. Tit. 1. 5. 1. Tim. 4. 14. The dogmatick power, as to
Ministerial judgeing of doctrine. Act. 15. The critic power, as to the
public rebuke and purging out of the Scandalous, and receaving of the
penitent. Matthew. 18. 15, 16. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. Compared with Matthew. 16. 19.
John. 20. 21. So the diatactick power, in relation to Ritualls and and
alterable Circumstances, is clearly asserted and rules laid down anent its
exercise 1 Cor. 14. And as the administrations, ordinances, and acts of Church
government, So the administratores, officers, yea and Courts falls under clear
Scripture warrands and institutiones. Pastoures, Doctores, Elders, Deacons,
their several works, the greater and lesser Church judicatories, have their
clear warrant, 1. Tim. 4. 14. Matthew. 18. 17. Act. 15. 1. Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4.
Now let this Informer show me a reasone of this distinctnes, If not to point
out all the substantialls of government? and if it be lawful to add any new
officers, or administrations, or ordinances, to these expressly warranted? He
dare not say but is unlawful; therefore say I, upon the same ground, that he
shall acknowledge this to be unlawful, this eminent officer, the Bishop or
Archbishop, must either produce his warrant and institution, among the
forementioned Rules, or he must be holden unlawful. 2. The Scripture coming
this length in the forementioned condescendencie in point of Church government,
as to Ordinances, Officers, Laws, Censures, Courts etc, it must needs amount
to determine Some species of government, and presbitery, and Episcopacie, being
of contrary moulds, it must needs appointe and authorize the One, and discharge
the other. For all Church offices and officers have a positive institution. 1.
Cor. 12. 28. God has set etc. Ephesians. 4. 11. God has given etc. Romans 12. 6,
7. The office not given is not a gift of grace. And surely the command [not to
add to the word] includes a command not to add new spiritual officers, who
must have a new work etc. And the Bishops authority must either be comprehended
among the rules anent these officers enumerat, and the exercise of their power,
or he is an^ apocriphal officer and unlawful: Or he must say we may add new
officers, and offices, and institutions in point of government, to these
contained in Scripture; and so our divines argument against the pope, from the
Scriptures silence anent him, in its enumeration of officers, is naught. 3.
Christ exercising ane external visible kingdom over his Church visible, and all
Church officers, and their administrations, being in his name and authoritis as
is above cleared, every Church officers mission and warrant must be found in
his word, other w^yes he runs unsent, and cannot expect his blessing; all that
come be for him, and anticipat his call, are thieves and robbers. 4. All
Christ's officers, and their gifts are Christ's royal and mediatorie donations
to his Church, and by him peculiarly set and authorized therein. Ephesians. 4.
(...), 7, 8. etc, 1. Cor. 12. 28. He, as the great Master of the house, gives
all his Stewards their Keys, their Orders; Now, how Christ the king and head of
his Church, his donation, his commission, his giving his Keys, Should be
instructed other ways, then by his clear warrands and institutiones in his
word and Testament, I would gladly learn of this Informer. Is there any
officer of State, any subordinat Magistrate allowed in a kingdom, which has
not the clear warrant of the laws? Surely not, and so the case is here.
Finally. The ground and reasone which he builds this shifting evasion upon
[viz. That many things are not otherwise commanded, then under some general:
as that all things be done decently or to edification, instancing in the
moderator and Clerk of a meeting of Ministers] is very poor: For since the
authority which God gave Paul was to edification, and all ordinances which have
the most clear institution, must be thus qualified, and to this end, that which
is not Otherwise commanded then under this general, must needs be the
alterable circumstances only, commone to Civil and Sacred actions, and such as
supposes the thing it self, clothed with these circumstances, to be [that
which is to be done,] and by consequence falling Hactenus under the Compass of
a command or institution; for it is these only which are left to the regulation
of Christian prudence, according to the general rules of the word. But, as we
have above cleared, such ane eminent Church officer as the Bishop is supposed
to be, or any Church officer, can be no such circumstance, but is such a
substantial point of government as requires a clear and positive warrant, or
else must be holden unlawful; and this he must acknowledge or contradict
himself, for He dare not say but that Church officers are other ways commanded
then under this general, and himself alleges the prelates divine institution:
and so He can be none of these things which has only this general warrant.
Besides, I would know, if He will say that this officer, the prelat, must be
set up and Act with decency and order; surely He will not deny this: If then
the prelat himself is but a piece of [decentie, and order] (as being only
commanded under that notion, and a species under that general) then he says
that [order and decencie] must be managed and clothed with [order and
decencie] which will be very hard to reconceale to sense; or He must say, that
the prelat must act with disorder and confusion, or (to evit these rocks) that
the prelat must be warranted under another notion then that of a circumstance
of mere order, and so must have a particular warrant. His instance of the
Moderator and Clerk is very foolish, the Clerk not being necessarly [a Church
officer] and the Moderator [no distinct Church officer] from the rest of the
members, and so is utterly Impertinent to this point and question, anent a
Church officer distinct from and Superior to a presbiter, whither he ought to
have a particular Scripture warrant. Besides that the same divine warrant that
a judicial procedor by disquisition, votes, and suffrage has, and is
exemplified in that Synod Act. 15. (this being the necessary frame of
judicatories, as such, and consequently of all Church judicatories) the
moderator has the same foundation of his office; but He will never let us see
a shadow of this for the prelat. Now to show what good Harmony this Informer
keeps in this point with some chieff men of his way (and others also) let us
hear what they hold, Institutum Apostolorum de regimine Ecclesiastico -- and ea
gubernationis ratio quae aetate Apostolorum fuit etc. -- The Apostles
appointment as to Church government, and that way and method of government
which was in their time, is perpetual, and can no more be changed then the
priesthood of Aaron could, says Saravia con tra bezam Whitaker controv. 4.
Quest: 1. Cap. 9. Tells us, That the Church must not be governed-vt humano
ingenio arriserit, as pleases men's fancy, sed ut Christo Ecclesiae domino so
lique principi placet, But as it pleases Christ her only head and Lord. Hence
he concludes that the forms which He has institut must be held fast as the
best. Matthew. Sutliv: de Pontif: Roman: lib. 1 Cap. 1. Answering Bellarmins
argument from Civil to Ecclesiastic Monarchy, tells him that-sicut unus
Ecclesiae summus princeps etc As thereis one chieff Prince of the Church, so
there is one true essential form thereof, differing from the various moulds of
commone wealths; and that as she has but one head, so but one frame of
policy, which those who resyle from Christi leges transgrediuntur-they
transgress the laws of Christ, and blotts her true government. Field, of the
Church, lib: 5. Cap: 45. Argues thus against the popes temporal power, that
among men non has power of chaingeing any thing but he alone to whom in an
eminent degree it belongs, and from whom it is originally derived; but to
govern the Church as such is not eminently in the Magistrate.] It is a Bad omen,
cespitare in limine; our informer we see, in his first answer to his doupter,
is so anhappie, as therein to justle with soom chieff champions of his cause.

CHAP. IX.
The Informer undertakes to answer the Arguments of Presbyterians against
Episcopacy. His answers to our Argumets from Matthew. 20: 25, 26. and Petr. 5: 3.
Examined at large. The genuine strength and nerves of our reasoning upon these
Texts, which he dare not meddle with. His answers found inconsistent with
themselves, the same with Papists answers for the papacy, and contrare to the
sense of sound divines.

THe doubter in the nixt place [alleages Prelacy to the forbidden, and
therefore unlawful: bringing for proof Matthew. 20: 25, 26, 27, 28. And the
Argument from this text, he makes his poor doubter slenderly and curtly to
represent thus, That Christ forbids any of his disciples to he greater then
another. This passage with its parallel Luke 22: 25. Is much scanned betwixt
the Papists and us, in relation to the popes Dominion, and as it striks clearly
against Prelacy, so Papists and Prelates do as clearly join issue in their
answers. In both passages it is apparent, that upon occasion of a sinful and
ambitious emulation among the Disciples, which of them should be greatest, our
Lord did sharply reprehend them, dischargeing them expressly the Lordly
grandour of Earthly Rulers or Princes, and to exercise Lordsnipe or Dominion
over one another, commending instead thereof, and in opposition thereto, a
humble Ministerial service, and spiritual diligence in their spiritual
stewardship or Ministry, pressing both, from his own exemplary humility in his
converse with them. Now, our Argument against Prelacy is very strong from this
text, and has these Nerves. 1. The Lord most expressly discharges Superiority
and inferiority among officers of the same kind: Non are greater then another
in their office; no Apostle above another, but a complete parity in their
official power is here holden out; ergo, by necessary consequence, he commands
a parity among Pastoures, and discharges superior and inferior degrees among
them. 2. Whatever priority of order among officers of different kinds, be
allowed, yet he discharges Dominion or principality in any of them, all
masterly power, such as is allowed in civil Government; there being but one
Master or Lord over the Church, and all Ministers being Brethren. This is
clear, in that he mentions the civil Lordshipe of Rulers who are called
benefactors in exemplyfiing what he discharges them, and likewayes in
opposition thereunto, commends a humble Ministerial service, not a sort of
warrantable Dominion, as that parallel 1 Pet. 5: 3. Makes it evident; So that
he gives two deadly blows here to the Diocesian Lord Prelat. 1. In that he
makes himself a higher order and degree of the Pastoral office, whereas the
Lord discharges this among officers of the same kind. 2. In Lording it over
his brethren (other Pastoures) both in a pretended spiritual capacity,
arrogating to himself a sole power in ordination and jurisdiction, and a
masterly power and principality over Church judicatories, (as is cleared above)
and likewayes in his assumeing the Earthly Lordship, place and grandoure, of
civil Magistrates, which is here expressly discharged. This being premised, let
us hear what this new Advocat says to this Text. 1. He tells us that [It is a
great mistake to think, that all superiority among Church men is here
forbidden, which he fortifies 1. With this Reason, that the twelve, though
equal among themselves, yet were superior to the seventy Disciples who were
also sent to preach, and this He proves, because Matthias who was chosen to
succeed Judas in the Apostleship, was one of them.] Ans. 1. It is here
convincingly apparent, that this man shifts, but dare not grapple with this
Scripture, and the argument drawn from it, while he shuffles in this gloss and
mistake (which is his own, not ours) viz, that all superiority is here
discharged among Church men, as our inference or medium against prelacie from
this text, as is evident from what is said. We grant with all sound divines,
that among Church men or Church officers, there are superior and inferior
degrees. First Apostles, secondarly Prophets etc. But we say, that hereby
superiority among these of the same degree is forbidden, and likwayes
principality and lordship in any of them of whatever order or degree, over
another. So that we are not concerned to enquire, whither the Apostles were
Superior to the seventy Disciples, or whither they were sent to preach, and not
rather (as some do judge) entrusted with a transient mission to prepare our
Lords access to those places whither he was to come, with out any formal
Ministeral mission above ordinary Disciples. Only I must say, his proof of
this Superiority of the Twelve above the Seventie, is very odd (viz.) Matthias
was chosen ane Apostle, though one of the Sevintie. Now, to give Scripture
light and proof of this topic, both branches of this assertion must be proved
from Scripture, not only that Matthias was chosen in Judas room, but also and
mainely, that he was one of the Seventie, whereof the Scripture is utterly
silent: and instead of Scripture proof of this, we must take Clemens and
Dorotheus, their Said so, which maks up a heterogenious proof, like the feet
and toes made of iron and clay. 2. He tells us, That ambition, and not
inequality, is here discharged. This ane old shift of Bellarm: and the Papists,
we say that both ambition, the root and principle of this desire, and the thing
it self which was the object of this ambitious desire (viz.) Dominion,
Principality, and Lordship one over another, is here forbidden: Subordinata non
pugnant, it is strange sottishnes in this man to imagine, that ambition, the
inward principle of this unlawful primacie or inequality, should be forbidden
only, and not the inequality or primacie it self, the outward act and
accomplishment of this ambition. Bellarm: answer to our divines argument
against the popes Supremacy from the text, is, that dominion is no: here
discharged, but rather supposed, and that it is only such ane ambitious lust of
overruling as is among the Kings of the Gentiles, that is forbidden. Whittaker
(de Pontif: Cap: 1.) Answers him, that this dominion it self, not the ambitious
affectation only, is discharged. Bernard writing to Eugenius, and expounding
this passage, and that of 1. Pet. 5. Understands them both as striking against
dominion, and enjoining a Ministerial care in opposition thereunto, Dominion
(says he) is discharged and Ministry is enjoined, So at length he concludes
after several things to this purpose. Thus Bernard clearly teaches (says
Whittak: de Pontif: Quest: 1.) that humility is not required in dominion (as
our Informer distinguishes with Bellarm:) but dominion it self is discharged.
But Bellarmin admitts to play the Lords if they be modest and humble in their
dominion. Christus de re ipsa etc. (says Iunius, de pontif: lib: 1.) Christ
said of the thing it self, they exercise dominion but he spoke not of the
manner, they exercise dominion after this or that manner; they exercise dominion,
says he, but not so ye that is, ye shall not exercise dominion: it is a
plain denial of the thing proposed. So we see his shift here as to prelacie,
is the same with that of the Papists in defending the papacy. But his Reason
of this his gloss must be considered, [viz.] Because otherwise, our Lords
argument taken from his own example v. 28. Would not suite his purpose, since
he was in power and authority above the Twelve. Ans. (Not to stay here to tell
him, that this defense and gloss will equally serve the popes turn, and bear
the blow of this text off his head in Correspondance with Bellarmins Notion
above touched) Our Lords scope in proposeing his own example, is to antidot
their inward pride, the root of their desire of this dominion, and powerfully
to commend to them humility and low lines, as the most excellent remedy thereof:
And his argument runns a fortiori thus. If I your Lord and Master be as on that
serves, and am such a pattern of selfdenial and humility among you, much more
ought you to study humility, and to guard against all usurped authority and
dominion, over on another, who are fellow Disciples, and servants. So he
reasoned Joh 13. If I your Lord and master have washed your feet, you [viz,
much more as being equalls] ought also to wash one another feet; so that which
he imagines does make Christ's argument not suit well, maksit the more forcible
and suite the better. 2. He here contradicts himself, while making the argument
from Christ's example, v. 28. to suite the discharge of ambition only, not of
inequality (the terms in which he impertinently states the difference and
opposition, as to what is discharged and not discharged) for he grants there
was to be no inequality among the Apostles; and when he thus limits his
general answer [that all supeiroritie among Church men is not here discharged]
he grants that some superiority (viz) among the Apostles themselves, was
discharged, and consequently discharged upon this motive Christ's own example
How then, I pray, will he make this argument from Christ's example, who was in
dominion and principality above the Twelve, and their, and all the Churches
monarch and head, suite his purpose of discharging Inequality, Superiority, or
primacie among the Apostles? His reason he explaines, thus further, that taking
Christ only to speak against ambition, or a sinful desire of superoritie,
which was Diotrephes fault, the reason from his own example suites well who,
though above all, yet was, a pattern to all in humility. Ans. 1. We have heard
that Christ's argument suites best in the sense we have propounded, which is the
sense of all sound divines. 2. If it was only a sinful desire of a superiority
in it self lawful, such as he says Diotrephes had (how rationally we shall
after see) which our Lord dehorted from by his own example, then all our
divines have mist the mark in pleading from this text against the object of
this desire, not the sinful manner of desiring only, and the Papists gloss holds
good against them, viz: that Christ's example will plead only against ambition.
3. Our Informer yet again falls here into a twosold contradiction. 1. He
makes the Superiority, the object of this ambitious desire, to be in it
selflawful, and their fault only to lie in the ambitious or sinful desire; yet
in answer to the nixt objection he grants, that Christ discharged dominium
civil and despoticum; Now, he must either say, that this was the object of
their desire, and consequently that it was sinful in the object, or else that
our Lords discourse and exhortation was not to the purpose; Again, this
domineum civil and despoticum, is more then a mere superiority. But 2. the
superiority here discharged was among the Apostles themselves, and this was
the object of their desire; the ambitions question and debate was, which of
them should be greatest, and highest above all the rest? Now he grants that
there was to be no superiority, far less principality among them; How then can
he say that Christ discharged only ane ambitious affectation of a superiority
in it self lawful; such as Diotrephes had, whom we will find him after assert
to have endeavored to put himself into a lawful pre-existent office. Surely if
there was to be no inequality among them, their desire of inequality was most
sinful in the object, upon that very ground. Again, he grants that Christ
speaks to the Twelve, and likwayes cannot deny, but clearly insinuates a
concession with the text, that the Apostles were striveing about inequality,
which he acknowledges was unlawful in them, yet in the second answer, he will
not have this discharged; which how inconsistent it is, let any judge. Beside,
since. Christ spoke this to the twelve, among whom there was to be [no
inequality in respect of power] as he says, and consequently discharged this,
since he is rebuking them for striving about a primacy, the highest degree of
inequality in respect of power, how absurd and nonsensical is his 2d answer,
which denies [that Christ discharged inequality;] could Christ discharge them
an inequality of the highest pitch, and yet not discharge inequality? Or could
[all inequality in respect of power] be unlawful among them, and yet not be
discharged when our Lord discharged [a primacy of power?] he will prove a
strange critic if he distinguish these. He tells us lastly here that humility
and imparity can well consist. But can humility, and a forbidden imparity
consist? can humility in a Churchman, and [Dominium civil and despoticum]
consist? Both which he acknowledges were discharged to the Apostles here. So he
insinuats that their desired imparity, was still lawful in it self, since it
may be possessed even humbly, and thus heaps up inconsistencies. He objects to
himself That Christ in denying to them, the Dominion of the Princes of the
gentiles, discharged all superiority among Church men. To which he answers That
he only discharges [Dominium civil, and despoticum] a princely Lordly power,
such as they exercise: but the power of the Church is of another nature. Ans.
1. [Not to meedle with his making Dominium civil, and despoticum, adequat
terms, there being a Dominium politicum, ordinately contradistinguished from
despoticum, which is also a Dominium civil) He grants here, that it was more
then a simple desire of a lawful superiority, which the Apostles were tainted
with, forgeting what he said immediately before. Nixt, if Christ discharged this
civil Lordly power to Churchmen, he discharged them to be Parliaments Lords,
and to hold civil state offices, contrare to what he pleades from the instances
of the Priests Numb. II. and from Eli and Samuel; and so he must grant the new
Testament Church and its dispensation, to be in this different from the old,
since he acknowledges that Church power was here allowed the Apostles and their
successors, and civil power discharged. Thus our Informer must grant, that
Christ did here rid marches betwixt these things which he before confounded,
and their Erastian Prelacy confounds. Again, this is the very shift of
Bellarmin to save the popes supremacy: The Lord, says he, In forbidding them,
to rule as the Princes of the Gentiles, signified they were to rule, but not
after that manner [viz.] Ecclesiastically; So he thinks it touches not the
popes Ecclesiastic supremacy, and the Informer in this stryks hands with him.
For if our Lord discharged only here that kind of Dominion as he says; But
allowed a Church power or dominion of another nature, surely for anything that
is here discharged, ane Ecclesiastic pop or patriarch his mytrestands sure,
and is never touched by any prohibition which the Disciples here got, against
the sense and pleading of all Protestants. Moreover, will this Informer
adventur to say that the popes primacy, or ecclesiastic Monarchy, even as
abstracted from his civil Dominion, is not here discharged; And if it be [as
all our divines assert it is] then our Lord understood another sort of abuse of
power then invadeing a Dominium civil, even all despotick or Lordly power,
whither civil, or pretended ecclesiastic in Church officers. Besides, if he
discharged Lordly power, he discharged that which Peter discharged 1 Pet. 5.
Even to Lord over Gods heritage. What? will he dare to say that it is only a
civil Lordship which is there discharged and not rather ane ecclesiastic
dominion, Which bath Gods heritage or Church for its object: And if so, then
the Prelates Dominion is expressly stricken against, since (as we have above
cleared) his power is a mere despotick Lordship or rule; For to be the proper
object and fountain of all ecclesiastic authority in the Diocese, to have
sole power in ordination and jurisdiction; the sole decisive suffrage in
Judicatories, is either a despotick Dominion and Lordship or it is nothing; and
if the Churches power is of another nature then this civil Dominion, as this
man tells us, of what nature is it? Only of another nature, because it touches
spiritual objects; Then for any thing that is here forbidden, a papal
ecclesiastic monarchy is never touched. Or is it of another nature because in
it self Steward-like and Ministerial, not despotick or Princely, like that of
the Magistrate (which is the sense of all sound divines, and must be his too, if
he speak sense) then who sees not that the power of the Prince-or Lord-Prelat
is most formally discharged? It being evidently of this nature. Yet again, it
is in this apparent that he shifts and shuffles the question, and its terms
here, anent the power of the Prelat and the power discharged in this text. For
in saying in the beginning of his Answer, that Christ discharges that kind
Dominion of only which civil Princes exercise, he must needs be supposed to
contradistingush from this, ane ecclesiastic Dominion which is allowed, yet
when he speaks of this he alters the terms, telling us [that the Churches power
is of another nature] he should have said the Churches reserved Dominion, if he
had spoken consequently, as that other kind of Dominion which he allows, and
by the consequence of his discourse, holds that the Text will allow; In a word,
that all sort of [Dominion] whither pretended ecclesiastic, or civil, is here
discharged to Church officers, and consequently his offering violence to the
Text, is apparent from the context two ways. 1. In that the strife among the
Apoles, flowing from this desire of unlawful greatness, and which drew forth
this exhortation and prohibition under debate, was not about a civil despotick
rule; properly, or only, but anent a Lordship and chief rule in the Church,
and in matters ecclesiastic, under Christ as their head; So that though the
Lord exemplified the greatness which he discharged them, in that of earthly
princes, (there being no other then existent and apparent) yet it was not this
primarily, but ane ecclesiastic Lordship or dominion, which he strycks
against; Since he is directing them both negatively and positively anent the
nature, And exercise of their spiritual and ecclesiastic Authority and Rule.
2. The positive part of his injunction touching a Ministerial service, or
humble Ministry, excludes all sort of dominion in what ever sense it can be
taken, and not a civil dominion only. Our Informer tells us, nixt. That
sundry interpreters, interpret Christ's words, as discharging only Tyranny,
such as earthly Princes exercise. And in this he Informers us right; Only he
should have been so ingenuus as to tell us that they are interpreters beyond
our line, that is popish interpreters, for this is directly Bellarmins shift,
to which, since he stands here upon the same ground with him, I shall return
learned Whittakers interpretation and answer, which hitherto I believe has
passed current with all sound Protestants. Christ sets before them the example
of the Kings of the Gentiles, not to the end they may fly ambition on'y (as
this man shifts it) but to let them understand that they have nothing to do
with a kingly rule. -- For (says he) though the words translated [exercise
dominion or authority] which Matthew maks use of, does sometimes signify
immoderat dominion, yet Luke Omitts the preposition in both these Words: But so
it is that the simple verb, is attribut to these who obtain power and
dominion, not to these who insolently and tyrannically overerule; for all those
who among the gentiles obtained principality did not reign tyrannically or
unjustly, nay the Clemency of many such, and their justice is praised. Thus he,
de pontif: Quest: 1. To which I may add, that our Lord speaks of such Princes
as were called Benefactoers or gracious Lords, a very unsuiteable designation
for Tyrannes.

How easy is it from the Informer reasoning here, and with his net to fish out
a papacy. That which the Apostles here desired was in it self lawful, and the
fault was only in the ambitious desire, as it was with diotrephes who desired
a lawful preexistent office: This he clearly asserts: I subsum: But that which
they desired, and were striving about, was a primacie or papacy, Ergo that
office is lawful in it self. The pope will thank our Informer for this.

The nixt text objected by the doubter, is that pregnant passage 1 Pet. 5: 3.
Be not Lords over Gods heritage. And from this he maks him mutter out this
slender argument, [is not superiority among Church men there clearly
forbidden.] Still we see our Informer keeps him under the covert of his own
groundless supposition, that we do from this and such like texts Impugn,
Superiority among Church men, as he terms it, whereas we allow (as he cannot
but know) with all sound divines, and scripture it self, superior and
inferior degrees among Church officers: And he cannot show that any
Presbyterian did ever draw forth from this text such ane insignificant notion
as this against Prelacy; But he behoved to make the knot easy, since himself
must loose it. Our Argument from this text, is this, That the Apostle here
injoyneing Ministers their duty [both negativil and positively, he first
dehorts from evils they are liable unto, such as heart reluctance at their
laborius employment, covetusness and usurpation or Lordship and Dominion,
whither over their fellows, which Dietrephes affected, or over the people, by
taking ane arbitrarie masterly imperious way with them, or a way of force and
rigor, as these reptehended Ezekiel. 34: 4. He nixt, positively exhortes them to
lead or rule in a holy exemplarie, Shepherd-like Method, expressing the word of
grace in their practice. Now [I say) from this genuine sense and scope of the
place, we argue against Prelacie, thus. 1. The Apostle exhorts these elders or
Ministers as their [fellow-elder] supposeing them his immediate Successors in
the highest Spheere of ane ordinary Ministry, for he supposes them to have
non higher over them now when he was shortly to put off his Tabernacle. 2. He
enjoins them to feed and take the oversight, or exercise Episcopal authority
over the flock, as Paul did likewayes the Presbyters or elders of Ephesus, in
his last farewell. (Act. 20.) a scrybing a complete Episcopal authority to
them, both as to jurisdiction and ordination. 3. Yet he discharges any of them
to Lord it over Gods heritage, commending instead thereof, ane exemplarie
humble service or ministry, Hence we infer against the Diocesian Prelat. 1
That there is no higher officer then a Presbyter, left by the Apostles as their
ordinary Successor, since the Apostle as their follow Presbiter, exhorts themas
the highest ordinary officers, and therefore the Prelat, pretending to be ane
higher ordinary officer, is Apocriphal. 2. All Episcopali authority is in
Presbyters, both as to ordination and Jurisdiction, and they have both name and
thing of a Scripture Bishop, and therefore the Prelat, arrogating this name
solely to himself, and all the Episcopal power of ordinationand Jurisdiction as
his solely, and denying it to Presbyters, is ane Anti-scripturall Monster:
Since these Presbyters had this in a complete parity 3. Non of these Elders
must exercise a masterly power and dominion over the flocks, therefore the Lord
Prelates imperious Lordly power is palpably condemned, which he exercises over
both Pastores and flocks. Now, this being our argument from this text, let any
man judge of this Informer ingenuity, while representing it in such a disguise,
that he may seem able to grapple with it; Whereas we shall find that his
answers to his Argument presented thus in its genuine strength, are like the
conflict betwixt the giant and pigmee. But what says he to the Argument as in
his own mould. 1. He answers That superiority among Churchmen is not
discharged. By [Churchmen] if he understand in General, [Church officers]
(though the term be some what odd) we shall easily Admit that this Text
discharges not superior and inferior degrees among them, but this will nothing
help his cause, as is evident. If he mean superiority among preaching
Presbyters, or Elders, we have proved it to be here discharged, since the
Apostle attributes episcopal Authority to these elders in common, and
discharges Lordly preheminenc in any of them. Well, what is it that our
Informer will admit to be here discharged? domineering and Tyranny, says he,
which may be the fault of ane ordinary Minister toward his flock. This is the
old popish song made new again, to which I repon two things. 1. The word (...)
is parallel with that of Matthew. 20. and Luke 22. Where peter learned the
prohibition, and (as is said) imports indeed Dominion but no Tyrannical
domineering it being made use of by the seventy interpreters to express
Dominion unquestionably lawful. 2. The positive part of the precept refutes
this gloss, he says not, Not Tyrannically domineering, but using Dominion
moderatly (which ought to have been the other alternative branch, if this man's
gloss were true, and the Apostle had allowed a lawful Lordshipe) but He adds
for the other branch in expressing what is enjoined being examples to the
slock. Injoyneing thus to feed by example, and a humble Ministry; And this is
opposite to all Dominion and Lordship whatsoever, and does not discriminat only
one Dominion from another; which is also apparent in the alternative branche,
and positive precept of the above mentioned parallel texts. Besides we might
here tell him, That the Episcopal pre-eminence, being so many ways cross to
the Scripture rules in point of Government, may be truly called a most
TyrannicalDomineereing. But the reasons of his gloss follows. He tells us; That
this domineering and Tyranny may be the fault of ane ordinary Minister toward
his flock, and that the Apostle is not here speaking of Church men's carriage
toward one another, or of their equality or inequality among themselves, but
of their behavior toward the people, who are called the flock, or Gods
heritage. Ans. This is a strange reason, and very hard to comprehend, only
Tyrannical domineereing must be understood because it relates only to the
flock. Can there not be a Tyrannical domineering over the Clergy also? And
because the Apostle forbids to Lord it over the flock, therefore he forbids not
Dominion over the Clergy; The quit contrare conclusion will better follow: If
the Apostle forbids them to Lord it over the flocks, who were subject to them
as their spiritual guides, therefore, a fortiori, he much more forbids them to
Lord it over their fellow Presbyters, who were their equals in this Spiritual
trust and Authority over the flocks; And if it be unlawful to play the
Domineering Prelat over one poor flock, it must be much more unlawful to Act
this Tyranny over some Hundreds of both pastores and flocks. So that Ministers,
or (if he will) Churchmens carriage toward one another, must be here clearly
pointed out by a very necessary consequence from the less to the greater, and
the equality of Ministers in their spiritual Government and Rule, by he same
topic strongly inferred from this place. It strange that the Apostle should
discharge to Lord it over the flocks, and yer allow a Lordship over both Clergy
and flocks. But another wonder is, how he comes to excludMinisters from that
tittle of Gods heritage, which his party (from whom our Informer here proves a
separatist) do often make peculiar unto [Church Rulers] one would think that
they should have a special Interest and share in that which grounds this
denomination; Are they not the Lords purchase, as well as the people Act. 20.
Nay they are in a singular manner such, and Christ's glory; Are they not such
as he will never cast off and alienat Psalm. 94: 14. They are the stars which
Christ holds in his right hand; nay, as being singularly dedicat to him, they
are singularly his: as the Levits had the Lord for their Inheritance in a
special way; So they were singularly his, set aparte for him beyond all the
rest of the tribes. And are not Ministers taken from among the people for his
Priests and Levits -- And called therefore men of God, stewards of God,
Ministers, Servants, Ambassadoures of Christ, because of their singular
relation to him: And as this is a strong disswasive from Lording over the
people, that they are Gods heritage, who therefore most not be the servants of
me^, So upon the ground of Ministers special interest in this denomination,
the Apostles argument as to them, is the more forcible. Again, since he so
expressly forbids any of these Pastoures to Lord it over Gods Heritage
(enjoining them a humble exemplary Ministry) and far less to exercise a Lordly
Rule over one another, he establishes by clear consequence (as I hinted) ane
equality among them, in their pastoral official power and authority; Withal,
the Apostle speaking to them indefinitely in this precept without the least
exception and reserve as to any one of them: and making their episcopal
inspection relate to the flock (as this man himself pleads) both these grounds
hold out their equality among themselves, and inferrs a discharge of
inequality. This Informers likewayes would remarke that the Spirit of God here
commands Presbyters to act the Bishopes, thus indentifying the Bishop and
Prisbyter, but without Lording it over Gods heritage, the prohibition not to
Lord it, is remarkably joined with the command to Act the Bishop: And referring
their office to the flock, he must confess the Apostle acknowledged no Bishops
whose inspection was over Pastors themselves. Thus we see hisanswer to the
Argument against Prelacy from this Text is contrare unto the scope and sense of
the Words, yea and inconsistent with it self.

CHAP. X.
The Informers answers to our Argument from Act. 20. and from Tit. 1: 5, 7.
Philip. 1: 1. Ephesians. 4: 11. For the identitie of [Bishop] and [Presbyter,] win
nowed, the insufficiency, and inconsistencie thereof, together with his
begging of the question, discovered; and these texts at some length improven
against him.

THE Doubter in the nixt place objects [That in the new Testament, Bishop and
Presbyter signify one and the same office bearer, that in Act. 20: the elders
in the 17. v. are called Bishops in the 28. v. So in Tit. 1: 5, 7. And therefore
Bishop and elder are the same in Scriptur, and the word elder signifies no more
then a Minister of a particular Congregation] Here he touches a part but not
the strength of our argument from these texts. We argue not merely from the
Samenes of the Names, but the identitie of all the essentiales of the office,
Duties, and Qualifications of the office bearer expressed by these names, when
applied to ane ordinary office bearer; Particularly f. om Act. 20. We draw
forth these weapons. 1. The Apostle speaking to the elders, tells them that the
holy ghost had made them [Bishopes over the flock,] showing that the Scriptur
Bishop set up by the holy ghost, is the Minister or elder who feeds and rules
over the flock. 2. The Apostle gives them not only the Name of Bishop, but also
the thing, commanding these elders or Ministers (...) and (...) which takes in
all the power of order and jurisdiction, and whatever the Diocesian Bishop may
pretend unto. 3. (Which is very remarbable) he gives this Charge so these
elders before Timothy, who was now present with the Apostle, and after the first
Epistle was written to him, for it was writtin when Paul was at Macedonia, and
after this Paul having Timothy with him came to Miletum, and gave the elders
of Ephesus this charge. Finally. This was Paul's last charge to them, for they
were never to see his face more; So that we have here a pattern of the mould of
the Gospel Church in relation to Government as this great Apostle of the
Gentiles left it, and consequently as all the rest left it; which is
convinceingly apparent by comparing this with the parallel 1 Pet. 5. compared
with 2 Pet. 1: 14. Hence we exterminat the Diocefian Prelat thus. 1. The Holy
Ghosts Bishops were Ministers which he set up to feed and rule the flock
immediately. These, and these only, the Apostle and the Apostolic Church knew,
therefore he dissownes the Prelat, who pretends to be set over some hundreds of
Pastoures and flocks, and is bound to feed no flock himself. 2. These who
watch over the flocks immediately, and only, have all the Episcopal power, both
the key of doctrine, and Government committed to them by the holy Ghost:
Therefore the Diocesian Prelat, taking and arrogating to himself the sole power
of ordination and jurisdiction, and leaving Presbyters nothing but the
Doctrinal key, as his deputies, while he himself preaches to no flock, is ane
Antiscriptural Sacrilegious robber. 3. The elders or Pastoures of Ephesus got
all Episcopal authority as to order and jurisdiction, committed to them by Paul
as the Holy ghosts Bishops, and the highest ordinary officers of that Church,
in the presence of Timothy, without the least hint of any interest that
Timothy had in or over them, as their Bishope or Overseer therein, or the
least hint of any direction anent their duty to Timothy as in that Capacity,
and this after he had gotten all his directions in the 1. Epistle written to
him. And therefore Timothy was never set up as a Diocesian Prelat over that
Church (as this Informer would persuade) and the inspection which he is
supposed to have in that Epistle, was occasional, transient, and
extraordinary, and by conseguence lays no ground for Prelacie. Finally,
Paul's directions here were his last and farewell directions, therefore this
Church was to continue thus governed by these elders or Bishops in common: and
the Prelatists Plea [that the Apostles set up Presbyters at first, keeping the
reyns of Government in their own hands, till toward the end of their life,
and then set up Prelates over these Presbyters] is here convict of falsehood,
since neither Paul, nor Peter, the great Apostle of the Gentiles, or the great
Apostle of the Circumcision, do in the least hint any such Super-institution,
but both of them in their last directions to the Churches, commit the wholl
power both of order and jurisdiction, to the Pastoures of the flocks, in
common, as the only Bishops set up by the Holy Ghost.

From 1 Timothy 1: 5, -- 7. The great Argument is not only from the promiscuouse
use of the Name [Bishop] and [Presbyter] but from the form and mould of the
Apostles reasoning; which inferres not only the identitie of names, but of the
office also. For the Apostle showing Titus how the elders are to be qualified,
gives this reasone for a Bishop must he blameles. This [(...) or causal For]
expressing the knot and connection of the Apostles argument or reason, does
clearly Import that the office, expressed by both these words, is one and the
same; for there is neither sound matter or form, in such reasoning as this
[Presbiters must be so and so qualified, because a Bishop, of a Superior order
and degree must be so qualified] So that from hence it is evident that the
[elder] is the [Bishop], and vice versa, and that no higher Bishopes were by
the Apostles constitut in the Churches. Here then, as in the preceding text,
we have not only Bishops and elders getting the same designation by the
Holyghost (who knew best the nature of the things themselves, and how to
express himself thereanent) but likewayes the same qualifications, work, and
office; and so the office is supposed to be every way one and the same. Now let
us hear, what he says to the argument. [He grants that the two words
oftentimes do point out one and the same officer, but denies that the officer
meaned by these words, is never understood above the degree of ane ordinary
Minister. Or that the word [Presbiter, or elder] signifies only the Minister of
a single Congregation, and no more.] The insufficiency and prevarication of
which answer evidently appears. For 1. He grants that these two words Bishop
and elder signifies one and the same officer, oftentimes, supposeing that
sometimes they express diverse officers, but where can he show us that the word
Episcopus signifies one officer, and Preshiter another, when the Spirit of God
is pointing out thereby the Churches standing Officers and Ministers, and not
when either the one or the other is in a general sense applied to ane Apostle.
2. The state of the Question is [whither the scriptur (...) design a higher
ordinary officer then a Presbyter] And this Informer should have adverted, that
the drift of the argument from the texts mentioned, is to prove the Apostles
promiscuous use of these words in describing the office of the highest ordinary
office bearers in the Church. Moreover, the Diocesian [Episcopus] is ane
ordinary officer, having the inspection over some handereds of flocks, and the
sole power of jurisdiction and ordination in the diocese, and is by him held
to be ane officer of Gods appointment, and by this designation of Bishop, as
the Characteristick of his office, is distinguished from Pastoures or elders.
Now, if presbyterians do prove that wherever the word Bishop is used to point
at ane ordinary standing officer in the Church, it imports a pastor or
presbyter and no higher officer, they sufficiently over throw the diocesian
Episcopus or Bishop of his mould, as having no scripture warrant. And if he
grant that in the forementioned Scriptures, and other passages where the word
Bishop is used to point at a necessary standing Church officer, it signifies
no higher officer then ane elder or ordinary Minister, he grants enough
against himself, and all that the presbiterians desire: for there from it
follows necessarly that their diocesian Episcopus or Bishop contradistinct
from, and superior to the preaching presbyter, is apochriphal and
antiscripturall: Since the preaching presbyter and Bishop, are the same
ordinary highest officer in all the Holy Ghosts expressions theranent. 3.
Whereas he denies that we con prove [That the officer meaned by these words, is
never understood of any above the degree of ane ordinary minister] Let him add
this necessary limitation [when the words are applied to design ane ordinary
standing officer (which he must admit, if he speak to purpose) and the proof
is very easy] since the forementioned Texts, and all the parallels where elder
or Bishop is thus used, do evince it. Again 4. Since this Informer with his
follows have diversified the Bishop from the elder in the manner above
expressed, we challing him as the affirmer, to show in all the new Testament
where the officer meaned by this Word Episcopus or Bishop, when pointing at ane
ordinary standing officer in the Church, is to be understood of any above the
degree of a Presbyter or Pastor of a congregation; This lies upon him to make
good, else if Episcopuss denotte only a Presbyter, sure the cause of the
Diocesian Prelat is lost. He fortifies his answer with two Reasons. 1. We find
the name [elder] given to the Apostles themselves 1 Pet: 5: 1. John. 2. 1. and
Epist. 3: 1. And if Apostles be called [elders] why not also [Bishops]. Ans: 1.
The point debeateable is [whether the word [Bishop] and [elder] do Import the
same, officer, when applied to a constant standing officer in the Church.] His
Presbyterian doubter offers the forementioned Texts to prove this, and he
answers, That one of these names are sometimes attribut to ane extraordinary
officer whose formal office is ceased. Now how impertinent this is to the
point and Queston let any judge? To prove that Episcopus or Bishop, imports
ane ordinary standing officer above [a Presbyter,] and that the Word Bishop and
Presbyter signify not the same ordinary officer, because sometimes the Word
elder may be applied to ane Apostle, is a consequence, as we use so say, a
baculo ad angulum, and known to no logik. 2. We told him already that we prove
enough against him when we prove that the Scripture-Episcopus, or Bishop, is
never found to Import any ordinary officer above the Presbyter, and that the
Office, Work, Qualifications, and Duties of these officers, as ordinary
standing officers, are one and the same. 3. The Instance of the Apostles
assumeing the name of elder, does in this further appear to be ane impertinent
exception to the Argument adduced, in that the office of ane Apostle, is in
Scripture both by a proper name, work, qualification, call, etc. diversified
and distinguished from that of ane ordinary elder; so that though in a general
sense the Apostles be called elders, their Specific difference from the
ordinary elder is apparent: But this Informer will never show the least
vestigies of the Diocesian Bishops distinction from the preaching elder or
Presbyter in any of these respects? And therefore his reason added here viz.
The Bishop may be called ane [elder] as well as ane Apostle, and yet be ane
officer superior to him, is a begging of the Question, since he cannot show
that there is a higher ordinary officer then a Pastor or Presbyter, appointed
in the Word, nor can he show any designation, qualification, work, or
ordination of his Diocesian Bishop, as distinguished from the Presbyter by the
Prelatists; And therefore the Apostles being called elders can no more ground a
distinction betwixt the Bishop and the elder, then betwixt the Pastor and the
elder, whom he acknowledges to be one and the same, or betwixt the Minister and
the elder. I suppose one should allege the Pastor to be a higher officer then
the preaching elder and Presbyter, notwithstanding that in Scripture their
names, and qualifications are one, as of the Bishop and Presbyter, and should
ground his opinion on this Informers reason here, (viz.) [that though the two
words are promiscuosly used often times of the same officer, yet the officer
meaned by one of these may be sometimes understood of one above the degree of
ane ordinary Minister] what will he say to his own reason, pleading for this
foolish distinction? Would he not say that the [Apostle] and [elder] are
elsewhere clearly distinguished on Scripture, not the Pastor and the elder,
which answer he must here bestow upon himself. Sure this man will not deny but
that the various Church officers both ordinary and extraordinary have their
proper formal office is deciphered, and distinguished from other offices and
officers, As Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors: and particularly he will
not deny that there is such ane ordinary Church officer as the Pastor or
Presbyter, distinguished by his proper designation from others, notwithstanding
that the Apostles took this name in a general sense: So that from this it
follows that if the Bishops proper designation, work, ordination,
qualifications, as distinct from a Presbyter, cannot be produced, he must be
always understood in that sense (viz.) ane ordinary Pastor and no more: And
not as the Apostles when termed elders, whose distinct Superior office, and
proportioned designation, is clearly extant in Scripture.

His 2d. Reason and exception to the Argument is that with us the word [elder]
signifies both the preaching, and ruling elder, and that he can, upon as good,
and better ground say, that it signifies the [Bishop] and the [Minister] both
being elders, but of different dogrees Ans. 1. When he shall make as evident
from Scripture, the Diocesian Bishopes distinction from, and Superiority unto
the Pastor or Presbyter-Bishop or Minister of a congregation, as we have shown
the superiority of the preaching elder, abov^ ^he ruleing elder, and the
distinction of the one from the other, then his parallel will pass current, but
till then it is a mere nonsequitur. The Scripture clearly distinguishes, as we
have seen, the elder that rules only, and the elder that both labors in the
word and doctrine, and rules also, clearlydiversifying the offices, and
allowing honor to the one above the other. Now, let this, or any thing like
this, be shown as to the Diocesian Bishop and Presbyter-Bishop; where will this
Informer point us to such a distinction of Bishops, and their office and honor
as there is here of the elders? Nay, since in all directions as to peoples
obedience to Pastors, their is not the least intimation of his supposed
different degrees of pastors we strongly con-

the contrare: So that we infer the distinction betwixt the preaching and
ruleing elder, from the Scriptures clear specifying of different offices, Acts,
and degrees of honor accordingly, among elders, but the sucks out of his
fingers the different degrees of Pastors, and the distinction of the Bishop
from the Presbyter without the least Scripture-warrand. 2. He grossly belies
our princples and the truth, when he maks his Presbyterian doubter allege That
the word [elder] signifies no more but [a Minister of a particular
congregation] which he forged to bring in, and give some color unto, this his
2d. Answer or reason. But saltem mendacem opportet esse memorem. A liar, they
say, should have a good memory; He be contradicts himself, while suggesting in
the objection, that we hold that elder signifies no morethen a Pastor, yet
telling us for his answer, that we hold the Word elder to signify, sometimes
the preaching, sometimes the ruleing elder. It is enough for our purpose that
neither the word Bishop, nor Presbyter, do signify any ordinary standing
Church officer higher then a Pastor or Minister of the gospel laboring in the
word and doctrine (whither indiscriminatim, or in fixed particular
congregations, in the Apostolic ^s, we need not determine as to our defense
here) an^ until he prove that either of the names do signify a higher
ordinary officer (which will be ad calendas Graecas) the argument stands good
against him. We may here mind this Informer that hereafter he alleges that 2 Timothy 4. The Deaconta or Diaconship is in a general sense attribut to Timothy
ane Evangelist, yet he would reject it as ane absurd inference to conclude from
this that there are different degries of deacons allowed or appointed in
Scripture Which notwithstanding is his own consequence here, and the strength
of his answer to the premised Argument. As for what he adds. That Bishops were
afterward sometimes called Presbyters of their Churches, though unquestionably
Bishops in his sense, in rembemberance of the indifferency of the names in the
times of the new Testament, though they were ordinarily called Bishops, We say
it is certane that the first supposed Bishops, named in the pretended
Catalogues from the Apostles and Evangelists (of which afterward) were mere
Presbyters; and if they were called Presbyters in rememberance of the new
Testament times, the more guilty were they who afterward made the word Bishop
(contrare unto the new Testament times and language) the Characteristick of ane
office Superior to a Pastor or Presbyter, and the rather in that whereas the
word Presbyter or elder is several times assumed by the Apostles in a general
sense, the word Episcopus or Bishop always denots ane ordinary Pastor (if we
except that Episcopatus in Act 1. Which our translators on the Margin renders
office or charge in a general sense) so that when Prelates ambitious invention
was upon the wheel, it seems they should rather have appropriat to themselves
the word Presbyter or elder, a fit designation for Fathers of the Church, as
this man calls them.

The doubter, nixt offers ane Argument against prelacie from Philip. 1. [where
the Apostle speaks of Bishops in the plural number in that Church, who were
only Ministers, since there could not be many Bishops over Ministers in that
^nChurch.] we shall take up here with this hint of argument, only adding, that
by confession of Prelatists, there was never in one city more then one Bishop
even when the inhabitants were all professed Christians, much more here where
the generality of the inhabitants were Heathens and the Christians but a small
remnant. So that the Apostles saluting here the ^ishops in the plural number.
Bishops of that one Church of Philippi, and contradistinguishing them from the
Deacons whom he immediately subjoyns to them, he must needs be understood of the
Pastoures, and Presbyters, as the highest ordinary officers of that Church. To
answer this Argument, the Insormer hathgathered together several scrapes and
some very odd and inconsistent notions. 1. He tells us that Ambrose takes these
Bishops, not to be the Bishops at Philippi, but certan Bishops present with
Paul when he wrote, and in whose name he writs to the Philippians, joining them
with himself. But this gloss, as it is cross to the current of expositores, so
to common sense. Paul, who only was the Spirit of Gods penman, joins here
Timothy with himself in the inscription, as in several other Epistles, and
having taken to himself, and Timothy, the designation of Servants of Christ,
he does nixt after this description of himself and Timothy, according to his
usual Method, describe these to whom he writes, (viz.) [to all the Saints in
Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons] viz, there,
at Philippi, not with Paul, they being ranked among these to whom he writes,
who are contradistinguished from Paul and Timothy, the directors of the
Epistle, and supposed to be with these saints at Philipp; Otherwise there is
no sense in the Text to read it thus, Paul and Timothius, to the saints at
Philippi, with the Bishops with Paul. Had the Apostle joined them with himself,
as he does Timothy, in the inscription, they would have been mentioned in that
branch of the verse together with him, and not cast after the adress, and the
description of these to whom he writes. The Apostle in Gal. 1. After he has
described and asserted his Apostolic authority, he nixt adds, and all the
brethren that are with me, to the Churches of Galatia. Thus he takes in many
with himself in this inscription, before he describe these, to whom the Epistle
is addressed. And should not these supposed eminent Bishops, have been after
this manner joined with him; Besides, will any say that the Deacons, joined with
these Bishops in the period of this verse, were not at Philippi, or belonging
to that Church, but with Paul? But they are mean men, and their credit needed
not to be saved by such a conceit as this. All the fear of that Father was,
^east these Bishops at Philippi, be found mere Presbyters of that Church; And
how to ward off this blow, hoc opus hic labor ese. Well, what further answers
he? He tells us nixt. That others think they were Bishops of theChurches about,
conveened at Philippie, which Paul knowing of, salutes them with the Church:
Since he first salutes [the Saints] as intending mainely to write to them; and
then [the Bishops.] So we see the Prelatists sail every point of the
compass, to save the credit of these Bishops. If Bishops cannot be gotten set
beside the chair with Paul, when addressing the Epistle (this gloss standing
clearly antipod to the Text) the nixt shift is, rather then these Bishops be
degraded to mere Presbyters, to send for some other Bishops to Philippi at this
time of Paul's Writing, that this casual Mustere of Bishops of other Churches,
may ward off the deadly blow which the cause will get, by seating all these
Bishops at Philippie, as officers of that Chuch; and to compass this design,
they must be but occasionally saluted here, and not as fixed members or
officers thereof; upon the Apostles Information (comeing to late to his ears
from our Informer and his fellows) that there were several Magnates there,
besides the ordinary Presbyters at Philippi. But, which also odd, they must
become so humble as to fall behind the Saints, the persons mainely written to.
Had our Informer left out this clause (which notwithstanding his answer did
require) Our Prelates Parliaments order, Who are before, because behind the
most, would have saved their reputation still. But many of the Ancients are
more ingenuous. Thodoret confesses that Presbyters are here understood, because
their could not be many Bishops in one-city, on Philip. 1. Oecumenius, on
Philip. 1. Tells us, That we are not so to understand it as if there were many
Bishops in one city, but that the Apostle calls the Presbyters, Bishops.
Chrisost. ibid. acknowledges, That they were Presbyters who were called thus,
because the names were then common and the Bishop, himself was called Deacon,
and that the distinction of names came afterward. This conjecture is sib to
that other shift to take off the strength of our argument. from Act. 20. viz.
[That these Elders were not Church Officers of Ephesus only, but the Bishops
of all Asia met together at Ephesus, and sent for by Paul from thence] least
if the Episcopal authority be found seated in these Elders of Ephesus, at Paul's
last farewell, it break the Diocesian Prelat all in pieces. But as it is well
replied that since Paul sent to Ephesus for the Elders of the Church, it is a
groundless conjecture to call them any other Elders then of that Church to
which he sent, and that there is no hint in the text of any other Elders there
at that time So this fancy is as fond when applied to this passage, and may
receave the same reply. What shadow of proof can be produced that therewere
any other Officers there at this time then the Bishops or Ministers of this
Church? And what Logic, I pray, or sense is there in this inference, that
because the Apostle first salutes, all the Saints or the Church collective in
bulk, and then the Church Officers, Bishops and Deacons, or the Church
representative in special, that therefore he salutes these Church Officers as
casually there, and not as Officers of that Church. Beside, had the Apostle
saluted them as casually present, they would have been saluted with every Saint
in Christ, Chap. 4: 21. rather then in the inscription. The English Annotations
thus sense it [That by the Bishops and Deacons, we are to understand the whole
Ministry at Philippi consisting of Presbyters, to whom the government of the
Church was committed, and Deacons, who not only had the care of the poor, but
also assisted the Ministers in their Ecclesiastic function.]

But our Informer has a third Answer, wherein, He grants that these Bishops
and Deacons were [Officers of this Church] and asks where were the ruling
Elders] here, and if we say they are included in the word Bishop, then he tells
us that upon better ground he can affirm, that Bishops here signifies both the
superior Bishop and the ordinary Minister, who may be called Bishop as well as
Epaphroditus is called ane [Apostle.] Answ. 1. Our Argument from this place and
such like, beside the Scriptures silence as to the Diocesian Bishop, is, That
the Scripture Bishop does therein stand so described and qualified, that it is
impossibe to understand him of any other officer then a mere Presbyter, which
is most manifast here, It being impossible that a multiplicity of Bishopes
could be at Philippi, as is universally acknowledged. And if he grant that
these Bishops were officers, of that Church in Philippi, he must either say
they were mere Preebyters, which is all we seek, and the yielding of his
cause, or he must prove that either here or else where, the word Episcopus or
Bishop designs the diocesian Bishop, and place a multiplicity of such Bishops
here against the old Cannons, particularly that of Nice. But 2. As to what he
says of the ruleing elders, it is utterly impertinent and answered already. We
proved the ruling elders office, as distinct from the preaching elder, by clear
Scripture grounds, and did show that the Scripture points out two sorts of
elders, giving them both this general name of elder, and then distinguishing
them into such as rule, and such as labor in the word and doctrine: But this
Informer will never prove that [Episcopus, or Bishop]. designs two sorts of
Pastors a higher and a lower, or that there is any difference of degrees in the
pastoral office: So that he cannot include here his Superior imaginary Bishop
of whose office the Scripture is utterly silent. As we may, the elder in the
Bishop. And till he make the Diocessian Prelat appear in Scripture, we must
still hold that when Ministers are called Bishops, they get the proper
specific designation, and characteristick of their office, and are not called
^o in a general figurative, sense or Catachrestice, as Epaphroditus is called
the Philippians Apostle, or messenger. But how? viz. their messenger sent to
Paul, who ministered to his wants. Phil. 2: 25. So 2 Cor. 8. v. 23. Titus and
others are called the Apostles and messengers of the Corinthianes viz (as it is
there inumar) in that bussines of the collection for the Saints at Jerusalem,
for which end they were sent to the Corinthians. So the Spirit of God in
Scripture, both in holding out the distince office of Apostle properly so
called (for I hope our Informer will not upon this ground make different
degrees of Apostles as he does of Pastors) and likewayes in the very manner of
these designations, and their circumstances, when atribut to such inferior
officers, does state the distinction betwixt them and ane Apostle in his proper
acception, clearly holding out that they had neither name nor thing of the
apostolic office properly so called, but that Ministers are so improperly only
called Bishops, He will never prove. But now what is his last shift? It maybe
(says he) their were no Bishops settled as yet at Philippie, and so it may
very well be. But our Informer here supposes two things in Question which he
will prove ad calendas graecas 1. That their were Bishops, superior in office
and degree to Presbyters, appointedby the Apostles. The first and second Answer
tells us of Bishops (he means diocesian Bishops) either with Paul when he wrote
to Philippi -- Or come from their diocesses (forsooth) and present accidentally
there: And having told us that the diocesian Bishops were among the rest of
the Presbyters Bishops in his third answer, His last shift is, that they were
not it may be, yet set up at Philippy, But remark, that as all these proteus
like shifts and answers contradicts one another, So they all lean upon this
Egyptian reed, that the Diocesian Bishop is ane officer divinely appointed, and
then existant. Now, how impertinent dealing this is, let any judge. We prove
from this and many such like texts, that the scripture Bishop is a mere
presbyter, they in all there answers do coin glosses of these Texts, which
do suppose the Jus and existence, of the diocesian prelat, which is the very
quaesitum, and the thing in Question. 2. He supposes that the Bishop over
presbyters (the Chimaera of his own brain) though he was not settled at this
time, yet was to be Settled afterward at Philippi. But how proves he that the
Apostle was to setle after ward such a prelat there? This is another of their
shifts, that the Apostles first set up prebyters, keeping still the government
of the Churches in their oun hand, till at last toward their end they set up
prelates, committing the government to them. But how does he or they prove this
after-institution of the diocesian Bishop? we have already abundantly evinced
the Contrary, both that the presbyters were the highest ordinary officers
established by the Apostles, and that without any such fancied reserve as this
is, the wholl power both of order and jurisdiction was committed to them, and
exercised by them, and supposed by the Apostles to continow so in their last
farewelles to the Churches: and therefore may conclude that the Bishops of
Philippi were mere presbyters: and that Paul acknowledged, and knew no other.

Arnold: in his Lux in Tinebr.: (on Act. 20. 17. He called the elders, etc.
represents the Orthodox opinion, thus, Episcopos and Presbyteros, etc. -- That
Bishops and Presbyters are not names of diverse gifts in the Church, but of one
and the same office, because they who are here called Presbyters, verse 28. are
called Bishops. The Papists object (says he as this Informer that in these
times the names were common, but yet the [office] of Bishops and Presbyters
diverse. he answers 1. This is to affirm, not to prove. 2. When offices are
distinct, there also the names are diverse, 3. there was one office both of
Bishops and Presbyters viz. the office of teaching. 4. Upon the Papists
supposition there can and ought to be only one Bishop in one city, but so it is
that there were here many, therefore [Bishops] signify [Presbyters.] Thus
Arnold. classes our Informer among the Papists in this point, and represents
our principles as the Orthodox principles of the Protestant Churches, and so in
several other passages as we may after show. Chamier, (de Oecum: Pontif: lib.
10. cap. 3.) Having represented the Papists glosses upon Matthew. 20.-25 [the
Kings of the Gentils] etc. the same with our Informers, viz. That our Lord
discharged only that sort of Tyrannical Domination, and having answered and
confuted them, as we heard Iunius and Whittaker did before; and having
prefixed to the 7. chap. this cirle, An jure divino etc. [Whether the Bishop be
greater than the Presbyter by divine right] he represents the affirmative
answer as Bellarmins, together with his arguments and confuts them, and having
proved Presbyters power in ordination, from [their imposeing of hands upon
Timothy], he afterward confuts the Papists, (and this Informers) pretenses for
Prelacy from the Government of the jewish Church, and the Apostles Superiority
to the seventy disciples: and adducing Bellarmin's argument from this passage
(act. 20: 28.) to prove that the Holy Ghost set up Bishops, he answers thus -
locus exactis alienus est, etc. -- that place of the acts is impertinently
cited, for from thence it is evident that Bishops and Presbyters are the same,
Witness Ierom. and others, for they whom Luke before called elders, or
Presbyters of the Church, those Paul afterward affirms to have been made
Bishops by the Spirit, and indeed for feeding, and (as the latin Interpreter)
for governing the Church.] So we see Chamier: classeth also our Informer among
the Papists in those his prelatick principles and glosses upon those
Scriptures. Calvin upon Tit. 1: 7. Collects the identity of Bishop and
Presbyter, from the Apostle's calling them Bishops, who were before called
Presbyters, and (as we heard above) reprehends, upon this ground, the
distinction placed betwixt them, as profane and antiscriptural. The same he
inferrs upon Act. 20. where the Presbyters of Ephesus are called Bishops,
making our Informer's great topic anent the calling of such Ministers
Bishops, qui primas tenebant in singulis civitatibus, or had a precedence in
every city, a corruption and sin of those times. The Dutch annot: on Act. 20:
28. observe that those termed Bishops in this verse, being called elders in the
17. verse [it does then appear that in the Holy Scripture there is no
difference made betwixt elders and Bishops.] referring us to Phil. 1. 1. verse,
upon whch passage they assert the same thing: and especially from the plurality
of such Bishops in one and the same Church, conclude this, referring us to 1 Timothy 3. 1. verse. and Tit. 1 chap. 5, 7, v. upon which places they observe,
that by Bishops and Elders one kind of Ministry is signified, viz. the
laborers in the word and doctrine, citeing 1 Timothy 5: 17. 2 Pet. 5: 1, 2. and
from the Apostles description of the Bishop in the 1 Timothy 3. they conclude that
by Bishop we are to understand all teachers of the Church without difference,
referring again to the forementioned places. The english annot. express the
same sense of these places under debate, and upon Acts 11. 30, v. adduce both
fathers and counsels to prove this point.

The Nixt Scripture argument which the Doubter bings against prelacie, and the
Last too, is taken from Ephesians. 4. 11. [where the Apostle reckons up Church
officers, and makes no mention of Bishops]. Our argument from the Scripture
enumeration of Church officers here, and in the parallels 1. Cor. 12: 28. Romans
12: 6, 7, 8, Is this [That the Holy Ghost therein describing purposly the
various kinds of Church officers, and speaking of the office of the pastor,
makes no distinction of a higher and lower pastor, nor gives the least hint of
either Name or thing of a diocesian prelat, although both ordinary and
extraordinary officers, be enumerat, even the ruleing elder and the deacone:
from which silence of the Scriptur, as to this imaginary Bishop, we conclud
him to be no plant of the heavenly fathers planting, by the same reason that
our divines conclude the pope to be such. To this our Informer answers. 1. That
it is ill reasoning, that because such ane officer is not in such a particular
place, or, enumeration, that therefore he is no where to be found in scripture,
for how prove we that the Apostle intended in that place, a cempleat
enumeration Ans: he is guilty of a palpable forgerie here, whillmaking his
Doubter instance in this place only, as if we held, that there is here a full
enumeration, whereas he cannot but know that presbyterians in this argument
against prelates, as also protestants in opposition to the papacy, do,
together with this passage, join the parallels. 1. Cor. 12: 28. Romans 12: 16. In
which places collated, there is found a complete, enumeration of all Church
officers ordinary, or extraordinary, and adiscoverie of their duties, and gifts
who are ordinary officers, even of the very Deacon. Lykwayes, we take in with
these Texts, the several descriptions of ordinary officers, and particularly of
the Bishop, and his gifts and duties, found in any other places of the new
Testamament. And since this Informer cannot deny the Apostles, or rather the
Spirit of God his intention of a full enumeration in these places Collated
(Such a full Catalogue of Church Officers being therein found) our argument
from the Scriptures utter silence of the Diocesian prelat in all these places,
stands firm by his own Confession, until he shall disprove this silence and
prove the Contrary. 2. We might tell him also, that upon his own ground, even
the Silence of this Text as to the Prelat, will prove our point; for it being
upon the one hand the Apostles scop to enumerat the most illustrous excellent
gifts and offices given by Christ to the Church, for her grouth and
edification, as his royal Mediatorie Donations upon his ascension into heaven:
and upon the other hand, the Apostle descending as low in his enumeration; as
the Pastor, and teacher, whom this man holds to be officers inferior to the
Diocesian Prelat, Certainly upon both these grounds, he would have mentioned
him in order to this scope, had such ane officer been allowed or apappointed.
And as for this Text, it is enough if we prove that the Apostle intended
therein though not a complete enumeration of all, yet of the most excellent
functions and officers given by Christ to his Church, amongst which the
Diocesian Bishops office has the prime place in this man's Judgment. How then
(I pray) can he be here ommitted, and ane inferior officer named, His 2d.
Answer is. That Bishops are comprehended under [pastoures] and teachers Bishops
being such though of a Superior degree to ordinary Pastoures. Ans. first that
Scripture Bishops are comprehended under the pastor and teacher, is certan, but
that the Diocesian should be so, is Impossible, and by him gratis dictum. For.
1. he cannot show that in these enumerations, the Superior officer gets the
designation of the inferior, now he holds the Diocesian Prelat to be ane office
and order Superior to the Pastor. Nixt this were no proper enumeration, as he
acknowledges there is here, of distinct and officers offices, if they had not
all there proper distinct names and designations. And since Apostles,
Evangelists, Pastors, are proper designations of distinct officers; and
offices, why ought not the Diocesian Bishop to have had his proper epithet, and
to have come in between the Evangelist, and the Pastor, for this was his proper
Class as the higher Church officer. Again, This answer and shift is the same
with that of the Papists to save the pope, for they answer our divines Argument
from this Text, that he is included in the office of the Apostle. But as we
tell them that according to there account and Character of him, he ought to
have had a more peculiar designation, So we may say to this Informer here.
Besides, may not Patriarchs, and all the rabble of the popes locusts have this
pretended for them, that they are included in some of these officers? Sure we
may in Charity suppose that if a Papist were pleading thus, This man would tell
him, that it were no defense to shape out officers of their own devising, and
then allege they are included in some of these scripture designations, which
answer suites his own case, Since he cannot make it appear that the Diocesian
Bishop is appointed in Scripture, And we have proved his office to be contrary
unto it. Lastly. Hetels us [That if we will have here ane perfect enumeration
of all Church officers, we must comprehend [ruleing elders, and deacons] in
some of these words, and why may not he do so with [Bishops.] Ans. 1. We need
not, in order to our scope nor argument from this text, allege either a full
enumeration of all officers, or go about to includ [elder] and [Deacon] under
some of these words, It being, enough if we con show that the most eminent
Church officers given for the Churches edification, are here enumerat, and that
the enumeration comes the length of ane officer inferior to the Prelat, in this
man's esteem^, down from ane Apostle; which renders our Argument from this Text
impregnable. 2. If we should include the elder and Deacon, in one of these
words, we should but include therein inferior officers of divine appointment
in the designation of Superior, which he will acknowledge to be no unusual
thing in Scripture. But his including the Diocesian Bishop is both the
including of a forged anti Scriptural officer of his own deviseing: and
likewayes, if he includ him under the Pastor and teacher, ane including and
comprehending of a Superior officer under the designation of ane inferior,
both which differences do cut the sinnewes of Reason and answer.

CHAP. XII.
The Informer offers Scripture warrant for Bishops. His Argument from the
Government of the Church under the old Testament, and from the Apostles
superiority to the seventie disciples, examined. The first Argument concludes,
a lawful subordination of Church-offiers; in general, but reaches no help to
the Diocesian Erastian Bishop. The second beggs the question in supposing
Prelates to succeed the Apostles immediately, and Pastoures, the seventy
disciples; and from a Superiority among officers of different kinds
groundlesly concludes a superiority among officers of the same kind. No Image
of our Prelacy in the Iewish-Church-Government, or in the Apostles superiority
above other Church Officers. The Informer contradicts his fellowpleaders in
this cause and himself also.

THE Doubter over come by this Informers mighty Answers (forsooth) [Confesseth
Episcopacie not to be unlawful, and only pleads that it may become inexpedient,
and a better put in its place] Whereupon he promises [That if we will not stand
out against light, he will let us see warrant in the word for Bishops] and so
he may easily do. But the Bishop he must let us see the warrant for is the
Diocesian Erastian Bishop, having sole power in ordination and jurisdiction,
bound to preach to no flock, and deriving all his power from the civil
Magistrate. Now, when he has given us Scripture warrant for such ane ordinary
Church Officer, as is of this mould under the new Testament, erit mihi magnus
Apollo. We see he still walks in darkness as to the State of the Question, and
dare not exhibit to us the mould of the present Bishop now existent, when he
offers to produce Scripture warrands for him. His 1. Warrant is; that under the
old Testament (setting aside the hie Priest who was a Typ of Christ) there was
a subordination among the rest of the Priests, mention being made of chief
Priests 2 King 19: 2. Ezr: 8: 29. etc. Matthew. 2: 3. Act. 19: 14. And over these
again a chief priest under the hiest priest, who only was Typical, since two
hie priests are sometimes mentioned, Luc. 3: 2, So there was a subordination
among the Levites Exodus 6: 2. Numb. 3: 18, 19. with 24. 30. v. Neh. 11: 22. One
is set over the Levites, called by the Greek, Episcopus, and another over the
Priests v 14. From all which places he concluds, That subordination among
Churchmen is no such odious thing as some believe] Ansr. (...). If this be all
the Conclusion which this man draws out against us from the premised trite
argument of Bellarmin and others, viz. that there is a subordination among
Church men, It will never help him, nor wound our cause in the least; for as we
grant without the least prejudice thereunto, that there is a subordination,
both of Courts and Church Officers under the new Testament, Pastors being
above ruleing elders, and they above Deacons. Presbyteries also being above
Kirk Sessions, Synods above Presbyteries, National assemblies above Synods, as
the jews had there Supreme Sanhedrin, Exodus 24. 2 Chronicles 19. And also betwixt
the Sanhedrin and Synagogue, a middle Ecclesiastic Court called (...) the
Pre^bytery Luke 22: 66. Act. 22. 5. and also their least Sinagogue-Iudicatorie,
wherein was both ruleing, and censures. Act. 26: 11. Compared with Act. 9: 1,
2. And with Mark. 5* 35, 36. Act. 18: 8. Answerable to our Kirk Sessions. which
is largely demonstrat by Mr Gillespie, Aar. rod. lib. 1. Cap. 3. page 8. to 38.
As this (I say) is clear, so it is evident, that it is much more then a mere
subordination of Courts or officers, which he most prove if he will conclude
any thing to purpose against us, viz, The Prelates sole decisive power, and
negative voice in judicatories, and their deryvation of all their authority
from the Magistrate as his deputs, in their administration. Now, from the
subordination of Courts, or officers, mentioned under the old dispensation, to
conclude [the lawfulness of a Prelat (a pretended Minister of the new
Testament) his taking from other Ministers all the power of Government,
contrary to our Lords express command, his laying, aside the preaching Talent,
and giving up all the ecclesiastic authority which he pretendes unto, to one
who is not, Qua talis, so much as a Church member] is a wide and wild
conclusion: yet that this is the conclusion which he must infer to prove his
point, is beyond all Question.

2. Giveing, not granting to him that there was under the old dispensation such
a Hierarchy as he pleades for, and such a difference of degrees among Church
officers, as he represents, how will he prove this consequence [that the
Government of the Church under the New Testament must be thus molded, and have
the same degrees of Ministers, as the Jews had of Priests and Levits] this
Connection he supposes here, and offers afterward some smatterings in proof
thereof, but with what success we shall see with in a little. Will he say that
it is lawful to bring into the christian Church every point of the jewish
policy? Bilson, ane English Bishop (even in pleading for Prelacie) will give
him the lie if he say so, and show him the disparitie betwixt their Church
government and ours: Perp: Gov. Chap. 2. [for the tribe of Levi (says he) was
neither subjected to the Government, of another tribe, nor without manifest
confusion could it want all Government, wherefore as all the rest, so this
tribe also had its proper Magistrates, to wit, its, Pinces Elders, judges etc.
-- He adds, that the Jews Law contained in the books of Moses, comprehended
the mould of their civil Government, and the Priests and Levits being most
skilful in this knowledge, we need not wonder that they were placed in the same
benches with the judges] (this we offer to our Informers observation, to snew
how this Bishop Pulles his care in argueing from the Priests sitting in civil
courts numb. 11, To Justify our Prelates civil rule) but now to our purpose in
relation to Church government, he adds further [that the offices of the
Sanctuary, and rites and ceremonies of the Sacrifices, from which all the
other tribes except the Levites were restrained, were not of one kind; So that
it needs be no wonder that these degrees of the administrators were
distinguished according to the diversity of offices and services. But in the
Church of Christ, the Word and Sacraments concredited to all Ministers without
distinction, as they are of one kind, neither admitts any difference of
administration, or celebration, so neither do they require different degrees
of Ministers] Thus he. Sure had our Informer listened unto this information of
this Father of the Church (as he speaks) he would have spared this Argument as
not worth the repeating. The Ministry of the Levites who served in the
sojourneing Tabernacle, is compared to warrfare Numb. 4. Because of the
Military order which the Priests and Levits observed in their external
Ministry. Where there was one common Temple, a common Ministry of the
priesthood, a thousand administrators in every family (the twenty four families
who served each their week in the Temple being called courses by Luke, and
stationes by the Talmudists, the term being borrowed from warrfare, as Scaliger
observes (in Canonibus isagogicis) it is no strange thing if in this Ministry,
and Priesthood, their were such degrees of administrators; but the Prieststood
being changed, there is made of necessity a change of the law, says the
Apostle Hebr. 7: 12. And the policy suitable to the state of that Church must
by necessary consequence be changed also.

3. The antecedent of the Argument from that policy, will be a harder task
then he imagines, and this Informer would be quite out if put to draw us the
Image and lineaments of our present prelacie in the Jewish Church Government.
For 1. We cleared above that the Ecclesiastic Sanhedrin was distinct from the
civil, and that the priests had a distinct independent authority and ministry:
But the prelates derive all their spiritual authority from the Magistrate. 2. He
cannot show that either the Highpriest, or any inferior priests had the sole
decisive Suffrage in their ecclesiastic Courts, or such a negative voice as
the prelates exercise and assumein their pretended Synods and presbyteries. The
learned Iunius will inform our Informer (De Cler. Cap. 24 Not 13.) That, par
consortium honoris and potestatis fuit inter sacerdotes, sed ordine impari, qua
familiarum, qua temperis respectu. Penes concessum sacerdotum ex lege fuit
ordinaria jurisdictio ecclesiastica That is, Among the priests there was a like
participation of honor and power, though in a different order: partly in
respect of families, and partly in respect of times, the ordinary
ecclesiastic jurisdiction belonged to the assembly of the priests according
to the Law. Thus he* Sure then it belonged not to the Highpriest alone, far
less to any inferior priests, and therefore none of them all had our prelates
negative voice in judicatories, or a sole decisive Suffrage, so that they were
far from our prelates principality as to directive and corrective power. And
therefore though we should grant that his argument will hold as to our being
oblidged by the policy of the Jews, and to have the government of the Gospel
Church this molded, yet our present hierarchy is so different from it, that
it will not help his cause in the least.

But the doubter objects [that there ought not to be such a subordination under
the new Testament.] To which he answers, [That the Old Testament-subordination
being to maintain order and unity in the in the Church, there is the same
reason for it under the new, and stronger, because the Christian Church is of
larger extent then the Jewish, and the danger of schisms, and the necessity of
preventing them, the greater: And what better way for this then Gods way thus
exemplary pointed out to us, although the New Testament gave no other ground,
Gods own model being best for the Church.] I answ. 1. He must plead for much
more then a mere subordination of Officers, if he speak to the point, as is
clear from that is said. And his Doubter, (if he had dealt fairly) should have
objected [that the New Testament Church ought not to have the same mould of
government that the Jewish had, and that there is a vast disparitie betwixt
their prelatick Erastian Hierarchy, and the Jewish Church-Government] Both
which grounds do break the force of his argument. But it is good that our
Informer has the doubters arguments and objections of his own moulding. 2.
Though he know reason of a subordination under the Old Testament (he should
have said of that particular mould of government which the Jewish Church had
but his general one, to maintain order and union in Gods Church (he should
have said in that Church, under that special dispensation,) yet we have showen
him some Reasons of their particular policy which do not reach us. And shall
only resume to him that we have neither. 1. Such a distinction of tribes. Nor
2. A common Temple, and common Ministry in one Temple for the universal, or for
any National Church, as they. Nor 3. Have we such types and shadows, from
which (as upon the former grounds) this mould of government did flow. Nor 4.
Such various sanctuary offices, and degrees, and varieties of administrations,
requiring (as Bishop Bilson has told him) such variety and different degrees
of Administratores, the Word and Sacraments being concredited to all Ministers
without distinction etc. Besides, has not the Apostle in the forementioned
passage, Hebr. 7: 12. Given this Informer a sufficient Reason why we are not
tied to the same Policy, viz because that the Priosthood is changed, (i. e.)
their particular frame of Church officers, and that therefore there is made a
change of the Law, that is, of the legal ordinance, both of worship and
Government. 3. Darene say that Christ's Church under the New Testament, may have
every mould of government which may be in it self, or in respect of some
circumstances, commendable, and subservient to these ends of order and union?
Where is Christ's faithfulness as a Sone over his own house, beyond that of
Moses? Where are all the New Testament prescriptions in point of government,
Officers, Laws, Censures, if the Church thereof like a Tabula rasa may have
any government introduced into it, which may be in its own time and place good,
and Ministers framed according to the Old Testament dispensation?

4. How will our Informer extricat himself as to the Jewish High priest in
maintaining this Answer to his doubter? Was not his office a special mean of
order and unity in that Church, and to prevent schisme*s and divisions? And is
there not the same reason that the Christian Church should be thus kept from
that evil by a supreme Highpriest or bishop? What better way for this, then
Gods own way? And what better pattern for modelling the New Testament-Church
in point of her government, then this pattern? Surely the Pope will thank him
for this. I know he sets aside (in contradiction to Saravia, as I shall show)
the Highpriest in his argument, as a Type of Christ, the man forsaw that this
would cast his argument in to ane entire Popish mould; but he is not so
forseeing as to prevent his being snared by his own reason, and caught in the
brieres of contradictions. For 1. He dare not deny that this Officer was a
singular Mean of their order and union. Hence he must grant that his answer to
the doubters objection is naught, and that Gods way of preserving order and
union in the New Testament Church, is different from his way, and the means of
preverving it under the Old, and that the Samenes of the end of Gods ordinances
and institutiones under both dispensations, will not plead for holding the same
institutiones. Was not order, union, and the edification of the Church, the
great end of all the Mosaical Ceremonies and Pedagogie. Were not the Jews for
this great end of order and union to keep their solemn Feasts? To go up to
Jesusalem solemly and joynly three times in the year? To have one common
Temple, one Altar, etc. And must therefore the Christian Church observe the
same ordinances and institutions? 2. How will he prove that the inferior
Priests were not Types of Christ as well as the Highpriest? Dare he say that
their praying for the people, and their sacrificeing, were not typical of
Christ's intercession and sacrifice, as well as the praying and sacrificing of
the High priest, though not in the same degree of eminency? I grant that the
Apostle (Heb. 5.) speaking of the authority and honor of Christ's Priesthood,
presents the legal type thus; Every Hiepriest taken from among men, etc. Yet
if we shall consider that Hebr. 10. discoursing of the efficacy of Christ's
sacrifice in opposition to the legal, he says in the 11, and 12. Ver. And
every Priest (simply, not evrie High Priest) stands daily ministering and
offering the Same sacrifices, which can never take away sin, but his man after
he had offered one Sacrifice for sins, etc. It will be evident that the
inferior priests were also Types of Christ. So that he should either have
taken in the High priest into his argument, or excluded together with him, the
inferior priests upon the same ground. For majus and minus non variant
speciem rei. If he say that he is not speaking of their Sacrifices, but of
their Government, which was not typical. Answ. Why might he not then have taken
in the High Priest upon this ground, since these are as well distinguishable in
him, as in the inferior Priests? So that he might have been excluded from
having any thing to do with the Type in point of his government as well as
they. And for his single eminency, it drew along with it those degrees of
inferior priests and Levits, (in his principles) which are mentionedso that if
the one must evanish as a Type, in the same manner must the other. 3. It will
much puzele this Informer to prove, that the High priest in respect of his
government was a Type of Christ; Sure he will find this denied by his fellow
brother in the cause, Tilen in his Parenes: (Cap. 2) in summo Sacerdote ceu
pontifice, non typi solum sed (...) ratio conspicua and -- [In the highpriest,
the type is not only conspicuous, but the reason of order, for he bore not a
type or resemblance of Christ in resspect of the Kingely and judiciary power
which Christ has, who otherwise should have had the dignity, both according
to the order of Aaron, and the order of Melchisedeck, that is, both of a King
and a priest.] Iunius, a greater then he, (de Pontif. lib. 1. cap. 6.)
distinguishes these in the Highpriest. -- in summo Sacerdote consideranda, non
solummodo ratio typi, sed etiam ordinis and politiae, -- [We must consider in
the High priest not only the reason of the type, but like ways of order and
policy, etc.] then he adds the abovementioned: reason; So that in this
argument, and his way of pleading for prelacie upon the ground of the Jewish
policies. He will of necessity introduce a pope into the Christian Church:
Which will be convincingly clear, If we shall in the 4t. place consider, that
our Informer in this argument having set aside the High priest, as only
typical, tells us of another single Chief and High priest under him, and tells
us in answer to the premised objection, that this method of the Jewish
government (with this Chief or high priest; distinct from the typical priest)
is exemplarlie pointed out to Christians as Gods pattern for moddeling the
Gospel Church government. So that without all shadow of evasion his argument
pleads for a chief patriarch over the Christian Church, as being a part of the
Jewish policy oblidging us, and exemplarly commended to us for our imitation.
Moreover, I would know what he would say, If one should plead for retaining of
all the judicial laws of the Jews upon his two grounds. 1. As not being
typical. 2. As being Gods excellent means for order and union, and commended
exemplarly unto Christians to the same end, what better pattern for modelling
our government and laws then this pattern? Likewayes will he say that every
piece of the Jewish antiquated pedagogie was properly typical: And that we are
bound to reteane as of a moral perpetual nature whatsoever thing in their
policy was not such. Surely there were many things depending upon the
particular exigences, and state of that people, both as a Church under that old
dispensation, and as a Commonwealth regular in its civil Laws immediately by
God, which no found divines do call Typical, and yet do hold that they
oblidge no Church or state under the New Testament.

For a conclusion of this argument, I shall tell this Informer that he grossly
mistaks these Scripture expressions (at least in the judgment of some learned)
anent the Chief Priests 2. King. 19: 2. etc. When taking them to denot
different ecclesiastic degrees among the priests in their spiritual function:
these chiefness (to speak so) or principality among the priests, being meaned
of a civil principality existent in that Tribe before the priesthood was
therein established: and that they were called Chief-priests, or Elders of the
priests, did flow from this that this Trybe (subject to the same Princes as at
the first) was afterward set apart for the priesthood, for Aaron and his Soones
were chosen to be priests Exodus 28. but the whole. Tribe was not assumed unto
the priesthood before Numb. 1. Yet in the mean while the tribe of Levy (Exodus
6.) had the Heads of their families and their Princes. The Scripture then
speaking of the tribe of Levy as a Tribe simply, ascribes to it the same
policy with the rest of the tribes, and Princes of the several families by the
right of primogenitur: Thus both priests and Levits had their chief men and
presidents. But as a Tribe separat to holy things, it had its peculiar policy.
One was chief priest only by Gods appointment, at whose hand all the rest of
the priests were. 1 Chronicles. 24: 24. And at the hands of the priests were the
interior Levites, in their several services. David in distributing them in
their several Temple offices, did not set the Princes over them as such, but
only having numbered them after the Heads of their families, and by their
lotts or Courses, did assign to them their service of the Temple, upon Gods
command by the mouth of Gad and Nathan, the more to facilitat this Sacerdotal
tribe, their comeing unto, and returneing from the Temple. The Chief of the
families then, are not upon this ground Princes or Chief as to the Holy
Ministry; for there was but one only high priest, all the rest as well the
heads, as the families themselves, were at the hand of the highpriest in the
Ministry of the House of the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 24: 19. Where the Chief or head in
matters sacred, had no more power then the wholl body. So was it in the
distribution of the Levits into their several classes by their Heads Chap. 23:
27, that they might beat the hands of the Sons of Aaron in the Temple
Ministry. So that none of his citations do amount to any proof of his fancied
degrees and subordination among either the priests or Levits in their spiritual
functions, or any other way then in their civil capacity as a Tribe; neither
had the two high priests (mentioned Luc. 3.) The least warrant in Gods
institution, but this is acknowledged to be a corruption in their Government
then creept in among other corruptions: and since he draws his first instance
of the Levits subordination from Exodus 6. before that tribe was set apart at all
to the Holy Ministry, that passage at least, and (as I said, in the judgment
of some) its parallels also aftermentioned by him, do speak of the Civil
Government and subordi nation of the Levites in that capacity; and that any of
their Chief rulers are by the Greeks termed Episcopus, is a very poor argument
to conclude their Ecclesiastic rule, it being notourly known that the best
Greek Authors put his designation upon Civil Governoures.

This subordination among the Levites in Exodus 6: 15. is unquestionably civil
upon the ground assigned. And numb. 3. It is evident that the heads and princes
of Families are numbered. And accordingly the heads and Chief of the families,
1 Chronicles. 24. and in Neh: 11: 14. He that is set over the priests, is the son of
one of the great men (Haggedolim), or eminent in paris and place as many take
it. 1 Chronicles. 24: 4. before the division and order is set down, its said, there
were more Chief men found of the sons of Eleazar, then of the sons of
^thamar, etc. all which does much plead forthis assertion, but we need not be
peremptor in pressing this, since the weight of our answer lies not upon it.

Our Informer comes nixt to his New Testament proofs for Bishops and produces
first, the superiority of the twelve Apostles above the seventy Disciples.
Where 1. We see, He is still in the clouds of a general superiority, which is
far from the Prince-like Arbitrary, and Erastian superiority of the Diocesian
Prelat now existent, and whom he undertakes to plead for, which this Informer
(Had he intended to have informed right) should have condescended upon. Had the
Apostles such a superiority over the seventy Disciples? Were they subject to
the Apostles as their Rectors and judges? Did the Apostles (as our Prelates)
assume a Sole Decisive, conclusive suffrage, and a negative voice over Church
Judicatories, notwithstanding of their extraordinary and high prerogatives? Did
we not see the contrary exemplified in that meeting of Apostles with ordinary
Ministers, Act. 15? Had the seventy only a derived precarius Ministry under
the twelve Apostles, as their Vicars and Substitutes in their Ministration? Had
they no Interest in the Church Government but upon the Apostles mere pleasure.
As Curats are now in all these respects subject to their Prelates? Had not the
seventy their mission, their institution, immediately from Christ as well as the
Apostles themselves? Were they not consequently to exercise their Ministry
upon this ground, without such a servil dependence upon the twelve as Prelates
do arrogat to themselves ane arbitrary principality over Ministers? Were the
twelve to rule only, and to committ the preaching work to the seventy as their
deputes, as our Prelates now do? Or were they not rather to help forward the
great harvest, and the work of the Ministry, together with the Apostles
themselves? So that this Informer will never find the least shadow of ane
Episcopal superiority here. But 2. Granting that the Apostles were officers in
asuperiour degree to the seventy, which is the utmost Conclusion which he can
draw from Scripture, how will this infer a superiority among officers of the
same degree. We grant the Apostles were superior to Evangelists, they again to
Pastoures, Ergo, one Pastor may be a diocesian Prelat over hunderds of other
Pastors, is a consequence known to no logic. Christ appointed both
extraordinary, and ordinary officers in their several degrees, as Apostles,
Evangelists, Pastors: Ergo, he appointed different degrees of Pastors, has
no connection imaginable. 3. Tht basis of his argument lies in this [that the
Prelates are immediate successors of the Apostles in their degree of superiority
to the seventy Disciples, and Pastors come after the seventy in their supposed
subjection, and are not the Apostles immediate successors in the ordinary
Ministery] but this, as the (...), the quesitum or question, must be proved,
not begged and supposed by him. We did already evince the contrary, viz, That
the Pastor to whom is committed the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, and
both the keys, immediately from the Apostles, are the highest ordinary officers,
and the Apostles immediate successorus as to both order and Jurisdictione. But
the doubter and I object further [that the Apostles superiority over the
seventie, was extraordinary, personal, temporary, and to cease with
themselves.] In answer to this, He grants that in some things their privileges
were extraordinary, and to cease with themselves, such as their immediate cas.
ling, their sending to all nations their infallibility, gifts of tongues, or
whatever was necessary for the first founding of the obristian Church. but in
other things wherein they were superior to other Ministers, their power was not
extraordinary and temporary, but still to be continued, such as ordination of
Ministers, and governeing them by ecclesiastic authority; in which power the
Bishops succeeds them, who are [the children in stead of the Fathers] as
Augustine applies that of Psalm. 45, v. 19. Ans. 1. Then it seems that with him
the Episcopal office properly succeeds to that of the Apostles, and is a
continuation of their power in ordination and jurisdiction over Pastors, which
contradicts his second answer to our Argument from Ephesians. 4 viz [that Bishops
in that place may be comprehended under the the office of Pastors and
teachers] For here he makes their office the same with that of the Apostles as
importing ane authority in ordination and Jurisdiction over Pastors and
teachers, and so he should have said rather that it is comprehended under the
Apostolic office 2. He yet again contradicts himself in this answer whill
granting [that whatsoever was necessary for the first planting of the Christian
Church is a privilege ceased with the Apostles] and yet making their power of
ordination of Ministers, and in governing them, to be still necessary, he must
understand it as performed and done by them, since therein he imagins the
pattern of episcopal power to ly: For other ways the Presbyterians do hold
and prove that ordination by the Presbytery, and Government by Presbyters
collegiatly, is still continued and necessary; This he will not allow, and so
must understand it of the manner wherein the Apostles performed this at first.
Now I say, their Apostolic power in ordination and Government as exercised by
them at first, was necessary for the first founding of the Church. For 1.
Their power of ordination was of equal limits and extent with their mission to
all nations -- Go disciple all nations, I hope he will grant was
extraordinary, as being necessary for the first founding of the churches, Ergo,
say I. so was their power in ordination and Government of Ministers, since it
was of a like nature, and of the same extent; for to what ever nations they
were sent together a Church therein, there they were to ordain Ministers, and
govern them by ecclesiastic Discipline, which he makes to be the Bishops
office. 2. Their sole power in ordination and Government, here supposed, by
him, did certainly presuppose the Christian Church in fieri, whereof they were
to be founders. First They were, as Christ's immediate extraordinary
Ambassadors, to convert and bring in Churches, then to plant officers, and the
Gospel Government in them; Now, who will say but this power was necessary for
the first planting of the Churches, and so comes under the Character of these
things which this man acknowledges to be expired: Surely where no other
officers were to concur, the Apostles of necessity behooved to ordain
solely, and their Apostolic Inspection over them did necessarly depend upon,
and flow from, their Apostolic extraordinary mission and infalibilitie, So
that this power in so fare as Episcopal like, was indispensibly needful for
the first founding of the Churches and consequently must be expired by his own
confession, the nature and exercise of this power supposeing, and requiring
their peculiar mission, infallibility, and gifts of tongues, which are
acknowledged by this man to be expired privileges, necessary ry only at that
time. Moreover, the Apostles power in ordination and government did include
extraordinary miraculous rodes and censurs, and a power in coerceing the
rebellious, thus Peter stroke Ananias and Sapphira dead for their lying which
was a fearful Apostolic Censure, put forth by his Apostolic authority at
that time, Paul stroke Elimas the sorcerer blind for withstanding the truth;
besides, their power in ordination at that time, included their miraculous
conferring of the Spirit by the Imposition of hands. 2 Timothy 1: 6 Act. 19: 1, 2,
6. Now, all these Apostolic privileges (which this man must needs acknowledge
upon his own ground to be expired and extraordinary) being necessarily
included in, and essential unto the Apostolic power, the nature and exercise
thereof must be expired also. We shall offer here to the Informer a
distinction of the learned Iunius, who in his answer to Bellarmins argument for
the Apostles Episcopal singular power, from that word Shall I come to you with
a rod, distinguishes the ordinary and extraordinary rod, secundum illam, etc.
(de Council. lib. 2. Cap. 16.) -- that is, according to the commone ordinary
rode. Peter was a fellow Presbyter 1 Pet. 5. But according to the singular and
extraordinary, he stroke dead Ananias and Sapphira. In respect of this
commonrode (says he) Paul says 1 Cor 5. -- [You being gathered together with
my Spirit in the name of our Lord Jesus] but as to this singular one, he says
[Shall I come to you with arode 1 Cor 4, 21] this common rode he denies to have
him in the hand of any one man whither Apostle or other, or that they had any
sole or singular pre-eminence in Churches constitute. And this cutts the wind
pype of our Informers topic and argument here for the prelates power. Which
leads to a 3d. Answer.

3 We proved already that the Apostles exercised no singular Episcopal
pre-eminence in Churches constitut, and what they did in churches not as yet
constitut and infieri, is not to the purpose by his own confession, since it
falls in among those things necessary for the first planting of the Churches,
which privileges the acknowledges are gone, That the Apostles exercised no
such single pre-eminence in churches constitut, is abundantly cleared in the 2.
Argument against Episcopacie, where we showed that neither in ordination, nor
excommunication, nor in Ministerial decision of controversies, the Apostles
assumed ane Episcopal power in Churches constitut, but had the ordinary
Churchofficers Presbyterialy concurring with them. We likwayes proved in the
8. Argument, that the Episcopal power is neither formaliter, nor eminenter,
contained in the Apostles authority, but is inconsistent there with, and
contrary thereunto, there sole directive, corrective power over the diocese, as
being the proper sole pastoures thereof, their sole decisive suffrage, and
Lordly dominion over Church-judicatories, besides their civil rule, like that
of the princes of the gentiles; rendering our prelates power ex sua natura, and
in universum, different from the very nature of the Apostles authority, and the
authority of a Gospel Ministry altogether: and consequently it could not be
transmitted by the Apostles, to the Church, as any piece of the Gospel Church
Government; and by further consequence they are none of the Fathers or Children
whom the true church, or the Apostles brought forth, but the Spritus brood of
Satanical Antichristian pride. As for what he adds of the Fathers making
Bishops Successors to the Apostles Iunius will tell him (De cler. cap 14. Not.
15.) That this is not to be understood of a Succession from Christ's
institutionquia nunquam instituit Christus ut Apostolis secundum gradum in
ecclesia succederetur, because Christ never appointed Successors to the
Apostles in the Church according to degree -- And that the fathers understood
it of a succession ex simili, non ex pari, a succession of similitude, not of
paritie and of a similitude secundum quid, or imaginary, according as Prelates
were then molded.

CHAP. X.
The Informers great argument for Prelacy, from the pretended Episcopacy of
Timothy and Titus. Their Episcopal office disproved, from the office of
Evangelist, ascribed expressly to the one, and by good consequence to the other,
from many circumstances of the sacred text, and the judgment of Interpreters.
The Informers pleadings from there power in ordination and jurisdiction,
supposed in the precepts addressed to them there anent; from the necessity of
this power, the concernment of of after-ages therein, etc, examined. The
unsoundenes and inconsistency of his arguing and answers upon this head,
several ways discovered.

THe Informer presents unto us Nixt, the pretended Episcopacy of Tymothy and
Titus at Ephesus and crete, and the Douhter alleging [that Paul calls all the
Miniters at Ephesus and crete, Bishops,] He rejoynes That Tymoth and Titus were
Bishops as the word (...) or Bishop was afterward taken, that is, had a power
in ordination and Jurisdiction over and above inferior Ministers. This
argument from the pretended Episcopacy of Timothy and Titus, as also the nixt,
taken from the supposed Episcopal power of the seven Asian Angels, has been so
fully answered and baffled by many, That it is, a wonder how he has the
confidence to repone to us these often sodden coleworts. We gave already a hint
in the St A^gument; of the acknowledged extraordinary function of Tymothy and
Titus, which is abundantly cleared by many, from their unfixed motion and
officiating, their occasional transient employment in these places, Paul's
actual revocation of them both there from, the condition of these Churches, as
being but in fieri as to their organick settlement and constitution:
Particularly, that their power in ordination and Jurisdiction was not
episcopal, I prove from these grounds. 1. In Churches already constitut, this
Authority was not solely resident in Tymothy and Titus Falluntur, qui putant
(says Calvin, Instit: lib: 4. Cap. 3.) etc. that is, they are mistaken who
judge either Timothy at Ephesus or Titus at crete to have exercised any impite
or Dominion to dispose of things each at his own pleasure, they were set over
the people (no word of their being set over Ministers) to go before them in
good and wholesome Counsels in relation to the placeing of Ministers, not that
they might do as they pleased excluding others. Since Paul himself neither
imposed hands nor did excommunicat alone, and since (as I said above) a wholl
college or Presbytery of Apostles acted nothing pro imperio, but in Churches
constitut had elders going along with them in all that Sinodal procedour Act
15. Farrless would Timothy and Titus assume this episcopal pre-eminence, who
were inferior to any of the Apostles, therefore their power in this was not
episcopal. 2. That authority which was entrusted to the elders and Ministers
in commone, /was not entrusted to any one officer, such as Timothy; But so it
is that after the Church of Ephesus was exedified and completed in its
organick being, and after Timothy had gotten his charge as to ordination and
Jurisdiction in Ephesus, Paul committed the wholl episcopal power to the elders
(as is said) before Timothies face in his last farewell, Act. 20. therefore he
entrusted him with no episcopal pre-eminence in or over that Church when
completed in its organick being. 3. They whose power stands so circumstantiat
as to ordination and jurisdiction over these Churches, that it excluds
Episcopale pre-eminence, properly and formally such, their power in ordination
and jurisdiction, cannot be prelatical, nor ground ane argument for prelacie:
but such is the power of Timothy and Titus. For 1. As Diocesian Bishops they
ought to have been determinatly and designedly set and fixed there, as the
officers of these Churches, but the contrary appears in the text [I befought
the to abide at Ephesus] and again [I left thee at Crete, and to set in order
things that are wanting] which words point at ane occasional transient,
employment there, not a fixed instalement. 2. In these Epistles they are both
Called back without the least intimation of their returneing. 3. If their power
was Episcopal and ordinary, then in the apostles prescriptions and rules anent
their Successors, their power and authority ought to have been described, and
rules given touching the gifts, Call, ordination etc. of the diocesian Bishop,
but the Apostle prescribes no rules for any officer higher then a Pastor, and
supposes still that he is the highest ordinary officer, in all his directions
as to Church government. 4. Add to this, That Paul never calls Timothy, or
Titus, Bishops, though frequently making mention of them, but Ministers,
Soldiers of Christ, workmen, the Churches messengers etc. 1. Tim. 4. 6. 2.
Tim. 2. 3. and 15. 2. Cor. 8. Supposing them his attendants in his Apostolic
function; Their accompanying Paul in his Travells is largely described by the
divines at the I Will of wight. 1. Timothy is found at Berea with Paul, Act. 17.
14. then at Athens 15. Thence Paul sends him to Thessalonica 1 Thessalonians. 3. 1.
Then, hav^ig been at Macedonia with Paul, he came to him to Corinth Act. 18. 5.
Then he is with him at Ephesus, and thence sent into Macedonia Act. 19. 22.
Whither Paul, went after him, and was by him accompanied into Asia Act. 20. 4.
He is with him at Troas 5. v. and at Miletum 17. v. where Paul gave the elders
his last charge as the Bishopes of that Church. And after this, he is found
either in journeys, or absent from Ephesus. Forafter he is found a prisoner
with Paul at Rome, being mentioned as his companion in these epistles written
while Paul was at Rome; as that to the philippians, Philip. 1. to philemon. 1.
1. and to the colloss. 1. 2. and he is never found again at Ephesus, and near
the end of the Apostles pilgrimage, he is sent for to Rome. So Titus is found
at Jerusalem, before he came to Crete, Gal. 1. 2. thence is sent for to
Nicopolis, Tit. 3. 12. then to Corinth, then he is expected at Troas 2. Cor. 2.
12. and meets with Paul in Macedonia. 2. Cor. 7. 6. whence he is sent again to
Corinth 2. Cor. 8. 6. and after this, near the time of paul's death, is found
at Rome, from whence he went not to Crete, but unto Dalmatia, 2. Tim. 4. 10.
And after this is not heard of in Scripture. So that from their various
journeys, the order of them, the time spent in them, the nature of their
employment, which was to be the Apostles Copartners in their Apostolic
function, and negotiat the affairs of the Churches where the Apostles
traveled, and the Sciptures silence touching their being Beshops of any one
Church, These divines conclude that they could not be diocesian Bishops.

Others do remarke severale other pregnant Circumstances in the sacred text,
specially relating to Timothy which do evince him to be neither Bishop at all,
nor particularly at Ephesus in the prelatical sense. As 1. That paul stirs
him up to diligence upon this motive, that thus he shall be agood minister of
Christ, not a Bishop of Christ, 1. Tim. 4. 6. He was therefore a Minister
Bishop, but nothing else. 2. That when Paul wrote this first epistle to him, he
was but newly entered into the ministry. 1. Tim. 1. 3. with Act. 16. 1. 2. 3.
etc. And Paul will not have a Novice to be a Bishop. 3. He is commandes to
entreat elders as Fathers. 4. To Honor them doubly that rule well, therefore
he was not to be a Father over these elders 5. That he had his gift by the
laying one of the hands of the presbysery, which could not be ane episcopal
function. 6. That Paul appointes him to reside there only until his own
return from Macedonia, to instruct the people for someshorte time until he came
to him again 1. Tim. 3. 14. 15. -- 7. That as soon as Paul came from Macedonia
to Ephesus, he sent Timothy into Achaia, himself staying at Ephesus and Asia
for a season. Act. 19. 22. to 40. v. and from thence he returned to Macedonia,
and through it unto Asia, accompanied with Timothy and others, after which we
never read that he returned to Ephesus. 8. That Timothy was sent to many
churches to confirm and strengthen them, as, to Macedonia Act. 19. 22. To
Thessalonica. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 2. 3. To philippi. chap. 2. 19. 20. but never to
Ephesus after his first departure. 9. That though he is joined with Paul in the
Inscription of some Epistles. Collos. 1. philip. 1. and frequent mention is
made of him in the epistles to several Churches, 1. Cor. 4. 17. Philip. 2. 19.
20. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 2. 6. Hebr. 13. 23. Yet there is [altum silentium] of him in
the Epistles to the Ephesians, his own supposed diocese. 10. That Paul laid
hands upon the disciples who were ordained in that church after his supposed
episcopacie. That as Timothy was sent to confirm. Instruct and Comfort other
Churches, as Philippi, Troas. So Paul writes to him. 2 Timothy 4. 12. that
Tychicus was for this same end. sent to Ephesus: and that he wrote the Epistle
of Paul to the Ephesians from Rome, whom the Apostle (chap. 6. 21. v. of the
Epistle directed to that church) sent to them as a faith full Minister, who
therefore looks liker their Bishop then Timothy. That the same is supposable
of Titus is also apparent, both in that he is called (as Timothy), not Bishop,
but Paul's fellow helper, and that concerning the Corinthians, not the Cretians,
and likewayes in that he is employed to the church in corinth, after he was
left by Paul at crete, as his fellow helper in that church, 2. Cor. 2. 13. and
was fixed to no one place of residence. That being charged to come to Paul at
Nicopolis, his stay is found very short at Crete, so that after half a years
residence there he was sent to Corinth and Dalmatia etc.

But the Doubter acknowledging [Timothy and Titus, their power over Ministers
at Ephesus and crete, since they are taught how to ordain them, what
qualifications are requisite, how to proceed in their trials and censures,
alleges that this they had, as evangelists and companiones to the Apostles in
their labors and as appointed to settle and water these Churches which they
had planted.] In what respect these things are attribute to these Church
officers, will be after examined, when we shall consider how our informer
pleads for their episcopal power upon these grounds. But to this exception of
the Doubter, he answers That this supposes them to be extraordinary officers,
whose office was not to continue in the Church. And the Doubter affirmeing
this. [Because Timothy is called ane Evangelist 2. Tim. 4. 5. and that
therefore he could not be a Bishop] To this our Informer Rejoynes That in a
large sense, he was ane Evangelist or a preacher of the gospel, but that he
was ane Evangelist in astrict sense, can no mor be proved from that scripture;
then that he was a deacon: Because the Apostle in that same place says,
fulfill thy deaconship, as the Greek signifies. Or that Philip was ane
extraordinary evangelist, because he is called ane evangelist Act. 2. 8. for he
was a deacon Act. 6. and Act. 8. 5. did preach the gospel, but was not
therefore one of these extraordinary evangelists whose office was to cease in
the Church. And Finally, He tells us that ordination and jurisdiction is
properly no work of ane Evangelist but rather preaching and spreading the
gospell] Ans. 1. This man casts up but a mist of Insignificant words in this
distinction, whereby he endeavoures to elude so clear a scripture. Timothies
Evangelistick office, we see, is a gripping argument which our Informer would
feign Elude, but with what success shall presently appear. He grantes he was
ane Evangelist in a large sense or a preacher, but not in the strict sense, but
what that strict sense is, in which he denies Timothy to be ane Evangelist, he
does not clear, and so his strict sense is left without sense, and his
distinction must fly with one wing. He knew that his assigneing ane
explication of his strict sense, would have so palpably included Timothy, that
his evasion would be presently shut up: therefore he left the other branch of
his distinction, a mere mute under the clouds, and gives us a distinction which
stands upon one leg. 2. If he will take Eusebius sense (Hist. lib. 3. cap. 33.
o^ 37. with some) he will tell him [that this title is taken but two ways,
either for such as wrote the Gospel, (in which sense we grant that none of them
were Evangelists, or such as taught the Gospel, and these again were either
such as had ordinary places or gifts, or whose plaees and gifts were
extraordinary, that is, who were not settled upon any one charge, but were
Apostolorum vice, having a vicarius care of all the Churches, as the Apostles
had the principal care.] The Evangelists (as Ambrose phrases it) did
Evangelizar sine Cathedra, or preached without a fixed charge. Here, by the way
I cannot but admire the inconsistant subtilty (may I call it so) of Saravia (de
diverse. grand. minist. cap. 6.) who, in answer to Beza, pleading [that the
appellation of Evangelist is given not to every on who preached, but to the
Apostles temporary coadjutors in watring the Churches, not yet fully constitut
etc.] tells him that Apostolus nunquam Timotheum -- Euangelistae nomine
compellat. That the Apostle no where puts the Title of Evangelist upon Timothy,
and that this title was given to none but Philip. Yet immediately
addes-Evangelistae nomen non nego Timotheo, quem Paulus Evangelistae ^pus
sacere jubet, I deny not the name of Evangelist to Timothy, whom the Apostle
bides, do the work of ane Evangelist. If he deny not this name to him and the
thing therein imported, how can he quanel the Apostles not putting this title
upon him, or deny him the title, and the peculiar office therein imported.
Calvin takes the word hereto Import that special extraordinary office
mentioned. Ephesians. 4. Now that Timothy was such ane Evangelist, is already fully
proved and by consequence that the objection stands untouched and unanswered by
him. viz. That he was ane unfixed extraordinary officer, and not to continue,
and therefore any authority which he is supposed to have over this Church,
lays no foundation of Prelacie. For he says nothing to this consequence, but
admitts it upon the supposition that Timothy was ane Evangelist in a strict
sense, and ane extraordinary officer. Cartwright answering the Rhemises upon
this place, takes it in the strict sense mentioned, telling the Jesuits that
Paul's calling Timothy once ane Evangelist, has more pith in it then all
denominations of Pishop that others can give him.

3. The Informers reason of denying the special office of Evangelist to be here
imported, viz That he might be as well called a Deacon, as being enjoined to
fulfull his Miuistery or Deaconship in the Greek, is very poor. For 1. It being
clear that the Scripture holds out such ane office as that of Evangelist,
specifically distinct fromother offices. Ephesians. 4. (as this man acknowledges)
and it being equally certain that this or any other office and relation has a
work and duty proper andpeculiar thereunto and likewayes that the office lays
ane obligation upon the person who carries it, to perform the duties thereof.
And Finally. It being evidently the Apostles Scope, from the consideration of
the office, to exhort to the duties suitable thereunto, its destrable by its
own light that Timothy is here stirred up to the duties of that peculiar
station and office which we have proved he sustained; and thereforit cannot be
understood of a general Ministry or service. Will any doubt what the sense of
such phrases is, [do thework of a parent] [do the work of a Master] [do the
work of a Pastour] who knows what the office and relation of a parent, master,
and Minister is, and that this phrase importes, this precept enjoynes the
duties proper to such relations and offices. So the case is here, which none
will doubt of but this Informer who starts needles doubts, when he cannot
answer his presbyterian Doubter. 2. The Deacons office having in Scripture its
limits drawn, the circumstances of the place where the word Diaconia stands,
discovers when we are to take it in a general sense, and when this inferior
officer is pointed out. So it were absurd when Archippus is bidden fulfill his
Ministry, or when the Apostle calls himself a Minister, to imagine that the
proper formal office of Deacon is ascribed to the one or the other: But the
service there meaned is ane Apostolical and Pastoral service, not the service
of Tables. Now, fulfill, or make full proof of thy Ministry (as our
Translatores do weill render it, giveing the deacon a peculiar Inglish term
according to the greek sound of the word to avoid confusion) is exigeticall*
the Ministry he is to fulfill, is his Evangelistick Ministry, the latter
expounds the former, so that in the very phrase it self, the evangelistick
office is asserted and the deaconship denied. The phrafe of Evangelist, and
especially the workof ane Evangelist, determins his peculiar office; there
being no other Evangelists in the scripture sense, but either those that wrote
or published the gospel in that extraordinary way, and Timothy being clearly
one of such, it must needs import the Evangelist in a peculiar sense, and is
distinct from the general phrase of Ministry in the latter branch of the
words, which stands limited and restricted by the first part as Isaid. Again,
since he includes in the general term [Episeopus] his diocesian Bishop, as
distinct from a presbyter, in philip. 1. and Act. 20. We may with far better
evidence take in the peculiar evangelist here, the office properly taken, being
both a scripture office, and likewayes so clearly applicable to the person to
whom this precept is given, non of which he can say in his case. Moreover, I
wonder whither he would admit this his gloss, if this phrase were directed to
a Pastor as it is here to Timothy [doe the work of a Pastor, make full
proof of thy Ministery] would he think this a good argument or reason to deny
him to be a Pastor, because the latter branch of the sentence expresses a
deaconship? Sure he would not: or had the Apostie expressed the first branch of
the precept thus, do the work of a ^ishop, would he have taken this answer
from us, that Timothy might be as well proved a deacon from that place? Sure,
he would here tell us that the fi^ r^trictive phrase, determines the subsequent
general one, and that different offices may well share in general names.

3. The phrase of doing the work of ane Evangelist, if we compare scripture
with it self, will appear upon Two grounds to import a peculiar Evangelist. 1.
Such a sense must needs be admitted in paralleel phrases where the Syntax and
construction is like ^o this, As [the signs of ane Apostle] 2 Cor. 12: 12.
[commands of Apostles] 2 Pet. 3: 2 [foundation of Apostles] Ephesians 2 20. who
will deny but that the word Apostle is here peculiarly designeing the office,
and why not also [the workeof aneEvangelist] especially it being his scope to
stir up Timothy to diligence from the consideration of the office, and others
to the greater reverence of him. 2 The term of Evangilist occuring only thrice
in the new Testament (viz) Act. 21. 8 Ephesians 4. 11. and in this place under
debate: since the first Two places, do ^yond all question speak o^ the
Evangelist in a strict and proper sense, h^ (I pray) and why does it change its
signification here? Extraordinary functions communicats with inferior offices
in the general names, as when the Apostles are called pres byters in a general
designatione, but extraordinary names are not made use of to point at ordinary
functions, at least when the office is so distinctly pointed at as in this place

4. He stumbleth yet again here into a material contradiction, whil telling
us, That Timothy was ane evangelist in a large sense, that is, One who proached
the Gospel, which he contradistinguishes from ane Evangelist in a strict sense,
denying Timothy to be such, and that strictly termed Evangelist had it for his
work to preach and spread the Gospel, as he seems to insinuat in the close of
his answer, if at least he mean it of his strictly called evangelist (for his
way of expressing it is very indistinct.) But however he will not say that
Timothy was no otherwise ane Evangelist then in the sense wherein any ordinary
Minister is such. And if he understand him to be ane Evangelist as having a
more large unfixed or universal office of preaching the gospel with
extraordinary gifts, and as coajutor of the Apostles, as Hooker himself,
together with Eusebius do take it, as being thus contradistinct from writers of
the Gospel, how comes he only to acknowle^ h^ ane Evangelist in a general
sense, as a preacher of the Gospel simply? I would know what this Informer
calls ane Evangelist in a strict sense, sure he will not say that it is merely
preaching the Gospel which makes up this office, for that he makes the large
sense; is it preaching and spreading the gospel with extraordinary gifts ad
unfixedly? (as he seems to insinuat by making this the proper work of ane
Evangelist) then surely he will not deny but this was Timothy's work, and so
he must be ane Evangelist in the strict sense, against what he first asserts.
He acknowledges the ordinary Evangelists or preachers, were to preach and
spread the Gospel within their Sphere, and so the strict Evangelist must be
distinguished from them by unfixed preaching and spreading the Gospel: which
(besides what is mentioned) will bring a new inconvenienc upon our Informer and
dash him against his principle of fixing Timothy Bishop of Ephesus. Yet again,
though Philip preached the Gospel upon the dispersion and spread it unfixedly,
yet he denies him to be one of these extraordinary Evangelists whose office was
to cease: So that he does (as to this) distinguish preaching and spreading the
Gospel from the proper work and characteristick of the Evangelist strictly
taken Thus it is hard to know what he calls ane Evangelist or how he
understands it: For neither will he admit power in ordination and jurisdiction
to be ane ingredient in this office, and thus it is neither fixed nor unfixed
preaching or government either, that with him will make up this office properly
taken, if we consider the whole structure of his reasoning.

5. As for what he says of philip, That it will not follow, he was ane
extraordinary Evangelist, though termed ane Evangelist, since he was a Deacon.
I answer, that Philip was not ane Evangelist properly so called, is by him
poorly and gratis asserted, and worse proved; Learned Calvin upon the place
tells us That his Deaconship was a temporal and transient function, then
expired, because otherwise it had no been free to him to leave Jerusalem and
go to cesaria; And that he is not here proposed as a voluntar deserter of his
office, but as one who had a more excellent office entrusted to him, Which two
grounds will put fair to prove that he was not a deacon still. Then he adds
[Evangilistae meo judiciointer Apostolos and doctores medii erant, munus enim
obibant Apostolis proximum ut passim Evangelium praedicarent, nec
praeficerentur certae Stationi -- That is, Evangelists were set in the middle
betwixt Apostles and Doctors, had ane office nixt to that of the Apostles and
Doctors, had ane office nixt to that of the Apostles, that they might every
where preach the gospel and were not fixed to any Station. He gives this
reason of his description of the Evangelist, Because, (Ephesians. 4.) the Apostle
describing the order of the Church does in such manner substitut them to
Apostles, as he shows that they had a more enlarged office of teaching
entrusted to them then to Pastors whose work was tied to certain places.
Hence he concludes that Philips deaconship at Jerusalem, was only temporal.
And for some time there exercised by him, and that he was afterby the Church
assumed to be ane Evangelist. In which words we see. 1. He does upon weighty
grounds prove him to have been no Deacon at that time wherein he is called ane
Evangelist. 2. That he was ane Evangilist in the strict and proper sense as it
is taken. Ephesians. 4. -- 3. That Evangelists are officers above ordinary teachers
or pastors, and in this distinct from them (in the judgment of this great
divine) that they were fixed to no certan charge, as they, but as being nixt
Apostles had ane indefinit unfixed Ministry; all which is cross to this man's
blunt confused discourse of this matter, and cutts the sinews of Timothy's
supposed Episcopacy.

Lastly, Where he affirms that ordination and jurisdiction were no proper
work of ane Evangelist, but preaching and spreading the Gospel. 1. I urge him
thus, if preaching and spreading the gospel was the characteristick of the
Evangelist (He must mean it in a more extensive way then ordinary Pastors if
he speak sense) then sure he cannot deny but that Timothy thus preached and
spread the gospel as the Apostles Coajutor in many Churches, as is cleared
above. Whence it follows by his own Confession. 1. That Timothy's office was
extraordinary and is ceased, for he affirms that the office of ane Evangelist
whom he calls extraordinary was to cease in the Church. 2. That he had no
Episcopal authority in ordination and jurisdiction, He being ane Evangelist in
a sense beyond any ordinary preacher, and upon the other hand ordination and
jurisdiction by his confession, not being his proper work who is ane
Evangilist. So that Paul's calling him ane Evangelist must lay him by from being
a Prelat, and consequently all the Informers pleading from his supposed power
in ordination and jurisdiction in the 1. Epistle written to him, is frivolous
and vain. For in his sense he could not Act both the work of evangelist and
Prelat, these being according to his pleading, inconsistent. But nixt, the
wonder is, how this man comes to divide [preaching and spreading of the
gospell] from [the power of ordination jurisdiction] since he cannot but
acknowledge that the Apostles did both these, and affirms that their office was
episcopal, as we heard above. And after he will tell us that Catalogues of
Bishops are drawn from the Apostles, and by Ierom, from mark the Evangelist
who was Bishop of Alexandria. Then it seems this power in ordination (wherein,
with him the Chief part of my Lord Bishops office lies) was very well
consistent with both the Apostles and Evangelists their unfixed enlarged
preaching and spreading of the gospel; The Apostles unfixed preaching and
spreading of the gospel, sure he will not deny: nor can he deny to mark, the
Evangelists office in the strictest sense he can imagine: so that both are with
him compatible. Thus we see in withstanding the truth, he is still in the
briers of Contradictiones.

The Doubter excepts aganist his reason [That philip might be both a deacon and
Evangilist] To which he answers [That by the same Reason Timothy and Titus
might be both Bishops and Evangelists] I answer 1. We have showen already, That
philip ceased to be a deacon at Jerusalem when he became ane Evangelist. 2.
Supposing he were yet the Informers answer and parallel, is naught. For 1.
Philipes becoming ane Evangelist was ane advancement to a higher office,
holding still ane inferior, which is eminenter included in it, as he will
grant, but making ane Evangelist a Bishop is a degrading of a high
extraordinary superior officer, to ane ordinary inferior.

2. As ane Evangilist properly so called, his work was to preach and spread the
gospel unfixedly, as a Bishop, his work he will say, was ordination and
jurisdiction, which Two we heard him affirm to be incompatible.

Besides, in separating the power of ordination and jurisdiction, from the
Evangelistick office, he is contradicted by Saravia, who in many places
mantaines the contrary (degrad: cap. 1. -- and Cap. 16. and cap. 23) And here I
shall show our Informer how he has run cross to his great Master in his
glosses upon several of these Texts under debate, that it may appear, what
babellike builders our prelates Advocates are.

Upon that passage (Matthew. 20) I find he is a little more ingenuous then this
is Disciple, and plainly speaks out what he but mutters (exam: tract: de
episc: tripl: quest: 1. page: 70. after he has repeated that Text with its
parallel in Luke, he adds. Ex his verbis quaero number cuiquam sano videri possit
D. Iesum sustulisse aut prohibuisse primatum aut principatum? and non potius
docuisse quid eum deceat, qui in Ecclesia primus and princeps futurus erat etc
that is, From these Words I demand whither any that is sound can judge, that
the Lord Jesus did take away primaci and principality, and did not rather teach
what becomes him, who was to be first and Prince in the Church -- and
thereafter he tells us that Christ by his own example did show what sort of
primaci it is that the allows in his Church, so that he does in downright
express terms plead for a supreme patriarch or pope representing Christ's
pritcipality over the Church, and what harmony this keeps with the judgment of
protestant divines upon that passage, any may judge. The Informers holds That
there was to be no inequality of power among the 12 Apostles (although he is
not consistent with himself in this, as is already observed) but Saravia runs
so far cross to him in this assertion that he mantaines a primaci of power
among them.

That the Bishops, saluted with the deacons, (Phil: 1.) were mere Presbyters,
he is forced to acknowledge, and so condemns our Informers shifts, about
Extraneus Bishops accidently there, or with the Apostle himself, or that the
Diocesian is included in the word [Bishop] -- in epistola ad Philippenses
salutem dicit Episcopis and diaconis, unde quemadmodum intelligitur
Philippensium ecclesiam habuisse Presbyteros and diac^nos etc. (de Grad: Cap:
8.) In the Epistle to the Philippians Paul salutes the Bishops and deacones,
hence as we are given to understand, that the Church of the Philippians had
Presbyters and Deacons, etc. Again, the Informer lays aside the Highpreist, as
a type of Christ, when he pleads for prelacie from the Jewish
Church Government. But in this Saravia gives him the lie fort. He holds the
inferior priests to have been in there administration types of Christ as well
as the high priest. And 2. That the Government, whether of the inferior or
high priests, is not abolished as typical (de honor: praes: and prysb: deb:
cap: 10, and de Diverse: grad Miniser: cap 14.) Besides, the Informer holds that
that place 2 Timothy 2: 4. Commandes Churchmen to be as Abstract as possible from
publik civil employments, and not entangle themselves therein. But Saravia
adstricts the affairs of this life spoken of in that Scripture, unto the
endeavors which belonges to the nourishment and mantainance of this life, and
holds that it does not at all speak of nor discharge Churchmens holding of
public state employments under Princes. He minces not the matter as this man.
Vitae negotia (says he] sunt ea quibus, quae ad hujus vitae victum pertinent,
comparantur, non quae sunt principis aut civitatis publica. And [de ^on:
praesul. and Presbit: deb:] he praefixes this title unto: Cap: 26. As that
which he undertakes to prove -- Idem Homo tanquam episcopus curam ecclesiae
Domino Jesus, and fidem ac obsequium regi tanquam ipsius beneficiarius reddere
potest. That the same man may perform his duty to Christ as a Bishop, and
attend the Church, and also render faith and obedience to the King as his
vassal etc.

The doubter nixt excepts to better purpose That they could not be Bishops,
because they were not settled at these places, especially Timothy, had he been
Bishop at Ephesus, he had been fixed to his charge, but he was left only there
upon occasional employment, and for a season, 1 Timothy 1: 3. To this he answers
1. That they were rare and singular persons useful for the Apostle at that
time, and therefore it is no wonder that they were called from their particular
charge when the Churches good required it. Philip. 2: 19, 20 2 Cor. 8: 23. As
with us a Minister may be called from his charge for a season when the good of
the Church else where requires it. To which I rejoyne 1. This answer supposes
the thing in Question (viz) [That Timothy and Titus were once fixed as Bishops
in these Churches] But the ground of the exception is, That because their
occasional transient Employment in these places, is so clear and express,
therefore they were never fixed to these Churches as their particular charge,
but had it for their charge to water all the Churches which the Apostles
planted, and attend their planetarie motion from Church to Church. So that they
cannot be in their work and duty paralleled to a Pastors transient Employment
from his particular charge for the Churches greater good, whose fixed charge is
supposed. But we have proved that Timothy and Titus their ordinary Employment
was this transient and unfixed Ministry: which is clearly holden out in
scriptur both before and after their officiating in these Churches. 2, It is
also cleared above, that as the scripture is utterly silent of their return to
these Churches again, after Paul's recaling them from the same, and after their
transient Employment therein: So we have made it likewayes appear, that they
did officiat thereafter in many other Churches, performing to them the same
duties of Evangelists as in Ephesus and crete. And that in Ephesus, elders were
called Bishops, and had the whole Episcopal charge before Timothy, committed
to them in paul's last farewell. In a word, it can never be made good that any
who were fixed to particular charges, did so travel up and down as these
Evangilists are proved to have done. Again he t^lls us That Gerard thinks they
were first Evangelists, then made Bishops by Paul at Ephesus and Crete. Ans. If
he think so too, he must quite all his plea for their Episcopacie from these
Epistles: for Paul calls Timothy to do the work of ane Evangelist here, and
Titus work was the same: And he must understand this in the strict sense (if
he offet Gerards exception to any purpose) which, according to him, secludes
power in ordination and jurisdiction. So that a work and office being enjoined
Timothy in this Epistle, which has nothing to do with ordination and
jurisdiction, he was not yet made a Bishop, and if not yet, it will be hard to
find out his commission and patent afterward in scripture, since he was in
perpetual evangilistick Employments, and sure if Paul ever designed him Bishop
over Ephesus, he would not have called the elders of Ephesus, Bishopes, before
Timothy in his last farewell. We heard Saravia plead that Paul intitles not
Timothy an Evangelist [non compellat nomine Evangelistae] how did he not see
that [that Paul, numquam compellat nomine episcopi, never puts upon Timothy or
Titus, the title or name of a Bishope, neither in the inscriptiones of the
Epistles written to them, nor in any place of these Epistles, or else where in
scripture, nor injoynes any of them to do the work of Bishop. As he injoynes
one of them expressly to do the work of ane Evangelist. And since the Apostle,
disertis verbis, in (...) these elders of Ephesus, Bishops, and (to use
Saravia's phrase) compellat nomine Episcoporum, and that with the signal
emphasis, of being made Bishops by the Holy Ghost, his reason from epi^hets and
compellations, will the more strongely evinc them to be such. 2. This is a
great degrading of ane Evangelist, and derogatorie to his high function, to
make him a Bishop. The Council of Chaldecon judges it sacrilegious to degrade a
Bishop to a Presbyter, such must he acknowledge this degrading to be, and
therefore that being once Evangelists, of necessity they behoved to continue
so. Next, the Doubter objects, what we have been saying, that Paul gave to the
elders of Ephesus the Charge, not to Timothy, which he would not have done, had
he been Bishop, since it is probable he was present at this time, for v. 4. He
was in Paul's company. Here he gingerly nibbles at this Argument least it prick
him, omitting these pregnant circumstances of the context. 1. That this was
Paul's last and farewell exhortation. 2. That he not only gives these elders the
Charge over that Church before Timothy, and not to him, but also the wholl
Episcopal charge, (...), to feed and rule as the Holy Ghosts Bishops set over
the same, which comprehends both ordination and jurisdiction. But what says he
to this Argument. 1: It may be he was not ^et settled Bishop as Gerard thinks.
But sure he had all the (...) as Bishop which the first Epistle afoords him,
from which this man derives his Episcopacy, and power in ordination and
jurisdiction: and if, for all these, ^ur Informer will grant that he might have
been not ^s yet Bishop, but ane Evangelist. Then 1. he must acknowledge that
all his pleading for his Episcopac in the nixt pages, from the power he is
supposed (...) have in the first epistle, is but a beating of the air an
impertinent, since it might be Antecedaneous to h^ Episcopacie: and by the
Informers confession, he mig^ have had yet no more Episcopal relation to the
Church, then any who was never Bishop there. Henc^ 2. Not being yet Bishop, but
ane Evangelist still, (a^ Gerard takes him) in a traveling posture up and down
with the Apostle (as also Bishop Hall, Downam and Hooker acknowledge him) I
wonder how this man will sustean his denial, that he was ane Evangelist in the
proper and strict sense, such as his was. Sure, if this his supposition, or
[may be] will hold good, timothies office, as suc^ ane Evangelist, was to cease
in the Church, as he expresses it, and Paul's bidding him do the work of ane
Evangelist sufficiently Unbishops him at least pro tunc, which notwithstanding
we heard him deny. 2. He tell us] that Irenaeus who lived not long after the
Apostles thinks there were Asian Bishops mingled with the elders of Ephesus,
and with Timothy their Bishop to whom in common Paul made that exhortation
comprehending the [Bishops] under the name of [elders] as Apostles were
sometimes called] Ans. We may be much in love with this scripture in the
present debate, since it forces adversaries upon such simple incoherent shifts.
First, it may be he was not yet made Bishop -- then least that concession prove
too gripping, there must be other Bishops of Asia, minglcd with these elders,
and Timothy of necessity must be now* Bishop, or hardly well after, and their
own Bishop and the extraneous ones, must be all shuffled up unde the name of
elders, and exhorted in common, a he shifts the argument from Philip. 1. But
the text it self sufficiently discovers the folly of this poo^ shift. For 1.
Paul called the elders from Ephesus, an^ the elders of the Church there, not
imaginary elders or Bishops from other places. 2. He sent for the elders of the
Church, in the singular number, not of the Churches, and so all he sent for had
a particular relation to that Church, for had there been elders of other
Churches there, It would have been expressed elders of the Churches: If other
elders or Bishops of Asia had been there, they would have received the
Scripture denomination of provincial Churches, which are expressed in the
plural. So we read of Churches of Asia, Revel. 1: II. Churches of Judea Gal. 1:
22. Next, This answer still supposes [The existence of the diocesian Bishop
over Presbyters at that time] which is a poor begging of the question. We
prove from this and such like texts, that the Bishops of Asia, and Ephesus were
mere Pastors, who had in Common the Epicopal charge over the Church, and that
the Holy Ghost set up these, and none else. Infine, This is but a mere shift in
the Judgment of Chrysostom, Hierom, Theodoret, and the Current of Interpreters,
who take these elders for mere Presbyters, and is contrare to the Syriack
translation, which reads it, Presbyteros ecclesiae Ephesinae. So the Concilium
Aquisgravense.

But now comes his proof of Timothy, and Titus, their Episcopacie from these
Epistles. His first Reason in general, is That in these Epistles more fully
then any where else in the new Testament, Paul gives direction to Timothy and
Titus how to carry in ordination and jurisdiction, which Two comprehends the
Episcopal office. Ans. 1. With him there is a possibility, or may be, that
forall these directions, Timothy and Titus were evangelists still, and not yet
Bishops; and so these directions might be given to them as extraordinary
officers, who, according to him, were to cease, and consequently though
comprehensive of the Episcopal office, yet the office might cease with their
persons as exercised in that manner, and the power of ordination and
jurisdiction be deryved to different recipients, to be exercised in another
manner, (viz) by presbyters in common. 2. By what consequence will he infer ane
Episcopal authority and inspection, from the Apostles prescribing rules to
them anent ordination and jurisdiction? May not all Ministers be herin
directed, as well as Timothy and Titus? or will his giving directions to them
in this point infer their sole and singular authority therein? Surely not at
all in Churches constitute: and as for what they did in the frameing and
constitution of Churches yet in fieri, as to their organick being, is not to
the purpose. 3. We did show above that the prelates power, and their way as to
ordination and jurisdiction, is in its very nature, different from that which
either Apostle or Evangilist exercised, as being a dominion and arbitrary
power, yea including in it a civil dominion, and derived from the civil
Magistrate. None of which can be said of any authority which Timothy and Titus
are here supposed to have: In a word, as it is clear that the elders of
Ephesus, at Paul's last farewell, were entrusted with the whole power of
ordination, and jurisdiction, and as the Episcopi were commanded (...), to feed
and rule with out any respect to Timothy: which clearly demonstrats that he
(and consequenly Titus) had no Episcopal power of ordination and jurisdiction,
over these Churches, established in their persons, by any prescriptions here
delivered; So it is as evident that the same prescriptions might be delivered
to any Moderator of a Synod, or unto a transiently visiting Minister, though
even in relation to a province, which being necessarly to be understod Salvo
jure Ecclesiae, would import no Episcopal or sole authority, and thus the case
is here.

But what were these directions importing this power? He instances 1. [In the
qualifications which they must require in such as were to be ordained-not
suddenly to lay on hands, which respects ordination, next, the rules anent
government, how to rebuke offenders, not to receave ane accusation, but before
two or three witnesses, how to deal with heretics, etc. Ans. 1. These
Apostolik directions in point of Government, are good and excellent, but how
does he prove that the adressing of these directions, to Timothy, will infer
his Sole and single authority in all these, so as to seclude Presbyters from
their share therein? And if he prove not this, it will say nothing to evince
ane Episcopal authority. What if such directions were adressed to a Moderator?
would that infer his Authority over the Synod? Nay, since a Presbytry laid on
hand's upon Timothy himself, Since the Presbyters of this Church of Ephesus,
had the Episcopal power in Common, committed to them as the Holy Ghosts
Bishops, Since the Corinth-Presbytery did excommunicat the incestuous, we may
clearly infer, that these directions, though immediately addressed to Timothy,
yet belonged to Presbyters of that and Other Churches, as well as him. 2.
Supposing that this adress will give him a special Interest herein, yet how
will the Informer prove that it respects Timothy any other way, and in any
other Capacity, then of ane Evangelist, which he says it might be, he yet was,
and not a Bishop? He dissallowes not of Gerards opinion, who says, that he was
not yet made Bishop; Now, if these Rules were to be observed by him, and this
his supposed singular Authority exercised [as ane Evangelist, whose office was
to cease,] It will plead nothing for the Episcopal power. Surely upon our
supposition, that he was a fellow-helper and assistant of Paul, in his
Apostolik function, and had a transient occasional Employment here, as is
clearly held out in the Text, these rules are very suitable unto him in that
capacity. Besides, these Directions are for instruction of every man of God, or
Minister, in point of Church Government 2. Tim. 3: 16. 1 Timothy 4. 6: But does
not give them Episopal power. Or will he say that every man has the formal
office, or place, in the nature whereof he is instructed? The dedication of a
book to a man anent rules of kingly Government will not make the man, or
suppose him, either King or Governor.

In the 3d. place. As to these Directions themselves, particularly as to
Timothies direction, as to laying on of hands, it is Answered, that laying on of
hands in ordination, is found in Scripture a Presbyterial Act competent to
mere Presbyters, which (as I said) they exercised upon Timothy himself, though
Paul was present, 1 Timothy 4: 14. 2 Timothy 1. 5. And therefore Timothy could have no
single, or Episcopal authority therein in Churches Constitute So that the
precept directs Presbyters as well as him in that point. Nay, this addressed
direction mainly respected them, as the proper subject of this power, and the
Presbytery received their lesson here (not to lay on hands suddenly) rather
then Timothy. Nixt, As for his Authority and directions anent rebuking and
Censures. I answ. That neither can this be Timothy's sole prerogative, for
either it is meaned of a Private rebuke, and this every Christian has authority
in: Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him.
Levit. 19: 17. Prove. 9: 8. Or of a ministerial rebuke: and this is competent to
every Minister of the word, Isa. 58: 1. 2 Timothy 41, 2. Ti^. 1: 13. 2; Sam. 12:
8. And besides, Institutions and reproofs of Church officers, will not prove a
fixed Episcopal power. Prophets rebuked, but had no jurisdiction over Priests,
nor Paul over Peter, though he reproved him. As for that which he particularly
mentions about receiving ane accusation against ane Elder, It is answered. That
this also belongs to the official juridical power of Elders, since Ruling and
Government attribute to them in Scripture, does necessarily import ane
authority to receive accusations, and correct delinquents by reproofs and
censures, Matthew. 8: 16. 17. There is ane accusation to be delated ecclesiae, to
the Church, or the juridical Court, not to one Prelat, as is above cleared; and
therefore the direction anent the receiving of the accusation, respects them
who were to judge upon it, and not the Prelat. Compare this with 1 Cor. 5: 4,
5. The Presbyters must meet together to rebuke the Incestuous there and they
that are Spiritual must restore the delinquent, Gal. 6: 1. The Church officers,
or Ministers of Thessalonica must note and admonish authoritatively the
disobedient Brother, 2 Thessalonians. 3: 14, 15. To which I may add, that as upon the
one hand Timothy is forbidden to rebuke ane elder, and positively enjoined
[doubly to honor them, when faithful] So, the receiving ane accusation, is no
more then that which every private Christian and Minister is capable of, even
against the superior, whither in state, or age, in relation to admonition,
Counsel or Comfort accordingly. Levit. 19: 17. Gal. 6: 1, 2 John 10, 11. None
in whatever capacity are exeemed from this precept, not to receive accusations
lightly. Hence the 4th. Council of Carthage (cited by Blond. Apol. Sect. 4)
enacted That no Bishop should hear ane accusation without the Clergy, and that
without their assent, the sentence should be void. where was the negative voice
here. Whittaker, thus answers the Popish pleading upon this text, and our
Informers too (controv. 4. Quest. 1. Cap. 2.) That Timothy is commanded not
rashly to receive ane accusation, proves not that he had dominion over Elders,
which according to the Apostles mind is to bring a crime to the Church, to
bring the guilty into judgment, openly to reprove, which not only superiors
may do, but also equals and inferiors. In the Roman Republic, the Kings did
not only judge the people, but also the Senators and patricii; and certainly it
seems not that Timothy had such a ^sistory and Court as was afterward appointed
to Bishops in the Church, what this authority was may be understood by that
which follows, [those that sin rebuke before all], which equals also may do.
Thus bishops heretofore, if any elder or Bishop had ane ill report, referred it
to the eeclesiastick Senate or, Synod, and condemned him if he seemed worthy, by
a public judgment, that is, did either suspend, excommunicat, or remove him,
the Bishop condemneing nocent elders or deacons, not by his authority alone,
but with the judgment of the Church and clergy -- and in case of appeals, even
to the Metropolitan he could do nothing without the Synod and what they did
was ratified. The same is the answer of Bucer de vt and usu, Sacr. Minister:
Willet. Sinops. Papis Contr. 5, Ques. 3* part 3, In the appeudix Eucer. de Gub.
page 300. to 398.

The Informer tells us in the next place that these directions concern after,
ages and are of ordinary use: and therefore they cannot be extraordinary
officers in these Acts -- that in calling Timothy and Titus, extraordinary
officers in these Acts, we lead the way to their error, who call ordination
and jurisdiction, extraordinary. Answ. As we have proved, that none of these
directions will infer in Timothy ane Episcopal Power properly such, but that
any power he had above Presbyters; was by his special Evangelistick Legation,
so the concernment of after ages in these directions, and their being of
constant use, is a pitiful argument to prove the continuanc of the power in
that manner. Are not all the old Testament precepts anent the antiquated
ceremonies, all the acts and directions given to extraordinary officers, both
under the Old and New Testament, of perpetual use in after ages? But are they
therefore to be imitated and retained? What will he say to the Papists,
pleading for the anoin^ of the sick upon the Apostle James his precept [let the
elders anoint the sick with oil, and pary] this is ane Act enjoined to
ordinary officers, viz, to elders, and joined with with prayer, a constant
standing duty: and he will not say that this Apostolic precept is to be ex
punged as useles. What? must we therefore retean anointing? would he not in
this case distinguish betwixt that which is a constant duty, and a temporary
concomitant and appendix. Acted not the Apostles extraordinarely in their very
preaching, both as to its extent, its confirmation by miracles, their gifts of
tongues, and are not the Acts of preaching and baptizing of constant use in the
Church? Must not this Informer grant that these Apostolic Acts of preaaching
and baptizing are perpetual, though the mould and manner is extraordinary and
gone, in so far as their extraordinary Apostolic power interposed therein.
Thus the Acts of ordination and jurisdiction are moral, but the modusrei, is
extraordinary, in so far as their Evangelistik authority, and special
legation, interposed therein. He must either acquiesc in this, and acknowledge
this his argueing Sophistick and pueril, or he will contradict what he said
before, anent the Apostles extraordinary Privileges, which are gone with them,
viz, infaillibilitie, their immediate call, sending to all nations, and what
else was necessary for the first founding of the Church. Now, is not that which
was thus necessary, of perpetual use? Are we not built upon the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets? Are not the ordinances and Ministry received from
them, of perpetual use? And their most extraordinary Acts, if we mean it of
improvement. Nay, did not the New Testament Church receave the Law of God, and
ordinances from the Jews? Must we therefore Judaize? 2. How will he prove that
the asserting, that any officer has ane extraordinary authority conversant
about such ane Act, will give ground to say, that the Act it self, is
extraordinary, or the ordinance touched by that Act, expyred? Will his
asserting, that the Apostles exercised ane extraordinary authority which is now
ceased, in their preaching unfixedly, by ane immediate call, and confirming
their doctrine with miracles, and strange tongues, give ground to conclude that
the ordinances of preaching and baptizing are expired also? I trow he will not
grant this. How then will our asserting, that Timothy and Titus put forth ane
extraordinary Evangelistick authority in ordination, and jurisdiction infer,
that the Acts of ordination and jurisdiction, or these ordinances themselves,
are expired? can he not distinguish betwixt the power it self, and the
different subject, and manner of its exercise, ordinary or extraordinary? can
he not see in Scripture ane extraordinary power derived, and cut out in a
succession of different and ordinary channels, and diverslie exercised? Says
he not that the Apostles had ane extraordinary power, of both ordination and
jurisdiction, and both the keys. But I trow he asserts that, there are
different recipients, who bring down ane ordinary power by succession. Some
(Prelates forsooth) have the key of Governmant, others (viz,) Presbyters, have
preaching for their work, but no rule properly. And says he not that the
extensive authority, in which the Apostles exercised their Ministry, is gone,
and a limited ordinary Ministry derived from them. If the extraordinary Mission
of twelve Apostles, has derived from it a Ministry and ecclesiastic
authority spread throw all Church Officers in the world, who succeed them not
into the same office, let this Informer show me, why may not Timothies
Evangelistick extraordinary power in ordination and jurisdiction, be deryved
by, and seatted, in a Presbytery, though the Evangelistick Office is
extraordinary, and (as such) not succeeded unto. The service, and work of
teaching, and governing to continue in all times, does not render the
Apostolic mission or commission, ordinary, nor infer their being succeeded in
idem officium, and eundem gradum, the ordinary power being institut and settled
in the hands of ordinary officers, by a new warrant and commission, according
to the Scripture rules of ordination. The office of Moses was not rendered
ordinary, because many works of Government exercised by him, were recommitted
to the Elders of Israel; and so the case is here. The Evangelists extraordinary
office and commission (necessary, as that of the Apostles, for the first
founding of the Churches, and watering and building them up in their organick
being, and for settling all their ordinary officers) is changed into the
Presbytery their ordinary Collegiat power of ordination and jurisdiction; which
we find was in the Apostolic Churches exercised, and even in this of Ephesus.

His 2d Reason to prove them Bishops, is, Because their commission at Ephesus
and Crete, was not voyded upon the first settling of Ministers in those places,
therefore their office was to be constant, since if merely as Evangelists they
were to settle a Church there, then they were to give place to the Presbytery
when some Ministers were ordained: but they did not so: -- ^itus needed not
ordain Elders in every city, if some few ordained might ordain the rest. Ans.
1. This is a poor argument, and has no twist of a connection [their commission
at these places was not voyded upon the first settleing of Ministers,] ergo,
[they were not extraordinary officers, but had a standing Episcopacie there]
which is a mere rope of sand. The Apostles office and commission was not voyded
over all Churches when settled, Ergo, they had no extraordinary inspection,
office, or commission, toward all these Churches. What consequence is here? So
may it be said of these Vicarious Apostles, their commission to these or other
Churches could not be voided or expired, though they were never so much
settled, but they were prore nata to visit and water all the Churches, and
bring Apostolic instructions to them, and reports from them anent their case.
We have proved that Timothy and Titus exercised their extraordinary office,
and commission, toward many other Churches, after their return from these of
Ephesus, and Crete, so that their commission toward these or other Churches,
could be no more voided whil the Apostles Employed them therein, then their
office. Besid, this Informer should advert, that Timothy is left To charge some
that they teach no other doctrine which was a commission beyond the mere
settling of Ministers, and supposing some already settled. 2. Will he say that
Timothy and Titus were ordinary standing officers or Bishops, over these
several Churches, where they might reside some time, and have Employment
therein, even after they had officers of their own? did they not visit and
water many other Churches, were they therefore their Bishops? if so he must
quickly transport them to be Bishops of other Churches, after they were Bishops
here: and exalt them to metropolitan's as some of the ancients make them. 3.
Their Evangelistik inspection, direction, and assistence, even after some
ordinary officers were settled, could no more prejudge the ordinary power and
authority of these officers, then the Apostles extraordinary inspection, and
infallible universal directive power, could prejudge the Churches ordinary
authority, in ordination and jurisdiction. The Apostles power (which could not
be voyded, nor expyre, whil they were alive) being Cumulative unto, but not
privative of, the Churches ordinary power, so it is here. I would ask our
Informer, was Paul's apostolic commission to Crete and Ephesus, voyded, after
Bishops were set up there? Nay, he will not say it. But did this Null the
Episcopal power of Timothy and Titus, over these Churches? I trow not. Well,
no more could Timothys extraordinary inspection make void the ordinary power of
presbyters. 4. We told him already that how long soever Timothy and Titus were
resident there, they were to do nothing pro imperio, and were not to lord it
over the presbyters. 5. Although elders once ordained, have power to ordain
others, yet the been esse, did call for the Inspection and direction of such
highely gifted and extraordinary officers herein, as these were. And Moreover,
in that Infant-state of the Church, Apostolic precepts and rules in reference
to Church government, and the exercise of both the keys, were to be delivered
by these extraordinary officers, and consequently might call for, and protract
their continuanc therein, even after ordinary officers were ordained. Infine.
He cannot deny but that the Apostle recalled both Timothy and Titus from these
places, to the further prosecution of their employment in other Churches, and
that their transient employment therein is held out, after their return from
Ephesus and Cret; as likwayes their occasional employment in both these
places, which will in so far void their commission in relation to them, as
clearly to refu^ the supposed episcopal ordinary charge which he alleges they
exercised. Next, from the Authors of jus divinum Minist: evangel: [concluding
against the peoples power of ordination, upon Timothy and Titus being left at
these places to ordain elders] The Informer inferrs against them thus, why was
Timothy or Titus left to ordain elders, after some were ordained by Paul, If
Ministers so ordained could ordain the rest? and after some were ardained by
Timothy and Titus, they were left still upon that employment. I answer, his
inference touches not these Reverend authors in the least. The ordaineing of
elders in relation to the beue esse, even after some elders were there, and the
further directing and completing of these Churches in their members and
officers, did require ane Evangelistick inspection, though the ordinary power
of ordaineing, remained with the ordinary elders and Church officers, as the
scripture does clearly hold out. Paul having after committed to the elders of
this Church of Ephesus the whole power of government. But the scripture gives
not the least hint of the peoples power to ordain, but attributs this still to
Church officers as proper to them. So that this Inference stands good in the
general [though some were converted to Christianity there, yet they could not
ordain officers, but Church officers were sent upon that Imployment] ergo.
Church officers must ordain, and not the people: but the special inference
will not hold, ergo, Biohops must only ordain for the reasons already given,
no more then from Paul's ordaining the first elders, it will follow [ergo Paul,
or ane Apostle only, must ordaine] which is a Consequence our Informer dare not
admit, else he will contradict himself. It is a good consequence [Paul, a
Church officer, preached and baptized] ergo [none but Church officers must
preach and baptize] but [ergo, none but ane Apostle must preach and baptize] is
bad logic. So his inference is neither logical nor theological.

His 3d. Reason to prove Timothy a Bishop, is taken from Paul's solemn Charge
1. Tim. 6. 13. to keep. what he had commanded him, till the appearing of Jesus
Christ. That presbyterians (particularly, jus divinum Minist. page 74.) hold
these Directions to be for all ages of the Church, making them paralleel with
Matthew. 28. 20. anent Christ's promised presence to the end and 1: Tim. 5. 7, 21.
Anent Paul's Charge to observe these things. Whence he concludes that they were
to have successors in their office, and were not extraordinary officers, since
these divines say, page 160. [That Apostolic examples in things necessary for
the good of the Church, and which carry a perpetual equiry and reason in them,
have the force of a rule] and the Apostles setting Timothy and Titus, over
these Churches, is ane example Apostolic for the good of the Church, and has
a perpetual reason and equity in it. Ans. 1. We have made it appear that no
directions given to Timothy will amount to demonstrat any episcopal dominion
over this Church, and that he had no sole or arbitrary power either in
ordination or jurisdiction, and consequently that the charge of [keeping that
which was commanded him] will Import and infer no keeping of ane Episcopal
charge. 2. We have also showed what a bad consequence it is, to argue from the
perpetual use of precepts or directions, given to extraordinary officers, in
relation to extraordinary acts, toward the Churches imitating of these acts,
and retaineing these expired functions, which is palpably a nonsequitur, as
this man can not deny, else he will swallow horrid absurdities. Every thing
which is for our constant use and Improvement, is not likwayes for our
Imitation. Again, 3. I would ask this Informer, if the Command 1. Tim. 6. 13.
joined with the promise Matthew. 28. 20. Will not reach and include every piece
of the Apostolik and evangelistik office? Sure he cannot deny this, and yet he
acknowledges there were several pieces of their work temporary and expyred.
Will he dare to say that what the apostle commanded Timothy in this Epistle,
was confined within Ephesus, or reached him only as oversieing that Church, and
not in relation to his Evangilistick office throw all the Churches? and that
the promise Matthew. 28. did not reach the most extraordinary Apostolic Acts; So
that himself must distinguish (unless he be inconsistent with himself) betwixt
what is moral, and extraordinary, in this command and charge, and accordingly
reached by the promise. 4. His citation from the Ius divin. Minist: etc Cuts
the throat of his cause: for argueing thus against private persons intrudeing
into the ministry [That the scripture lays down rules for calling men to that
office] they instance in the qualifications of the person, Citeing 1. Tim. 3.
2, 3. anent the properties of the scripture Bishop or presbyter. Then they add
[That the Scripture directs as to the manner of his calling, viz, who are to
ordain, how he is to be ordained, citeing 1. Tim. 4. 14. viz, that the
presbytery is to ordain, and ordain by the laying on of hands -- adding, that
these directions are for all ages, and citeing. ^1 Timothy 6: 13, 14.] Now, if
these perpetual directions for all ages, be touching no other Bishops but
these in 1 Timothy 3: 1. And anent ordination by the hands of the Presbytery,
surely those are Presbyterial not Episcopal directions, and do palpably
exclude Timothy^s standing Episcopacy; So that he did not well to raise this
Ghost. Next, ane Apostolical example for the good of the Church, is not that
which they hold to have the force of a rule, as the Informer belies them but
ane example in things necessary for the good of the Church. And as this, so the
next citation out of that book, burns his fingers. For the authors having
cited. 2. Tim. 2: 2, In order to their scope of pleading for ordination as a
perpetual standing ordinance, Timothy being in that place enjoined to commit
those things which he had heard from Paul, to faithful men who shall be able
to teach others. They infer. 1. A necessity of setting apart some to be
teachers in Christ's Church. 2. The qualifications of such, viz, they must be
faithful men, and able to teach. 3. That Timothy is enjoined to committ what
he had heard to faithful men, which they understand of ordination of ministers,
that there might be a perpetual succession of teachers. And comparing it with
the former citation, it appears that they hold these precepts to import the
deryvation of the ordinary power of teaching and Government to ordinary
Ministers. And when the Anti-Ministeriall party object [that these are but
examples, which do not amount to make up a rule] they give. this answer [that
Apostolic examples in things necessary for the Church, and which have a
perpetual reason and equity in them, have the force of a rule] now, this
example is anent the committing of ane ordinary power of ordination, and
jurisdiction, to faithful Ministers and teachers, which quit justles out the
prelatical power. For since they hold Timothy's singular way in this, as ane
Evangelist, was to cease (which they must needs do upon the forementioned
ground, the Presbyterial, and the singular power being inconsistent in the same
subject) they must needs place this Evangelistick power among these examples
which do not obleidge, and it is ordination it self, and its continuance in
this manner by ordinary teachers which they expressly plead for, as the
Apostolic example, which has a perpetual reason and equity, and the force of
a rule; not Timothies singular power herin which they hold to be expired. So
that the Informers assumption viz; That Timothies Evangelistick Inspection by
the Apostles apointment over this Church, as also that of Titus, is such ane
exemple, as has a perpetual reason and equity in it. He might have found to
be rejected by these divines (had he read that piece attentivly) as no way
following from (yea contrare unto) their assertion and it is still left at h^s
door to prove and make good.

His Last Reason, to prove the Episcopacy of Timothy and T^us, is taken from
Testimonies. That Polycrates and Eusebius affirm Timothy to have been Bishop
of Ephesus. -- That Leontius Bish: os Magnesia in the general Council of
Calcedem Act 11. points out a Series of Tuentie Seven Bishops in Ephesus, from
Timothy etc: Ans: Since the scriptures do clearly hold out his extraordinary
Evangilist^k function, and there is nothing therein which can in the least
infer his having ane ordinary episcopal power, The Informers pleading upon
this head being found frivolous and leaning upon that known fallacy viz, to
argue from [The singularity of ane extraordinary officer] to the [Singularity
of ane ordinary perpetual officer] in Church government which will as well set
up (upon the ground of the Apostles universal inspection) patriarchs, or popes
as prelates: Surely the improper styles and designations which the Ancients put
upon Timothy or Titus, who spoke in the language of their own times, is a very
insignificant proof to Counter balance Scripture light in this matter.
Tertullians saying (cited by park, l 2. C, 7.) is here remarkable, Si constat
id verius quod prius id prius quod ab initio id ab initio quod ab Apostolis
etc: that is truest which is first that is first which is from the beginning,
that is from the beginning which is from the Apostles. Their opinions who call
them Bishops, are for most part borrowed from Eusebius, of whose hallucinations
Scaliger gives large prooses, and yet all that he says is (...) It is
reported; and this report he had from a fabulus Clemens. The ancients likewayes
call the Apostles themselves Bishops, peter of Rome, James of Jerusalem. Yea
Theodoret Calls Timothy and Titus Apostles of Asia and crete, which the
Informer will not justify. Yea some call them Motropolitanes, Arch Bishops,
patriarchs, and this because (says Walo Messalinus) they did these Acts which
afterward by human Custom, were appropriat to Bishops, which (says he) they
did as Evangelists, as one of them is expressly called. As for jerome, it is
certain that he both mantaines and proves the Bishop and elder to be one in
Scripture, when disputing that point in his Commentar upon Titus: and therefore
when at any time he gives these evangelists such appellations he does it
allusively, and improperly, according to the degenerat custom of his time. As
for the Catalogues of Bishops, from Scriptur times, they are found to terminat
upon Apostles or Evangelists, as that of Jerusalem, comes up to James the
Apostle: that of Antioch, to peter: So that of Rome, to peter, and Paul: that
of Alexandria, unto mark etc: Now, they were not ordinary officers, nor
succeeded in eundum gradum. And besid, there are ecclesiastic customs traced
up by some to the Apostolic times, which not with standing are acknowledged
not to be of divine oppointment. Some first Bishops were but primi presbiteri
(as we shall after show) How lost they the sole power of ordination and
jurisdiction, which their first founders had, in so short a time? This sole
power in ordination and jurisdiction (which our prelates now acclaime, and this
man pleads for) will not be found till Three hundred years after Christ, if at
all then. The gross mistak of many ancients in their constituting of Bishops,
appears in this instance. That many fathers affirm peter to have been Bishop of
Rome, and to have continued Bishop there for many years. Yet Marsilius
patavinus pars: 2. c: 16. Carolus Molinaeus, Scen: Consult: franc: contr:
abusus etc: Paparum) proves by scripture and reason that peter was never at
Rome. In a word, the ancients call them ^shops, as likwayes Apostles such, not
properly (says Bucer. de Gub: Eccles: p. 432. So fox, Act mon: p. 11465) but
in a large or general appellation, because they first preached the gospel to
these Churches -- and to this end, To prove a perpetual succession of sound
preachers, and sound doctrine, in those particular Churches from the Apostles
time to their own; nameing the eminentest Ministers for parts and gifts, the
Bishops of these Churches: which Method and scope of Catalogues, appears by
Irenaeus, Tertullian, cited by Mi^prin. (un Bish: of Tim: and Tit: p. 34.)

The Doubter objects against Timothies Episc. That he was ordained by the
layingon of the hands of the presbytery 1. Tim 4. 14. and therefore could not
be a Bishop, Since a Presbytery which is a company of Ministers, cannot make a
Bishop. To this the Informer returns, 1. That Calvin thinks that by presbytery
is meaned the office. I answer, Suppose Calvin think so what will that say to
the argument it self? Again Calvine upon the place, does not wholly dissoun
the ordinary comment, which takes the presbytery for a company of elders, but
thinks it may well sustean Presbiterium qui hio (says he) Collectivum nomen
esse putant, pro collegio presbiterorum positum, recte Sentiunt meo judicio.
Such as esteem the presbitery here to be a collective word put for the assembly
of elders, do rightly judge in my judgment. Besides that the greek word (...)
or Presbytery, especially as it stands here constructed, cannot in any
tolerable sense import the office, for the office has no hands to lay on.

2 The Informer flies to his old shift of sh^uding the diocesian Bishops under
the lapp of these presbyters, which he tells us we need not think strange of
since he has showed that the [Apostles] are called elders or [presbyters.]
Ans. We have already disproved what he alleges from the Apostles being called
elders (in agenerall sense) here, as before, he but begges the Question in
supposing his imaginary different degrees of preaching presbyters or Pastors
to be at this time existent, which (until he make it appear from Scripture) is
as easily denied by us, as affirmed by him. What a pitiful cause must that be
which needs the support of such vain shifts? In phil: 1. and Act. 20. Bishops
(diocesian Bishops) must be set up among the presbyters. So here they must be
brought into this presbytery, whereas the very Question is anent the being and
existence of any such Bishops at all at this time. Next, If hi-man were posed
upon it, why he maks the presbyters here to be of his imagined hiest class of
diocesian Bishops, and not also in all plac^s where they are mentioned, as Dr.
Hamon does: And how it comes that there were so many Bishops so early here
before Ephesus, Crete, and other Churches had even his inferior elders or
ordinary Ministers? He could give no answer but what would render him
rediculous, in his running the Circlestick, and begging the Question. Besides
Timothy was yet no Bishop, for he was advanced to this office when set over
Ephesus in the Informers judgment: and he was now only (with him) a sort of
unfixed preacher of the gospel, or ane Evangelist in his large sense. And
Hooker says the Evangelists were presbyters of prime sufficiency assumed by
the Apostles to attend them. This resolver will have him to be no other ways
ane Evangelist, then Philip, who, he supposes, was still a deacon when so
termed. Thus it evidently appears that Timothy, according to him, and upon the
sequel of that answer, received at the utmost but a mere presbyterat in his
ordination; and then I wonder what needs a number of Bishops be mustered
together for ordaining him? Might not Paul and the Inferior presbyters ordain
such ane one? Thus we see he is still inconsistent what himself in all his
shifts. But he has a 3d. Answer taken from the laying on of paul's hands,
mentioned 2. Tim. 1. 6 which (he says) gave the substance of the ordination,
although the presbyters might share in the Ceremonial pare of is. Ans: 1. If it
were denied that the Apostle 2. Tim. 1. 6 affirms That Timothy was ordained by
the laying one of his hands since hementiones only [the gift conferred by the
laying on of his hands which] Paul might confer upon him antecedaniously to
his ordination, since he laid on hands in order to gifts of the Spirit
abstracting from ordination as other Apostles did Act. 8. 17. And also because
the different manner of expression in 2. T^m. 1. 6. and 1. Tim. 4. 14. viz,
(...) in the one place, and (...) in the other, diversifies the conferring of
gifts, and the ordination, or at least will plead that Paul's laying on of hands
was in order to the Conferring of the gifts, and not necessary for the
ordination it self, which he received entirely by the laying on of the
presbyteryes hands, even supposeing that they were both contemporarie; If I
say, Some presbyterian Doubter should suggest these difficulties to our
Informer, he would be puzzled to come liquide off with this his answer. Surely
[the Charisma] the gift, is a differing thing from the office. And the Apostles
laying on of hands as ane Apostle, being in a special way in order to the end
mentioned thouh contemporarie with the presbytryes action, yet mig^t be
temporary and expired. 2. What Calls he the cemonial part (distinguished from
that substantial pat of his ordination, which Paul gave) which he admitts the
presbyters unto, if we will. Nay Sir, we will not; it is known your party are
much in love with ceremonies, and we quite them unto you, where they want
substance. Was it the Ceremonial part to lay on hands? Then I would propose to
our Informer. 1. That since this was neither in order to the gifts, which Paul
gave, nor any part of the sacred authority and mission as a Church officer,
which Paul only gave according to him, what signified their laying on of hands
at all? Was it only to signify their consent? Where can he show in all the
scriptures, where laying on of hands is mentioned, that it Imports only
consent, and not authority? this Ceremony, borrowed from the old Testament,
does always present a badge of ane Authoritative blessing, flowing from
Prophets, Patriarchs and others, to which though there were many assenters, yet
none of these assenters laid on hands. Next, since this Ceremony was used by
our Lord, toward his Apostles, and thereafter by them, and particularly in
this work: and withal, since it must needs Import here a solemn blessing of,
a setting apart unto God, and sending out into his vineyard, the person thus
ordained (not to debate whither this Ceremony be of the essence of ordination,
as some judge, yea or not) let our Informer show me, why it may not, upon all
these grounds be looked upon as a badge of Ministerial authority, and supposing
this authority inherent in the presbyters. I would ask him, 3. Since Paul
commended the whole official power of ordination and jurisdiction, to the
presbyters, Act. 20. and Peter. 1. Epist. 5. Ch: Imputs ane (...), or actual
exercise of Episcopal authority, to the elders, who were (as himself
acknowledges) set over the flocks only, and so none of his imaginary Prelat
elders? With what sense or reason, can he or anyelse say that they could not
share in the substantials of ordination. many no doubt concurred with the
public blessing at Timothies ordination: for I suppose it was done in the view
and presen ce of the assembly, But did any of them lay on hands? Besyds, we
might here tell him that the word (...), or presbytery, does always Import a
juridicall authoritative Court, so the word is taken Luke 22. 66. and Act. 22.
5. As likewayes the word [presbyter.] Imports ane officer clothed with
authority, so that this Court of elders, must needs have ane interest in much
more then the rituales of ordination.

His Last Exception, is, That upon our supposition, That Timothy was ane
extraordinary officer and Evangelist, he could not be ordained by ordinary
inferior officers or Ministers. Ans. 1. As some say of the Prince, that though
Major Singulis, greater then every single person, yet he is, Minor universis,
less then the whole body, so it may be said, that though Timothy, as ane
Evangelist, were superior to any mere elder; yet ane eldership, the juridical
Court, the Church representative, might be above him; if at least such a
superiority was here necessary; else let him say, whither the Prophets at
Antioch, were in Capacity to Impose hands upon Paul, and Barnabas, and send
them out upon a gospel legation. Himself is bound to answer this, whither these
Inferior officers, in that act, were greater then he, yea or not, and how
these ordinary officers and teachers could authoritatively bless, and lay hands
upon ane Apostle. And when he has cleared this, he will easily exped our
difficulty in this point. 2. Though it were granted, that a presbytery,
consisting of mere ordinary officers, could not ordain ane Evangelist, yet I
hope he will grant, that a presbytery, where such a one as paul was, might do
it, who as ane Apostle, might ordain alone. If he say, what is then become of
our presbyterial ordination, which we draw from this text? I answer, it is much
confirmed, but not weakened by what is said, for if the Apostle Paul took along
in this high Act [the ordination even of ane Evangelist] the authoritative
concurrenc of a Presbytery, therefore much more does this power of ordination
belong to the Presbytery now, in relation to ordinary Church officers or fellow
Presbyters, when the office of Apostles and Evangelists is ceased. 3. If the
ground and topic of our Informer's argument [They who ordain must be greater
then he who is ordained] were denied, he would be more puzeled to make it good,
then he Imagines. Because 1. The blessing in ordination being only ministerial
and instrumental by way of service but not by ane original primative authority
(as a learned man distinguishes here) God and Christ alone ordaining thus,
whose servants and Ministers, both the ordained and ordainers are. Ephesians. 4:
11, 12. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Matthew. 9: 37, 38. 2 Cor 4: 5. 1 Cor. 3: 5. 21, 22. Act.
13: 1, 6. The ordination will no more infer a superiority over the ordained,
then peoples blessing of God will make them greater then He, Jacobes blessing
of Pharaoh, will make him greater then Pharaoh, the peoples blessing of
Solomon, greater then Solomon. The Kings Acturney (says he) who draws the
nobleman or officer of state, His patent and commission, is not greater then
he, But the King who is the original of temporal honor. So Ministers in this
work do only draw out the Kings patent and apply it, but Christ only is the
original proper ordainer. As for that text, Hebr. 7: 7. He says i^ is meaned
of Christ himself who by Melchisedeck his type, blessed Abraham by his own
inherent authority and power. 2. Admitting that the ordainers, behoved to be
greater then the ordained before the ordination is execut, yet it will not
necessarly follow, that they must be still greater after the ordination is past
and finished, the very end of it being to conferr upon the ordained a like
Ministry with that which themselves have. He instances Matthias and Paul, who
were inferior to the Apostles, before they were called and ordained: But being
called, they became equal with other Apostles in Apostolic power, dignity,
degree, etc. We might exemplitie this in other instances, (if intending to
Press it) As the army Creats the Emperor, which of the two is greater? Three
Bishops creat a Metropolitan, the Council of Cardinals a pope etc. But enough
is said to rectify our Informer's thoughts of Timothy and Titus and so we
proceed unto h^s next Argument.

CHAP. XI.
The Informers pleadings for Prelacy from the seven Asian Angels, discussed.
That the style of Prophetic writings, and of this book, do strongely conclud
a collective sense of the term Angel, fully proved. The admitting the Angel to
be a single person, will not help the Informer. his reasonings from the
pretended Catalogues of succeeding Bishopes in these Churches, frivolous and
vain, as also his new Argument taken from [diotrephes's love of preeminence,]
wherein he embraces Bellarmins evasiones, and offers violence to this, and
parallel Texts.

OUR Informers next great Argument for Prelacy, is taken from the seven Asian
Angels Revel. 23. Whom he holds to be Diocesian Bishops: Because though there
were many Ministers at Ephesus Act. 20. Yet when that Church long after this is
written to; and when increased there is but one Angel addressed, and commended,
or blamed, according to what was well, or amiss in the Church: And in all the
rest whatever is commended or discommended, is directed to one Angel, who by
his place and authority, was mainely concerned therein. Ans: This man, if he
had been so ingenuous and seen in this debate, as he would appear, might have
found all this, and much more then he has offered, fully removed and answered
by many Godly learned. But they must still tell over and over, their old
baffled arguments, to which satisfying answers have bein often returned. But to
the point, the weakness of this proof; is many ways evident. 1. It is grounded
upon a Misterious Metaphorick term of Angel, and stars; Revel: 1: 20. the
mystery of the Sevenstarrs, so must the expression of Angel, be likwayes a part
of this mystery. The Maxim is known, ^heologia Symbolica non est argumentativa.
Far less can this be rationally opposed unto so many pregnant clear scriptures,
as are produced for Presbyterian Government. Besides that, the word [Bishop] is
no where in John's writings, made use of; who calls himself a Presbyter, and
never mentions superiority of one Presbyter over another, but in condemneing
Diotrephes. He calls Christ the word, and the Sabbath, the Lords day; these are
expressions not found before in Scripture; Surely he should have made mention
of a new office, as well as of a new phrase, had any such thing as a Bishop,
been allowed by him. Besides, the Metaphorical terms of Stars, or Angels, do
import the qualities of light, heavenlines of frame etc: which are proper and
suiteble to all Ministers of the Gospel: and therefore they cannot ground the
peculiar pre-eminence of a Bishop over many Ministers. 2. The great topic of
his argument is [that one is named, though many are spoken to, and where many
Presbyters are supposed to be, as at Ephesus, who threfore must needs be a
Bishop.] but this ground will not hold good. Because, 1. This is no more then
what is suitable unto the style of this book, which is by mistick visional
representations, to include many individuals as one singular: So all the
individuals of the Church, both members and officers, are represented by one
candlestick: and why not also all the Ministers, by one angel, which is a term
that of it self, and in this place, imports no jurisdiction properly, but is
immediately referred to the qualities of Ministers, above expressed. 2. This is
also suitable to the style of this book, as it is epistolar, the address may
be to one, but it will give no Authority to that one, over the rest, no more
then ane address from the King, to a speaker of the Parliament, will give to
that person, jurisdiction and authority over them? Or then our Lords saying to
Peter only expressly, not to the rest of his fellow disciples, I will give unto
thee the keys etc. Will conclude that he was Prince or primat over the
Apostles, and that they had not equal authority with him, in the use of the
keys. Our Informer and his fellows here, do justify the Papists pleading for
the Pope. 3. This is suitable unto Scripture prophetic writings, and to this
book, as such, to represent many individuals by one singular, The four beasts,
and twenty four Elders, are not four individual persons, or twenty four
single Elders. The singular names of Woman, Beast, Whoor, Dragon, signify a
collection of many individuales. So the one Spirit of God is called the seven
Spirits, in the 1 Chap: With reference to his manifold operations. Dan. 8: 20.
One Ram signifies many Kings of the Medes and Persians. He that will not
hearken to the Priest. Deutr. 17: 12. That is, the Priests, in the plural. So
the Priests lips should keep knowledge and the Law is to be sought at his mouth
Mal. 2: 7. That is the Priests. Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord etc.
that is, those servants. Particularly, as to this term Angel, It is said Psalm.
34. That the Angel of the Lord encamps about the Godly, that is, many Angels.
4. It is suitable to Scripture, and to this book, To represent ane indefinet
number, by a definit. Thus all Judas Adversaries are represented by the four
ho^es, Zachr. 1: 18. All the Godly, and the ungodly, are represented by the
five wise, and the five foolish Virgins Matthew. 25. and in the 8. Chap of this
book, The Seven Angels standing before God, represent all the Angels. For in the
7 Chap: Mention is made of all the Angels who do thus stand. So we are to
understand with the same indefinitnes ofttimes the Septenary number, as the
Seven pillars which wisdom hewes out Prove. 2. The seven Pastors or shepherds
Mic. 5. The Seven eyes Zachr, 3. And in this very book the Seven condlesticks,
Lamps, and vials, Revel, 4: 5, 15 -- 5. As we find the scripture, and this
same Apostle first naming a multitud, and then contracting it into a singular,
as 2 John 2. many deceavers are come into the world -- then -- this is a
deceaver and ane Antichrist. And sometimes the individual in one sentence;
turned into a multitud: as 1. Tim. 2: 15 She shall be saved, that is, the
woman bearing Children -- if they abide in faith and Charity that is such women
in General, as Beza tells us all writers do take it: So it is as certain that
this single Angel is turned into many in one and the same Epistle in this book,
and spoken to in the plural, as when it is said Revel. 2. 24. to you and to the
rest in Thyatira. and in Revel. 2: 10. we find John changing in one sentence,
the singular Angel into a multitude: fear none of these things which thou shall
suffer, Behold the devil shall cast some of you into prison that ye may be
tried etc. as in 2 ^oh. 2: He changes many into One. Finaly, We have proved
that the Scripture allows of no Angels Standing-Church officers or Bishops
above the Pastors or Presbyters, who have in Scripture the whole Episcopal
power given them. So that whatever this Informer shall produce as the
Characteristick of this Angel, we find it applicable to Presbyters. 1. Is it
the work of this Angel to preach and baptize? This Commission he will grant
belongs to all Pastors. 2. Is it the power of ordination? The Scripture shows
us that this is Seated in a Presbytery. 1. Tim. 4: 14. with Act. 22: 5. Luke
22: 66. Matthew. 18: 17. Or, 3. Is it the ruling Governeing power? Surely all
Ministers are such Angels, All that watch for the peoples souls have a joint
rule over them, Hebr. 13. 17. And therefore none can challenge it solely to
himself. In the Church of Thessalonica the labors in the word and doctrine,
joytlie and indiscriminatim fed, joyntlie censured and admonished, and were
jointly the (...) or Rulers, to whom consequently the people were
indiscriminatim (or with out any difference of one of them from another) to
submitt themselves, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. There was therefore no sole Angel or (...)
and ruler, but this Prostasia or ruleing power was in many. So was it with the
Church of Ephesus Act. 20. So with these elders or Bishops 1. Pet 5. And we
offer to this, or any man's serious thoughts, whither it be suiteable to divine
rules, to cross so many clear Scriptures upon the ground of a metaphorial
mistick expression: and to expone them in that sense, rather then to explain
the Metaphor and mistick expression by plain Scriptures. And whi^her it be not
more suiteable to understand the Angel of Ephesus, of the Ministers: to whom in
a plain Scripture, the whole Government is found entrusted, rather then to
expound that plain text, (Act. 20) by a Metaphor, and contrary to that plain
text, to set up one Angel or Diocesian Bishop over that Church, with sole power
of ordination and jurisdiction.

But the Doubter objects what have been saying, viz, That the Angel is to be
taken collectively, and not for one single person, but for all the Ministers.
To which (in a piece of petulant folly) he Answers That he has often wondered at
this reply, that it seems this Scripture pinches us sore, when we fly to such
a shift -- That Scultetus, a learned Protestant, affirms that the most learned
interpreters understand the Angel thus, and that without offering violence to
the Text, it cannot be otherwise understood. Ans. 1. We hope is evident from
what is said that the most native scriptural acception is to take the Angel
collectively. To which we may add, that although the Lord Jesus (the best
interpreter of these Angels) does expound the Seven candlsticks, to be the
Seven Churches, yet in expounding the Seven Stars, he losses the number of
Seven, and calls them not the Seven Angels (as he should have done according to
this man's meaning) but indefinitly the Angels of the Seven Churches; from which
it is convincingly apparent that though there were Seven Churches written unto,
yet there were not Seven diocesian Bishops, according to the number of the
Seven Angels: but that all the Ministers or Angels are thus collectively
understood. And whereas this man professes (in the deept of his wit for sooth)
to wonder at this answer and taks it to be a shift. He should wonder at
Augustine (Homil. 21. upon this book,) who thus taks it, expounding the Angel
of Thyatira, the proepositi ecclesiarum, the governoures of the Churches. He
should wonder at Aretas, lib. 1. Cap: 1, 2, 9, 10. Wonder at Primasius in Apoc:
C: 2. At Ambrosius, Anbertus, To: 1, 6 p: 1. Anselm, Pererius, Victorinus,
Tirinus, Haymo, Beda, perkings, Fox, in his Meditationes upon the Revel. p: 7,
8, 9, 17. who cites also many Interpreters thus expounding him. Yea more, he
wonders at King james and the Episcopal clergy in England, under and by whom,
in the contents annexed to the Bibles of the last translation, the contents in
the 2. chap: are represented [what is to be written to the Angels, that is, to
the Ministers of the Church of Ephesus, Smyrna etc] Its pity they had not this
grave dictator to correct their mistake, and to present them with his new
spectacles, to discover therewith, the Bishop in these Epistles. He should have
wondered at Pilkington Bishop of Durham (in his exposition upon Hag: Chap. 1:
v. 13.) who expoundes the Angel thus collectivly. See Gers. Buc. de Gub. Eccl.
p. 1. 205, 393, 408, 419, 422, 433. Now, what pinched all these Authors to
embrace this Silleptick exposition of the Angel? As for Scultetus, although a
Protestant, yet he is a high Prelatist, and a partial witness in this point, and
cannot conterballance these Authors mentioned.

But next, what will our Informer gain though it were yielded that this Angel is
ane individual or single person? Some learned men do so take it, as Beza, and
Reynolds, who notwithstanding were far from thinking him a Prelat. Because I.
He may be the Angelus Preses, or the moderatour Angel, not the Angelus
Princeps, or Lord Angel, yea, and the Preses and Moderator for the time, as a
speaker in the Parliament. Ephesus had many elders. (Act 20: 27. 1 Timothy 5: 17.)
of equal authority, who were made Bishops, and they are spoken to in the
plural, though the Angel is named in the singular number. 2. This Angel is said
to have no jurisdiction and superiority over the rest of the Ministers. And we
challeng our Informer to show where this Angel is spoken unto, with reference
to Ministers, as subject unto him, which notwithstanding is his supposition,
and petitio principii, all along in this Argument. 3. The Parochial, and
Diocesian division of Churches, were long after this and not until 260. Years
after Christ. 4. Nothing is required of this Angel, but that which is the
common duty of all Ministers. Finally, Suppose it were granted to him, that a
superiority were imported in nameing this Angel, It may be a Superiority of
Order, Dignity, or Gifts, not of power and Jurisdiction

But the Dcubter Object's [That (Revel. 2 24.) Christ by John speaks to the
Angel in the plural [or You'] and that therefore he means all the Minist^rs.]
(...) To this he answers That Beza by this phrase understands the president and
the company of Ministers with the rest of the people, tabing the Angel still
for a single person, and h^lds that more then the Angel are spoken unto. He
tells us, that the words are ane Apostrophe, wherein the speaker amplifies his
speech, turning it to some others then those who are first spoken unto. Ans. 1.
We have already shown that this, and the other parallel phrase mentioned, do
strongely plead for the Angels being understood Collectivly: since the Lord
makes a Plural of the singular Angel, as 1 Timothy 2. 15. She shall be saved if
they continue etc. especially the above evinced equal power, and authority, of
the Angels or Presbyters, who where in these Churches, being pondered. Besides,
how does this remove the objection, that Beza understands it some other ways
then collectively, what says that to the reason and argument it self? But 2.
If Beza understand by the (...) or you, the moderator or president Angel with
the rest of the Ministers, wherein (I pray) is our argument infringed? viz,
That this Angel is not a Diocesian Prelat, since other Ministers are taken in
with him here as of equal authority in this compellation. In Beza's sense this
is no other language then what might have been said or written to a presbyterian
Synod with its Moderator all being equally concerned therein, and supposed
equaly Angels in this Church. And if this Cut not the sinnews of this man's
design and argument here, let any judge. 3. Non can rationally call it a
turneing of the speech to any other then such as were first speken to, (...)
But to you I Say is a continuanc of the speech to the same persons, with ane
exegitick explication of the [Angel] by (...), or [yow,] especially since they
are distinguished from [the rest] or the ordinary Presessores, by the
Copulative, and. In our ordinary language, we usually reinforce our speech to
the same persons, and to the same purpose, with ane emphatick [I say] as it is
here. Some Prelatists have a Knack (which I wonder our Informer stumbled not
upon) in alleging that some copies leave out the Conjunction -- Reading it
(...) that is, to you, the rest in Thyatira; making the term [yow,] all
onewith [the rest in Thyatira.] but the plain reading of the 23. v. confutes
this.

But that which the Informer thinks should put it out of question which us,
That these Angels were Diocesian Bishops, [ Is the Testimonies of the Ancients,
who came immediately after them, and condescend upon some of their names. Then
he repeats to us again the story of Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, borne near
the Apostles times, who, numbers Se^n of his Predecessors before him and tells
us That Leontius Bishop of Magnesia, Numbers Tuenty seven Bishops of Ephesus
from Timothy. That these Seven Bishops of Asia are at the Council of Neice
designed by their styles Ephesus, Smyrna, etc. That Eusebius, Tertullian,
Irenaeus assert that John made Policarp Bishop of Smyrna. That he is thought to
be the Angel to whom John wrote. That Ignatius writes to him as such, etc.
These he thinks as acomment upon this and such like scriptures, should
convince us.] Ans. 1. He forgot one maine point of this argument from
Antiquity; before it convince us, he must condescend upon the mould, and power,
of the Bishops which these Ancienas speaks of; he holds that the word [Bishop]
is variously taken in Scripture, and why not also by the ancients? But if he
had offered us Testimonys speaking of sole power of these Bishops in ordination
and Jurisdiction, leaving nothing to Presbyters but the key of doctrine, of
Bishops with a negative voice in judicatories, having sole Dominion over a
diocese, the only proper Pastoures thereof; and Prelates of Erastus his Cut,
Then I should confess there were early such Bishops as he pleads for: and we
should acknowledge their power to be a commentary upon the Scriptures he pleads
from; But with this proviso, that he could quiparat them with their first
progenitors, and show us these privileges in the scripture-Escutciones of
their founders. But till then, I think our conviction must be suspended.

That Presbyters have the key of Doctrine, he will not deny, That they have the
power of ordination, and jurisdiction, and that key likewayes entrusted to
them, has been proved from Scripture. 1. Tim. 4. 14. Luke 22. 66. Act. 20: 28.
1. Pet. 5: 2, 1. Cor 5. 5. Now let him say, did these first succeeding Bishops
(in their supposed diocesses) always take this power in ordination and
jurisdiction from the first Scripture Bishops, and stood invested therewith in
after times? How then comes jerome to say [That even in his time] elders were
subject to the Bishop only by Custom, not by Dispensation from the Lord. (In
his Coment: on Tit:) and, (on Isa. 3.) That they had even in his time, a caetus
presbiterorum, a meeting or Court of Presbyters, and ane Apostolic senate.] How
comes a (...) or Presbytery to be mentioned, Councancyr. Can. 18. How comes
Ambrose, (a father of the Church) upon Ephesians. 4. to assert [That after the
Church was enlarged., Cepit alio ordine Gubernari. It began to be governed
after another manner then at first, -- and that non per omnia convenient, etc.
That the Government then in the Church, was not every way suitable to the
Apostles appointment] me thinks these assertions might convince the Informer
of the folly of this argument.

But 2. What if some of these first successors, be found but mere Constant
moderators? What is then become of his Series of a Succession of Diocesian
Bishops from Timothy; and Titus, and the Asian Angels? says not jerome (ad
Evagrium) Alexandriae Presbyteri unum ex se electum in excelsiori gradu
Collocatum Episcopum nominabant, etc That the Bishop at Alexandria was only a
Presbyter Chosen to preside. etc. Ambrose says that this distinction betaixt
Bishop and Presbyter; came in by Couns^l (Cubi prius) therefore he holds it was
not derived from divine (...), (and therein gives the lie to our Informer:) for
that he says was different from their present custom. Augustine (Epist: 10.)
says (with jerome) that by Custom of the Church, Episcopatus, was; Major
presbyterio, the Episcopacy was greater then the presbyterat. How comes
^irmilianus (apud Cypr. ep: 78.) to assert that the presbyters, possident
ordinandi potestatem, posseses the power of ordination, and these presbyters he
calls praepositi, the presidents or rulers. Ierom says, quid facit excepta
ordinatione Episcopus quod nonfacit presbiter. what does the Bishop except
ordination, which the presbyter does not, -- yet even in this, presbyters then
concurred with them, and shared in that power. Says not Chrisost: upon 1. Tim:
inter Episcopum et presbyterum, interest ferme nihil-between the Bishop and
presbyter, there is almost no difference. As for his lines of Succession, they
will say nothing until he prove these Bishops to be Episcopos principes,
Prince-or Lord Bishops, and nor Episcopos presides or Moderator Bishops, which
will be a hard task, since he must answer Blondel, who largely proves, that
before the year 140* there was not a Bishop over presbyters, even the Constant
president, far from the power of the present dioces^an. Policarp himself, his
supposed Bishop of Smyrna, makes but Two orders of Ministry, Bishops and
(...), in his Epistle to the Philippians. Dr. Reynolds in his conference with
Heart, proves that the first Bishop who came in after the Apostles, was nothing
but the (...), Moderator of the presbytery. In a word, as many learned men do
prove the discrepancy of the ancients among themselves, and their variety of
names, and speech in relation to these first supposed Bishops, and that several
authors are Spurius and counterfit who are Brought in to give Testimony in
this point. So it is certain that this man and his fellows in pleading thus
for Timothies Episcopacy, do put the blott of dread full Apostasy upon him, in
making him fall (as the Angel of Ephesus is charged) from his first love; so
that, if they will not runn on this inconvenience, and stage this eminent Saint
for such ane Apostat, contrary to the Scripture account of him, they must
wholly quit this plea. As for what he adds [of Several writers acknowledging
the Angel a Single person] we have shown how vain a reason this is, to prove
his point.

But the Doubter objects to some purpose [that Beza and others might take the
Angel to be but Moderator.] To this he answers [that the Angel must needs be a
Bishop, because he is cheifely commended or discomended, as having a chief
hand in what was right, or amiss, in these Churches. That the power found in
Timothy and Titus, proves it was so with these Angels. -- That Beza says these
Angels power was more eminent then the rest of their fellows.] Ans. 1. As for
Beza, its true he expones [the Angel] (...) [to the president] -- but adds --
[Sed hinc statui episcopalis ille gradus etc: -- that is, But that Episcopal
degree, which was after ward by human invention brought into the Church of God,
nether certainly can nor ought to be hence concluded, nay not so much as the
office of a perpetual president, should be of necessity, as the thence ariseing
oligarchical tyrranny; (let our Informer mark this) whose head is the
Antichristian beast now at length with the most certan ruin, not of the Church
only, but of the world also, maks manifest. And this also is all which Dr.
Reynolds acknowledges. Now I think he will find no advantage nor credit here to
his Diocesian Bishop, since Beza maks him but a human invention, yea and the
poisonous egg out of which Antichrist was hatched. 2 As for his Reason [That
this [Angel] is chefly reproved or commended, as having the Chief hand, in
what was right or amiss.] He must prove, (before this Reason will pass current)
that one single person is Chiefly reproved or commended, and likewayes that his
having the commendation, or reproof adressed to him, will evince a Chief
authority, or Chief hand, (as he calls it) in government. We told him that in
Beza's, and Dr. Reynolds judgment, the [Angel] is only the preses Mor^derator
receaving the Epistle or address. Now, will ane Epistle containing
commendations or reproves of a Synod, and addressed to the Moderator, make him
Chief as to what is commended, or taxed, in all that Synodall assembly or
Church? Surely not at all. The Moderator may be a man as little concerned
therein, and possibly less, then any of the meeting: Or will the Kings Message
or Charge to a parliament, adressed to the speaker, containing reproves and
commendationes of that great body and assembly, fix the guilt or commendation
principally upon the speaker, or president? He will not say it. As for Timothy
and Titus, we have proved that they had no such power, as he pretends, and that
their inspection was extraordinary and Evangelistick, which cannot with any
show of reason be said of these Seven Angels. As for Beza [his acknowledgment
of a more eminent Authority in government, which these single persons had] this
man cannot with any show of reason allege Beza to understand thereby any other
thing beyond the eminency of his Episcopus divinus, which with Beza is the
Pastor, among whom jure divino, he will not a^mit so much as a perpetual
president, far less a Bishop: for the perpetual president or Moderator, is with
Beza, the Episcopus humanus, which he distinginshes from the divine, or
scripture Bishop; and the diocesian prelat (pleaded for by this Informer) who
has the Chief, and sole power in ordination and jurisdiction, is the Satanical
Bishop. (In his Treatise de triplici Episcopatu;) So that Beza cannot Imput to
these single persons any authority over their brethren, or ascribe to them any
other eminency, then what the eminency of a Moderatorship will give, If Beza
do not compare them with the Elders of the Inferior sort, who rule only, as
some would readily admit, who take these Churches to be Congregational. As for
Mede, it is no great matter whither he take the Angels Collectivly, or for
Single persons, if he Imput not to these Asian Angels ane Episcopal Authority,
which this Informer proves not, in telling us, [Tha^ the Tuentie four Angels
about the Thron, do with him, represent the Bishops] unless he can show that
he means his Diocesian Bishops: for he may mean the Bishops indefinitely,
according to the genuine scripture acceptance. He holds there are Seven
Bishops of Asia here only written unto, where are the Tuentie four Bishops, if
Mr Mede take them in his sense? As for Mr. Brightman, his exponeing ordinarily
the Angel, of a single person, as the Informer alleadges. Let us hear Brightman
himself. [To the Angel etc.] The Epistles are entitled (says he) one by one,
to the Pastors, Because the safety of the Congregation depends upon the
soundnes of the Pastors: for there was not one Angel alone at Ephesus, but
many, Neither yet any prince among these, as is manifast by Paul, who to
Miletum sent for the Elders or Bishops of Ephesus, -- adding, that nothing is
spoken of their obedience to any one Chief Bishop -- That a Prince hood came
after the Apostles, and was not yet borne, save only that Diotrephes gave some
show of it. hence he concluds thus [therefore under the name of one Angel, the
Epistle is written to the whole order of Pastors etc:] And by this account of
Brightmans acce^tation of the word Angel, Let any judge of our Informers
fidelity.

But now comes his last Argument for Episcopacy (which surprises not only his
Doubter, but I believe, Most, if not all else, who have seen it) taken from
[Diotrephes his loveing to have the preeminence, 3. Joh. 9. who (he says)
ambitiously loved to be first, and to have the Chief place: and that this
ambition only John speaks against, -- he adds, that ane office may be good and
lawful, though ane ambitions seeking of it, be sinful. -- That Beza renders
it, qui primatum ambit -- that our Inference of the unlawfulnes of the office
he aimed at, will not follow from his seeking of this chief place, but rather
that their was such ane office at this time in the Church, and now void, into
which he meaned to put himself, or had already done so, out of ane ambitious
desire to be great, which was a sinful end: that, he looked after himself, not
the good of the Church.] Ans. it is long since we had this answer, and gloss
from Romanists, though not as ane argument. We see popri and prelacy in
despite of all con^radiction will strick hands. When Luke 22. Touching our
Lords forbidding a Dominion, or primacy among his Disciples, is objected to
Bellarmin, he resolves it just as this resolver. viz. That the Lord rather
institut and established a primacy in the Church, then removed it: And
commanded his vicar to preside, but not as the Heathen, who seek themselves,
and their own glory and commodity. de Pontif, Ques. 1. Chap. 3. Sect. 3.) Ye
shall not rule as the Princes of the Gentiles (says he,) Imports, that he
admitts one to preside but not after that manner. He presses the Greek word
(...) which signifies a Prince or Captain (just as this man does the (...) or
loving of preeminence) to show that such a Prince or primat was designed, de
Pontif. Lib: 1. Chapter 9. Thus the Papists gloss generally the Text under debate.
Tilen [in his Not. 67.] answering him [That if it were so, then Christ rather
inflamed then quenched their ambitious thoughts, which they ^hil (...), or
loving preeminence, intertained] makes this sin of diotrephes the same with
theires which the Lord reprehended, viz. A sinful desire of ane unlawful
forbidden primacy. Adding, [That the Lord said not, he who by my appointment
shall be Chief^, but he who from his sinful desire would be Chieff. Bellarmin
and the Papists fine notions, and old exploded evasions, we see stands these
men in much stead: And do furnish useful materials to dress up Prelatick
pamphlets. But what will this man say? Will he indeed own this popish Argument
and answer upon Luk 22. Which the topic of his argument here will necessarly
infer? Was their a lawful primacy supposed among the Apostles, and the
ambitious desire only forbidden? Bellarmin presses that ane exorbitant dominion
or tyrannical only was forbidden since the Princes of the Gentiles are
mentioned (which this man also taks hold of) which seems to put a restricton
upon that prohibition, but there is no such restriction in this place under
debate: So that he is cut off from Bellarmins evasion. We heard before he
admitted a lawful Church Dominion as not discharged in Luke 22. And here he
admitts a lawful primacy over this Church, and in his pretended antiquity we
will find him not to di^owne a Chief patriarch if not directly to plead for
him; And then I see not why he may not take in the High Priest into his old
Testament Argument, in relation to a moral standing primacy in
Church Government, and merit a co^l in some Popish order ^r it be long. Now it
is evident that the Apostle simply dissounes this lover of preeminence, and
censures him upon the account of the preeminence he desired. And the Informer
himself (though, as I observed before, he is not one with himself in it)
acknowledges that the Lord discharged all inequality, and especially a (...),
or primat, among the Apoles; and therefore, why his scoler John censured not
likewayes a (...) or primacy - affecting Minister; seeking the same
principality over his Brethren or fellow Ministers, which our Lord discharged
among the Disciples, will puzell him to show the disparity. Surely, when our
Lord said, [It shall not be so among you,] and when he discharged a protos or
Chief among the Disciples, recomending to the desirer of this to be their
servant over whom this was affected, he spoke to them as Ministers, and in that
capacity: and therefore discharges this among all Ministers. For aquatenus ad
omne -- I wonder if this man will say that if any of the Seventy Disciples had
affected to be a protos over the rest, our Lord would not have given them the
same injunction. Or if he will say that they did not hold themselves concerned
in the same rule, and the prohibition which the Disciples here got. Surely he
cannot deny this, and therefore it is Certan that John discharhes the very
protos or prostacy self for what reason will it: he invent wherefor a
preeminence or primacy should be disgarged to the Apostles, and allowed among
the Seventy (who he thinks represents the Pastors) or any Inferior order of
Church officers? Besides, what was it which Peter discharged to these Bishops 1
Pet. 5. Was it not a preeminence, or masterly primacy, and to be a protos?
learned he not this prohibition of his Lord? and will it not be a Critical
distinction to distinguish lordship from preeminence? Now the first we find
universally discharged to Pastors, even over the flock^, as this man
acknowledges, and therefore why this preeminence, is not likewise in it self and
simply stricken against, will be Impossible to show the disparity. I must
presume that the Apostle understood the sense of this prohibition of his Lord,
much better then our Informer: and we see he applies to inferior Pastors and
Bishops, that which was discharged to himself, and the rest of his fellow
disciples. And, (as I said before) if none of these scripture-Bishops were to
lord it over the flock, far less over their fellows. So that to be a protos
or Chief over them, was inhibit, as by the lord before, so by the Apostle here,
and consequently this lover of preeminence is simply condemned. The Inglish
Annot: make the two places of Peter and John, parallel, and the same evil to
be discharged in both. So do the dutch annot expressing that which diotrephes
sought, in the Apostle Peter's terms, of lording it over his brethren. Now I
hope he will not say, that when Peter discharges Ministers to be lords over
Gods Heritage, he discharged only ane ambitious affectation and Supposed a
la^ll Lordship over the flock^, abstracting from this ambitious affectation.
Surely then this Prohibition of the Apostle John, where Diotrephes is supposed
to be practicing, what is by Peter discharged, can admit of no such evasion
either; unless he would make these Apostles to interfer together in this
matter: for it were strange clashing of weapones, and contradiction of the
tongues and pens of these Apostles, if Peter should discharge all Lording even
over the flocks, in any Pastor, and yet John should allow unto a Pastor, a
preeminence, and primacy, both over the flocks, and his fellow Ministers and
laborers with him in the Lords vineyard. Infine, If to be a primat or (...)
was a lawful office, to be a (...) or lover of it (which is all that the word
will Import) could deserve no censure. The Informer knows who said [He that
desires the office of a Bishop, desires a good work] but our Lord who spoke
this by the pen of Paul, said also himself immediately to the Apostles, and by
the Apostle John in this place, he that desires to be a protos or Chief, must
quite that desire. Hence these are different objects of desire, to be a
scripture Bishop, and a protos or primat. To affect the office of a scriptur
Bishop, and a primacy, are Antipods: so that it was not a lawful, nor
consequently praeexistent office in the Church, allowed by John, which this man
desired, and therefore he is simply condemned by the Apostle, both as to the
desire it self, and the object of it. He who thus affects to be first,
deserves to be called least in the Kingdom of God, and who thus exalt
themselves, shall be abased. To all which I might add, that diotrephes
Imperious lordly carriage in casting out and censureing, and not admitting into
this Church, such as the Apostle appointed to be therein received, is a lively
effigies of an^ Episcopal primacy or preeminence, and of that arbitrary
prelacy, that sole power in ordination and censures, which this Informer pleads
for. Against which disorderlines of this early primat, the Apostles threatening
of his holy censure, is a thunder-clapp which may terrify all who carry this
usurped office: and may make his Supposed Angels or Prelates, for this their
aspyreing, fear the stroke and punishment of those Angels, who kept not
their first estate, but left their own habitation.

I shall dimiss the Informers last argument, with one remarke further, which is
this, if the affecting to be a protos or Chief, tainted the Apostles
themselves, while the Christian Church was in its first Infancy, if in Paul's
time the mystery of Iniquity, and of propry, was working (the monstrous embrio
of a papacy, and consequently of a Prelacy) If peter found it needful to
disscharge Covetousnes and lordship, to ministers, If the holy Apostle John was
contradicted and counteracted by ane aspiring primat, Surely we need not wonder
at that universal Change of the Apostolic Holy, humble Church Discipline and
parity among Ministers, which overspread the Christian Church not long
thereafter. And to our prelatists ordinary question [When began the Change of
preshyterian parity among Ministes]? We may answer, That the bitter ^ootes of
a Primacy or prelacy, were sprouting in the Apostles times; and therefore it is
no strange thing that this destroying weed grew up so quickly thereafter the
(...) or evil one, did quickly sow his Cocle among the wheat, and blew up this
fire of ambition, primacy pride and (his own proper sin) till it came to the
flam, first of a human proftasie, then of a Hierarchy, and unto the Culmen or
tope, of a chief universal primacy at last. For that which he adds of Blondel
his granting [That diotrephes sought to be first Presbyter, and such a
president as had authority over the rest.] Surely none who have read Blondel
can but acknowledge, that he distinguishes all along the Presbyters set over
others from the Episcopus divine jure institutus, So in his 1, 2, 3. and 4t.
Arguments, page. 190: 191, 192, 193 etc. So that he maks the very constant
fixed president (much more such a president or primat as diotrephes affected to
be) distinct from the Divinely appointed Bishop; And therefore whatever he
might suppose to be creeping in at that time, he must needs, upon this ground,
interpret it to be a recesse from the divine appointment, and in so far a
Corruption. As for what our Informer repeats here again ad nauseam [ That
Bishops were immediately the Church before all the Apostles were gone and
imediatly after, which is a commentary upon Timothy, and Titus, and the Asian
Angels, and Diotrephes.] I answer, I believe indeed, as to his last instance,
that there were Diotrephesies, early enugh, and Beza's Episcopus humanus or
fixed president, but that there was either in the Apostles time, or ane
hundred years, and more afterward (I speak far within compass) his Diocesian
Prelat, with sole power of ordination and jurisdiction in a Diocese, he will
as soon join the poles together, as prove it by any faithful and authentic
Testimony.

CHAP. XII.
The Informers appeal to antiquity in the point of Episcopacy. That antiquity
is at most, testis facti, but not judex very, may witness matter of fact, but
is no judge of what is right therein, proved from the Testimony of Scripture,
and the fathers. The Informer's reasoning on this head, reduced to a formal
Syllogism and discussed. That in the first purest age the Church was governd
by Presbyters withtout Bishopes, proved by Testimonys of the fathers,
particularly of Jerome. His Testimony at Large vindicated from the exceptiones
of the Informer.

OUr Informer has by this time got out of the straites of his Scripture
Arguments for prelacy, and his pretended replies to Scripture arguments against
them. Wherein we have seen how pitifully he lies been Bruillied in his
endeavors to put the fairding of some Scripture Characters upon this Monster,
The Diocesian Prelat! Now he will lanch out in to the vast Ocean of Antiquity
wherein he supposes (and not altogother amiss) that this Leviathan can swim
much better. And therefore he fills up the Third part of the pamplet, with a
tedious legend of human Testimonies in relation to Bishops. But in this his
argueing from antiquity, he plays the same petty Sophister as in his pretended
Scripture proofs. For he is still pleading for a versatil Chimaera of his own
brain, and dare not state the Question, as to the Prelat now existent in his
Diocesian and erastian mould, like to whom if he will show me but one Prelat
among all his ragged Testimonies, I will yield the Cause to him. So that we are
not concened in his Testimonies, They being all Mute or Ambiguous as to our
debate. We shall therefore proceed to Consider the substantials of his
Argument on this head, and add some Chapters which will be found abundantly to
cut the sinne^es of his reasoning from pretended Testimonies of the Fathers,
and vindicat our Cause even in point of Antiquity.

(...) I Suppose this man (if he will not renounce his protestant profession)
cannot but grant, that it is not Antiquity as he call it, or human Testimonies,
but the Scriptures of truth, which most judge in this debate. So that I hop I
may suppose that he looks upon his Antiquitity as ane accessorie appendix
only to his Scripture arguments, and that the Scripture is not for him, but
against him, I hope it is conuincingly apparent from that is said above; we
must to the law and the Testimony in this and all other points of faith.
Antiquity without the first Scripture antiquity, deserves not the name. Id
adulterum quod posterius, id verum quod pri nium, said Tertullian. That is
adulterat which is Last, and trere which is first. I am the way, the truth and
the Life, said Christ, but not I am Custom And Cyprian tells us, that
Consuetudo sins veritate est vetusias erroris; Antiquity without truth, is but
a moldy error. Our Lord himself rejected this argument [it was said of old]
and apposes unto it [but I say] Well may we then oppose the Scripture sayings
to our Informer's [it was said of old] and by our Lords warrant, reject his
pretenses from Antiquity, to warrant any thing which the word condemns: and
for this we have good warrant of antiquity it self: for the fathers universaly
do hold that only the Scriptures must judge in points of faith. Sunt libri
Dominici quorum authoritati utrique consentimus, utrique credimus (there being
in them all things to be believed and practiced) utrique servimus, ibi
quaeramus ecclesiam, ibi discutiamus causam nostram, is great Augustins advice.
The books of the Lord are they to whose Authority we both consent, which we
both believe, To which we both submit, There let us seek the Church, There let
us discuss our Cause. Jerome on Chap. 23 of Matthew. tells us quod de scripturis
authoritatem non habet, eaedem facilitate contemnitur qua probatur. That which
derives not its authority from Scripture, the contemneing of it is as ready as
the proof is offered, and (on the 1.) Chap. of Hag Quae absque athoritate and
Testimoniis scripturarum quasi traditione Apostolica sponte reperiunt atque
confingunt, percutit Gladius Dei Such things as men of there own accord find
out and forge upon pretense of Apostolic tradition with out the authority and
Testimonies of Scriptures, the sword of God strikes throw the same. Besides
this discovers the plea from Antiquity to be very Impertiment in this debate:
Because the Question betwixt us is not defacto, but de jure, not what sort of
Bishops have been as to matter of fact, introduced into the Church of old, or
of late, but by what warrant and right they have possessed their places? We
allege and prove that the present Prelat now existent stands condemned by
Christ, the great lawgiver, his rules in point of Church Government, set down
in his Testament. Now, to answer this Charge with humane Testimonies, as to
Custom or practice of the Church, (even granting that his Testimonies did prove
the matter of fact, viz, That our present Prelat is exemplified in the ancient
Bishops) what is it but to oppose, humane corruption to Gods ordinance, The
practice of men to Gods rule, and men's Testimonies who are liars, to the divine
Oracles of the God of truth.

This man thinks it a Herculean argument, when he draws his human
Testimonies, as to prelacy near the Apostles time (as if he had traveled to
Hercules pillars) and wonders how we can suppose, that the Church could so soon
alter the divine institutions. But I pray, how long was it after Gods Holy law
was proclaimed from heaven, by his own terrible voice, that the wholl Church of
Israel, together with Aaron himself, set up and worshipped the golden Calf,
contrary unto the very express letter of the Second command? Now, suppose that
idolatry several hundred years afterward had pleaded this Antiquity, or
ancient Custom of the Church of Israel, (after frequently imitated, and which
had its plausible pretexts of intention to worship God, for the seasi was
proclaimed to Iehova, and to have a visible sign of his presence) Will the
Informer say, that this had been a good argument to warrant the breach of the
Second command, though this Practice was but forty days younger then the
promulgation if self. So the case is here, Though he could show us human clear
Testimonies, nay more, even Scripture Testimonies, as to the factum, that the
diocesian; yea, and Erastian Prelat, had been existent and set up in some
Churches in the Apostles own time; yet if we can from our Lord, and his
Apostles doctrine, and practice, prove this officer to be a plant not of a
divine plantation, and contrary to the divine institutiones, He must needs
grant (that though esteemed golden) it ought to be Nehushtan, rejected and
plucked up by the roots. The Papists, who hold the Scriptures to be but a
half-rule, made up by traditions, yet will not dare to own (professedly at
least) any principle, or practice, condemned in the Word. suppose he could
bring thousands of Testimonies from ancient writers, touching his Prelat he
pleads for; they are but h^man Testimonies, and therefore cannot beget a divine
faith, which is founded upon the word only. Surge veritas ipsa Scripturas tuas
inter retare, quam c^nsuetudo non nooit* nam si nosset non-esset, says
Tertullian. Arise o! truth it self, and expone they Scriptures, which custom
has not known, for had it known them, it had not been. The Informer's
Testimonies may induce to believe that there were Bishops in the Church; but
whither the office which these Bishops are supposed to hold, be of God, yea or
not; this queston must be brought to a higher tribunal; and Gods Oracles must
determine therein, before the Conscience can be satisfied, as to the owning of
such a Church officer: And if God dissowne him, I may be ane Athanasius contra
orbem, in withstanding him, It being still certain that these human witnesses
are testesfacti at most, but not judices very and recti, Attesters of matters
of fact, but not judges of what is right and equal therein.

Thus we have seen, that though all our Informers pleading from antiquity, were
granted, his cause, profliga by Scripture weapons lies grovelling in the dust.
whereas he alleadges [Testimonies as to the existence of Prelates in the
Christian Church, near the Apostles times, or contemporary with them, and that
Catalogues of a Succession of Prelates, down from Apostles and Evangilists, have
been keept in Churches, which he thinks speaks convincingly for the
Episcopacy of Timothy, and Titus etc. I Ans. Although this be the very Marrow
and strength of all his argument from Antiquity, yet when tried, it will be
found many ways defective, and unsound. For clearing whereof I shall offer
some things, both to the Major, and assumtion of this argument, which will be
found quite to break the force of al his pretenses this way. For thus the
argument must run.

If Diocesian Bishops, by the Testimonies of the ancient fathers, did exist in
the primitive times, and Catalogues of them are drawn by these ancients, from
Apostles, and Euangilists, then I must believe these Bishops to be of divine
institution: but thus it is by the Testimony of the ancient fathers: Ergo, I
must believe Diocesian Bishopes to be of divine institution.

Now this being the argument in its genuine strength, this pitiful pleader
offers not a jott in proof of the major proposition, whose connection he cannot
but know, the we all deny. All that he offers is in proof of the assumption,
which is also denved, and will be found very maimed. I. To the Major, I say,
that it is of very dangerous consequence, to make that which men call
antiquity, or [ancient custom,] the infallible rule, and commentary, as to the
nature and office, of Church officers, mentioned in Scriptur. Because 1. If
men's practice must be the key and comment in this case, so as we must not
contradict or counteract it, then why may not also human practice, and
profession of succeding ages, determine as to every Scripture truth, and duty
therein held out? 2. This were to set up a higher rule, and tribunal, then the
Scriptures, and to make our faith to stand in man's wisdom, not in Gods, and to
make the Scriptures of a private interpretation, as if the Prophecy had come by
the will of man. For if I must believe no otherwise anent the Scriptures
relating to the offices of Timothy, and Titus, then according to the practice
of supposed Bishops, their successores, and that they held no other offices,
but such as these supposed successores are said to have had, then the Custom
and practice of fallible men, becomes to me, the (...), the ratio a priori, and
the chief ground, why I believe these Scriptures to have such a sense and no
other; and so I give men a dominion over my faith, and my faith herein resolves
ultimatly into a human practice, and Testimony of fallible men, which is a
principle no protestant will allow.

Next, as to the asumption of the argument, I would demand of this informer,
how I must be infallibly assured anent this universal judgment and practice of
the ancient Church, and of this true succession; and how he will instruct the
universal harmonius judgment of all the ancient Fathers in this great point,
(viz.) [That such prelates as we have now, were the first recipients of the
ordinary power of government, from the Apostles and Evangelists, as their only
immediate and ordinary successors.] The topic of our Informers argument does
suppose the certanty of this matter of fact. But to clear this will be found a
hard piece of work. Because 1. It is certan that many of the ancients wrote
nothing; many of their writings are lost; many writings going under their name
are counterfit, and most especially to this debate. It were possibly none of
the hardest Tasks to discover some writings here cited; to be mere
countersites. How shall I know, that the Testimonies of those who have written,
are not contradicted in this point, by such men of their times, who either have
not written, or whose writings are perished? 2. There are many things, which
the Ancients speak of as derived from the Apostles, and have had ane universal
consent (as far as the knowledge thereof has come to us) which are
acknowledged to be contrary to the word of God and the Apostolic doctrine; as,
the error anent the vision of God, [that the Saints sie not his face till the
last day.] the error of [free will,] which until Augustine opposed it was
universally received* the [Millenary error,] anent Christ's personal reign
upon the Earth a Thousand years; called by Lactantius, [the doctrine of the
holy prophets, and christian wisdom, which christians follow.] Justin Martyr,
holds them to be no christians that dissown this* and this is owned as ane
Apostolic tradition. So [childrens partaking of the Lords supper;] and [the
necessity of baptisme] was by Augustine and others owned as such a tradition
(lib: 1. de pecc: mer.) Basil names four Apostolic traditions, signeing with
the cross; praying to the east; anointeing with oil; praying in the standing
postur from Easter to whitsuntyd. See the Appendix to jus divinum minise. Evan
(prop. 2.) The informer and his fellows, make a great bustle anent the
condemneing of Aerius, for holding that Bishops and presbyters are all one. But
Beza could have informed him, de grad: (346.) that Epiphanius (Haeres: 75)
imputs to him, as great heresies, these Tenets, 1. That he held it unlawful to
offer and pray for the dead. 2. That he held that Saints departed were not to
be invocat. 3. That there were not fixed fast days to be keept. 4. That the
jewish pascal was not to be observed, because ourpassover is already offered.
Now, if our Informer condemn him for these also, we weed care the less for
his condemning him in the point of prelacy. 3. It is certain, that the account
of the first times immediately after the Apostles, is, as to matter of fact, very
dark and uncertain, and consequently a very slippery rule. Hegesi pus (apud
Eusebius: lib: 3. Cap: 28.) tells us, [that immediately after the Apostolic age
was gone, tunc impii erroris conspiratio, per seductionem eorum qui alienam
doctrinam trad* ant, initium caepit -- Then the conspiracy of wicked error, but
the seducings of those who delivered another doctrine, took its beginning.
Eusebius himself the prime writer, (from whom in a manner is the wholl of all
that is delivered anent Church Government and Bishops, and who presents these
fragmens of writers out of which our episcopal men ga^her up their proofs) in
the proem of his History acknowledges that he is in that work entered into a
dark desert, therein he has no footsteps of any goeing before him, but only
(...) Some little occasions, or some pity narations, which every one in their
own time has left and delivered. let any read haumer (ane Inglish Bishop), his
translation of Eusebius, wherein this will be found very clear. Scalliger
(prolegom in Chron. Eusebius.) Says, Intervallum illud ab ultimo capite actorum
etc. the nterval from he last chotter of the Acts of the Apostles, until the
midst of the reign of Trajan, in which tract, Quadratus and a Ignatius
flourished (let our informer observe this as to Ignatius) may be truly called
with varr^ (...) or obscur, wherein nothinthat is certan, has come to our hand
concerning the affairs of Christians, except some very few things, which the
enemies of godliness carches up by the way, such as Suetonius, Cornelius
Tacitus, Before Cecilianus, which gap that Eusebius might fill up, he drew
some things without discretion and choice out of the upotiposes or exemples of
I know not what Clement (for he is not that learned Clement who wrote the
Stromata^ and out of the fyve books of hegesippus a writer no better. Tilen
himself (a great pleader for the Episcopal cause) yet tells us (Contr: 3: l. 2:
c. 2: Not. 39. and c. 3. Note. 6) That, the history of these first times has
great blacks and gapes, which the Spurius Clements and other writers of the
same stamp, filled up with petty fables drawn from their own brain. -- That
from the end of the acts of the Apostles, until Traian's times, thereis almost
nothing extant which is certain: hence (he says) occasion was taken by men of
bad dispositions to make hold to feign anything, whom even the Apostles times
wanted not. Not to insist upon the many things written and observed of
Eusebius, which may invalidat the credit of his history, and his many gross
errors therein, and in other points, observed by Scalliger and others. How
fabulous is that history of Christ's Epistle to Agbarus, rejected even by pope
Gelasius in a Council of Seventy Bishops at room. That which Philo the jew
wrote of the Essae Ans, a Sect among the jews, Eusebius affirms that he wrote
it of Christian mmks, which Scalliger shows to be false out of Philo himself
(in elencho tribaeresii.) He proves peter's crucifixion at Rome by a tomb
proof: -- In the computation of times, Scalliger observes his gross errors.
Nay, which is more considerable, he discovers gross ignorance of Scripture, in
saying that the Cephas reprehended by Paul, was not the Apostle peter, but
another of the number of the Seventy disciples. Besyds, many things in his
personal carriage and qualities, which may weaken the Credit of his History, as
his presideing in the council of Tire against Athanasius, and standing upon the
Arrians side. Scalliger (in his Thesaurus temporum. Animad: p: 268) Setts down
the testimonies of the Ancients concerning his errors and Arrianisme, wherein
some affirm that he died. When he wrote the history he was ane Arian.
Moreover, Admit his Testimony were abeve all exception, yet that his history
has been corrupted by some ignorant impostor, is demonstrated from this by
Didocl: (cap. 4. p. 119) [that he maks mention of Sozomen, who was born ane
hundred years thereafter.]

Lastly, As to the Catalogues of Bishopes, which our Informer, and his masters
before him, exhibit to us from the Apostolic times, he might have found them
abundantly invalidat by many of the learned, whose judgment and Testimonys
are collected by Didocl: (cap: 4 p. 121: 122, 123, 124, etc.) Which we may well
challeng this man to answer. Therefore we shall dismiss it with these observes.
1. That Tertullian, Irenaeus, and others, who make use of this Argument of
Succession, against heretics, design only to show a derivation of true
doctrine from the Apostles against them, and that the Church had the Traduoes
Apostolici Seminis, a derivation of the Apostles Doctrine, but never meaned it
of a Succession of men of the same office every way. Tertullian says, [Arise o
truth and expone they Scriptures etc.] Iren^us in his time, speaking of this
Succession from the Apostles, and pressing adherence to the truth which they
delivered, makes mention of Presbyters [opportet adhaerere iis etc: We must
adhere to them who keeps the Apostles doctrine, and with the order of
[presbitery] mentain the word. And again, therefore we must obey these
[presbiters] who are in the Church, who have their Succession from the
Apostles, as we have showen. Then he adds qui cum Episcopatus Successione,
charisma veritatis certum, Secundum placitum patris acceperunt. That is, who
with the Succession of Episcopacy, have received from the father the sure gift
of truth.] thus he, (l. 4. c. 44.) And because this Informer singes their old
song who before him, will still Shuffle in Bishops, when the Ancients speak of
Presbyters. Let him remarke what he says (lib: 3. cap. 2.) Speaking of the
contumacy of the adversaries of truth [quum autem ad eam iterim traditionem,
quae est ab Apostolis, quae per Successiones presbyterorum in Ecclesiis
custoditur, provocamus eos etc: -- But when we apeall them again to that
tradition, which from the Apostles, is preserved by Succession of Presbyters in
the Churches -- They will allege that they are more wise then the Apostles
themselves or these Presbyters] dare this man say, that Irenaeus meaned that it
was only a Succession of Bishops in these Churches who keep that Apostolic
truth.

That Presbyters are successoures of Apostles properly and immediately in the
power of the keys, is evident by a full Testimony of ancient fathers. ^gnatius
(about whom our Informer makes a great bustle in several places of his Pamplet)
in the Epistle ad Trallianos, calls the caetum Presbyterorum, the Assembly of
Presbyters, Con^unctionem Apostolerum Christi, a meeting of Apostles of Christ.
^rinaus, (lib: 4. Cap. 43) holds Presbyteros in Ecclesia ab Apostolis
successionem habere, that Presbyters in the Church have there succession from
the Apostles. Cyprian (lib. 4. epistol. 9.) asserts, omnes praepositos vicaria
ordinatione Apostolis succedere, that all overseers (so he calls Presbyters)
succeeds the Apostles by a vicarious ordination. Jerome, on 2. Chap. of mica,
(cited by Cratian in decretis distinct 5. cap) speaking of himself a Presbyter,
says si in Apostolorum loco simus, non solum sermonem eorum imitemur etc. If
we be in the Apostles place, let us not only imitat there doctrine, but also
their conversation. Augustine (sermon: 36. to the fratres in Eremo) and these too
Pre^byters, call them sal terrae, Apostolorum successores, the salt of the
earth and the Apostles successors.

2. As it is certan, that these Catalogue-drawers, did not understand very
nominis ep^copos, or diocesian Bishops properly suoh, though speaking after the
manner of their times they gave them all one name: So it is equally certain,
that the Testimoyns out of which these Catalogues are patch^d up, are most
inconsistent and contradictory to one another (as the divines at the i will of
Wight, and many learned men have made appear) and still the nearer the Apostles
times, the Catalogues are the more dark and various. They make Peter Bishops
of Rome (a fable contradicted by many of the learned and proved to be such) but
whither Clemens was first or Third, and who or in that order next after Succeed
them, whither Linus, or Anacletus is never yet cleared, Some make Titus Bishop
of Crete, some Archbishop. Some Bishop of Dalmatia. Timothy and John are made
by many Bishops at the same time. Some say Policarp was first Bishop of Smyrna.
Some make him succeed one Bucolus. some make Aristo first. Some give Alexandria
one Bishop, some tuo at once. See appendix to jus. divin. min. Evangel.

And whereas our Informer replies [that notwithstanding of this, yet all agree
that a Succession of Bishops was, and that these different relations cannot
impeach the certainty of the Succession it self, no more then difference about
the Succession of princes will invalidat the certainty of the History] I
answer, if he could prove that they understood Bishops properly so called, or
his diocesians in all these Catalogues of Succession, this evasion might have
some Show of truth, but it is certain that they did not. Patres cum Iacobum
Episcopum vocant etc. the Fathers, says Whittak. (de pontif. quest: 2. c. 15
se: 2. When they call James Bishop or Peter, take not the name of Bishop
properly, but they call them Bishops of these Churches, wherein they stayed for
some time -- and again -- [if spoken of a Bishop properly, its absurd to say
the Apostles were Bishopes, fore he that is properly a Bishop cannot be ane
Apostle, Because the Bishop is set only over one Church, but the Apostles were
founders and overseers of many Churches]. After he tells us, that non procul
distat ab insania etc. it differs little from madness to say that Peter or any
other Apostles were Bishopes. And to this purpose he speaks afterward at large
(Q: 3. c: 3. Sect: 9. [proveing this from the unfixed extraordinary nature of
their message or mission, who were to follow the Spirits conduct toward all
places whither they were called. Which argument reaches evangelists upon the
same ground. So that Whitaker will send our Informer to Bedlam, if he mend not
this information, and revocke not this principle anent the Episcopacy of
Apostles and Evangelists, and the Succession of Bishops from them. The learned
Iunius also (Contr: 3. lib: 1. cap. 23. not. 3.) mantaines ane aequivocall
acceptance of the word [Bishop] in this matter, so that his paralleel holds
not, as to a difference about the Succession of Kings, when a Monarchy all a^e
Supposed such, but here the difference and equivocation is, as to the authority
of these Succeeding Bishops. When he shall read Scallig. (Animadvers: 277.) The
Informer may possibly suspect Hegesippus his naration anent James; yet jerome
and Eusebius depend upon him. Scalliger holds Clemens Romanus to be no better.
likwayes jerome (: Catol: Scrip:) is a Counterfit, not the true jerome, since he
mentions pope hilary, who lived long after jerome was in his grave.

And whereas the Informer maks a great outcry of jerome [that jerome begins at the
Evangelist Mark, in the Alexandrian Catalogue, which our w^itters leave out in
their citations] its easily answered that it needs not be putt in, since the
Author, says [A marko, from, or after him, the Presbyters choosed* out one
whom they made president] wherein its evident, that he speaks of this custom,
after Mark and excluding him, who was ane Evangelist before, and needed not be
set up by the Presbiters. And surely if the first Bishop was ane Evangelist,
the rest were very heterogenious to their first pattern. Besides, in that jerome
says Presbitiri a marco unum [ex se] electum, etc. He clerly insinuats that
it was the Presbyters thereafter, no Mark that it, for if by Marks Apointment
these Bishops wereset up, he could not attribute it to the Presbyters etion*
Should one say, in Scotia, a regimine presbit: Anno. 62. Episcopi introducti,
Ergo, ab isto regimine introducti, were ^t not a bad consequence. Here I will
offer to him the remarke of a learned author (Repl: to Dun: 143.) anent the
Circle, which he and his fellows do ride in this argument. Timothy and Titus
etc. had ane Episcopal authority, why? because their authority was not
Evangelistick. Why so? because it was not to die with them, why that? Because
it was ordinary and perpetually necessary. And how is that proved? Because, if
the Apostles being alive, they behooved to instruct Timothy and Titus with
Episcopal authority, much more being dead, this was necessary to the Churches.
But when it is inquired, how this Episcopal authority is proved, it is fairly
assumed again, as if it were granted, [that the Apostles made them Bishops of
Ephesus and Crete.] So the last medium is still that which is in Question. Let
him ponder also what Didocl: (p. 125. and 139*) has produced, anent the
confusion and contradictions in this Alexandrian Succession. Tilen himself (de
pontif: l. 1. c: 24. not: 1.) acknowledges that [De Alexandrinae Ecclesiae
primordijs, nihil ex Scriptura, im^ne ex patribus quidem, qui ante Synodum
nicenum floruerunt, quicquam certi demonstrari potest, That nothing certanly
can be made appear concerning the beginings of the Church of Alexandria from
Scriptur, no not from the Fathers who flourished before the council of Nice.
Baronius (Anno. 44. 11: 42.) says cum Apostolorum nomine tam facta quam
scripta reperiantur esse suppositia, etc. -- Since there are suppositious both
words and Acts under the Apostles name, and since what is related by true
writers, remains not incorrupt, it may make one despair to reach that is true
and cer^in. So much is the great popish historian forced to confess.

The Informer should likewise have done well to have put into the mouth of his
doubter, Joseph Scalliger, his grave difficulty about the succession of the
Bishops of the Church of Jerusalem. (Related by Didocl. Cap: 4: p. 123.) Wherein
he proves Eusebius relation to be contrary to our Lords prophecy anent the
destruction of Jerusalem, and to Josephus his History. To this I add, that he
will find many learned men do hold, that the first successors after the
Apostles in these supposed Catalogues, were mere Presbyters, [who according as
they were more eminent in the Churches, and consequently their memories
referved therein, whose Natales (as Iunius speaks) that is their days of
banishment, martyrdom, or death were keept in the Churches records;
accordingly they were culled out by the Fathers to fill up these Catalogues,
though they were contemporary, and those they named [Bishops], in conformity to
their own times. For this I recomend Franciscus Iunius his learned discourse to
this purpose Cont. 3: l. 2: c. 5. not. 18* -- [errori causam prebuit, etc, the
cause of the error (he means in those contradictory confused Catalogues of
Bishops) was that there were many Bishops or Presbyters at once appoyinted by
be Apostles in the Churches etc.] Its then evident (which is the Collection of
Diocl. upon what is premised) 1. That the Ancientes without examination having
from their progenitors received many fabulous stories, delivered to the
posterity such things as can neither be reconciled to Scripture, nor with
themselves.

2. That they might fill up their Tables of Bishops, and conform the first
ages to their own, they culld out the most famous Minister for zeal, piety etc
and put them into their Catalogues. 3. Whom they thus put in, they called them
[Bishopes] in conformity to their own times, though they were [meer
Presbyters.] For (as we saw upon Phil. 1.) himself acknowledges, that the
Fathers used the names indifferently. So by this time we suppose it is
convinceingly evident, that ou^ Informers great argument from his Testimonies
is lost.

There is a great consent of the learned in this that for the first purest age,
the Church was governed by Presbyters. without Bishopsblondel (Apol: Sect: 3:
p: 3: 14. 3: 5 -- p. 308: 378.) Shows the consent of the learned heerin. For
this Church of Scotland, we have the Testimony of Ioanes Major (de Cest. Scot:
l. 2.) of Fordon (Scoto-chronicon, lib. 3. Shap. 8.) likewise of Blond. (Sect.
3.) All showing, that this nation (having embraced the Christian faith Anno.
79.) till the year 430. (When the pope sent Palladius as our first Bishop,) was
governed only by Presbyters with out Bishopes; so that we had our union to the sea of Rome together with Prelacy. Clemens, of the first century, in his
Epistle to the Philippians, maks but two orders of Ministry, Bishops and
deacons, these only he says the Apostle set up to propogat the ordinances to
believers. And this to be a remedy to end all contests about Episcopacy. (page.
57. etc.) The same we heard of policarp (in his Epistle to the Philippianes) we
heard of Augustins Testimony (Epist. 19. to Jerome.) Dr. Reynolds (in his Epist.
to Sr Francis Knolls) cites Chrysostom, Ierom, Ambrose, Augustine, Theodoret,
and many others ancient and modern, to prove, that in Scripture, Bishop and
Presbyter are all one. Jeroms Testimony upon Titus, is famous for this point,
who assertes, and proves at large; from Philip. 1. Act. 20. Hebr. 13: 17. 1
Pet. 5. That by Gods appointment, and in first Apostolic times and afterward,
the government was by Presbyters, communi concilio Presbyterorum, [by the
common council of Presbyters.] that by divine appointment, Bishops and
Presbyters are one, that the difference betwixt them had no better ground then
contudo or Custom. That divisions by Satan's instinct occasioned the difference
afterward made betwixt Bishop and Presbyter. That their equality was not his
private Judgment, but a Scripture truth. The same he has in his Epistle to
Evagrius.

But now let us hear what ou^ Informer has Scraped together from his masters,
Saravia, Dounam, Tilen, etc. To infringe this Testimony. 1. He ^ayes [That
Ierom speaks only of the first gospel times, when mentioning the identity of
Bishop and Presbyter, when the Apostles did by their own presence and industry
Supply the rowme of Bishops, but as they began to fail by death, or their
bussines called them elsewhere and upon the Churches enlargement, and the
Schism that arose upon the Presbyters equality, Bishops were set up over
Presbyters. This he proves, because, jerome says, that from Mark the
Evangelist. The Presbyters choosed out one, and called him Bishop, even to the
Bishops heraclius and Dionisius, but Mark died before Peter and Paul. Then he
compleans of Smectimmuus as dealling defectively in leaving out this in their
Citation -- And of Mr. Durham (on the Revel. pa^ 225. and thatMr. Durham takes
no notice of jeroms similitud in speaking of this Election of Presbyters in
relation to their Bishop, viz, As the army does choose the Emperor] Thus far we
have our Informers first great defense, Which brings to mind a remarkable
saying of Marcus. Anton. De Dom. De repub Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 3. Numb. 46. Sunt
qui Hieronimum in rectam sententiam vel invitum velint trahere ille tamen dum
consuetudini Sole ecclaesiasticae, ecclaesiaeque humano decreto tribuit quod ab
Apostolis jure divino, est factitatum, aliquantum certe deflexit -- neque in
hoc aut excusari potest, aut in alium contrarium sensum trahi verba ejus, neque
aliam Sententiam neque defensionen neque excusationem, admittentia sunt haec in
Epist. ad Titum: etc Some would (he says) draw jerome to a contrary mind
against his will, but whil he does ascribe only to Ecclesiastic Custom, and
the Churches human deccree, what was done by divine right, he went out of the
way, and in this he cannot be excused, nor can his words admit of any other
sense, or meaneing. So much was this man's ingenuity beyond that of our
Informer. But to the point, I Ans. 1. We have nothing here but the old Song,
which has been answered by many. Iunius [decler: c. 15. Not. 16.] tells him
[That tria distinguit tempora Hieronimus. Primum, quo Ecclesiae communi
presbyterorum concilio gubernabantur. Secundum, quo studia in religione facta
sunt, ac dictum est in populis, ac non corinthisolum etc: nam quum primum illa
corinthi dicerentur, adhuc communi presbyterorum concilio ecclesiae
gubernabantur, ut patet ex icor. 5. and 2. cor. 1. tertium demum quo unus de
presbyteris electus caeteris fuit superpositus. Atque haec singula tempora
suam, ut cum vulgo loquar, latitudinem habuerunt. Ierom distinguishes, Three
periods of time. 1. When the Church was governed by the Common Council of
presbyters. The 2d. Wherein there were divisions in religion, and it was said
among the people, not at Corinth only; I am of Paul etc: for when these things
were said at Corinth, the Church (says he) was as yet governed with the Common
Council of presbyters, as it appears 1. Cor. 5. and 2 Cor. 1. The 3d. and last,
wherein one chosen out from among the presbyters, was set over the rest. And
every one of these times (says he) that I may speak with the vulgar hade their
own latitud. here in this one judicious account of this learned author, our
Informer might have seen his error, and the violence which he offers to jerome
words for jerome draws his proofs for the first period from many texts of
Scripture, from Phil. 1. Act 20. etc when Paul took his last farewell of that
Church, never to see their faces more. Yea he draws his proofs from John the
Surviver of all the Apostles, for the identity of Bishops and Presbyters, and
in relation to the Churches being governed by their Common Council. And as to
the choice of the constant president he adds quod autem postea unus electus,
that their was one afterward chosen to preside, for the remedy of Schism etc,
and to be Episcopus preses, this period he fixes after John's time, and so after
all the Apostles.

2. Whereas the Inform^r (following Downam defens. lib. 4. cap: 3. Sect: 10.)
alleges That the Presbyters in jeromes senc did in the beginning of the gospel
govern the Churches [Modo privato], in a private way and [in foro conscientiae]
feeding with the word and Sacrament; the Apostles themselves, by th^r own
presenc supplying the room of Bishops; and that thereafter Bishops were set up
by them to prevent schism among Presbyters. I answer. He will as soon squize
water from a flint, as this meaneing out of jeroms words. Fori jerome speaks of
a frame of government, yea a divine frame, which postea and Paulatim, afterward
and by degrees, came to be altered and changed: but this private government of
Presbyters in foro interno, was never changed 2. jerome in speaking of that
government which was afterward changed, and by degrees, proves its divine right
from many scriptures as a Disp^sitio divina, or a divine appointment. Now I
beseech him, did the Apostles first practice a divine f^ame of Government, and
then changed it into a human custom? (which is the Character that jerome puts
upon the Episcopacy which afterward came in.) will any of common sense or
discretion, say so? Far less so learned a man as Jerome was.

3. If the Apostles themselves did supply the roum of Bishops, before the
change which Jerome speaks of, then Jerome could not say of that period of time
before the change, that, communi consilio Presbyterorum ecclesiae
gubernabantur, the Churches were governed by the common Council of Presbyters,
but according to this gloss of his words, before the change, the Government was
episcopal. But so it is, that jerome says, idem episcopus and Presbyter, the
Bishop and Presbyter are one and the same, by divine right, and that before the
change which came in by a human custom (which he distinguishes from that
dispositio divine or divine frame, which first took place) the Presbyters
Governed theChurches by common Counsel, according to divine appoiniment. 4. If
the Apostles upon their with drawing, or the increase of Churches, set up
Prelates, let the Informer show me why and how Ierom could draw his proof for
the identy, of Bishopes and Presbyters, from Act. 20. Where Paul was taking his
last farewell of the Churches? was he to supply the room of a Bishop by his
presence with them, when never to see their faces more? how could Jerome plead
for the divine right of, Presbyters Episcopal, Scriptural, GospelGovernment,
from Paul's calling them Bishops at his last farewell, and committing the
whollGovernment to them, if this had been his meaning? Besides, were not the
Churches increased a^ this time? why then were no^ Bishops set up, since this
man holds the increase of Churches to have grounded such a necessity of
Prelacy? Nay, since Jerome draws his proofs against the Prelates divine right,
from the 1 Pet. 5, And from John, could he suppose that this was but the
beginning, while the Apostles had the power still in their own hand? Again,
our Informer would do well to resolve this doubt, how Jerome could call a
Government which he asserts to be brought in by the Apostles according to Gods
appointment, a human custom opposite to the Lords appointment? Or how could
this answer Jeroms scope, [to prove Presbyters to be one with Bishops] to say
that the Apostles first governend them, episcopally themselves, and then set up
Bishops over them? And how will he make this corres^ond with what Jerome says
as to the original of this change viz. the studia in religione, or factions in
Religion? Will the Informer say (which is his own argument afterward) that the
Apostles immediate episcopal Government, had influenc upon this Schism? Was not
likwayes the Schism at Corinth, (from which this man draws the change in
Jeroms sense) long before several of Jeroms proofs from 1 Pet. 5 Act. 20 And
from John, for the divine warrant of this common Government of Presbyters? And
was this the change which Ierom speaks of, as toto orb decretum, and postea,
or a change afterward through the World? Appage inneptias.

3. As for what he adds, That Ierom draws the Alexandrian Episcopacy from
Mark, which he compleans that Mr. Durhame and Smectimmuus take no notice of.
Ans. We have showen already, that it is not worth the noticeing in this
matter, and any notice can be taken of it, makes rather against him, then for
him for if Mark was ane Evangelist in the strict sense, as Ierom calls him, he
does (as chamier answers Bellarmin in this point) cut him of from the Series
of Bishops properly so called. The Informer must grant this, or contradict what
he said before of the inconsistency of these offices in a strict senc, in on
and the same person; for he said nothing against this consequenc, Timothy is
called ane Evangilist in astrict sense, ergo He could not be a Bishop. Now I
say Ierom calls Mark ane Evangilist, for he tells us that a Marco evangelista
from Marks the Evangilist, the Presbyters at Alexandria set up one to preside.
Ergo he speaks exclusively, and cannot put Mark among the series of them, for
Mark was ane officer of a higher nature. Moreover, the Informer tells us, that
Mark died before Peter and Paul; hence I infer against him, ergo, Ierom could
not reckon Mark among these Bishops of Alexandria: for Ierom draws his proofs
for the Presbyters divin right of governing in Common, from Act. 20. phil. 1.
1. Pet. 5. And from John the last of the Apostles, and maks this divine
Presbyterial government run along all the Apostles time, and tells us that the
Bishops who were set up, came in by custom, and afterward, and by degrees when
it was toto orb decretum, decreed through the world; to put the power upon
one; ergo these Bishops of Alexandria behooved to be set up long after Mark
was in his grave, according to jeroms calculation. And whereas he compleans that
Mr Durhame leaves out that Clause [Where jerome maks use of a simile anent the
armies choosing ane Emperor -- That he may make the Bishops power when brought
in, as little as can be.] Its answered, that passage will as little help him as
the other, for jeromes scope is, to show That the Bishops first rise and power
over Presbyters, was by their own free election, not by divine disposition, as
the Army chooses the General. Now no simile must be strained and hold in every
point, else it were not a simile. Scripturparables themselves mast not be
strained beyond the scop. And besides, jerome cannot be supposed to give at
that time, even de sacto, far less jure divino, an Imperial or Lordly power to
these Presbyters thus chosen out by their brethren, and made Bishops over them,
unless he would Cross his own doctrine, since he maks this choic and Election
of the Episcopus^reses, to be the hum^n Custom, posterior unto, and different
from the divine appointment of governing in a parity, which first took place.
Likewayes jerome says in his own time quid facit excepta ordinatione Episcopus,
quod non facit Presbyter. What does the Bishop except ordination which the
Presbyters does not. So that they had not then arrived at any imperial power.

And because this man tells us even ad nauseam of this passage, a Marko
Evangilista. I will turn here the weapons point upon him, and demand, Since
Jerome make these Alexandrian Bishops from Mark, to have been set up by
Presbyters free election, how comes the Prelates he pleads for, to be Elected
and set up at Court, while the poor Creatures, the Curats, over whom they are
set, to play the little emperoures, have no more Interest as to their choice
and Election, then the silliest Monck in choosing the pope I add here, that
this supposition of his [that Ierom holds the Apostles to have supplied the
Bishops rowme for a time, though no fixed ordinary Bishops, until the Churches
growth, and their necessary absence, did necessitat to set them up for
preventing schism,] will Cross what himself and Downam also do plead, defens.
l. 4. c. 5. Sect. 3. (If at least they will not make Jerome oddly to contradict
himself, viz.) that Ierom [in Catal. Scrip. Eccles]. holds that James
immediately after the Lords suffering, was Constitut Bishop of Jerusalem. Besides
that neither of them will prove that to be the true jerome.

But now the Informer will resolve the great doubt against what he has said,
viz. That Jerome proves from Scriptur, Bishop and Presbyter to be all one and
that schisms by Satan's instinct, gave occasion to change the government from
the Common Council of Presbyters, to another mould of setting up one over the
rest, to whom the whole Care should belong etc. To which he answers, that Ierom
speaks of the power which Bishops in his time had come unto beyond what the
first Bishops had, viz. That at the first Presbyters had a hand in government,
but after, omnis Ecclesiae cura ad unum de lata, that is, the wholl care was
put upon the Bishop. But if we take Ierom to speak of the first introduction of
Bishops, then he must be understood as speaking of the Apostles own times. Ans.
1. Upon this ground the Informer must grant, that in Ieroms sense, Bishops who
only in ordination, were superior to Presbyters, had a greater power then the
Bishops first set up by the Apostles; which will clearly exclud his diocesian
Prelates, who have sole power in ordination and jurisdiction, as no divine
Bishops. And Next, it will follow that the ishopes set up a Marco, or after
Mark, were mere presidents, or Moderators; since they were less in power then
these Bishops, who only in ordination, differed from Presbyters. So we see the
rebound of this answer will strik his cause dead. And he must feel another
rebound of his own blow, as to his Complaint of our leaving out what maks
against us in Ieroms words. For I ask why he lea^es out here Ieroms scripture
proofs, evincing that Bishops and Presbyters are one jure divino? Why leaves
he out Ieroms Collection upon all these scriptures (which runes along the
through Apostolic age) viz. That the Bishops are more by Custom, then by any
true dispensation from the Lord set over Presbyters? for although he after
bringes in this as ane objection, yet it ought to have been set down here, as
the main conclusion of Ieromes arguing: and his testimony is very blunt without
it. Again, how comes he thus to disguise what Jerome says of Presbyters
governeing [Communi Councilio], or by common Council, as if it Imported no
more, then having a hand in government, which he maks Compatible with prelacy,
whereas Ierom maks it distinct from, and anterior unto, even the first human
prostasy. Beside, their governeing, Communi Concilio, Imports particularly,
their joint decisive suffrage in government; which he does but meanly express
by their governing in Common. 2. What a rediculous conceit is this That Ierom
speaks of the power of Bishops in his time, beyond the first Bishops Ierom
speaking of Presbyters expressly, as contradistinct from Bishops, and of the
Presbiters existent in the Apostolic Churches, while the Apostles were alive,
as himself just now explained i^, in saying [that the Apostles by their presenc
and industry supplied the want of Bishops over these Presbyters.] So that he
compares not the Bishops in his time, with the first Bishops who came in by
Custom, but these human Bishops who thus came in, with the first scripture
Bishops. we know not where to find this versatil proteus in his answers here,
and may truly allege, that this Testimony pinches him and his fellows.

Next, will he stand to this exposition of Ieroms words, which he here offers,
viz, [That the first Bishops admitted Presbyters to govern with them, and the
after Bishops in Ieroms time, governed alone.] Then he must grant, that the
first and second Bishops, were of very different cutts; and so he breaks his
Argument from the Catalogues, all in pieces; and must grant that the word
episcopus, or Bishop, is variously used by the ancients, And that our present
Lord-prelats can receave no Pratrociny from Bishops of the first ages, wherein
Presbyters governed by common Council, and had a decisive sufferage in
Government, whereas the Prelates now are beyond what their predecessors had come
unto, even in Ieroms time: For then except ordination, the Bishop did nothing,
beyond what the Presbyter might do, whereas our present Prelates are sole both
in ordination and Jurisdiction, and assume a negative voice in Church
Judicatories, Yea a decisive suffrage in Parliament: which he dare not say that
any of these Bishops did ever pretend unto.

Well, But if we shall say that Ierom speaks of the first introduction of
Bishops into the Church, then (he tells us) Ierom must understand it of the
Apostles times. What means he by the first introduction of Bishops? Can he give
the least shadow of reason for it, that Ierom speaks of any other
introduction then that introduction of human custom, which he distinguishes
from the divine appointment of Presbyterian paritie? But how proves he [That
Ierom maks Bishopes to have been introduced in the times of the Apostles] (yet
I must tell him by the way, that introduceing them in the times of the
Apostles, is one thing, and by the Apostles, is anotherthing. Diotrephes sought
his primacy in John's time, but was disowned by him therein. So that if we can
prove that what jerome cites for the parity of Bishops and Presbyters jure
divino, will conclud the point, these Bishops are in themselves, and in jeroms
judgment, condemned by the Apostles.) his 1. Reason is [That jerome makes the
thing, which gave occasion to this Introducing of Bishops, to be the peoples
saying Iam of Paul and I of Apollo, and this was the Schism spoken of I Cor.
I.] But this notion of Saravia, and others, he might have found long since
answered. Ieromes scop is evidently, to prove that by Scripture warrant, Bishop
and Presbyter are all one, which he clears by many Scripture Testimonies, even
to John's time; and therefore he could not be so brutish, as to make this Schism
at Corinth, the occasion of the Change, so long before John's Testimony, yea
before Paul's farewell Sermon to the Elders of Ephesus, from which he draws
another of his proofs. But he speaks of a human Custom comeing in Paulatim,
postea, piece and piece and by degres, long after these times: and but alludes
unto that Division I Cor. I. Expressing it in the Apostles words, not of their
times; for the Apostles never appointed this prelatik excrescent power of
Bishops over Presbyters as a remedy of Schism, among all their prescriptions
of the Cure of this evil. Romans 16. 7. I Cor. 3: 3. 11, 18. Moreover famous
whietaker will tell him, that this remedy is worse then the disease. The
mystery of iniquity was then working; the Apostles therefore would not lay a
step under Antichrists foot, to get in to his Chair. Besides; these factions
in religion were not at Corinth only. Iunius (de cler. Cap. 15. not 16.) will
Inform him that [jerom asserts not, that it was said at Corinth, I am of Paul,
etc. But among the people, etc. malum non Corinthi solum, etc. It was a Public
evil -- Paul himself prescrybed no such remedy (says he) unto the
Corinthians. -- and afterward [Not. 17.] Jerome says, after it was said among
the people, he says not that this human Prostasia, began at that time, viz, of
the schism, but after that time. Compare it with Wittaker, (de pont. Q. 1. c.
3. Sect* 29. [he says not, it was decreed by the Apostles, that one Presbyter
should be set over the rest, this he says, was by the Churches Castome; not
the Apostles decree -- Then he adds (Ierom, viz,) Let the Bishops know, that it
is rather by Custom, then the divine appointment, that they are set over
Presbyters. Had the Apostles changed the first order, and set Bishops over
Presbyters, and forbidden the Churches to be governed by the Cammon* Council of
Presbyters, truly that had been the Lords appointment, because proceeding from
the Apostles of Christ, unless we will ascrib to Custom, not to divine
appointment, what they decreed. But the Apostles being alive, there was nothing
changed in that order, for this Epistle was written when Paul was in Mac donia,
etc.] Let our Informer read this learned author, who at large will cure his
error in this point, if it be not incurable. Whereas he adds [That Ierom^
comment upon Tit. I. Imports only his opinion, anent the Community of names of
Bishop and Presbyter not of their office at that time] I beseech him what will
this say to Ieromes scope, which is to prove Presbyters superiority to Deacons?
for the deacons name was in a general sense, attribut both to Apostles, and to
the Evangelist Timothey, as himself pleads. Besides, what signifies Ieroms in
ferenc from all his Citations, viz, [That Bishops had not their superiority
over Presbiters, by divine appointment] If only a community of names, was his
proof from these texts.

The Informers 2 Reason, to prove that Ierom makes Bishops, to be introduced in
the times of the Apostles, is [ That had the decree which Jerome speaks of, been
after the Apostles, it would have been extant in antiquity, where, and in what
Council, it took place, but this is not found. Ans Jerome by, toto orb
decretum, or prospiciente concilio, cannot mean any formal Council, either in
the Apostles times, or afterward. But the meaning is, that when through the
world, it was said among the people, I am of Paul, etc. It was decreed among
the people, or in, and among particular Churches, through the whole word, that
is, distr^butively, though all places of the world, not representatively, in
any aecumenick Council of the whole world. Decreed through the whole word, is
all one with, Decreed by the whole world, which is distributily to be taken.
Ieroms words convince this, for the Councils decree, representing the world,
would be all at once; but Ierom says this Chance came not in Simul and Semel,
but paulatim ly degrees; And that the Prostasia came in by Custom, which
points at a graduall comeing in. Besides, the Apostles changing the first mould
of government, to prevent Scism, will say they made themselves wiser then the
Lord.

His 3 Reason is [That this will suppose the worlds universal defection, from
the Apostolic Government, against which there is, no footstep of a Testimony.]
Ans. we We have seen (as he cannot deny) as great, and more sudden changes of
the divine institutions, exemplified in Scripture; and that ane universal
defection, has been through the Christian world, from both the Apostolic
Doctrine, and Government, he will not deny: and many Testimonies there might
have been against this, though they have not come to our hands. He knows how
our divines answer such a Question of the Papists, as to the beginnings of
their Corruptions, and their universal spread. Moreover, this mystery of
Iniquity, and affectation of primacy, began in the Apostles own time, and
therefore we need not wonder that it spread shortly thereafter. Jerome tells us
that this change was Paulatim, by degrees, and upon specious pretenses of order
and union, and therefore it is no wonder that this monster in its nature and
dreadful effects, was not seen at first.

His 4t. Reason is [That Ierom makes this change to have been for remedy of
Schism, and it is absurd to say, that the Government of the Apostles was liable
to this evil But this inconvenience is salved, if we say, that the Apostles for
preventing Schism which parity breeds, set up Bishops over Presbyters.] Ans.
1. To begin at his last part, he eschews not this inconvenienc himself; for he
makes the Apostles to have Governed the first Curches Episcopaly, keeping the
Episcopal reyns of Government still in their own hand (in Ieroms sense) till
their absene and Schism procured that change which Ierom speaks of. So that,
with him, the root of Schism was sown in that Church which they Governed
Episcopally; the Presbyters with him, ab initio, yea first or last not having
a power of ordination, and jurisdiction; and he maks jerome to reflect upon the
Apostles, as if they had bettered Christ's appointment, as to Government: I pray
him, how grew up the Corinth Scism while Paul acted the Bishop over that
Church? as he and the rest of hisparty do plead. The men of his way say that
the Apostles keept the reyns of Government in their own hand, until they were
about to die, before which time there were schimes in their Churches. Did not
the Apostles foresee this? and if the Apostolic Episcapacy was by liable to
schisms, much more that of their substituts. 2. It is too gross ane Inferenc
to say that [ Because Jerome holds that for preventing schisms which were at
that time, the Government was changed, therefore Jerome charges it upon the
Apostles Government,] he may as well say, that a man's asserting Corruptions to
be in the Church, will infer his imputing them to the ordinances. Was there nor
discord among the disciples, under Christ's own immediate Government? but did
that reflect upon his Holy Government that this recorded? Did not Paul and
Barnabas divid and part asunder? but did Luke in relating this, Charge it upon
the holy Apostolic Government. 3. The absurd [reflexion upon the Apostles
Government] which he speaks of, lies upon his party, and these who first
brought in, and now (after its evil effects are discovered) uphold this
hierarchy, which is so cross to the Apostolic parity. Ierom says [they
brought in this imparity for remedy of schisme] but leaves the charge of
[reflecting upon the Apostolic government] upon the Authors of this
innovation, and upon its promoters still it mustly.

His 5t. Reason is That Ierom in his writtings derives Episcopacy as high as
from the Apostles, making James Bishop of Jerusalem, Titus of Crete, Mark of
Alexandria: and Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons to be that which Aaron and the
levites were in the old Testament. Then he adds, that if we make him contradict
himself, it must be with advantage to Bishops. Ans. We have heard already,
that it is past doubt with many godly learned, that the Fathers used the term
Bishop, in a various and general sense, and spoke of the Apostles, and of
extraordinary officers, after the mode and custom of their own times, wherein
these offices and designations were prevalent. It is this Informer, who puts a
contradiction upon Jerome, while he maks him assert Episcopacy to be set up by
the Apostles, upon occasion of the Corinth Schism, in contradiction to his
Scriptur proofs of the parity of Bishop and Presbyter from the Apostles
doctrine, and brings him in here as asserting the Apostles, to have been
formaly Bishops from the beginning. Whereas our answer has none of these
inconveniences; and tho it were granted, that it is the true Jerome who asserts
this of the Apostles (which we put this Informer to prove) yet we accommodat
this with his other doctrine, by what is said of the aequivocall sense of the
word. Aaron and the Levits authority might, in Ieroms judgment, be as to
Church government in general, derived in the n^w Testament, and also as to a
distinction of Church officers therein. But if he should allege, that Ierom
assimilats here, the one government and the other; he will make him plead for a
gospel Aaron and pope. In a word, Ieroms judgment, as to the divine right of
Presbyterian parity, being so clear, and by him founded upon the Apostles
writings; ought to preponderat any other general, or ambiguous expressions,
anent Bishops; and as a rule, to expound the same, in the sense most suitable
unto this his judgment: especialy since the Fathers usage of speech, as to
Bishops, is thus general and ambiguous as is said.

But the Doubter objects to purpose [That Ierom letts the Bishops know that
they have their power, more by Custom, then by divine right] To this the
Informer repones his recocted crambe again viz, [Ierom speaks of the power
which Bishops in his time were invested with, beyond the first Bishops -- And
that Ierom in that same Epistle expones [Consuetudo, or Custom] by [Apostolical
tradition] -- That if we understand him of Consuetudo, or custom after the
Apostles, this will fastten upon him a contradiction. That he says of the
first Bishops, who governed by commoune Council with the Presbyters; that they
differed only from them in ordination, but of these in his own time, ad unum
omnis cura delata, the wole charge was put upon one.] Ans. As for this conceit,
of Ieromes distinguishing here only [Bishops of his own time,] from [these of
the Apostles time,] we have confuted it already, and shown its absurdity, and
that it is most cross to Ieroms scope and words, who proves a complete parity
among Ministers, and ane identity of Bishop, and Presbyter, in Name and thing,
all along the Apostles times, and writings, even to John, the surviver of all
the Apostles, So that it is most absurd to fancy him to speak of Bishops in the
Apostles timet. The Informer offers but a gross distortion of his words, for he
says of the Bishop who differed only in ordination, from Presbyters: quid
facit, what does the Bishop except ordination etc in the present time, but of
these who have all the Care, he says Paulatim ad unum cura delata, the wholl
care was put upon one, in the preterit time, pointing out these who came in
upon that schism, which, with the Informer, was in the Apostles time: The
objection tells him, that Ierom applies the Bishops mould whom this man calls
[first Bishops] to [his own time] when he says what does the Bishop, except
ordination etc: And having proved Bishopes and Presbyters to be all one, he
says Sciant, that is, let the present Bishops know, that they have their power
more by Custom, then divine appointment. 2. As for Ieroms expounding Consuetudo
or Custom, by Apostolic tradition, it receaves the same answer with what is
said, as to his calling Apostles, Bishops. For with Jerome, Apostolic
tradition, and Ecclesiastic Custom are all one; as that instance clears anent
the observation of lent, which he calls Apostolica traditio, or Apostolic
tradition, writing to Marcellus, and yet writing against the Luciferians, he
calls it Ecclesiae consuetudo, o^ a Custom of the Church: therefore by
Apostolic tradition, he meaned not Apostolic appointment, for this were ane
implicantia in terminus, a flat contradiction, since he denies this to these
Bishops, but only Ecclesiastic Custom, upon which he says their office was
founded. The Informers 2d. Answer o this exception is (with Davenant) That by
[tru^h of divine appointinent] Ierom meaned Christ's express command, by
[Custom] the Apostles practice, begun by them, and after continued. For
proveing this he adduces the Instance now given, anent Ieroms making
[Apostolick tradition], and [Ecclesiastick Custome], all one. Hence he thus
senses the words, That Bishops were brought into the Church, not by Christ's
express command, but by a Custom, introduced by the Apostles into the Church,
and continued in their Successors. Ans. 1. This fine conceit maks Ierom reflect
oddly upon the Apostles, as if they taught one thing, and practiced another;
for Jerome proves from their writings, that all along they make Bishops and
Presbyters one, Now if they in practice set up Bishops distinct from
Presbyters, what Harmony makes this? 2. He thus maks him reflect upon Christ's
express command, in relation to government, as if it were altered; and opon his
government Apostolic, in saying that it was the ground of schisms. How will
this man guard against this, which he imputed to us before? 3. What will
Davenant or he make of these Three periods of time in Ieroms discourse,
observed by learned Iunius and others, to clear his words. 1. Presbyters and
Bishops all one and governing by Common Council all the Apostles time. 2.
Scismes arising. 3. Paulatim and postea, in process of time, and by degrees, a
new mould of government projected, and immutata ratio, the order changed, as
Ambrose says to the same purpose. Now this gloss of his words, will make the
Apostolic government and practice, not only the rise of scismes, but to be
Changed, for a change its sure Ierom speaks of from the first order of
government appointed by the Apostles; and making yet the Apostles practice in
government to continue, the answer contradicts it self, as well as Jerome. As
for the instance adduced, it cannot quadrat here in this place, when Ierom
opposes the consuetudo or Custom, unto disposition of divine truth, for the
Apostles practice, seconded by their Doctrine, (as the Informer holds that
both will patroniz prelacy) is most formaly a divine appointment, and their
giveing unto the Churches what they received of Lord in their commission; and
therefore cannot with any show of Reason, be apposed unto a divine appointment,
as Jerome opposes this Consuetudo, or Custom. In Fine. How will Davenant or he,
separat and distinguish that which Jerome cites [Act. 20.] for the parity of
Bishop or Presbyter, and to prove Presbyters their common joint government,
viz, [That Paul gave the whole Episcopal Charge to these elders in his last
farewell as the Holy Ghosts Bishops, not noticing Timothy in the thing.] How
will he (I say) distinguish this from ane Apostolic practice and a practice
to be continued? So that here was (in Ieroms sense) a Presbyterian practice of
this great Apostle, a practice founding that Government and to be continued so.

But the Informer dismisses this discourse of Ierom with some remarkes. The 1
is That he speaks at least of ane Apostolic right, as in many other his
writings, in relation to prelacy. Ans. we have proved that Ieroms words in
these Tuo places mentioned (the clearest account of his judgment in this
matter, since he is disputing this point ex professo) do evince the contrary.
his 2. Remark is That suppose he makes Bishops laiter then the Apostles, yet he
maks them needful to prevent Schism. Ans. Ierom only Narrats rem Gestam, or
the matter of fact, viz. The ground that moved to bring them in, but gives not
his approbation of it. Besides, the Informer would take home his own argument
here, and bewar of making Ierom reflect upon the Apostolic Government, and
contradict himself, in approving of a government as a remedy of schism, which
he disputs against from Scripture. His 3d. Note is [That Ierom submitted to
Episcopacy; and that Mr. Durham says that Aerius was condemned for brangling
this order to the hazard of union.] Ans. Ieroms keeping fellowship wi^h the
visible Church in his time (tainted with this Corruption, and which was but
then are embrio of that grown Monster now among us,) is a poor argument to
plead for the best and purest (and in so far the most considerable) part ^f
Minsters and professo^s in this Church, heir complying with a Scismatick
backslyding par^y, introducing this Corruption after it has been universaly
cast out and vowed against, and the same may be said of Aerius Neither
contradict we Ierom in this, for he maks not prelacy necessary for keeping out
shisme, as we have alteady told him, and we heard that learned Whittaker calls
it a remedy worse then the Disease. Before ^e can mke either Ieroms practice
heranent, or Mr. Durhams assertion as to Aerius, bear any conclusion against
us, he must prove that the prelatick party are the only visible organick
Church of Scotland, else Ieroms practice will fortify more the Presbyterians
plea against him, for breaking down the wall of Gods house, and seperating from
the Presbyterian Government of this national Church. But of this when we come
to examine the third Dialogue.

CHAP. XIII.
The difference betwixt our present Prelacy and the Ancient Episcopacy stated
and evinced in 12. Instances. Hence all the Informers pleadings from Antiquity
for our Prelates, is found a beating of the Air and impertinent.

ALthough this Informer would make the world believe, that our Prelacy is
nothing discrepant from that of the ancient Bishops, yet there are many
remarkable differences betwixt the one and the other, which renders all his
pretenses from antiquity mere words and wind.

1. In general its clear from a great consent of the learned, that the Bishop
who first came in after the Apostolic age was nothing but Episcopus preses or
Moderator, and had no power of ordination and Jurisdiction above Presbyters.
This Moderator fixedly set up durante vita, during life; And Endued with a
higher honor upon this ground, is Beza's Episcopus humanus, or human Bishop,
whom he distinguishes from the divine Bishop of Gods appointment. Ambrose in
his time, acknowledges [on 1 Timothy 3.] [That Bishops and Presbyters had the same
essential office and ordination.] Dr Reynolds, in his conference with Heart,
proves, that at first the Moderator or president among Ministers in their
meetings, is he whom the Ancients in after times called Bishop. So he holds
that the Bishop at his first rise was only the (...) or Moderator of the
Presbytery. Blondel at large mantains the same, only he holds that the next in
degree succeeded him when dead. Hence Musculus after he has from the texts
alleged by Jerome, proved that Bishop and Presbyter are all one* adds That
thereafter Ambition begetting strifes about precedencie, one was set up to be
Moderator in a fixed orb. And least our Informer or any else allege, that
prelacy therefore is necessary to prevent Schism. This eminent light of the
reformed Church adds. but whither that device of man profited the Church or no,
the times after could better judge, and that the effects issueing upon it,
dicovered, that it was not the Spirit of God his remedy to take away Schism,
but Satan's project to destroy a faithful Ministry. The same says Sadael viz,
that this difference betwixt Bishops and Ministers which was introduced to
remedy Schism, opened a gap to ambition. So Dr Whittaker having out of
Jerome showed [That faction occasioned the change of the Ancient Apostolic
parity among Ministers,] -- adds -- That many wise and godly men have judged
the change and remedy more pernicious then the disease it self, which though at
first it did not appear, yet experience after proved that it brought the
Antichristian yoke upon the neck of the Church. See the appendix to jus*
divin. Minist. Evangel. In which Testimonies of these great men we may observe
two things. 1. That they admit the first Bishops to have been nothing else but
fixed Moderators. 2: That even this much they do condemn as a deviation from
the first appointment, and as that which gave a rise to the Antichristian
Tyranny. Now the difference and disproportion betwixt this fixed Moderator, and
our present diocesian erastian prelat, is so plain and obvious, that nothing
further needs be said to clear it. Therefore his Argument from the Catalogues
and those early first Bishops who took place in the Church, is pitifully
claudicant as to a conclusion of the ancient Churches approbation of our
Prelates.

To clear it further, its evident (if we lay weight upon the Judgment of the
ancient Bishopes themselves in point of Church Government) that 1, They held
not their consecration or ordination to be distinct from that of Presbyters,
Episcopi and Presbyteri una and eadem est ordinatio. [That the Bishop and
Presbyter have one and the same ordination,] we heard is Ambrose assertion.

2. No delegation of external jurisdiction to Presbyters was acknowledged by
the ancients. As it is by our new hierachical pleaders. The Prelatists hold
that the Bishop is properly the [Pastour of the whole diocese,] and that all
the Ministers thereof have but a derived precarius Ministry under him* so D^wn.
(defens. lib, 2. c. 4. p. 67.) Field. (of the Church 56. c. 27) Sarav. (de
trip. epis. p, 87.) Spala^. l. 2. c. 9 Number. 15. and yet Ambrose [on 1 Timothy 5*
And Chrisostom [Hom. 17 on Matthew] calls Presbyters expressly Christi
vicarios, Christ's vicars. Cyprian. [lib. 4. Epist. 8.] says, Dominum
sacerd^tes in sua ecclesia -- etc. That the Lord condescended to elect and
constitut to himself Priests in his Church. 3. The Ancients held that the power
of external jurisdiction was common with Bishops and Presbyters. Ignatius (in
his Epistle to the Trallians,) Calls the Presbyters senatum Dei, Gods Court, or
Senate. Et non consiliarios solum, sed and assessores Episcopi. not Councillors
only (as are our Curats, and scarce that) but the Bishops assessors. Irenaeus.
(lib. 4. Cap: 44.) Calls them Principes, Princes or Chieff. Augustine. (Sermon:
86.) Calls the Brethren ineremo, Patronos rectores terrae, Patrones and Rectors
of the Earth. Chrisostom expressly shows (on 1. Tim. 1, Hom: 11.) Ecclesijs
praesidisse sicut Episcopi, etc: That they presided over the Churches as the
Bishops, and received together with them the office of teaching and governing
the Church.

The homily begines thus, postquam de Episcopis dixit, eosque formavit, quidnam
illos habere conveniat, a quo item abstinere necesse sit dictans, ommisso
interim Presbyterorum ordine ad diaconos transiit. Cur id quaeso? quia scilicet
inter Episcopum atque Presbyterum interest ferme nihil. quippe and Presbyteris
Ecclesiae cura permissa est: and quae de Episcopis dixit, ^ea etiam Presbyteris
congruunt: that is, after he has spoken of Bishopes and formed them, injoyning
what things it becomes them to have, and from what it is necessary they should
abstain, omitting the mean whil the order of Presbyters, he passes over to
deacones. Why so, I pray? even because that betuixt a Bishope and Presbyter
there is almost no difference. Because unto Presbyters also the care of the
Church is allowed: and what he said before concerning Bishopes, the same
things also do agree to Presbyters. I know he adds -- sola quippe ordinatione
superiores illi sunt, atque hoc tantum, plus quam Presbyteri habere videntur.
That the Bishopes only in ordination are superior to Presbyters, according to
the latin interpretation followed by Dounam, and Bilson, and by Bellarmin
before them. But the more learned interpreters have observed that the greek
will bear a far other sense, (...) Sola enim suffragatione horum ascenderunt
atque hoc solo videntur Presbyteris injuriam facere. that is, that only by the
Presbyters suffrage they have ascended, (viz to this power) and in this only
they seem to do injury to Presbyters. The learned Iunius (de cleric. cap. 7.
not. 611.) tells us that (...) (hic) Presbyterorum non Episcoporum; quod si
(...) est ordinatio, ergo Presbyterorum est ordinatio. The hand suffrage, is
here the Presbyters. but if it be meaned of ordination, then ordination
belonges to them. And having proved this construction and sense of the greek
from Suidas, he shows that Chrisost. places not the difference in ordination
betuixt the Bishop and Presbyter, but in this that the Bishopes ascendunt supra
Presbyteros in gradum (...) Do ascend into there degree of Episcopacy above
the Presbyters -- although, because they stepp up by their suffrage, they seem
to wrong them when they assume any power to themselves, who upon the ground of
order, not of power, (says he) are set over them by there own suffrag. He
also tells Bellarm. (de cleric. ca. 15. not. 29.) That granting his sense of
Chrysostom. Words, yet the Bishop ordained only signo and sermon declaring the
sacred institution or inauguration of the person ordained, but not ordinatione
veritatis, or by the true ordination which that sign represented. Some add,
that if Chrisost. be thus understood in the sense of Bellarm. and his Episcopal
sectators, he did not rightly expound his text, while distinguishing that which
he acknowledges the Apostle makes one and the^ same* Jerome tells us of their
common Government of the Churches together with the Bishops; from whom Gratian
(in decretis cause. 16. Quest. 1 cap.) shows that Ecclesia habet senatum
Presbyterorum etc: That the Church has a senate of Presbyters without whose
counsel the Bishop can do nothing.

2. We heard that these Ancient Bishops were set up by the Presbyters as their
fixed Moderator and had all their Episcopal power from their free choice and
election. And that any prerogative which they had over Presbyters, they ascribe
it to Custom, and to the Presbyters own choic, consuetudini., non dominicae
dispositionis veritati, to Custom not the truth of divine appointment, as
Jerome speaks. Irenaeus, (who lived ann. 180; lib 4. cap. 43) tells us that we
must adher to those Presbyters, qui successionem habent ab Apostolis, qui cum
Episcopatus successione charisma veritatis acceperunt. -- Who have succession
from the Apostles, and together with the succession of Episcopacy have the gift
of verity. Ambrose (in cap 4. Ephesians.) affirms that -- non per omnia convenient
etc. -- [the government in his time agreed not in all points with scripture] he
means it of any excrescent power which the Bishop then had above Presbyters.
And Augustine ascribes al his difference from Ierom (who was a Presbyter) unto
Ecclesiae usus, the Churches Custom, and grantes that in this only
Episcopatus Presbyterio major est, the Episcopacy is greater then the
Presbyterat. (Tom. 2. operum. Epist. 19. ad Hieron) And Jerome holds (in his
Epistle to Evagrius) Primatum hunc Episcoporum Alexandriae Primum caepisse etc.
That this primacy of Bishops began first at Alexandria, and, post-mortem Marcae
Evangelistae -- after the death of mark the Evangelist. And thus gives the lie
to our Informer who would make us believe that it came from Marks personal
practice and appointment while a live. he tells us also that it was [paulatim]
and by ^ent degrees, that omnis sollicitudo ad unum delata, The episcopal care
was put upon on. Sozom. (lib. 1. cap. 15.) calls it civitatis consuetudinem a
custom which prevailed with other cites* it is remarkable, that by Ephiphanius
confession (Haeres 87.) non habuit Alexandrie duos episcopos ut aliae urbes.
Alexandria had not two Bishopes as other cities. But the Informer will not dare
to say, that our Prelates now have their power by Presbyters election as these
ancient Bishopes

3. It is also clear, that in these first times when the Episcopus* praeses was
set up, and for some ages afterward, not only the Presbyters but the people
also had a great interest in their choice. Cyprian (epist. 68. --) speaking of
the choice of Bishops says That pleb^ maxim habet potestatem, the people have
mainely a power -- and that [plebe present,] that is in the peoples presence,
they were set up: Which he says was a power they had descending upon them de
divina auctoritate* that is, from the divine Authority. And this had the
approbation of ane African Synod consulted by the Churches of Spain as to
Election. Athanas: (epist. ad Orthodox.) condemned the comeing in of a Bishop
without the peoples consent as a breach not only of ane [Ecclesiastick
constitution,] but ane [Apostolick precept.] See Smect: (page 26.) proveing
this at large that Bishops were elected by the people. Cyprian. (lib. 1. Epist.
4. nomine Synodi africanae) videmus, de divina authoritate descendere ut sacer*
dos plebe present sub omnium oculis deligatur etc. [That the Priest was chosen
under the eyes of all the people being present, and approved as fit and worthy
by a public Testimony.] This (he says) we see descends from divine
Authority, and (ibid) diligenter de traditione divina and Apostolica
traditione tenendum est quod apud nos fere and per provincias universas tenetur
ut episcopus deligatar plebi cui ordinatur present etc. [That it was to to be
held from the divine and apostolic tradition, as almost through all provinces
it was observed, that that the Bishop was chosen in the peoples presence over
whom he] was ordained etc.] He testifies that thus Cornelius was chosen Bishop
of Rome (lib. 4 epist. 2.) Great. (did. 62. Can) nulla ratio fuit ut inter
episcopos habeantur qui nec a clero sunt electi, nec a plebibus sunt expetiti.
No reason permitts that they should be holden Bishops, who are neither chosen
by the clergy nor desired by the people.] So Ambrose was chosen by the
citticens of Millan, Flavianus by those of Antioch, Chrisostom, by the
Constantin^politans. This Custom was so rooted, that when Emperors afterward
obtruded Bishops without the previus election of the clergy and people, the
most famous Bishops much stomached it. Ubi ille Canon, (says Athanasius Epist.
ad solitariam vitam agentes) ut a pallatio mittatur is qui futurus est
Episcopus. Where is that canon, That he who is to be Bishop, should be sent
from the court? Let our court prelates mark this: And our curats answer this
quere. Now I hope our Informer will not allege that the people have any the
least Interest in the choice of our Prelates, so that they are but novell and
none of the ancient Bishops in this point.

4. Non of the first Bishops could ordain alone. This is beyond debate as to
the first [Episcopus preses.] But even in after times also when Bishops power
was farther advanced they could not thus ordain.

That their power of ordination was not singular appears from the 4th Council
of Carthage (Can. 22) which decrees that the Bishopes ordain not without the
Clergy; and [Can. 3.] they are not to impose hands without them.

The Presbyters in Cyprians time had the power bartisandi, of baptizing, manum
imponendi, or of laying on hands, and ordinandi, that is, of ordaining. (epist.
78.) and in Egypt, in absence of the Bishop they ordained alone. see Smect. (p.
27.) upon this ground Ambrose said, that betwixt the Bishop and presbyter there
is almost no difference. Now have not our prelates power to ordain alone? and
have they not de facto frequently done so? so that upon this account also they
are new minted Gentlemen.

5. The power and Government of the ancient Bishops in Church judicatories was
[not sole and singular,] as that of our prelates, [nor did they invad or inhanse
their decisive conclusive suffrage] as they do, who are Princes in all the
present Church meetinges which must only give them advice, and not that, unless
this high priest judge them of known loyalty and prudence, and may do with
their advice what he pleases. Whereas Cyprian (Epist. 6. and 28) professes that
he neither could nor would do any thing without the Clergy. And the 4^.
council of carthage condemns the Bishops decision unless fortified by the
sentence of the Clergy (Can. 23.) where was the negative voice here? see
Ruffin. hist. lib. 10. Cap. 9. Smectim. proves from Canons of ancient Councills
and the Fathers, That neither 1. In censuring presbyters. Nor 2. In judgeing of
the conversation or crimes of Church members. Nor 3. In excommunication, nor
receaving of penitents, Bishops could do any thing without presbyters. And
that there was no delegation of their power. Downam himself confesses in
reference to Ambrose time, and long after it. So that for 400 Years our prelates
present Prince like power was not known in the Church. The ancient Bishops made
themselves sole in no point of ecclesiastic discipline as our prelates, who
have excommunicat alone. Tertull. (Apoleget.) shows that the exhortations,
castigations, and censuradivina, the divine censure among which he takes in
excommunication, were performed by the probati quique seniores, all the
approved elders. Before him Iraenus [haeres: lib: 4 cap. 44.] Will have these
Presbyters obeyed. Qui successionem habent ab Apostolis, have succession from
the Apostles -- And that ad correctionem aliorum, for censure of others as well
as for sound doctrine. Basilius magnus Archiepisc. Caesariens. affirms, that
jus ligendi and solvendi (...) ex aequo, omnibus pastoribus and doctoribus etc.
That the power of binding and lowsing is equally and together given by Christ
to all Pastors and Doctors. Which even Lombard denies not [sentent. lib 4.
did. 19.] It is also demonstrated that elaborat piece that the oath ex officio
is a Monster to Antiquity.

6. Our Prelates Civil and State offices are also a Monster to pure antiquity,
as they are Cro^se to our Churches Authority; who in her general assembly has
condemned this. (Assemb: 38. sess: 25.) The forsaid author proves this also at
large, to whom we refer the Reader, So that our Informer must acknowledge that
our Prelates in this point also are different from the Ancients.

Whosoever shall peruse the Canones called Apostolic, and of ancient councels,
will find Bishopes meddling in state affairs, and especialy their holding of
state offices, so harmoniusly condemned, that its a wonder that any who
pretends to the knowledge of antiquity, and to plead for prelacy upon this
ground, should have the considenc to justify it.

The 6. canon of those called Apostolic passes the sentence of deposition upon
bishops who assume secular employments. [Episcopus vel Presbyter, vel diaconus
seculares curas ne suscipiat, alioqui deponatur.] Balsamon upon this canon,
referrs us to 13. cap. 8. Tit. Where there is exhibit a full collection of
canons to this purpose. The 81 canon. diximus non oportere Episcopum vel
Presbyterum seipsum ad publicas administrationes demittere, sed in
Ecclesiasticis negotiis versari. Vel ergo ita facere persuadeatur, vel
depon^tur. That is, we have appointed that a Bishop or Presbyter must not stoop
to, or debase himself with public (that is, civil) administrationes or
offices, let him therefore be either persuaded so to do, or let him be deposed.
^alsamon upon this canon, observing that it lenifies the first, referrs to XVI
Canon Carth. Syn.

Again Canon 83. runes thus, Episcopus vel Presbyter, vel diaconus, exercitui
vacans; and utraque obtinere volens, remanum scilicet magistratum, and
Sacerdotalem administrationem, deponatur, quae sunt enim caesaris, Caesari, and
quae sunt Dei, Deo. That is a ^ishop or Presbyter or deacon who bears office in
an arm^, and will needs hold both offices, to wit the Roman magistracy, and the
sacerdotal administration or ministry, let him be deposed; for ^uch things as
belong to Caesar must be rendered to Caesar, and the things that are Gods unto
God. Balsamon upon this canon referrs us to VII. Can. chalced. syn. -- tales
(says he) anathemate ferientem si non penitentiam agant -- Which strickes them
with [anathema] (the last extremest curse or ex communication.) who assume
military employments and repent not. And having moved ane objection, whether
the formentioned clause [cesset vel deponatur, let him leave off this office,
or let him be deposed.] is here also to be understood, he tells us in the close
of his answer, that omnia publica eandem rationem habent, that al public civil
offices falls under the same consideration as thus discharged. And begins his
gloss upon this canon thu^, diversi canones Apostolici prohibuerunt sacris
initiatos publica negotia administrare. That is, diverse Apostolic canones
have forbidden such as are entered into sacred functiones to handle or
administer public (or civil) affairs. In the beginning of his gloss upon the
6 canon, he represents thus the crime of church officers holding of civil
places which is censured therein* De hominibus consecratis qui seculares
servitutes exercent etc: concerning men consecrat to god who exercise wordly
slaveries. -- such a Character do the Canons put upon our Prelates state
offices. That VII. Canon of the Council of Chalcedon puts the formentioned
censur upon such as -- [secularia negotia exercent divinum ministerium
negligentes] -- who manadge wordly places and offices neglecting the divin
ministry.

The XVI. Canon of the second Council of Nice forbidding Bishops or presbyters
to be (...), actores or procurators, does it upon this ground. -- debent enim
ad id quod scripium est respicere nemo Deo militans seipsum implicat
secularibus negotiis. For they ought to take heed to that which is written no
man warring for god, or who is his soldier should involve himself in secular
affairs, see Balsamon, comment. in Canon. Apost. council. and patrum, and in
Photii nomo can page (mihi) 39: 108, 127, 178, 167, 319. Whenc we may collect.
1. how constant and sever the ancients were in their censour of this guilt 2.
That they held this to be a debasing of the holy ministry, to which the pastor
or Bishop most give himself 3. That upon the ground of that gospel precept (2.
tim. 2: 4.) No man that warreth, intangleth himself With the affairs of this
life, and that other ground of giving Caesar what is Caesar's, and to God what
is Gods, they do condemn, not military employments only, in a Pastor or Bishop
or taking farms (as our Informer would make us believe) but also also all
secular and civil offices without exception. 4. That they held the sacred
function of the ministry to be utterly inconsistant with public civil
employments. And the civil office of a state-ruler incompatible with the
ministerial office, in one and the same person; since they are opposed and
contradistinguished as thus inconsistant, in the forementioned Canones and the
grounds thereof. So that there is not a shadow of defense for prelates state
offices. Whil these Canones do sit in judgment, especialy the scripture
grounds hinted therein, and many others which have been adduced.

7. What ever general expressions of the ancients he may plead, yet is it not
certain, that in the first pure ages even after the [Episcopus humanus,] and
the fixed presidents were set up, the archbishops, primats, metropolitanes,
were Monsters and unknown, yea even the diocesian mould and cast of Churches,
let any peruse Mr Bains, his diocesians trial trial against Downam, and this
will be convincingly clear.

8. Where will the Informer show us our erastian prelacy in all his antiquity?
A prel^y deryoing all its power both of ordination and Jurisdiction absolutely
from the civil Magistrate, having no intrinsic spiritual authority, and in
all its administeration, acting by way of deputation and commission from the
Magistrate as accountable to him in every piece thereof immediately and solely as
other inferior civil Governors. Dar he say that these Bishops in the first
ages exercised not ane inherent Ecclesiastic spiritual power, distinct from
and independent upon the Magistrate? Was all their meetings and all matters
cognoscible in them, given up to be, pro libitu, disposed of by any Prince or
potentat whither heathen or Christian? Did not all Ministers and Bishops of
these times exercise ane Ecclesiastic independent authority, as being totally
distinct from, and not a part of the civil Government? Was ever there Erastian
Government heard of in the Christian World till Thomas Erastus of Heidleberge
brotched it? And has it not since that time been Impugned by the most famous
lights of the reformed Churches as contrary to the Rules of the Gospel Church
Government? So that our Informer must acknowledge the present
Ecclesiasticocivil, or linsy-wolsy-Prelacy to be a speckled bird of new
fashioned colors, never before seen, to which he will not find a paralleel
among all the Fathers or Bishops of former ages.

9. Let me add, how will our Informer make it appear That in the first purer
ages, any of the ancient Bishops did deny and wholly exclud [ruling elders]
from Church Iudieatories. We have proved this officer to be juris divini from
Scripture. And the full consent of Antiquity, and also of reformed divines is
abundantly clear, and exhibit by many of the learned for the divine right of
this officer. Ambrose is brought in compleaning of the disuse of these officers
(on 1 Timothy 5.) As a devation from the Scripture-patern, and proceeding from the
pride and negligence of Doctors. Origin. his Testimony (lib: 3. contr: Celsum)
is remarkable, who shows that among the more polite hearers who were above the
Catechumenists (...), etc. Non nulli praepositi sunt qui in vitam and mores
eorem qui admittuntur, inquirunt, ut qui turpia committunt, eos communi caetu
interdicant, qui vero ab istis abborrent. ex animo complext meliores quotidie
reddant. There are some set over the rest who inquires into the life and
manners of those who are admitted, that such as committ these things that are
vile, they may discharge them from the public assembly, and embracing from
their heart such as are far from these things, they may render them every day
better. Here are censurers of manners found in the ancient Church, though not
Ministers, and designed and constitut to their work with authority in their
hand to interdict the scandalous, and what are these but ruling elders? So
Augustine (Epist. 137.) writeing to his Charge directs it thus dilectis
sratrbus, clero, Senioribus, and universae plebi Eccle^ae hippo ensis, To the
beloved brethren, the Clergy, the elders, and the wholl people of the Church
of Hippo. So (Contr. Crese. Gramattic.) omnes vos. Episcopi, Presbyteri,
diaconi, and Siniores Scitis. All you' Bishops Presbyters, deacons and elders,
do know. Here are Tuo sorts of elders mentioned in one comma, who can be
nothing else but ruling elders. For the same purpose, the learned in handling
this theme, do cite Barronius (Ann: 103.) Where he enumerats Episcopi,
Presbyteri, diaconi, Seniores. Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, Elders. So also
Tertullian (Apolleget. adversus gentes c. 39.) Cyprian (Epist. 39.) (Optatus
(lib. 1. p. 41.) and many others. See assertion of the government of the Church
of Scotland. Christoph. justell. observe. and not. in Cod. Can. Eccles. affric.
p. 110, 111. jus divinum Regim. Eccles. Smectim. etc:

10. The Ancient Bishops were not set over whole provinces, but city by city
for most part, yea several Cities had more, which says they were not at all
Bishops properly. Clemens (in Constit. l. 7. c. 46.) shows that Evodius and
Ignatius had at once the Episcopacy over the Church of Antioch, and what was
this but a mere Collegiat Ministry. Council. African (Cap. 21.) appoints that
to examine the cause of a Presbyter, sex Episcopl ex vicinis locis
adjungerentur, 6 Bishops from neighboring places be adjoined. Poor dorps had
their Bishops as is clear in History. Nazianzon, a little town near Caesarea,
yet was all the Episcopal See of Gregory Nazianzen. In Chrysostoms time, the
diocese contained but one city. Homil. 3. (in acta) nonne terr arum orbis
imperium tenet imperator etc. [doth not the Emperor (says he) Govern the
World, but this man is a Bishop only of one city.] Sozom. (Hist. Bcclesiast.
lib. 7. cap. 19.) Tells us that he found with the Arabians and those of Cyprus,
Bishops in little Dorps.

11. The Ancient Bishops placed [preaching] among the chief parts of their
office, and were not idle drones as ours are? Theophilact. on 1 Timothy 3. tells
us that docendi officium omnium precipue ut insit episcopis est necesse, that
the office of preaching, which is the chieff of all others, its necessary that
the Bishop be indewed with it.

As ours Court-prelats, so our non-preaching Prelates, are strangers unto, and
condemned by the ancient Canons. Photii Nomocan. tit. 8. cap 12. [de Episcopis,
qui non convertunt haereticos, and de Episcopis and clericis qui non docent
populum.] he presents and digests the Canons against Bishops and clergy men who
convert not haeretiks, and teach not the people. some of these Canones are as
follows.

The 58. canon of those called [Apostolick], runes thus, Episcopus vel
Presbyter, qui cleri vel populi curam non gerit, and eos piet atem non docet
segregetur: and si in socordia perseveret, deponatur. The Bishop or Presbyter
who takes no care of the people or clergy and teaches them not piety, let him
be set aside: and if he continue in his folly let him be deposed. Balsamon upon
this Canon, tells us that, Episcopalis dignitas in docendo consistit, and omnis
Episcopus debet docere populum pia dogmata etc: The Episcopal dignity consists
in teaching, and every Bishop ought to teach the people holy statutes for the
Bishop is for this end established to attend the people etc: thereafter he
shows that the presbyters ought to be so employed, quia etiam prope Episcopos
sedent in superioribus cathedris, [because they sit beside the Bishops in the
higher seats] they were not then the prelates underlinges as our curats are now;
hence he concludes that the Bishop or priest who neglected this duty, were to
be set aside, and if continuing, to be deposed.

The 36. of these Canons puts this censour upon the Bishop who neglects this
duty, Si quis ordinatus Episcopus non suscipiat ministerium and curam sibi
commissam sit segregatus etc: That the ordained Bishop shall be set asid sured
who goes not about his ministry and the duty entrusted to him etc. Balsamon
expoundes this part of the Canon, and sums it up thus. Decernit itaque
praesens Canon, ut si quis Episcopus, vel Presbyter ad docendum pertinentem
manuum impositionem acceperit, and suum munus non implea, segregetur. The
present Canon discerns that if any Bishop or Presbyter has received imposition
of hands relating to teaching, and fulfilles not his office, that he be set
aside etc. Where its evident that he makes the Bishops ordination, or
imposition of hands, relative unto the great duty and office of preaching the
gospel, as well as that of the Presbyter, and accordingly expoundes the Canon.

The XXXIX. canon intrusts the Bishop with the Charg of the peoples souls, in
correspondence with the preceding. In the forecited cap: XII. Photii, we are
referred to the Syn. Carthag. can. CXXIII. Syn. VI. can. XIX. LXIIII. See also
Syn. Sexta in trullo can. XIX. quod opportet eos qui prasunt Ecclesiis, in
omnibus quidem diebus, sed praecipue dominicis -- docere pietatis and rectae
rationis eloquia, ex divina scriptura colligentes intelligentias etc That all
such as are set over Churches, on all days, but especialy on the Lords days
most teach the oracles of piety and pure religion, drawing instructions from
the divine scriptures etc: Balsamon begins his commentary upon the canon thus,
Episcopi Ecclesiarum doctores constituuntur, and propterea dicit canon cis
omnino necesse esse, eum cui praesunt populam semper docere, and multo magis in
diebus dominicis etc: That is, The Bishops are constitut teachers of the
Churches, and therefore the canon says unto them, that its absolutely necessary
always to teach that people over whom they are set, and much more on the
lords days wherein all are almost present in Churches and artificers ceases
from there work etc. So that our non-preaching, or seldom preaching prelates,
who by a new consecration (forsooth,) superadded unto their Presbyterial
ordination to preach the gospel, get a bill of ease from this great duty, to
act state games, except when their Lordships please to step into the pulpit, to
supererogat, stands arraighned, stigmatized, and deposed by the ancient
Canones, as unworthy of any office in the house of god. Vide can. Apost. conc
general and partic. Sanct. Patr. Photii nomocan. cum Balsam. comment. page
(mihi) 39: 116, 117, 121, 207.

Unto this account and censure of antiquity, and of the ancient canons, past
upon our non-preaching prelates, I will here subjoyn a remarkable passage of a
learled divine whose praise is in all the Churches. Whittaker (de Eccles.
contr. 2. cap. 3.) being about to prove that the Church of rome is no true
Church of Christ. Presents this for his first argument. Pontifex Romanus non
est verus Episcopus: Ergo Ecclesia Romana non est vera Ecclesia. Nam Ecclesia
non potestesse sine episcopo. The Pope of Rome is no true Bishop: therefore the
Church of Rome is no true Church: because the Church cannot be without a
Bishop. But least this last assertion cheer up our Informer and his fellows,
he adds, disputo ex eorum placitis. That he disputs upon his popish
adversaries principles; and thus classeth them among the popish party in this
point. But how proves he the pope to be no true Bishop -- propter praecipuum
munus episcopi (says he) quod in illo desideratur, because of the Chief office
of a Bishop whcih is wanting in him. And what is that, olim episcopi Romani
diligenter docebant ecclesiam; and nulli facti sunt episcopi nisi qui in hoc
munere fideles erant. Olim hoc ad se pertinere, and praecipuum suum munus esse
putabant, ut populum sibi commissum docerent atque instituerent; adeo ut
monstri simile esset, per Annos post Christum plusquam sexcentos, episcopum
aliquem in ecclesia esse, qui aut nollet, aut non posset populum docere. that
is, of old the Bishops of Rome diligently taught the Church, and none were made
Bishopes who were not faithful in this office; of old they looked upon this as
the Chief duty incumbent upon them to teach and instruct the people committed
to them; so that fore more then six hundred Years after Christ, it would have
been looked upon as a monster, if any such Bishop were in the Church who either
was not willing or able to teach the people. He adds, That all the Apostolic
Bishopes were such. And that the Apostle requires it in a Bishop that he be
(...), apt to teach 1 Timothy 3: 2. hoc est (says he) non ejusmodi, qui curet
^antum, and det operam, ut alii doceant, and hanc authoritatem docendi aliis
tribuat: sed qui ipse sufficiat alios docere. Not such a one who is diligent
only to provid, others to teach, and gives this authority to others, But who
is himself sufficient to teach others. This he proves because the Apostle is in
that place showing, how the Bishop most be endued and gifted before he be
chosen, and that therefore by [being apt to teach] we most understand a personal
care and ability and not a deputed care, quis enim hoc praestare non posset?
(says he) who is he who may not perform this. This he further cleares from 2.
tim. 2. 2. where the Apostle injoyns Timothy to commit what he had heard of him
to faithful men, qui essent (...), themselves able to teach others.
Reprehending Turrian (and with him our Episcopal men) in interpreting that
first passadge of a deputed care as to teaching. And shows that the old
interpreter translates (...) a doctor, or teacher. And a doctor (says he) is
such a one as can teach himself. Thereafter he cites Oecumenius, and Chrysostom
thus expounding the premised scripture, and even soom of the popish scoolmen,
as Aquinas upon this text, who calls this the proper work and duty of a Prelat.
And shows us that Aquinas pertinently applies to this purpose that passage,
Jer. 3. 15. I will give Pastors according to my own heart who shall feed you with
knowledge and understanding. And that Cajetan, and Catharinus do thus expound
this text. In all which we see with how full a consent of ancient and modern
Churches and divines our non-preaching or seldom preaching Prelates are
condemned, and how fully our scripture-argument against them upon this head, is
fortified and confirmed.

12. As in other points of difference, so the ancient Bishopes were as far
from our Prelates fastuus pomp, and sumptuus grandeur which they assume.
Ammianus Marcellinus (lib. 27. de habitu vitae beatorum episcoporum,) tells us
of their tenuitas edendi, potandique parcissime, indumentorum vilitas etc.
Their spare eating and drinking, their meanenes of apparel, their lovely
countenance, as that which commendes them to God and his true worshippers.
Paulus Samosatenus, his fastuus pomp and attendants, although a great Bishop,
is highly condemned, as exposeing our faith to envy and hatred. Eusebius. (lib. 7.
cap. 29.) The Canon of the 4 Council of carthage (insert by Gratian in the
body of the decree distinct. 41.) provides that, Episcopus non long ab
ecclesia hospitiolum, vil emsupellectilem, etc. That the Bishop have his little
manse not far from the Church that he have mean household stuff etc. Et
dignitatis suae Authoritatem fide and meritis quaerat, and purchase Authority
to his office or dignity by faith and good works. Sozom. (lib, 6. Cap: 16.)
Relats of Basilius Magnus, Bishop of Caesaria, that he answered the Imperours
prefect who threatened the Confiscation of his goods, thus, Horum nihil me
Cruciari potest, equidem opes non habeo, preterquam laceram vestem, and Paucos
libros. None of these things can torment me, truly I have no goods but a torn
garment and some books. See the historia motuum [page 143. to 174.]

Now from all that is said, I think common ingenuity will acknowledge; (and
this Informer himself, if he be not ane utter stranger to it,) that our present
Episcopacy is as far discrepant from that of the Ancient Christian Church, as
east from west, and by consequence that this pleading from the ancient
prostasie, or even the after Bishops to legittimat and patronize our present
prelacy, is a most gross nonsequitur and notorius fallacy.

CHAP. XIV.
The Informers pretended Testimonies out of Calvine, Beza, Blondel, etc. For
Episcopacy, Examined. Their anti-Episcopall judgment, cleared from their
writings. The Informer crosses Bishop Spotswood, and Tilen. His two absurdities
which by way of Dilemma he offers to us, from our assertion of the
unalterablees of Presbyterian Government, and our concession of a Proestos
early brought in, Scanned, and retorted upon himself. The Authors of jus
divinum Ministerii Evangelici, vindicated at some length.

WHereas the Informer is bold to affirm that Calvin^ Beza, Blondel, and other
eminent divines who have written against Episcopacy, are reconcilable to it,
yea to a hierarchy of the highest stamp. We answer 1. The full and harmanious
consent of Ancient and modern divines and reformed Churches, for that which we
plead for in point of Church Government, shall be exhibit in the last Chapter.
2. As for Calvin's judgment in relation to Presbyterian Government, It is so
fully known to the world in his writings, that we think there needs no more to
put a brand of impudence upon any, then to deny it. And we do appeal to his
judicious commentes upon all the controverted places of the new Testament
betwixt them and us; wherein all that we plead for, either as to the identity
of Bishop and Presbyter, in name and thing, the Presbyteryes power in
ordination and jurisdiction, the extraordinary Evangelistick Power of Timothy
and Titus, the divine right of the ruling elder, the peoples right in the call
of Ministers, the unlawfulness of Prelates sole power and dominion over their
brethren, the unwarrantablenes of Ministers state offices, etc, is clearly
asserted. Let any consult him upon Matthew. 18. 17. Matthew 21: 22. Luke 22: 25.
Act. 6: 2, 3, 4. Act. 14: 23. Act. 20: 17, 28, 29, 30. 1. Cor. 5. 1 Cor. 12.
28. with Romans 12: 6: 7. 2 Cor. 2: 6, 7. Ephesians 4: 11, 12. 1 Thessalonians. 5: 12, 13. 2 Thessalonians. 3: 14. Heb. 13: 7, 17. 1 Timothy 1: 3. etc. and 4: 14. 2 Timothy 2 4: 2 Timothy 1:
6. Tit. 1: 6, 7. etc. and such like places, where he will be found to give
sentence for us against the Prelatik party, and expounding them just as we do.
3. These adversaries do grant that the Government in this Church, which famous
Mr. Knox owned, and all his days contended for, was Presbyterial Government.
And it is as well known and acknowledged by themselves, that he had the sense
and judgment both of Calvin and Beza in that great bussiness. Spotswood in his
history tells us that [John Knox framed our rules of discipline in imitation of
what he had Seen at Geneva.] Tilen* in his petulant piece entitled Paraensis
ad Scotos Genevensis discipline Zelotas, makes this undeniable. He calls Calvin
and Beza all along our Masters, and alleges that we can hear of nothing but
out of their scool etc. But that they owned Presbyterian Government, as the
only Government appointed in the house of God, he never took the confidence or
had the forehead to deny. When John Knox was desired by some to write to
Calvin, and others about a certain difficulty, he answered that he came not
here without all their Judgments in what he had done, and that they might think
him unconstant in writting for a resolution in that matter. Now John Knox
looked upon Episcopocy as a limb of Antichrists Hierarchy, and as having
aliquid commumune cum Anti Christo. Something in it common with Antichrist. So
that what the Informer mentions of Measson, and Bish: Andrews their asserting
of Calvin and Beza's Episcopal Government at Geneva, and their preeminencie in
ordination and jurisdiction, is a gross calumny. The eminent parts of these
famous divines might make their judgment have great influence in determining
others, but that either Calvin or Beza, did ever incroach upon the decisive
power of their fellow Presbyters, or acted any thing pro imperio or solely, is
a calumny which any who ever read their lives can sufficiently disprove. Their
labors and practice as well as their writings was for mantaineing the due
right of Presbyterian Government against enemies of all sorts. In the life of
Galleaceus Caracciolus, It is reported, That Calvin being consulted by him in a
case of conscience requireing secrecy (in a great measure) would give him no
determinat answer (tho a ruleing elder in that Church) without consulting his
Brethren. As for that which the Informer cites out of Calvines Inflit. [l. 4.
c. 4. Sect. 2.] where [He acknowledges that Jerome teaches that the proestos is
ane ancient institution, and that he repeats what Jerome says, a Marco etc.]
Its a pitiful proof to conclud thereupon that Calvin acknowledges diocesian
Prelates as Ancient as Mark. For Calvine knew well that Jerome speaks but of the
proestos first set up, and the Informer has not proved that either Calvin or
Jerome gave their approbation to the setting of him up. And for what he adds
[That Calvin says ne ex equalitate ut fieri solet dissidi^ orirenter. That
they were set up least from equality discord should arise as usuallie there
does.] granting that he acknowledges they were more then mere Moderators, that
is fixed Moderators. What then? Are our Prelates no more? Or will his
acknowledgment of the factum, prove his acknowledment of the jus? and though
man's corruption abuse parity to discord, what then? our corruption will abuse
the best ordinance of God. As for what he cites from Instit. (l. 4. c. 5. Sect.
11. Our Informer has not proved. That Calvin by [Episcopi] and [paraeciarum
rectorcs] does understand diverse Church officers of Gods appointment, as he
distinguishes the Bishop and Presbyter. That Calvin did not acknowledge the
Episcopus distinct from the paraeciae rector his comment on Tit. 1: 7. makes it
evident -- [For a Bishop etc.] locus hic abunde docet nullum esse episcopi and
Presbyteri discrimen, quia nunc secund^ nomine promiscue appellat quos prius
vocavit Presbyteros. Imo idem prosequens argumentum utrumque nomen
indifferenter eodem, sensu usurpat, quemadmodum and Hieronimus tum hoc loco,
tum in Epistola ad Evagrium annotavit. Atque hinc perspicere licet quanto plus
delatum hominum placitis fuerit, quam decebat, qui abrogato Spiritus Sancti
Sermon, usus hominum arbitrio inductus, praevaluit. That is, This place
abundantly shows that there is no difference betuixt a Bishop and Presbyter
because now again he promiscuusly calls them by the seccond mane, whom before he
called Presbyters, nay prosecuting the same argument he maks use of both the
names indifferently in the same sense, as also Ierom both in this place and in
his Epistle to Evagrius, has observed. And hence we may perceive how much has
been ascribed to men's pleasure, and inventiones more then did become, because
ane use brought in at men's pleasure has prevaled while the language of the
holy ghost is laid aside -- and after he has spoken of the first Moderators
early brought in, he adds -- verum nomen officij (N. B.) quod Deus in communi
nibus dederat, in unum solum transferri, reliquis spoiliatis and injurium est
and absurdum, deinde sic preve^tere Spiritus sancti linguam, ut nobis eaedem
voces, aliud quam volue^ (...) significent, nimis profanae audaciae est. That
is, But that the name of the office which God gave in common to all should be
transferred to one only, robbing the rest thereof, is injurious and absurd.
More over to pervert thus the language of the holy ghost, that the same words
should signify another thing then he pleased is too profane boldness. Thus
Calvin puts this censure upon our Informer, in making the name [Bishop]
signify any more then [a Presbyter.] And upon Act. 20. 28. De voce Episcopi
hic notandum, omnes Ephesinos Presbyteros sic vocari indifferenter, unde
colligimus Secundum Scripturae usum nihil a Presbyteris differ Episcopos.
That is, Concerning the name of Bishop, we must observe this, that all the
Presbyters in Ephesus are so called indifferently, hence we conclud that
according to the scripture language, Bishops do nothing differ from
Presbyters. Now let any judge if Calvine make not the Name and thing of the
scripture Bishop proper to every Minister of a parish, and if he judged a
Diocesian Bishop, thus differenced from the parish Minister, to be a
warrantable office which he holds to be so cross to Scripture. So that in the
passage which this man has above cited, he would have all Bishops contending
for and reteaning the true scripture function, for none else he can call
eximium munus, or ane excellent gift. So that those of these places will help
our Informer. The Context and tenor of that 4 chapter obliedgeth as to think
that this is really the meaning, that whatever titles these Ancients used, yet
they designed not thereby to wrong that Presbyteriall Government grounded upon
Scripture, which, Calvin, is there defending.

And moreover, even straniing that place [Chap. 5. par. 11.] to the out most
advantage, it will Infer nothing but this, that Bishops, and Parishpriests in
those days, had the essence of the Pastoral office; which is not denied, or
that their Pastoral acts, when rightly performed were valid. The Pastoral
office Calvin calls pium and eximium munus as the ensuing words do convince.

As for his citation from Sect: 13. it were very absurd to think that Calvine
by [the heirarchy which the Fathers commend as handed down from the Apostles]
should understand the prelatick hierarchy which this man pleads for. Since 1.
Many Fathers, as Jerome, never saw such a hierarchy set up, but by [Bishops]
understand either the (...) at first set up, or the Bishops of whom we now
heard, who governed with Presbyters jointly, and had no sole power in
ordination and jurisdiction. 2. Calvin speaks of the Fathers commending a
Hierarchy, not like the papal, but he tells not what his judgment of that
hierarchy is. 3. How could Calvin commend a hierarchy (such as the Informer
pleads for) or so much as acknowledge it as handed down from the Apostles, who
shows from their Doctrine that they owned no Bishop higher then a Presbyter, as
is clear from what is said. To which we may add Calvin's words on Philip: 1.
Episcopi nomen omnibus ministris est commune. Sunt igitur synon^ma Episcopus
and Pastor. Postea invaluit usus ut quem suo collegio praeficiebant in Singulis
Ecclesijs, Presbyteri, Episcopus vocaretur Solus. Id tamen ex hominum
consuetudine natum est, scripturae authoritate minime nititur.

That is, the name of Bishop is common to all Ministers, Bishop and Presbyter
then are one and the same. -- Afterward the Custom prevailed to call the
Minister whom the Presbyters set over their meeting, in evry church the Bishops
only, but this had its rise from men's Custom, but is not at all grounded on
the Authority of Scripture. -- And after he has spoken of the advantage of one
to preside for orders sake, he adds this limitation -- de Singulis corporibus
loquor, non de totis provincijs etc: I speak of single incorperations, not of
whole provinces, adding, prestaret spiritum Sanctum linguarum autorem in
loquendo sequi, quam formas loquendi ab ipso positas in deterius mutare, nam ex
corrupta verbi Significatione hoc malifecutu^ est, quod per inde ac si non
essent omnes Presbyteri collegae (N. B.) adeandem vocati functionem, unus, sibi
pretextu no^ae appellationis, dominium ^n alios arripuit. That is, it were
better in our speech to follow the holy ghost the author of languages, then to
change into the worse the forms of speaking set down by him. For from this
abused signification of the word, this evil has followed, that as if [all
Presbyters] were not Colleagues called to [the same function,] one has usurped
to himself a dominion over the rest under pretext of this new appellation.

As for what he objects [p. 78.] from Calvin upon Tit. 1. 5. [That unus
authoritate praeest etc:] I Ansr. After he has said that every city had
several Presbyters -- and asserted that there are Two sorts of elders, and
that these elders were the Bishops appointed to teach -- He moves ane objection
-- Had Titus this Princely power and alone, and answers -- Non permitti
arbitrio titi ut unus possit omnia, and quos voluerit Episcopos Ecclesiis
imponat, sed tantum jubet ut electionibus praefit tonquam Moderator. That is,
It is not permitted to Titus pleasure to do all things alone, and impose upon
the Churches what Bishops he pleased: but he only bides him oversee the
Elections as Moderator. Paralleling this with Act. 14. 23. where he says that
Paul and Barnabas acted not soli, and pro imperio, that is, solely and
imperiously to put Pastores upon the people who were not expetiti or electi,
desired and chosen, but only probatos and cognitos, men approved and known. Now
let this man say himself, does not Calvin here clearly assert our principles,
and kill the diocesian Prelat with the sole power of ordination and
jurisdiction?

So that nothing can be hence Inferred, but that Church consistories were not
then without order, and that one did praeside among them; for Calvine says on
the 7. verse, porro locus hic abunde docet nullum esse Presbyteri and Episcopi
discrimen. And he who praesided here was Titus, whose Episcopacy we have
abundantly disproved.

As for that which he tells us Calvin adds, [that one was in authority over the
rest at that time,] ergo, what? Had not Paul, Barnabas, and Titus ane
extraordinary authority and commission? for he says, tunc, or at that time
wherein these offices did exist; but will any think that Calvin could mean, a
Diocesian Prelates ordinary power which; immediately before he was disputing
against from the text? He adds presently nihil tamen hoc ad prophanum and
tirannicum collationum morem. This has nothing to do with the profane and
tyrranicall Custom of Collations, long enim diversa fuit Apostolorum ratio,
for the Apostles case and ground was far different from this. As for that which
he adds [of Calvin's letters to a Bishop in the Church of Rome, anent
Episcopacy it self, as being of God] I can appeall this man's conscience, if
Calvin thought the Episcopal hierarchy with sole power of ordination and
jurisdiction, far less the popish hierarchy, to be of God, and whither he does
not in his Commentaries Particularly in the places cited, speak against the
diocisian Prelat as such. Besides, we shall here tell the Informer that this
passage which he cites as in the volume of his [opuscul a page 72] upon a
search of two several editions, has not been found. As for his letter to the
King of Pole, approveing all the degrees of the hierarchie] it is so grossly
contrary to Calvin's principles and writings, that the Informer must excuse us,
not to take it upon trust from him, Especially since he exhibits no part of
that letter. For his letter to the Duke of Somer set (citted by Durel, and the
more to be suspected as coming from the hands of such ane enemy to his
principles.) [anent some fantastic ones fludiing to bring in confusion under
the name of the gospell] we think it a fantastic inferenc of our Informer, to
conclude thereupon, that he calls the asserters of Presbyterian government such.

Although in that Epistle there is no express advice to remove Episcopacy, what
then? there is no express advice for removing several other Corruptions. But
the Consequence that therefore Calvine did not disowne these Corruptions, the
Informer himself will grant to be a gross non sequitur. And some
Considerationes of prudence might move to wave the express touching upon this
head at that season, when light was but dawning as to a Doctrinall reformation,
and the scales of the gross cimmerian darkness of popery, were but beginning to
fall off from the eyes of that people. Yet when the Informer shall peruse that
Epistle again, he will find that Calvine Leaves it not altogether untouched,
when heuseth these words, habeat sane hoc locum In rebus istius vitae -- atqui
alia prorsus est ratio regiminis Ecclesiae quod spirituale est, in quo nihil
non ad Dei verbum exigi fas est, non est inquam penes ullum mortalem quicquam
hic aliis dare, aut in illorum gratiam deflectere, -- that is, let this truly
have place in affaeires of this life -- but the Church Government, which is
spiritual, is of a far other nature, wherein there is nothing but what most be
brought unto the touchstone of the word of God, here I say it is not in the
power of any mortal to gratify any thing unto others, or to decline for their
favor. A passage which compared to Calvi^s principles in point of Church
Government, does fully Antidot the Informers waspish extraction from this
Epistle.

For his treatise to the Emperor Charles the 5i. anent embracing of a hierarchy
tied by a brotherly society among Bishops and by the bond of truth, and united
only to Christ] I see nothing discrepant in it to Calvines, or Presbyterian
principles, If [Hierarchie] be rightly taken, and for this (if their be indeed
such a passage whereof I have no certainty) I think we can in no reason suppose
Calvine to own the popish Government, even as abstracted from false doctrine,
since he holds the very Diocesian Bishop, to be contrary to the Apostolic
Government, far more the Hierarchy; will any man say, that Calvin did own all
the Locu^s of the profane popish orders which are parts of this Hierachy? so
that Calvin by hierarchy, and spirituale regimen, does indigitat the most
simple and primitive Episcopacy which the fathers speak of; and withal since
the embracing of the gospel simplicity and truth which Calvin there desires
(as he says,) would quickly sned off all Luxuriant branches of humane
invention in point of Government, and like ways since Calvin ownes the Church
Government set down in Scripture as our pattern (which does as much reprobat
the popish hierarchy, as the doctrine therein set down, does their errors;) all
this will preponderat toward Calvin's meaning only a gospel Ministry, which
is equally distinct from Bishops in the popish and prelaticall mould. As for
the difference [betwixt the primitive and popish Episcopacy] I think there is
indeed a great difference, and we have proved our present hierarchy to be as
much different from it, and soom what more if its erastian mould be taken in as
the Informer must.

The treatise to Charles the fifth, entitled de necessitate reformanda
Ecclesia is so Generally cited by the informer, without quoting, either page or
section that himself seems half convinced of the Impertinency thereof.

For Saravia his asserting, that he defended Calvin's opinion against Beza, he
said in this as in the rest, more then he could prove. For what he adds of
Hooker and Durel who assert [That Presbytery was settled at Geneva, because
another Bishop could not be gotten after the popish was away, and that it was
settled not out of a dislike to the hierarchy, but because they were in ane
equality and stood so, being bent on reforming the doctrine] I Answer. His
Authors in this assertion stand upon a very slippery and sandy fundation.
What? Were there no able men to be Bishop after the popish Bishop was gone? and
had they not leisure sufficient to do this after the doctrine was reformed?
Why lived they so long without a beloved hierarchy? and (which is yet more
strange) why Employed they their pens and their pains so much for Presbyterian
government, and not rather for the hierarchy? why were both Calvin and Beza so
active in that which John Knox did here in opposition to prelacy? But stay,
has not the Informer told us, that Masone and Bishop Andrews do assert [That
Calvin and Beza assumed ane Episcopal power at Geneva] How comes Durel and
Hooker then [To suppose a complete parity among the Ministers to havt begun and
continued at Geneva for want of a Bishop foresooth] He must grant that some of
these accusers are ingrained liars and accusers of the brethren in this point,
So he must deliberat whither he will bestow this upon Mason and Bishop Andrews,
or Hooker and Durepl. For what he adds of these, that have written for
Presbyterian government, that they designed only to prove it lawful, it is a
gross Calumny, their design is to prove it a divine frame of government
appointed in the new Testament, which I hope he will say is necessary as well
as lawful, since Christ promises to the end his presence with those officers
clothed with his commission. And him self holds that the end of that
Government practiced in the new Testament, and its grounds are Moral and
perpetual. For Blondel his calling Episcopal preeminence an apostolical
constitution, which the Informer cites page 84. no such words being in the
printed copy, (as he acknowledges) who will be so foolishly credulous as to
take it upon the Informer or Durells bare word that it was in the written on,
Unless we will admit the Informer (as the Papists do by the Scriptures in
their unwritten traditions) to add his unprinted patchments to any author, and
thus to dispute pro libitu, and make his weapons from testimonies of authors,
(as once a certain Chiftain's sword is said to have done) to wound and kill a
great way before the point. He distinguishes the Government he pleads for, as
divinitus institutus, or of divine appointment, from any other frame as humane
only, which will say that this divine institution must stand, and all other
frames of Government give place to it. The same may be accomodat to that which
he cites out of Beza (page 85.) who looked upon the very Episcopus humanus as he
calls him, or the first proestos, as the first rise of all the popish
Hierarchy and mischeiffs.

That sentence of Beza de min. grad. Cap. 21. page 343. stands Entirely thus,
imo C^nctos sic [id est Archiepiscopos and Episcopos] hodie appell^tos, modo
sanctissimorum illorum Episcoporum [meaning Timothy and Titus, etc, whom
Saravta termed. Bishops; Beza allowing the designation in a sound and scripture
sence] exemplum imitentur and tam misere deformatam domum Dei ad amussim ex
verbi divini regula pro viribus in^aurent ut Ecclesiae Christianae fidos
pastores, cur non agnoscamus, observemus and omni reverentia prosequamur? Nedum
ut quod falsissime and impudentissime nonnulli nobis objiciuut euiquam uspiam
Ecclesiae, etc. certainly there walking up to such rules and patterns as are
here prescribed, as the proviso's upon which Beza Proefesses to reverence and
own them, would so sned off the Episcopal heteroclyt excrescencies of our
diocesian Erastian Prelates, and smooth them to the Scripture Episcopacy, as
quite to destroy their power and office, pleaded for by this pamphleter.

As his acting, so his writing for Presbyterian Government accordingly, was not
to prescribe his own, (which Beza disclaimes,) but Gods example. How will the
Informer prove, that Beza's denying his prescribing of their example of Church
Government at Geneua, merely as such, will infer his not commending a divine
frame of Church Government? This was not to prescribe his example simpliciter.
And how will he prove that Beza looked upon a Government which he held to be
[the egg from which Anti Christ sprung] as Dei beneficentia, or Gods
beneficence, He makes him a very gross ignoramus, for what man of the meanest
capacity would say so? And if Beza held the first Episcopacie or proestos to be
a recess from the divine institution, he certainly condemned it [in so far.]
And the diocesian Prelat he holds to be Satanicall. Therefore when he seems to
condemn the desowning of all order of Bishops, he must understand it of a
condemning scripture order, and the beautiful subordination among Church
officers, or that divine order that is among them. But here again I must needs
take notice, that in this passage of Beza in his dispute with Saravia, the
Informer has sned off that which wounds his cause to death, for the words
following do discover another ground of this distinction of Bishops from
Presbyters (viz Beza and Jeroms humane Custom) then what the Informer would
persuade. For it follows immediately, neque hoc scelere tenentur, qui de
episcopalis muneris sive prostasias finibus regendis, and de discrimineinter
ordinem and gradum. postulant, ut ex verbo Dei decidatur. Whence it is evident
that he does not understand Bishops set over Presbyters to be Iure divino or
speaks of them in this place.

As for the passages of Beza's letters to Bishop Whitegift, and Grindal, which
the Informer after cites, (page ^6.) I say 1. That certainly Beza's principles
so largely expressed from Scripture anent Church Government, and the
contrariety of the episcopus humanus or humane Bishop, (far more the Diocesian
Satanical Bishop,) to the divine rule in his principles, will necessarly infer,
that in this great man's Judgment none of these Prelates had qua tales or as
such, a lawful spiritual authority from God, 2. It is as certain that all
Beza's pleading and arguments strikes against the diocesian Prelat or Arch
prelat as in that capacity, and against this office and policy in it self,
abstracting from its union unto the pope, so that he could own no authority
that way committed to them of God. 3. It follows, that since he judged the
episcopal hierarchy unlawful, he held the first parity unalterable, since he
pleades for it upon moral perpetual Scripture grounds and institutions. And
by these his solid Scripture grounds, when ex professo handling this point and
theologically, we are more to determine of his Judgment then by Missives.
Wherein the circumstances of time, and several exigences, might engadge to
some insinuations in point of a civil deference, and respect. But however that
be, we are to look unto intentio and natura operis in his writings, or the
native design thereof, rather then critically to scanne or strain every
practical conformity or disconformity thereunto. And the Informers answer to
what we offer anent the assertions of Bishop Mortoune, Bilson, Jewel, who write
for the parity of Bishop and Presbyters by divine right viz, [That they held
the Episcopal office themselves] charging them thus with a practical breach of
their principles, most make him retract this argument, as signifing any thing
against us, Since the retortion thereof is so manifest; and therefore nothing
he has said will impeach Calvine and Beza's impugning of Episcopacy, whose
impugnations of it will stand to all generations.

Moreover in this citation of that epist. to Bishop Grindal, the Informer has
sued off the half of the sentence viz, quod tu igitur coram istam quorundam
(...) tamdiu pertulisti reverende vir, ineo sane insigne patientiae ac
lenitatis Christianae specimen dedisti, quo majori etc. -- and near the close
of the same letter Beza faithfully advises, as the fittest remedy for removing
offenses, ut in legitimo -- caetu, ex uno Dei verbo, abolitis semel papisticae
tyrannidis vestigiis, ea constituatur administrandae Ecclesiae ratio, non quae
huic vel illi adlubescat, non quae veteri aut recenti consuetudine ( --) sed
quae -- firmo verbi Dei fundamento superstructae piorum Conscientiis
fatisfaciat, and in eternum perseveret; that is, that in a lawful A ssembly
from the Word of God only, all the footsteps of popish Tyranny being once
abolished, that Method of Church Government be established, not which shall
please this or that person, not which is founded upon new or old Custom or the
wisdom of the flesh, but which being built upon the sure foundation of the word
of God, may satisfy the consciences of the godly, and endure for ever. Which
rule and mould of Bishops would no doubt cashier and raze to the foundation the
diocesian Erastian prelate whom he pleades for, yea all the Prelates in
Britain.

For what he adds (p. 87.) It may be easily, and without prejudice to our cause
granted, that God by his providence had made him a Judge. The Informer will not
own such ane Atheistical principle, as to deny that the Bishops civil
government in England, or pretended Ecclesiastic, is not the object of divine
providence, or be so brutish as to conclude Gods approbation of usurping
Tyrannes, from his permissive providence in reference to their tyranny or
usurpation, else he will for ever destroy his loyalty and fealty, either to the
King or his Lordbishop.

That passage of Calvin's letter to Cardinal Sadolet, after citedby him (p. 88.)
though admitted, is a poor proof that he held Church Government to be
alterable. Certainly Calvin held the scripture - parity to be the most ancient
Government Vetustissimae Ecclesiae, or of the most ancient Church, for such no
doubt he held the Apostolic Church to be.

Beside, we must tell him that this passage upon search is not found, and as
it is here expressed is very insignificant; since by Vetus Ecclesia, he may
understand the Church after the Apostles time, which early began to Corrupt the
Government.

As for Salmasius his retracting his opinion as to Church Government, it will
no more Impeach the truth it self which he asserts, then any other man's
defection will weaken the sound Doctrine which he once held. Would the Informer
take this argument from the Papists if they should plead from the retractiones
of protestants, and from their writing for popery, that the protestant Doctrine
were not sound? would he not say that their first practice, or writings for
truth, will stand good and witness against them in their defection? Though it
may be a question whither that retraction be real or not which Durel mentions,
and the Informer out of him. (p. 89.) Especially this being another of our
Informers mute citations which he keeps (as he does the state of the questions
in these Dialogues) under the Clouds, pointing us to no page in that Answer of
Salmasius to Milton. We will not here stand to show how that Salmasius eyes
were blinded with Court-gifts and pensions, having received no small sum from
King Charles the second for his encouragement to that work, and several
learned divines who best knew him, think his literature more Considerable then
his divinity was solid.

As for that place of Salmasius in his Walo. Mess. (c. 4. p. 253.) cited page
90. the Entire sentence is Epistolae illae viz; (quae Ignatii dicuntur) natae
and suppositae videntur circa initium aut* medium secundi saeculi, quo tempore
primus singularis Episcopatus supra Presbyteratum Introductus fuit. Whatever
time this was, it appears by what follows that place in Salmasius, that about
this time Church power began exceedingly to be Corrupted, and Bishops exalted
almost to ane equality with Christ; and men began to plead a jus divinum for
them; for Ignatius, (In Epistola ad Trallenses) asserts, Episcopum venerandum
esse sicut Christum quemadmodum Apostoli praeceperunt, that the Bishops must be
had in veneration as Christ, as the Apostles have commanded, and he cites the
Apostles words, but such as do no where occurr in our Bibles.

And certanly if there be no more truth in that relation anent his retraction,
mentioned by that author, then their is soliditie in that ground of it which he
alleges, it is not worth the noticing. For the confusions in England cannot
with any show of Reason be charged upon Presbyteriall Government, which was
never yet settled there. And this Informer dare not deny the blessed effects of
truth and unity and godliness, which it has had in this land, as is
acknowledged by Churches abroad, and particularly in that passage of the
Syntagma confessionum which he cites in the last dialogue, If Blondel in callng
Episcopacy most ancient, does except the more ancient Apostolic times, which
he pleads as exemplifying Presbyterian parity, he gives it but the spurious
afterbirth of humane antiquity. The same we say as to his passage cited out of
Moulin (p. 90.) and if something of the [humane proestos] were granted to have
creeped in ere John went often the stage, will that commend it any more then that
mystery of Iniquity, and love of preeminence which the Scripture assures us was
in Paul's time and his? Surely by no means.

Besides, we must here again tell our Informer that this Citation out of Moulen
is among the rest of his Mutes, since he has neither noted book nor page.

But now from our opinion of the unalterablenes of Presbyterian government, and
our acknowledgment of the bringing in of a Proestos so early, the Informer will
involve us (he says) in one of Two great absurdities. Parturiunt montes! What
are these? the 1. is [That that generation who lived shortly after John, was
altogether ignorant of Christ and his Apostles mind anent Presbyterian parity,
else they would not have adventured to change the government] But this
absurdity is easily discussed, for it lights equally upon the Instance already
given of Israells defection in worshipping the golden Calf forty days
(sooner then 40. years or more) after the holy pattern of doctrine showed them
upon the mount. How often do we find suddener changes in scripture of the
divine Institutions? How quickly after Joshua and the elders did all Israel
depart from Gods way and ordinances? How quickly did they relapse after
deliverances, both in the times of the Kings and of the judges, yea and after
solemn vows of Reformation? How quickly after Hezekias death did they turn
aside? How quickly after Josiahs death? How quickly after Solomon's death did
Rehoboam forsake the law of God and all Israel with him? I think these
scripture instances of as universal, and far greater defections then this was
anent the proestos, might have made this man ashamed to bring this as ane
absurdity. Now what will he say to his own Question here? I* it possible, is
it probable that Gods Israel could be ignorant of his mind, and adventure so
quickly to change his ordinances? Heard not all the Church of Israel Gods
voice from mount Sinai? Had not these departers afterward known or seen his
eminent seers, heard his word and seen his works? Could they be altogether
ignorant of his mind who thus suddenly departed from him? How could they then
adventure to make such a change? Alace! What a poor querist is this? I think
indeed He and his party have given the Instance in our generation, that such a
sudden defectione is both possible and probable. Was ever a nation more
solemnlie and universallie engaged unto God, and had seen more of his greatness,
power, and glory, then we did in the late work of reformation? How long is
it since Scotland not only knew and embraced Presbyterian Government; but also
solemnlie vowed to mantaine it? But he knows how universally this work and
cause of God is now rejected, his Covenant abjured and disowned. And the
Informer himself (who for what I know, might have seen our first beautiful
house) is pleading for this perjurius change of Gods ordinances and laws, and
breaking his everlasting Covenant. Read he never the 106. Psalm. 7. verse. They
provoked him at the sea even the red sea, and verse 11. The waters covered
their enemies and there was not one of them left -- Then believed they his
words, they sang his praise, they soon frogat his works, they waited not fr his
counsel. The Informer bluntly supposes ane impossibility of a peoples crossing
light in apostazing changes, and that all that generation most needs give a
formal consent to this change of government in order to its introduction; both
which are groundless suppositions, and they render this horn of his Dilemma
very pointlesse. Besides, this change (as we said before) was but small at the
first, only a fixed Moderator, and far from his Prelacy, which even in Ieroms
time was but come the length of taking from Presbyters ordination, or rather
the rituall part of it. And the change had plausible pretexts of order, and
union, as every innovation has its own pretenses, besides that this change was
not all at once but by degrees. We must also here tell him, that the same very
suggestion is his 3d. Reason to prove Ieroms bringing in Bishops in the
Apostles time, and so a nauseating repitition.

But if we decline this absurdity, the next he thinks is worse viz, That that
generation went over the belly of light in changing the Government, and
conspired against Christ and his Apostles Government, and none are found
testifying against it. Answer 1. This absurdity does like ways fall upon the
former Scripture instances of greater, and more sudden, and as universal
defections of the Church of Israel. What will he say to these questions in
relation thereunto? Were all ignorant? Did all sin against light, and adventure
presumptuously to change the divine ordinances? And as for a Testimony against
these evils, the Informer himself and his party (for all their clamoures
against us) falls under ane obligation to answer this, in relation to many
corruptions and erroures, which as early creept into the Church as Prelacy;
Whereof we gave Instances already, and no Testimonies are recorded against them.
He seems to have forgot, or to be ignorant of our divines answer to this
argument of Papists, calling for our producing of Testimonies against such and
such evils, or dating their first rise, viz. That there might be, tho we have
not known them, and that it is bad arguing from the defect of the History, or
the darkness of the first original of such a corruption, to deny the plain
matter of fact, and the corruption itself to be such. How many Thousand eminent
persons and acts of these times (which we told him, the learned do
acknowledge, to be very dark as to matter of fact) have never come to our
knowledge? And since we have often told him from Ierom that this change was
lent, and by considerable degrees, and intervalles of time, and Method of its
procedor, some might be overtaken with weakness, others puffed up with ambition,
and upon this ground the one might endeavor, and the other give way to this
change, especially its first degrees being small in respect of what followed.
Knows not this man, that the evil one sowes his tares while men sleep? And
this hierarchy being as in its nature, so in its rise, a Mystery; Mystery of
Iniquity! Mystery Babylon! Yea and a Mystery which was working long before this
change, even in Paul's time; upon all these grounds his absurdity evanishes, and
reflects a greater absurdity upon himself, who would have us shut our eyes
against Scripture light upon such pretenses as these, and rather embrace 2
corruption contrary unto it, then acknowledge that the Church did err. We know
very well what a wicket this notion has opened for obtruding and retaining
popish innovations, and these men are fast warping in to that Method. As for
that which he adds of Blondel (p. 94) who asserts that the Presbyters made him
proestos, or fixed Moderator, who was first ordained. We told him already that
this fixed president, tho a deviation from the Scripture rule, yet is far
from the diocesian Prelates sole power in ordination and Jurisdiction, So that
his confidence (some will be apt to say impudence) is strange in calling this a
power episcopal now existent, since notwithstanding all its after growth, it
was not in Ieromes time come the length of our present Hierachical power of
Prelates, by many days journey. Neither is it probable that Blondel could
suppose this to be allowed of John, which he holds to be cross to the divine
pattern.

As for Blond (Apol: page: 25.) the Informer has been mistaken in this
citation, no such words being found in that place. But in page 52. after that
he has abundantly proven this (thesis) initio Presbyter and Episcopus synonyma
fuerunt, [that in the beginning Bishop and Presbyter were one and the same.] he
begins the next sect. thus. Ubicumque Primum nascente Chistianismo
Presbyterorum aggregari Collegium caepit, Antiquissimum (rectius Antiquissimo)
inter Collegas Primatus Contigit ut concessus totius Caput, fratrumque tandem
(...) jure quodam (...) fieret. Which only a mounts to thus much, that first a
moderator, among ministers being established, grew by peecmeal to a fixed
prostasie and after he has Confirmed this, he adds in the next sect: Cum
itaque Collegium id est ordinatus ratione utentium caetus fine ordine nec
institui, nec Conservari, nec agere, nec agi, (amplius dicam) nec cogitari
potest; aequabilis inter ejusdem muneris Consortes, ac sese honor mutuo
praevenientes sanctos paritas, divina propemodum (...) and commune Consilium,
in (...) aut (...) nequaquam degenerabant: stabant enim aequo (in eodem gradu
and ordine) jure omnes sed suo quisque loco; erantque in familia quaque
Ecclesiastica, post primo genitum secundo, tertio etc. Geniti, qui majorem
natufratrem (secundum Patrem caelestem) colebant, eique nec ambienti nec
poscenti (invidioso nunc) (...). In singulis communis regiminis actibus jure
volentes cedebant, acprimas ubique parts deferebant; ut si quando novus
Cooptandus esset Collega, Cleri totius jam consistentis plebisque
Consentientibus suffragiis and judicio Comprobatis, (N. B.) totius Presbyterii
(...) (praeunte tamen ac reliquorum nomine solemnia benedictionum verba
pronunciante promotione antiquissimo) in possessionem muneris mitteretur,
priorum per Consecrationem quoddamodo filius factus, qui (...) ratione aequo
cum aliis omnibus jure (licet (...)) frater erat, ubi vero quaestionis in
Ecclesiae regimine quicquam emergeret, consultantium in commune fratrum
disceptationibus (quasi naturae jure favore omnium firmato,) praeesset Senior;
non gradu alio major (N. B.) non nativa gradus communis potestate potior, sed
adventitia ob aetatis meritum delegata, superior.

Which is this in sum [that though the college of the ordained were all alike
as to their official power, yet least their joint council should fall under
anarchical confusion, the first ordained minister (although of the same degree
and juridical power with his colleagues) had a sort of veneration and
precendency as to some acts, but stille in their name, and by their consent who
were his brethren. Which will reach a patrociny to the diocesian Erastian
Prelat, with his sole power of ordination and jurisdiction, his negative voice
in Church judicatories, and his delegation of Ecclesiastic power to the whole
synod, his civil state office etc. When east and west shall meet together. Then
he adds.

Hanc originalem Ecclesiasticae politiae formam sub Apostolorum oculis natam,
non immerito putavit Hilarious, quid enim pietati, naturae rationibusque
dictamini consonum magis, quam ut priorum canitiem reverenter habeant aetate
posteriores? fac tamen Apostolis non modo nonimprobantibus, sed palam
laudantibus ortam; ego sane libere ab initio observatam Christianisque sive ab
Apostolis sive ab eorum discipulis traditam, sed ut mutabilem and pro usu and
arbitrio Ecclesiae mutandam (prout in causa consimili piae memoriae
Crakanthorpus sensit) crediderim. In which passage he pleades only for this
fixed moderatour, and does not positivly assert the Apostolik institution for
it, but comes near Bezaes expressiones in reference to the [Episcopus humanus.]

As for Blondels confessing this primus Presbyter to have had authority with
his precedence, as the Informer is bold to assert, he had done well to point us
to the place where these words are found [quis enim praesidentiamsine
authoritate somniet?] for upon search they are not found; but it seems the
Informer puts this sense upon his words which follow these cited above ac forte
consistorialium omnium qui Pastorum Ecclesias quasque in commune regentium
(...) urgent, calculos evertit, quod ab ipsa Apostolorum aetate collegii
cujusque Presbyterialis singular quoddam caput fuit. Qui vero? an nostrum
ullus synedrium sibi (N. B.) vel (...) vel (...) hactenus somniavit? an non
eodem inter nos jure modoque, vel per vices, pares inter compares, vel delegata
a paribus ad tempus potestate praesunt, quo inter christianismi primordia ae^o
honoris inter conseniores primas fuit? Where he denies that this singular head
of the consistory, or moderator his power did justle with, or evert the common
votes or Episcopacy of the Pastoures, and consequently their joint Presbyterial
government, because the consistory or meeting could neither be without a head,
(or mouth) nor have many heads, which he assimilates to the then power of their
moderators, chosen from among his equals and co-presbyters, either by turns, or
a delegated power of presidency for some time.

The Informers citation of Chamier (p. 35.) [acknowledging from the beginning a
[primus Presbyter] with a [nova potestas and jurisdictio] ne esset Episcopatus
mere titulus: Or a first Presbyter, with a new power and jurisdiction etc.]
Burns his fingers, and rebounds a deadly blow upon himself; for in calling this
jurisdiction and power, Nova or new, he makes it later then the first scripture
patent anent that Presbyters Authority, which was the same with that of his
Brethren before this humane supperadded power. And consequently he must look
upon him only as Beza's humane Bishop, supposing ane anterior divine Bishop
which is the Pastor or Minister.

And here again the Informer puts us to tell him that this his citation of
Chamier attributinge a new jurisdiction from the beginning to the primus
Presbyter, or first Minister, is so general, without pointing at either book or
page, that it seems he resolved that in this (as in other passages) none
should trace him, to know whither he cited true or false. However the place he
means is, lib. 10. de oecum. pont. c. 5. Where Chamier grants primum
Presbyterum accepisse novam potestatem, that the first Presbyter received a new
power. But that it was so from the beginning, is our Informers incrusted
eekement, which (as in another passage of Blondell) we must suppose his lyncian
eyes discovered in some written copy of Chamier, which the printer was so
uncivil as not to put in, because this our great doubtresolver was not overseer
at the press. Any who looks upon that chapter may discover that Chamiers
scope is to prove that ab initio regimen Ecclesiae fuit Aristocraticum, that
from the beginning the Church government was Aristocracy, and that the
disparity which after came in use, was ane innovation.

As for what he adds of Moulin, (page 76.) If he hold [The Episcopal power in
ordination to be among these things, which, though in the Apostles time, yet
were alterable] He may be probably supposed to include it among the Apostles
extraordinary expired prerogatives, which this man must acknowledge will lay no
foundation for prelacy. As for Stillingfleet, we are not concerned in his
principles, or any debat betuixt him and them. For that which he calls ane
evasion [Anent the alteration of some things in the Apostolic Church] As we
disowne Stillingfleet, in making the frame of government which the Apostles
established in the Church, versatile, various or alterable. So we disowne this
Informer in resolving it solely upon the Churches decision, [what Apostolic
practices are imitable or moral, and what not.] A dangerous popish principle,
and wherein he will be found inconsistent with himself. But for the apostolic
government by the Common Concell of Presbyters, we hold it moral and
perpetual, upon the same grounds of the Churches union and edification which
himself does plead. As for the shifts and bad issues which he alleadges
Presbyterian writters are driven unto, Neither he nor any of his party can make
it appear, but his own pitiful shifts, and of others of his way, in pleading
for this Hierarchy, we hope by this time are sufficiently apparent. As for
Durells offer [To get Episcopacy ane approbation from all foreign divines] we
let it pass as a piece of prelatick pageantry fit to fill pamphlets. Ad
pompam non ad pugnam -- quid tanto tulit hic promissor hiatu. Durel and the
Informer cannot stand before their evidences, who have made the Contrary appear.
For what he adds anent our Superintendents, as having upon the matter ane
Episcopal power, I referr him to the defense of the Epistle of Philadelphus
against Spotswoods Calumnies, printed at the end of Didoclavius page. 30, 31.
Where he will find the difference betuixt them and Prelates cleared and stated
in 12. Particulars to his Conviction, unless he has resolved -- Ne si
persuaseris, persuaderis. So that worthy Mr. Knox gave no patrocinie to prelacy
in Countenancing the admission of Superintendents. How he has deryved his
Prelacie from Scripture, and through antiquity to reformed times, and
Churches, in their confessions, Let the impartial judge by what I have answered
from the beginning. As for the Authors of jus divinum Minist: Anglic: [Their
proof of the identitie of Bishop and Presbyter, at length cleared from Fathers,
Schoolmen, and reformed divines, even from Episcopal divines in England] the
Informer had done better not to mention that piece, then to have made such a
simple and insipid return, [Anent the Scoolmens notione, whither Episcopacy be
a different order from Presbytery, or a different degree of the same order] for
though this were granted that the scoole-men tossed such a question, dare he say
that the Ancient Fathers both greek and latin, and late reformed divines cited
in that learned piece, in their clear and positive assertions of the parity of
Bishop and Presbyter jure divino, entertained any such notion as this? Again,
had he been so ingenuus and true to the learned authors of that piece, and
unto himself, ^s he ought to have been, he might have found cited therein a
passage of Cassander in his book of Consul^. (Artic. 14) Which breaks this his
answer all in pieces, and because his squeemish eyes looked asquint upon it, I
shall here set it down, that it may appear what a great charge this is which
he brings against these divines. An Episcopa^us inter ordines ecclesiasticos
ponendus sit, inter theologos and canoni^as non convenit; convenit autem inter
ownes in Apostolorum aetate inter episcopos and presbyteros nullum discrimen
fuisse, sed post modum schismatis evitandi causa episcopum Presbyteris fuisse
praepositum etc: That is, Whither Episcopacy is to be placed among the
Ecclesiastic orders, It is not agreed between the Theologues and Canonists,
but it is agreed among all, that in the Apostles age there was no difference
between Bishops and Presbyters, but afterward upon the ground of eviting
Schism, the Bishop was set ever Presbyters, etc. Now whither these disputants
did agree That always from the Apostles time, there were Bishops distinct from
Presbyters, as this Informer is not ashamed to affirm. Let the greatest
adversary judge by this account of such ane impartial witness. How could he
say, that these Fathers might be of this mind, and likwayes these later
divines, that always from the Apostles there were Bishops set over Presbyters.
What a selfcontradicting tenet is this for any rational man to intertaine?
viz, Bishops and Presbyters, re and nomine, in name and thing, the same in the
Apostles times, and in their doctrine: and yet [that Bishops were set over
Presbyters by the Apostles, and distinct from them in their times.] What will
he make of all Jerome Scripture proofs through the Apostles times, and
writings, anent this complete parity of Bishops and Presbyters? of the saying
of Ambrose [That, Non per omnia convenient seripta Apostolorum ordinationi quae
nun^ est in Ecclesia. The writtings of the Apostles agree^ not in every thing
with the ordinance or appointment (he means of government) which is now in the
Church.] What will he make of Bishop Jewel telling Harding, in his defense
against him? [That in calling it a haerefie to affirm Bishops and Presbyters
to be one, He reflects upon Jerome and other Fathers whom he cites against him,
yea upon the Apostle Paul, and makes him also a Haeretick] What will he make of
that assertion of Beza, Episcopus papam peperit. The Bishop brought forth the
Pope. Of Whittaker [That the setting up the Prelat, yea the first proestos or
president to prevent Schism, was a remedy worse then the disease.] Now if he
will reconcile these sayings and assertions with their holding Bishops distinct
from Presbyters, to have been in, and from the times of the Apostles, he will
prove a wonderful Oedipus.

But our Informer has not yet done with these Authors, and has another
reflection upon them anent what they say page 64. [That Eusebius and Iraeneus
were deceaved themselves, and deceaved others] he tells us 1. [They are hard
put to it when seeking to relieve themselves by discrediting these authores]
But this man is hard put to it, if he deny that which is so Noto^ly true, and
made good by so many of the learned. Were Iunius and Scalliger (who are
approved herein by Dr Reynolds) hard put to it, who demonstrats Eusebius gross
errors and mistakes. 2. He says Though in some things Eusebius was mistaken,
most he be so in every point wherein he maks Bishops superior to Presbyters, and
draws their succession from the Apostles. Ans. For the Catalogues of Bishops
from the Apostles, we spoke to it already, and for Eusebius speaking always in
that strain, the reverend authors of that piece, (with others) do tell the
Informer that all that Eusebius says, is that it is reported -- that his
learned censurer Scalliger, maks it appear that he read ancient histories parum
attente, (not attentivly,) and that he takes his measures in this point, and
his relations upon trust, from Clemens fabulus, and Hegesippus not extant.

3. The Informer thinks it strange [that they can suppose Irenaeus (John's
contemporarie and disciple) to be deceaved as to Church government.] Answer.
Had he but looked upon the 4. proposition of their appendix, he might have seen
this objection fully removed. For therein they make good from many places of
Irenaeus (which were tedious here to transcribe) that by Bishops he understood
mere Presbyters, and not Bishops distinct from Presbyters. From which places of
Irenaeus they collect. 1. That he calls Presbyters Successors of the Apostles.
2. That he calls them Bishops. 3. That he holds the Apostolic doctrine to be
derived by their succession. 4. That what in one place he says of Bishops, the
same he says elsewhere of Presbyters; which sense and account of him they back
with pregnant Testimonies of Dr. Reynolds, and Whittaker, and other learned
protestant divines, and lights in that Church. And in proposition 7. anent the
pretended Succession of Prelates from the Apostolic times, they clear it that
these Successions are drawn from mere Presbyters, viz, the (...) or the
Minister first ordained, as among the Athenians their were 9. Archontes or
Chief Rulers, equal in Authority: yet the Succession of Governors in Athens,
was derived from one of them who was the first Archo^, ut compendiosior ac
minus impedita esset temporum enumeratio, that the Calculation of times might
not be hindered, but be the more compendious.

4. He says it is more likly that Ierom was deceaved, If we understand him to
speak of Bishops who were introduced after the Apostles times, then Eusebius or
Irenaeus who lived before] Ans. That Eusebius was deceaved, is not only
alleged, but proven by the learned, and Ierom proving so clearlie from
Scripture the identity of Bishop and Presbyter both in name and thing, does
convincing lie infer that the Bishops set over Presbyters, are discrepant from
the scripture pattern. That Irenaeus by Bishops understood these first
Moderators, is made good from his writings.

Next, whereas these reverend authors (page 114, 115.) say that Irenaeus by
Bishops meaned [Presbyters,] and (page. 65.) That the Fathers spoke of Church
officers of former times after the style of their own, and that the Bishops in
the Catalogues are only the first ordained Presbyters, for the more expedit
reckoning] this man thinks these Answers inconsistent; Because 1. they say that
Eusebius and Irenaeus were deceaved when they spoke of Bishops, And Next that
by Bishops, Irenaeus meaned only Presbyters. Ans. Had the Informer attended
better the places he points at, he would have keepd off this fantastic
reflection. For they show that these first Proestotes or Moderators, who were
in themselves, and upon the Matter, mere Presbyters, were by former times and
writers presented under ane Episcopal notion, and the power of Bishops then
prevalent, unto Eusebius and Irenaeus; whom Eusebius especially, too
credulously following in his Character and accounts of them, occasioned the
deceaving of others, and that he and Irenaeus speaking of them in that manner
and style in the Catalogues, might deceave others, by naming them so, who were
upon the matter mere Presbyters; whom the succeeding writers following (as they
show out of Iunius. Contr. 2. Ch: 5. not: 18.) and fancying to themselves such
Bishops as then had obtained, fell into these snares of tradition, because they
supposed that according to the Custom of their times, there could be but one
Bishop in a Church at the same time. And to clear it, that the persons whom
Irenaeus speaks of, were upon the matter, Presbyters, in answer to that
objection from Irenaeus (lib: 3. Cap: 3.) where Bishops are named as set up by
the Apostles, They answer that the word Bishop has a various acceptance: and
that Irenaeus names Anicetus, Higinus, Pius, Presbyters of the Church of Rome,
the words being then promiscuouslie used. So that whatever impression Irenaeus
might have of them according to the language and Custom of the time, yet upon
the matter they were Presbyters only: and therefore they put the Episcopal
party to prove that those whom they named Bishops, were very nominis Episcopi,
or Hierarchicall Bishops. They do not speak so much of the Impression which
Irenaeus or Eusebius had of them, as of the true nature and State of these
Church Officers, whom according to the Custom of their times they call
Bishops. By Irenaeus his calling them sometimes Presbyters, according to the
promiscuous use of the names, even handed down to him, they prove that his
expressing them under ane Episcopal notion then received, or any such
impression of them which he might entertain, was wrong: since according to the
scripture language the Bishop and Presbyter imports no other office then a
Pastor. What inconsistency will our Informer show in this, that Irenaeus and
others were deceaved in representing the first Proestotes under ane Episcopal
notion, upon a Credulous report from their forefathers: and yet that the
persons whom they thus represented were upon the matter Presbyters.

As for what he adds (p. 102,) [from Bucer (de animarum cura) anent a Proestos,
or the Election and ordination of one who went before the rest, and had the
Episcopal Ministry in the Chief degree, even in the times of the Apostles, by
the Testimony of Tertullian, Cyprian, Irenaeus, Eusebius, ancienter then
Ierom.] We say that any who knows Bucers judgment in Church government, and
are acquaint with his writings theranent, will acknowledge that the Proestos is
the utmost length he goes as to Episcopacy; and a Proestos during life, has no
doubt something of ane Episcopal Ministry, and is above his Brethren: and we
are to expone his summus gradus, or Chief degree, by the word praecipue or
Chiefly, that goes before. Who will doubt but the constant fixed Proestos is in
so far set over the rest? But here we must mind the Informer of Two things.
1. That this Proestos chosen by the Presbytery, is (as we said) far short of
the Diocesian Prelat who owns no Presbyters in his election, and has ane
arbitrary power over them. 2. That it being thus defacto, is far from
amounting to a proof of the jus, and who will say that Bucer could take the
Apostle James to be formalie Bishop of Jerusalem, or chosen to be a fixed
Moderator by Presbyters, whose Apostolic office both Bucer and the Informer
will acknowledge to have reached the whole world, in relation to the watering
and planting of Churches. Next, if these words will plead for a Hierarchy,
even in the Apostles times, and that Bucer took upon the Testimony of
Tertullian, Irenaeus etc, the Apostle James and others for Hierarchicall
Bishops, surely he was oblidged to have taken notice of Ieroms proofs for the
parity of Bishops and Presbyters in the Apostles times; which since he does
not, its most probable that he means to assert the factum only, of exalting
Presbyters to such a degree at that time, but not the jus as is said: else I
see no consistencie in the words if he reckon the Apostle James in this
account. For he says Apostolorum temporibus unus ex Presbyteris electus. That
in the Apostles times one was chosen from among the Presbyters. Now surely the
Apostle James was not of the Presbyters merely, or chosen from among them; But
to undeceave our Informer as to Bucers judgment in this point, and to fortify
the answer adduced, I shall present unto him that which Bucer asserts (De Gub:
Eccles: p: 432.) viz, That the Fathers call these first Proestotes or
Moderators, yea even the Apostles themselves, Bishops (N. B.) [in a large and
general appellation] Because they first preached the gospel to those Churches,
and that to prove a succession of the true doctrine, they named the most
eminent Ministers the Bishops, to show that there was in these Churches a
Constant tract from the Apostles both of sound doctrine, and faithful teachers
thereof; Eminent, I say, for gifts, and zeal, or suffering for the gospel (N.
B.) not in any Episcopal authority except what was in that prostasie often
mentioned. Now whither Bucer was for ane Episcopacy in the highest degree even
in the Apostles time, and the Episcopacy of James, Let any judge. And whither
or not this Informer has acquitt prelacie of being both a groundless, and
godless usurpation in Gods Church (as his now prosyleted Doubter says he was
taught to call it) the appeal is likwayes made to the judicious and impartial,
to judge from what is offered from the beginning hereanent.

CHAP. XV.
Mr Durhams citations of the Fathers for evincing the identity of Angel,
Bishop, and Presbyter, vindicat from the exceptions of this Informer.

Mr Durhame in his excellent commentary upon the revelation (page 223.) having
gone throw the Epistles, and embraced the sylleptick sense and acceptance of
the word, Angel, presents in a digression several weighty and unanswerable
arguments, both from these Epistles, and parallel texts, to prove the identity
of angel, Bishop, and Presbyter. Which this Informer passes over sicco pede,
finding them no doubt pills of too hard a digestion for his stomach. But Mr.
Durham adding to his scriptureproofes of this important truth, Several clear
testimonys of most eminent Ancient fathers, asserting the very same thing, then
Seria res agitur with our Informer, and he bestirrs himself amain to take these
weapons out of Mr Durhams hand, offering several exceptions against his
testimonys, which (in vindication of the memory of so great a Seer from this
pampleters imputations, and for the more full confirmation of this truth) we
shall now examine and repel.

Mr Durhame says That not only Jerome, but likewise others of the Ancients,
such as Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostom, were of Aerius mind hereanent. To this
he answers [That Mr Durhame brings this as Medina's assertion, as he is cited
by Bellarmin. But knows he not that Medina is cited for this by many others,
as Dr Reynolds particularly. And likewise why would he not examine these
Ancients cited by Medina, and examine what truth is in his citations, if he
intended to repel this Testimony. Well, but what says our Informer to these
Testimonies offered by Mr Durhame. He answers.

1. That though these fathers be of Ieroms mind, i^is n^ great prejudice that
will hence ensue to Bishops, as he hat^ already cleared. Ans. We have made it
appear tha^ Jerome makes the first Bishops, mere fixed Moderators, and
likewise ane humane invention or custom, discrepant from ihe first divine
Bishops, who are proved by him to be in Scripture the same with Presbyters. And
i^ this be no prejudice to his Diocesian Prelat with sole power of ordination
and Jurisdiction, let any judge.

2. The Informer wonders how Mr Durhame could cite Augusti^ as of Aerius mind,
since Augustine hold him to be erroneous upon this ground. (Haeres. 53. A^s.
Why does he not answer to that passage of Augusti^ cited by Mr. Durhame, as he
pretends to answer to some of the rest of these fathers. What says he to
Augustin^ words? are they not his? Or do they not clearly assert the identity
of Bishop and Presbyter? To say that Augustine accounted Aerius a heretic for
this, while he offers not to remove Augustins clear assertion of the same
thing, is but to set him by the ears with himself, not to answer his
Testimony. Next, as for Augustin's accounting Aerius a heretic for this, he
should know that the learned do Consent that Augustine in this follows
Epiphanius, who first imputed heresy to Aerius, and made but very
simple-insipid answers to Aerius arguments for his opinion. And moreover that
Augustine relates his opinion anent the parity of Bishop and Presbyter, or
rather his denying that their ought to be ane Ecclesiastic constitution anent
their difference, as that which Epiphanius put among the roll of heresies,
himself not positively determining, that this was a heresy. For (as is
consented unto by the learned, and particularly by Dr. Reinolds in his letter
to Sir Francis Knolls, touching Dr. Bancrofts Sermon about the difference
betwixt Bishop and Presbyter) Augustine aknowledges himself ignorant how far
the definition of heresy does extend. He enumerats the heresies which he found
noted by other writers, but applies not the definition of heresy to every one
of them. Far less could he do so in this point, which was his own judgment,
as the passage cited by Mr. Durham does evince. That Ierom and Augustine were of
Aerius mind as to Bishops, is the judgment of very many: sane cum Aerio sensit
Hieronimus (says Whittak. Contr. 4. Q. 1. Cap. 3. Sect. 30.) Ierom truly was
of Aerius mind, on which ground we need care the less that Aerius is so often
objected to us by blockish men. See how rude Whittaker is again to our
Informer. Saravia himself (de Grad. cap. 23.) acknowledges that Ierom dissented
from Epiphanius in this. Dr. Reynolds in that Epistle to Knolls about Bancrofts
Sermon, asserting with the Informer [That Aerius was for his opinion condemned
of heresy by the whole Church] proves from Ierom and other writters who were
contemporarie with Epiphanius or flourished after him. That Augustine Presents
that assertion anent the identite of Bishop and Presbyter, a^ heretical, only
as he found it related by Epiphanius, whereas himself knew not how far the name
of heresy was to be extended, as he testefys in his preface concerning
heresies. But that Augustine himself was of the judgment that by divine right,
there is no difference betwixt Bishop and Presbyter, he proves from his words
Epist. 19. he cites also -- Jewel against Harding the jesuit (asserting
likewise with the Informer that Aerius was condemned for his opinion as a
heretic) who proves that Jerome, Augustine, Ambrose, were of the same mind.
Thus we see Augustine made in this point consistent with Jerome, and also with
himself, whom this man makes to speak contradictions, so as he may come fair
off.

3. He answers That Ambrose and Chrysostoms Testimony will not come Mr. Durhams
length, Because, Though Ambrose [or one Hilary] says that Episcopi and
Presbyteri una est ordinatio, that they are both priests, yet the Bishop is the
first, So that every Priest is not a Bishop, for the Bishop is the first
priest. Ans. The Informer has left out wittily (whither honestly or not, let
others judge) in his translation of this sentence, the inference which Ambrose
Draws from this identity of the office, viz, that they have both one
ordination. He maks the office one, and the ordination one consequently, and
gives this reason why they have one ordination, viz, because, every one of them
is a priest or Minister, uterque enim Sacerdos, sath he: Their ordination, is
terminat upon, and relative unto, one and the same office. Now what greater
length would he have Ambrose assertion come then this? That there is no
diff^rent ordination of the Bishop and Presbyter, and consequently no official
differences does he not plead for ane official specific difference? betwixt
Bishop and Presbyter? Makes he not the Bishops succeed the Apostles and
Evangelists in their official power, and the Presbyters to come after the
Seventy Disciples or mere ordinary Pastoures? Are their not many essential
differences, which this man's principles, and the present practice, fixes
betwixt the Bishop and Presbyter, whereof we have spoken above? How can Ambrose
then assert, that they have the same office and ordination? Where is the
Consecration? Where is the Bishops sole power in ordination and jurisdiction?
Where is his negative voice among the Presbyters, making them in all their
official power certain deputs under him, if their office be one, and their
ordination the same with his?

2. As for the difference here assigned, viz, That the Bishop is the first
priest, and that every Presbyter is not a Bishop in Ambrose sense, this will
nothing help our Informer; Because 1. This is fitly applicable to the Proestos
then in use, yea to the Moderator of a Synod, who (as such) has a sort of
Prostasie while the Synod sits, and every Minister is not Moderator, though the
Moderator be no more then a Minister in his official power; nay, this is
applicable to the least accidental difference Imaginable. Every man is not
white or black, yet every such is a man. Every Parliament man is not speaker,
though the speaker is a Parliament man only as to his authority. Blondel his
first ordained Minister, who, with him, is the first Bishop or Proestos, has
this properly applicable unto him. 2. He must be minded, that Ambrose says,
when speaking of the Scriptur - parity of Bishops and Presbyters, non per omnia
convenient scripta Apostolorum ordinationi quae nunc est in Ecclesia. That the
writings of the Apostles did not in every point agree to the order which was
then in the Church. Now this preter - scripturall or new order of government,
what is it but that anent the primus or first among the Presbyters? so that
this very primus or prostasie (tho far from the present Hierarchy of our
Prelates as is said) yet comes after the scripture appointment -- with Ambrose,
and is unlike to that paritie betwixt Bishop and Presbyter, which is therein
held forth.

The Informer Next offers something in answer to Chrisostoms Testimony, who
asserts That almost there is no difference betwix a Bishop and Presbyter. And
his great Answer is That notwithstanding these Fathers acknowledge a
difference, and themselves were Bishops] Ans. If the difference betwixt Bishop
and Presbyter come to a ferme nihil, or almost none, Surely it decays and is
ready to vanish away. And what this difference is, and wherein placed, we have
already heard; and surely that prostasie in Chrysostoms time; behoved to be
very in considerable, since it came to make upno greater difference betwixt
Bishop and Presbyter then a ferme nihil, upon the borders of a non ens. As for
what he says of their being Bishops themselves. I answer, they are the more
impartial witnesses in this matter; They tell us often that Jerome was a
Presbyter, and therefore no friend to Bishops. Now here is a Testimony of
eminent Bishops for this very truth which Ierom asserts, and which this man
would make us believe, was condemned as a Heresy. And surely we are more
tender of their reputation, who interpret any Prostasie or Episcopacie which
they held, to be according to this their judgment anent Episcopacie, and
assert that what overplus of power they had or might possibly exercise, beyond
that of a Presbyter, was by them looked upon as founded on Ecclesiastic Custom
or Ecclesiae usus, As Augustine speaks, but not to flow from a divine right,
Then this Informer and his fellows, who make them maintain one thing and
practice another; yea and contradict themselves so grossly in maintaining as
high a jus divinum, as Apostolic doctrine, and practice, in relation to the
Hierarchicall Bishop, and yet assert a ferme nihil as to the difference betwixt
Bishop and Presbyter.

But the Informer adds, That they might think Bispop and Presbyter to differ
Gradu, not ordine, in degree not in order, which is still a debate in the
Schools. Ans. This assertion is so improbable, that he dare but lisp it out,
and faintly asserts it with a might be; But sure he must needs acknowledge this
distinction of the Schools to be much later then these Fathers, and any
graduall difference which they place betwixt Bishop and Presbyter, it is clear,
that they found it upon Ecclesiastic Custom, as we heard both Jerome,
Augustine and Ambrose assert.

But how long will this man involve himself in contradictions, and these
Fathers also? Told he us not (page 15.) That Augustine upon Psalm 45: 16.
affirms, That the Bishops are properly the Successors of the Apostles unto
their office. And says he not immediately thereafter, That Ambrose upon 1 Cor.
12: 28. affirms of the Apostles first named in that Class of Church officers,
that ipsi sunt Episcopi firmante illud Petro, episcopatum, ejus accipiat alter.
That the Apostles are the Bishops by Peter's assertion, let another take his
Bisheprick. Tells he us not likewise here that Augustine makes James the first
Bishop of Jerusalem, and Peter, the first Bishop of Rome? Tells he us not, that
they transmitted ane Episcopal power in that train of Successors, proved by
Catalogues of Bishops? Did we not hear him plead, that the seventy Disciples,
placed in ane inferior orb to the Twelve Apostles, are properly succceded by
Presbyters; that Matthias behoved to be ordained ane Apostle, tho one of the
Seventy disciples, is his great argument to prove this. Now I beseech him per
omnes musas, will he say that Apostles and Presbyters differ only ordine and
not gradu, in order, not in degree? or that these fathers do hold this
opinion? how come their successors then to coalesce into one, after such a
manner as to differ only in a ferme nihil, or almost nothing? Says not
Ambrose, Episcopi and Presbyteri una est ordinatio, the Bishop and Presbyter
have the same ordination. But the Informer will not adventure to say that the
Apostle and Presbyter have one ordination. For Matthias one of the Seventy must
be solemnlie by God ordained ane Apostle: And the Prelates must be solemnlie
consecrat by their fellows -- (...) to their new episcopal order. In a word,
we heard from Cassander, that the Canonists and Theologues who dispute this
Question, do both accord, that as to a jus divinum or divine right, there is
no difference betwixt Bishop and Presbyter either in order or degree. And so
though it were granted (which yet the Informer himself dare not positively
assert) that the Fathers tossed this question, it will nothing help him, nor
prejudge Mr Durhams quotation, which speaks of a jus divinum.

As for what he adds, That the Fathers cited by Medina might hold the same
notion, Let him hear how Bellarmin (no friend to Presbyterian Government)
represents his assertion (de Cler. Cap 15.) Michael Medina lib. 1. De sacrorum
hominum origin and eminentia (Cap. 5.) Affirmat sanctum Hieronimum idem omnino
cum Aerianis sensisse, neque solum Hieronimum in ea haeresi fuisse, sed etiam
Ambrosium, Sedulium, Primasium, Chrysostomum, Theodoretum, Oecumenium, and
Theophylactum, atque ita, inquit Medina, isti viri alioqui Sanctissimi, and
Sacrarum Scripturarum consultissimi, quorum tamen sententiam prius in Aerio,
deinde in Waldensibus, postremo in Joanne Wickleffo, damnavit ecclesia. That
is, Michael Medina in the first book concerning the original and eminency of
sacred men 5. Chap. Affirms that St Jerome was every way of the same judgment
with the Aerians, And that not only Jerome was in that Heresy. But also
Ambrose, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecomenius, and
Theophylact; And thus (says Medina) these men otherwise most godly, and most
expert in the holy Scrptures, whose judgment notwithstanding the Church
condemned, first in Aerius, Next in the Waldeneses, And lastly in John
Wickleff.] Let our Informer note here. 1. That it is beyond debate with
Bellarmin that with Medina at least, all these Fathers were Aerians. 2. That
his holy Catholic Church of Rome is the grand condemner of this Heresy. 3.
That this is one of the Heresies of the old Waldenses, these famous witnesses
against Antichrist: And of John Wickleff, and such like eminent reformers.
Afterward he adds [That in Jerome and these Greek Fathers, that opinion was of
old dissembled out of reverence to them, But contrarily in the Heretics
always condemned.] So we see the Presbyterian Principles, are with him, one of
the Heresies of Protestants. Peter Swav. (in the History of the Council of
Trent, page 664. edit. Francfort.) relates. [That when the Authority of Ierom
and Augustine was brought to prove episcopacie to be but ane Ecclesiastic
constitution, Michael Medina answered -- That it was no wonder that Jerome,
Augustine, and others of the Fathers, fell into that heresy, not having
thoroughly searched the matter, and that he maintained pro virili this to be
their opinion.

Finally, to make these Fathers one with themselves (whom this man enforces
in his next passages, cited page 71, 72. Anent the derivation of Episcopacie
from the Apostles and higher, to speak palpable contradictions) we must say,
with Whittaker, that they call the Apostles so, because they did that upon the
matter which Bishops then did. And because their power quadam similitudine, or
by a certain similitude or likeness (as Junius expresses it) was like to that
of these extraordinary Church officers, whom notwithstanding they could not
succeed in the same office, nor could these Fathers think so upon the grounds
formerly mentioned. Tilen. in his Specul. Antichr. ortum aperiens (Aphoris.
88.) Tells us that [episcopos and Presbyteros re and nomine eosdem fuisse, non
Hieronimus solum in 1. Tim. 3. Sed etiam scriptura perspicue docet Tit. 1. Act.
20. Phil. 1. Proinde humani instituti, sive positivi, ut vocant juris, est illa
sub diversis nominibus munerum distinctio. That Bishops and Presbyters were the
same in name and thing or office, Not only Jerome on 1. Tim. 3. But the
Scripture also does evidently teach, Tit. 1. Act. 20. Phil. 1. And therefore
that distinction of the offices under diverse names is of human institution, as
they call it, or of positive right] A fit looking-glass, this had no doubt
been to the same Tilen when he wrote, his paraenesis, and changed his note. And
likewise it is a fit looking glass for this Informer:

CHAP. XVI.
The harmonius consent of ancient Fathers, Modern divines, and confessions of
Reformed Churches for Presbyterian Government, in all its essential points of
difference from Prelacie, is exhibit.

IT is clear that Presbyterian Government (the pure, ancient, and genuine
Government of this Church) in every essential ingredient of it, as it stands
in opposition to prelacie, is approved by, such a consent of antiquity, and
modern divines, that it would take up almost as much room as this Informers
pamphlet, to reckon up their names. That we may present them in (...)
compendious view take it thus.

1. That jure divino, there is no difference betwixt a Bishop and Presbyter,
has a very large consent of antiquity collected by many of the learned, whose
testimonies we may see in Bishop Jewel against Hardin, edit: Ann. 1570. p. 243.
And Reynolds in the forementioned Epistle at large cited (Petries Hist. part.
3. p: 469, 470, 471.) Where there is exhibit a full consent both of the Greek,
and Latin Fathers, for this point of truth. The Doctor in his conference with
Heart, holds That the president chosen out at first to moderat, is be whom
afterward the Fathers called Bishop, and that the name Bishop common to all
Ministers, was by them thus appropriat to this president. Next for modern
writers, the same Dr Reynolds tells us in the formentioned Epistle, that those
who have labored about the reforming of the Church these 500 Years, have
taught that all Pastors be they entitled Bishops or Priests, have equal
authority and power by Gods word. Citing the Waldenses in Aen. Silv. hift. of
Bohem. Chap. 35. Pich. Hierarch. Ecclesiast. lib. 2. Cap: 10. Marsil. Patavin.
Defens. pacis part. 2. Cap. 15. Wickleff. in Thom. Waldens. Doct. Fill. Tom. 1.
lib: 2. Cap: 60. and Tom: 2. cap: 7. And his Scholars Husse and the Hussits,
Aeneas Silvius Loccit. Luther. Advers. falso: nomin: Scot: Epise. and adversus
Papat. Romans Calv. in Epist. ad Phil. Tit. 1. Erentius Apolog. Confess.
Wittenberg. -- Cap. 21: Bulinger. Decad. 5. Sermon: 3. Musculus Loc. Com: Tit: de
Ministerio Verbi. Then he adds Jewel, Pilkington, Dr. Humphrey in Campian. and
Duraeum Jesuit. Part. 2. Ra^: 3. Whittak. ad rations Campian. 6. and Confut
Durae. lik. 6. Mr Bradfoord, Lambert, Fox (Act. Mon.) Fulk. (Ansr. to the
Rhemeflits.) To these may be added Cartwright against the Rhemists. Bishop
Bilson himself against Seminartes lib. 1. p: 318. Bishop Morton in his
Catholic Apology Part. 1. Cap. 33. Erasmus upon 1 Timothy 4. To which add, that
in the O^cumenick Coun^les of Constance and Basile, it was concluded that
Presbyters should have decisive suffrage in Councils, as well as Bishops,
because that by the Law of God Bishops were not greater then they, and it is
expreslie given them. Act. 15. 23. To which we may add the Council.
Aquisgravense sub Ludovico Pio Imperatore. 1. Anno 816. Which approved it for
sound divinity out of Scripture, that Bishops and Presbyters are equal;
bringing the same texts that Aerius does. To these mentioned the learned
Reynolds does add, the common judgment of Reformed Churches, viz. Helvetia,
Savoy, France, Scotland, Germany, Hungary, Poland, the Low Countries, citing
the harmony of Confessions. Yea their own Church of England (Chap: II. of the
harmony.) Thereafter he learnedly refutes our Informer as to what he says
anent Ieroms (so often repeated) a Marco Evangelista -- showing both by the
decree of the 4t. Council of Carthage Cap: 3. Anent Presbyters interest in
ordination (which, says he, proves that the Bishops ordained not then alone in
all places, although Ierom says, quid facit excepta ordinatione etc:) and by
Ieroms proving Bishops and Presbyters to be all one in scripture, and even in
the right of ordination 1. Tim. 4. 14. That Ierom could not mean Bishops in
Alexandria to have had that Episcopal power since Mark, about which the
question is. Where also he vindicats Calvin (Jnstit: (...): 4. c: 4. Sect: 2.)
cited by Bancroft (as likwayes by our Dialogist here) as consenting to the
establishment of ane Episcopacie since Mark at Alexandria. He says [That
Calvin having showen that Ministers choose out one to preside, to whom
especially they gave the name of [Bishop,] Shows that notwithstanding this
Bishop was not above them in honor and dignity, that he should rule over
them, but was appointed only to ask the votes, to direct and admonish -- and
see that performed which was agreed upon by their common consent -- And having
declared, that Ierom shows this to have been in by the consent of men upon Tit.
1. He adds, that the same Ierom other where shows, how ancient ane order in the
Church it was, even from Marks time to Heraclius etc: In which words of Calvin
(says the Doctor) seeing that the order of the Church which he mentions, has
evident relation to that before described, and that in the describing of it he
had said, The Bishop was not so above the rest in honor that he had rule over
them: It follows that Mr. Calvin does not so much as seem to confess upon
Ieroms report [that ever since Marks time Bishops have had a ruling
superiority over the Clergie] A contradictorie Conclusion to that of our
Informer. The Doctor proceeds thus. Wherefore to use no more proof in a thing
manifest, which else might be easily proved more at large out of Ierom and Mr.
Calvin both, it is certain that neither of them does affirm, that Bishops so
long time have had such a superiority, as Dr. Bancroft seems to father upon
them. To all this add, that Dr. Holland the Kings professor in Oxford, at ane
Act (Iully 9. 1608.) Concluded against Mr Lanes question [an Episcopatus sit
ordo distinctus a Presbyteratu, eoque superior jure divino. That is, whither
Episcopacie be a distinct order from the Presbyterat and superior thereunto by
divine right] That the affirmative was most false, against the Scriptures,
Fathers, the doctrine of the Church of England, yea the very Schoolmen
themselves, Lombard, Thomas, Bonaventur.

A 2d. Essential point of Presbyterian government in opposition to Prelacie,
is in the matter of ordination and jurisdiction, viz, that these are not in the
hand of any single Prelat, but that Presbyters have ane essential joint
interest therein. And this also has a large Consent and Testimony of the
learned both ancient and Modern. For this the 4t. Council of Carthage is
adduced Can. 5. and the Councils of Constance and Basile, anent Presbyters
decisive suffrages in Council. Cyprian Epist. 33. and 78. Council of Antioch,
Can^: 10. of Aneyra. Can. 13. Ruffins hist. lib. 10. Cap. 9. Sozom. l. 2. c.
23. and many such. Smectim. page 28, 29, 30, 31. cites many Testimonies for
this. See Blondel. Apol. Sect. 3. page 120. to 130. Prins un-Bish: of Timothy
and Titus from page 52. to 83. Where the full Consent of reformed divines is
adduced, such as Ioannes Luckawits in his confession of the Taborits against
Rokenzana Cap: 13. the Wald^nses and Taborits apud Fox acts. Monum. p. 210.
Illyric. Catol. testiumveritatis. Tit. Waldenses 455. Melanchton, Arg. and
Respons. par. 7. De Potest. Episcopi Arg. 2. Hiperius on 1. Tim. 4. 14.
Hemmingius ibid. Gerardus Loc. Theol. de Ministerio Ecclesiastico proves this
at large. Peizelius, Arg. and Resp. Par. 7. de Ordin. Ministrorum in Arg. 1.
Musculus, Loc: Com. de Ministerio verbi. Morn^y Lord of Pless. de Eccles. Cap
11. Nay Canonists and Schoolmen themselves, Summa angelica ordo, Sect: 13. and
Innocentius there cited. Filiu^ius Jesuit* de Casibus Consc. Par. 1. Tract. 9.
Alexander Alensis Sum. Theol. par. 4. Quest. 9. M. 5. Artic. 1. Cajetan. on 1.
Tim. 4. 14. and many others. Likewise it is made good that the Bishops
swallowing up this power of Presbyters, and reserving it only to himself comes
from Popish Authority. Leo primus (Epist. ^8.) on complaints of unlawful
ordinations writing to the German and French Bishops, reckons up what things
are reserved to the Bishops, and among the rest Presbyterorum and diaconorum
consecratio, the consecration of Presbyters and deacons. Then adds, quae omnia
solis deberi summis pontificibus authoritate Canonum praecipitur. That is, All
which things are commanded to be reserved to the chief priests by the
Authority of the Canons. For this see also Rabanus Maurus de Instit.
Clericorum. l. 1. c. 6. And to this truth of Presbyters power in ordination,
the Confessions of reformed Churches gives a harmonious echo. The latter
confession of Helvetia (Harmon. of Confess Chap. 11. page: 232.) asserts, That
the holy function of the Ministry is givin^ the laying on of the hands of
Presbyters, no word of Pre lats hands. So the 18. Chap: (page 236.) they are to
be ordained by public prayer and laying on of hands, which power they say is
the same and alike in all, citing that passage Luke. 10. he that will be great
among you, let him be your servant. So Act. 15. and Ierom on Tit. 1. -- therefore
(say they) let no man forbid that we return to the old appointment of God (so
they call the Presbyterian way of ordination) and rather receive it then the
Custom devised by men, (So they call the Episcopal Method). Thus the
Confession of Bohem. Chap. 9. (Harm. Sect: 11 page 246. 247.) after setting
down the qualifications of Ministers -- As to ordination they say, that after
prayer and fasting they are to be confirmed and approved of the Elders by the
laying on of their hands. So the Confess. Sax: Chap: 12. (Harm: Conf: par. 2.)
affirm that it belongs to Ministers of the word to ordain Ministers,
lawfully elected and called. Where we have asserted both the Presbyters power
in ordination, and the peoples interest in the Call of Pastors, in opposition
to prelacy. So the Confession of the French Church. Credimus veram Ecclesiam
etc: We believe that the true Church ought to be governed by that policy which
Christ has ordained, viz, that there be Pastors, Presbyters or Elders and
Deacons. And again we believe that all true pastors wherever they be, are
endued with equal and the same power under one head and Bishop Christ Jesus,
which strikes our Diocesian and Erastian frame of government stark dead. Which
is seconded thus by the Belgic Confess. (Art: 30.) All Christ's Ministers of
the word of God have the same and equal power and authority as being all
Ministers of that only universal head and Bishop Christ. To thesewe might add
many other Testimonies of reformed divines, as Calvin, Piscator, Marl^rat on 1.
Tim: 4. 14. Tit. 1. 3. Zanch. de Statu. P^ccat. and Legal. in 4tum. praecep.
Chemnitius Loc. Com. Part. 3. de Eccles. Cap. 4. Exam. Council. Trid. part. 2.
de Sacram. ordinis page 224, 225. proving also that Election and vocation of
Ministers belongs to the whole Church. Antonius Sadael, Resp. ad repetita
Turriani Sophismata, par. 2. lo^. 12. Beza (de diverse: Ministrorum gradibus.)
Iunius [Controv. 5. l. c 3. N: 3.] Chamierus [Panstratia Cathol: Tom: 2. de
Occum: Pontis: Cap: 6.

A 3d. Great point of Presbyterian Government in opposition to prelacie, is the
peoples interest in the election and call of Ministers. And for this there is
as full a consent of divines, and Churches, both ancient and Modern. Several
of the forementioned Confessions clears this, the peoples election and call
being taken in together with, Presbyters ordination, Cyprian (Epist. 68.) is
full to this purpose. Plebs ipsa maxim habet potestatem, vel eligendi dignos
sacerdotes, vel indignos recusandi, quod and ipsum videmus de divina
authoritate descendere ut Sacerdos sub omnium oculis, plebe present deligatur,
and dignus atque idoneus public^ judicio ac Testimonio comprobetur. That is,
The people themselves have Chiefly the power, either of Electing, worthy
priests, or refusing the unworthy: which matter we see even of it self to
descend from the divine authority, that the priest be set apart under the eyes
of all in the peoples presence, and as worthy and qualified be approved by a
public judgment and Testimony. So lib: 1. Epist: 4. is full for the Churches
liberty and right in elections. The 4t. Council of Carthage [Can. 22.]
Requires to the admission of every Clergy man, civium assensum, and testimonium
and convenientiam, The consent of the citzens, their testimony, and agreement
Socrat [l. 4. c. 25. says that Ambrose was chosen Bishop of Millan by the
uniform voice of the Church. In the pretended Apostolic, but truly old
constitutions of Clement [lib. 8. cap. 4.] The Bishop who must be ordained is
appointed in all things to be unblameable, chosen by all the people; unto whom
let the people being assembled on the Lords day (N. B.) with the Presbytery and
the Bishops there present, give their consent: And a Bishop asks (...), the
Presbytery, and the people^, if they desire such a man to be set over them. The
Helvetick confession told us, that the right choosing of Ministers is by
consent of the Church. So the Belgic confession tells us [that Ministers,
Elders, and Deacons, are to be advanced to their office by the lawful election
of the Church.] Greg. Nazian. (orat. 31.) commends Athanasius his calling as
being after the Apostolical example (...) by the suffrage of all the people.
Blondel clears this from a large consent of antiquity (page, 379. to 473.) And
this is cleared also by a large consent of protestant divines. Luther (de
potest. Papae.) Calvin (on Act. 6: 3.) Beza (confess. Cap. 5. Art. 35.)
Musculus (in Loc. com.) Zanch. (on 4t. com.) Junius (Animadvers. on Bellarm.
Controv. 5. l. c. 7.) Cartwright (on Act. 14. v. 23.) Wallaeus, Bullinger,
Wittaker. See Mr Gilesp. Misc. quest. page 18, 19. Our first book of Discipline
appoints to the people their votes and suffrage in election of Ministers. (in
the 4t. head.) And the 2d. book (Cap 3.) discharges any to intrude contrary to
the will of the congregation -- or without the voice of the eldership.

A 4t. Essential point of Presbyterian Government in opposition to Prelacie, is
in relation to the office of the ruleing elder, as appointed by Christ. This we
cleared from Scripture, and there is as clear a consent of antiquity for it,
and of modern reformed Churches and divines, exhibited by our writers. For this
Ignatius (Epist: ad Trallianos, ad initium page 66. edit. oxon. An. 1644.) is
cited. Likewise Baronius (in his Annals Anno 103. in the Gesta purgationis
Caeciliani and Felicis.) Tertul. (Apolog. Advers: gentes. Cap. 39.) Origin.
(ontra Celsum lib. 3.) Cyprian (Epist. 36.) Optatus (lib. 1. page 41. edit:
paris: An. 1631.) Ambrose (comment. on 1 Timothy 5: 1.) And for modern writers,
Whittaker (contra Duraeum lib: 9. Sect. 47.) Thorndicks discourse of religious
assemblies (cap. 4. page 117.) Rivet (Cathol. Orthodox, Tract. 2. quest. 22,
Sect. 4).

Finally. Presbyterian Government, as it stands in opposition to the present
Prelacie in its Erastian mould, and maintains a spiritual authority in the
hands of Church officers, distinct from, and independent upon the civil powers
of the world, has as full a consent of the learned. As Erastianism was first
hatched by Thomas Erastus Physician in Heidleberg about the year 1568. -- And
much catched up, and pleaded for by Arminians since, so it has been impugned
by a full consent of reformed divines, who have fully proved it to be contrary
to the rules of Church Government set down in the Scripture both in the old and
new Testament, and utterly eversive of the Gospel Ministry and Church. The
eminent divines who have written against it, are Beza (who encounters with
Erastus himself upon this point) Zachriasursin, Wallaeus, Helmichius,
Triglandus, Dr Revius, Dr Voetius, Appollonius, and many others, Especially the
famous and learned Mr Gillespy in that elaborat piece, entitled, Aarons rod
blossoming; wherein the consent of the ancient, and modern Church, as to this
great point of truth, is exhibit. See 2. book. 1 Cap. p^g. 167.

Now, from all that is said, Whither Presbyterian Government has not the
patronage of the purest Scripture antiquity, and a full consent of the after
purer times, and of reformed Churches and divines, in all the forementioned
points of its opposition to the Prelacie now established: Both in holding, 1.
The identity of Bishop and Presbyter, as to name and things 2. Presbyters right
of ordination, and Jurisdiction. 3. The peoples interest in the Election, and
call o. Ministers. 4. The ruleing Elders office. 5. The Churches intrinsic
power of Government, I leave to the Impartial to judge. And consequently of
the vanity of this new Dialoguist, His pleading upon this point.


A Confutation Of the Second DIALOGUE, Anent the Covenants Against EPISCOPACIE.
Wherein, the Informers reasonings against the abjuration of the present
Episcopacie in the National and Solemn League and Covenant, and the obligation
of these oaths in opposition thereunto, are examined.

CHAP. I.
Atwofold state of the Question proposed, the one touching the abjuration of
this Prelacie in either or both these Covenants, the other concerning the
obligation of these oathts against it. That Prelacie is abjured in the National
and Solemn League and Covenant, proved at large. And arguments offered to
evince their oblidging force upon the present and succeeding generations.

THE state of the Question in the Second Dialogue is twofold, 1. Whither the
Prelacie now established by Law in this Church, be abjured in the national, and
solemn league and Covenant? 2. Upon supposition that it is abjured in both the
one and the other, whither the obligation of these Oaths stands against it, yea
or not? We shall a little touch.

For the 1. Our National Covenant, sworn by King James in the the year 1580,
and by the Estates of this land, and many times thereafter, solemnlie and
universally renewed, both by our Church and State, does clearly exclude
Prelacie. The passages thereof pleaded against Prelacie, and wherein our
obligation lies, are these. 1. In General, we profess to believe the word of
God to be the only rule, the Gospel contained therein to be Gods undoubted
truth, as then received in this Land and maintained by sundry reformed Kirks
and States, chiefly by our own. Whereupon we renounce all contrary doctrine,
and especially all kind of Papistrie in general and particular heads, as
confuted by the word of God and rejected by the Kirk of Scotland. 2. After a
large enumeration of many points of poprie, disowned upon this ground and vowed
against, as contrary unto the word of God, and the gospel of Salvation
contained therein. We renounce the Popes worldly monarchy, and wicked
Hierarchy, and whatever has been brought into this Church without, or against
the word of God. 3. We vow to join our selves to this reformed Kirk in
Doctrine, faith, religion and Discipline; Swearing by the great name of God to
continue in obedience to the doctrine, and Discipline of this Kirk, and upon
our Eternal peril to maintain and defend the same according to our vocation,
and power, all the days of our life.

Now the obligation of this engadgement against prelacie is evident these
ways. 1. All doctrines contrary unto, or beside the word of God, are here
rejected and disowned: All doctrines contrary to the simplicity of the Gospel,
recived and believed by the Church of Scotland, and whatever has been brought
into this Church without or against Gods Word. But so it is that the present
hierarchy is contrary unto the Word of God, both in its Diocesi^ and Erastian
mould, as has been proved at large. And we heard that this Church of Scotland,
since it received Christianity, did stand for a long time under Presbyterian
Government, and until Palladius was sent unto us from Pope Celestine, never
knew a Prelat, Ergo, Prelacie in its Diocesian Erastian mould is here abjured.

2. Our Prelacie is condemned in that clause of the Popes wicked hierarchy,
whereby the Prelatick Government is most clearly pointed at, which is evident
thus. 1. That the Government of the popish Church is prelaticall: this man will
not deny, it is by Archbishops, Bishops, Primats Deans etc: and it being
distinct from his Monarchy, for else the naming of his worldly monarchy had
been enough: and moreover, it being ranked among these things which are brought
into the Church against the Word of God, and into this Church against her pure
Doctrine which was clearly the sense of it, that assemblies, and the body of
this Protestant Church entertained; assemblies declaring that the Word [Bishop]
was not to be taken as in time of Papistrie. And John Knox (whose sense and
Judgment herein was certanlie retained, and upon all occasions manifested by
our Reformers) accounting Prelacie to have quid commune cum Antichristo. Ergo,
Prelacie is here vowed against simpliciter and in it self considered. 2. If he
grant a hierarchy to be here abjured, sure it must be abjured with the rest of
the corruptions enumerat in that large list of them exhibited in this Oath. Now
these are abjured in themselves simpliciter, as contrary unto the Word of God
and the doctrine of this Kirk, ergo, So must a prelacie or hierarchy be in
its self abjured under the same formalis ratio, as thus brought in, whither by
the Pope or any other. 3. This hierarchy is supposed in this Oath to be
contrary unto the Discipline of this Church, as well as the popish Doctrine is
therein supposed contrary to her pure Doctrine. Now (as we shall show) the
Discipline which this Church then owned, was Presbyterian. So that that
Discipline or Hierarchy, which stands in opposition to Presbyterian
Government, is here abjured: but so it is that prelacie ex se, and sua natura
stands thus opposite unto it, ergo, by the hierarchy, all prelacy is abjured.

3. Prelacy is abjured in that clause where we profess to join our selves to
this reformed Kirk in her Discipline, as well as her Doctrine, and vow and
swear adherence unto both. Now that the Discipline then owned by this Church,
was Presbyterian Government or discipline, Is evident these ways. 1.
Discipline by general assemblies and Synods having complete parity of all
Ministers, with a joint decisive suffrage, is Presbyterian Discipline; but this
was that Discipline owned by our Church: For her first National Assembly
(completely Presbyterial in its mould) was in the Year 1560. After which time
until 1580 When this Covenant was sworn, there were many assemblies
exercising their power. 2, That is presbyterian Discipline, which did
judicially condemn prelacie as having no warrant in the Word, and ownes no
Church officers as lawful but pastors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons. But so it
is that this was the judicial decision of our general assemblies, long before
this Covenant; for the first book of discipline, containing the Basis of
presbyterian Government, was approved and subscribed by this Church in the year
1560. And the Second book of discipline in Anno 1578. Which two books
completely overthrow Prelacie, and lays down a mould of Presbyterian
government. And thereafter in the assembly at Dundie (Anno. 1580. Sess. 4.) The
office of a Prelat was particularly condemned by a solemn act, and abolished
as unlawful, and void of Scripture warrant, ordaining under pain of
excommunication such as brooked the said office to lay it aside, as ane office
to which they are not called of God, and cease from preaching and administering
Sacraments, under hazard of the same Censure; or using the office of a Pastor
till they receive admission [de novo] from the general assembly. Now in the
national covenant, this existent discipline being sworn to be maintained, who
can say but that Prelacie is most formallie abjured therein; Especially if it
be considered, that in the same year 1580 This national covenant was sworn, at
which timethese things were so fresh and recent. 3. That discipline which the
takers and framers of this cov^nant, at the taking of it, and in pursuance of
its ends, did carry on and establish, that discipline it must needs include and
engadge unto in their sense: but that was Presbyterian-government. For (to omit
many preceding discoveries heirof mentioned in the Apology) in the year 1580.
The assembly after their judicial declarator, that Prelacie is contrary to
the word of God, sent Commissioners to the King to desire the establishment of
the book of policy by ane Act of Council, until a parliament were conveened;
and what this book of policy contained, we did already hint. Then in this same
year, the national covenant and confession is sworn by the King and Council. In
the assembly 1581. it is subscribed by all the members, and the Act of the
Assembly at Dundie explained. And it was again judicially declared that the
Church did thereby wholly Condemn the estate of Bishops as they were in
Scotland. At which very Nick of time the Confession of faith (Sworn before in
the year 1580.) is presented to the assembly by the King and Council, Together
with his Letter to Noblemen and Gentlemen for erecting Presbyteries Completely
through the nation, and dissolving Prelacies, all the three, viz, both the
King, the Estates and the assembly, fully agreeing in this judgment as to
Church government, and this oath for its maintenance. And according to this
joint authoritative determination of Church and State, Presbyteries were
erected. Likewise in this assembly according to the forsaid joint conclusion,
the Second book of discipline containing the mould of Presbyterial Government,
and likewise this National Covenant and oath for its perservation, are (as the
two great Charters of our Churches government and liberties) insert into the
Churches records ad futuram rei memoriam, And that posterity might not be
ignorant of the discipline sworn in that covenant. Upon which, and many such
like grounds, the Assembly 1638 did again judicially declare this sense of
this National Oath, which accordingly was received with ane express
application to prelacy, and the other Corruptions attending it, and taken by
the whole land with a full concurrence of the civil Sanction and authority,
Anno. 1640.

The 2d. Great engadgement pleaded against prelacie, is that of the Solemn
League and covenant: Wherein we vow the preservation of the reformed religion of
the Church of Scotland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and government
according to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches. In
the Second Article, We swear the extirpation of poprie and prelacie,
Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellours and Commissaries etc. And all
Ecclesiastical officers depending on that Hierarchy -- of whatever is found
contrary to sound Doctrine and the power of godliness. Which engadgement has
been likewise taken by all rancks, by Parliaments, Assemblies, and the body of
the people. Now that the Prelacie at this time established is abjured in this
engadgement, is these ways Evident.

1. Prelacie being razed in Anno. 1638. according to our national covenant, and
ane engadgement being framed of adherence to the Religion established in
Doctrine, worship, discipline and Government, in opposition unto all
innovations formerly introduced, and upon both grounds, Presbyterian
government, in its exact paritie being set up, and judicially enacted, both by
Assembly and parliament: that the Solemn league must needs strike against
Prelacie, is in this apparent, because this league is clearlie referable to the
great ends of the national covenant, as it stood then established, explained
and Sworn by this whole nation; and therefore is ane accessorie engadgement,
commensurat unto, and to be explained by the preceding: and consequently none
can doubt that it strikes against prelacie, and engadgeth to Presbyterian
government, who knows how former engadgements stood.

2. The preservation of the Doctrine, worship, Discipline and government then
existent in Scotland, referring to the then establishment thereof, in opposition
to the former prelacie and all its corruptions; Its evident that all sort of
prelacie and whatever corruption in Government is inconsistent with
Presbyterian simplicity and parity, is here abjured and covenanted against. As
we engadge the preservation of the Doctrine and worship as then reformed, from
Prelatick innovations, so likewise we swear to preserve our Churches ancient
and pure discipline as it stood then recovered from prelatick encroachments.
That discipline and government is here sworn unto, as the discipline and
government of the Church of Scotland, which the Church and State of Scotland at
this time established and owned: But so it is, that that was Presbyterian
government, then fully ratified both by Church and State, Ergo, the
preservation of Presbyterian government is sworn; and by further consequence
that government which was by Church and state extirpate, as abjured in the
national covenant, and contrary unto this Presbyterian frame, was likewise
abjured and covenanted against in this league. But such was prelacie, Bishops,
Archbishops etc: ergo. Again.

3. The great ground upon which our adversaries deny the national Covenant to
strike against prelacie, is, that they hold that the then existent discipline,
to which in that Oath we vow adherence as the discipline of this Church, was
not Presbyterian government, and that King James did not own it. Ergo, (by ane
argument a contrariis, and ad hominem) since its undeniable with them that de
facto Presbyterian government was now enacted, ratified, established and set
up, both by Assemblies and King and Parliament, that government we must stand
oblidged unto by the solemn league, as the reformed discipline and government
of this Church, and contrarily that government which was then de facto by
assemblies, King and Parliament razed as inconsistent with Presbyterian
government, and as abjured in the national Covenant, that government we
cannot deny, but the solemn league stricks against. But so it is that prelacie
was at this time razed by Assemblies, King and Parliament, as inconsistent with
the national covenant, and Presbyterian government then established, ergo this
solemn league stricks against Prelacie.

4. The word preserve here used -- and the expression of common enemies cleares
this further: preserving ^relates to that which one is in possession of, the
common enemies of this possession, in the sense of all, both Imposers and
engadgers, are the Prelates and their Malignant Agents, so that the holding fast
of what was attained in point of reformation etc: Presbyterian government in
all its established privileges against Prelates, Prelacie, and all the
incroachements thereof, is here most evidently engadged unto.

5. That engadgement and oath which they who have set up prelacie in our
Church, did Cassat and remove, as inconsistent therewith, that must needs, by
their own confession strike against it: but so it is, that our Parliament and
Rulers did wholly Cassat this solemn league, in order to the establishing of
Prelacie. Ergo, by their own confession it strikes against it. They cassat the
national covenant only as interpreted against Prelacie, supposing that it
will not in its self strike against it, but the league they simply abjure, and
disclaim its obligation as to a change of this Prelacie: Ergo they do upon
the matter acknowledge that it stricks against it.

Finaly, Our adversaries do grant that it strikes against Bishops,
Archbishops, Deans etc: That we are bound thereby to extirpat such officers,
though its only that specific complex form expressed in the Second Article,
which they think is properly abjured. But 1. Is it not a prelacie inconsistent
with Presbyterian government (which we engadge to preserve in the First
Article) which we abjure and engage to extirpat in the Second, and under this
formalis ratio, as thus inconsistent, in the sense and judgment of our Church
and State (the Imposers of the Oath)? And are not Bishops, Archbishops, Deans
etc: contrary to Presbyterian government, then in being? 2. Dare this man or
any of that party deny but that the former prelacie which we had in Scotland
was intended to be abjured by our Church and State, and the Imposers and
renewers of this oath, and do not all engagements bind according to the sense
of Imposers, in the judgment of Casuists? 3. Is not our Government now by two
Archbishops and twelve Bishops? Have not these their Deans, Archdeacons,
Chanters etc? 4. Are not our Prelates restored to all their pretended
privileges, taken from them by the Parliament who Imposed this oath? Nay
redintegrat to a more absolute possession of pretended Spiritual authority
then ever any before them possessed since our reformation? 5. Are we not
engadged to extirpat all Eeclesiastick officers depending upon that hierarchy,
as we are engaged against whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine and the
power of godliness not in bulk only, but every thing Sigillatim upon this
ground, and formalis ratio? And dare any of them deny that in the sense of
Imposers, a diocesian Bishop or Archbishop (especially as their power now
stands enlarged and qualified) is contrary to sound doctrine, and the power of
godliness? Dare he say that any of the Imposers judged ane Archbishop, or
Bishop, especially in such ane Erastian mould as he is now, to be consistent
with the word of God? Sure he were very Impudent who would assert it.

This being clear then, that these engadgements leavells against the present
Prelacie, let us point out Next, their obliging force.

This will be clear, if we consider these oaths. 1. In their form or formalis
ratio, or nature and essence. 2. In relation to their subject whom they affect.
3. In their matter and object. 4. Their end and design.

1. In their Form, and that either in relation to several sorts of ties
included in them. Or 2. The Qualifiations of these ties. For the 1. They are
oaths wherein God is invocked as a witness of our sincerity, and as a swift
witness against us if we break. The Scripture is full in pointing at the
Sacred nature of oaths. The Third command of that fiery law which Gods own
voice pronounced from Heaven; and which his finger wrote upon the Tables, and
which he commanded to be keept within the Ark, is, thou shall not take the name
of the Lord thy God in vain, and with this severe Certificat, that he will not
hold them guiltless who thus profane his name. He threatens to be a swift
witness against the false swearer. [Thou shall perform to the Lord thy
oaths,] is amongst the grand and moral precepts frequentlie inculcat in
Scripture. See levit: 6. 3. 19. 12. Numb. 30. 2. Psalm. 15. 4. In this egagement
the debt accrews to God, and the absolution consequently must have his
special warrant. Quia religio juramenti pertinet ad forum divinum. Hence the
Scripture is full of Instances of the Lords dreadful punishing the sin of
perjurie, witness that of Saul and Zedekiah whereof afterward. Now in both
these engadgements, there is express mention made of Swearing by, and unto
God. 2. These engadgements are promises or promissory oaths, whererein we
express our purpose, and resolution, as to important duties both to God and
man, invocking himselfs as a witness of our sincerity: we have opened our
mouths to God, and to one another in reference to great and weighty duties,
relating to the first and Second Table. O what strong bonds are promises,
especially of this nature; what conscience did even heathens make of them,
where of instances are abundantly adduced in the Apology (page: 334, 335. etc.)
3: These engadgements are vows unto God, that is promises made to God in the
things of God, such as public and personal reformation: God here is not only
invoked as a witness, but is the proper Correlat and party in this engagement,
and O but it is a fearful thing to fall into his hands, to be punished for the
breach hereof. The Scripture is full as to commands and precedents to pay and
perform our vows, see Numb: 30: 2. 1. Sam: 1, 21. Ps. 76, 11. Ecc: 5, 4. 5.
4. They are Covenants, and that both with God and man, viz: engadgements to God
for performance of duties revealed in his word, such as the people made, when
upon the laws promulgation, they said, whatsoever the Lord commands we will
do, Exodus 19. 8. cap. 24: 3, 7. Deuteronomy. 5, 27. and 26, 17. and therefore are so
often charged with breach of Covenant in their after disobedience. We have
engadged to God (in these vows) speaking to us in his word from heaven,
touching national and personal reformation. Here is also a mutual
stipulation betwixt the nations, and with one another touching important duties
of the 2d. table in relation to there mutual rights. Now, the Scripture is
full in pointing out the weight and importance of such engadgements, see Ezekiel:
17. Jos. 9: 18, 19. Neh: 9: 38. Jer: 34: 18. So that in these Sacred bonds
there is the tie of an oath, from the reverence we owe to God, whose name we
must not take in vain. The obligation of a vow, from the homage and fealty we
owe unto him, the strength of a promise, both to God and man, from the
influence of truth and righteousness, all concurring to render the same Sacred
and inviolable.

The binding force of these engadgements does further appear in their
qualities, as 1. they were solemnly taken on: Its a Maxim that the obligation
grows* with the solemnity of ane engadgement; and the Scripture aggregeth the
breach from the solemnity, such as the cutting the ealfe in twain, and
Zedekiahs giving of the hand etc. For this imports deliberation and resolution
in the engadgers, and renders the breach more scandalous and infamous. These
oaths were taken by solemn assemblies, and Parliaments, after conference,
prayer, fasting etc. 2. These are holy and most weighty engagements in the
great concerns of Gods glory and our own salvation, the crown and kingdom of
Christ against Antichrist. 3. They are large and extensive, including duties
of the whole word of God, all duties we are tied to in his holy law. 4. They
are universal engadgements, all were given up to God in them, representatives
and members of Church and state. 5. perpetual and real, as that betwixt David
and Jonathan 2. Sam: 9: 7: 21: 7. That betwixt Joshua and the Gibeonites,
Joshua 9: 18, 19. And that Covenant Dent: 29: 14, 15.

Secondly the binding force of theseengadgements appears in the subject they
affect, as first, our Church in her representatives, and in their most public
capacity, the solemn assemblies in both nations. 2. State representatives and
Parliaments, thus all assurances are given, that either civil or Ecclesiastic
laws can afford, and the public faith of Church and state is plighted with
inviolable ties: So that they must stand while we have a Church or state, in
Scotland; both as men and as Christians, as mmbers of Church and State, under
either a rereligious or civil consideration, we stand hereby inviolably
engadged: and not only representatives but the incorporation of Church and
State are under the same.

Thirdly their binding force appears in the matter and Object, 1. The
immediatformall object is the Word of God and the Truths and duties therein
contained, and whatever is contrary to sound doctrine, and the power of
Godliness, under that formalis ratio, is here abjured, the eternal Truth of
the Gospel as holden out in the Word, and received in this and reformed Kirks
being the grand rule in this engadgement, whatsoever is approved by it, is
embraced, and what is condemned by it, is rejected under that notion. 2. The
more remote or material Object, are the public, necessary, great and
important Truths and duties therein enumerat, both of the 1 and 2 Table, and
the errors and sins therein abjured: To the observation, faith and obedience
of the one, and abhorrencie of the other, under the formentioned consideration
as either consonant unto, or dissonant from Gods eternal Word and truth, we
stand perpetually and inviolably oblidged: So that this Oath has ane
objective, as well as subjective necessity contained therein, a necessity of
the matter in its own nature, prior to the engadgement, as well as a necessity
of performance flowing from the engadgement it self, which may take place in
things indifferent.

Finaly the constantly obliging ends and scope of these engadgments, joined
with the importance of the Matter subservient to these ends, further discover
their inviolable obligaions. There is here both necessitas precepti, necessitas
medij, and finis. The matter sworn to be performed, falls under divine
precepts, the sins and evils abjured, falls under divine prohibitions, and
these engadgements are both in respect of the matter it self, and as to the
professed scope of the swearers and engadgers, levelled at continually obliging
ends, such as Gods glory, the advancing of Christ's Kingdom, the public good of
Church and State, the preservation and propagation of public and personal
reformation, truth, unity etc. Now both these Oaths and Covenants are
professedly entered into as perpetual engadgements, and in order to these great
ends for ever to be promoted, as their tenor clearly holds out.

If any say what is all to the special obligation for Presbyterian Government,
and in opposition to Prelacie^? the Oath may be temporary or cassat and made
void as to that point, though there be never so great duties otherwise
engadged unto therein. Ans This particular engadgement in relation to the
maintenance of Presbyterian Government, and in opposition to Prelacie, runs
along in the forementioned particulars. 1. It falls under the obligation of the
Oath, vow, promise, and Covenant, and under the forementioned qualifications of
solemnity, universality, and importance. Again 2. the public faith of Church
and State reaches this most evidently, and is engadged for it. And 3. as Gods
great ordinance holden out in his Word, Presbyterian Government falls within
the compass of the object of these Oaths, and under that consideration is
sworn to be maintained, and Prelacie as contrary thereunto is abjured, which
contrariety has been already cleaed. Again Presbyterian Government is here
engadged unto as subservient to these great ends mentioned, and Prelacie is
abjured as hindering the same, as both the Word of God and experience has
convincingly discovered.

CHAP. II.
The Informers arguments against the abjuration of Prelacy in the national
Covenant fully examined. Some reasons of his against an Oath in general, or
this Oaths obligation upon the posterity, weighed. The Apologeticall narration,
and the Assembly 1638, vindicated.

WE come now to examine what this new absolver or pretended doubt-resolver,
has presented to us against the oblidging force of these great engadgments.
The defense which he has patcht up out of the survey of Naphtali, and that
pamphlet called the seasonable case, consists of 2. parts. 1. He denis that the
bond of either the national, or solemn league and Covenant, does strike
against the present Prelacie. 2. Upon supposall that the solemn league and
Covenant does strike against it, he denis its obligation. In both points we
shall examine his grounds and trace his Method. I the doubter alleges that
Prelates are abjured in the Covenant, so that none may warrantably own the
Ministry of such as preach under them, as being perjured. To this consequence
he repones nothing, but seems to admit it, and therefore we need not speak
unto it. Only he quarrels with the antecedent and tells us that we would act
more Christian Like, if we were sparing in judging another man's servants, who
stand or fall to their own Master. But the judging there forbidden, being a
rash felfish judging of others in things indifferent, as meats or drinks, and
(as Calvin paraphraseth the words) de hominium factis pronunciare extra verbum
Dei de factis aliorum non licet statuere secundum nostram ipsius estimationem,
sed ex verbo Dei. That we are not to judge of men's practices by our own
opinion, but according to the rule of the Word, and not without its limits.
Telling us further, that Iudicium quod a verbo sumitur, neque humanum est neque
alienum that it is no human private judgment which is drawn from the
Scriptures, the impertinent application of this passage and premised Scripture
to our case, which is a practical disowning of palpable perjury, and turning
away from such, whose instruction causes to err from the words of knowledge,
is obviously evident. This is no judging without Gods word, but according to
it, to say that perjury is perjury, sin is sin. Our Informer by this new knack
would take away all christian judgment of discretion, yea by this his wide
gloss, all judicial decisions whither civil or ecclesiastik. Besides, is not
his pamphlet a judging of another man's servants, Ministers and people, as
schismatics and what not, for disowning Curats upon the forementioned grounds.
Does he not and all his party judge, despise, and persecute the people God, for
that which he calls indifferent, and a disputable point, at the foot of the
page. But to proceed, his Doubter alleging [that all stand bound against
Bishops in the Covenants which do abjure them] he cries out at, all Bound! as
a paradox, and tells us that many Ministers and people never took it, and asks
if we think them bound. Yes we think them bound as we do judge them bound in
Gods covenant (Deuteronomy: 29.) who were not there, as well as these who were there,
young and old, wives, little ones, from the hewer of wood, to the drawer of
water. It seems this man either has not read that chapt: or understands not
the import of national compacts even among nations themselves; which do
certainly oblidge all members in the incorporation, although not personally
sworn by every individual. Will he say that no subject as a born subject
owes fealty and alledgeance to his Majesty, but such as have personally sworn
the oaths of supremacy or alledgeance. If so, then a man could not, be guilty
of treason, which is certainly a breach of this fealty, unless he had
personally sworn, which I know not who will assert.

But the doubter alleging That it obliges even the posterity, he tells us
that this is a strange fancy, Iuramentum being with casuists, vinculum
personale, binding those that took it only, that accordingly the Covenant
says, [we every one for ourselves] and not [for our selves and others] -- That
the father who was against Bishops, his swearing should not prelimit his sons
judgment (who is for them) in a disputable point, or oblidge him to act
contrary, to his judgment. Ans: 1. That there are covenants and oaths real and
hereditary, as well as personal, is evident in scripture; and if this man were
not more led by fancy then truth he would not deny it, which is not only thus
evident, but acknowledged also by Casuists. Was not that oath and Covenant,
Deuteronomy: 29. made with them who were not there and belonging unto (and by
consequence engadging) their seed for ever. Deuteronomy: 5: 2, 3. Moses tells the
people emphatically that God made the Covenant with them who were then alive,
even that Covenant at Horeb, though they were all near dead with whom it was
made. Neh 9. 38. all entered into Covenant but only some sealed it. Was not that
oath of Joseph's brethren anent the carrying up of his bones from Egypt to
Canaan, the oath to the Gibeonites, such as did reach and oblidge their
posterity? So that oath betwixt David and Jonathan. 2. Sam: 9. 7. Now that the
nature of this oath is such, cannot be doubted, it being about matters of
perpetual and everlasting importance, which no time can alter, evacuat or
limit, and having the public faith of Church and state interposed therein, by a
vowand Covenant with God and man over and above the oath: And likewise being in
its nature promissory, in relation to duties, midses and ends perpetually
necessary and oblidging, it is palpably evident that it is real, and not
personal only. 2. For that expression, every one for our selves, it is very
impertinently here alleged to exclude the posterity: for the end and motive
of the oath before this is expressed to be, the glory of God, the advancement
of Christ's kingdom, the happiness of the King and his posterity, the true
public liberty, safety of the kingdoms etc. wherein every ones private state
is included; which of necessity includes the posterity and designs the
obligation for them.

Next, in the close of the first article, the posterity is expressly taken in,
when the end and design of the matters therein contained is said to be, that we
and our posterity after us may live in faith and love etc: And in the close of
the 5. article we engadge to endeavor that the Kingdoms may remain conjoined
in a firm peace and union to all posterity: and therefore his negative
inference viz: for our selves, and not for our posterity, is opposite unto the
very sense, scope, and words of this oath: so that this clause is cleary
referable unto the various capacities, conditions, and relations, wherein, in
order to the work of God, the then engadgers stood. 3. his notion about
prelimiting the son by the fathers engadgement, is a poor shift. For this
might be objected against any national mutual compact, in matters of a far
lower nature then this. This might have been objected against Josuahs oath to
the Gibeonites. Might not the posterity look upon it as a disputable point to
keep unto them, and might not Zedekiahs posterity look on it as a disputable
point to keep that oath of his to the king of Babylon? I wonder if this man
would think it ane unlawful Covenant and vow to engadge for prelacie as now
constitute, and oblidge for our selves and posterity, that it shall stand in
this posture. Sure he will not deny the warrantableness of this, since he looks
upon prelacie as the ancient apostolic frame, owned by the primitive Church.
But shall the sons judgment who is other ways minded, be prelimited by the
father, or else must he act contrary to his judgment? let the Informer see to
this. If he say its not a disputable point to hold the present prelacie, and
that therefore the son is oblidged to inform his judgment and act rationally,
the obligation to the duty carrying in its bosom a prior obligation to know
it: surely he must acknowledge that this is our case and answer as to the
Covenant; and that consequently his objection is naught, and the horns of his
horned argument are crooked, so that it pushes us with neither of them. We
might also here tell him that a prelimitation as to practice, in many things
not indispensably necessary: will fall under the fathers paternall power over
Children, witness that case of the Rechabites: And that this will not in every
thing infer a prelimi, tation in judgment as to the object simpliciter: Nay
who knows no^ that the great moral precept [honour Thy Father and thy Mother]
imports a very extensive obligation upon Children as such, in order to
obedience to parents, and gives unto parents a large, and extensive authority
hereanent. But shall the son be prelimit in his judgment anent all these, or
act contrary to it? so this objection (in the Informers sense, and according to
his scope) will blurre out a great part of the 5t. Command. But what needs
more, the matters here engadged unto, are important truths and dutys, not
disputable points, as he and the rest of his adiaphorist latitudinarian party
would make them: and therefore we are under perpetual obligations to own and
mantaine the same.

But if this man will abide a quere here, and a little retortion of his notion
further, thinks he it not hard to prelimit the faithful ministry and
professors of this nation, in their judgment about his disputable points of
the present conformity, by so many laws and acts, or else oblidge them to act
contrary to their judgment? Sure fathers have at least as great, if not a
greater authority to limit their children, then the Prelates and their party to
prelimit the Presbyterian Ministers of this Church. Especially (which is our
advantage in this comparison) the children being supposed under no previous
contrary obligations to that which in this case the fathers put upon them in
relation to prelacie, as the non-conformists are under counter obligations to
that which is now demanded of them by their persequutors.

Mr Crofton. (in his analepsis, page 145.) tells us that considering the
Covenant as made by the people of England, as a Kingdom and a Political body,
professing the reformed religion, it looks like a national obligation, that
the confluence of public assent and authority by the people collectively and
distributively considered, the accession of Royal assent, makes it a Public
and national Covenant, binding all persons of the nation (that swear, or swear
not personally) and our posterity after us, in their particular places, and all
that shall succeed unto the public places, and Politic capacities of this
kingdom, to preserve and pursue the things therein promised, so long as it
remains a kingdom, under one king, and in the profession of one reformed
religion. He enforces this with the lord chief Barons speech, to the condemned
traitors at the old baylie [you were bound to bear allegance to your king, yea
though you may not have taken the oath of alleadgance your selves, yet you were
bound by the Recogintion of king James and his posterity made at his first
coming to the crown of this Realm, by the whole parliament, being the whole
collective body of the kindom] hence he inferrs, that they and their posterity,
must needs be bound, who themselves have [universaly] by the authority of such
who were entrusted for them engadged the faith of the nation: for I see not
(says he) how they can give away our estates or take pardons in the name, and
to the security of the nation if they may not in our name make oaths, promises,
and Covenants to bind us and our Succeeding generations and posterities, in
sense whereof I cannot but desire all that wish well to England to consider the
Covenant, the Solemn League and Covenant. So that with Mr Crofton it is an
uncontrovertible point, that the obligation of this Sacred oath reaches the
posterity, which he makes good from the sense and pleading of the Lord chief
Baron in the point of alledgance and fealty to his Majesty which is the
sentiment of all Lawers, and of the law itself. So that what our Informer calls
ane odd fancy, appears to be a most solid truth, consonant both to Scripture,
reason and the law of nations. As for the next objection of his doubter anent
the fathers oblidging for the child in Baptism it is not our argument, nor is
suitable to the state of this question, which is concerning a Covenant taken for
our seed als well as for our selves; and if he acknowledge that the father
binds not, in the name and room of the child, then it touches not our point,
for our question is about fathers taking on engadgements for themselves and
their posterity. As for what the Informer adds here, its good that he
acknowledges that ane oblidging force flows from the binding matter in that
baptismall Covenant, and that the child's obligation is strengthened by his vow,
which is enough in our case against him, since the matter of our Covenants, and
vows fall under divine precepts, to which the obligation of the oaths and vows
is accessory. So that having sworn to keep these holy engadgements unto God,
we must perform, and here he contradicts his forleader, the author* of the
seasonable case, who will have us either acknowledge the matter of the Covenant
indifferent, or not plead the force of an oath or vow as superadded to that
which was duty before.

The doubter next objects That having sworn against prelacie we must not any
more dispute, or question the obligation, citing, Prove: 20. 25. This objection
he advantagiously for himself, but foolishly propones, that he may make way for
some discourse (forsooth) upon this Scripture. We acknowledge as well as he,
that we are not forbidden to enquire into an oath and vow in what cases, and
how far it is binding. Nay this is commanded, since we must both swear and
perform in Judgment, which requires a knowledge and inquiry as we said
before; and when an oath of vow is found materialy unlawful, and vinculum
Iniquitatis, it is no transgression of this precept to quite it. Such an
inquiry as is in order to the understanding and performance of this vow in
faith, we will allow whither to young or old. Only for what he says of many
who were put to swear at schools and colleges, and engadge in this Covenant,
who could not do it in judgment, it is a calumny which he cannot justify,
all being exhorted and instructed therein who were come to Years of discretion,
so as to be in capacity to enter into this Covenant, with judgment: and if
lesser young ones present in congregations where it was sworn, did signify a
spontaneous consent, it was no more, then what Isreal's little ones did by their
presence before the Lord, Deuteronomy: 29. Well, but what is forbidden ehre to make
inquiry (says he) how the vow may be eluded. This is ingenuouslie said, and
hereby his own lips condemn him and all his party, who have been now for many
years, racking their wits to find out evasions how to elude this Sacred vow.
Witness the many pamphlets on this Subject since his Majesty's return, and
this man's among the rest.

But the Doubter alleading that upon enquiry we will find our selves bound
against prelacy both by the national and solemme League. He falls upon his
impugnation first of the national Covenant, telling us as touching it [that
the term of the Popes wicked hiearchy will not include prelacie, as the survey
of Naphtali fully proves] well, let us hear these proofs. The first is because
king James and his counsel (the imposers of that Covenant, and the takers of
it, Anno 1580) did in anno 1581: ratify the agreement at Leith, made betwixt
the Commissioners of the state and Church anno 1581. which was in favors of
episcopacy. And would the king and counsel the next year have acted so
contrary to it, if they had thought all episcopacy to be abjured therein Ans. Is
this the great demonstration, which the Survever, and he have drawn out to
prove this point, this being nothing but the old musty store of the Seasonable
case, better propounded therein, then its here. To this I say, first, it is a
very weak or rather wild proof to conclude that such a corruption as prelacie
could not be imported in that expression, Because the takers and imposers did
some time after counteract and contradict their engadgement: must the sense of
a promissory oath and Covenant be measured by the after practice of engadgers?
Sure he will not darre to admit this rule, and yet its the very topic of his
argument. I would but ask him, if we could clearly demonstrat from the words of
this oath, and from this expression, that episcopacy is therein abjured, must
he not grant that this argument taken from their after practice who took it,
will signify nothing, since it cannot stand good against the sense of the
words, and the obligation natively resulting therefrom. Sure he cannot deny
this, else he will swallow monstrous absurdities. And therefore unless he can
disprove our arguments, which do prove prelacie to be abjured in that oath, and
by the words in their genuine sense, he must grant that this practical
argument will signify nothing. 2. He might have found that the Apologist
outshoots the Surveyer and him, as also the Seasonable case in their own bow,
and breaks this argument with a wedge of their own setting: for whereas they
allege that about a year or less after this Covenant was imposed and taken,
King James ratified that aggreement at Leith. He retorts that at the assembly
1581. which had declared prelacie utterly Unlawful, and without warrant in the
word, the Kings Commissioner presented to them (together with the Covenant
subscribed by the King) a plot of presbyterys to be erected by him through the
Kingdom, together with his letter to noblemen and gentlemen to be assistant
therein, and for dissolving prelacies, to make way for these judicatories made
up of Ministers and Elders. Hence (Says he) how could King James intend
prelacy by this confession since the self same day (a shorter time then half a
year) wherein this confession (subscribed by him and his household) was
presented to be subscribed by the assembly, he presented a plot of presbyteries
to be erected through the Kingdom. Now let our Absolvers Medium come in here,
would King and counsel have acted so much for presbytery, and in opposition to
Prelacie, in that very day wherein this national Covenant was presented by
him, If he had not judged prelacie to be therein abjured, and presbytery
engaged unto. And (if this assemblies carriage will have any weight in this
argument) would they have recorded this oath as the Test and badge of this
their national engagement, after they had immediately before judicially
declared against prelacie, if they had not looked upon it as abjured therein,
and understood this oath in a sense opposite thereunto.

The Informers next reason is, that in their strivings with the King to get
prelacie away, they never used this argument; that it was abjured in the
national Covenan^, which they would have done, had they thought it to be
included in that expression, of [the Popes Hierarchy.] This, our Informer has
very justly copied out of the Seasonable case. What? had the Surveyer in all
these pages which he cites, no new notions to furnish him with, that this
proctor is still feeding on the old store. But to the matter, first, how (I
pray) runs this argument, [Ministers pleaded not this obligation at that time
with King James: Ergo, There was no such meaning in the national Covenant]
surely this is a wide consequence. 2. this is yet wider [we know not of any
such pleading at that time: ergo there was none] besides, he might have found
that the Apollogist tells him out of Petries hist: page 448. That Mr. Melvin in
anno 1584. writing to divines abroad anent our Church, shows them that three
years since, the discipline of this Church was approved, sealed, and confirmed
with profession of faith, subscription of hand, and religion of oath, by the
King and every subject of every state particularly. And that (page; 570.) he
shows that when some Ministers (anno 1604) were accused by the Synod of Lothian
as to a design of overturning the government, the synod presented the
confession of faith to them, as containing ane abjuration of prelacie, and a
vow for presbyterian government, And that Mr. Forbes one of the impannelled
Ministers for holding that meeting at Aberdeen in anno 1605. in his discourse
to the gentlemen of the assize, showed that they were bound by the national
Covenant to mantaine the discipline of the Church, and having read it to them,
he told them that they would be guilty of perjury, if for fear or flattery
they discernd that to be treason which themselves had sworn and subscribed.
Who also desired the Earl of Dunbar to show the King what followed upon the
breach of the oath to the Gibeonites, and that they feared the like should fall
on him and his posterity. The Seasonable case (page: 13.) acknow ledges that
Ministers at that time looked upon themselves as obliged against prelacy, by the
national Covenant, as well as we by the League, in plain contradiction to this
Informer. As for that which he adds [of Beza's intention in writing against
prelacie] we spoke to it already upon the first dialogue. And seeing this man
objects to us Beza here again, we will offer to his consideration, Beza his 79.
epistle written to John Knox, and dated at Geneva, Aprile 12. 1562. Wherein he
says, This is the blessing of God that ye brought into Scotland, together with
the sownd doctrine, (...) or good discipline -- he obrests him to keep these
two, since if the one be lost, the other cannot long continue -- thereafter he
imputes it to this cause, viz the want of this pure discipline, that the
gospel is preached to many in judgment, not in Mercy. Then he adds, I would
have thee (my Knox) and the rest of the brethren remember (which is now as
before our eyes) that as the Bishops brought in the papacy, so these false
Bishops the relicts of papacy, will bring Epicurisme into the Church. Let them
beware of this whoever wish the safety of the Church: and seeing ye have once
banished is out of Scotland, receive it never again, albeit it does flatter
with the show of retaining unity, whereby many of the best ancients were
deceived. See Petries hist. part. 3. page 376.

The Doubter next enquiring what is meant by the Popes hierarchy. He answers,
not all Bishops, but these who actually depended upon the Pope, and that all
Bishops can no more be understood, then reformed Presbyters, who renounce their
dependence upon him; Presbyters and Deacons being a part of his hierarchy, as
the Council of Trent determines. Ans. This is already removed when we did show
that prelacy is here abjured simpliciter, and absoluty, abstracting from this
dependence, it being here abjured as other corruptions are abjured, not mainly
or only, because the Pope brought them in (as the assembly at Glasgow in the
year 1638 clears it in their explanatory act, and likewise the Apollogist page
396.) but as a corruption, ^ex se and sua natura of its own nature, contrary to
the word of God, and the pure received doctrine of this Church. It is His
wicked hierarchy as the rest of the corruptious therein enumerat, are called
[his] such as invocation of Saints, dedications of altars etc. Because
introduced by him, not to distinguish these corruptions, from a lawful
dedication of altars, worshipping of Images etc. Does this man think that these
Reformers would have admitted such corruptions presented under another notion
then the Popes authority, and obtruded by this Argument; that their dependence
upon him being broken off, they were no more to be accounted his corruptions?]
or that they would have embraced extreme unction, or some other of his
Sacraments, and the inferior orders of Lectors, Acoluthi, Exorcists etc: upon
some other consideration then his Sacraments or orders? surely he dare not
assert this, and so the case is here. 2. As for his reason that otherwise all
Ministers and Deacons should be abjured. It is very impertinent, Because 1.
Ministers and Deacons, are officers of divine appointment, so that the abuse
being removed, this divine officer stands; but prelacie is, exse, or of it
self, contrary to the word of God, as we have proved. 2. The Hierarchy is
abjured in that Covenant, as contrary to the then discipline of this Church,
but so are not Presbyters and Deacons. 3. We have proved that the Hierarchy,
and the special prerogatives which prelates arrogate to themselves, ar
originaly papal, and they in a special manner are looked upon by him as his
creatures. 4. as the Papacy cannot subsist without prelacie, and any otherwise
then upon its shoulders, so neirher prelacie nor the Papacy can consist with
Presbyterian government, and Presbyters divine right and power.

The Doubter next objects [that all Bishops depend on the Pope, citing Appol:
page 395. And that therefore all Episcopacy is abjured in this oath.] He
answers, the Apology says they depend upon the Pope, in esse and operari, but
asks how he proves it, and tells us that to say it is so because the Pope
acknowledges they depend upon him alone, is a poor because, evident to any
ordinary capacity, resolving this upon the Popes [ipse dixit] like a Papist,
and gives the Papists that advantage over Protestant Churches, that a Bishop
depends upon the Popes supremacy, now and from the beginning, wherein he
says, protestants do oppose the Pope and prove that his supremacy was
contradicted by Councils and Fathers. Anf: The silly Impertinency of this new
agent of the tottering cause, is here very evident, in thus reflecting upon
that Author, whose answers to these poor arguments of the Seasonable case, he
dare not touch. For that Pamphleter alleging [that Prelates are not abjured in
that Covenant, but as they depend on the Pope, as it abjures the five bastard
Sacraments, as he makes them Sacraments, and that therefore the corruptions only
of these offices which flow from him, are abjured, and as a part of his
blasphemous priesthood.] The Apollogist taking this concession, inferrs
thereupon, That if these offices be abjured as a part of his Hierarchy, and as
confirmed by, and depending upon him, then Prelates are abjured, who depend
upon him in esse and operari. The Prelate as such being no officer of divine
appointment, as the Presbyter and deacon, which if they were, then this
Casuists argument would hold good, that we were to remove the corruption, and
retain the institution and ordinance of God. But since we do suppose the office
it^self to be a corruption, and he has not proved the contrary, his paralled
as to the bastard Sacraments is naught. And to clear this matter of fact that
they are a part of the Popes hierarchy, by the Popes acknowledgement, that
Author cites Peter-Suave in his history of the council of Trent, where the Pope
would not have it determined, whither Prelates were Iuris Divini, lest they
should not depend upon him after this as formerlie. Now the question here
being, whether the Pope looked upon Prelates as a part of his hierarchy, as in
the capacity of Prelates: in order to the clearing of this other question
depending betwixt this reverend author, and the Author of the Seasenable case,
viz. whither our Reformers intended to abjure Prelates in that Covenant, as a
part of the Popes hierarchy. To clear this matter of fact, what could be more
pertinent then the Popes own acknowledgement, and judicial declarator; that de
facto they depend upon him, and areowned as parts of his hierarchy, is in this
convincingly apparent. That de jure they have no divine warrant, this author
supposed it as his principle, the contrary whereof neither that Pamphleter, nor
any other has proved: So that the Popes [ipse dixit] in this, is sufficient to
prove this matter of fact. That he made not the Popes, [ipse dixit] the rule to
decide whither this officer be juris divini, or not, is in this convincingly
evident (and by consequence this man's obvious folly in imputing to him such ane
assertion) that he grants, that if this Casuist had proved the Prelate to be
juris divini, and institute by Christ or his Apostles, then the abjuring [of
the Popes wicked Hierarchie], would import only the abjuring of [the corruption
of this officer], whose lawful office might be still retained: but this
casuist taking this for granted that he is so institute, and reasoning upon
that supposition, the author had good ground, until his Antagonist as the
affirmer shouldpro vehis supposition, to hold fast his own principle viz, that
the prelates Episcopal being is papal: which is cleared by many of the Learned
from convincing Testimonies. Let this Resolver read Leo (epist. 86.) and Swave
(Tom. 4. page 465. of the Council of Trent, sess. 23. cap. 4. de Sacram.
ordinis) where Anathema is pronounced upon any that denies Prelates power of
ordination. etc. over Presbyters. I suppose he were alleging against a Papist
that some of the Popish orders are essential pieces of his hierarchy, and
should prove it by the Popes acknowledgment and constitutions, would he think
the Papists rejoinder good, ergo, ye own the Popes authority, and make his,
[ipse dixit] judge. Say it were a question anent ths Acoluthi or Exorcists etc.
Whither they are a part of the Popes Hierarchy? would he not think the Popes
acknowledgment and owning them for such, to be a sufficient argument to prove
this? Since he supposes (and rationally) that they have no other right either
in esse, or operari. Do not all our divines draw Arguments from the Pope and
his councils acknowledgment, to prove their owning of many corruptions, and
that they are properly theirs. But do they justify the Popes [Ipse dixit] in
proving this, or in this method of arguing? since they do suppose aliunde, that
they have no divine right, as the Apologist in the point of prelacie rationally
does. 2. as for what he adds of protestant Churchet, or Prelates, their
opposing the Popes pretended right and Supremacy hereanent, we say that they
impugn his supremacy best, who lay an axe to its root [prelacie]. And to grant
that prelacy is of its self a part of his Hierarchy, will no more justify his
supremacy, then Paul's saying that the mystery of iniquity was working in his
time would do it. And al tho the first Proestotes or Bishops did not formally
depend upon him, yet as a humane device they made way for him, and eatenus, are
a part of his Hierarchy, which the opposition of some Bishops when he first
attempted supremacy does nothing invalidat. Besides that the question here
betwixt the Apologist and that Pamphleter, was about prelacie as it appeared
before the Reformers in its then being and would, but not of the first
proestotes or moderatours. What he adds here anent Calvin [his owning of a
hierarchy, and pronouncing Anathema upon them who would dissowne it, if cut
off from its dependence upon the Pope] is answered already upon the 1.
Dialogue. He^e I shall only add, that if Calvin in that passage, opposed unto
the [Popish Bishops] Such as take Christ for their head, what curse will he not
judge them worthy of, who own and plead for such Bishops as pretending to
renounce the Popes headship, take for their immediate head a civil Pope, and
make him as to all spiritual matters, a more absolute head then the Pope
himself.

As for his argument from these Ministers who reasoned with the Doctors of
Aberdeen [their declaring that the Doctors might take the National Covenant,
and yet debate and vote in relation to episcopacie in the ensuing assembly] I
wonder what blurred this man's eyes, that citing page 395. of the Apollogy, he
could not look back, to page 393. where he might have found this argument of
his Master the author of the Seasonable case answered, which this casuist drew
from that pamphlet emitted anno 1638. under the name of his Majesty's
Commissioner; so that we have it here in the 3^ concoction, and yet it is as
raw as at the first. The answer in short is (I remit it at length to his
reading in that piece) that it was not the national Covenant it self that the
Doctors scrupled to subscribe, and consequently anent which that debate was
stated betwixt the Ministers and them, but the addition containing, the
application to the present times, which as to prelacie was expressed thus [a
forbearing the approbation of the corruptions of the public government of the
Church] by this they thought they were expressly specifically bound against
prelacie: this these Ministers denied, but never said that prelacie was not
abjured in the national Covenant it self, or the negative Confession. Let this
Absolver read the answers of the Ministers, wherein this will be cleared.

The Doubter next objects [that the decision of the assembly 1638. put it out
of doubt that prelacie was abjured in that Covenant, and that all Episcopacy
was meant by the Popes hierarchie]. To which he answers. 1. That prelacie being
of divine, or Apostolic right, that decision is null from the beginning. Ans.
whereas he says he has proved prelacie to be of divine or apostolik right, I
will presume to say I have proved the contrary; so that the Covenant is so far
from being null upon this ground, that it is rather an accessorie tie to disown
a corruption, to the disowning whereof, wewere before by scripture grounds
preoblidged. But passing this, he next alleges that it was more then that
assembly could do to declare this. Who so? 1. (says he) how could they put a
sense upon ane oath taken 58. years before, and few or none of the first takers
alive, or if alive, few or none members of that assembly? how could they know
that their exposition was according to the mind of the first imposers? But why
will this Plageary tell us still over and over the arguments of the Seasonable
case, without noticing the answer thereof already exhibit unto him? did not the
Apologist tell him, that this reason supposes the sense of that Covenant to
perish with the first framers. And whereas that casuist added, to make the
argument stronger (which this his disciple forgot) that the oath being vinculum
personale, they could not give the sense of dead men. To this the Apologist
answers, that there is also a vinculum reale, as this national oath was, and
that it oblidging all the Land, and the posterity, we were accordingly in order
to performance, bound to Search into its meaning, and that this was the proper
work and duty of a general assembly. That that casuist himself acknowledged
(which this borrower should have noticed) that this was the judgment of
Ministers concerning its sense when prelates were first obtruded upon this
Church, so that its true meaning from hand to hand was come to them, and that
they were the more in tuto to judge of it. And whereas the argument of the
Seasonable case had a Limitation in it which this man forgott, viz: [unless
that assembly could produce authentic evidences that this was the meaning of
Imposers] the Apologist told him that they did produce authentic express
evidences, that such was the meaning of the first takers. I would know how this
man comes to descant upon the sense of ancient writers in this pamphlet, and to
determine anent sentences of private writers, dead several centuries of years
ago? He is very confident in fastening his Glosses upon Jerome's words. I trow
that Author is dead more then 58. years ago. And for as clear as his words are
against the divine right of prelacie, yet this man thinks he is Cock sure that
this was not the meaning of Jerome's words, which presbyrerians allege. Quis
talia fando, temperet a risu.

But the Seasonable case goes on to object next (and this resolver follows up
at his heels.) That all which that Assembly produces (Sess. 16.) to prove this
to be the meaning of that Oath, amounts only to this, that the Church about
that time of taking the Covenant, and also afterward, was laboring against
Bishops, but proves not that episcopacie was abjured in the words of the oath.
Now why would he not do his Doubter such a small piece of justice, as to put
into his mouth the large answer of the Apollogist to this argument, from (page
406. to 409.) But this would have made him too stiff a Doubter for this
Resolver or Informer: but had he nothing in the Surveyer to resolve this? Well,
the Apollogist here tells him and his Leaders in this argument, that the
Covenant supposes a Government then in being, to the defense of which it
oblidgeth: that that Government was not prelacie, but presbytery, he clears by
a large induction of our assemblies acts and procedour, as the Assembly 1638.
did before; so that, that matter of fact being clear, there is No doubt but
that the national Covenant binds to defend and preserve presbyterian
Government then owned and existing; even as its engadgement to defend the King
must needs be understood of King James who was then reigning. That this was the
government then Existent and owned by this Church, we cleared in short already,
and need not here repeat it. But 3. this Informer (passing over a more
plausible objection of his Master the Seasonable case) enquires by what war
and that assembly could put upon others their sense of the Covenant; they might
declare their own sense (says he) which possibly was not right, but how could
they oblidge others to their sense, who had taken it before, the first imposers
having given them no such power. The Apollogist here told him, that this
assembly put no sense of their own upon any who took it either before or after,
but as the representatives of this Church gave a judicial interpretation of
it, and by authentic evidences made it appear, that this was the sense of the
imposers, and of the Church of Scotland when it was taken, and that such as
swear it before with an explicatory addition [to forbear the approbation of
prelacie, until the assembly should try whither it was abjured in that oath]
did consequently commit this unto, and were accordingly depending upon the
assembly to declare the meaning thereof; besides that the judicial
interpretation of this national Church her oath, did of right belong unto this
her supreme judicatory as is said. Here the Doubter objects [that those who
took the Covenant after it was thus sensed by the assembly, have abjured
Episcopacy]. To this he answers that the assembly did intend to put no other
sense upon it, then the sense of the words, and of the first imposers. Very
true, but what then? the first imposers having no such meaning (says he) as to
abjure Episcopacie, the assemblies ground fails, and their posterior meaning
could not bind against the first meaning. This last is easily granted, but the
great pinch lies in this, how proves he that the first Imposers never meaned it
against Episcopacie. This he says is already showed, but where? we must wait
it seems for a new pamphlet to get an account of this great proof.

The Doubter next alleadeth to purpose [that we engadge our selves in that
Covenant to adhere to this Church in doctrine, faith, religion and discipline,
-- and to continue in the doctrine and discipline thereof, which is Presbyterian
discipline.] To this he answers. That by discipline, cannot he meant
Presbyterian government. Why so? because (says he) at the first imposing of
the Covenant there was no such government in Scotland nor for a confiderable
time after. Ans. we have made it appear that Episcopacie was judicially
declared unlawful, and that both the books of discipline were received, which
overthrow prelacie, and asserts Presbyterian discipline, before ever that
Covenant was taken; and that at the very time of taking it the old mould of
prelacies were dissolved, and Presbyteries erected both by the King, and
assembly. But how proves our Informer that there was no such government in
Scotland at that time? because (says he) the King, for all Ministers essays
to introduce Presbytery, yet owned Episcopacy. But how proves he this, that at
the imposing of the Covenant, he owned episcopacy? did he not own the
assemblies power, and the power of Synods? presented he not to that assembly
1581, a plot of Presbytries, and his letter enjoining their erection, and to
dissolve prelacies, together with the subscribed Covenant? how did this own
episcopacy? let Royalists take notice what an ingrained dissembler this man
makes King James, in saying that he still owned episcopacy, when so palpably
disowning it to the sense of all reasonable men. And if king James came all
this length as to the introducing of Presbytrie, surely Ministers essays with
him for this end, were very effectual. Besides, its a poor argument to prove
that this protestant organick Church was not at that time owning Presbyterian
government, or exercising it (and by consequence that the Discipline as then
existent, sworn to be mantained in that oath, is not Presbyterian) to say that
king James owned episcopacie. Nay, in granting these essays of Ministers for
Presbytry, he grants that Presbyterian government was owned. For suit I am what
was their sense and endeavors as to Presbyterian government from the
beginning, the same were the sense and endeavors of the body of this
protestant Church. But his 2d answer to the premised objection of his Doubter
is ushered in with a therefore -- what next? therefore the government meant in
it must be Episcopacie, if any particular mode of government be understood.
This is well stepped out, a piece beyond his Master the Seasonable case, who
hardly comes this length. The man that will let us Episcopacie in this Church
at that time, as the Government imbracd by her, must have odd prospectives, and
of a like quality with these of our Informer, which have descryed Diocesian
Bishops in Scripture. We heard that the Seasonable case grants [that Ministers
then looked on themselves as oblidged against episcopacie, both by the national
Covenant, and by the word of God] pray Sir, be tender of these Ministers
reputation, were they so principled and still owning episcopacie too? this is
strange, yea and owning it and promising to defend it in this Covenant.
Besides, how will he reconcil our Churches laboring now against Bishops,
acknowledged by him page 118. with her practicing Episcopacy, which he asserts
page 118. But his answer has a proviso [if any particular mode of government
was understood.] But why will this latetudinarian Informer cast the mist of a
hesitating [if] upon a clear and plain truth? strange! Speaks not the Covenant
of an existent frame of Government embraced by this Church? What! Were they
embracing a Proteus? was it an existent individuum vagum, or materia prima,
some Embryon that had received yet no form? But how proves he that Prelacie
was sworn unto in that Oath? Because (says he) the Year after, the King
ratified the agreement at Leith in favors of Episcopacie. This we heard
before, and did show what an insignificant reason it is, from King James
practice a year after, to infer what is the sense and intendment of this
Oath, and the takers of it. A topic and reason which none who are solid and
rational will admit. Yet the Informer still beats upon this Anvill. Besides,
the Apollogist tells him (page 15.) that this treaty at Leith, anno 1571, was
opposed and censured by the National Assembly, the very next year; So that
this national Church in her suprem judicatory, gave no consent unto, but
opposed that treaty, and whatever recesses from her Presbyterial Government,
were therein begun; But this man's sqeemish eyes, still overlooks what he cannot
answer. Now remark our Informers profound and subtle reasoning in this point.
King James did not abjure episcopacy in the National Covenant, why so? Because
the next Year he acted for Episcopacie. And when we allege that the Government
to which that Covenant oblidgeth, was Presbyterian Government which was then
existent; he tells us that the Government then existent was episcopal. And
when he is put to the proof of this paradox against such clear evidences, he
just recurrs again and tells us (for his proof) that King James then acted for
episcopacie; fine circular reasoning this is, and the Informer shall thus never
want a Medium, and knows exactly to answer the solidest argument against-him
with turning, according to the Soldiers dialect, asye were.

But what is meant by [discipline] in that Covenant? The substantialls of it
(says he) and necessary policy as expressed in the first dook of discipline, 9.
Cap. which is unalterable, tho particular forms (as some think) may be
changed. But 1. Why will this versatil Informer bemist his reader what dark and
general expressions. Whither means he the [essential necessary Policy,]
according to that phrase of the book, or a necessary Policy expressed and
asserted in that book? If the first, I would ask him. 1. Why condescends he not
upon that essential and necessary policy, and gives no account of its nature
and extent, as it is contradistinguished from that which is not necessary, but
mutable. 2. If by substantials of Government^, he mean all Church Officers of
divine appointment, according to the Scripture account of their qualifications,
their authority, and its due exercise, with what sense or reason can he
suppose, or any else, that this will not determine a particular form, and
cansubsist without it? how can a particular form be more formaly and explicitly
described then thus? But, next, if by necessary Policy, he understand the
Policy held out and asserted in that first book, I would ask him. 1. Why
excludes he the second book, which was at this time extant and received, and
which does in several chapters viz. 5, 6, 7, 8. treat of the Pastor, Doctor,
Elder, and Deacons office, which he will no doupt own as substantial pieces of
Church-policy, being so clearly asserted in Scripture. 2. Why answers he not to
the account and character of that first book given by the Apoll: (page 10.) who
tells him that it overthrowes prelacy in the establishing of Church-sessions,
the way of election and trial of Ministers, and several other things contrary
to the episcopal method; will he by this silence consent, that prelacy stands
in opposition to the substantialls of Church Government, and the utterly
necessary Policy thereof? to a policy indeed unalterable; (to use his time
phrase)? if he say, that he understands by this phrase, that policy which is
necessary in either or both these books, but not the intir. Policy delineated
therein; how will he prove that the Covenant-obligation in the Intention of the
imposers, reaches the on and not the other? Next I would ask this Informer,
whither thinks he that particular forms of Government are alterable, yea or
not? if not, how comes he to distinguish them in this, from the essential
necessary Policy which he calls unalterable? if he think them alterable, why
does he not positively assert this, but presents this opininion as the thoughts
of some only, and censurs Stilling fleets opinion herin (page 76.) Besides, if
by [substantials of Government] he unstand [the discipline asserted in that
book,] he justles and deals strokes what his reverend father B. Spotswood, in
his character thereof exhibit in his History, page 174. For first, he says it
was framed in imitation of the Government of the reformed Church in Geneva,
which all know was Presbyterian. 2dly. He says it it could not take effect as
being but a Dream. And did he call the [substantialls of Government] but a
Dream, thinks this man? Surely either the Bishop or our Informer dreams. 3dly.
He wishes John Knox had retained the old policy, and therefore in his sense
this policy was distinct from Prelacie. On the other hand the framers (the
Ministry owneing it) supplicat the Parliament after it was drawn up for [the
restoration of the Discipline of the ancient Church,] and for discharging the
Popes usurpation, and of all that Discipline that did flow therefrom, as
inconsistent with the Discipline of the ancient Church, and the Discipline
contained in that book. How absurd is it to suppose that it was only
substantialls which was at this time existent, and no particular form; it
being a form of Government and the Discipline of this Church, which the
Covenant oblidges unto; and the Apologist as, well as the Assembly 1638. could
have given him a large account and proof of a particular form at this time
existent. In a Word, let us have all the substantialls of Government, i. e.
AllChurch officers divinely appointed, with their due power and Assemblies
higher and lower, and it will quickly justle his prelacie to the door, and make
him him and hisFathers feast he dint of the true Church of Scotland, her sword
and censures for what they have done, if they repent not.

CHAP. III.
The Abjuration of Prelacie in the solemn League and Covenant, vindicat from
the exceptions of this Informer. Also Mr Crofton and Timorcus acquit of
affoording any Patrociny to his cause. Dr Sanderson stands in terms of
contradiction to him in this point.

BUt now this our Oedipus and doubt resolver who has acquit himself so
dexterously in absolving us from the national Covenant, marches up after the
Seasonable case, to try how he can play the absolver as to the solemn league.
And his Doubter making a wide step to the 2d. Article [wherein he allegeth
Bishops are abjured, and that Protestant Bishops are meant]. To this he
answers, That its not every kind of Protestant Bishops that is there intended,
and that Timorcus (page 14, 16.) holds that all episcopacy is not abjured, but
that they could in England freely Submit to the primitive episcopacy viz, the
precedencie of one over the rest; without whom nothing is ordinarily to be done
in ordination and jurisdiction -- that they assert its only the English kind
of prelacy (expressed in the Article for that end) that is abjured, which we
have not in Scotland. That Mr Vines and Gattaker assert, that its only that
complex frame consisting of all the officers there mentioned, that is abjured
-- that the Assembly of divines was reconcilable to moderate episcopacie, -- --
That Timorcus holds that the English parliament and our commissioners were not
against all Episcopacy, (citing likewise Mr Crofton page 70: 71.) hence he
concludes that the English preshyterians would not cry out against conformists
as guilty of perjury. Ans. I. It is a very pityfull shift to measure our
obligation in Scotland against Prelacy, by the 2d. Article of the league, which
relates to the Church of England, wherein only that prelacy was existent. For
since Scotland, from the time of our reformation never had such a Prelacie as
the adversaries acknowledge, they must consequently grant that the prelacie
which that article engadgeth to extirpat, is not solely or mainly the Prelacie
which we stand oblidged against in that Covenant, but a Prelacy inconsistent
with Presbyterian Government (and under that formal consideration) which in
the first article we are engadged to preserve. In order to which preservation
of our reformed discipline from our own Prelacie, the 2d Article, which does
relate to the extirpation of Prelacy in England and Ireland, is subservient as
a mean to its end. This is convincingly clear, for I. Extirpation and
Preservation being opposite terms, and the last being made use of as to our
Church of Scotland, must needs relate to Presbyterian Government as then
established, in all its previledges, which clearly excludes the episcopacy
formerly existent therein; And the extirpation, and reformation ingadged to in
the 2d. Art. must relate to the then existent Prelacy in England and Ireland,
and that by way of mids leading unto, and for execution of the ends of
preserving our own established reformation, engadged unto in the first Article.
2. We said already that our Parliament did rescind all acts against our
episcopacy, together with the solemn league, and restore Prelates to the sole
possession of Church Government under the King, declaring clearly that the
preservation engadged unto in the first article, cannot consist with our
Prelacie. Again, as this duty of extirpation is engadged unto in so far as is
necessary in order to the preserving of our own established reformation, by
this Church principally vowed and intended, so that clause in the end of the
2d. Article, viz. [to extirpate whatsoever is found contrary to sound doctrine,
and the power of godliness] amounts both as to us and England, to such an
extensive engadgement in opposition to Prelacie, that it totally excludes it
even in our adversaries mould, under this formalis ratio as thus opposite to
sound doctrine etc. Which has been cleared upon the first Dialogue.

Next, will this man deny that these officers, Archbishops, Bishops, Deans,
Chapters, etc. are not in themselves and simply abjured in that 2d. article, or
that the Presbyterians in England would not disowne them as inconsistent with
the Covenant? Says he not that it is only a fixed presidency of order which
they are for? and is this all that Archbishops and Diocesian Bishops do
possess? have we not in Scotland Archbishops, Bishops, Deans and are we not
engadged to extirpat these in the 2d. article? how then can he say that it is
only that complex frame with all these officers which we are oblidged against.
Do not two remarkable clauses contradict this gloss? I we engadgeto extirpate
all Ecclesiastic officers depending on that Hierarchy, what? is it only all
in bulk, and not all and every one? this were equivalent to such a wild
assertion, as if one should say that after the enumeration of these evils
schism, heresy, profannesse, -- which are thus Summed up, whatsoever is
contrary to sound doctrine and the power of godliness, this engadgement did
only relate to all these evils complexly, and not to every one sigilatim or
apart. 2. Whatsoever is contrary to sound doctrine in our principles, is there
abjured as I said: but such are Bishops, Archbishops, and I add, whatsoever
is inconsistent with our established reformation and with Presbyterian
government, is also here formally abjured. In the 3d place, Timorcus is clearly
against our Informer, for in explaining what is that prelacy which is abjured,
he distinguishes a Prelacie of jurisdiction, and of mere order. The prelacie
of jurisdiction, he says is twofold, the first is, whereby the Bishop has
sole power of ordination and jurisdiction (such as is our prelacy now in
Scotland) in which government Timorcus says that Ministers, do meet with the
Bishop only ex abundanti, to give him advice, which is all that our Curats are
allowed by law, as is said above, and scarce that. The 2d sort of prelacie he
calls paternall, wherein the college of Presbyters have a constant Prelate or
President, who must concur with them ordinarily in ordination and acts of
jurisdiction. He interprets the Covenant expressly to strick against the Prelate
with sole power of ordination and jurisdiction; which prelacy he calls Popish
even though the Bishop admit Presbyters to concur with him in ordination and
government. Now let this man say, since Timorcus (whom he will not assert that
these others divines do contradict in this point) together with the parliament
of England according to Timorcus, do disowne such a prelacie as is here
described, and interpret the Covenant obligation as reaching the extirpation
thereof, does not this article of extirpation according to their sense, clearly
reach and cut off the present prelacie of diocesian Bishops and Archbishops,
obtruded upon this Church? can he deny that they have the sole power of
ordination and jurisdiction, that all the power which Curats have according to
our Law, is to give the Bishops advice, yea and not that either, unless he
judge them to be persons of Known loyalty and Prudence. And surely if this
precedence of mere order, here expressed, be the only primitive Episcopacie, it
is far short of what our Informer pleads for, and will never come up to
justify the prelacie now existent. And if in the sense of Timorcus, and the
other divines mentioned, and in the sense of the imposers of that oath, the
extirpation engadged unto, cuts off whatsoever is beyond this precedence of
mere order; it is incontrovertibly clear that even in their sense, the prelacie
now existent is abjured.

That Mr. Crofton, and the Presbyterian Covenanting party in England according
to him, are not reconcilable to our prelacie, nor the Covenant in their sense,
appears evidently by his pleadings for the Covenant, against the Oxford men and
others. In his Analepsis (page 74. 75.) he mentions a breviary of reasons to
prove [that the prelatical government in its formality is a plain and clear
papacy, and that a Diocesan Bishop, and ane universal Metropolitan or Pope
differ only in degree and limits, not in kind] citing, and approving of
Salmasius and Beza's, calling episcopacie a step to the papacy; so that the
very office of a diocesian Bishop as such, is as unlawful as the Papacy in Mr
Croftons judgment, it being with him a part thereof. Again (page 78.) whereas
the Oxford men plead [that they cannot swear against episcopal government,
which they conceive to be of divine or apostolic institution] he chargth them
and Dr Gauden, with sophistick concealment of the ratioformalis objecti, and
not describing of episcopal government: And tells him that episcopal
government may denominat a government, communi concilio Presbyterorum, with a
Moderator or Chaireman, ordinis causa, which he says is of divine institution,
and exemplified act. 20. where Bishop and Presbyteter are terms synonimous
denominating persons invested with the same office and authority. This he says
the Covenant strikes not against, and the prelacie which is abjured he
describes to be a government wherein one person is advanced into a distinct
order of Ministry above other Ministers, and is invested with Prince-like
power over them, enjoying an authority peculiar to him eo nomine as Bishop, of
sole ordination and jurisdiction, unto whom all other his fellow Ministers are
subject, and must swear obedience to him etc. I wonder if our Informer will
deny this to be the characteristick of our present Prelates, or affirm that
they possess no more authority in Church judicatories but a mere precedence,
ordins causa, which is all the Episcopacy which Mr Crofton holds that the
Scripture, and the Covenant according thereunto, will allow. Thereafter, (page
72.) He tells these Masters, that Christ gave his Disciples charge that they
should not affect superiority one over another, or princely power over Gods
heritag^; and puts them to prove, that the office of the Ministry, may in
ordination be divided, or that there are more orders of the Ministry then one
(which our Informer still begs a supposition of) viz. Bishop or Presbyter, or
more officers in the Church then Elders and Deacons appointed by Christ, or his
Apostles by their apostolic authority. That the Presbyter (in whom are
required the same qualifications, to whom is to be yielded the same obedience,
subjection andrespect, who recives the same ordination, and is charged with the
same duty, and invested with the same power of feeding and governing the Church
of God, with the Bishop, and none other) is an order distinct from, and subject
to the Bishop, to be ruled by him, and not to exercise his office but by the
Bishops license, and that the Presbyter must swear obedience to the Bishop as
his ordinary. Which are the grand postulata and topics of all this man's
reasoning in point of prelacy. The autitheses of which tenets we see Mr Crofton
most evidently maintains as the sense of the Covenant in point of episcopacy;
he further describes (page: 80. and 81.) the prelacy covenanted against, and
anent which he challenges these Masters proof of a jus divinum, to be such
wherein one Minister or Bishop does stand charged with all the congregatious
and pastors -- -- of a County, or many Counties making one di^cess -- who is
by office bound to a pastoral correction and government of them -- that these
Bishops may be subject to one Metropolitan Church and Archbishop, to whom they
shall swear obedience -- adding, that if the Word of God conclude such
superiority, over the Church in one Kingdom, it will conclude a Catholic
superiority over the universal Church, and advance the Pope as warrantably
above the Archbishops, as the Archbishops are above the Bishops, and the
Bishops above the Presbyters, these not being differences of kind, but degree.
Adding further, that no more is pleaded for Prelates divine or Apostolic right
in the Church of England, but what is pleaded by Bellarmine, and the Council of
Trent, for she Papacy. Now from what is said, I darre refer it is this
Informer himself, whither Mr Crofton does not clearly disowne all the
essentialls of our present prelacy, and hold it to be abjured in the Covenant;
the office of our present Bishops and Archbishops being incontravertibly such
as he here describes. And whither Mr Crofton holds not our prelacy,
arch-prelacy, and metropolitan primacy, to stand upon the same basis with the
papacy, and to be equally with it, excentrick to the Scriptures; and that he
esteems consequently the Bishops and Archbishops (which I hope he will not
deny to be abjurd in the Covenant) to depend (as such) upon the Pope as a part
of his hierarchy. Next (page 81) he says that it is not the first sort of
episcopal government formerly described, wherein all Ministers are invested
with equal power and auhority or dignity, are all of the same order, and
govern by common counsel, but the specificall prelacy last described, which
presumes it self to be a Hierarchy: So that with Mr Crofton our present
prelacie falls within the denomination of the Hierarchy abjured in the solemn
league, and of the Popes wicked Hierarchy abjured in the national Covenant --
for he tells us in the preceding page that none can deny that a quantenus ad
omne, etc. He tells them moreover in that same page that had he lived in the
Churches of Ephesus, Antioch, Phillippi, Creet, or the seven Churches of Asia,
invested with the same ministerial authority which he then enjoined, he might
have stood up a Peer to any Bishops therein; so that he esteemed no Bishop
there, but Presbyters. Besides (page 82.) he cites several writers to prove
that the authority and distinction of Episcopal and Archiepiscopall chaires
and metropolitan primacies, owe their institution to the Church of Rome, or
politic constitutions of Princes. He tells us (page 84.) out of Cartwright and
Whittaker -- that the Church in respect of Christ its head (not his vicar, or
superiority of single prelates) is a monarchy; in respect of the ancients and
pastors that govern in common (all the Presbytrie) with like authority among
themselves (not a superiority over them) it is an Aristocracie, and in respect
the people are not excluded, but have their interest, it is a Democracy. The
inserted parentheses are Mr Croftons; and let any judge whither he assert not
with these authors, a Presbyterian frame of government opposite to diocesian
Bishops and Archbishops. In his Analepsis, in answer to Dr Gauden (page 2.) he
charges him (as before the Oxford men) with an uncertain proposal of the
object, and the ratio formalis of the Covenant obligation as to prelacy, under
the general term of Episcopacie (therein also las^ing our Informer for the
same laxness and ambiguity) telling them that by good demonstration [Bishop]
and [Presbyter] have been asserted to be synonimous titles of Church officers,
and are found to have been so used in the primitive times of the Church and of
the Fathers -- adding, that the government of the Church by its Ministers -- in
their several assemblies, with a Moderator Ordinis causa, to dispose and
regulat what belongs to order -- is the primitive episcopacie -- which he
grants to the Doctor, that the Covenant will not strike against -- then (page
3. and 4.) he describes the Episcopacy which the Covenant strikes against. And
page 5. summeth it up thus -- that the Covenant cannot be accomplished by the
removal of Prelates pride etc. Whilst the Preeminence, prerogative, Paternal
power, and juridicall authority assumed by them as distinct from, and above all
other Ministers of the gospel, as the only immediate successors of the Apostles
(So our Informer makes them) etc. -- are continued. What will this Oedipus
answer to Croftons assertion? Have not our Prelates this preeminence above
Presbyters, as a distinct order from them? and have they not a juridicall
authority over them, by our law and practice, and his pleading too? does not Mr
Crofton in terminis assert, that the Covenant obligation can never be satisfied
until such be removed? are they no more in Church judicatores, but Moderators
and Chairemen, set up Ordinis causa to order the actions of the meeting? does
not our law give them a negative voice in the meeting, and allows Presbyters
only to give them advice, if their Lordships do judge them prudent and loyal.

Again, whereas the Dr, (page 18.) did conclude that the Hierarchy being dead,
must rise in another quality. Mr Crofton tells him (page 6.) That if it arise
according to the Covenant, it must be in the establishment of Congregational,
Classical, Provincial and National Assemblies or Synods of Church officers,
Communi consilio Presbyterorum (this phrase of Jerome he frequentlie uses) to
debate and determine the affairs of the Church, and Exercise all acts of
discipline and Ecclesiastic power -- each having a Prefident to propone
questions, gather suffrages etc. and no more. Which mould of government,
whither it would not smooth our prelacie to a complete Presbyterian parity, let
the Informer himself judge. It is incontrovertibly clear from these passages of
Crofton, that even in their sense whom our Informer alleges to stand on his
side, the present prelacie is abjured.

Finally, as for the authors after cited, and that declaration of the sense of
the 2d article which he mentions, we say, as it is not clear (nay the contrary
is evident) that such proposals in explication of that article, were either mad
or approven by all, or the soundest Presbyterians there present, so it is als
evident that if prelacy even as by them reserved, be found contrary to sound
droctrine, and the power of godliness, that article of exti^pation does most
clearly and formally reach it. Neither are we so much concerned in the
problemarick glossings or disputes of any persons in England (they not having
tendered that oath unto us) as in the obligation of this oath, and that of the
National Covenant lying upon us, to preserve our reformation as it stood then
established. Moreover this man would take Dr Sandersons advice here that an oath
being stricti juris -- the meaning is to be kept when clear from the words --
but if it be doubtful, every one is to take care that they indulge not their
own affections and inclinations, or give way to too large a license of
glossing, to the end they may with more ease loose themselves from the
obligation, or give such a sense to others, or take it to themselves -- as the
unconcernd do see that the words will not bear, both for fear of perjury and
ensnaring of others. Thus he, de jur prom. praelect. 2. parag. 9.

The Doubter objects next [that we are not concerned in the parliament of
England sense, but in the sense of the Church and state of Scotland, who
imposed the oath, and meant it against all sort of prelacie.] To this he
answers, that it being a common league of the three Kingdoms, the meaning must
be determined by all the three; and that Timorcus shows that the Parliament of
England their sense mas with concnrrence of our Commissiners. Ans. 1. We have
already made it good, that giving the Informer the advantage of the sense of
the 2d. article which he alleges, it will notwithstanding clearly exclude our
present prelacy. Timorcus telling us expressly (page 16.) that the Covenant,
aperily oblidges against Archbishops, Bishops, Deans etc. which terms he
says are liable to no ambiguity, and particularly against all such exercise of
prelacie, as is by one single person, arrogating to himself sole and single
power in ordination and jurisdiction. Darre this man deny that our present
prelates have this legal prerogative expressly allowed them by our laws? is
not all Church government to be managed by them with advice only of such of the
Clergy, as their Lordships (forsooth) shall judge loyal? so that the prelacie
which Timorcus and the English are for, is point blanck cross to the present
hierarchy; and the three nations sense of that article will (as we have
proved) never be reconciled to his sense and pleading in this point. 2. We told
him also that it is not the 2d. Art. Whereby mostly or principally our
obligation against prelacy is to be measured, it being that which relates
especially to England, where Prelacy was then existent; and whatever sense any
there do put upon that Article, yet they never offered to put any glosses upon
our great engadgement to preserve our reformation then established, and never
imagned nor offered the least limitation of our obligations both by the
National Covenant as then particularly applied against prelacie, and likewise
our obligation in the first part and article of the League, to preserve our
established reformation, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, which
consequently stands inviolable according to its native and necessary meaning,
in contradiction to our Prelacie or any Prelacie whatsoever, as he dar not deny
that this Church and Nation at the imposing did understand the same.

Our Informer permits now his Doubter to tell him [that we are engadged to
preserve the Government of the Church of Scotland, which was Presbyterian, and
that therefore in the 2d. article we swear against all kind of Prelacie,
Prelacie and Presbytery being inconsistent.] To this he answers that if we are
in the 1. Article bound to maintain Presbytery, and in the 2d left at liberty
for some kind of Prelacy, and with all if Presbytery and Prelacie be
inconsistent, then we have sworn contradictions, viz, to admit of no kind of
Prelacie, and yet admit of some kind of it. Ans. 1. He has it yet to prove
that either we or England are left to a latitude (according to the Genuine
sense of that Article) as to any prelacy, or whatever government else is
inconsistent with Presbyterian Government, because, 1 the general oblidgements
[to endeavor a reformation according to the Word of God -- and to extirpat
what ever is found contrary to sound Doctrine and the power of Godliness] will
(as I have said) necessarily import, both as to us and them, ane engadgement
against all kind of Prelacy under this notion and upon this ground. 2. As for
[Englands reserving a latitude for a proestos] which he here alleges, Timorcus
will tell us (out of Doctor Sanderson) of this rule as to the interpretation of
promissory Oaths that tho its granted that promissory imposed Oaths must be
interpret according to the sense of Imposers, as our private Oaths according to
our sense, yet both these rules are to be limited, so that neither our private
sense of our spontaneous Oaths, nor yet the sense of those who impose Oaths
upon others, must be other then will comport, with the just signification of
the words and phrases, in the Oath, vow, or Covenant, for this were to destroy
[saith he] the simplicity necessary to every Oath, and indeed not to interpret,
but to coin ane Oath or new obligation. Now the obligation of both Nations in
this Oath, is to endeavor reformation according to the Word of God, and to
extirpat whatever is contrary to sound Doctrine and the power of godliness. If
therefore a fixed Moderator, or any supposed moderat mould of Prelacy be found
contrary thereunto, no man's glossings whatsoever, can (according to this
necessary rule) prejudge the native import, signification, and extent of these
general clauses. In the 2d. place, his contradiction here imputed to us, is
but his own airie imagination, for it is not ad idem, and eodem modo. Wherein
he imagines the contradiction to lie. Our duty to preserve, and our obligation
thereanent, being relative to the established Government of the Church of
Scotland, and the extirpation engadged unto, being relative to another nation
and Church, wherein that species of Prelacy particularized in the Article, was
existent; so that there is no liberty left for any kind of Prelacy in
Scotland; and for Englands reserving, I have told him that what ever glosses
any may put upon that 2d. article, yet if the general clauses and expressions
mentioned will exclude all kind of prelacie, their glosses will not comport
with the simplicity and genuin sense of the oath, and therefore are not to be
admitted. Since if it can be made good from the scripture that all kind of
prelacy is unlawful, dissonant to the divine rule, and repugnant to the power
of godliness, the oath does most clearly strike against it.

Mr Crofton page 110. in answer to the Author whom he calls Dr Featly's ghost,
objecting that in the Covenant, the Church of Scotland is set before the Church
of England, tells him that it is in relation to different acts, the Reformed
Religion of Scotland to be preserved, of England to be Reformed; that it is no
Solecism to put the factum before the fieri, to swear the preservation of good
acquired, before ane endeavor to obtain the same or better, to prefix the
pattern to that which is to be thereunto conformed. He adds, that his Antagonist
has little reason to grudge that Scotland should be propounded as a pattern of
Reformation to England, since Beda reports that this nation did as first
communicate the science of divine knowledge without grudge or envy unto the
people of England, citing his Eccles. hist. gent. Ang. lib. 5. cap. 23. Hence
he infers, that it is no folecisin to propound us as a pattern of Reformation,
who had first obtained it, and from whom Christianity it self was ar first
transmitted to them. Here let out Informer inform himself, first, that in the
sense of the English Presbyterians, [the preserving of our established
Reformation] is that article wherein our obligation to Presbyterian government
is properly included; and that the article of Reformation yet in fieri, relates
properly to England. 2. That they state a distinction betwixt preserving and
reforming as distinct acts, the one relating to our Reformation in Scotland
already obtaind, the other to that in England yet in fieri, wherein they check
this man's blunt measuring our obligation against prelacie first and principally
by the second article, and his denying our obligation to preserve Pretbyterian
government containd in the first, and his blunt confounding the obligation of
the two articles, to give some shadduw of his fancyed contradiction which he
would fasten upon us, viz. [That we are bound against all Episcopacie in the
first article, and yet the second can admit of some.] For as we have before
answered, so Mr Crofton tells him here again, that the acts and objects are
different. The preserving of the Reformation, government and discipline of this
Church (which we see he holds to be Ptesbyterian government, according to our
two books of discipline, and opposite to diocesan prelacie as such) is a
different act and object, from these of extirpating Prelacie out of the Church
of England. And thirdly, that with Mr Crofton, and the English Presbyterians,
it is no such paradox as this man afterward endeavors to persuade us, that
the Covenant obliges them to Reform England according to our pattern, which
we see they hold to be the Scripture pattern. For Mr Crofton tells his
Adversary that our factum was to be their Fieri, and our acquired good in point
of government, the measure of their good to be obtaind, and that the good they
were to obtain (according to the Covenant) was the same with ours, and tells
him in terminis and expressly, that our pattern is in the first article
prefixed, to which they are to be conformed.

From what we have said out of Mr Crofton touching his sense of the Covenant,
and the sense of the English Presbyterians, who adhere thereunto, it is evident
that it strikes against all prelacy including the priority and power of
diocesan Bishops and Archbishops; That prelacy disputed against by Gerson
Bucer in his dissertations de Gub. eccl. Didoclavius in his Altar Damascenum.
Cartwrights Exceptions. Paul Baines his Diocesans trial. Smectymnuus. Mr Pryn
in his public and positive challenge for the unbishop^g of Timothy and Titus,
cited by Crofton, page 83. as unanswerable pieces. Yea all Bishops whose office
and authority is such as Mr Crofton (to use his own expression) might not stand
up a Peer to them in official power, tho a simple Presbyter; so that our
Informer is quite out in telling us that in their sense the Covenant is
reconcilable to our prelacy, and strikes only against that of England. Again,
Mr Crofton in the Analepsis, (page 129.) answering the charge of Ambiguity put
upon that clause of [the best reformed Churches] tells the Masters of Oxford,
that the sense is [in endeavoring the reformation of England, the word of God
shall be our rule, and the best reformed Churches our pattern.] Wherein he
clearly asserts with us, that the obligation of the Covenant, reaches the
extirpation of whatever Prelacie is found contrary to the Word of God: But so
it is that the Apostolic Churches (as we shall find Mr Crofton here assert)
owned no Bishops but such as he might stand up a Peer unto, so that the
Scripture rule, and by consequence the Covenant according thereunto, strikes
against, and cuts of all Prelacy of Diocesian Bish: of whatever Government does
admit of any Church officers, above Presbyters. And in his sense they are
oblidged to reduce Englands prelacy or hierarchy, to a complete presbyterian
parity. The Scripture makes (with Mr Crofton) the Bishop and presbyter merely
Synonima; So that no prelacy wherein a distinction is admitted, can consist
with the Covenant in his judgment; nor can any glossings of men prejudge this
rule, and the obligation resulting from this clause to extirpate Prelacy foot
and branch.

Our Informer might have seen this his notion further refuted by the Author of
that piece entitled [The case of the accommodation examined, page 39. 40.] who
shows that in so far as England had attained we might close with them in a
particular Oath, for extirpating an evil discovered, and yet for a further
advance, rest upon the more general ties so surely cautioned, till God should
give further light -- so that the engadgement of both parties expressly only to
extirpat that species, did no way hinder the setting up of Presbyterian
Government, and rejecting of all prelacy to be Covenanted unto under the
General provisions -- That, it was aggreeable to truth and righteousness for us
to concur, with that Church convinced of evils, but not so enlightened as to
remedies, in Covenanting against the evils in particular, and also to
endeavor a reformation according to the Word of God, and by virtue of this
general oblidgement, become bound to make a more exact search anent the
lawfullnes or unlawfullness of things, not so fully clear in the time of
entering into the Oath, and after the discovery to reject what seemed
tolerable. So that no hesitation among them, does hinder England and Scotlands
respective obligations to extirpate all episcopacy as contrary to that doctine
which is according to godliness. What inconsistency will the Informer show us
in this, that one nation vow adherence to its own establishment in point of
reformation and Church Government, and likewise vow assistance of another
nation in the removal of a corruption therein, tho the removal will not amount
to such a compleatness of reformation at first, as will be every way like unto
this establishment, both nations being notwithstanding oblidged respective,
under general clauses to make this reformation complete.

The Informer next tells us, that it is doubted by the learned, whither in the
first Article there be any obligation to maintain presbyterian Government. His
first reason is, because there is no express mention of presbyterian Government
therein, but only of our reformed religion in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government. Ans. this reason of the Seasonable case which he has borrowed, is
very insignificant. Our Church, after long wrestling being recovered from
corruptions both in Doctrine and Worship, which Prelates had introduced, and
her Discipline and Government according to the Scripture pattern set up, in
Presbyteries, synods, and Assemblies, and all the privileges of these her
courts, authorized and established both by civil and ecclesiastic
constitutions and laws, will any doubt (but the sceptick who will dispute that
snow is not white) that the discipline then reformed and established, is in that
oath sworn to be maintained. He may als well allege that it is not the
doctrine and worship then established, which we Covenant to preserve, as to
doubt of the government, since this reformation then established, takes in all
the three together, and in the same sense. Besides his Master the Seasonable
Casuist, grants that there was then in Scotland no such officers, as are
enumerate in the 2d article, but an established reformed government was then
existent. Now dare any of these new absolvers or resolvers say, that it was not
Presbyterian government, or that this was not the sense of the imposers of that
oath. His 2d reason is, that Independents took that Covenant, and had a hand in
wording that article, that it might not import any particular form of
government. -- That the words import no one form of government, but with this
proviso, as reformed. The Seasonable case said this already, to which the
Apologist returned answer That the government of this Church at that time being
Presbyteriall (as he acknowledged) there could be no other government
understood, then what was then existent, established and reformed. That to say
Indendepents understood it of their government, will no more reflect upon the
Covenant, then upon the Scripture it self, which Independents do allege will
plead for their government. Next, I would ask this man, why may not the same
insignificant quirk be also objected as to the doctrine, and worship, viz. that
only the doctrine and worship with this proviso as reformed, but not the then
established doctrine, and worship, is understood in that article, and so
sectaries may lurk under this general also. Thus he may allege that no
engadgement or oath in relation to his Majesty's authority will bind, except
his name and Surname be in it, because some may entertain a chimera of their
own under his Majesty's general titles. Alas! what ridiculous conceits are
these.

The Doubter next objects [that the English parliament, who together with our
Scots Commissioners imposed that oath, did by [the reformed government]
understand Presbytrie which was then settled here, and that therefore we are to
understand the oath in their sense who imposed it, whatever Independents
think.] He answers, by denying that the English parliament understood the 1.
article of Presbyterian government, for then they would have thought themselves
bound to reform England according to our pattern, but on the contraire in anno
1647 they toid our Commissioners, that they could never find Presbytrie
necessary by any divine right, and charged them with Superciliousness in
judging that there is no other lawful Church government, but what they call
so, and with misinterpreting the article anent Church government. This the
Seasonable case also said before him, and this hungry casuist catches up his
cibum praemansum, but could not see the answer returned to this in the Apology.
To this I say first, that the Parliament of England tendered not that oath to
us, nor is their sense thereof, principally to be eyed by us, as in his mould of
the objection and answer, he seems to suppose. The parliaments of both
Kingdoms imposed the oath upon their own subjects, framed by the consent of
both according to their own condition, and exigence; so that we are to look
mainly to the procedour and sense of our Church and state, for a discovery of
the genuin sense and meaning of that oath. Now it is most evident that the
design of our Church and state in framing and imposing of this oath, was to
establish and preserve our Church government then in being, which, he who
denies to have been Presbyterian, in its complete forms, and courts, he may
deny any thing. 2. We told him already, that whatever defection or liberty of
glossing any might be guilty of, yet the words and clauses of the Covenant, as
to that 1. article, are clear and abundantly significant, and will admit of no
evasion. And in relation to the total extirpation of prelacie out of that
Church where it was existent, the 2d Article, is as clear and convincing. And
therefore whither they looked upon themselves as oblidged to follow our pattern
yea or not, we have proved that they stood oblidged, both by that particular
enumeration in the 2 Article, and also in the more general clauses mentioned,
to extirpate Prelacie root and branch. This man will make a mere Proteus of
oaths, if their sense and obligation must vary, turn ambulatory or ambiguous,
according as men do shift or turn aside. We told him of Dr Sandersons rule,
anent the import of the words of an oath, in their genuin sense in reference to
its obligation, whatever liberty men may take to gloss, or interpret, which is
the judgment of all sound Casuists. 3. Dare he say, that ever the parliament
of England denied, that de facto Presbyterian government was completely
established in the Church of Scotland, or will he make them so irrational as
to deny this necessary consequence, that therefore the 1. Article of the
Covenant does clearly oblidge this Church to its preservation as the reformed
Government then existent; and if his consequence cannot but be admitted, surely
whither they looked on themselves as oblidged to follow our pattern yea or not
they held no sense of this article contrary to our own sense, nor denied our
obligation to maintain our established Presbyterian Government. And besides,
they never denied their obligation to reform the Church of England according
to the Scripture pattern; and that of the best reformed Churches, in conformity
to that pattern. And that the Church of Scotland, and other Churches where
Presbyterian Government was existent, were such, was and is the sense and
acknowledgement of the reformed Churches themselves, as from their confessions
we have made appear.

For confirming this further (because the Informer has told us frequently of
MrCrofton) let us hear how he will bespeak him in this point. In that piece
entitled [The fastening of S Peter's Fetters page 40.] He tells the Oxford men
of the Church of Scotlands Philadelphian purity -- in delivering in writting,
and excercising in practice that sincere manner of Government whereby men are
made partakers of salvation, acknowledged by Mr Brightman on Apocalypse 3. and
the Apology to the Doctors of Oxford, and of Beza's epistle 79 to Mr Knox,
exhorting him to hold fast that pure Discipline which he had brought into
Scotland, together with the Doctrine. And (page 41.) he cites the corpus
confess. (page 6.) Where the collector lays down this as the ground of that
Churches purity of doctrine, and 54 years unity without Schism [that the
Discipline of Christ and his Apostles, as it is prescribed in the word of God,
was by little and little received, and according to that Discipline, the
Government of the Church disposed so near as might be] which he prays may be
perpetually kept by the King and Rulers of the church. These English
Non-conformists, Beza, the Author of the syntagma, in Croftons sense, and
himself together with them, thus clearly avouching Presbyterian government,
which Mr Knox introduced, to have been the government of this Church since the
reformation, and which King James also owned. For after he has told us in the
same page of Arundel, Hutton, and Matthews, three English Archbishops, their
approving the order of the Church of Scotland, he tells the same Oxford men of
the joy which King James professed in the assembly 1590 that he was born to be a
King of the sincerest Church in the world. Again (page: 39.) he makes mention of
this Churches two books of discipline, as the great badge and Test of her
government; and in answer to the Oxford men's exception against that article of
the Covenant, which binds to preserve the discipline and government of the
Church of Scotland [viz. that they were not concerned in, and had little
knowledge of that government] he tells them, that he wonders how an university
conversing in all books, could profess they had no knowledge of these books. So
that in Mr Crostons sense and in the sense of the Presbyterian covenanters in
England, the government engadged unto in that article, is that platform of
Presbyterian government contained in these 2 books of discipline, which
adversaries themselves do grant to comprehend an entire frame of Presbyterian
government.

Again (page 141.) he gathers from the tenor of the Kings coronation oath at
Scone, that the royal assent was given unto Presbyterian government in
pursuance of the obligation of the solemn league and Covenant, and that, in
his Majesty's most public capacity as King of great Britain, France and
Ireland, for himself and Successors: and asserting clearly the equity of the
obligation, he asks the learned in law [whither the royal assent by such
expressions publicly made known (as here it was unto acts and ordinances of
parliament in his other dominions to be past here anent) be not sufficient to
make an act of parliament a perfect and complete law by the equity of the
statute 33. Hen. 3. 21. etc.] So that Mr Crofton clearly asserts our obligation
to Presbyterian government to be contained in the Covenant, and to reach all
his Majesty's dominions. For he tells us in the preceding page, that to all
such as apprehend the constitution of England to be Merum imperium, wherein the
King has supremam Majestatem, it is evident that his Majesty's ratifying the
Covenant thus, has rendered it national. Again Timorcus (page 70.) asserts
that the parliament who imposed the Covenant (anno 1648.) sent propositions to
the King wherein was demanded the utter abolishing of episcopacie. Which is
point blanck cross to the character of that piece obtruded by the Informer, and
does evidently demonstrat (compared with these passages of Mr Crofton) that the
whole body of Presbyterian covenanters in England, both imposers and takers,
parliament and people, understood that article of Presbyterian government.

The Doubter here poorly grants [that England and Scotland did not understand
that article in the same sense, but alleges that since our Church understood
it of Presbytry, we are bound to it in that sense.] Upon this he assumes, That
it will not follow that we are bound to it in the sense of our Church and
state, but rather that in relation to government it is with out sense, since
the imposers themselves were not aggreed as to its meaning. Ans. we have
already made it good, both from the sense and scope of the national Covenant,
the judicial interpretation and application of it to our former prelacie
expres^ie, the nations universal taking it so, and the authorizing thereof
both by King and parliament, as well as by the recommendation of the assembly,
from the total extirpation of prelacy, and setting up Presbyterian government
in all its courts, in consequence hereof, that that article of the solemn
league which relates to the preservation of the then existent Reformation in
doctrine, worship, discipline, and government, cannot without extreme impudence
be distorted to any other sense, then a preservation of the Presbyterian
government then existent. Especially the league being framed and entered into
by us, for our further security in relation to what we had attained. And this
being the article framed by the Church and state of Scotland at that time, and
this being also their scope and design, discovered in their treaties with
England, when that Covenant was entered into, I dare appeal this man's
conscience upon it, whither ever any demurre here anent, or any other sense of
this article, was offered by the English when the nations first entered into
this oath? or whither, the imposers thereof in Scotland, would have engaged in
that league with the English, upon any other terms then these, and in this
their sense of that 1. article. Thinks the Informer that if any such thing had
been muttered in the first transaction of this business, that the English did
not look upon the Presbyterian government as the reformed government of this
Church, that the Scots nation would have transacted with whem in this league?
Nay, when (as Timorcus tells us) it was debated branch by branch, phrase by
phrase in the convention house, in the parliament, in the assembly of divines,
was there ever such a notion as this of our Informer started, that by the
reformed government of the Church of Scotland, Presbyterian government was not
to be understood? in a word, dare he deny that the godly conscientious
Ministers and people of England, did in the sense of this oath, and even in
imitation of the Scottish, or rather the Scripture pattern, plead for, and had
begun to set up Presbyterian government, and are closs to their principles to
this day.

But he adds, that it is irrational to say we are bound to it in the sense of
the Church and State of Scotland, because they were but a part of the Imposers
and the least Part. Ans. I told him already that in relation to the engadgers
in Scotland they were the proper imposers, the authority of the respective
rulers of both nations, in relation, to their own subjects being first and
immediately to be looked unto, and their sense and scope therein to be mainly
eyed, and each Nation being properly and immediately judges, as to their own
national end in this stipulation. Thinks this man, that the then
representatives of Church and State, did eye any other end as to Scotland, then
the preservation of the reformation in Doctrine, Discipline, Worship and
Government, as at that time therein established. Moreover, the sense and scope
of the article it self being convincingly inclusive of Presbyterian Government,
it can admit of no other gloss without manifest distortion, and frustration of
the imposers design therein. Next he tells us, that suppose Presbytery were
meant in the 1 Article, yet the 2d will admit some episcopacie. What poor
stuff is this. Suppose the Article of extirpation relating only to England and
Ireland, would comport with some episcopacie (which the Informer has not yet
proved) what has that to do with Scotland? Or how can that enervate our
engadgement to preserve the reformation as then established in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government? Because in relation to the extirpating of
Englands Prelacy after the reformation in Scotland is completed and sworn to,
we are to bear with the English Church in some remains of Prelacy, till God
give further light, must we therefore be oblidged or allowed according to the
sense and scope of this Oath to corrupt or raze the Fabric of that established
reformation, and bring in again prelacy into that Church out of which it had
been totally eradicate? Nay, this is too dull inadvertancie. As for what he
adds that Presbytery is not inconsistent with any kind of prelacie. I answer
that the presbytery established and sworn to be maintained in Scotland, is, and
Beza is so far from disowning this, that (as we heard) he exhorts John Knox
to keep that Church and house of God clean of prelacy, as he loved the
simplicity of the Gospel.

CHAP. IV.
The grounds, upon which the Informer undertakes to prove that the obligation
of the Covenant cease, although its oblidging force for the time past were
supposed, examined at large. As also his reasoning upon Numb. 30. Wherein his
begging of the question, his contradicting of Dr Sanderson and other Casuists,
and manifold inconsistencies are made appear.

OUR Informer having spent his Master pieces, and the chief products of his
invention, or rather of those who have gone before him, upon this difficult
task of reconciling the Covenant to Prelacy, does next (as a liberal bold
disputer) undertake to loose the Covenant, even upon supposall of its
preexistent obligation against it. And therefore making his Doubter tell him
[that he bears off the acknowledgement of anyobligation against episcopacie,
either in the national, or solemn league, lest he fall under the charge of
perjurie]. In answer to this he will suppose that episcopacy is abjured in both
Covenants, and yet undertake to defend that they arenot perjured who now submit
to prelacie. The Doubter thinks this strange Doctrine, and so do I. Because [to
swear against episcopacie and yet acknowledge it is to do contrary to their
Oath.] To this doubt he returns a large resolution, but still follows up the
Seasonable case closs, for fear of miscarrying. And first, he begins with a
threefold partition, either prelacy (says he) is an unalterable necessary
Government of divine or Apostolic warrant, or it is sinful and contrary to
the Apostolic Government, or thirdly of a middle nature, neither commanded nor
forbidden, but left to Christian prudence as found expedient to be used or not.
Here I must stope him a little, and mind the reader, that we did upon the
first Dialogue, disprove this indifferent Proteus-Prelacie, as a monster to
Scripture, since the Scripture condescending so far as to its institution of
officers, ordinances, Laws, censures; and (as we heard himself acknowledge)
setting down all substantialls of Church Government, prelacie must of necessity
be either consonant or dissonant thereunto, and by consequence necessary or
finfull, commanded or forbidden. So that he is to be limited to the first two,
and any supposal anent the indifferency of presacy, is but his petitio
prnicipii; and the gratification of his adversary for further clearing of this
question: now proceed we. If it be the Apostolic Government derived from their
times to all ages of the Church, he hopes we will grant that no Oath oblidges
against it. This I willingly grant to him, but what then? Why, we must not cry
out perjurie till what he has offered on this head be solidly answered. Let
this bargain stand, I hope I have made his Scripturae pretenses, appear to be
vain, and proven the contrariety of that prelacie now established, both to the
Scripture and pure antiquity, and till he has answered what is offered upon
this point, we may impute perjury to him by his own acknowledgment. What next,
what if it be sinful? Then he says we need not plead the Covenant obligation.
No? may we not plead the Covenant obligation against Schism, heresy, and
profanness? May not the Oath of alledgance be pleaded against treason, because
before this Oath treason is a sin? Said he not already that the Baptismall vow
is a superadded obligation, though the matter it self does bind? did not the
Oath and Covenant (Neh. 8.) contain an abjuration of many sins, against which
the people stood before preoblidged? But he adds, its true a supervenient Oath
makes the obligation the stronger. Right, why then may not we plead that which
makes it stronger? Especially against this man and his fellows, who have such a
mighty faculty of resolving and absolving all S Peter's fetters. Sure they had
need of Double nets who would catch a Proteus. Then he tell us, That the ablest
champions for Presbytrie dar not assert episcopacie to be unlawful. What
champions are these that prove it to be contrary to Scripture, and yet dar not
assert it to be unlawful? Sure they are very faint disputants. We heard that
Beza (whom our Informer will sure call a champion for Presbytery) called
episcopacy dia^olicall and the egg out of which Antichrist was hatched. Was not
that near the march of calling it unlawful? But how will he now absolve us?
Why, it must be indifferent, neither lawful nor unlawful, and then the
question is with him, if we could by our own Oath, make it absolutely and in
every case unlawful, so that we can never after submit unto it. He adds, that
we are mistaken if we think that an Oath against a thing indifferent will in
every case bind. Here I shall only tell him that since all his resolving skill
goes upon this supposition, he should have traveled to Utopia with this
resolution, since we do suppose and have proven Prelacie to be unlawful, and
so are not in the least concerned in what he says upon this point: Since he is
still arguing ex ignoratione elenchi.

But let us see how he will absolve us upon this supposition, which he must in
pity be gratified with, before he can draw forth his weapons. Our Informer
still stricks hand, with the Seasonable case and the Surveyer, telling us
first, that the oath ceases to bind, if the thing sworn against, be a matter
wherein our superiors have power to command us, they by their authority given
them of God, may require obedience of us in any thing lawful, and so may in
that particular, command us to do or use what we have sworn against, it being a
thing in it self lawful, and in this case our oath ceases to bind. Ans. this
simple notion, by our Informer poorly propounded has no taste in it, and
cannot reach our case, even though he had won over that insuperable mountain of
the unlawfullness of prelacy, and had proven, or his adversary had granted it,
to be indifferent, for 1. his supposition runs thus. That episcopacy is
indifferent to be used in the Church or not as it shall be found expedient.
Now, I beseech him, who is the proper judge, what frame of Church government
best suits her condition? is not the Church representative, to whom is
entrusted the power of the keys? by what warrant will he bring in the
Magistrate primo instanti to alter and set up Church government as he thinks
fit, even granting it were indifferent? he sought at first but a grant that
prelacy was indifferent, but ere he can produce one reason for his point, he
must have a further grant of Erastianisme, and that the Magistrate is the
proper competent immediate judge in matters ecclesiastic. Who can stope the
mouth of this hungry cause of his, that must have multiplied concessions of the
adversary, and yet cannot subsist, but starves with its own weakness when all
is done. For 2dly, although this were also granted, what will he say in this
case, wherein the superior has bound and engadged himself with the same
Oaths, vows, and bonds that the subject is tied with, and has solemnly vowed
to God against such a frame of Government? Sure this will tie up his hands if
we may believe the maxim asserted by Dr Sanderson and other Casuists that
juramentum tollit libertatem even in a thing indifferent. Had we not the
ratification of the National Covenant with the band and explication against
the Scots Prelacie, in plain Parliament by King Charles the first, under his
hand writing 1641? Did not the King who now is in the Year 1650 and -- 51,
swear and subscribe both this oath, and the solemn league and Covenant, and
gave all imaginable assurances for upholding Presbyterian Government, and in
opposition to Prelacy? suppose he had power to command in this matter, sure his
commanding power is tied up, when he has vowed and Opened his mouth unto God,
and lifted up his hand to the most high, That Prelacy shall never be allowed
within his dominions, far less commanded. Whatever power God has given to
Magistrates over their subjects, sure he has given them no power to loose
themselves from his oath and vow upon them is. Thirdly, it is too laxe a
principle, to hold that in every thing, in it self indifferent, the Magistrates
power reaches to supercede or loose, the obligation of an oath or vow of the
subject. For a subjects freedom and liberty, as in that capacity, and the
Magistrates authority, being coordinate, as the subjects liberty must not justle
with the Magistrat's lawful Command, suited to the ends of government, so
neither must the Command of the Magistrate incroach upon this reserved liberty
of the subject, who has many things in his own power and without the reach of
any lawful command of the Migistrate. A Subject, and a slave, are quite
distinct things. God restrained and set bounds to the power of Kings, and
Magistrates whom he set over his people, so that they might not command such
and such things. Therefore in what things soever, the exercise of a subjects
liberty, crosses not the design and end of the Magistrates power expressed in
Scripture, his vow is without the reach of the Magistrates suspending or
loosing power. Naboth would not give Ahab his Vineyard, no not for money. What
if a man in a parentall capacity, interpose a vow as to his child in reference
to some occupation or inheritance, which are supposed, before th^s vow, to be
things indifferent? Sure the Magistrates suspending power will not reach this
vow. This will be clear, if it be considered, That the preservation of the
Subjectes liberty, is one of the great ends of the Magistates Authority.

The Second case wherein the Informer tellsus, that ane Oath in things
indifferent binds no^, is when the thing sworn is so altered in its nature,
that it becomes sinful and cannot be lawfully performed. He tells us that
Casuists say, That cessat juramenti obligatio cum res non permanent in eodem
statu Ans. This other case generally byhim propounded here, shall be considered
and spoken to, when we shall see how hereafter he explaines and applies it.
Therefore we shall in this place dismiss it with one word, That Prelacy is now
the same, and worse thn formerly, And therefore the premised maxim cannot reach
his Conclusion in the least.

His Third case wherein he tells us, that the Oath in things indifferent
cease to bind, is, when it is impeditivum majoris boni, which he says the
Seasonable case and the survey of Naphtali, do apply to this Oath. And how he
applies it we shall after hear, He tells us, they do prove; that supposing
Episcopacie lawful, though i^ were meant in the Covenant, none should think
themselves bound to stand out against it, our Superiors having commanded us to
obey and submit to that government. And that he solidly repells what is brought
by the Apology or Naphtali to the contrary. But how insignificantly either he,
or these new Casuists, do loose the Covenant upon this Pretense, has already
in part, and shall yet further appear.

What a laxe Adiaphorist is this, who by his new divinity, first takes this
great duty of vowing or swearing quite away; For, no Oaths must be pleaded in
things necessary, in this man's judgment, They canno in things that are sinful
or unlawful have place, and so all the subject thereof must be things lawful;
and for this, there needs no more to make all Oaths and vows evanish, but a
command from the superior, and then they are gone. Secondly, he makes the
Magistrat's posteriour and supervenient command, no^only loose all his subjects
from the obligation of what is lawfully sworn, but also himself from his
personal Oath: Though he has sworn and vowed never so deeply, he has no more
to do but to make a Law against it, and then the Oath, as impeditivum boni,
ceasethto bind either himself or his subjects. Thirdly, he makes all the
reserved liberty of the subject (which Government is for preservation of) a
mere nullity and Chimaera, so as this liberty it self, or any vow or Oath in
things which are properly within it is sphere, evanishes at every arbitrary
command of the powers. Hence a subjects liberty resolves into a mere nothing or
slavery. Fourthly, thus the Judgment of all Churches in Britain and Ireland
under this Oath, must in relation to the expediency of this supposed lawful
Episcopacy, and its present suitableness to her edification, be at the mere
beck of this arbitrary command of the civil power, as the sole and proper
judge of this matter. And so.

First, the Magistrate is not only the immediatjudge of all ecclesiastic
Government, or what is most suitable to the Churches State and edification in
point of Government. But 2dly, all judgment of discretion is taken away from
the people of God, in relation to this matter of so high importance, and their
acting in faith consequently, in this supposed obedience. So that men are made
absolutely Lords over their consciences. Yea 3dly, all regard to the eshewing
the offense of the weak, and the Scripture Rules in relation to their scandal,
and stumbling, are made void; the mere command of the powers determining that
matter, in the principles of this Informer. Yea Moreover, all our Christian
libetry in things indifferent, which Christ has purchased with his precious
blood, and which we are commanded so much to hold fast, is close swallowed up,
so that both judgment and practice, in matters wherein God has given a
liberty, are tied unto, and only regulable by, the arbitrary command of the
powers: And what monstrous absurdities these are, the meanest capacity may
judge.

As for what he adds here, that an Oath about matters not sinful, is always
to be understood with this restriction, [so long as lawfully I may] which the
matter thereof requires, because the taker is under prior and greater
obligations (viz obedience to his superior and the like) then that of the Oath
in a thing indifferent, and therefore when the prior obligation crosses this
latter of the Oath, its obligation must cease. Ans. This prior obligation the
Informer makes relative to the Magistrates command interposing, which according
to his laxe and unrestricted supposalls, makes all Oaths no stronger then a
thread touched with the fire, and when applied to our case, is utterly
impertinent, because; first, there are things in their own nature indifferent,
yet within the sphere of the subjects reserved liberty; and Consequently not
within the reach of any lawful command of the Magistrate, nor of any anterior
obligation, to that of the Oath by further consequence; and that the matters in
debate are not such, he has not proved. 2ly, The Magistrate himself has by
his own Oath (in this case) superseded and tied up any right of commanding,
which the Informer may suppose he had. 3ly, upon both these grounds, the
performance of this great engadgement, can never justle with any lawful
command of the Magistrate. And by further Consequence, 4ly, There is no greater
or prior obligation in this case lying upon the Swearer, from the Magistrat's
right, to break or cut short the obligation of this vow. All which is yet
further convincingly clear, if it be considered, that this great supposition of
the lawfulnes or Indifferency of Prelacy (which is the grand Topic bearing the
weight of his Argumentation) is but begged by him, and as an alms, given by
his Adversary. But the contrariety of Episcopacy to the Scripture, which we
have already proved, being once supposed, it follows, that there is an
obligation Prior to all Oaths, lying both upon King and subjects for it is
Extirpation, but which is much more strengthened by the Supervenient Oaths and
vows of God upon them, for this great end.

The Informer adds further, that our obligation to our Superiors, is Gods tie
-- our Oath a knot of our own casting, and that when two duties at once seem
to require performance, and we cannot get them both satisfied, the lesser
should give way to the greater. Ans. 1. The same God who has enjoined
obedience to Rulers, has reserved the subjects liberty, and Christian liberty,
and by his authority salv'd and authorized Oaths and vows which are within the
compass of that reserved liberty, so the last knot is of Gods casting as well
as the first. And such Alexander-like absolvers or Cutters as our Informer and
his fellows, will find that they are hewing at divine cords, when the curse
due to perjury shall enter into their houses and souls, if they repent not.
2ly, Hence in this case and question under debate, our obedience to the
Magistrate (especially upon our true supposition of the unlawfullness of
Prelacy, and of the Oath against it, lying upon the Magistrate himself) is
sinful; and so the comparison is betwixt duty, and sin, not a greater and
lesser duty, which this man must grant is ever to be preferred. And besides,
the Informers supposition, that this Oath is a mere voluntary deed of our own,
which had so full a ratification of the Magistrates Authority, is among the
rest of his gratis supposita and Beggings of the question, which we must send
back to him with a lash, until it be returned with a due Testimonall of better
proof then of his Ipse dixit. 3ly, Even upon his own supposition, Dr Sanderson
will tell him, that any law made against an Oath, which is but spontaneous, if
the law be alternative, to obey or suffer, the Oath will bind against the
active part, and oblige not to obey the power in that supervenient command or
Law, which is contrary even to the private spontaneous Oath, de Iur Promis.
Prel. Sect. 9. But a fortiori much more will this oblige not to obey that Law,
if the Oath be not only spontaneous, but has been fortifyed by the Legislative
power, yea and vow of the Superior himself, who Pretends to loose it by his
after-Law. 4ly, Whereas he alleges, Gods putting us under the commands of the
powers in this case, and his friend Dr Burnet in this Argument, tells us that
[our Oath being a voluntary deed of our own (as he gratis supposes with the
Informer) cannot prejudge the commands of our superiors, which are Gods own
immediate commands.] They should know (as Timorcus long since Informed them
Chap. 6. sect. 35.) That the Topic of this Argument being, The dominion of the
superior over the Inferior, if the command or Law be the exercise of a
dominion in things wherein he has no dominion, the Oath will bind against such
laws. This man and his fellows are still talking of the prior obligation of
obedience to the Magistrate, but they must know that the Magistrates dominion in
this point must be instructed by a Patent from God the supreme Legislator,
before we can acknowledge it. And if our Oath interferre with the exercise of a
dominion which is without its due sphere, sure it interferres with no prior
obligation which God has laid upon us. Even Azorius (Mor. Quest. l. 11. cap.
6.) will tell him, that an Oath will bind Contra mores jure civili institutos,
if the divine Law be in any thing crossed thereby. Nay, Casuists, even such as
Abbas, Silvester, Azorius, Molina, Lessius, Leyman, Sanohes, Swares, do grant.
That an Oath will bind against any civil Law, if it oblige ad paenam non ad
culpam necessario, to punishment, and not necessarly to sin. And further most
of them admit the binding force of Oaths against the Laws or commands of
superiors, ubi materia legibus opposita sine peccato fieri potest, where the
matter of the Oath, which is contrary to the laws, may be performed without
sin it being non contra jus natural aut divinum, that is, not against the Law
of nature or the divine Law. See Timorcus ubi supra. 5ly, Even putting
episcopacie in the category of things indifferent, this Oaths obligation
against it, will countervaile and oversway our obligation to obey the
Magistrate, and submit to his laws, In such a case, wherein it is found
inexpedient for the Church, and particularly for this Church, as by its
apparent dreadful effects is evident; such as the desolation and wasting of
this Church, the spreading of popery and Arminianism, the Casting out of many
of the godly Ministry, the fixed division therein, the endless Confusions and
broiles, and thereby the wide door opened to all Popish invasions etc. For since
the Magistrates simple Command cannot determine what Government is expedient or
inexpedient for the Church, this must be supposed that Prelacie is best, before
the Command can be, so much as supposed Lawful, else the Magistrate may injoyne
an Hundred Oaths this year in such and such things as he calls expedient, and
null them all the next year, though himself be engadged therein, upon pretense
of inexpediency of the Matter, because of occurring circumstances, which will
make mad work of Oaths, and hang them all at the Magistrates sic volo sic jubeo,
as to their obligation. Its true that the greater duty (as is clear Math. 9.
13.) counter-balances the less, but I Pray, shall the mere will and Command of
the power, determine the greater duty? and be the sole and supreme rule to
determine the Conscience, as to the expediency of a thing hic and nunc. And
though (as he says) every positive precept oblidge not ad Semper. Yet he must
acknowledge, first, that it oblidges semper, and though not as to the act, yet
as to the eshewing the Contrary thereof. And Secondly, to act semper, except
when Gods command superseds it, as to other duties in their seasons. So that
till he clear this in the point of prelacie, and that the renouncing of our
Covenant, and presbyterian Government at the Magistrates Command, is in our case
the greatest duty, this rule makes against him.

The Doubter, as to his first rule, anent the authority of superiors
interveening, objects, that its hard to say that man's authority can loose the
Oath of God, since in this Case we must say, that we have opened our mouth unto
God, and cannot go back]. To this he answers. 1. That the law of God in the 5th
Command lays the first and Primarie obligation upon us to obey our superiors,
which Command we cannot bind up our selves from obeying. Ans. 1. the same God
who gave that Command, did by the third Command oblidge both superiors and
inferiors, to be a ware of taking his name in vain, and therefore not to presume
to break their Oaths and vows in any Lawful matter, unless insuch Cases as
himself the blessed and supreme Lawgiver, excepts; which he has not yet letten
us see as to this Oath, wherein both superiors and inferiors have entered, and
thereby oblidged themselves to God against what he pleads for. So that Gods
reserved Supremacy, and Dominion, which (to use his own argument against him)
is the primarie and fundamental tie, upon which this 5. Command is bottomed,
and according to which our obedience thereto must be Regulat, will cut short the
obedience to the superior in this case, wherein we cannot obey him in the Lord,
and without violating our fealty and alleadgeance to the God of Gods, and
wronging his suprem dominion. 2ly, In this same 5. Command, God has limited
the Power of superiors, and tied them under many bonds of duties to their
subjects or inferiors, which, in none of their Commands they must transgress,
and if they do, their Commands oblidge not Inferiors to obey. Now, that this
Loosing the obligation of these Oaths is in our case an encroachment upon the
subjects right and reserved Liberty, as well as christian Liberty, and an
encroachment upon Gods sovereign right, is above Cleared. Next he says, this
were a way to frustrat the superior of all obedience, and every man might
pretend, I have sworn against such a thing commanded, therefore I cannot do it.
Thus private persons might prelimit themselves from obeying in every thing.
Ans. in our case there is no such hazard, for the superior has prelimit
Himself by his own oath, and this will not prelimit him upon such a pretense,
from obedience in any thing that is Lawful, or which falls within the Compass
of his Power As a Magistrate and is suitable to the great ends of his Power, to
say, that he cannot Arbitrarly loose people from a Lawful Oath, sworn also by
himself. But on the contrary, this pretended Informer his doctrine herein
prelimtes and cuts short Subjects Liberty, and Christian Liberty, and
Liberty of Conscience, subjecting it, and all Gods rules theranent, all
scripture Rules of Expediency and Edification, and all Oaths and vows
superadded to matters subordinat to these ends, unto the Magistrates arbitrary
disposal and laws, which is a prelimitation equally if not more dangerous.

Our Informer in the next place for proof of this his doctrine, sends the
Doubter to Numb. 30: where (he says) the husband or parent is vested with a
Power to null and make void the vow of the wife or daughter, and by Proportion
the King, who is Pater patriae, has the same authority. Ans. it will be a
harder task then this man can well manage to bring in the King here within the
Compass of the father and husbands right, as to this absolving Power. For
first, the Magistrates Power is far different from the Marital and Parental, and
the relation betwixt King and subject is nothing so strait, as betwixt husband
and wife, parent and Children, the one being natural, the other Political, the
one changeable, the other not. A man may choose to Live under what Magistrate he
pleases, but the woman cannot cast off her husband, nor the Child shake off his
relation and duty to the father. Besides, subjects set up their Magistrates and
Limite them: But so it is not as to the Marital and Parental relations. The
husbands authority flows not from the wife her donation, nor the parents from
the Children. So that a parallel argument can hardly be drawn from the Power
of husbands and parents, supposed in this text, in relation to Oaths and vows
of the Children and wife, to that of the Magistrate in relation to his subjects.
2ly, in the beginning of that Chap. the Lords way of Laying down this great
Sanction touching vows, seems to exclude the Magistrate from this absolving
Power. For after the propounding of the Law touching the keeping of voluntary
Oaths and vows, viz. that the person vowing shall not break nor profane his
Word as the Hebrew signifies, but do according to all that Proceeds out of his
mouth. 1. The Case of the wife and the Daughter not foris-familiat, is Gods
great and only exception (expressed in the Text) from his own rule, and Law,
touching the strick observation of voluntary Lawful vows. So that, the rule
and Law seems to reach all other Cases, as to free vows, except only this. 2ly,
in the Beginning of the Chap. we find that Moses spoke this to the Rulers and
heads of the tribes, but the text is silent as to his applying of this
exception anent the father and husbands Power in absolving vows, unto these
heads and Rulers, which should have been especially intimat to them. Hence it
may be probaby Concluded that the Rule and Law touching the observation of
vows, stands fast in all other Cases except these here expressly excluded, by
the Great Lawgiver. So that ere his argument can reach us, he most give in
Sufficient proof that the Magistrate stands vested with this Power, and falls
within the Compass of this exception, in relation to his subjects. Not to
detain him here in tasking him to prove, that this Judicial statute, as others
of the like nature, does belong unto the Christian Church. But in the second
place, Granting that the Magistrate is here meant, it will never speak home to
his Point, but much against him, for 1. the dominion of the Superior being the
ground of this discharge, wherein the husband and Parent have Power, if the
matter of our vow be found such as is excepted from the Magistrates dominion,
the Informer must grant that this text will not reach our Case. And supposing
the matter, antecedaneously unto the vow, to fall under divine Commands, this
is evident beyond exception. But because he beggs our concession, that it was
before indifferent, I add, if it be within the Limits of our reserved Liberty
as free subjects, or of our Christian Liberty, its still on both grounds,
beyond the reach of his dominion, and consequently excluded from this
exception, and the vow must stand and oblidge according to the Grand precept
here set down; so that a hundred discharges of the Magistrate will never touch
it.

We heard him acknowledge, that by [discipline of this Church] in the national
Covenant, the substantialls of Government is understood, and that consequently
it binds thereunto; So he must acknowledge that our solemn Covenant will
inviolably bind to this divine Frame of Government, and no earthly power can
loose therfrom, no more then from Scripture institutions. And Doctor Featlie
acknowledges that people may Covenant, without their Superiors, to fulfill
Gods Law. Now, give us all Scripture Church officers, and their Rules of
Government, and Prelacie shall be quickly gone, So that upon his concession
that the national or solemn league do reach the substantialls of Government, or
what is necessary for the ends of Government set down in Scripture, it will
amount to that which we plead for; and he must grant it falls not under the
Magistrates Dominion, and that his argument from this text is lost. 2dly, this
dissent which looses the vow, must be both ane open dissent, and also
presently in the very day he hears of it. Qui sero se noluisse significat
putandus est aliquando voluisse. That is, he that declares a late dissent, may
be presumed sometimes to have given his consent, says Dr Sand. de jur. prom.
This he cannot say as to our King. 3ly, It most be constant, the dissent
suspending, but not loosing the obligation. The oblidging virtue being
natural, and inseparable to the vow (as Dr Sand. tells us de jur. prom. page
3. Sect. 10.) when ever the consent comes, the obligation returns. Now have not
our King and Rulers consented unto, and ratefied all our vows both in the
national, and solemn league and Covenant? 4ly, This consent of the superior
once given, can never he retracted by a dissent again. Whither it be before or
after, he can never make it void, as the Text does clearlie hold out. See Sand.
16. Prel. 7. Sect. 6. Now have not both the national and solemn League, the
Consent and vows of all our superiors ratifying the same. So that this text
every way pleads for the obligation thereof; for this their consent, once given,
they can never revoke, far less their Oath and vows, but the vows of the
inferiors, are thereby rendered for ever valid; as Casuists in setting down
these rules do grant, so Aquinas, Filucius (Tract. 25 cap. 9.) Azor. (Moral.
inst. lib. 11. cap. 10.) Sanches (lib. 3. Cap. 9.) Amesius (cas. lib. 4. cap.
22. Quest. 11.) Sand. (Juram. Prom. Prel. 4. Sect. 16.) But the Doubter
objecting [this consent and ratification of our superiors, which therefore
they cannot make void.] He answers, that by comparing the 12. and 15. verses it
appears, that after the husband has by silence confirmed his wifes vow, yet he
has a power of voiding it again, and she is exonered of her vow, and bound to
obey her husbands Commands. Ans. Although this were granted (as the Text stands
in clear contradiction to it) that the husband might null the vow, after he
has confirmed it by a silence or tacit confirmation, yet it will not follow
that his nulling power will hold, after he has given not only a formal
consent positive, but also solemnlie vowed and bound his soul to the Lord, in
the same vow, which is most evidentlie our case. Have we not the solemn vows,
subscriptions and Oaths of both King and Rulers, concurring with the vows of
the subjects in this case? How then shall they loose their own vows. 2ly, this
wild gloss is expressly cross to Dr Sanderson, and other Casuists, their sense
of this case and text as we heard, who hold that if once the superior has
either tacitly or expressly, precedaniously or subsequently consented, he can
never by his dissent again either discharge from the Oath or (so much as)
suspend the obligation of it. Dr. Sand. says (16. Prel. 7. Sect. 6.) its a
true rule, quod semel placuit amplius displicere non debet, what once in this
case has pleased the superior, ought never to displease; Gods Word declaring
it established for ever. If he has consented (says the Dr) either before or
after, be can never afterward take away its obligation. 3. He makes the text
contradict it self, for (ver. 7.) upon the husbands tacit consent, and holding
his peace in the day he heard his wifes vow, the Lord declares that her vow
shall stand, and the bond wherewith she bound her soul shall stand. And (verse.
14.) The husbands holding his Peace, establishes her vows and confirms them.
Now then, God having declaire that the vow stands, is confirmd, and established
as soule-bond upon their souls, by this consent tacit or express how shall it
be null, and not stand, by ane after dissent? Sure [to stand] is here opposed
unto [not to stand] upon the terms of the present open dissent in the day he
heard of it, which is the only exception. That which God declares to be
confirmed, and to stand, upon the father or husbands consent, admits of no
nulling afterward by them; but so it is, that the wife or daughters vow upon
the first consent and ratefication, stands and is confirmed, as a soule-bond:
ergo, it admits of no loosing by ane after dissent. I prove the major two
ways, 1. standing and Confirming here are opposed, to nulling and making void.
And 2ly, this would make more Limitations then God makes, as to the Loosing of
the vow; for there is no exception but that one, of the husbands open dissent,
or the parents, in the day he hearts of it. This is the only exception from
the rule in the 2d verse. anent the binding of the vow. But this man's gloss
brings in another limitation cross to the very scope and express sense of the
words viz. the husbands dissent, after he has by a previous consent ratefied
the vow. That God admits the vow to stand, upon this express or tacit consent,
is evident in the text.

As for the reason which he adds, viz. That the wife is under a prior
obligation to obey her husband; it is absurd and ridiculous, for will he carve
ou^ ane obligation in this point beyond what God has so expressly limit and
declard. This were to give the husband a power, not over the wife only, but
over God himself, and his express declarator. As for that clause (ver. 15.)
that if he shall any ways make them void, after he has heard them, then he
shall bear her iniquity. What a wild inference is it, from hence to conclude
ane absolving power, in express contradiction to the text, and the limitations
previoussie set down. To say that the vow cannot be loosed, unless the father
or husband declare his dissent in the day he hears of it, And that if he hold
his peace he has confirmed it, and the bond and vow shall stand; And yet that
after all this, he may loose it by ane after dissent, is so plain a
contradiction, that none can be plainer. If we will make the text then
consistent with it self, the plain meaning is, that he shall bear her
iniquity, or the guilt which otherwise would have Iven upon the wife or
daughter, if not hindered in the performance. That the guilt and punishment of
the nonperformance shall ly upon him who hindered the same, does clearlie
import the nonperformance of it self to be a guilt (which contradicts his
pleading and argument.) But the poor votarie being hindered, it lies upon the
hinderer as I said. So that we strongly infer from this, the binding force of
the vow, since the Lord terms the nonperformance a guilt: as violent men
hindering Ministers to preach, shall bear their guilt and punishment, which
otherwise they were exposed unto if neglecting this great work. All do know,
what these Scripture-Phrases of bearing his judgment, bearing his iniquity,
being partakers of Other men's sins, do import. Which Confirms this answer. His
comments upon this phrase are very vain [first he shall bear her sin (says
he) if a guilt] what is that? bear a guilt, if a guilt, sure a repugnantia in
adjecto. His next gloss makes the husband ane expiator of the guilt because she
did her duty in obeying him, who revoked-his Confirmation upon just grounds.
What, upon just grounds contrary to Gods command? this is ane odd exposition.
Does God give the least warrant here to absolve and null the vow, after it is
ratefied by his previous consent.

Mr. Poole in his annotations renders thus the sense of this 15. verse [after
he has heard them etc.] and approved them by his silence from day to day, if
now after that time spent, he shall upon further thoughts dislike and hinder
it, which he ought not to do. Her nonperformance of her vow shall be imputed
to him, not to her: Where, as he does clearly assert (with us) that her
iniquity, mentioned in the close of the verse, is the iniquity of the
nonperformance of the vow, which is imputed unto the husband, so, that he
ought not to hinder the votarie, or stop this performance after that he has
confirmed the vow by silence; in plain contradiction to the Informers
fantastic glosses and inferences. Wherein although he pretend a concurrence of
Interpreters, expounding this verse of the husbands Lawful voiding of the
wifes vows after his previous confirmation, yet he has produced none of their
names.

The Doubter enquires next how he applies his Second rule, anent things sworn
their not abiding in the same state, to the Covenant. He answers, that upon
supposition that Prelacie is Lawful, and abjured in that Oath, the great
change now is, that Prelates are again Established, and submission to them
commanded. So that we are now bound to obey authority herin, and not to keep
the Oath. And this is very suitable to his large absolving glosses, which we
have already heard and refuted, and which is Likewise removed by what we have
said, anent the matter of this vow, which is not capable of any such absolving
trade as is now set up. These men's plagiary faith and divinity, makes all vows
no stronger then straws. Though the Magistrates and subjects universallie vow,
yet a Law (if the matter be not absolutely necessary, though never so
expedient and edifying) makes it ipso facto null and void. If he had letten us
see any greater good, expediencie, or necessity of prelacie, then in keeping
this vow, he had spoken to the purpose. But this neither he nor any of his
party will ever do.

In a word this lax rule as here interpret by him, will infer many
absurdities, as 1. that the mere Law looses the obligation of the vow and Oath,
though the matter thereof falls not under the dominion of the Ruler. Which, 2ly,
it does not if it be either expedient or necessary, and yet the mere Law (with
him) robs it either of expediency or necessity. And thus, 3dly, man's law stepps
up above the divine Law, authorizing the matter of the Oath upon the
forementioned grounds. 4ly, He makes the expediency of the Law, and its being
wholesome or no, cognoscible by no anterior or superior Rule, but its self, and
the mere will and power of the Magistrate, and to be obeyed upon that sole
ground. 5ly, hence the obedience thereof in faith, is excluded, and no acts of
obedience can flow from spiritual knowledge.

The Doubter next objects [that his Oath against Bishops had the first
obligation, and therefore he cannot be loosed by the after Law.] To which he
answers, that the 5th. command, and submission to the ordinance of man, had the
first obligation, and that obedience to authority comes under the baptismall
vow -- that to say our Oath will oblidge against the Magistrates Command to the
Contrary, will elude the express precept Ecl. 8. 2. to obey the kings command
in regard of the Oath of God Ans. This is nothing but what we have heard,
repetitions ad nauseam, and still idem per idem. Our obligation in the 3d
command, not to take Gods name in vain, and to keep and stand to all Lawful
Oaths, and vows, unless in cases which God himself excepts, is surly a very
arlie, and a baptismall obligation, prior to any Law of the Magistrate, and such
as no authority and Laws of men can evacuatand enervat; and our obedience to
the ordinance of man, or the higher and Lower Powers, being for the Lords sake,
that is upon the motive of his authority, does infer, that we must not dare to
cross his authority, under pretense of obedience to the powers, in breaking
lawful Oaths and vows which he has commanded us to keep. Sure no Laws of men
can supersed this obligation. That the Oath under debate is such, has been
already made good, and needs not be here repeated. As for that of Eccl. 8. 20.
It makes clearlie against him; the English annotations having upon that text,
mentioned the mutual tie, oath, and Covenants betwixt King and subject,
instancing 1. Chron. 11. 3. do tell us that this is not only ane enforcement of
the duty of subjects, but likewise, that the clause contains a limitation, by
which our obedience to men is bounded: And thus they sense the precept, keep
the Kings command, yet so that thou do not violat thine Oath and obedience due
unto God. Our service to the one (say they) must be such as will consist with
our fealty to the other. We are bound to God and his service by Oath and
Covenant, and no subordinat obedience to others, must make us forget our duty
to him. Which clearlie crosses this Miss-Informers scope who would persuade to
perjurie and breach of Covenant with God, upon pretense of fealty to the
Magistrate.

Mr Poole in his annotations having told us That the first branch of the verse
is not to be understood universally, but of such commands as do not cross the
commands of God, expones this Oath of God mentioned in the second part of it,
either of the Oath we are under to keep all Gods Laws, or the subordinat Oath
of fealty and allegiance. But adds, that this also may be understood, and is by
learned Interpreters taken, as a limitation of their obedience to Kings, the
words being thus rendered, as the Hebrew (faith he) will very well bear, but
according to the Word of the Oath of God, obey the Kings commands, with this
caution that they be agreeable and not contrary to the Laws of God, which thou
art obliged by thy own and thy parents Oaths often renewed, to observe in the
first place.

As for what he adds (out of the grand case) anent Jesuits Oath in Rome to
preach in England Catholic doctrine, and of a Law made in England against the
same. It is, so palbablie impertinent and unsuteable to the point, that I
wonder at the man's confidence in presenting to the world such poor trifling
fopperies in so weighty a matter. Dare he say that the matter of our vows,
which our Rulers themselves have taken, is in any measure like to this. Nay,
does he not suppose the Matte^ of this Oath to be Lawful, he must then confess
this instance to be most impertinent. But the knack is, That abstracting from
the unlawfullness of the Matter, it was declair'd, that ane Oath cannot bind
against a Law, although the Law be made even after the Oath is taken. This was
no doubt a lax determination, And such as he dare no^ himself subscribe unto in
every case; what, an^ Oath cannot bind against a Law in universum, and simply?
what if the matter be necessary, or falling under divine Prescriptions or
institutions? What if convincingly expedient in its circumstances? Will thi^
Law, yea and after the Oath is taken, overrule the divine Law determining the
same? Well resolve^ Mr. Informer. You may go sell absolutions ano^ of a high
rate.

Come we now to his third case, anent the Oath hindering a greater good, then
the performance it ill amount to and the dissolution thereof upon that ground.
This the Doubter thinks [will furnish people with a ready excuse to free
themselves of Oaths, by alleging that some greater good is hindered thereby.]
To this he answers 1. That Casuists admit this rule with these limitations
viz. when that greater good is certain, and no otherwise attainable, but by the
discharge of our Oath, and a good to which we are preobliged before we took the
Oath. Ans. We shall not much contend about these rules and limitations of this
Maxim in thesi, or in the general, only I shall add some more limitations
here. That 1. This greater, certain, and no otherwise attainable good, must be
such, not in our apprehension only, but according to the Rule of the Word, for
otherwise we are just where we were as to the hazard of perjurie, if every man's
[thinks so], or the Magistrates [arbitrarie Laws] shall be the only Rule to
determine this, as this Informer makes all resolve thereunto which he pretends
in this case, in relation to that greater good, which he offers in breaking
this Oath. Hence Gregorius Sayrus (clav. reg. l. 5. cap. 8. n. 15.) having
determined that every man has a power to commute ane oath for something
better, is opposed by Silvester and others, who say, that the Pope must
determine the good to be better. So rational and Consequent to their
Principles are even Papists in this point. And must not Protestants be ashamed
to refuse this limitation, that the Scripture (with us the only, and supreme
rule) must determine this greater good. Next, Timorcus will tell him, that the
Oath thus irritat, must be only made to God, for if it be to our brother, and
for his advantage, we must have his consent as necessary toward the
commutation. This he tells us, is agreed upon by Casuists, as well as the other
limitations. To these we add Dr. Sand. rule (de jur. prom. Prel. 3. Sect. 12.)
that, precise ob hoc quod videtur impeditivum majoris boni, obligandi vim non
amittit. Id est, That the Oath loses not its obliging force, merely because it
seems the bindrance of a greater good, unless other circumstances also concur
(as usuallie there do) which either evince it unlawful, or not oblidging. His
reason is because in all cases it is not true that every one is oblidged to do
what is best, he means, simpliciter, and abstracting from the present
circumstances) since this would open a flood-gate for all manner of perjury. As
for that limitation (presented with an especially as the main one) anent the
Oaths hindering the greater good, to which we were preoblidged, which this man
foists in, to make way for his nauseating repetition, anent the Magistrates
power, it may be alleged that it is not consistent with it self: for if we
stood Preobliged to this greater good, it renders the Oath ab initio null, for
the same cause on which it is loosed upon the prospect of that greater good.
The greater obligation (as he says) still overruling the lesser, and ane Oath
in prejudice of a greater obligation, and contradictorie thereto, can lay on no
obligation, for so we might be under contradictorie obligations according to
his way of reasoning about the Magistrates power. [I will have mercy and not
sacrifice] is one of his illustrating instances. So that the obligation of the
Oath, according to his reasoning in this matter, was like unto this inverted
rule, viz. Sacrifice and not mercy, and being such ab initio, it could not
bind. I know (as Dr Sand. says) that which is abstractedly and simplicer a
greater good, may hic and nunc, and in such a complex case become the lesser,
consideratis considerandis all circumstances taken in. But this he admits not,
for he adds unto the known rule anent the greater and certain good in its time
and circumstances, that other limitation anent the vower his being preobliged
unto it, which can no otherwise be understood then in opposition to the
obligation of the vow, unless this his added limitation be redundant, or
nonsense.

But 2dly, let us come to the assumption, what is that greater good, attainable
in breaking this Oath and vow rather then in keeping it. This he tells us is
obedience to authority (that is the panacea curing allwounds the universal
topic, and primum mobile) avoiding of Schism, Ministers serving God, in the
work of the ministry to which they are called; these he says are greater and
better goods then adhering to the Oath in a thing indifferent Then he adds,
that Ministers should consider, whither is be better to lay aside their Oath,
then their Ministry. (Especially ane Oath about a thing indifferent) and
incapacitat, or do that which by consequence incapacitates them for the
Ministry -- that Ministers think that by their Oath they are obliged not to
continue in their stations, as matters now stand, and yet divines hold that the
lesser duty gives place to the greater, as David did eat the show bread rather
then starve, Paul and those with him, did cast their goods into the sea etc. In
Answer to this, we need not much enlarge, it being nothing but what is upon the
matter already objected and answered. 1. If the Oath, for its matter contain
important duties falling under divine commands, and unalterable obligations, if
Prelacie be contrary unto divine prescriptions in point of Government, and the
disowning of it consequently be a standing necessary duty (which we do suppose
and have proved, and he cannot disprove) then this man himself will grant that
all this tatle about the greater good in breaking the Oath, is to no purpose.
2ly, say prelacie were but indifferent, yet upon the supposall of the greater
expediencie of Presbyterian Government for this Church then Prelacie, and upon
the certain supposition of all the Rulers engadgement in this Oath and vow to
God against it, (the first of which suppositions he has not disproved, and the
2d he cannot deny) it is certain, that both Rulers and Ruled their keeping the
Oath, is a far greater and more certain good, then their breaking it. 3ly, let
Dr Sand. limitation here again come in viz. That the Oath is not precisely
loosed because it seems to contradict a greater good, unless Other
circumstances do also occurr, which either evince it to be unlawful, or not
oblidging, and that its not true that in every case we are bound to do what is
best, that is unless omnibus pens^is, and caeteris Paribus, all circumstances
duly pondered, it be found best; and then the Question is whither it were
best for Rulers or ruled to keep this Oath for these great ends which he
mentions, than to break it. Whither it be a greater good to keep a Lawful
Oath, though I suffer under authority levelling against it, or break it to
please men* or whither I shall choose the evil of suffering or sinning? (for he
has not yet proved that the interposing of the Rulers mere Law or authority,
will make this Oath unlawful, and we have showed that Casuists mantain the
Contrary.) Whither peace with God be a greater good in keeping his Covenant,
then peace with men and with the world in breaking it? This Question was soon
resolved with Elias. The children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant -- and I
only am left etc. 4ly, This greater good, he acknowledges must be such, as is
no Otherwise att^inable then by breaking the Oath. Hence the Question will be,
whither the Gospel might not have been preached, schism avoided, and God
served in the Ministry of the word, by keeping this Oath and Covenant with
him? This man will come to a great height of impudence if he deny this. Nay, if
he deny that this good might have been thus beter obtained. He alleges we have
now a great Schism by Presbyterian Ministers departing from their party, and
he will not deny that many excellent preachers are Laid aside, the Magistra^ is
displeased and disobeyed, all filled with confusion and disorder, popery like
to creep in etc. Now, had not all this been eshewed by keeping our Covenant
with God? The gospel had been preached by Presbyterian Minist^rs, and he will
not deny that all his party of Conformists too, had kept their ownstations,
this schism had been avoided, and the Magistrate obeyed while commanding for
God. So that this rule every way makes against him. And in stead of obtaining
a greater good by breach of Covenant, we have lost the greatest good, the
gospel and peace with God, and incurred much sin and misery.

I know he will say that he speaks upon the suposal of the Rulers disowning the
Oath, and Establishing prelacie. But then I urge him thus, 1. Since he cannot
but grant that the keeping of the Oath, or holding fast Presbyterian
government, would have had the forementioned advantages following upon it,
shall the mere pleasure of the Rulers cast the balance, and disprove its
native tendencie sua natura toward the formentioned effects? the matter of the
Oath is still of it self, or of its own nature, more productive of these good
effects; and Consequently the keeping is to be preferred to breaking of it, which
is attended with evils counterballancing these apparent good effects, which he
imagins to attend this breach. 2ly, if the Oath cannot be commuted or changed,
but for a greater good, and all these good effects mentioned, might have been
better, and more certainly attaind, by keeping then breaking it, then the
Rulers commuting the Oath, or altering or breaking of it, he must acknowledge
to be sinful upon his own ground. Since they might have attaind these good
effects of obedience, preaching the gospel, and unity, by keeping this Oath,
and might have more surely and better eshewed the forementioned evils then by
breaking it. And then, let him in the third place seriously Consider, whither
the Rulers sin in commutting or breaking this Oath, for neither a greater, nor
more certain good, will warrant my breaking of the Oath to follow them in that
sinful course; and loose me from my obligation. 4ly, It will hence follow,
that he plays the petty sophister here, in calling disobedience to the
Magistrate, in this one point of a sinful command in relation to this Oath,
(which on the formentioned grounds is proved Sinful) a disobeying of
authority. For he dare not say that disobeying a sinful command can come
under this character. And the true state of this Question is not, whither it be
a greater good, to obey the Magistrate or keep ane oath? but whither it is a
greater good in this particular to obey him, in Embracing abjured Prelacie, or
to stand to the Oath; and the issue of this is, whither it be best for the
Church of Scotland to have or want Prelates? which, from what is said is soon
determined. 5ly, What if these pretended good issues, be countervaild by
greater evils: such as persecution of many thousands, godly faithful
Ministers and Professors, laying waste Gods heritage, Blood, misery,
confusion, schism, (the godly adherers to this Oath, being without all
question this Pure Church) famine of the word etc. Nay, according to Dr Sand.
rule mentioned, where is the Relaxation of all parties engadged in Covenant one
with another, as well as with God? were not the Churches of both nations nay in
all the three Kingdoms, engadged to one another in this Oath? now thinks he not
that this prospect of a greater good in breaking this oath, should have been
laid to the eye of the representative Church in the three Kingdoms, in order to
the change of government. And should not all parties engadged in this Covenant,
have dispensed with it, and with one another in contemplation of this greater
good, and for obtaining this better government? thinks he that such a great
question as this: What is this greater good in point of Church Government? And
that other Question. Whither such great and solemn Oaths may be laid aside in
order to the obtaining of it? Are Finally decided by the Magistrates Law without
the least owning the Church representative? and besides, he dare not say that
all are bound to obey the Magistrate in all things indifferent. Is not
subjection (by the acknowledgement of most, and even of his Master the
surveyer) different from active obedience.

Finally, as for what he says of Ministers, the Apologist told him, and his
master the Seasonable case, and I do tell him again, that God calls no man to
preach the gospel by such ane unlawful mean as perjurie and breach of
Covenant, and that in this case Ministers suffering for truth, is a
Confirmation of the gospel Phil. 1. 12. That in deserting and not preaching,
they are merely passive: being persecute for their integrity; so the charge
and guilt of not preaching lies upon their persecutors. Besides, the state of
the question in truth, and in our principles importing a competition betwixt
sin and suffering, and duty and sin, not a lesser and greater duty, the folly
and impertinency of his instance, anent the lesser duty overruled by the
greater (exemplified by that, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, repeated
here ad nauseam) as also that instance of Paul and those with him, their
casting their goods in the sea etc, is most evident. The sin and perjurie of
this course of conformity, being our principle, which he cannot disprove, even
though we should grant all his pleading here (which goes but upon a begged
supposition of prelacies indifferency, and the indifferency of the matter of
the Covenant) what a flat folly is it, to tell us of preferring greater to
lesser duties? whereas with us the question and case is, anent Ministers duty
when the Magistrate refuses to admit to preach, but upon sinful terms; which
one consideration makes all his tatle here evanish in wind. Suppose the Rulers
of a land discharge all preaching, but upon the terms that Ministers should
commit some horrid act of wickedness, would this man admit any to plead as he
does for doing evil that good may come of it, and to tell what a weighty duty
it is to preach the gospel, and that the lesser duty of forbearing that evil
commanded, is overruld by the greater obligation to preach, etc. Well, he and
his party (like the pharisaik teachers, twixt whom and us he insinuats a
comparison) are sure blind Informers and leaders, and may be set to learn
better (thou that teach another teach thou not self;) For they have
vented such principles anent sacred Oaths, as some heathens would be ashamed
of, and which banishes all faith out of the world. For what he adds anent the
Rechabites, when he shall equiparat the matter of their vow, a thing merely
civil, relating to their abstinence from wine, and the manner of their
dwelling, with the weighty and great duties of a Covenant with God, for public
and personal reformation, and withal prove that hazart will equally plead for
the laying aside of the last, as in some cases it may warrant a dispensing with
some part of the first, the parallel shall be admitted, but till then, it must
pass among the rest of the Informers gratis dicta. The Dutch annot. (on Jer.
35. 7.) Show that Ionadab probably put this ingadgment on his posterity, upon
his foresight (by a prophetic spirit) of the judgments and desolations to come
upon Israel, in order to their inoffensive walk, and for inuring them to
parsimony. And as for their dwelling at Jerusalem in case of hazard they show
(on. 11. V.) that the Rechabits, laid aside in this one thing their fathers
command, because it was but a humane ordinance, which in obedience to the law
of God, they might in some cases wave, which was also Ionadabs intention, and
acceptable to God. And that in giving this account to the prophet of their
practice in reference to their dwelling now at Jerusalem upon the Assyrians
invasion, they do show that their fathers charge, and their vow was not to be
extended to this case. So that in their sense there was no breach of the vow
properly and strictly taken, but only the laying aside of a part of a humane
ordinance, in case of extreme hazart, and this according to the nature and
design of the vow it self, and the first institution thereof.

CHAP. V.
The Informers answers to our Argument for the Covenant obligation, taken from
the Oath to the Gibeonites, and Zedikiahs Oath to the King of Babylon, weighed.
Upon the first argument after a foolish traverse about the consonancy of the
Oath to the Law of God, he yields the cause in granting that the Oath did
oblige the first takers, and their posterity. Upon the second he begs the
question and admits its chief scope and nerves. Likewise his answer to Psalm.
15. 4. His reflection on the Assembly 1638, and his argument offered by way of
retortion anent our owning of Comissaries though abjured in the Covenant,
largly scanned.

THus we have seen into what a fascination and labyrinth of absurd inconsistent
notions this new proctor has involved himself, while endeavoring to loose
these sacred bonds of our solemn vows and Covenants with God, and that he has
run cross to the scripture, to Cafuists, yea to himself, in this enterprise. We
shall now proceed to examine what strength is in the remnant of his reasonings
upon this head; And how he acquits himself in his answers to some pregnant
passages of scripture pleaded for the Covenant. The first that follows in this
dialogue is that remarkable transaction of Joshua and Israel with the
Gibeonites, largly and unanswerably pressed and improven by such as have
written for theCovenant; which this man thought he could not for very shame
pass over; but sure he had better done so, then to have made such a pitiful
and superficial return. Well, let us hear it.

The Doubter now assaults him as to this notion anent the greater good in
quiting the Oath, with that instance of the Oath to the Gibeonites, [whom God
had commanded to make no peace with, but enjyond Israel to root them out, to
whom Josua and the Princes might have said, Gods command Looses us from our
Oath, and it will hinder a greater good, yet in that particular they rather
dispensed with Gods command, then with their Oath; the acceptablness whereof to
God, appeard in his punishing Saul a long time after for killing these
Gibeonites, to whose predecessors Joshua and the princes had suorn.] In answer
to this, he runs out a great length anent that transaction, to infringe this
argument. Which I shall now examine.

But before I enter upon this, I would premise two things, first, that this
trifling Informer has so molded our argument from this text as quite to
divert it from its true channel and scope, which is to prove the oblidging
force of ane Oath or Covenant (Lawful upon the matter) both upon the takers,
and their posterity, notwithstanding of many circumstantiall sinful
aberrations from the divine rule, in the manner of entering into it. As is most
evident in this instance as I shall after show. And this man could not be
ignorant, that this text is thus Improven by Timorcus and Others, who have
written for the Covenant, and this argument, and improvement of the text which
he presents, is but a man of straw of his ownupsetting. Secondly, that we are
not concerned in order to the evincing the premised truth for the proof whereof
we adduce this text, peremptorly to determine this question, whither this Oath
did contradict Gods positive Law, and how far any piece or circumstances of the
divine precepts anent the destruction of the Cannanites, making no leagues with
them, justles with this Covenant and Oath, and are found overruled by its
oblgation: for our argument stands good and entire, tho we abstract from any
positive determination in this point. So that in tracing our Informers
extravagant discourse in answer to this objection of his own moulding, we shall
rather discover the slippery grounds he walks upon, and the inconsistencies
wherein he is involved by his answers, and confident assertion of the Oaths
conformity to the divine Law, then positively to resolve and determine any
thing in this debate, which this man has no less ridiculously handled, then
impertinently brought in. But to the point.

First, he wonders that we make use of this argument to prove the obligation of
our Oath against Bishops. But sure it is ane argument very Suitable, if ane
Oath into which Joshua and all Israel were cheated, ane Oath to heathens, and
which had at Leastwise a very apparent inconsistencie with Gods command, to
root out these Canaanites, and not to pity or spare them, is found so highly
obligatorie, and even binding the posterity, how much more the nations
Covenanting with God, and with one another for public and personal
reformation. But he says, That we mistake this place. Why so? First, if we
think Joshua was forbidden upon any terms to make a Covenant with these
Canaanites, but to root them all out, and yet because of this Oath spared them,
then (he says) we run in a most wild and gross opinion. Severe censure! why
so, what is that opinion? that ane Oath (says he) can bind against a command
of God, whither it be a moral or particular Command, its all one. So that as
we said before, that ane Oath can bind against commands of men in authority,
now we go a greater length, in making them bind against Commands of God. But I
answer, first, that there was a command of God to cut off these Canaanites,
without pitying or sparing them, I hope he will not deny, and if he do, it is
easy to be produced, Exo. 23. 32, 33. Exo. 34. 12. Deuteronomy. 7. 2. Nay more, Gods
command herein was so peremptory, that where he appointed his people to tender
peace to other cities, before they proceeded to destroy them, there is ane
exception made (as Iackson observes upon Joshua 9. 7.) of the cities of Canaan
Deuteronomy. 20. 15, 16. thus shall thou do unto all the cities which are very far off
from thee, which are not of the Cities of these nations. But of the cities of
the People which the Lord thy God has given thee for ane inheritance, thou
shall save alive nothing that breaths. To this place Jackson points us to
clear this matter. 2ly, Its as evident that these Gibeonites had their saftie
from this Oath and Covenant. For upon this we have the judgment of all the
princes of the congregation, (Josh. 9. 19.) in determining that question about
their saftie, we have sworn unto them by the Lord, therefore we may not touch
them, because of the Oath which we swear unto them. Yea more, when many
hundred years after, the injury of Saul is mentioned in slaying them, the
ground of their right to Live and dwell among the Lords people, rather then the
other Canaanites, is attributed expressly and solely to this Oath; 2. Sam. 21.
2. Now the Gibeonites were not of Israel but of the Amorites, and the children
of Israel had sworn unto them, and Saul sought to slay them, wherefore David said
what shall I do for you. Now the command being so express to cut them off, and
upon the other hand, their saftie being first and last attributed so clearlie
to the Oath, that which this man calls a wild and gross opinion, he must
either impute to the Scripture-account of this matter, or resolve and
accommodat this difficulty, which he is (in maintaining the Scriptures
authority) oblidged unto as well as we. 3ly, that which he calls a wild and
gross opinion, is the Judgment of Learnd Divines, particularly of Jackson, who
upon the twenty verse. of that 9 of Joshua, having moved this objection, that
what the Princes swear was against the express command of God, who had often
enjoind to destroy all these Canaanites. Returns this answer. That though one
Oath or vow does not bind men for doing of any thing that is absolutely
unlawful, yet in this case it was not so, because the charge which God gave
for slaying the inhabitants of the Land, was a particular command, and so far
only to bind their consciences, as it might be obeyed without any breach of the
moral Law, as in Rahabs case it is also evident. But, here they could not obey
that command of God concerning their destroying all the Inhabitants of Canaan,
without perjurie, which is against the Law and light of nature -- he adds, that
their perjurie would have given great occasion to the enemies of Gods people to
blaspheme -- So that (says he) there lay a strong bond upon the consciences of
the Israelites, though they were deluded by the Gibeonites. Now I think the
account of this difficulty exhibit unto us here by this learnd divine, may make
him ashamed of his assertion in this point, and we may retort his objected
absurdity thus, if the moral Laws obligation in opposition to perjurie, stood
against and counter-ballanced a particular command of God in this matter, much
more will the force and obligation of ane Oath, in a matter of far greater
importance, stand good against any positive Laws and statutes of men. And if
even Gods positive Particular command, could in this case gound no dispensation
with their Oath, but God would rather dispense with the particular command,
than with it, how much more absurd must he be, who pretends a dispensation
with, and a nulling of, such selemn Sacred Oaths and vows to God as we are
under, and in such weighty matters, upon the arbitrary commands of men,
especially men under the same Oaths themselves.

In the premised distinction of Mr Jackson, the Informer might have discovered
the folly of his bold unrestricted assertion; no Oath can bind against a
command, no not a particular command. For Jackson distinguishes (which this man
admits yea and positively asserts) betwixt that which is simply and absolutely
unlawful, and that which is unlawful only upon the ground of a particular
positive precept, which in some circumstantiat cases may-come to justle with
the absolutely binding moral Law, as in the instances adduced by the Informer
himself is evident.

4Ly, His own rule anent the lesser obligation overruled by the greater or
Prior, will plead for this, and his instances, of Mercy and not Sacrifice, of
Paul and those with him, their casting the goods into the sea, David's eating
the shewbread to keep from starving, do confirm the answers above set down.
For here particular positive precepts, are overruled by the greater and Prior
moral obligations of the 6th Command anent self Preservation. What absurdity
then is there in this assertion, that the great moral precept of Not taking
Gods name in vain, did overruled a particular positive precept? Does he not
here see Gods great moral Commands (in the premised instances) binding against
lesser positive precepts. And when he says that whither the command be moral
or particular which the Oath binds against, all is one as to his fancied
absurdity, he discovers ignorance, and inconsistency with himself, for in all
his formentioned instances, moral precepts do overrule positive, particular and
lesser precepts. And why shall not also the great moral command anent not
taking Gods name in vain, overruled that positive and particular precept anent
the staying of these Gibeonites, and far more our solemn vows, the present
statutes of men. Sure, he will never be reconciled with himself here, or
assign a disparity. Hence Iackson having said that the bond of this Oath lay
strongly upon the consciences of the Israelites to observe it, though they were
deluded by these Gibeonites, adds that in this the Rule holds good, I will
have mercy and not Sacrifice, and from his own argument concludes that which
he here denies. So that this case of the Gibeonites (according to Jacksons
solution of this difficulty, and that sense of this scripture followed by him
and Other learned divines) strongly repells his rule, from the hindrance of a
greater good to loose the Covenant, especially since this greater good does
with him still resolve into obedience of men's Laws. Had not the Israelites this
ground more strongly to plead against the keeping of their Oath to these
Gibeonits, since not only they were cheated into it (and dolus aufert consensnm
say Casuists) but it seemd to hinder a far greater good viz, the obeying of
Gods express command to root them out; yet Joshua and the Princes knew not this
new knack for loosing Oaths. But the interposing the sacred name of God in ane
Oath, was with them so weighty a matter, that it overruled all these pretenses.

Thus we have seen how he acquits himself as to his first charge of [a mistake
of this place] and that what he calls a gross and wild opinion, is the sense
of the scripture embraced by learnd divines and consonant to his own pleading;
so that in this charge he discovers too bold ignorance. What more has he to
say? he tells us 2ly, that we are mistaken if we thank, that Joshua had no
warrant to make peace with any of the Canaanites, but was commanded without
once treating with them, to root them all out: because in Deuteronomy. 20. 10. he is
commanded to proclaim peace indefinitly to any city he came to fight with, the
Canaanites not excepted. Ans. How can this man say that the Canaanites are not
excepted, from that offer of peace there enjoined, when as he does not so much
as offer to answer to these pregnant circumstances of the text, pleaded by
Iackson and Others to prove the contrary. For, after the Lord has commanded
them to proclaim peace to a city before they assauted it, there is (verse 15.)
a limitation. Thus shall thou do unto all the cities which are very far off
from thee, which are not of the cities of these nations (viz: who were devoted
to destruction) therefore in the 16. verse. after the Lord has thus ridd marches,
as to the Canaanites they get this precept, But of the cities of these people
which the Lord thy God does give thee for ane inheritance thou shall save alive
nothing that breaths. Can any restriction and exception be more peremptory?
and that we may know, who these are who are thus excepted from mercy, and from
these offers of peace mentioned, the 17. ver. clears it. But thou shall utterly
destroy them, namely the Hittites, and the Amorites, the Canaanites, and the
Perizites, the Hivites and the Iebusites, as the Lord thy God has commanded
thee. This additional motive of Gods command is here remarkably inserted; which
is the more remarkable if compared with the 2. of Sam. 21. 2. The Gibeonites
were not of Israel but of the Amorites, and the Children of Israel had sworn to
them. When the spirit of God, is reminding us of this story in pointing at
Saul's guilt, we are first told that they were of the Amorites, a people devoted
to destruction by Gods command, but excepted from the rest that were destroyed,
upon the ground of this Oath, and upon this ground solely.

Jackson upon this passage, holds that the offer of peace, is not to be
understood of any city of Canaan upon these grounds, first, because they were
expressly charged utterly to destroy the inhabitants of Canaan, to the end they
might dwell in their room and might not be ensnard by their dwelling among
them; and secondly, we do not read that ever Joshua tendered peace to any of
the cities, tho it be mentioned as a strange thing, and a sign of Gods
hardening their hearts, that never any of those people, did of their own accord
crave peace, save the Gibeonites Josh. 11. 19. -- Yet we never find that there
was peace proffered them, and it seems that the Gibeontes did therefore seek it
by craft, because Otherwise they saw it would not be granted them; and 3dly, it
is expressly noted as a fault in the Israelites, Judges 1. 28. that they put the
Canaanites to tribute, and did not utterly drive them out. Hence he concludes,
that this is only to be understood of such cities as they should besiege that
were not of the land of Canaan. And upon the 15. verse. Thus shall thou do unto
all the cities which are very far off from thee, which are not of the cities of
these nations, He adds, but these must neither have peace offered them, nor
must their women and little ones and cattle be spared when their cities are
taken by force; for the following reason (says he) does manifestly exclude
them from both these favors (citing verse. 18.) That they teach you not to do
after all their abominations etc. Sure it had become this Magisteriall Informer
to ponder these reasons ere he had obtruded upon us his bold and inconsiderate
assertions in this point. The Dutch Annot: on this 15. verse. expressly assert
that the cities of the Land of Canaan are excluded from offers of peace,
because the Lord had commanded them to be banned (that is devoted to
destruction) as is related in the sequel. Mr Poole upon this 10. verse. asserts
that this seems to be understood not of the cities of the Canaanites, as is
manifest from verse. 16, 17, 18. who were under ane absolute sentence of utter
destruction, Ex. 23. 32, 33. Deuteronomy 7. 1, 2. Whence they are blamed that made any
peace or league with them, Judges 2. 2. but of the cities either of other
nations who injured or disturbed them, or commenced war against them, or aided
their enemies, or oppressed their friends and allies or of the Hebrews
themselves, if they were guilty or abettors of Idolatry or apostasy from God,
or of sedition or rebellion against authority, or of giving protection and
defense to capital offenders. Citing Genesis 14. Judges 20. 2. Sam. 20. The
English annot. upon this 10. verse. do also assert that this offer of peace is
not to be understood of the cities of Canaan, for they were to be more severly
dealt withal verse. 16, 17. and for showing them more favor Israel is blamed
Judge. 1. 28. but of cities without the land of promise verse 15. So that our
Informer is here runnig cross to the plain sense and scope of the text, and
the current of Interpreters.

But he adds, that there was a difference betwixt these Canaanites and the
nations a far off in relation to this allowance of peace to them. First, it was
to be upon the terms of relinquishing their idolatry, yielding up their Lands,
and becoming servants. That therefore leagues with them are forbidden, they
reserving their heathnish worship. But where will he show us this restriction,
or difference in Scripture? non est distinguendum ubi lex non distinguit. We
have seen Gods peremptory precepts to cut them off, to save alive none that
breaths of these excepted cities and nations. We find also peremptory
commands to make no leagues with them, no not for civil commerce, as they
might with other heathens afar off, Exo. 23. 32, 33. -- thou shall make no
Covenant with them -- they shall not dwell in thy land, as these Gibeonites
were permitted; so Exo. 34. 12. Deuteronomy. 7. 2 we have the same precepts renewed.
Now, where is this exception, as to these leagues? it lies upon him as the
affirmer to prove and instruct this limitation, which he here affirms, out of
the text. God who gives the law must himself also give the exception. And this
man must be charged with malapert intruding into what he has not seen, in
presuming to put in his exceptions, unless he can instruct them, which yet he
has not done. I confess God who is above the Law might allow an (...) in
certain cases, especially such as this anent their Oath, but looking to his own
precept we find no such exception from it. 2ly; he says, there was this
difference betwixt them and other nations, that if they refused peace, they
were to be worse dealt with then any other city that was not of the Canaanites,
because (Deuteronomy. 20. 16, 17.) in ease of their refusal, nothing was to be saved
alive while, other cities were but to lose the lives of the Males only. verse.
12, 13, 14, 15. Now, the violence which he offers here unto the text, is
obvious to any that but reads it. For after that (ver. 10.) the lord has laid
down this Law in general, anent their proclaiming peace to a city before they
assault it, and showen (in the 11. ver.) That if the city yield, they shall be
tributaries -- (verse. 12, 13.) God injoyns that if the city refuse peace, every
male must be cut off -- and (ver. 14.) the Women, little ones, and the cattle
must be saved, and its spoil taken. Then (verse. 15.) to ridd marches, and to
show whom all these prescriptions relate unto, and whom not. The lord adds --
thus shall thou do unto all the cities which are very far off from thee which
are not of the cities of these nations. And then (as I said) in relation to
them the severe command follows (16. ver.) but of the cities of these nations
which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shall save alive nothing that
breaths. And that these excepted cities and people may be known they are
particularly named as in above expressed. He says, in the case of their
refusal, nothing was to be left alive, and they were to be worse deal; with
than others, who refused peace, who were to lose the males only. Whereas the
text appears express, that the Law anent offering peace, and dealing thus
according as it was accepted or refused, did not belong to them at all, but
that they are very clearly and peremptorly excepted from it. As for his long
confused parenthesis here foisted in anent the difference betwixt the peace and
a league, and that Joshua first made a league with the Gibeonites, but knowing
them to be Canaanites-brake it, because contrary to the command of God (citing
Josh. 9, 21, 22, 23.) and merely allowed them a peace. It is fl^tly
contradictory to the text, for (verse. 15.) it is said, he made peace with them
and made a league with them (and this league was) to let them live, and the
Princes of the congregation swear unto them. Lo here is the Identity of the
peace and league, and the design and contents of it [to let them live.] The
Dutch annot. upon 15. v. [the princes of the congregation swear to them] tell
us, that they ratified by Oath that which Joshua had promised them, viz. that
they should remain alive. The English annot. in stating the question and
difficulty concerning the contrariety of this transaction to Gods command,
express it thus, whither Joshua in making peace with them, and the Princes in
confirming it by Oath, did Lawfully or not. And speak to the Lawfulness, or
unlawfulness of both Jointly without any distinction, but make no exception in
the least of the league as if distinct from the peace confirmed by Oath, which
certainly in statingthe question they would have expressly excluded, had they
imagined any such distinction. That Joshua keept the peace and the league, and
that this league and peace was to let them live, is accordingly set down in the
same terms when the Princes ratefied it; and all along where the peace is
mentioned, The Oath (and by consequence the league which was thereby confirmed)
is proposed as its ground. They smote them not because they had sworn by the
Lord (18. verse.) And (verse. 19.) the Princes determine they must not touch
them, because they had sworn to them. And (20. verse.) we will let them live
lest wrath be upon us because we have sworn unto them. And (verse. 21.) the
Princes said to the People let them live -- as they had promised unto them. Lo
all along the Oath is most consciencioussly observed, and that as accessory
unto, and confirming this whole transaction, both the peace and league, the,
scope and sum whereof is still expressed thus [to let them live.] As the text
makes no distinction, betwixt the peace and league in this ratefication, so the
intendment thereof is never extended byond their life and saftie first or last.
How then can this man say that Joshua brake the league, since the terms thereof
were to let them live (ver. 15.) which is acknowledged by the Princes and
faithfully performed. The league and peace and Oath here are still one, and
fall under the same consideration as consonant, or dissonant to the command; if
the peace was contrary to the command so was the Oath, and if the league was
contrary to the command so was the Oath also. For it is most evident, that the
text speaks of the peace and league indiscriminatim or without distinction in
relating this transaction, and of the Oath as accessory both unto the one and
the other; so that the Oath was unlawful, if either the peace or league was
unlawful, and if either was broken the Oath was broken, and Joshua and the
Princes were perjured: Whereas the text records their faithful performance of
the Oath as ratefying all that transaction. But it is no strange thing to see
men so notoriously blotted with perjury seek precedents in scripture Saints if
they could find them. But this instance will stand in judgment against them
if they repent not.

Whereas he says, that Joshua brake the league as contrary to the command of
God when he knew them to be Canaanites, giving this as a reason why he allowed
them a peace only. It is such a flat contradiction to the text, and to it self,
as none can be more plain. For according thereunto Joshua could not break this
league without breaking his Oath which confirmed it, and could break neither
the one nor the other, and allow them a peace. Since this peace was the import
both of the league and Oath, and all that the Scripture mentions as their
demand of Joshua, was peace and their life, and no more; and this all along
Joshua and Israel keept, and precisely because of the Oath. As any who reads
the text may see. The Dutch Annotations upon Josh. 9. 15. expone that branch
that relates to the Princes swearing thus, that they ratified by Oath that
which Joshua had promised them, viz, that they should remain alive. Wherein, as
they clearly hold that the Oath was accessory to this whole transaction, so
they make it entirely to terminate in this that they should have their life.
And upon 2. Sam. 21. 1. Where Saul's guilt in slaying these Gibeonites is
mentioned, they paraphrase it thus, that it was contrary to the promise made to
them and ratefied by Oath. Josh. I. 15, 18. And whereas we are put in mind in
the 2. ver. that [the Gibeonites were not of Israel But of the Amorites] --
they paraphrase it thus, that they were remaining of the heathen nations whom
God had commanded to destroy -- and the other clause of the verse wherein we
are put in mind [that Israel had sworn to them and Saul is said to have sought
to slay them in his zeal] they paraphas^ it thus, that it was irregular fained
zeal whereby he thought to mend what Joshua and other godly Governors,
according to his opinion had neglected or ill done, but it was directly against
the Oath made by Gods name, by his special providence, for which thing God was
now greatly provoked, as by this pleague upon the land, and Gods answer
appears. Wherein, how evidently they stand in opposition to this man's glosses
and pleading upon this head, is obvious to themeanest reflection since only
for thatOath they charge guilt on Saul. The English annotations upon (ver. 18.)
say, that abstracting from the Princes Oath it had been cruelty to have slain
them seeing they had violat a lawful Covenant. Now how this aggrees with this
man's gloss of [Joshuas breaking the league, as contrary to the commandment] let
any judge. Jackson thus senses ver. 23. -- the curse, which God had pronounced
upon the people of this land requires that you be cut off as well as the rest,
yet because of the Oath which we have taken this curse shall be upon you in
bondage and not in death.

His next instance to prove his supposed limitation of Gods command to destroy
the Canaanites is that of Rahab her being spared Josh 6. 17. Which clearlie
crosses his pleading and argument here; for 1. the spies upon very strick terms
state their Oath: and told Rahab not only that if she should make the least
discovery of their busi ness, but likewise that if she or her friends, even so
much as one of them, were out of the house when the city was taken; this Oath
should not reach them, whatever submission she had made. And 2dly, All Joshuas
ground when he commands the spies to secure her and her friends, is their Oath:
they are commanded to bring out the Woman, [as they swear to her] and for no
other reason. 3ly. I pray, what saved her friends and her relations as well as
her self from this common destruction? Surely, they made no peace nor any such
submission as this man supposes necessary to exeem them from the commanded
destruction, nor was there any assurance the spies could have touching them,
and therefore they could not be upon any other ground saved, but because
included in this Oath. Besides, what power had these two men to transact a
peace without Joshuas advice and knowledge? the ground of, their transacting
with her, is their necessity, and the Woman's offer of their saftie. Now I
retort his argument here against him; to prove that they were spared upon other
terms then the Oath, he adduceth this instance of Rahabs preservation upon the
submission mentioned, viz. her making and accepting of peace, and hence
concludes that she (and by consequence the Gibeonites) together with her
friends, were saved upon other terms, then merely upon the Oath, and that
abstracting from it Israel was obliged to save them. But one might argue thus,
if Rahabs friends (at least) might have been Lawfully cut off upon the ground
of Gods command to cut off the Canaanites who made or accepted no terms of
peace, and were only saved by the spies Oath, then the Oath (according to the
Informers own principles) did bind in opposition to a positive precept to cut
off the Canaanites: but so it is, that upon the ground of this Oath only her
friends were spared, as this man cannot deny: ergo, the Oath did bind here in
opposition to a positive precept. He dare not say that her friends were
proselyts, or did in the least directly or indirectly submit. Nay for any thing
that the spies knew they might be as cursed heathens as were in all Jericho
(for what was Rahab her self before God extraordinarly touched her heart) and
consequently by Gods positive precept devoted to destruction with the rest. Yet
this Oath, made even to another for them, yea an Oath which had a seeming
extortion of fear in the spies hazard, saved and exeemd them from this stroke
and curse, so that in this case himself must confess that the Oath did bind in
opposition to the positive precept. And this one clear Scripture instance
seems enough to prove the point that the Oath did overruled a particular,
positive precept, though all that he says of the Gibeonites were admitted.

He adds, that it is evident, from Josh. 11. 19. that if other cities in
Canaan, had submitted, as Gibeon, Joshua might have spared them. I answer; the
Text says that de facto they made no peace, and that God hardened their hearts
that they might come against Israel and fall. But this will be too weak to bear
the weight of his conclusion that Joshua might have spared them all. For 1. How
can this consist with the plain positive command as to their utter off cutting
(often renewed) and with Gods promise of giving Israel their inheritance, to
spare them all. For the Psalmist tells us, that he did drive out the heathen
with his hand and planted his people, he did afflict the people and cast them
out. Psalm. 44. 2. And Psalm. 78. 54, 55. He brought them to the border of his
Sanctuary, even to this mountain which his right hand had purchased. He cast
out the Heathen also before them, and divided them an inheritance by line, and
made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents. Hence as they were
frequently enjoined to cast them out least they should become a snare to them
Exodus 23. 33. Deuteronomy. 7. 16. Ex. 34. 12. So Isreal's sparing them when they were
planted in that land is frequently reprehended as their great guiltiness Judges
1. 27, 29, 30, 31, 33. And Judges 2. 1, 2. Upon which ground the Lord threatens
as a punishment that he will not drive them out: But that they shall be thorns
in their sides. And this threatening we find execute, and the same very
guiltiness presented as the cause of it, viz. That they did not destroy the
nations concerning whom the Lord commanded them. Psalm. 106. 34, 35. which
confirms this assertion; and therefore this historical clause in that passage
of Joshua, is to be expounded in correspondence with the plain and positive
command, which we have already seen clear. 2ly. Jackson upon that 19. ver.
[there was not a city that made Peace with Israel etc.] tells us, that this is
added as a reason why the wars with the Canaanites lasted so long -- because
the Inhabitants did obstinately stand out -- and attempted not to procure
conditions of peace save only the Gibeonites -- Which is far from coming up to
his scope and design. For it is one thing to say that de facto ^he wars lasted
long -- because none offered to yield but Gibeon, and another thing to say that
Joshua was not oblidged nor commanded to cut off any but those who thus warred
and resisted. Which will be the more weighty, if it be considered in the third
place, that as in the command to cut them off, no such restriction appears,
but upon the contrary the Canaanites are excepted from mercy, so we do not find
that Joshua offered terms of peace (as this man alleadges he was obliged) unto
any of these that were cut off, but assaulted them as those whom God had
devoted to be destroyed, in obedience to his holy, though severe command, As we
heard Jackson has observed. This will be more clear, (and therein the Informers
adversary might puzle him) If we shall again reflect upon the remarkable
circumstances of that transaction with the Gibionites. In the 6. ver. of that
9. of Joshua, they propose the matter thus, we are come from a far country,
therefore make a League with us. Whatever they had understood of Gods command
to cut off the Cananites, this surely was a strong argument with Joshua. Now
remark the answer in the 7. ver. the men of Israel said peradventur ye dwell
among us, and how shall we me make a league with you. Sure their offering terms
of peace and submission, might have stopped this question and demurre according
to his opinion, who holds that upon their submitting to terms of peace, They
might have been spared and even incorporat among Gods people, as he tells us
from Josh. 11. 19. that all these Canaani^es might have been spared, had they
thus submitted So that in his sense their first offer was a ground of peace.
Especially since (as is observed by learned Interpreters from their offer in
the 8. ver.) they sought peace from Joshua and Israel upon their own terms,
and offered to accept any conditions proposed by them. Which was the lowest
step of submission. And when they further answer that demurr about the place of
their abo^e with this general, we are thy servants, i. e. We offer our selves
to thee and all that is ours, which was enough in this man's Judgment, to
except them from the stroke threatened, and commanded to be execute upon the
rest of the Canaanites. Yet this does not satisfy Joshua, but again he
particularly interrogats them upon these two points, who are ye? and next, from
whence come ye? This their free and general concession (as some do judge)
giving Joshua just cause to suspect that they were of the cursed Canaanites
whom he was to destroy; and then they tell him that wherein the dolus lay, we
come from a far country. Now, I suppose they had answered to these two
Questions thus, we are Amorites, and we dwell here. Thinks this Informer that
Joshua would have looked on himself as obliged by Gods Law to transact with
them. What needed then his peremptory Interrogations (after their declared
submission) anent their stock and lineage, and the place of their abode? What
needed the people murmur, and desire to cut them off, after the contrary of
what they pretended was discovered, notwithstaning hereof? Nay thirdly, why is
it, that again and again their saftie is attributed solely to the Oath, without
the least hint of their submission as having any influence thereupon? Finally
that passage Joshua 11. 19. [no city made peace -- For it was of the Lord that
they might have no favour] seems to import no more but this, that favor might
have been shown them had they submitted, but how? Even by God the supreme
lawgiver (whose mercy is over all his Works) his dispensing with his own Law,
and severe positive precepts, (as in the case of the Gibeonites he did) and in
what Method it seemd best unto him, but it will be hard to infer from this a
limitation of the precept it self for the reasons already given. So that all
that seems to follow from this passage is, that had they submitted, God might
have spared them by a special dispensing with his own Law, (For he will have
mercy and not Sacrifice) and Joshua upon Gods appointment. But not that the
Law it self did dispense with them.

As for what he adds in further confirmation of this opinion, anent Salomons
imposing bond service upon the remains of these cursed Nations, and their
posterity afterward, whom the children of Israel were not able to cast out
(which, in ane odd phrase, he calls a kindness) and anent these Children of
Solomon's servants, mentioned Ezra. 2. 55, 58.] Jackson will tell him [That it
contradicts not the Law (Deuteronomy. 7.) anent utter smiting them, and showing them
no mercy, since, that Law may be meant of the inhabitants that were in the Land
at their entering first into it, not of their posterity. Especially these who
had their lives previously secured.] Which fully cuts off his argument from
this Text. And this is also the answer of Mr Poole and other learned
interpreters upon this passage. Besides, that the Nethinims were probably the
Gibeonites issue, and were however all of them, by a long tract of time
Proselyts incorporat among Gods people and professing the true religion, which
providentiall title might abundantly secure their lives

The Dutch Anotations upon Josh. 29. 27. do infer from the nature and mould of
that phrase which signifies [a delivering them over.] that hence it is thought
they were called Nethinims i. e. given and delivered over which confirms the
answer adduced. However the person who should directly impugn the Informer as
to what he maintains in this question (which he has impertinently brought in
without any ground, to make some shift of answer) might further tell him that
this being but a practice, cannot be pleaded against a rule, but must be
measured by it, which is a principle acknowledged by all.

And here I shall exhibit some remarkable inconsistencies of this man with
himself upon this point 1. he supposes that Joshua and the princes their Oath
to the Gibeonites stood inviolable as to this transaction both now and
herafter; for he says (page 143.) that Saul's slaying the Gibeonites moved God
to wrath, because it was contrary to Ioshuas Oath made to their fathers. Now
Joshua and the Princes Oath ratefied all the Transaction with them, and was
accessory thereunto as the text most clearly holds out, viz. both the league and
the peace; yet he tells us (page 141.) that as soon as Joshua knew them to be
Cananites, he brake the league as contrary to the command of God, and
consequently his Oath confirming it according to his doctrine as being Likewise
contrary to the command. 2ly, In that same page he tells us that no peace was
to be concluded with the Canaanites, unless they became servants and renounced
their heathnish idolatries, and that with the same proviso leagues were
discharged with these Canaanites. Yet immediately after he makes a distinction
in this point betwixt a peace, and a league, and tells us, that Joshua had
first made a league with them, but when he knew them to he Canaanites, he brake
it as being contrary to the command of God, and only allowed them a peace. Now
both the peace, and the league, were equally allowed and commanded upon their
terms of yielding up their Lands, and relinquishing their Idolatry, and both
were equally discharged if they did not so, according to the series of his
reasoning, as is obvious to any Reader. How then (I pray) could Joshua break
his league with them as contrary to the command of God, more then the peace,
both which he holds to have been allowed them with this proviso. 3ly. He says
Joshua and the Princes swear nothing but what God commanded (page 142.) Now the
text is most express that they swear the league ver. 15. and Joshua made peace
with them, and made a league with them to let, them live, and the princes of
the congregation swear unto them. This league he says Joshua brake as contrary
to the command of God, in his second answer; yet in his 3d answer he tells us,
that the Oath contained in it nothing contrary to the command. Again, he says
God commanded to make no peace with them, But upon the terms of submission,
relinquishing their idolatry, and giving up their Lands. To this only he
restricts the Princes stipulation, as falling under the command, yet
acknowledges the command will include a league also upon their terms, which else
where (as I said) he dstinguishes from the peace, which he holds was not to be
allowed them even upon their terms. And likewise, in his second answer he tells
us that they had peace only upon their submission, without mentioning these
other terms. Likewise he says that on these terms he transacted to spare
Rahabs friends, but where was this assurance as to her friends?

4ly, He acknowledges (page 143.) that Gods wrath for slaying the Gibeonites
was because of Ioshuas Oath, made to their fathers. Yet page 108. he cries out
upon his Doubters assertion anent ane Oath binding the posterity, as a strange
fancy, and tells us that Casuists say, that Iuramentum est vinculum personale,
binding these only who take it. Now whereas this man wonders much at our
argument from this text anent the Gibeonites, let any judge whether his own
shattered inconsistent discourse be not rather an object of wonder.

But to proceed, his third answer to the premised argument of his Doubter, from
this instance of the Gibeonites, is that Joshua did nothing contrary to Gods
command, which was to spare them upon their submission. Ans. (Besides what is
touched anent his inconsistency with himself in this, and what we are to add,
anent the impertinency of this unto the point, though granted.) I say first,
that Joshua and the Princes were bound to spare them abstracting from this
stipulation and Oath, is more then he has proved, and appears contrary to the
command above expressed, and the current of the context where this Oath and
stipulation is set down; whether we consider Joshuas peremptory demands and
demurres anent receiving them to peace, after they had expressed their
submission, or the Oath its being again and again mentioned, both in setting
down the stipulation its self (ver. 15.) and the reason why they were not
smitten (ver. 18.) and the Princes judicial determination. (ver. 19.) as the
sole ground of Joshuas and the Princes obligation to them, without the least
hint of any other, which certainly might have been (and consequently if true
would have been, might his impugner say) very pertinently and strongly pleaded
by Joshua and the Princes, to quash the peoples murmuring at the sparing of
them. 2ly, I might say, that this stipulation and Oath, although cross to a
particular positive precept, yet notwithstanding, as matters here stood
circumstantiat, was consonant to a general moral rule of Gods mercy, who loves
it better then Sacrifice. And the sparing of these Gibeonites was grounded upon
this great moral precept [of the reverence due to Gods name, interposed by a
Sacred and Solemn Oath.] Which answer is the very determination of Joshua and
the Princes in this matter. His impunger might here add that it is utterly
improbable, that in the Princes determination of the question [whether these
Gibeonites were to be saved, and the stipulation with them held as valid] their
submission would have been omitted, if they had understood Gods command with
this limitation, which is a doubt that would much puzle this Informer to
resolve.

His 4t, Ans. is, that God was angry at the slaying of the Gibeonites, because
it was contrary to his command, to give them peace upon their submission, and
unto Ioshuas Oath to their fathers, and not merely because it was contrary to
the Oath. Ans. Joshua and the Princes Oath is both in that 9. of Joshua, and
the 2. of Sam. 21. mentioned as the only ground of their right to their life,
without the least hint of any command anent their having peace upon their
Submission, which notwithstanding this antiscriptural Informer (who will be
wise here above what is written) sets in the first place, as the principal
cause of their right. When the reason is rendered (2. Sam. 21.) why these
Gibeonites had a right to live among the Israelites, though they were not of
Israel, but of the Amorites, it is expressed thus, the children of Israel had
sworn to them, and Saul sought to slay them. Again, since he grants that God
was angry at the slaying of these Gibeonites upon the ground of Joshua and the
Princes Oath to their fathers, he confequently grants that this Oath,
notwitstanding of the cheat by which Joshua and the Princes were brought under
it, was still binding and did oblige the posterity, which is the Chief point
that this instance is adduced to prove against him, as we shall presently show.
For what he adds after, it is not much noticable. The reasons of the English
annotations as touching this Oaths consonancie to Gods Law, we are not in this
point concerned to scanne, since our argument stands good even upon their
supposition. As for these who say, that Joshua and the Princes Oath, was
contrary to Gods Law, and do therefore assert that it did not bind. We have
shown that as herin they are not ours, so in this assertion they clearly cross
the Scriptures, as is evident from what is above touched.

Here we shall again mind the Reader for a conclusion to this argument and
instance anent the Gibeonites, that all this man's clamor, about the consonancy
or dissonancy of this Oath to Gods Law, is out of the way, and never meets our
reasoning from this passage, even as its molded by himself, so that we may
without losing our argument as to its main scope, grant all that he says anent
the consonancy of the Oath to the divine precept about cutting off these
Canaanites, and that it did admit these restrictions which he speaks of. But
our argument for the Covenant is here twofold 1. That this Oath and Covenant
with these Gibeonites though its matter were of a far lower nature then our
Sacred Covenants, and vows, yet did not only oblidge that, but all succeeding
generations, And therefore much more our solemn sacred vows, so solemnly and
universally sworn, and about the great concerns of Public and personal
reformation, do oblidge all the posterity. Now this being our main Argument, he
is so far from denying it, that he grants it upon the matter, in asserting and
yielding unto us, that this Oath consonant to Gods Law, did bind the posterity;
for thinks he that we do not suppose and hold the matter of the Covenant to
be consonant to Gods Law' Why then wanders he out of the way, while pretending
to answer this argument, and pleases himself, and leads his Reader off the way
with unprofitable talk not to the purpose? The consonancy of our Oath to the
Law of God, being even his own supposition in this argument. 2ly. From this
instance we argue (as I said) for the binding force of the Covenant even upon
the adversaries supposition anent the coaction, deceit, fear, or such like
irregularities in the manner of entering unto it, (which they use to make a
great clamor about) and from this text we conclude that all these will not
loose the Oath, when once it is taken. Since here there was a notable cheat
whereby Joshua and all Israel were brought under this Oath, taking away both a
rational assent of the Judgment, and the free suitable election of the will,
quia dolus aufert assensum that is, deceit takes away assent, say Casuists, Yet
all this did not irritat this Oath when taken. And even as himself states the
objection, his Doubter alleges, that the pretense or appearance of a greater
good in breaking the Oath, was not wanting, -- and particularly pleads, that
this Oath did bind the posterity. Now what his roaving discourse anent the
Oaths consonancy to the Law, says to all this, let any rational man judge;
Since both his Doubter and he, do suppose the matter of this Oath lawful. He
knew that his stating the question aright and speaking to it, would have made
the vanity of his answers appear, and therefore he started this notion anent the
Oaths binding against a precept, that tossing it a little upon his forked pen,
the unwarrie Reader might believe, he had returned a full answer to this
argument: Whereas he but beats the air in ane airie discourse out of the way,
and yields the cause when he has done.

Next he says, we use to plead Zedekiahs breach of Oath to the King of
Babylon, which the Lord was so much displeased with. But how, and to what scope
we plead that text, he durst not set down, nor put into the mouth of his
Doubter any formal argument from it; Which if rightly propounded, he knew well
his cause would quickly fall before it. This man could not be ignorant how
Timorcus, and others, improve this text, viz. that Zedekiah who was of the
Kings seed, the son of Josiah (Ezekiel. 17. 13.) had ane Oath put upon him by the
King of Babylon anent his, and the Kingdoms fealty and subjection to him (2 Chronicles 36. 13.) after he had overrunn the land, and made prisoner Jehoiachin his
Brother, and keept Zedekiah himself under his power. That he could neither have
the crown, nor his liberty without this Oath of fealty to the King of Babylon,
which was forced upon him out of fear, and as a prisoner -- yet for the breach
hereof (Exek. 17.) he is threatened with the loss of all. Shall he break the
Covenant and be delivered -- as I live says the Lord surely my Oath and
Covenant that he has broken even it will I recompense upon his head. And in
the midst of Babylon he shall die. Here was ane Oath, forced upon a prisoner,
and a King of Judah, and upon the matter inconsistent with Isreal's Laws, made
that the Kingdom might be base, yet the breach of it was thus terribly
revenged: Therefore much more dreadful is the breach of our solemn vows, whose
matter is of such high importance, and their end so excellent, and the power
imposing so native and Lawful etc. What says he to this Argument? he tells
us, that the Jews were commanded to submit to the King of Babylon (Ier. 27. 6.
etc.) so that the breaking of the Oath was disobedience to Gods command. But
who denies this, and what does this arguing reprove? does not his Doubter and
himself also suppose the matter of the Covenant to be consonant to Gods
command. But how takes he away these nerves, and t^ckling points of this
instance and argument for the Covenant. 1. That this Oath was forced upon him
as a prisoner. 2ly, taken by Zedekiah out of fear. 3ly, had a very apparent
Inconsistency with a greater good, viz. to free Gods Church and people from a
heathen slavery. 4ly, was cross to many standing Laws of Israel, yet neither
the force of this heathen Invader, in imposing this Oath, nor the fear and
bondage of this King of Israel when he did take it, nor the apparent
inconsistency of its matter with a greater good, and its certain inconsistency
with the standing Laws of Israel, did loose the Oath when taken, nor exeem the
breaker of it from wrath and Judgment. And all this because it was upon the
matter warrantable, and allowed of God, as we hold the Covenant to be. And
therefore neither force, fear, bondage, the greater apparent good in breaking
it, nor the inconsistency of it with our present Laws, none of all these
pretenses (we say) will loose the Oath of our Covenant, the matter of it being
warranted of God, and of such high importance as is said. Sure it is obvious to
any that this answer of his, says nothing to the antecedent or consequent of
this argument for the Covenant, nor touches it in the least.

The Doubter objects next [the mark of the blessed man (Psalm 15. 4. verse.)
swearing to his own hurt and not changing.] In answer to which this Informer
grants, that in many things a man may swear to his hurt and not change. This is
sound, and in so far he must grant, that the Oath may hinder many goods and yet
not for all that be violat. And in recompense of this concession I readily
yield to him, that ane Oath will not bind to a man's hurt in every thing, as to
take away his own life. And that such ane Oath binds only to repentance, as
being iniquitatis vinculum. But what will he say to this argument which he
makes his Doubter here mutter out? Why, when it hurts (says he) those in
authority and peoples souls, it will not bind. True, but how does the keeping
of the Covenant hurt peoples souls, or these in authority? we read much in
Scripture of the hurt that breach of Covenant has brought upon both these. But
how a peoples keeping Covenant with God wrongs either their souls or these in
authority, we would gladly hear. Dare he say that every disobedience to the
command of Rulers, impeaches their authority? or that peoples want of the means
and ordinances of life, is to be imputed to Godly suffering ministers, whom for
keeping Gods Covenant they have chased away from their flocks and families? As
for family hurt, or in relation to things of this life, there is no question but
that ane Oath in many cases will bind notwithstanding thereof; Which is the
Judgment of all Interpreters. But now the Doubter having spent all his
arguments, has only one poor General left, viz. that we are tender of Oaths.
To this he answers first, by acknowledging, that we ought to be considerate
before we enter into ane Oath. Very true, and had we all been so, there had not
been so many contradictory and ungodly Oaths, standing upon record against
Scotland, as this day there are. Withal he says, we should be well advised
before we think our selves discharged of an Oath. And no doubt if he and his
party had advised this better with God, with his word, with sound Casuists, and
their own consciences, they had not upon such poor grounds as we have seen,
first perjured themselves, and pleaded for others doing the like. But yet
(says he) to think we cannot be at all discharged of an Oath, in a thing not
necessary, is to be more tender then we ought to be. True: but not to take
every matter of an Oath for not necessary, which he may have the confidence to
call so, but cannot prove it, and not to admit every ground of discharge as
lawful, which such Adiaphorists as he may pretend, is to be no more tender
then we ought to be.

But here, our Informer will reach a blow again at the Assembly 1638, because
of their loosing Ministers, who entered by the former Prelates, from their Oaths
to them. But where is his discretion and tenderness, who objects this as a
fault of that assembly, and yet dare not exhibit, nor offer to scanne their
grounds mentioned in their act, in reference to these engadgements? wherein,
because that Prelacy is condemned in the word (and consequently the matter of
these Oaths,) and likewise found contrary to the privileges and reformation of
this Church, to maintain which, the se Prelates themselves who exacted such
Oaths, stood engadged, and such like grounds, they prove them to be Materially
sinful, iniquitatis vincula, and from the beginning null or never obliging,
and do not pretend (as he) to loose from Oaths antecedently lawful and
binding. Besides, Prelates being removed, this Oath supposing their existing
power and office, was ipso facto null and void, as the soldiers military Oath
to the captain upon the disbanding of the army, and so its root was plucked
up. Sublata causa tollitur effectus. Sublato relato tollitur Correlatum. So
that he gets but a Wound to his cause, in kicking thus against the pricks.

But he tells us, that he will come yet nearer with an other argument, and so
he had need, for the preceding have never yet come near our cause nor his
design. Well what is this? Commissaries (he says) were abjured in the
Covenant, as officers depending upon the abjured bierarchy, yet we ownd them,
before Bishops were restored, and why may not he, the abjured Bishops also. But
will he suffer a Reverend father Bishop Lighton to answer for us, and show him
the disparity of our Commissariot (a mere civil administration, influenced and
authorized by superior civil Governors, as a part of the political
constitution of the Kingdom) with a Church office. In his first letter anent
the Accommodation, printed in that piece entitled, The case of the
accommodation examined, he will tell him, that though we have the name of
Commissaries yet they exercise not any part of Church discipline. Which he
sets down, expressly to distinguish them from the Commissaries abjured in the 2d
Article of the Covenant. Now, the difference of this owning our Commissaries in
Scotland, from owning and swearing fealty to the Bishop as a Church officer, in
all his Spiritual usurpations, is so palpable, that any may see the
impertinency of this instance even in Bishop Lightons Judgment. Moreover, we
abjure in the Covenant all Ecclesiastical officers depending upon that
hierarchy. But will he dare to say that the Commissary, whose administration is
properly Civil, and when the Covenant was taken had not the least dependence
upon a Prelat, was an Eclesiastical officer depending upon that hierarchy.
Surely the meanest capacity may discover the vanity of this argument.

The Doubter objects this, [that the Commissaries did not then depend upon the
Bishops, and therefore might be ownd as not contrary to the Covenant.] To this
he answers, that upon this ground of a non-dependance upon Bishops, we might
have ownd a Dean at that time, or a Bishop, as having no dependence upon an
Archbishop; and that he cannot see why any member of the hierarchy under the
highest, might not have been owned and retaind on this ground, as well as the
Commissary. Ans. The disparity is manifest to any of Common sense; the Dean sua
natura is an Ecclesiastic officer, and the very office denotes a relation
unto, and Ecclesiastic dependence upon a prelat, in spiritual
administrations: so that Prelacie being laid aside, and the hierarchy smoothed
to Presbyterian Parity and Government, the Dean is a mere Chimaera, and so is
the diocesan Bishop, and can no more subsist, the basis and fountain of his
very office qua talis, or as such, being removed and extinct. But the
Commissary (a civil officer and Magistrate) his administration, of its own
nature civil, depends upon, and is regulat by, superior civil Rulers, and so
in that case subsists entirely as a part of the civil Government, where
prelacie is abolished; and can no more be scrupled at, because a prelat did
sometime usurp an authority over that office, then the office of the Lord high
Chancellor, or any other civil office of state, and inferior offices thereon
specially depending, because sometime a Prelat was Chancellor, and usurped
authority in these matters, ought to be disowned or scrupled at upon this
account.

2ly, He says, this answer comes near to what he said before, anent the
English divines who hold, only that complex frame to be abjured in the 2d
article, which consists of all the officers there enumerat. Ans. 1. It is more
then he has proved, that the English divines do own (even sigillatim or
apart) all these officers, or look upon themselves as only obliged against
that complex frame consisting of all the officers enumerat in that article. We
heard before out of Timorcus (whom Bishop Lighton in that letter, and the
Informer himself cites, as holding that our Prelacie is consistent with the
Covenant, and whom they appeal unto in this debate) that they disowne all
Prelacie, where one single person exercises sole power in ordination and
Jurisdiction, all Prelacie beyond a Proestos, and particularly the name and
thing of Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Chapters, Arch Deacons. Timorcus in the
7. Chap. adds, -- all Bishops not Chosen by the clergy and people -- all
Bishops who act by Deans, prebends, and exercise their power by Chancellours,
Commissaries etc. Does not the article it self abjure, all ecclesiastical
officers depending on that hierarchy. So that though we did come near to what
they say in this answer, we come never a whit nearer him. 2ly, we told him
already that the Commissaries office is properly Civil, though usurped upon by
the Prelat, so that when purged from this usurpation, and running in the
channel of a mere civil administration, influenced and authorized by Superior
civil Governors, as a part of the political constitution of the kingdom, it
falls not within the compass of an Ecclesiastical officer depending on the
hierarchy, by his own Confession, and Bishop Lightons. How then was the owning
of him before the introduction of Prelacie, contrary unto the Covenant.

But because he suffered not his poor Doubter to tell him that the Commissary,
besides that in our late times, he did not depend upon the Bishop, is really
and upon the matter with us a Civil, not a Church officer, he thinks to
surprise him with a third answer. That now the Comissaries do actually depend
upon the Bishops, yet we scruple not, nor decline their Courts and authority,
and if we decline them not (as according to our Principles we are oblidged) how
are we free of perjury? and if we can acknowledge a Commissary notwithstanding
the Covenant, why may not he also a Bishop. Ans. What poor tatle is this? we
told him already that the Commissariot is of it self a lawful Civil
administration, not ane Ecclesiastical function, and the prelates usurped
authority cannot render this civil office unlawful. Whereas the dicoesan
Bishops office, is a pretended Ecclesiastical function, and in its very nature
a gross corruption, and contrary to the word of God, as is above cleared. Which
disparity is palpable to any that will but open their eyes. Do we abjure any
Civil courts or officers in that article? are they not termd expressly
Ecclesiastical officers who are there abjured: Nay, does not Timorcus tell us
that in England the Commissaries exercise a power in Church discipline by a
delegation from the Bishop. And does not Bishop Lighton deny this to be
competent to our Commissaries here. For in that passage of the letter now
cited, he says we have nothing but the name of Commissaries, he means in
respect of these in England, who exercise ecclesiastical discipline under the
Bishops. Didoclavius page 458. Cites Cowellus in Interpret, about the office
of the Bishops Commissary in England, speaking thus, Commissarij vox Titulus
est Ecclesiasticae Iurisdictionis (saltem quousque commissio permittit) in
partibus Diocesios a primaria Civitate tam Long dissitis ut Cancellarius
subditos ad principale consistorium Episcopi citare non potest etc. That is,
that Commissary in England is a title of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction so faras
his commssion will allow in places which are so far remote from the chief city
of the diocese, that the Chancellor without great molestation cannot cite them
to the Bishops chief court. Didoclavius tells us (ubi supra) that according to
the Statutes of England, the Chancellor is the Bishops principal official,
and the Commissary the Bishops foraneous official.

To conclude, 1. The Bishops power as to Civills, and their deputation of this
their power to Chancellours is a most gross usurpation, Contrary to the
Scripture, which forbids the Minister to entangle himself with things of this
life. Our Lord himself would not so much as be an arbiter in a civil Cause.
Paul speaking of the ministerial duties, says who is sufficient for these
things. The Apostles must Give themselves continually to the Word. Cartwright
against the Rhemists upon 2. of Tim. 2. 4. Proves that pure antiquity Knew
nothing of prelates thus meddling, citing Jerome (super Sophon. cap. 1.) who
expounds that place against Ministers meddling in Secular affairs. And Cyprian,
who applies this place against one who took upon him to be executor of a
Testament: Lib. 1. Epist. 9. council. Carthag. 4. Cap. 20. Apostol. can. (Can.
6.) Seculares Curas non Suscipite. Likewise Ambrose, who affirms that Worldly
Government is the weakening of the priest. (Lib. 5. Epist. 33.) Smectimnuus
(page 32. Sect. 10.) cites council. Hispall. 2. Cyprian Epist. 28. against this
deputation of prelates power to Chancellours, Commissaries etc. and Brings in
Bishop Dounham aknowledging (Defens. Lib. 1.) that in Ambrose time and a good
while after, which was about the year 400. till presbyters were wholly
neglected, the Bishops had no ordinaries, vicars, Chancellours, Commissaries,
that were not Clergy men. But this restriction they affirm to be a mere
blind, and Challeng him to show any such underofficers of Bishops in those
times. So that they hold this to be one main point of difference betwixt their
Bishops, and the primitive Bishops. 2dly, in England, not only has the
Commissary a Civil administration under the Bishop, but has Likewise power of
Spiritual censures, and a great part of the Bishops ecclesiastical
administration, committed unto him both over Ministers and others; such as
suspension, deposition, excommunication: See Didoclav. (page 464, 465. de
officialibus) Cartwright (2. repl. part. 2. page 69.) who shows that the
prelates not only exercise Tyrrany themselves over the Church, but bring it
under subjection to their very Servants, yea their Servants Servants such as
Chancellours, Commissaries etc. 3ly, it is clear that since the reformation we
never had in Scotland such Commissaries; but our Law and practice since that
time, and since Popish Prelacies were dissolved, has much reduced them to the
state and Quality of other civil officers, whose administration of its own
nature depends upon superior civil officers. For this we have (as I said)
Bishop Lightons own Confession, that we have but the name of Commissaries here,
who have nothing to do with Church discipline; Only their civil power is
invaded again by the Prelates. 4ly, B Lighton and this Informer do both plead,
that its only the officers enumerat in the 2d Article of the Covenant, and the
Commissaries as then molded and Existent in the Church of England, that this
Oath oblidges against. And so according to their Principles and pleading, our
Commissary here, so vastly discrepant from theirs, falls not within the compass
of the Covenant abjuration. Hence finally, the owning of the Commissary in his
Lawful civil administrations, can be no acknowledgement, either, 1. of the
English Commissaries Power, which he has not. Nor 2dly, of the Prelates
usurpation upon this civil office; no more then the simple using of our civil
Laws, and the ordinary civil courts during Cromwells usurpation, was a
homologating the wickedness thereof, which this man will not dare to assert. An
usurper may be in titulo, and such submission and improvement of the civ^l
power invaded by him, as does acknowledge the providentiall Title, and his
being possessed of the power de facto, and having as they use to say jus in re,
or actual providential possession thereof, If there be no active concurrance
toward his Establishment, is, as to civills, free of any guilt of the
usurpation, and will import no acknowledgement of the usurper his Pretended
jus. Which is the Judgment of all sound divines and Casuists. But the case is
far different as to our Informers deriving his deputed Ecclesiastical Ministry
or spiritual authority from the Bishop; because, 1. the Prelates office it self
is a gross usurpation, contrary to the Scripture, so is not the Commissaries
office. 2dly, the Pelats usurped possession of unlawful power over the Church,
which is Christ's Kingdom, cannot give him so much as a providentiall Title; and
therefore all acknowledgement thereof is unlawful. Thirdly, his submission to
prelacy as now it stands Circumstantiat, is an acknowledgement both of the
possession, and jus, which this man will not deny, and this is far dictinct,
from an act which does but indirectly acknowledge the usurpers possession. So
that his Conformity is ane express acknowledgement and owning of a gross
encroachment upon Christ's Kingdom (his Church) which is toto Coelo different,
from acknowledging a possession de facto of, and a Providential title unto, a
part of the civil administration of the Kingdoms of the world, which are
mutable. And as for a testimony against this usurpation, I suppose that had the
people of God disowned these civil courts, upon this ground of the Covenant
obligation, his party, for the preceding reasons, had signally cried out
against it, as an AnaBaptistical rejecting of Lawful civil Government, more
then he does upon this Pretense, allege a homologating of Prelacie, in this
acknowledgement. But however, we say, that the people of God their notour and
standing testimony against Prelacie it self as now Established, does
sufficiently reach this among other its usurpations, although this piece of
civil Government be eatenus or in its own nature and as such, owned as formerly.

But now our Informer charges us with another breach of Covenant, upon the
ground of schism, which he says, we are carrying on in opposition to the
peace and liberty of this Church, which Christ has bequeathed to her in
legacy. This heavy charge we would gladly know how he will instruct, and
because he cannot stay to discuss that point in this dialogue, we will therefore
supersed our enquiry here, and pass over to his third dialogue, and Examine
therein the grounds of this accusation, which we doubt not to discover, to be as
Irrational, as these examined in the preceding Dialogues.


A Confutation Of the Third DIALOGUE, Upon the point Of SEPARATION.
Wherein upon exhibiting the true state of the Question, the practice of
adhering to Presbyterian Ministers in the exercise of their Ministry, and
denying of a subjection to Conformists as the lawful Pastors of this Church,
from whom Gods people are bound to receive the ordinances, is vindicat from
the charge of a sinful Schismatic separation, the true and solid grounds of
this practice offered, and the Informers arguments against it, fully ansvver'd.

CHAP. I.
The question stated and cleard, from our Churches state before, and since the
introduction of Prelacy, the different condition of Presbyterian Ministers and
Conformists* Separation in many cases not Schism. The Informers groundless
suppositions. Arguments presented and prosecuted at some length, whereby this
practice is acquit of the charge of a sinful separation, and discovered to
fall under Scripture precepts and obligations as duty.

THE state of the Question in the third Dialogue, is anent sinful separation
and Schism; whether the people of God be guilty of it in adhering to such
Ministers as contend for our Reformation, rather then Curats or Conformists;
And whether they stand in this case of our Church) obliged to adhere to the one
or the other, as their true Pastors, from whom they are to receive the gospel
ordinances, and to whom they owe subjection, reverence, and obedience
accordingly. This state of the Question our Informer cannot in the least pick a
quarrel at, it being most suitable unto his pleading, which is all along
grounded upon this supposition, that conformists do stand in a Ministerial
relation to this Church, and professors therein: from which he concluds
peoples obligation to adhere unto them, as their only true, and proper
Pastors. And in correspondence to this principle and inference, does
universally and absolutely fasten the charge of intrusion and Schism upon
Presbyterian Ministers, and people, as to their respective acts of preaching,
and hearing in their present state and circumstances So that if we can overturn
this his grand topic, and fortify the antithesis thereof, he must grant that
all his reasoning in this Dialogue falls to the ground. For clearing this let
us take a little view, first, of our Church of Scotland her case at Prelacies
introduction. 2ly, of her present case. 3dly, of the different grounds which
the Presbyterian and Prelatick party plead upon, for the peoples adherence.
4thly, on whose side the separation stands. Schism is a sinful separation from
a Church, with whom, and in what acts we are bound to adhere. So that when this
Question is cleared, who are that Church to which we stand under obligations to
adhere, it will go far to clear this debate.

First, As to the state of our Church at Prelacies Introduction, I shall l^y
down these three suppositions in relation to the matter of fact. First, that
our Church from the infancy of her Reformation, together with popry rejected
Prelacy, and in her National capacity, and in her supreme Judicatories
disowned it as contrary to the Word of God, as a piece of Antichrists wicked
Hierarchy: And in her National capacity abjured the same often, solemnly, and
universally. This has been already cleared upon the preceding Dialogue. 2ly.
Presbyterian Government has been looked on by our Church, as the only
Government of the Church appointed by Christ in Scripture, and as the hedge of
her reformed Doctrine. Nay the owning of it has been the great badge and
Criterion, to try her true members; the subscribing the books of Discipline,
and the national Covenant of old, and the solemn league of late, with
engadgements of adherence to Presbyterian Government, have been the ordinary
door of entry into her Ministry. This, as to matter of fact, is clear and
undeniable. 3ly, Our Church has Judicially condemned E^astianisme, and
Ministers their state offices, and appointed Judicially the censuring of the
opposers of this her establishment as scandalows, Assembly 38. Sess. 16: 17.
Confirmed and renewed in Assembly 39. So Assembly 40. Sess 5.

In the 2d place, as to our Church her present condition, these things are
clear and undeniable. 1. That all the legal right of the late work of
Reformation is removed in the act rescissory. 2. Presbyterian Government is
razed, and the Church Government monopliz'd in the Arch Bishops and Bishops,
obtruded upon this Church: And the right and liberties of Presbyters and all
our former Church-Judicatories is removed and taken away. 3ly, Ane arbitary and
Erastian Prelacy is set up in opposition, both unto our Churches intrinsic
power of Government, and likewise her particular frame of Presbyterian
Government. 4. All her vows and great Oaths both in the National Covenant, as
explaind An. 1638. And in the solemn League against Prelacie, and for
maintaining her reformation, are disowned, razed, and cassat, as far as legal
enactings can reach. 5. Ane express bad^e is appointed as to both Ministers and
people their owning this course of defection, and disowning the late
reformation viz. ministers submitting to Erastianism and Prelacy and owning
their new courts; and peoples hearing their vi^ars and substitutes, for the
same scope in the rulers diclaird design. 6. Ministers betwixt three and four
hundred disown, and stand in opposition to this course, and a great part and
body of the professors of this Church have likewise disownd the same, and
stood their ground. Hence upon what is said, it follows in the 7th place, that
ane ax is laid to the root of her reformed Doctrine, Worship and Government;
The great hedge thereof is removed, viz: her solemn vows: and beside, her
doctrinall principles anent the Antichrist and his Hierarchy, the Churches
intrinsic power of Government, Christian liberty, the unlawfulness of
significant ceremonies in Gods Worship; her Doctrine anent Justification, the
Imperfection of obedience, Christ's certain, determinat, and full satisfaction
for sinners, in opposition to the Socinian and Arminian errors; The morality of
the Sabbath etc. are opposed by this innovating prelatick party. And next, for
her Worship (beside what corruptions are already introduced, and others pleaded
for, as the perth Articles etc.) It is, upon the matter, subjected to men's
arbitrary impositions; And our National Covenant and Conf^ssion is disownd, ae
stricking against popish corruptions, and also our late confession as asserting
the abovementioned Doctrine and principles. And for Government, the Curats are
mere slaves of Prelates, in all their meetings by his negative voice, and the
Prelates themselves are but the Magistrates creatures. And thus as our late
consession is disownd in relation to several doctrinal points of Christian
liberty, morality of the Sabath, free election, etc so likewise in relation
to its principles as to Church Gobernment, and Christ's appointing Officers,
laws, and censures, as head of his Church, his not giving the keys to the
civil Magistrate etc. Wherein our prelatick party are come so great a length
that the late theses from St Andrews an. 81, daines that Assembly of Divines
whose confession is authorirized by the general Assembly of this Church, with
no other name then that of a conventicle. 8ly, Our Churches case is now worse
then when prelacy was introduced by King James. The Limitations of Erastianism
by the Act of Parliament An. 1592. in relation to her privileges concerning
heads of religion, heresy, excommunication, and censures, clear this. Next,
Church-Judicatories were not discontinued, but sat upon their old ground; and
Prelates were restored by Parliament to their civil dignities only. Hence 9ly.
Its clear that this pure Presbyterian Church has been merely passive as to all
these innovations lately introduced; her true representatives or lawful
Assemblies never having consented to this course of conformity, as appears by
the Assembly 38. Their act anent these meetings, at Linlithgow 1606; at Glasgow
1610. at Aberdeen 1616. At St Andrews 1617. at Perth 1618. Which consented to
Prelacie; All which meetings they demonstrat to be contrary in their frame and
constitution, to the privileges of this Church. And at prelacies late erection
Presbyterian Judicatories and Synods were preparing a Judicial Testimony,
before they were raisd. So that the voice of our lawful Assemblies is still
heard in opposition to this course; and since Prelacies erection we have never
had so much as a shadow of ane Assembly etc.

For the 3d point, viz. the different grounds which the Presbyterian and
prelatick party (and this man particularly) do plead upon, for the peoples
adherence; take it shortly thus, the prelatists do plead first, that they are
Ministers, and in that relation to this Church. 2lv. That corruptions in
administrators will not (according to our own principles) warrant separation
from ordinances. 3ly, they plead order, and union, which (they allege) is
broken by peoples withdrawing. These are the chief topics they insist on. On
the other hand Presbyterian Ministers plead for disowning them according to the
forementioned state of the question, first, from this that the body of
Presbyterian Ministers and professors adhering to our Churches reformation,
principles, and privileges, are the pure genuine Church of Scotland, tho now
fled into a wilderness; whose voice we are called to hear as her true Chiidren.
2ly, that this course of conformity is a mere intrusion on this Church, and
invasion of Christ's Kingdom, prerogatives and ordinances, subjecting the
laws, officers and censures of his Church unto men, exauctorating and putting
in officers without his warrant; that Prelates, and their deputes consequently,
have no right to officiat as Ministers in this Chuich. Since both the one and
the other are arrand intruders upon the same, and promoters of this Schismatic
destroying course of defection. 3ly, that our Churches divine right and claim
to her privileges stands fast, notwithstanding the present encroachments and
invasions thereof; and her Childrens obligation of adherence to the same
accordingly. 4ly, That hence it follows, because of the nature and tendency of
this course of defection, that all are obliged to keep themselves free from the
least accession to it, and therefore to disown Curats; both as maintaining
principles contrary to the principles and doctrine of this Church, and as
standing in a stated opposition to her, and likewise as the objects of her
censure, if she were in capacity to draw her sword. That the people of God have
both corrupt doctrine to lay to their charge, beside the corruption Worship;
and also their going out from the fellowship of this Church, and leading the
people away from our vowed reformation etc.

In the 4th place, to come to clear ths great point on whose fide the
separation stands, let us premise these things. 1. Every separation is not
sinful, even from a Church which has the essentialls, yea and more then the
essentialls, a man may go from one Church to another without hazard of
separation. But further, in these cases separation is not schism. I. It if be
from those (tho Never so many) who are drawing back, and in so far as drawing
back, from whatever piece of duty and integrity is attaind. For this is still
tobe held fast, according to many scripture comands, as we shall show. So Elias
when Gods Covenant was forsaken, was as another Athanasius; (I, and I only am
left) in point of tenacious integrity. 2ly, if we separat in that which a
National Church has commanded us as her members to disown by her standing
acts, and authority, while those from whom we separat own that corruption. 4.
If Ministers their supposed separation be ane officiating as they can have
access, after a National Churches reformation is overturnd, and they persecute
from their watchtowers by these overturners. For in this case the persecuters
separat from them, and chase them away. 4. There is a Lawful forbearance of
union and compliance with noto ious backsliders, in that which is of it self
sinful, or inductive to it, which is far from separation strictly taken; The
commands of abstaining from every appearance of evil, and hating the garment
spotted with the flesh, do clearly include this. 5. Many things will warrant
separation from such a particular Minister or congregation, which will not
warrant separation from the Church National; nor infer it, by Mr Durhams
acknowledgment (on scandal page 129.) For if scandals become excessive, he
allows to depart to another congregation. 6. There is a commanded withdrawing
from persons and societies even in worship; the precepts, to avoid them that
cause divisions and offenses contrary to the received Doctrine, Romans 16. 17. to
come out from among the unclean and be separat. 2 Cor. 6. 17 to cease from
instruction that causes to err from ehe words of knowledge, Prev. 19. 27. to
save our selves from the untoward generation. Act. 2. 40, will clearly import
this by consequence. 2dly, This charge of sinful separation which they put on
Gods people supposes many thigs which must be proved, as first, that the
Prelates and their adherents, are the only true organick Church of Scotland,
which is denied; her frame and constitution being such as it said; surely the
Ministers and professors adhering to her reformation must be the true Church
of Scotland tho the lesser number, as they should have been, if this prelatiok
defection had been entirely popish. These soldiers who keep the Gen^rals
orders are the true army, not the deserters of the same. Either the Church in
this Nation as lately reformd and constitute, and to whose constitution many
Conformists vowed adherence, was not the true organick protestant Church of
Scotland, or this party, whose constitution, Principles, Doctrine and
practice, are point blank contrary thereunto, is not. 2. It supposed that there
is no lawful use of ordinances among Presbyterian Ministers, as persons who
have no Lawful call to officiat in this case. Hence this man pleads for
disowning them universally and absolutely; but we affirm they are Ministers
standing in that relation to this Church, and under the obligation of Christ's
command to officiat, which Conformists have not yet disproved 4. He supposes
that every thing which may be expedient as to the (...) and order of a Church,
when enjoining her full peacable constitution, will equally oblidge in her
broken and persecute condition, when a prevailing backsliding party is in her
bosom. Now; scripture and reasen will disprove this: circumstances of order
must give place to important duties in extreme necessity as this is: the
scattered officers of the Church of Jerusalem, went every where preaching the
gospel (Act. 8,) so did Ministers in the beginning of the Reformation. 4. It is
supposed that our change is only as to government: and such only as was in King
James time, both which we have showen to be false. 5. He takes for granted that
their personal faults who are conformists, and a supposed pullution of the
worship thereby, is our ground of non-union; and that our granting them to have
the essence of a Ministerial call, and that their scandals will not pollute
the worship, will infer the hearing of them in this our case, which is also
false. For even upon this supposition, we are not bound to own them no more
then ane ingraind Schismatic, obtruded forcibly by a party of the congregation
upon the rest of the people, might be ownd on this ground. 6 This man begs the
question in supposing that the constitution and frame of the Prelacy now
established, is the same with that of the ancient Church, for he often tells us
that we would have separat from the ancient Church, upon the same grounds for
which we disown Conformists. Whereas we have showed the difference of our
prelacy from theirs in many points. That our prelates both as Diocesian and
Erastian, are wholly discrepant from the ancient Bishops. 7. He takes it for
granted, that Ministers who disown this course of backsliding their relation to
their flocks is cut off, in the present posture of our Church, and that the
Prelates and their substituts, (the Curats) are the only proper representative
Church of Scotland, who accordingly have only the lawful power and exercise
of the keys as to either admission or censure of Ministers. A principle
always disowned by our Church. See Protesters no subverters (page 96.)
Rutherfoords due right of Presbyt. [pag. 430. 431.] Altar Damasc. (page 23.)
8. He supposes that its unlawful in this our case to officiat, ren^tente
Magistrat^; that this very violence and the present Laws will render Ministers
officiating unwarrantable [pag. 205.] which is a great mistake, for the
Magistrate cannot loose from the pastoral relation which he gave not, ejusdem
est constituere and destituere. A^esmedull. [cap. 30. these. 14. And hence the
Ministers relation to the Church National stands, tho he restrain the exercise
thereof in any one place; and consequent ly the ties and commands to officiat;
so that disobeying the Magistrates command not to officiat, is no disobedience
to his lawful authority. Nay Apollonius thinks that the divine relation of a
Minister to this Church, tho banished from his native country, does stand. Ius
Majestatis circasacra part. 1. page 331. (9.) He still supposes that, what will
not exse, or of it self plead for disowning the hearing of the gospel, or of a
Minister simpliciter, will plead nothing in this our case for disowning
Conformists. The man's weakness, personal faults, not lecturing etc. are not of
themselves sufficient to cut us off from hearing absolutely. But tho this be
granted, we have the pure genuine Church of Scotland, and her faithful Ministry
to adhere unto, and over and above these grounds mentiond, conformists
schismatic practice, and corrupt Doctrine to lay to their charge, which will
make this ground in our case very weighty and preponderating; and this the
Informer himself must grant, for he will not say that such like pretenses or
arguments in our case, were valid as to the owning of Nonconformists and
des^rting of Curats. Moreover he will grant, that Presbyterian Ministers might
Lawfully be heard, if Conformists were not standing in their way. Now so the
case is in relation to Presbyterian Ministers pleading; for that none of these
things which he mentions were valid to infer peoples disowning of Conformists,
were there no other Ministers in Scotland, and if this Church had universally,
both Ministers and people fallen into this course of backsliding, will be readily
granted; But without any advantage to his cause, as is evident. To these many
discoveries of his begging the question in this debate, our plea and arguments
will be clearer if we add a short view of our suppositions in this case and
question. Such as 1. our principle of the unlawfulness of prelacie. 2. The
binding force of our covenants. 3. Our Churches divine tight to her Reformation
and privileges once established. 4. that this is a case both of defection, and
persecution. 5. of competition betwixt Ministers and professors contending for
our Reformation, and a party of backsliders overturning it. 6. The tendency of
this course of Prelatick defection, to raze our Reformation; and that if not
prevented; it will end in propery. 7. That Presbyterian Ministers relation to
this Church, and their obligation to duty founded upon that relation, is not
extinguished but subsists notwithstanding of the present violence and
persecution, which they with their weeping mother are exposed unto. Having
premised these things, from what is said we may draw forth at length the great
state of the question thus, whether, when the Reformation of a National Church
in Doctrine, worship, discipline and government, is by a backsliding party
overturnd, and a course-carryed on to raze it, God having left a considerable
body of Ministers and professors, who stand in opposition to that course, and
are in their capacities testifying against it, are these Ministers and
professors who preach and hear in opposition to that course, or the complying
Ministry and hearers, the scismaticks? This being clearly the state of this
question, we shall offer these arguments to fortify our principle of disowning
conformists in this our case, and denying a subjection to them as the Ministers
of this Church, and adherence to Presbyterian Ministers in the exercise of
their Ministry, and acquit this principle and practice from the Informers
charge of sinful separation.

1. Whoever of the two partiss adhere unto the true genuine Church, owning her
constitutions, authority and privileges, its certain the contrary party must
be the schismatics; here it must be seen who are the first departers, who have
first broken the hedge, who have first disownd and opposed the Covenants, the
Government, the sound and pure doctrine of this Church, in compliance with
persecuters, surely they and they only are the schismatics. Had not this
invasion been made upon our Church and her privileges, what would have been
her Judgment of the present principles and practices of Conformists in any of
her Lawful courts? would they not have been judged censurable as the worst of
Schismatics? Now, what is the difference here, except, that this party makes
the greater number; but will this take away the charge of schism? suppose a
party of notorious schismatics should cry ou^ upon such as withdraw from them
as schismatics, were not this a ridiculous charge; and Just so is that of
Conformists in this case.

2. Every schism supposes ane obligation of adherence to that Church from which
the separation is made. Now then, let him prove ministers obligation to join
into this Prelatick course (without which they will not admit them to officiat)
and disprove our prior obligations to opposeit; or else Ministers obligation to
preach, and peoples consequently to hear in opposition to this course of
defection, will stand good on the old grounds, and all the scripture comands
(founded on Pastors of this Church their Ministerial relation) to set the
trumpet to their mouth, and give a Ministerial testimony against this
defection, and peoples obligation to hear and take warning, will press and
plead for that which he calls schism and a sinful separation.

3. Hence Presbyterian Ministers, and professors are in this their practice
never toched, by all his arguments and defenses, but these are weapons in their
hands against him and the conforming party. 1. Whereas he pleads the essence of
the ministerial call, which conformists lay claim unto, Presbyterian Ministers
answer, that Nonconforming Ministers have this, that they are Ministers of this
Church, and have a better right to officiat as her true pastors then
Prelatists. And if this will not plead for hearing Non-conformists, why shall
this argument be thought valide for hearing Curats? is not the same way from
Athens to Thebes, and from Thebes to Athens? if his concession touching the
essence of their Ministerial call, will not (with him) infer hearing
Non-conformists, because of their supposed schism: Ergo a fortiori it will not
infer the hearing of Curats, who really are such. 2. he pleads that
corruptions, and failings in administrators, or even some corruptions in
ordinances, will not infer disowning of Ministers. Why then pleads he for
disowning Presbyterian Ministers and ordinances adminis red by them, to whom
this is so clarly applicable. 3ly, he pleads union. But let him say, what was
the order and union of this Church before these innovations? was it ane union
under Prelacie, Erastianism, and persurious breach of Covenant; was not our
Churches Reformation in doctrine, worship, discipline and Government, a
beautiful order and union? Now who broke this? supppose we should Plead union,
against his withdrawing Presbyterian professors from Presbyterian Ministers,
will he own this pleading? or not rather disowne it, because he thinks our
union is schismatical; well, so we hold and do prove the prelatick union to be:
and therefore until he disprove our charge against his party, this pleading is
null.

4. Divines, do tell us (particularly Timorcus chap. 7. page 32.) that a
sinful separation which falls within the compass of schism, is from the
communion of a Church as walking according to the divine rule; otherwise, if
the Churches deviation specially be great, there is no fear of any guilt by
schism in departing from it; and hence infers, that unless absolvers can
instruct that prelacy is juris divini, disowning and abjuring it cannot be
schismatical. Moreover this man himself grants, that schism in its ordinary
acceptance, is taken for a causless separating, and that where communion with
a Church cannot be held without sin, in that case separation is necessary. Now
then if we can prove, that our non union is not causless, and that communion
cannot be held with Conformists (in our case and circumstances) without sin, we
are not Schismatics by his oun confession. To clear then this great point of
the sinfulness of owning them in their demanded conformity; we offer these
considerations. 1. Owning them and subjecting our selves to their Ministry as
the Pastors of this Church, has a palpable breach of Covenant in it as the
case now stands, for all along we must suppose its binding force, and that
there is a considerable body of Ministers and professors contending for it,
and that the question is, to which of the parties contending we are bound to
adhere, and that according to our principles anent its binding force, and the
unlawfulness of Prelacie, which this man cannot disprove. The owning of them in
the manner above expressed is a breach of Covenant many ways. specially as
this man pleads for it, with a total disowning of Presbyterian Ministers in
their Ministry. In this case it is a resiling from what we have attained in
point of reformation, contrary to the first article, wherein we are bound to
maintain purity of worship and Doctrine as then established. Now their preaching
is for the most part consisting of corrupt doctrine contrary to our
Reformation? And their prayers have several petitions with which we cannot
join, such as for prospering Prelates and their courses; Not to speak of the
abrogating the lecture, repeating of the creed at baptism, singing a set form
of conclusion, or what innovations in worship are introduced. Again, this is a
concurience with promoters of this course of backsliding, and a suffering our
selves to be withdrawn from our union engadged unto, and a denial of suitable
assistance to faithful Ministers contending for the Covenant against
backsliders, all which are contrary to the other articles thereof. This will be
specially clear, if it be further considered. That 1. The body of presbyterian
Ministers being ejected, if disowned in the manner and extent pleaded for by
this Informer, the presbyterian interest, and our Reformation according to the
Covenant, will be extinct, sold and betrayed. 2. Hearing Curats and peoples
subjecting themselves to their Ministry as the Pastors of this Church. is by
the Rulers required as a direct badge and Test of owning Erastianism and
prelacie, in opposition to the Covenant and work of Reformation: So that its a
case of confession, now to adhere to a faithful Ministry contending for it. 3.
There Is no other way to exoner our consciences before God and the World, and
Declare our nonconformitie to this course of backsliding, but by this practice,
there is no getting of wrongs redrest, or corruptions in the Ministry removed.
Thus the Apology page 272. 4. We are in the Covenant engadged against
Indifferency, in this great work of Reformation, and is not this the way to
fall into it more and more. 5. We engadge that we shall endeavor, that this
work of Reformation shall remain inviolable to posterity. But what memory shall
the posterity have of this work if prelates and curats be thus submitted unto?
6. We engadge opposition in our capacity to all prelatick malignant enemies of
the Lords work and interest; but how is it performd when we thus strengthen
their hands, in their avowed opposition thereunto. 7. How assist we and Defend
in this common cause of Religion and liberty, such as enter into this league,
when we thus Divide from our suffering brethren, wound and offend them and
shake off a faithful Covenant-keeping Ministry. 8 How maintain we our reformed
Doctrine, worship, and union, when thus owning false prophets, and the
instruction that causes to err from the words of knowledge, and such as cause
Divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine we have Learnd. Prove. 19. 27.
Romans 16. 17, 18. 9. How maintain we the privileges of our Church and her
Reformed Government? when owning intruding prelates and their creatures as
Ministers of this Church, and disowning her true Ministers, now taking her by
the hand. This practice is ane approving of Curats call and mission, rather
then that of presbyterian Ministers, which no man will deny to be contrary to
the Covenant. Next, owning and adhering to Curats in this our case, and
according to our principles, has an accession to much guilt otherwise, such
as. 1. The owning of a palpably blasted, and Disowning a palpably sealed
Ministry. 2 A high reflection on the sufferings of many Godly upon this ground.
3. A shutting of our eyes against Ministerial Discoveries of the sin and duty
of the time. 4. A casting of our selves on tentations of greater compliance. 5.
A breaking of fellowship with these that are contending for Gods work and
denying a sympathy with them, yea a trampling on their blood which has been
shed on this ground. 6. A disowning the Ministerial authority, and tearing the
commission of Christ's faithful Ambassadors, and depriving our selves of the
blessing and benefit of their Labors etc.

5. This practice of denying a Subjection to the Ministry of Conformists, and
of our Rulers demanded conformity therein unto the present course of defection,
will be found to fall under great scripture obligations, such as 1. The
obligation of persevering in integrity, and holding it fast. Colos. 1. 23. Heb.
10: 23. Psalm. 25. 21. Supposing prelacy unlawful, and the binding force of the
Covenants in reference to all the work of reformation as it stood established,
this practice is clearly cross to the premised obligation, both as ane
acknowledgement of prelacy and Erastiani me, and also as a Disowning of
faithful Ministers. 2. The obligation of keeping at the greatest Distance from
sin, expressed Jude 23. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. 1 Timothy 5. 22. will infer Disowning Curats
in this case. 1. All Direct, or interpretative consent to sin, is here
Discharged. 2. A practice otherwise lawful, will on this ground become
inexpedient hic and nunc. We must not eat in the case of offense, tho we may
freely eat all meats Romans 14. 14. 1 Cor. 10. 25. Now on the forementiond
Suppositions, the owning of Curats has an accession to their sin, beyond that
of ane apearance or a touch, It being both a Deserting the presbyterian
Ministry, and a badge of conformity to Erastian prelacy, and all the corruption
and defection of the time, which is thereby advanced and promoted, it is also in
this case of competition, a deliberat adherence to the prelatick rather then
presbyterian interest. 3. The great obligation of a testimony to truth and
Duty, expressed Heb. 10. 23. Mat. 10. 32. will plead for this practice, All truth
must be avowed, and practically avowed. We must walk circumspectly, or exactly
as the Word imports, and we must avow truth and duty on the greatest hazard;
even the smallest matter is great, when a testimony is concernd in it, were it
but the circumstance of an open window, Daniel durst not ommit it upon the
greatest hazard. And as this testimony must be full, so must it also be
constant. Demas shame is, that the aflictions of the gospel made him forsake
the Apostle after great appearances for Christ, and embrace this present world.
And beside, whatever truth or duty is opposed, that becomes the special object
of this testimony. Hence Ministers and Professors in their capacity are called
to contend for this Work of Reformation; and Ministers silence as to a
Ministerial testimony against this course of backsliding, and people's
disowning them, and adhering to Conformists, is so palpably cross thereunto, as
nothing can be more. 4. This practice is inferd from the scripture obligation,
to guard against the slumbling and offending our brethren, expressed 2 Cor. 6. 3.
Math. 18. 6. 1 Cor. 10. 32. Here is Discharged any Dictum vel factum quo alius
deterior redditur, says Polanus. Whatever practice gives occasion of our
brothers sinning, of calling truth in question, of acting with a Doubting
conscience, or which weakens his plerophory or assurance, is here discharged.
And neither the lawfulness nor Indifferency of the thing it self, nor men's
Authority commanding it, Nor the weakness, yea or wickedness of those in hazard
to be stumbled, will warrant the Doing of that out of which offense arises.
Paul Declares all meats lawful, yet will not eat in case of offense 1 Cor. 10.
25. 1 Cor. 8. 13. This Declaring of the lawfulness of that practice, is
equivalent to any civil Declarator or Law which alters not the nature of
scandal. Paul will not have the weak stumbled Romans 14. 1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 8. 11,
12. Nor give occasion to the malicious who desired occasion 2 Cor. 11. 12. Now
owning of Curats as the case is now circumstantiat does harden them in their
apostasy, and has a tendency to wound the peace of the godly who dare not own
them, or may provoke them to act against their light; and therefore unless
owning them could be proved a necessary duty, as matters now stand, the premisd
scripture obligation will infer it to be sinful. 5. disowning conformists will
clearly follow from the scripture obligation, to turn away from seducers, and
such as turn aside from Gods way. 2 Timothy 3. 1. The apostle having given a large
Induction of evils adhering to these in the last days, putting among the rest
of their black Theta's, Covenant breaking, concludes his discovery with this
grand precept (ver. 5.) from such turn away. We must beware of false prophets,
the concision, and of such as walk not according to the received ordinances,
Math. 7. 15. Romans 16. 17. Philip. 3. 2. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. Christ's sheep do flee
from the stranger, and hear not his voice. John. 10, 27. 1. All promoters of
ways contrary to the simplicity of the gospel, are here commanded to be
eschewed. 2. We must know and discover such by their fruits and practical
unfaithfulness, as well as false Doctrine, Mat. 7. 16. compared with 2 Timothy 3.
These that practically act the foxes Cant. 2. 15. are to be taken away, and
consequently eschewed, the saints must be fortifyed against these that ly in
wait to deceive, God disowns these that make sad the hearts of the godly and
strengthen the hands of evil doers. Ezekiel 13. 22. such as stand not in his
counsel Ier. 33. 22. and cause people to err by their lies and lightness. Ier.
26. 32. Now upon the forementiond suppositions its clear that Conformists are
leading aside from our Reformation, opposing the principles and privileges, of
this Church; they are Covenant breakers from whom we are to turn away; they are
speaking peace to the wicked, and healing the wound slightly, and are ruling
with force and rigor Ezekiel. 34. 4. 1 Pet. 5. 3. Witness their present violence.
6. This practice of Presbyterian Ministers officiating in opposition to this
course, and peoples adherence to their Ministry, is inferred from the scripture
obligation of many terrible charges and adjurations laid upon Ministers, in
reference to a faithful diligence in their Ministerial function, and a
suitable Ministerial testimony concerning the sin and duty of the time, which
is necessarly inclusive of their peoples reciprocal diligence, in attending
their Ministry, and their obedience and faithful adherence accordingly. They
are commanded to cry aloud and show the people their sin Isa. 58. 1. and as
they would not have the blood of souls upon them, to give faithful warning
touching sin and duty, and their peoples case and hazard, especially in times
of great sin and judgment, when God is terribly pleading his controversy with
them Ezekiel. 3. 17. hence they are enjoined to be instant in season and out of
season, reproving, rebuking and exhorting with all long suffering and Doctrine
2 Timothy 4. 1. And as faithful watchmen on Ierusalems walls, never to hold their
peace day nor night till she be established, and made a praise in the earth Isa.
62. 6. to fulfill and make full pro^fe of their Ministry Colloss 4. 17. And as
these comands in order to Ministerial diligence, do singularly oblige herunto
in this case, so the scripture woes and threatenings thundered against Ministers
negligence and unfaithfulness, are very convincing and awakening. See Ezekiel.
chap. 3. and chap. 13. 5. 6: Hence on the forementiond suppositions it clearly
follows. 1. That Ministers are oblidged to be constantly instant in season and
out of season, in their Ministerial testimony against this course of defection.
2. This case of defection and persecution ampliats and extends this duty to all
to whom they can have access, as the scattered preachers Acts. 8. Went every
where preaching the gospel, after that persecution that arose about Stephen. 3.
This Ministerial testimony upon the forementioned grounds, must be levelled at
all the corruptions of the times, and all the branches and degrees of our
defection. 4. The duty and obligation of the people of God, is reciprocal and
commensurable thereunto. And if hearing Curats and disowning Presbyterian
Ministers, be not inconsistent with this great obligation, let any Judge.

6. That part^ in a Reformed Church, which having overturnd her Reformation,
has shut out, laid aside, and persecute away sound adherers thereunto both
Ministers and professors, and will not admit Ministers to officiat, but upon
the sinful terms of compliance with their way, cannot charge the sound party
with schism in standing where they were, and owning and prosecuting their
respective duties, as Ministers and flocks, in opposition to these overturners
and backsliders. For this would justify the most ingraind schism that ever was
heard of; Now so the case is here, for all Presbyterian Ministers are cast out,
and they and all sound professors adhering to them persecute, unless they will
retract their principles, and conform to prelacie. Ministers, in taking up a
new tenor and exercise of their Ministry in a precarious servile dependence
upon Erastian prelacy, headed and influenced by a mere civil papacy; And
people, in subjecting themselves to the Ministry of the servile deputes of
Erastian prelates, as a badge of their hearty compliance with, and submission
unto, this blasphemous supremacy, and consent to the overturning of the pure
constitution and reformation of this Church. So that the Presbyterians their
plea is an owning of duty against Schismatics disowning it. Do not our Divines
tell the Romanists on this ground, that they have seperat and persecute us away
from them, and that therefore the schism lies upon themselves, not on us: So
the case is here. Let this man say, what would have been the judgment of our
Church in any of her former judicatories, anent a party owning such principles
as Conformists do, and persecuting or casting out all that oppose them, and
dare not concur in their course of backsliding in overturning the sworn
Reformation of this Church; I dare appeal to the Informer himself, if such
would not have been judged censurable as the worst of Schismatics. And he can
assign nothing now to turn or cast the scale, no ground of disparity, unless
he place it in this, that prelatists are the greater number, and have the civil
power on their side. And if this pityfull plea will carry it, the Romanists
have long since outweighed the protestant Churches in this debate, which this
man will not for very shame admit.

7. This practice of adhering to Presbyterian Ministers, and disowning Curats,
has nothing of the ingredients of schismor, sinful separation from this
Church, included therein, as matters now stand, and as the question is stated
on the forementioned hypotheses. Which will appear in these clear positions
in the point of schism (which are evident in their own light) being applied and
brought home to our present case. 1. Schism is a starting out from under due
relations to a Church and from her Ministry, and duties accordingly. But in
this our case, and practice under debate, Ministers and professors are
pursuing the duties of their respective relation to this Church, as it stood
reformed and established before these innovations, and the Apostat prelatick
party are doing the contrary. 2. In a sinful Schismatic separation, it is
always supposed that the withdrawing, is from those who are holding the
communion of the true Church, otherwise we lose the basis and fundation of all
sound definitions of schism. But here the persecute party are owning the
Reformation of this pure Church against a party of separatists, who have broken
her order, union, and National vows; and who are also censurable by all her
standing acts. 3. In a proper Schismatic separation, the principles and
practice of these from whom the separation is made, are supposed to be
subservient to that Churches union, right establishment, and for maintaining
her communion; but to separat from those whose principles and practice is a
stated opposition (and in so far as an opposition) to her purity and
Reformation, is to maintain her true union and communion, and not sinfully to
separat from it.

The Assumption as to this practice under debate, might be cleard by a large
induction of particulars. If we take a view of the two parties (Presbyterian
and prelatical) their carriage in relation to this Church: It will be evident,
1. In general. That Conformists their principles and practice, is a direct
impeachment of our established reformation, and that Presbyterians are
maintaining and adhering to the same. 2. Conformists do avowedly disowne and
abjure our Covenants, Presbyterians adhere unto and own the same. 3.
Conformists are breaking and dissipating our Churches established order and
union, Presbyterians are in this practice contending for both; the one party is
wounding our Church both by persecution and reproach, the other is taking her
by the hand, endeavoring her help and comfort in this her deep distress, and
so the Covenant obliges to disowne the first, and adhere to the second. 4. The
one is censurable by her, the other deserves her praise. Now can there be any
question in this, to which of these parties people are obliged to adhere
according to the principles of our Reformation.

In the 4th place, In a sinful separation as to communion in worship, it must
be supposed, the worship of that Church ownd and established therein, because a
party innovating herein, as well as innovating in doctrine and government
contrary to that which is established, are hactenus, and ipso facto (in this
their practice, and upon this very ground) schismatics both in their worship
and government. Therefore to disowne them therein can be no schism; for this
would involve a palpable contradiction, that these withdrawers in this same
practice, and in the same respects and circumstances thereof, were Schismatics
and not Schismatics. Now prelatists their doctrine is new and odd, and not the
voice of this Church. And their worship, (over and above the corruption
adhering to it) is the worship of an innovating party, and contrary to our
Churches established order. And therefore to disowne them therein is no sinful
separation from this Church her fellowship and worship, while existing in her
sound and purer part, and opposing these innovations.

5. In Schismatic separation, the rent is made in the bowels of the true and
genuine Church. So that when a schism and rent is stated betwixt a godly
Ministry contending for a pure Churches Reformation, against an apostat party
of the Ministry: the sound professors stand preobliged to adhere unto, and
strength^n the sounder part, upon this very ground of holding the union and
communion of that pure Church against these backsliders; supposing they will
rent and ruin her, if not opposed: and so the case is here. The union and
order of this Church, is already broken by the prelatick innovators and
backsliders, and by them only; so that upon the supposal of this fixed schism,
the people of God must adhere to the sound Church and Ministry. And in this
extreme necessity, the lesser obligation as to parochial order, must give place
to the greater duties of preserving and maintaining the Churches union and
reformation, when a course is carried on tending to ruin it.

6. Every sinful separation is, from the fellowship of a Church either in her
Ministry, lawful courts, or Worship and ordinances, according to the various
relations, state and condition of Separatists, whether Church officers or
others. But in this our case, Presbyterian Ministers and professors separat in
none of these respects from the genuine Church of Scotland. 1. Ministers
separat not from her courts; for none of her lawful courts are now publicly
owned or existent. 2. People separate not from her Worship, as it stood
reformed and vowed unto, when they own the ordinances dispensed by her true
pastors, for that only is the true Worship of this Church. Nor 3. from her
Doctrine, and a due subjection to her faithful pastors in the Lord: And
therefore neither from the fellowship of her faithful Ministers and
professors. Where is then the Schism? Since both the Doctrine, Worship and
Government of this true Church are ownd, and backsliders and Schismatics only
(and as such) are disownd.

7. Schism supposes that these whom we withdraw from, are such to whom we are
under obligation to adhere: for it is a breach of union, which is cemented and
conglutinate by the obligations and duties of those who are concerned to hold
it fast; So that where the obligation to the duty in subserviency to this union
cannot be demonstrate, to be incumbent upon such and such persons, and in such
acts, By whom and wherein this union is to be upheld, the charge of Schism upon
these acts, which are supposed to violat that union, evanishes and falls to the
ground. But if the person (tho a Minister supposed) from whom the separation is
made, wants that which immediately grounds this obligation of owning him hic and
nunc, as the case stands circumstantiat, in that respect withdrawing or
non-union can be no Schism, for else the most ingraind Schismatics might be
owned; the Informer himself must of necessity admit this, for otherwise he will
cross and cut the sinews of all his pleading and arguments which he presents
in this Dialogue for disowning Presbyterian Ministers in this our case, for I
am confident that out of this circumstanciat case he will grant that it is no
breach of any of his rules or reasons to hear them. That [they are Ministers]
and [are preaching faith and repentance] that [they have a lawful Ministerial
call and ordination etc.] All these he thinks will plead nothing, as the case
is now circumstantiat, for adhering to them, because of that in their present
condition, which outweighs all this, and looses peoples obligation to own
them, which he thinks is no Schism but duty: Now, let our Informer turn the
tables; if there be first that in Curats present state, which preponderats as
to our disowning of them now, tho all that he pleads as to their ordination,
and ministerial call were granted, its no Schism in this our case to disowne
them according to his own principles and pleading in this point. 2. He must
grant that denying to hear hic and nunc, and in such a complex case, is
different from a denying to hear simpliciter, or disowning such a man's Ministry
simpliciter, or absolutely, as he will grant that out of this case Presbyterian
Ministers might be heard, and that disowning them is not simpliciter a
disowning a true Ministry or Church, or them as Ministers; So that its this
case of competition with Conformists, which with him casts the balance. Hence
as matters now are stated and circumstantiat, and upon our principles and
premised Hypotheses, he must grant there is that in conformists case, which hic
and nunc will loose our obligation to receive the ordinances from them as the
ministers of this Church, which is the white in the mark whereat all his arrows
are shot. Such as 1. that we are preobliged by a lawful Oath to extirpat and
disowne them. 2. That they are promoters of a Prelatick design to ruin our
Reformation. 3. That they have avowedly disownd our Covenants, and that we are
commanded by the overturners of our Covenanted Reformation, to hear them as a
badge of our renouncing it; and concurring in this course of backsliding. 4.
That they are intruders, and not entering in at the door, and in the way and
order of this Church; That they are violently thrusting out, and persecuring
her faithful Pastors, that they perjuriously renounce a call from the people,
and ordination by the Presbytery. All which grounds he must either grant will
supersede our obligation to own conformists hic and nunc according to our
principles, or quite his plea and pleading as to the disowning of Presbyterian
Ministers in the exercise of their Ministry.

8. He pleads in the close of the preceding Dialogue, that the covenant
abjures Sell isme. Now let us stand to this Decision; the Informer will not be
dissatisfyed if I shall borrow one of his topics, and shoot ane arrow from his
own bow; I would offer then to him this syllogism. That Schism which he pleads
against is a Schism abjured in the Covenant: but disowning Conformists in their
present state and circumstances, and refusing to be subject to them as the
Ministers of this Church, is not a schism abjured in the Covenant; Ergo, etc.
The assumption I prove thus. If the disowning of Presbyterian Ministers in
their present state and circumstances, and withdrawing from them in the
exercise of their Ministerial function and their Ministerial testimony against
prelacy and for the Covenant, be that schism which is abjurd therein then a
refusing to be subject to Curats (against whom they are testifying as the
Covenant breakers, and upholders of prelacy) ad not owning them as the
Ministers of this Church, cannot be that scism. Unless he will make this scism,
such a Janus as will cast a malign condemning aspect upon both the contending
parties, and bring adherers unto either of the two, under this imputation. But
so it is that disowning of Presbyterian Ministers in the exercise of their
Ministry, is condemned in the Covenant as schism this we have already made
appear, it being a disowning of that established order and union of this Church
which therein we do swear to maintain, and a schismatical withdrawing from her
faithful Ambassadors and others contending for the ends of the Covenant, to
adhere unto whom, and keep up an union wi^h them herein, the Covenant lays
upon us an express obligation, putting the imputation of schismatic division,
and detestable indifferency upon the contrary practice. Ergo, upon the whole it
follows evidently, that the owning of Conformists which he pleads for in this
Dialogue (viz. subjection unto, and receiving ordinances from them as the
Ministers of this Church, and denying this to Presbyterian Ministers) is abjurd
in the Covenant as Schismatical.

CHAP. II.
The Informers charge of internal and external Schism, put upon
Non-conformists: ^f impeaching the Churches constitution, and her practice in
point of Worship for more than a 1000 Years, examind. His argument from Romans
14. Heb. 10. 25. answered, and retorted upon him. His answer to the argument
taken from the command of seeking the best gifts, considered. As also his
argument from ancient canons, from the Act of the Assembly 1647. from the
reciprocal tie betwixt a Minister and his flock, to fortify his charge of
Schism, repelled.

HAving thus cleard our question and plea, and fortified our practice with
these arguments; We come now to examine the grounds on which this new Casuist
imputes sinful separation to us therein, We acknowledge the evil of Schism
upon these Texts mentioned by him, which might have caused sad reflectings on
himself and his party, who are guilty of divisions and offenses contrary to our
received ordinances, and the doctrine of this Church: And so are lashed by that
Scripture Romans 16. 17. And who would have have us saying I am of this or that
Rabbi or Prelat, contrary to 1 Cor. 1: 12. It Is they who have disownd a
spiritual pure unity with this pure Church, and are seeking a perjurious union
in departing from God, contrary to that precept Ephesians. 4: 3. And are so far
from esteeming others in Lowliness of mind better then themselves, as we are
enjoynd. Phil 2. 2. That their Rabbis trample on all Ministers; and their
underlings do most insolently persecute and despise faithful Pastors for
adhering to the Reformation, authority, and union of this Church, against their
innovations. Schism is no doubt an evil which has much infested the Church,
and our Church: and the Scripture sufficiently discovering the evil thereof we
need not Cyprian, nor Jeroms elogies anent unity, to persuaed it. Only where he
insinuats from that saying of Cyprian, which he mentions. Who asserts from 1
Cor. 13. [that who are slain in their Schism, their inexpiable sin is not
purged by their blood, and that they are not Martyrs] that such is the case of
the suffering people of God at this time; we may discern the cruel venom and
sting of this man's malice, for all the sobriety which he pretends unto; I shall
only tell him, that as its more then he will be ever able to prove, that the
Lords remnant are guilty of this sin, and are assembling out of the Church,
when attending the Ministry of Christ's faithful Ambassadors in this Church,
so he and his fellows setting these murderers upon them in this duty, will (if
they repent not) be exposed to that vengeance which the cry of their souls
under the altar, who have been slain for this their Testimony, does plead for.
He would also do well to resolve this doubt upon Cyprians Testimony, viz.
Whether Cyprian did ever hold, or if himself will dare to assert, that the
blood and sufferings of the best of martyrs did expiat their guilt. As for
Jeroms assertion [that Schism. and Heresy, or some degree of it go together.] I
think it is fitly applicable to himself and fellow Conformists, who since their
departing from the unity of this Church, and her sworn Reformation, have not
only, to justify their course vented gross errors in point of Oaths, and
otherwise, but are now (as every one sees) posting fast to Rome, in denying
many and great points of our Protestant profession. We accord to Augustines
saying [that separatists (as such) receive no life from the body] and the
unquestionable godliness, and fellowship with the Father and the Son, to which
many Presbyterians are admitted, and wherein they shine, compared with the
abominable prophanity of the whole of those almost that own Curats, will by
this rule declare who are the Schismatics, and separatists from Christ's body.
The comment of the Thorn which rents the lili^ Cant. 2. 2. Is very suitable to
him, and those of his way, who have now of a long time rent the Lords faithful
flock, wounded our Church, and taken away her vail: esteeming themselves
Christians of the first magnitude, so he esteems his most reverend Archbishops
and reverend under-fathers; What pitiful preambles are these.

The Doubter alleadges [that every separation is not schism.] This (as we
heard) he acknowledges, and that when communion with a Church cannot be held
without sin, separation is necessary; wherein he yields all that we plead;
since we have proved that in this our case, joining to their way and party is
in many respects sinful; and since he Instances the protestants plea for
separating from Rome on this ground, knows he not that the Papists tell us
such stories anent union with the Church, and that suffering without the Church
is no Christian suffering, to Justify their bloody persecutions, which very
well suits his case. And no doubt the protestants answer, viz. [That we are in
Christ's Church, because owning his truth, tho separat from their syn^gogue, and
that notwithstanding this pretense, the blood of protestant Martyrs is in their
skirts] does suit the case of Presbyterians in relation to their persecuters.

But the great charge follows, viz. That we are guilty of as groundless and
unreasonable separation, as we shall read of in any age of the Church. Bona
verba! How is this made good? first, (says he) in casting off Christian love
which is heart Schism. 2. He charge with external Schism in separating in
acts of Worship. Now what if we recriminat in both these, and retort this
double charge upon himself. Have they not disownd the Worship of Presbyterian
ministers and Professors, and charged all to separat from them, merely for
non-complyance with their perjured Prelates? 2. Have they not for many years
glutted themselves with their blood, I may say sweemd in it, upon the same very
ground of forbearance as to prelatick compliance, and endeavor by multiplied
laws and Acts, to root them out of the very nation? Good Sir, Pull this beam
out of your own eye, that you may see a little clearer in this point. But as to
the first he says, that we make difference in Judgment as to lesser matters
(Church Government) a ground of difference in affection, as if they were no
Christians who are not of our persuasion in these things, putting thus lesser
points into our creed, and un unchurching and unsancting all who are not of our
persuasion therein. Ans. As to the first general charge, I know none more guilty
then themselves, who are contending with fire and sword tanquam pro aris and
focis, for these their lesser points, and with unheard of rage, seeking the
ruin of all who dare not comply in Judgment and practice with them therein.
2. I think Christian affection to their souls, is best seen in opposing and
testifying against their soul-destroying sins. Thou shall by any means rebuke
thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him is an old standing rule. Levit. 19:
17. And if they be even hated in so far as owning pernicious ways, its no more
then what David avowes, Psalm 139: 21, 22. do not I hate them that hate thee, I
hate them with a perfect hatred. I account them my enemies, I hate the work of
them that turn aside, it shall not cleave unto me. 3. As we have not so learned
Christ, to call every thing lesser or small po^nts, which his latitudinarian
party have the confidence to term thus, so we know no point of truth reveald
and commended to us in the word, as the object of our faith and matter of our
practice, which should be keept out of our creed, lest our says become much
shorter then the Scripture pattern. And we acknowledge not the new patchment of
men's Laws, which this man and his fellow-Conformists have annexed to their
creed, and which can pro arbitrio make or unmake these his lesser points.

But he says, that we unchurch and condemn all Churches in all ages who have
ownd Bishops, Liturgies, festivals and other ceremonies -- And if we make the
removal of these things necessary to a Church, there has not been a a Church
for above a 1000 years together Ans. To make the last part of this argument
not to contradict the first, he should have said that there has not been a
Church without these things mentioned these 1600 years, but the man seeing his
first flight or Rodomontade too fierce; he did well to clap his wings closser.
Upon a review of this page, I find our Informer in this charge plays but the
pityfull Camelion and versipellis: for finding that this assertion of his, that
Christians of all ages since Christ's time and in all places have owned Bishops,
Liturgies, Festival days and other ceremonies, would have drawn upon him the
heavy burden and task of a proof, he lightens himself of this burden, by a
prudent [almost] which in this point is very significant. But his confining the
liturgies, Festivals, and other ceremonies within the compass of the last
thousand years (sullied with all popish abominations) appearing too simple
inadvertency, within the compass of two or three lines, he secures it with a
[much above.] But lest this prove too broad reckoning, he instances the second
or third century from whence he says, we begin our reckoning as to Bishops,
festivals, liturgies, and other ceremonies. But 1. why mends he the matter so
inadvertently, as to run in such a wide uncertainty as the the length of 200
years in that calculation which he imputes to us. 2. I challenge him to show
what presbyterian writter did ever commence the original of liturgies and
festivals, with his blind etc. of other ceremonies (which will travel who
knows whither, and include who knows what) from the third, far less the
second century. I affirm that its more then he or any for him can prove, that
the Church has had Bishops, liturgies, and festivals since Christ. Our
writters have abundantly proved the contrary; and we challenge him to show
either his Diocesan Bishops, liturgies, or festivals and the etc. of his
ceremonies, in the first Apostolic Church, or in these two ages mentioned by
him. That there were not diocesan Bishops then or long after, we have already
proved, and far less Erastian Prelates. For holy days, let him show by divine
appointment any other then the Christian Sabath, in the Apostolic Church if he
can, or in the first succeeding ages. As for the feast of Esther, it is
acknowledged to have come in by custom after the Apostolic times. For
liturgies, we assert that the Apostolic Church and age knew no such thing as
set and imposed liturgies and forms, other then Christ's prescriptions as to
baptism and the Lords supper, and that they prayed as was suitable to the
present action and circumstances of time, place, and persons; If he betake him
to the liturgies which are ascribed to Peter, James, Matthew, Andrew, Clement,
Mark, Dionisius Areopagite, and other Disciples: protestant writers will
stigmatize him for embracing that which they have abundantly proved to be
counterfit. That liturgies had no place for a long time in the Church, is
proved by clear testimonies; Tertullian (Apol. cap. 30.) shows that in their
public Assemblies christians did pray sine monitore quia de pectore, that is,
without a prescription because from their heart. And in his treatise de
Oratione says, that there are somethings to be asked according to the
occasions of every man -- that the Lords prayer being laid as a fundation, its
lawful to build on that fundation other prayers, according to every ones
occasion. Agustine epist. 121. tells us that liberum est, Its free to ask what
was in the Lords prayer alijs atque alijs modis, some times one way sometimes
another. Likewise Justin Martyr Apol. 2. tells us that he who Instructed the
people prayed according to his ability (...). We might also tell him of Bishop
Andrews success, or rather disappointment in seeking an old Jewish Liturgy,
which when sent to Cambridge to be translated, was found to be composed long
after the Jews rejection, so the Bishop being ashamed, suffered this notion to
die and the Liturgy never saw the light. See Smectim and Didoclav. page 615,
16, 17, 18, 19. and seq. 2. What consequence is this, that because we disowne a
Schismatic party of Innovators introducing these corruptions mentioned: Ergo
we disowne them as no Churches wherein these have been admitted. Must we bring
in, or comply with every corruption once purged out, the retaining whereof may
be consistent with the essence of a true Church? what consequence or reason is
here? Again, does not he and all his brethren stand in direct opposition to the
order and government of the Presbyterian Church of this Nation, and unto all
that own's the same: will he then admit this consequence that he unchurches her
before prelacie came in, and other reformed Churches governed Presbyterially.
So we see himself must acknowledge this his reasoning naught.

The Doubter alleges [that these things mentioned, are of later date then the
Apostles.] To this he answers that Bishops were from the Apostles time. The
contrary whereof we have proved either as to diocesan or Erastian Bishops, such
as he means, yea even a proestos which in the Apostolic age had no place, as
we have made appear. Next, He tells us that Polycrates in the debate about
keeping of Esther with Victor Bishop of Rome, alleged John's authority. But how
proved he this, is the Question, not what he alleged; surely bare alleging,
as in other cases, so specially in divinity is bad probation; Then he asks, if
we will hence infer that they were no good christians who used these things
suppose that they came in after the Apostles times? I answer we think that in
so far as innovating they were not Sound Christians, and so must he think
unless he will be wise above what the Apostles have written; Then he tells us,
that from Romans 14. It appears that albeit some thought (he should say
understood and knew) that by their Christian liberty they were fred from the
ceremonial Law and therefore made no distinction of days or meats yet Paul
enjoined them to bear with the weak, to account them brethren, and not despise
them, and the weak were not to Judge the strong. Ans. 1. How proves he, that
the points in controversy viz. prelacie, laying aside our vows and Covenants,
Erastianism, liturgies, and festival-dayes for mystical ends and uses, are such
nothings or indifferent matters, as meats or days were at that time, wherein
pro re nata the Church might use her liberty. As for diocesan Erastian prelacy,
we have made its antiscriptural complexion to appear, so that it is not within
the compass of any Lawful liberty of the Church to embrace or establish it; We
have also made the binding force of the Covenants appear, and that the laying
aside of them consequently, is a horrid guiltyness, which this liberty can
never be extended unto. Likewise the liturgies and imposing of set forms of
prayer, and adstricting public Worship thereunto, have been sufficiently
impugned from Scripture and divine reason, by several of the godly learned, and
discovered to impeach the spiritual liberty of Gospel Worship. The holy days
also have with the same evidence been impugned by our divines, who have proven
that they do impinge upon our Christian liberty, are contrary to the fouth
command enjoining work all the six days, except on such occasional fasts and
feasts as are held out in the word, and likewise are reprobate by the New
Testament prohibitions about superstitious observation of days: The Jewish
days being abrogat (as the Informer cannot but grant) how dare we impose upon
our selves a new yoke? If it were here pertinent to dilate upon these points,
our principles herein might be abundantly fortifyed, and the truth cleard to
his conviction, and by consequence the impertinency of this parallel argument,
and his pityful p^. 1. 10 principii, in equiparating the points now controvered
with these things which are the object of Christian liberty. The Informers
gives us nothing here but magisterial dictates. Again, that tolerance which the
Apostle speaks of as to days and meats, relates to that time and case only of
the weak Jews, when the ceremonies tho dead were not yet buried (as they were
to be honorably) especially while the temple of Jerusalem stood, and the legal
worship therein by Gods providence was continued. But as these observances were
ever discharged to the Gentiles (except as to blood and things strangled for
that exigence only of the weak Jews) so after when christian liberty was known,
and this particular exigence was over, and the ceremonies buried, It is within
the liberty of no Church to unbury them, or tolerat these or such like
observances in others. Finally this very text condemns him, tho his begged
supposition were granted. For 1. The eater must not despise him that eats not:
why then do Conformists pursue Nonconformists, with such grievous punishment
and Laws? they not only despise but persecute to the death, and vilely
reproach them; who art thou that judge another man's servant? why then do they
Judge and censure Nonconformists so highly in their pulpits and pamphlets (and
the Informer in this) as Schismatics, of as deep a dye as ever the Church was
infested with? 2. He that but Doubts is damned if he eat, says the Apostle.
Why then do they so violently press conscientious Doubters to their way? 3. If
thy brother be grieved (says the Apostle) with thy meat, thou walks not
charitably. Why then are they so uncharitable as to grieve Nonconformists with
prelatick exactions? if the Judging and despising the forbearer be forbidden,
much more are their cruel edicts and constraining Laws, whereby they burden
the consciences of tender forbearers in this case. The practice of Victor as to
the Asian Churches, was no doubt highly uncharitable, but it was so mainly
because of his censuring about such a trifle as Esther-observation; and we see
from this schism the sad effects of innovations; and that the Churches unity
and peace is best keept by adhering to the simplicity of the gospel: and so our
departing from the gospel simplicity in point of government, and introducing
abjured prelacy, is the chief ground of the present schism, and confusions in
this Church.

But now follows our Informers main charge of external schism, in s^parating
from the Churches communion in word and sacraments, contrary to the apostles
direction, Not to forsake the assemblies Heb. 10. 25. It seems (says he) that
some then out of pride and singularity for sooke the ordinary and orderly
assemblies of Christians. Ans. In this accusation his so much boasted of
charity is evaporate. What! No assemblies for worship in this Church but among
Conformists; does he not thus unchristian and unchurch all the Assemblies of
Presbyterian Ministers and professors for worship? why persuades he people to
forsake these Assemblies? and who now Judges another man's servant as he, who
brands withself-conceit, ignorance, and schism all these Assemblies of
Nonconforming Ministers and professors, who dare not comply with prelates.
Again, how proves he that no assemblies are orderly except the Prelatical? we
avow our meetings for worship, to be the most orderly according to our Churches
established Reformation, and that their Assemblies are cross to her constution,
order, and union, both in respect of Curats perjurious intrusion, the doctrine
which they deliver, and their manner of worship, which is cross to this
Churches practice and appeintment; his charge of schism and disorderliness is
still begged, but not yet proved; and orderliness is (with him) described from
Church-walls; and as for unity, why have they east out hundreds of Ministers
from officiating, because they durst not join with Conformists, in their
perjured course of defection? if this man be not here self convict, let any
Judge. Let him produce (if he can) in our Assemblies for worship, that which is
contraire unto the nature, constitution, and worship of the assemblies
mentioned in that scripture; and until this be, we may on better ground
recriminat this charge upon his withdrawing people from the Assemblies of
Presbyterian ministers and professors.

The Doubter alleges poorly that all do not forsake their parochial
Assemblies, but some do now and then keep them. He Answers, that tho all
withdraw not in alike degree, yet the least degree is unwarrantable -- that
people advance from step to step, that some after withdrawing from them, hear
only the Indulged, or those who have still preached without conformity in their
own Ch^rches, and within a little will hear none of them; that some hear in
their own Churches but will not communicate, the reason whereof he cannot
understand, since the efficacy of Sacraments depends not on the Minister, that
the lest degree of separation makes way for a greater -- that Baxter in his
cure of Church divisions, tells of some turning separatists, who dyed Infidels.
Ans. He has not yet proved that the withdrawing which he mentions, is a
Sinful Schismatic separation; and we hope we have made the contraire appear.
As for these degrees he mentions, we say. 1. His cruel uncharitablness to
Presbyterian Ministersis here very conspicuous, since he will not allow them to
be in the least heard or owned in their present case and circumstances.
Certainly to tie up people from occasional improvement of the various gifts
which God has bestowed upon his ministers, even in a settled state of the
Church, and in her right constitution, is cross to that interest in one
another gifts and graces, which the members of Christ's mystical body (upon the
ground of their union and communion with the head, and among themselves) are
privileged with. And in impeaching this the Informer blotes himself with
scismatick uncharitablenes of the deepest dye. 2. As its no strange thing that
in such a time of darkness, desertion, and defection, peoples recovery be
gradual, and sometime attended with Infirmities in the manner of duties
incident to us while in time, so the contrary influences of love to truth and
duty, and fear of hazard, may be easily productive of such variety in the
carriage of poor tender souls in this matter. In a word, the Lords supper being
a special badge of our union and communion in and with Jesus Christ, Its no
strange thing that tender souls scruple to partake thereof from men at so
palpable a distance from him, as Conformists, especially while this ordinance
may be enjoyed more purely elsewhere. He tells us, that Schismatics ar cut off
from the body, and receive no life from it, and (if we may drawan inference and
retortion from this assertion) the people of God must judge Conformists to be
such. For these effects of separation which Baxter mentions, we bless the Lord
the contrary effects of sound piety, in many who were profane while owning the
Ministry of Conformists, are convincingly apparent, since they separated from
them: and the effects of backsliding from Gods truth, viz. gross prophanity, or
atheistical Indifferency in the matters of God, are as sadly evident in those
who having once owned Presbyterian Ministers, have returned to Conformists
again. As for what he objects and answers, anent some of their own party going
to others then their own parish-Curats, whom unless insuperable lets hinder to
attend their own Parish Church, he would have his fellows not to own. We are
not much concernd to notice any further, then to tell him that parvo discrimine
refert, which of them people go to, the best of them being as a briar, and the
most uprights as a thorn-hedge, and all of them blotted with such Schismatic
opposition to this Church her pure constitution and principles, as may put it
beyond debate with tender souls, (lovers of truth and duty) that they ought
adhere to Christ's faithful ambassadors rather then any of them.

The Doubter objects, [that its hard to hinder to go where we may be most
edifyed; since we must Cover the best gifts. 1 Cor. 12. 31.] He answers 1. that
the Apostle is not directing private Christians, what gifts in others to seek
after for their edification, but shows that though there are diversities of
gifts, and every one should be content with his own, given for the edification
of others, yet that he should seek after better, not in others, but in himself.
Ans. Our Informer does but trifle and deal deceitfully in his way of
representing this, and some objections ensuing; for 1. He supposes that this is
looked upon in it self, as a sufficient ground of adhering to Presbyterian
Ministers, without previous consideration of all the circumstances of our
present case; and also in supposing that nothing casts the balance (in the
Judgment of the objecter) as to profiting or not profiting, but difference of
gifts; whereas we grant, that the sovereign Influence of Gods Spirit, (who
teaches to profit) renders the means and ordinances effectual to salvation,
whether the Ministers gifts be great or small. 2. We grant, that tho people
have a discretive Judgment as to gifts, and their own profiting, and are to
try the spirits, yet in a settled state of the Church, they are not to shake off
the due regulation and guidance, of a faithful Ministry set over them in the
Lord, so as to be wholly at their own disposal herein: since there is no
Justling betwixt the private discretive, and public Ministerial judgment, in
this matter. 3. As in the trial of Intrants, not only the sufficiency, but
suteablenes of gifts for such a people, is to be eyed. So when a faithful
Minister is thus duly called and settled, people are obliged to own his
Ministry, by a due attendance upon the ordinances administered by him, which is
all that decency, union, and order, and that act of our Church after mentioned,
does call for; which notwithstanding cannot be supposed to exclude all
occasional usemaking of other gifts bestowed upon faithful Ministers, which
were (as I said) cross to the communion of Saints, and believers interest in
one another gifts and graces. But 4. our question here being stated upon the
supposition of the greater part of this National Church their apostasy and
defection from our sworn Reformation, and a great part of Ministers and
professors adhering to their principles, viz. to which of the two parties on
this supposition people are to adhere in worship? sure the Lords palpable
blasting the backsliding party their gifts, as to any saving success, and on
the contrary his as palpable owning and sealing with his blessing the Ministry
of his faithful servants adhering to his truth, is a loud call (in this broken
state of our Church, and case of defection and persecution) to come out from
the one party and way, and adhere to the other. So his Doubter in this and the
next objection, should have argued thus. In this case of defection and
overturning of our Reformation, God being pleased to seal with a palpable
blessing on our souls, the word from Ministers adhering to their principles, we
may safely look on this as a call from God to hear them, rather then the
prelates perjurd hirelings, whose Ministry we have found palpably blasted since
they complied with ^his course of perjurious back siding, and opposition to
Gods work. In this case certainly its an argument very pungent, and founded on
that of Jer. 3. 31, 32. Where the Lord threatens the prophets who caused the
people to err by their lies and lightness, and whom he has not sent nor
commanded tho they prophecy, with this, that therefore they shall not profit
the people at all. So the Argument going upon the supposition of our Churches
broken and persecute state; and a competition betwixt a faithful Ministry, and
a party of Schismatic Innovators, and overturners of our Reformation, will
infer nothing against our Churches settled order under Presbyterian government,
nor the assemblies act. 1647. presupposing the same; and its not merely the
gifts, but Gods saving blessing attending the same, which is the ground of this
argument, and that practice pleaded for, thereby.

Now as to his answer, Its palpable that it meets not this argument in the
least, and besides his exclusive gloss is very impertinent, viz. because we are
to seek the best and edifying gifts f^r our selfs in our siation, therefore we
are not to seek the best in others also. What consequence is this? Sure the
Informer will not deny simpliciter, that people are to seek after the most
edifying Minister, and this will follow on the very ground of our edification,
which we are to design in seeking the best gifts, in and for ourselves. Nay,
the one is the great mean subservient to the other; a faithful edifying
Ministry is Gods Method for winning to the best gifts for my self; and
therefore as a mean leading to this end, falls within the compass of this
command, to seek and Covet the best gifts. So a greater then he, Voetius,
concludes it a duty to seek the best edifying Ministry, on this ground De
politeia Eccles. page 52. And likewise on these Scriptures, Luke 8, 18: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. And removes objections to the cotraire.

His 2d answer is, That the Apostle is there pressing unity, and not to despise
the meanest gifts, more then the meanest member, and to avoid Schism verse 25.
Ans. Then it follows, that in the sense of this precept, which we have
explained, seeking the best gifts, is consistent with unity, and avoiding
Schism, and consequently in this our case, its no ways inductive to schism,
but consistent with a due esteem of the meanest gifted Minister who is
faithful, to withdraw from scandalous innovators, who have already fixed a
Schism in this Church, by opposing her sworn reformation, order, and unity. Nay
as matters now stand, this is the surest way to keep our Churches union and
integrity; Since this their course has such a clear tendency to the ruin of
her Reformation and pure constitution, in doctrine, Worship, discipline and
Government, as is above cleared.

His 3d Answer is, that edification is to be sought in an orderly way, not in a
way that marrs the Churches peace -- and that though our sense of this general
direction were granted, its thus to be understood. Ans. Let our sworn
established Reformation, its principles, rules, and design, sit in Judgment and
determine, who are greater enemies to this Churches peace and order, they or
we. Was not this Church privileged with a beautiful order of Government, pure
Gospel Worship, and sound doctrine, before Prelacy was introduced? Well then,
the way to this Churches true peace, Union, and order, must be in opposing
their pretended order, who are letting in the enemies, and have broken her
walls and hedge. Many of them said and swore that the Presbyterial Government
of this Church, was a beautiful order, unto which since they stand in
opposition, they are the most orderly, who disowne them. As for that which he
adds, of peoples neglecting Ministers set over them in the Lord, he must prove
that Conformists are such Ministers, who are both scandalous for the far
greatest part in their carriage, having no visible badge of the Lords call, and
do own principles, and carry on a design point blank contraire to our
reformation, have left the peoples conduct, in the way of truth, given up all
their Ministerial authority to abjured prelacy, and make it their work to
destroy, and waste the Lords vineyard. Tho it were granted that they had been
so set over people, yet since they are tracing ways of Schism, and innovations
condemned by our Church, Christ's flocks cannot own, or be subject to them, as
their souls spiritual guides, they being men that have corrupted the Covenant
of Levi, and made many stumble at the Law: And besides since that compliance
(in subjection to conformists, and disowning of Presbyterian Ministers) which
he does here plead for, is in very deed a despising faithful Ministers set
over their flocks by the Lord, and standing in a Ministerial relation to them;
and whom consequently the Lords people are called to honor and obey, this same
reason whereby he would persuade to adhere to the conforming party, pleads more
strongly against them. And his rule aftermentioned not to do evil that good
may come of it, will conclude that we should not under pretense of keeping
parochial order, or for eviting confusion, deprive our selves of the blessing
of the Ministry of Christ's faithful Ambassadors, to adhere unto whom in this
case we are under so many obligations.

As for the Canons after'cited by him, against Ministers receiving these of
another congregation to the Worship, We say, that according to the Informer
himself its clear that such rules of decency and order, are not calculat for
every meridian, every time and case of the Church: extraordinary cases must
have suitable remedies, and circumstances of parochial order, cannot in this
case be pleaded, when our main order of Government is already destroyed, and a
persecuting party is in our Churches bosom, tearing out her bowels; when a
besidged city has within her walls a party of professed defendants betraying
her to the enemy, they are the most orderly and faithful watchmen who resist
them, and run to the posts which they have betrayed. Again, should the many
Ministers now persecute (let us suppose they are residing in the bounds) plead
parochial order, for their parishes adhering to them, and disowning their
Curats incumbent, the Informer will not say, that parochial order, will plead
for owning them in this case. Or in the case of conforming Ministers turning
enemies to Prelates, and by consequence Schismatics in his account, he will
grant that the people (whom we will suppose they are breaking off from the
union of the Prelatick Church) ought not to own them, but were concerned to go
else where to hear. Now, the case being so with us this argument by his own
confession, cannot now have weight until all that we plead against them on this
ground, be answered.

Next, he cites the Act of the Assembly 1647. Against them who withdraw usually
from the Worship in their own congregation, except in urgent cases made known
unto, and approven by the Presbytery. Concluding, that therefore they thought
not this a fit method of edification, and that this act was made to prevent
Schism. But had he set down the narrative of that act, it might have coverd him
with blushes, and would expose him to the censure of every Reader; for it is
grounded upon the then complete establishment of the work of Reformation, this
Churches comely order of Presbyterian Government then exercised, her
Presbyterian unity and peace, the purity and liberty of the Gospel ordinances
then righly enjoyed. But what will this say to the present case of defection
and persecution, wherein the faithful Ministry are thrust from their flocks,
and that work razed dare he say this assembly did intend to stretch their act
to such a case as this, or to stop Ministers from officiating in such a
distressed and destroyed condition of our Church Suppose this case had been
stated in that Assembly, What if Presbyterian Government shall be razed,
Prelac^e erected, the Covenant and the work of Reformation overturned and
disowned by a number of Ministers, while a steadfast body of the Ministry stands
against them, shall this act reach the people in relation to their faithful
Pastors, ejected perjured intruders? I dare refer it to this man himself to
say to it, what their resolution would have been, and if they would have
concluded it the people's duty to adhere to these destroyers in that case,
rather then the faithful contenders for the work of Reformation. In the 7th
Article of their directions for family Worship past that same day, they suppose
this Church to be then blessed with peace and purity; and therefore do except
from the compass of these directions, the case of corruption and trouble,
wherein they say, many things are commendable, which are not otherwise
tolerable; And dare he say that they would not call this such a case. He makes
the Doubter yet again poorly except, [that men have different gifts] which is
here a mere nauseating repetition, to fill up idle pages. Upon this our
Informer very discreetly and charitably tells us, that we can little judge of an
edifying gift, and do call railing at Bishops, or at the civil powers, and a
tone in the voice so. Just as Dr Burnet said before in in his roaving
Dialogues. What is the Judgment of Gods people as to edification, and the
evidence of the Masters presence with Presbyterian Ministers in preaching to
his people, depends not on this Character, it being comprobat by clear proofs,
and sufficiently notour to such as can spiritually taste and discern.

But he will offer some considerations about diversity of gifts, and
edification by them, which is to no purpose; since our plea is not merely
grounded upon the gifts of preachers whether Conformists or others; but
abstracting from this, we say first, there is much more then mere gifts, yea
and an edifying gift, requisite to ground a peoples owning a Minister hic and
nunc, or in every circumstantiat case, as their pastor: what if he be in a
schismatic course? what if he be violently thrust in, and has shut out their
Lawful pastor standing in that relation to them, to whom by this man's
concession they owe special subjection, reverence and obedience in the Lord?
(for this we will find him hereafter plead) are the people bound in this case
to own the Intruder, because of his gift? Nay he will not say it. Now the case
is Just so with us. 2. We told him that our case is a case of competition
betwixt the betrayers and destroyers of our Reformation, and a faithful
Ministry adhering to, and contending for it: so that its this great Ministerial
qualification of faithfullness, (opposite to Curats ^reachery) beside
Presbyterian Ministers gifts, and Gods blessing attending the same: and the
Curats intrusion, unfaithfulness, destructive principles, and design in their
officiating (besides their insufficiency, prophanity, and blasted gifts) which
determine us in this matter; and the Lords call consequently that for our
edification, and to prevent our Church her ruin, and our perishing in their
sin, we come out from among them and be separat, as we would come out of
Babylon to which their party is running post: so that all he says here, may be
granted without prejudice to our cause.

But let us hear his considerations anent edification and gifts; first, (says
he) all Ministers have not alike gifts, therefore we must not undervalue the
lowest 1 Cor. 12. I told him our quarrel is not merely gifts, and a man may be
hic and nunc disowned, and yet no undervaluing of his gifts, which the Informer
must either grant, or contradict all that he intends in this pamphlet. For I
ask him, what if I plead this for Presbyterian Ministers, whom for all their
excellent and edifying gifts he and his party will not own, and whom be is in
this pamphlet striving might and main tanquam pro ^ris and focis, to get
universally disowned by all professors in Scotland? why quarrels he with the
Almighty (to use his own expression) in undervaluing their gifts, and would
tear their commission? I know our Informer will say that they are disorderly,
and so disowning them, is no despising their gifts. Well then, he grants that
men of excellent gifts may be hic and nunc or in some cases disowned, and no
hazard of this undervaluing and despising their gifts, or quarrelling with the
Almighty, and so the rebound of his own blow in this retortion strikes his
argument stark dead; and he must grant that the question is, which of the two
contending parties, have best right to officiat as Ministers in the Church of
Scotland, according to her principles and Reformation? and according thereto it
will not be difficult to determine who are the most orderly and to be heard,
and the disorderly have no reason to complain. 2. He says we must not think
the meanest gifts, useless. But he must grant that men may sinfully render them
useless, as he alleges Presbyterian Ministers do and we prove that conformists
do so. 3. He tells us that the best gifts cannot work without the spirit, and
that to do^e on gifts, is to idolize men, as those 1 Cor. 1. 3. Then he tells
us, how Zanchius was offended with that frenchman of Geneva, who said he would
leave Paul, should be come there, and hear Calvine. But what will this arguing
reprove? must they be stigmatized as Idolizers of men and gifts, who will not
Idolize abjured prelacy, and perjured apostats, and in owning them while
wasting and destroying a purely reformed Church, discountenance a faithful
Ministry contending for her reformation, and signally blessed therein? surely
his instance anent Zanchius, may be well applied to such as will hear none but
Curats, and wholly disowne Presbyterian Ministers; Again, if the best gifts
cannot work without the spirit, and the spirit works ordinarily and best with
those who entertain him, and as having their senses exercised, habitually wait
for his breathings in duty, what hope is there that profane men, and greivers
of the spirit in walking contraire to God, his people, way and interest, (as
are most Conformists) should have the spirits seal attending their Ministry.
What more? He tells us 4. That sometimes the spirit will act with the mean
gifts more then the greater as Peter Acts 2. is found to have converted more in
one sermon, then we read that our Lord himself did, tho he spoke as never man
spoke. That Christ (...) complained of small success, Isa. 49. 4. and 53. 1.
and upbraided people for unbelief Math. 11. 21, 22, 23. Ioh. 5. 40. -- that
after the sermon on the mount we read not that many were converted tho they
were astonished -- that the Centurions faith was commended above that of Israel:
and from the east and west many will sit down with Abraham while the children
of the kingdom are cast out. Ans. 1. He must grant that this argument, taken
from the spirits working great things by small means, will not plead for owning
Presbyterian Ministers, to whom many of his Scioli Rabbis impute weakness of
gifts, because they think that aliunde or upon other grounds, such Ministers
are not in this case to be heard. Well then let him take home his argument as
insufficient, until he prove that hic and nunc Conformists are to be heard
rather then Nonconformists, and prove his groundless suppositions above
mentioned (wherein he begs the question) and disprove our true suppositions
above also rehearsed, or this argument will signify Just nothing. 2. For his
Instances, as this man would be sober in such comparisons, so we must tell him
there is a great difference betwixt little, and no success, a Ministry with small
effects; and a Ministry palpably blasted as to any saving issue; and betwixt
sincere designing of success, and mourning over the want of it, making it a
complaint (as our Lord wept over Jerusalems impenitency and disobedience) and
the Ministers designing himself, and no such thing, and wanting this impression
mentioned. Sure as it will be hard for him to point us to any of their constant
hearers who have been converted by their Ministry, so it will be as hard to
point out any of their preachers, who have the peoples spiritual profit for
their design, or their unprofitableness as their burden and complaint to God.
And since both these are conspicuous in Presbyterian Ministers, Its quickly
resolved which of the two are standing in Gods counsel, and traveling in birth
to beget souls by the gospel, and to have Christ formed in them. But he would
have us praying for Conformists, and laying aside prejudice. Ans. I think we
are Indeed called to lay aside prejudice at their persons, and to pray for
their repentance; but to pray for a blessing on their Ministry, who are in such
direct opposition to the Lords people, work, and Interest, were a mocking of
God, and hardening them in their sin, and consequently hearing and receiving the
ordinances from them as the Ministers of this Church were a strenght ning of
their hands in their disobedience. Beside, will he allow people upon their
praying for Presbyterian Ministers to hear them? I trow not, then it seems*
laying aside prejudice and praying for Curats, may consist with not hearing
them. His next childish objection put into the mouth of his Doubter [that tho
some withdraw all will not] is not worth the noticing. It were good for our
Church all her members did so understand their duty and obligatons, as to deny
that subjection to Conformists which he pleads for. And that such pastors as
they who destroy but feed not, had no flocks: For they have not brought back
the straying, nor healed the sick etc. But he tells us, he has proved that
none ought to withdraw. How insignificant his preceding proofs are, has been
discovered, and if his ensueing be no better, Its certain that Successus defuit
ausis, and that he has overshote his mark, in this undertaking.

The Doubter enquires next [what obligation lies on him, to be an ordinary
hearer in his own congregation.] In answer to which the Informer tells us
first, of our obligation showen by him to maintain union, and of the Acts of
the ancient Church, and our own. Which I have already answered. Next, he tells
us, of the reciprocal obligation betwixt a Minister and his congregation which
cannot be so easily broken; the Minister is to labor diligently and
faithfully, among the people of his charge Ezekiel. 33. 8. Heb. 13. 17. the people
of his charge are to attend his Ministry to esteem him highly, and love him for
his works sake Mal. 2. 7. 1 These. 5. 11, 12. Heb. 13. 17. He asks how we obey
this charge, when we disowne, discountenance, and turn our backs upon our
Ministers, and will not receive the Law from their mouth. Ans. That there is a
reciprocal tie betwixt a Minister and his flock, is easily acknowledged: but
the Informer forgot the main and necessary point here (to make this weapon
strike home, and the argument run straight without a bias) viz. What makes up
this tie according to the Scripture pattern. This he should have condescended
upon, and made it good in the case of Conformists, and then his arguing had
been pertinent, and formidable to the Non-Conformists. But what will this poor
general say, that there is a reciprocal tie betwixt a Minister and his flock,
while he has not made appear, what is the Scripture foundation and basis of
that tie, and but begs the question in the application thereof to his case. I
suppose a Presbyterian Minister should plead this to warrant his officiating
among his people, in opposition to the Curat incumbent, that the people are
bound to own him as their Minister, because of this reciprocal ^ye: That the
Scripture obligations (mentioned by the Informer) lies on him to be faithful
and diligent, which while he is endeavoring (according to his duty, founded on
his relation to his people) the people are therefore bound to attend on his
Ministry to esteem him, love him, receive the Law from him, and and not to
discountenance nor discourage him by withdrawing to another. Now let this man
show what he will answer to this pleading, and his argument will quickly
evanish before his own answer; If he say that the tie is loosed, let him
instruct what that is which has in this case loosed it. Sure neither the
Magistrates violence, nor Prelatick censures, according to our Principles, and
the Doctrine of sound divines, when this case is truly stated. And if this
divine tie stand, what will he say? Will it not 1. follow (according to him,)
that a Minister may be under a standing tie to his people, and they to their
Minister, and yet the people for all this may not be obliged to hear him but
another hie and nunc, and that warrantably, without hazard of disobedience to
these Scriptures; and then he has with his own hand cut the throat of his bare
general argument from the reciprocal tie. Sure in some cases the tie may
stand, and yet the actual reciprocal exercise, or obligation to the exercise
of duties may be hic and nunc warrantably suspended in very many supposable
cases as of Physical impediments in the people and Minister, hostile invasion,
Pestilence, Imprisonment etc. 2. If the tie or relation do stand, and likewise
all things which do immediately dispose to the exercise of duty, then the
Prelatical incumbent is in this case an intruder, and not to be owned. For I
suppose he will not say, that a Presbyterian Minister might lawfully officiat
in his own Parish, after the Curat is settled there, for this would quite cross
the scope of his Argument. Now the Question betwixt the two competitors is,
which of them has the prior lawful, and standing tie? will he dare to deny,
that Presbyterian ministers had this; and since he cannot show how it is
loosed, nor prove it to be loosed, this argument will militat not for him, but
against him.

Next, as for what he cites out of Mr Durham on Revel. page 105: 106. anent
this tie, It is still extra oleas, and nothing correspondent to his purpose,
until he instruct that which is the basis and foundation of this Relation in
the case of Conformists, which he neither does nor offers to do. Mr Durham
speaks of a special delegation from Christ, of his special warrant and
appointment to such a man to treat with such a flock. Now sure this most be
instructed from his Word and Testament, as to Curats, before he can from this
make any show of Argument. For Presbyterian ministers do upon better ground lay
claim to this special appointment in relation to their flocks, upon which
conformists have intruded: yet this man thinks these ministers are not to be
owned. And since this deputation and appointment is, with Mr Durham, the
foundation of the duty betwixt minister and people, it must be cleard from the
word in the case of Conformists, before this passage of Mr Durham will afford
any patrociny to his cause. Then he tells us, Tha^ Mr Durham holds that this
obligation is not founded on mere voluntary consent. Well let him mark this,
and then he must acknowledge, that its not merely the Curats gaping consent for
the fleece and filthy Lucre, nor the peoples blind consent, that will make them
Ministers of these Congregations where they officiat. What is it then that
founds this relation? The Scipture-commands (says Mr Durham) 1 These. 5. 12.
Know them that labor among you and are over you in the Lord. Heb 13. 14. Obey
them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for
your souls as they that most give account, etc. But will this man deny that Mr
Durham speaks upon the supposition of the Minister his having the Ministerial
call and mission according to the rule of the Word, to ground his pleading
these Scripture commands, and his special commission to such a people: And that
he looked upon the Presbyteries mission, and ordination, and the peoples call,
together with due qualifications, and the visible evidences of Christ's call in
the person thus admitted, as the foundation of this special relation to such a
flock, according to the Scripture pattern, and the order and Government of this
Church then established. I durst pose his conscience upon the truth of this;
and whether Mr Durham did ever dream of a special relation to a flock in this
Church, resulting from a Prelates mission in a Method of perjury, in opposition
to our Covenant and sworn reformation, without the mission and ordination of a
Presbytry, or the peoples call, and in a way of intrusion upon the charges of
faithful Ministers violently thrust out by persecuting Prelates, the men thus
obtruded being for most part such as have nothing that may ground a reasonable
or charitable construction of them, that they are sent of God, but palpable
evidences of the contrary, While in the mean time the faithful Ministers are
willing to cleave to their flocks, and the flocks to them? If he say that all
the Ministers he pleads for are not such. I Answer, he makes no limitation of
this Argument, but pleads the forementioned Scriptures, and Mr Durham's
Testimony universally, and tells us in the next page, that Mr Durham binds the
people fast to the Ministers of their own congregations by this discourse, he
means to the Ministry of all the Conformists. As for that passage of Mr
Durham's Testimony after cited by him anent the Sympathy betwixt Ministers and
flocks, and the reckoning that will be made in relation to mutual duties. We
think it pleads very strongly for that Sympathy that ought now to be betwixt
Presbyterian Ministers and their flocks, which Conformists have usurped upon,
and the mutual performing of duty to each other upon all hazards, in
opposition to the Curats intrusion. And if Paul aggreaged particularly the
Gentiles slighting and grieving him, by his particular delegation to them,
which was, even as to the Apostle himself, by the imposition of the h^ds of the
Presbytry Act. 13. 13. Presbyterian Ministers delegation to their flocks, which
was in this manner, must needs stand, and may be much better pleaded upon this
ground then that of Curats Who are sent to flocks by Prelates as their own
underlings, and have nothing like Paul's delegation in their mission. So that Mr
Durhams arguments, and the Scriptures cited by him, are so far from tying
congregations to conformists, as this man alleages, that they tie them to their
own faithful Presbyterian pastors, and by consequence to disowne prelates and
their intruding hirelings, as none of the lawful Pastors of this Church.

I might here add that the account of the Pastors duty, and the ground of the
people's subjection and obedience exhibit to us in these scriptures which he
mentions, does sufficiently exclude their party from any claim thereunto. What?
do they hear Gods word and warn the people from him, who are generally so
ignorant of his word walking contrary to it themselves, and hardening others in
rebellion against him? are they watching for souls as they that must give
account? who are loving to sleep and slumber; and dare not say most of them,
that ever they enquird at any soul how it is betwixt God and them? do their
lips keep knowledge, who have departed out of the way, and caused many stumble
at the Law? are they laboring and admonishing as to sin and duty, who are
ringleaders in a course of defection? Sure if the duties of subjection,
reverence, and obedience, suppose such characters of Ministers, and such
qualifications as are here expressed, people are hereby abundantly discharged
from such subjection and obedience as to Conformists, who are so palpably
destitute of these qualifications. So that the Informer falls utterly short of
his intended advantage by this citation of Mr Durham, and the scriptures therein
mentioned do wound his cause t^ death, and cut the sinews of his reasoning.
This man is so unhappy as to fall still by the rebound of his own arguments,
and the scripture-weapons (which in pleading for this cause will never be found
the weapons of his warfare) wounds him every time he handles them: which as it
has before, so it shall presently appear further, in some more of his
arguments and answers upon this point, which we now present.

CHAP. III.
The Doubters argument from Curats not entering by a call from the people, and
that passage Acts 14. 23. cleared and improven. The Informers exceptions upon
the term (...) fully examined, and the peoples right in the call of Pastors
cleared therfrom. His reasonings about Patronages, and the prelatick
ordination, and peoples disowning of Scandalous Ministers not censured. As also
his great argument from Math. 23. 1. and the owning of the Temple-worship,
scanned and retorted upon him. Mr Durham in this point pleads nothing for the
Informer. His answers and reasonings anent the charge of Introsion examined.

Our Informer upon this point of separation (which he holds to be his
fort-royal in the present differences) having plied his Doubter with offensive
weapons, will needs show his skill and just dealing in acting the defendant for
some time. But I doubt that his defensive armor and answers shall be found as
thin and penetrable in this debate, as his impugning weapons are bluntand
pointless. Well, this fair disputant, will hear some of our arguments against
the owning of Conformists, but be sure they must be of his own mould and
digesting, for these can best suit the design of that pretty piece of
pageantry, which he is acting in this pamphlet. The first argument which his
Doubter offers, is [their not entering by a call from the people as all
Ministers should (citing Act. 14. 23.) but by a presentation from the patron.]
In answer to this, he spends some discourse upon that text, which we shall
examine. But to clear this point the more fully, I will premise three things.
1. That the people have a divine right to call their pastou^, we proved before
in the 9th argument against Episcopacy, and from other scripture-grounds beside
this, although it be a weighty ground also, unto this we refer the reader. 2.
That upon supposal of this divine rule and pattern of a Ministers Lawful call,
it does clearly follow, that the patronages are a corruption, rendering the
Ministers call in this respect maimed, and not so consonant to scripture as it
ought to be.

3. Though it be granted that a Minister presented by the Patron, and not
called by the people, has the essence of the Ministerial office, and might in
some cases be owned as a Minister, yet this will plead nothing for the owning
of Curats as the case is now circumstantiat: Because 1. Its certain that
according to the principles and reformation of this Church, as established
before these innovations, a Ministers entry by imposition of the hands of the
Presbytery, without the usurping Prelate, and by the call of the people without
the Patron, is the more pure and scriptural way of entry into the Ministry; and
moreover the only way of entry owned and authorized by her supreme
Indicatories, and by consequence its most suitable to Presbyterian principles,
when there is a competition betwixt the one and the other, and Ministers thus
Lawfully called, are violently ejected by men reestablishing prelacy, and
patronages, formerly cast out and vowed against, that people do adhere to their
faithful pastors rather then these Innovators and intruders; which will be
convincingly clear, if it be also considered particularly, that as prelacy and
allits corruptions and usurpations now existent and introduced, were fully
removed and abjured by this Church, so laick patronages in special were upon
most weighty grounds removed by the parliament 1649. in correspondence to our
Churches declarator as appears in the Narrative of their 39. act. viz. The
sense of the obligation lying upon them, both by the National and solemn league
and covenant, by many deliverances and mercies from God, and by the latesolemn
engadgement to duties, to preserve the doctrine and to maintain and vindicat
the liberties of the Church of Scotland -- to advance the work of Reformation
-- and considering that patronages and persentations of Kirkes is an evil and
bondage under which the Lords people and Ministers of this land have long
groaned. That it has no warrant in Gods word, but is founded only on the Canon
Law, that it is a popish custom brought into this Church in time of ignorance
and superstition, that its contrary to the 2d book of discipline, wherein upon
solid grounds its reckoned among abuses that are desired to be reformed, and
Contrary to several acts of general assemblies, prejudicial to the liberty of
the people, and planting of Churches, to the free call and entry of Ministers
to their charge etc. This act the parliament 1662 did ranverse among other
pieces of our Reformation: Ordaining all Ministers that entered since 49. to
have no right to the benefice, till they obtain a presentation from the Lawful
Patron, and collation from the Bishop. Now upon supposal of the Covenant
obligation, and our engadgement therein to separat from any corruption contrary
to our Reformation, to give a testimony to that work, to withdraw from
backsliders, is there any doubt but that people are oblidged (upon these
grounds) to adhere to that body of faithful Ministers, who are standing to our
principles and sworn Reformation (whereof these points mentioned are one main
piece) rather then such as have turned aside to this course of perjurious
defection. Sure our obligations mentioned do every way include Presbyterian
Ministers, and exclude Conformists. Presbyterian Ministers are maintaining the
peoples right and liberty to call their pastor, Conformists are selling away
this piece of her reformation and liberty, and thus crossing the
scripture-pattern, the first are adhering to this Churches vows (and people
are obliged to own these Ministers that are pursuing the ends) the other are
casting them away etc. Again 3. all the motives mentioned in the premised act
of parliament, and in our Churches public acts in opposition to patronages,
and prelatick usurpations in a Ministers entry, are still binding and in force,
according to our principles, as the Informer will not for very shame deny, and
he must admit this supposition since in this point he professes to argue
against us upon our own principles, and so what did then engadge to restore
this piece of our Churches liberty and Reformation, the same does now bind to
adhere thereunto, and consequently to own the Ministers that contend for this
Reformation rather then the backsliders and deserters thereof.

4. This man dare not assert, that the granting conformists to have the essence
of a Ministerial call, will in every case infer the conclusion of hearing them,
or that the granting a Minister to have this, is the only and adequat ground
which will in all circumstantiat cases make hearing necessary. For 1. What if
he be violently obtruded by a part of the congregation upon the previously
called Minister his labors, to whom the people stand obliged to adhere? Again
2. What if he be promoting a Schismatic course, setting up an altar against an
altar (as some of these men tell us in their Pamphlets) will a people cross
their principles as to his having the essence of a Ministerial call, if they
refuse to follow him in that Schismatic course? Nay he will not say it. 3.
What will our Informer answer to Presbyterian Ministers plea for peoples
adherence to them upon their lawful call, mission, and entry to their charges?
will this infer a necessity of the people's owning them, and deserting
conformists? If it will not (as he must here say, or yield the cause) then he
must confess, that acknowledgment of the essence of Curats call, will not
absulutely plead for hearing them until before the Scripture bar, and by the
constitutions and reformation of this Church, they can prove their claim to be
better then that of Presbyterian Ministers to officiat as her true Pastors,
which will be ad Kalendas Graecas; and whatever he can pretend here, as to
disowning of Presbyterian Ministers in their administrations, notwithstanding
of their having a lawful call, and pastoral relation to this Church, will be
easily retorted upon himself, and abundantly counterballanced by that which in
the case of conformists may be pleaded to supersede, and stop the peoples
owning of them in this circumstantiat posture of our Church. So that the state
of the question here being this, whether Ministers ordained by Bishops, and
presented by Patrons, or those who are ordained by the Presbytry, and called by
the people, have best right to officiat in this Church, as her Pastors,
according to the Scripture rule, her reformation and principles, and to be
owned or disownd by the people accordingly. The decision will be very easy and
favorable to Presbyterian Ministers, and exclusive of all his fraternity. And
whatever he does here allege anent P^esbyterian Ministers schism, intrusion,
or disorder, will be easily retorted upon himself, reputando rem in universum
and ab initio. Or tracing matters to their true originals. But now what says
our Informer to this argument of his Doubter, as he slenderly propones it to
make it foordable. 1. He tells us that sundry whom we refuse to hear, entered by
the peoples call. But tho it were granted that such might be heard, who are but
a few, how will this plead for all the rest, and loose his Doubters argument as
to them? 2. we told him that its not the want of the peoples call, simply and
abstractedly from the circumstances of our case, that we ground upon in
disowning them, no more then it is Presbyterian Ministers want of an Episcopal
ordination which he pleads simply as the ground of disowning them: But our
ground is their standing all of them in a direct stated opposition to the
Reformation, union, and order of this Church, and driving on an interest and
design tending to overturn it, and by consequence being liable to her highest
censures; and likewise their persecuting and opposing faithful Ministers
contending for her Reformation. 3. All those who he alleges entered by the
peoples call, havng by their conformity to this Prelacy and Erastianism,
disowned their first entry in this manner, and obtained presentation from
Patrons, and collation from prelates, according to their new acts and orders,
are now of the same stamp with the rest, as to their principles and carriage,
and consequently the peoples disowning them upon the forementioned grounds in
this our case, falls under the same obligations with their disowning others,
and the rather because their apostasy is an aggravation of their guilt. But now
what says our Informer to this text Acts. 14. 23. which is brought by his
Doubter to prove the peoples right in the election of Pastors. He grants, that
the word (...) is borrowed from the custom used in some of the ancient Greek
states, where the people signified their election of Magistrates, by the
stretching forth of their hands, because the word so signifies. Well, what then
has he to quarrel at in this argument, for the peoples right in the call of
Ministers from this text? 1. He tells us that Doctor Hamond and other Critics
show, that the word is oftenused by writters to express the action of one
single person, as its taken by Luke Acts 10. 41. Speaking of Gods choosing or
appointing, So that the word is not necessarly to be underst^od of the action
of many chsiung by snffrages. Ans. That the Greek Word in its ordinary and
constant acceptance does import, and is made use of to signify a choosing by
suffrages, and lifting up or extending the hands, Presbyterian Writers have
proven from a full consent of Critics, Interpreters, and the best Greeck
authors. The Syriack version shows that the word is not to be understood of
the Apostles ordination of Elders, but of the Churches election of Elders in
rendering the text thus, Moreover they made to themselves, that is, the
disciples mentioned in the former verse, made to themselves, (for such as were
made, were not Elders or Ministers to Paul and Barnabas, but to the multitude
of the disciples) in every Church while they were fasting with them and
praying, and commending them etc. Which election could not be but after the
Grecian form by the Churches lifting up, or stretching out of hands, thus Mr
Gillesp. Misc. quest. page 9. Who also cleares this from Critics and
Interpreters asserting this sense of the word. He shows that where Julius
Pollux has (...) lib. 2. cap. 4. Gualther and Wolf S^berus render it manuum
extensio, and that Budaeus interprets the word plebiscitum, suffragium, H.
Stephanus, manum porrigo. Because (he says) they did in giving votes (...)
thence the word came to be used, for scisco, decerno, ^reo. Justin. Martyr.
Quest. and Resp. ad orthod. Resp. ad quest. 14. distinguishes (...) and (...)
as of a different signification. Arrias Montanus in his lexicon, does interpret
this word manum elevare, eligere, creare Magistratum per suffragia. Again 2.
The manner of election among the grecians clears this metaphore, and
signification of the word. Demosth. Cicero and others make this appear; they
had a phrase (...), omnium suffragijs, obtinet, and another phrase (...), no
man gives a contrary vote. The approving votes, in choosing Grecian Magistrates
in the theater, was by holding up, or stretching forth of hands. See page 10.
11. 12. Where this is learndly and at large made good. 3. This is also made
good from the ordinary method wherein the scriptures do express the setting
apart of Church officers to their sacred functions, which is by the Churches
election and consent, see 1 Cor. 16. 3. 2 Cor. 8. 19. 1 Timothy 3. 7. Acts 1. 23,
26. and 13. 3. and 15. 22. And since the holy ghost does here intend by Luke to
express the manner of the establishment of Elders, it is utte^ly improbable
that the churches suffrage should be here omitted. 4. Protestant writers draw
the Churches suffrage in election of Ministers, from this word, Magd. Cent. 1.
lib. 2. cap. 6. Zanch. in 4. precept. So Beza, Bullinger decad. 5. Sermon. 4.
Iunius contrav 5. lib. cap. 7. Gerard. Tom. 6. page 95. Danaeus 1 Timothy 5.
Wallaeus in his treatise quibusnam competit vocatio pastorum. Cartwright,
against the Rhemists, objecting (with our Informer) That in scripture this word
signifies imposition of hands, answers, That its absurd to imagine, that the
holy Ghost by Luke speaking with the tongues of men, and to their understanding
should use a word in that signification, in which it was never used before his
time, in any writter holy or profane. For how could he be understood (says he)
if using the note and name, he had fled from the signification whereto they
used it, therefore unless he purposed to write what none could understand or
read, it must needs be that as he wrote, so he meant election by voices. Then
he proves this from Oecumenius the greek scholiast, from the Greek Jgnatius,
and tells us, there were proper words to signify the laying on of hands, had
the holy ghost intended this, and that its absurd to think that Luke* who
straitneth himself to keep the words of the seventie Interpreters, when he
could have uttered things in better terms then they did, should here forsake
the phrase wherewith they noted the laying on of hands, being most proper and
natural to signify the same. Next, As for what he objects from Acts 10. 41. had
he been sincere or diligent in this debate, he might have found that the above
mentioned learned Presbyterian writer with others does here tell him first,
that the word (...) used there, is not the same with (...), but is as it were a
preventing of (...) by a prior designation. 2. That its atribute to God
metaphoric^ or improperly, showing that in the council of God, the Apostles
were in a manner elected by voices in the trinity, which he clears by that
parallel Genesis 1. Let [us] make man. Adding, that this hinders no more the
proper signification of the word, when applied to men, then (...) ascribed to
God can prove, that there is no change in men, when they repent, because there
is none in God.

The Informers 2d answer is, That Greek wri ters do ordinarily use this word to
signify ordaining a person to a charge, without voices and suffrages. And that
here its so to be understood, he proves from this, that Paul and Barnabas are
said to do this work expressed by this Greek word, and not the people; That we
will not say that Paul and Barnabas elected Ministers to these Churches, which
were to yield the question. That therefore our translation reads it, they that
is Paul and ^arnabas, ordained them elders etc. they prayed and commended them
to the Lord; So that it was not the action of the people, but of Paul and
Barnabas. Ans. All this is nothing but his petio principii and what is answered
already 1. That this word signifies ordinarily the ordaining of a Person to a
charge without votes and suffrages, is most false, and contrary to the sense of
the word in Greek authors contrary to the Scripture acceptance of the word,
and to sound divines as we have heard. And to this may be here added (which is
also the observation of the above mentioned learned writters) that we find
extraordinary Officers in the Apostles times not put into their functions
without the Churches consent, hence we may conclude, that far less ought there
to be an intrusion of ordinary Ministers without their consent. Paul and Silas
were chosen of the whole Church to their extraordinary delegation, Acts. 15.
22. Paul's company were chosen by the Church 2 Cor. 18. 19. The Commissioners of
Corinth were approved by the Church 1 Cor 16. 3. Matthias an Apostle, (...)
simul suffragiis electus est, as Arrias Montanus turn's it, was together chosen
by suffrages, viz. of the 120 Disciples. 2. How prove's he that Paul and and
Barnabas did this work expressed by this word (...), we told him that the Syriack
version understands it of the Disciples. Mr Gillespy (lococitato) proves that
(...) is here to be rendered ipsis not illis, showing that Pasor in the word
(...) renders Acts 14. 23. quumque ipsis per suffragia creassent presbyteros;
so says he (...) is for (...), which he proves because the Greeks use the one
word sometimes for the other, as he clears from Scripture parallels. So he thus
senseth the verse and context, the Churches of Lystra, Iconium and Antioch,
after choosing of Elders who were also solemnly set apart with prayer and
fasting, were willing to let Paul and Barnabas go from them to the planting and
watering of other Churches, and commended them to God to open to them an
effectu^ll door, Ephesians. 6* 18, 19. or for their saftie and preservation Luke 23.
46. Again, what inconsistency with our sense of the word (...) will it be, if
all that is mentioned in the 23. verse be taken as joint acts of Paul and
Barnabas, and of the Churches together with them, viz. That they all concurred
in making them Elders by suffrage, and in prayer and fasting, and commending
themselves to the Lord. 3. How proves he, that the relative [they] in our
translation is referred to Paul and Barnabas only, rather then the Churches?
sure, this is a blind proof, and (as we use to say) a Baculo ad angulum; they
ordained elders: Ergo Paul and Barnabas only ordained by Imposition of hands;
since the word (...), or (...) as its resolved by the learned, cannot hardly in
propriety of speech import laying on of hands in ordination, which was proper
to Paul and Barnabas; and the Septuagint whom Luke follows, expressing the
laying on of hands by (...) Our Informer must acknowledge this from the sequel
of his own reasoning, for he tells us, that Paul and Barnabas could not elect
Ministers, very true, and therefore the (...) which in its native acceptance
signifies election by suffrage, as he has acknowledged, must relate to the
people; Since there could be no hand-suffrage betwixt Paul and Barnabas 4.
Giving and not granting that this was an act of Paul and Barnabas; distinct
from the Churches suffrage, our argument stands good and this will not in the
least yield the question as this man foolishly imagines; for to read it thus,
Paul and Barnabas ordained elders by suffrage, is all one with this, that they
ordained such to be elders as were chosen by the Chuch. The people declared by
hand-suffrage whom they would have to be Elders, and Paul and Barnabas ordained
them Elders: As the Consul who held the court among the Romans, created new
Magistrates, that is, did receive the votes and preside in the elections. Since
(as I said) the hand-suffrage cannot in any propriety of speech relate to Paul
and Barnabas alone. See Calvines Institut. lib. 4. cap. 53. paragr. 15. and Mr
Gillesp. ubi supra, who further tells us, that this may be either an action of
the Church only, as the Syriack makes it, or a joint action both of the
Churches and of Paul and Barnabas, as Iunius makes it, or an action of Paul and
Barnabas in this sense, that they did constitute elders to the Churches by the
Churches own voices, in all which senses (...) stands good for us. To which we
may add, that Calvine renders the word cu^ suffragiis creassent, when the had
made by votes. Adding, that Paul and Barnabas ordained Ministers to the
Churches, for they did preside over, and moderat the people's election.
Presbyteros dicuntur eligere Paulus and Barnabas an soli hoc privato officio
faciunt quum potius rem permittunt omnium sugragiis: Ergo in Pastoribus
creandis libera fuit populi electio, sed ne quia tumul^uose fieret, praesident
Paulus and barnabas quasi Moderatores. That is, Paul and Barnabas are said to
ebuse Elders, but do they this solely and by themselves, and do not rather
remit this to the suffrages of all, therefore in the making of Pastors the
people had a free election and choice, but left any thing should be done
tumultuously Paul and Barnabas do preside as Moderatours. So he says we are to
understand the decree of the Council of Laodicea, which seemed to inhibit the
people's elections.

The Dutch Annot. upon this passage do tell us, that this was a custom among
the Greeks in choosing their Magistrates, that the people by lifting up their
hands give to understand their voting, so it seems that from thence this
custom was also used in the primitive Church, that the setting forth of
Ministers of the Church, being done by Apostles or those that were sent by them
for this purpose, was approved by the Church by the lifting up of their hands;
which use long continued in the Church; as the Ecclesiastic histories testify.
And having told us that others understand this of imposition of hands (which
they set down as the secondary and less probable opinion) they add that this
also was done with consent of the church as appears by the fasting and praying
which was done by the whole Congregation, and was also done in this choosing of
the Elders, referring to 1 Timothy 5. 17. Acts 10. 41. upon which passage they
show, that the Greek word in Acts 14. 23. signifies properly by lifting up of
hands to choose or ordain, and is here used concerning the choosing of ordinary
Ministers by the suffrages of the Church, to which this extraordinary choosing
of Apostles is here opposed, as being done by lifting up or stretching forth of
Gods hand alone. Upon Acts. 6. 6. where mention is made of laying on of hands,
they tells us, that as this was usual in blessing Genesis 48. 14. in sacrifices
Lev. 1. 4. and in installing into offices Numb. 27. 18. Deuteronomy 34. 9. So the
Church (pointing at the Apostolic Churches practice) in investiture of
Ministers, did thus dedicate them to God his service, and used thus to wish his
blessing 1 Timothy 5. 22. The English annot. upon this text under debate do show,
that the word signifies making of such a choice, as was made or confirmed by
lifting up of hands, to signify suffrages or consent, and having told us of the
general signification of the word in reference to ordination or appointing
chap. 10. 41. they add, that the Syriack reads the text thus, [and they
appointed to them Elders in every Congregation.] Whence they collect that Paul
and Barnabas did not all alone in ordaining and Church Government; other
Christians showed their consent or approbation of the persons who were ordained
Elders by lifting up their hands; as very weel knowing, of what behavior they
had been among them: so (...) signifies (say they) to disallow by some act,
election, or decree. Adding, that Suidas interprets (...) by (...) which his
Interpreter renders electio, delectus, per suffragia confirmatio, populi totius
consensus, an election, choosing, a confirmation by voices, consent of all the
people. Let our Informer here observe 1. That the choosing of Ministers by
suffrage, and consent of the Church, is imported and held out in this passage
under debate, in the consentient judgment of Interpreters, and that this greek
word, as in its ordinary, so its special acceptance in this place, will
clearly infer so much, whatever authority in ordination and election as to Paul
and Barnabas, and of Ministers consequently, the circumstances of this text
will bear out and infer. 2. That this interest of the people in the election
and call of Ministers is comprobate by the judgment and consentient practice
of the ancient Church, as the history thereof does verify. 3. That that passage
Act. 10. 41. does (in their sense) nothing invalidate this right of the people,
held out in this text, the one place speaking of an immediate choosing by God,
the other of mediat and ordinary by men, the one, pointing at ordination and
appointing of the Apostles to their office in a general sense, the other of the
special or specifical mould of the call and election of Ministers. 4. That this
right and interest of the people in Ministers call, as it is founded upon the
ancient practice and unrepealed privilege of Gods Church under the old
Testament, so it has besides this, and such like instances, and exemplary
recommendations of the new testament, a constant moral warrant of the peoples
knowledge anent the case and behavior of their spiritual guides.

His 3d answer to this text is, That if we understand it of a hand suffrage we
lose by it. Why so? because we give advantadge to the Independents for popular
election of Ministers wherea; we give this power not to all the people, but to
the session. And he tells us, that therefore understanding Presbyterians have
forborne to pressthis text. Ans. 1. We have proven that a congregational
Eldership is Iuris divini, and that by consequence this election strictly taken
must be their privilege, See 9 Argument against Prelacy on the 1. Dialogue.
Who these understanding Presbyterians are, who do not understand this place as
warranding the people's interest in the election and call of Ministers, the
Informer has not given us an account, since his Doubter is none of them, and
if he mean the Authors of jus divinum Ministerii Evangelici, he will find that
they do clearly assert this truth (propos. 1.) so as it do not exclude the due
right of Ministers herein. See page 127. and 129. And the Assembly of divines
in their directory for ordination of Ministers 4. Branch, do require the
people's consent and approbation, as necessarily antecedaneous to the
ordination. Besides, could the Informer be ignorant that there are several
other weighty Scripture grounds and arguments pleaded by our writters to
fortify this right of the people; why did he not then put these also into the
mouth of his Doubter, and give us an account of his own, and his Episcopal
Masters' skill in dissolving them? Moreover tho it were granted, that all here
did concur in this suffrage where no Eldership was yet constitute (as Mr
Gillespy Judges probable miscell. page 14.) it will nothing infringe the power
of the Eldership in Churches constitute, there being a vast difference betwixt
the modus rei, in Churches constitute, and these in fieri or that are to be
constitute. Again 2. We told him that the word imports a judicial suffrage by
extending of hands, and that in commitiis, among courts, senats, and
representatives of the people, as in the Roman senate, in which the Consuls
presided. And that among the Greeks (...) is the Magistrate created by
suffrages, in the courts solemnly held for that purpose. That the Roman senate
did (...) as Chrysostom says, which Doctor Potter expones, made their Gods by
suffrage (Charity mistaken page 145.) Again, supposing Elderships here
existent, this phrase may be well referred to the people, as importing their
consent and approbation, reserving still to the Eldership their Juridical
suffrage, and decisive vote in election. Mr Gillespy (ubi supra) clears this,
showing that in Athens it self the people did (...), when they did but like
well the persons nominated, as when a Thesaurer offered some to be surety
(...), whom the people shall approve. This he proves from Demosth. advers.
Timocr. from which oration he makes it good, that the (...) the Assembly, and
(...), the court of Judges, are plainly distinguished so far, that they might
not be both upon one day; and that tho the people did (...), yet not they but
the (...), or judges did (...), ordain or appoint a Magistrate. In a word, we
give in this matter [the Ministers call] the suffrage and election to the
Eldership (I mean in a Church constitute) and the consent (which is distinct
from the decisive voice as the learned acknowledge, Gamachaeus in primam 2dae
ou^ of Thomas quest. 15 shows this) to the whole people, and the formal
authoritative mission, and imposition of hands, making the man a Minister, and
giving him the (...) who had it not before, to the Presbytery, according to the
Scripture pattern; which is toto coelo different from the Independents
principles in this point.

If any object that the giving the suffrage and election of Ministers to the
Eldership, excluding the people, makes the breach greater betwixt the
Independents and us then needs, it being sufficient to clear us from their
principles, that we allow not either to the Eldership or congregation, the
formal authoritative mission and imposition of hands. And that our arguments
upon this head seems to give to the people not only consent, but suffrage in
election. I shall desire first, that Mr Gillespies answer be considered
(Miscell. page 24.) to an objection about our homologating with Independents in
this point. Who says that in this point of election we do not homologate with
them, who give to the collective body of the Church (women and children under
age only excepted) the power of decisive vote or suffrage in elections, we
give the vote only to the Eldership or Church representative, so that they
carry along with them the consent of the major or better part of the
congregation. So that he makes the attributing of this decisive voice and
suffrage in elections, unto the people, to be down right Independency and the
march stone of their difference from us. He tells us afterward, that the
consent and knowledge belongs to the whole Church without which Ministers may
not be intruded, and the counsel and deliberation, (which is distinct from this
consent) to the ablest and wisest of the congregation, especially the
Magistrates. But he distinguishes from both these the decisive vote in Court or
judicatory, and the formal consistorial determination in the case of election,
and this he says, belongs only unto, and consists in, the votes of the
Eldership. And that the Independents contrarily give the conference and
deliberation to the Eldership (as we use to do in Comittees) but the decision
to the whole Congregation. Adding further, that such as have written against
Independents do thus state the difference betwixt them and us in this point,
viz. not whether matters of great importance and public concernment ought to
be determined with the peoples free consent (for this we grant) but whether the
cause must be brought to the body of the Congregation to give their voices
therein together with the officers of the Church, citing Laget in his defense of
Church Government, chap. 1. and Mr Herle Prolocutor of the Assembly of Divines
in that piece entitled the Independency on scriptures of the Independency of
Churches page 3. where he sets down this forementioned consent to the Minister
who is to be chosen, as that which we allow to the members of the congregation
in common. Adding further, that Independents place the whole essence of a
calling in election, accounting ordination to be but a solemnizing of it,
whereas we place the potestative mission, not in the Churches election but
lawful ordination. So that in the judgment of these Divines the reserving to
the Presbytry the formal authoritative mission is the not the sole point of
difference betwixt the Independents and us, nor can a man be cleard from
Independent principles in their judgment, who extends the decisive juridical^
vote in election beyond the Eldership, and gives this decisive, suffrage
strictly taken to the people Besides, the absurd and dangerous consequences
following upon this opinion, allowing the formal juridical elective suffrage to
the people, are evident, such as 1. That this goes in some respect beyond
Independents opinion as to the peoples power in elective suffrage, who though
they give it to the collective body, yet ^with a restriction excluding women,
children and persons under age, not to every individual. 2. That this will
infer that every point of government and every cause, relating immediately to
the congregation, must be brought to the multitude or body of the people, to
give their voices therein together with the officers of the Church, for upon the
same ground that the elective suffrages belong to them, so must every piece of
government. Now Mr Laget ubi supra expressly states this as the Independents
principle, and as that wherein they differ from us 3. This cuts off all right
and power of a juridical eldership, which is by our writters asserted and made
good from the scriptures, and makes all their authoritative decisive suffrages,
in this and other points of government, in reference to the congregation, an
invasion of the peoples right, and unlawful usurpation of their power; for if
this formal decisive suffrage belong to all the collective body jure divino,
how can they give it away? 4. This will by consequence bring the collective
body to have their formal decisive juridical suffrage, in superior
Church-judicatories, Presbytries, and synods, in every point wherein the
congregational eldership and session have an immediate interest. Again, since
consent and knowledge, is allowed by our writters to the whole congregation,
and deliberation and counsel to some eminent members, the elderships elective
suffrage, (which in their judgment is necessarly connected with this) cannot
be said to impeach the due right of the collective body of the congregation in
this point; unless (as I said) we step over the march-stone, and bring in the
whole collective body of the congregation to have a decisive suffrage in
government. In a word, the scripture arguments, and other grounds here hinted,
which do clearly conclude the people and congregations right as to a call in
general, will not infer that the (...) belonges to every one of the people or
the whole collective body, so far as to import a formal decisive suffrage, for
it being the due right of the peoples representatives, the Eldership (in whose
choice and election the people have a great Interest, and to which they give a
formal consent) the congregation does in and by them give their (...) or
suffrage, and what is proper to some part of this organick body the Church, may
be well said to be the due right and action of the whole in a general sense,
each part concurring suo modo. A man is said to see, though the eye only be
the proper organe of sight, because the eye subsists in and with the body, and
cannot act without, or separated from it. So the people in a general sense and
mediatly elect by the eldership, the whole collective body concurring in what
is proper to them herein. We heard from MrGillespy [ubi supra,] that among the
Greeks, the people in consenting to a choice of governors were said (...), so
that although, upon the supposal of the divine right of a juridical eldership,
representing the congregation (which right is abundantly proved from scripture)
the formal Cousistorial (...) by juridical suffrage belongs to them, yet the
whole collective body their (...), in the manner formerly explained, stands
good.

His last answer is, that if we think the peoples election s^ necessary that
none can be a Minister without it, then we null the ministry of the whole
Christian world for above 1000 years upward, and the Ministry of this C^rch
ever till the year 1649. For until then patronages were not taken away. Ans We
have proved that the People's right in the call and election of Pastors is the
pure Scripture pattern continued in the Church of God for diverse ages, which
is enough to prove that as it ought to be endeavored after and established, by
Churches who would imitat this pattern of the Lords tabernacle showed upon the
moun^* So where it is obtained it ought to be held fast against any contraire
innovations. That the people's interest in the election and call of Ministers
and teachers had place from the Apostles even unto his own time in a good
measure, may be proven (besides what we have said already to clear this) by a
very unsuspect witness Marcus Antonius de dominis de Repub. Eccles. lib. 1.
cap. 22. Number. 10. he says, in electione ministrorum etiam Apostolorum tempore
and ipsorum instituto, plebem and totam multitudinem magnam habuisse partem.
And lib. 3. cap. 3. Number. 12. Iam vero post concilium Nicenum in electionibus
eundem prorsus veterem morem perpetuo Ecclesiam ad nostra pene tempora
servasse, ut a clero and popul^ fieret ex patribus ac rebus gestis, and
conciliis and juribus: ex Romanorum Pontificum attestationibus and decretis jam
sumo comprobandum. That is, that after the Council of Nice the same ancient
custom was owned to his times by the Church, as to the peoples interest in
this election and call of Ministers, he undertakes to prove from the Fathers,
from history, and Councils and Laws, and the very decrees of Popes. In the
Council of Paris Anno 559. There was such a decree, Quia in aliquibus
crivitatibus consuetudo prisca negligitur. etc. Because the ancient Custom and
decrees of the Canons are neglected in some cities -- they appoint the decrees
of the Canons to be keept, and the ancient Custom, ut nullus civibus invitis
ordinetur Episcopus, nisi quem populi and clericorum electio pleni^ima
quaesierit voluntate etc. That none be ordained a Bishop without the will of
the citizens, but such only whom the people and Clergy shall choose with full
consent. That the people had a right to require, call and elect their Pastor
in the ancient Church, Didoclav. proves from the Example of Eradius, Ambrose,
Flavianus, Nectarius etc. From page 3^6. to 331. showing that Cyprian says of
Rabbinus that he was chosen Bishop, de universae fraternitatis suffragio, lib.
1. Ep. 2. By the chose of the whole Brethren. From the Epistle of the Council
of Nice, to those of Alexandria, Lybia, etc. which is extant with Theodoret
Hist. lib. 1. cap. 9. Where he shows that those who succeed in the room of the
dead Prelat must upon these terms succeed, si digni viderentur, and populus
eligeret, if they appear worthy and the people shall choose; That Chrysostom
succeeded to Nectarius; postquam in hoc Clerus and populus suffragia sua
contulissent, after he was called and chosen by the Clergy and people. Sozom.
lib. 3. c. 8. That Evagrius was chosen suffragiis, or by votes and suffrages,
Socrates lib. 6 cap. 13. That Augustine called again and again for the people's
consent as to his successor, Hic mihi v^stra assentatione opus est. F^. 11. To
which may be added, a very impartial witness Bishop Bilson (Perpetual
Government Chap. 15. page 434.) Where he shows that the people had their right
in choosing their Pastors. Only, to prevent mistake upon these passages, we
would take notice, that this suffrage here atribute generally and
indiscriminatim, to the people and clergy, must be understood pro uniuscujusque
modulo and according to every ones capacity, for the reasons above rendered.
Since both Ministers right in ordination, and also the right of a juridicall
eldership in churches constitute in reference to the election of Ministers,
has (as we have shown) a clear foundation in Scripture and antiquity. But of
this enough. 2. We have also proven that we are not concerned, nor in the least
constrained by our principles and practice in this case, to null a Church or
Ministry where this call is wanting, it being enough for us, that the want of
it is a corruption rendering a Ministry not so pure as it ought to be, and that
our case being a case of competition betwixt Ministers holding fast this piece
of our Covenanted Reformation, and a party of Schismatic Innovators opposing
and rejecting it, and turning back to the vomit of this and other corruptions,
after they have been seen, cast out, and vowed against: We are upon the grounds
of our Reformation and vows, sufficiently warranted to leave these innovators,
and adhere to the faithful Ministry. 3. As we did show that the granting of
Curats their having the essence of a ministerial call, will not infer our
hearing and owning them in every case, and especially in ours (which himself
must grant, unless he fall in a palpable contradiction) so its more then he can
prove, that this Church of Scotland from its first beginning, till 1649 had
pratronages; Which being founded on the Common law, and several ages posterior
to the pure Church in this Nation, planted (as we heard) without Prelates by
some of John's Disciples, how absurd is it to assert that it had Patronages from
the beginning. Finally, whatever tollerance of these corruptions before they be
removed may be pleaded for, yet such as have embraced them now, yea and as a
badge of owning this deformation of our once glorious Church, are certainly to
be disowned by all who would hold fast their integrity. For what he adds, anent
our owning Presbyterian Ministers adhering to our Reformation, tho they have
been presented by Patrons, It Is both impertinent to the point and already
answered, For its not this simpliciter, or only, which we ground upon in this
practice, as is often said, but the principles, state, practice, and design, of
Conformists in this complex case Beside, who sees not the difference betwixt a
Minister owning the principles of our Reformation, and disowning this with
other corruptions, although the times necessity did constrain to make use of
patronages in their first entry, when our Church was as yet groaning under this
bondage, and such as own this corruption both in judgment and practice after
it is rejected, and the Church delivered from it, yea and own it as an express
badge of Conformity to abjured Prelacy. Sure they are very blind who see not
the difference betwixt these.

The Doubter alleadges [that patronages are abjured in the Covenant] and the
Informer desires to see in in what place. But if he will open his eyes and but
read either our National or solemn league, he will easily see this; for
patronages being a popishcorruption contrary to the Word of God (as we have
proved) it is abjured among the rites or Customs brought into this Church;
without or against the word; And likewise in being condemned in the 2. book of
discipline, to which we vow adherence as unto the discipline of this Church, it
must be in that respect also abjured; And as contrary to sound doctrine, the
power of godliness, and Government of this Church expressed in the 2. book of
Discipline, it is abjured in the solemn League, wherein we likewise vow
adherence to that discipline. But (says he) Since patronages were in use aster
the Covenant, why was not this breach discerned, and was this Church perjured
all that time. Ans. The forecited act of Parliament shows that this corruption
had been long by this Church groaned under, and long before that time declared
and testified against, both in the 2. book of discipline, and by assemblies
thereafter, and if (the interposing of the civil Magistrate being necessary to
remove this) the Church still until that time groaned under this burden, where
can he fix his challenge?

The next argument of his Doubter for not hearing Curats, is [that they are
ordained by Bishops.] To which he answers 1. That all whom we refuse to hear,
were not ordained by Bishops. He means those who were ordained by the
Presbytery, and have conformed, Ans. 1. We have already told him that it is not
the Episcopal ordination simply and abstractedly from our case, which is our
ground of not owning them, but the Episcopal ordination of perjured intruders
breaking our union and reformation, and ejecting our faithful Pastors, and
testified against by our presbyterian protestant Church which they have thus
intruded upon. 2. We have told him that the concession of their lawful
ordination for substance, will no more plead for our owning them in this
complex case, then their concession of the lawful ordination of Presbyterian
ministers, will infer an obligation upon Conformists to own them, which is a
consequence that they all deny. And that they must grant, that owning of the
episcopal ordination in this complex case, is different from a simple owning of
it, in relation to hearing. Even as Presbyterian ministers are acknowledged by
conformists to have a lawful ordination for substance, whom notwithstanding
they will not suffer the people to hear. 3. Those who were so ordained and have
conformed, having (as I said) eatenus or in so far, renounced their
Presbyterial ordination, and adhering to the prelatical as the more perfect,
this their disowning of our reformation (especially aggreged by their perjury
and apostasy) puts them in the same, yea a worse condition as to our hearing
them, then those that are merely ordained by the prelates. 3. He tells us, That
on this ground we would not adhere to these whom Timothy and Titus ordained,
nor would we have heard a minister for many ages of the Church; Then he tells
us of Jeroms, quid facit excepta ordinatione Episcopus, and that ministers have
now a hand in ordaining Conformists. That on this ground we would not have
heard the members of the Assembly 1638. who were thus ordained, and some now
though non-conformists, who were ordained before the year 1638 by Bishops, the
valitidity of which ordination is vindicat by ^us dicinum minist. Ang^ie: Ans.
We have already proven, that Episcopal ordination is not in the lest warranted
by the Authority of Timothy and Titus supposed in these Epistles, but rather a
Presbyterial ordination, which is the pattern showed upon the mount. 2. We have
also proven that his prelatick ordination, whereof the Prelat has he sole and
proper power according to this constitution, is a stranger, in the first purer
ages, and even in Jerome's time. 3. We have also proven that the granting of the
essentialls of their ministerial call who are ordained by Bishops, will plead
nothing for owning Curats, who are both scandalous and perjured intruders and
have nothing for the most part which may in the least ground a charitable
construction that they were ever called of God; and are standing in opposition
to a faithful ministry, by them excluded and persecute from their watcthowers,
none of which can be said of the instances which he mentions. As for that
concurrence which he pretends Conformists have with the Bishops in ordination
of ministers, it is according to our Law, merely precarious and pro forma. And
therefore utterly insufficient to found his conclusion.

The Doubter objects, [that tho some of them were ordained by the Presbytery,
yet they are now turned the Bishops Curats.] He might have added, and turned
court or Erastian-Curats, since the all of our present Conformists authority,
is derived from the court and subordinat to the supremacy, as is evident in the
act of restitution and other subsequents acts. In answer to this he alleadges
weakness of Judgment, strength of passion in the objecter, but really shows
both in himself, by telling us, that we may fear Christ's threatening; he that
despises you despises me, since he has not yet made, it appear that the men he
pleads for have a relaion to this Church as her true Pastors, according to the
principles and tenor of our Reformation. Then he tells us, that Curat signifies
a cure of souls. But the True Nonconformist, told his fellow Dialogist, that
this term owes its invention to men's vanity, loathing the lowly Scripture style
of Minister, and is in effect nothing but the issue of the corrution of the
Churches humility, and that what they pretend herein while destroying in stead
of feeding, is like to stand in Judgment against them at the great day. For
his next interpretation of [Curat] viz. he that serves the cure tho not the
Minister of the place, but the substitute of another, We owe him thanks, for
one egg is not liker another, then they are to such vicarious substitutes. But
he will not have them called the Bishops Curats, as if he were Pastor of the
diocese, and they deputed, under him, and Bishop (he says) has such thoughts
of ministers. What their thoughts are, is best seen by their deeds. We have
proved that according to this frame of prelacy the Bishop is properly the sole
Pastor of the Diocese. In the 7. Argument against Prelacy.

The Doubters next objection is, [that they are perjured persons, and therefore
not to be heard.] He answers 1. That many of them never took the Covenant, and
therefore are not perjured, which is already removed, when we did prove from
Deuteronomy. 29. that it oblidges even those who did not personally swear. Its
remarkable that Deuteronomy. 5. 2, 3. God is said to have made a Covenant with his
people in Horeb, even with us (says Moses) and all of us alive here this day.
They were dead who engadged at Horeb, and many there present were not then
born. So Neh. 9. 38. all entered into Covenant, but some only did seal it. Sure
the intention, and relation of the Covenanters, and the matter of the Oath it
self, will make it thus extensive. Next he says, Ministers that took it, and
comply with prelacy are not perjured, for the reasons which be gave in the last
conference. Which reasons I have there answered, and proved that there is
nothing in our case, which may in the least limit or invalidat its obligation,
and upon the grounds which are offered to evince the standing obligation of
that Oath, I do affirm that they are perjured. 3. He tells us, That scandalous
faults tho deserving censure, yet while it is not inflicted, and the person not
convict, his Ministry ought to be waited upon, as Judas who came clothed with
Christ's commission to preach, so long as he was not convict, yet was to be
heard. Ans. 1. He grants that scandalous faults, specially of an high nature,
and if the man be impenitent, do deserve deposition. Now their faults are both
scandalous and of a high nature, such as prophanity, perjury and apostasy, in
all which they are most impenitent and avow the same; and as for their being
convict and censured, which he requires as needful for disowning them, I
answer they stand upon the matter convict by clear scripture grounds, and by
the standing acts and Judicial decision of this Church in her supreme
judicatories and assemblies, which have condemned and made censurable with
deposition their present principles and practices, in opposition to her vows
and government. Again, there is a great difference betwixt what ought to be
people's carriage toward scandalous Ministers when a redress by Lawful Church
Judicatories may be had, to which people may have recourse, and what the duty
of a people is in that case, wherein a prevailing backsliding party, and a
persecuting Magistrate own such Ministers; so that the true Church can have no
access for censuring and removing them. In this last case supposing their
scandals to be of a high nature, this inevitable necessity of the Churches
incapacity for present, may supply the defect of a formal censure (in the
judgment of some) and ground a disowning of them, as if they were already cast
out, especially if their entry be by perjurious intrusion, and their profanity
and scandals thereafter notour to all. Now how applicable this is to
Conformists, needs not my pains to subsume. We might also here tell him that
there are scandals which are official, rendering the man coram Deo no officer,
and that in case of their becoming very atrocius Mr Durham will allow to depart
to more pure ordinances. On scandal page 129. Although we will not take upon us
to determine, how and in what cases, during the Churches incapacity, and
discomposed state, a Ministers atrocious scandals after his entry, and
perjurious usurpation in the way and manner thereof, may supply the want of a
formal censure, yet absolutely to deny that in any imaginable case, whether of
the scandals and intrusion of the minister, the Churches incapacity to censure,
or the peoples clamant necessity, and apparent advantages for their edification
otherwise they were oblidged to own him still, and that nothing but this
declarative sentence, could loose their tie, would, infer very dangerous
consequences obvious to the meanest reflection. Specialy that in performance of
supposed duties, flowing from the tie and relation, they would cross many
scriptur-precepts enjoining the contrary. Shall Christ's sheep follow the
hireling and stranger, and not beware of wolves and false prophets, strengthen
Covenant breakers, and scismaticks, because a perturbed Church cannot draw
forth her censure. If it be said that this will open a door for separation,
since every one displeased, may pretend that scandals are of an highnature.
Ans. 1. The sinful abusive pretenses of men, is a poor argument to infringe any
truth or duty. 2. This absurdity may be retorted in the other extreme, and
under pretense of the man's exterior call who is not (nor can be in a Churches
disturbed state) censured, Christ's sheep may (as I said) be given up to
destroying wolves, the means and opportunities of their edification lost, and
their souls exposed to most imminent hazard of perishing. 2. There is a pure
Ministry and Church free of their scandalls, and testifying against them, so
that adherence to them rather then Curats is only a non-union to corruption, or
a scandalous party of Innovators who have gone out from the fellowship of this
Church, and such a separation negative or non-union, as Mr Rutherfoord allows,
Due right of Presbyt. page 253, 254. such as he says was the carriage of the
faithful in relation to the Donatists in Augustines time, or a separation from
the most and worst part not the least and best part, as he there distinguishes,
calling the greatest corrupt part the Schismatics; As before the Jews came to
blaspheme, there was no reason to join to them rather then the Gospel Church,
planted by the Apostles, to which Mr Rutherfoord says, converts were to
adhere. 3. We have heard that according to our principles and the tenor of our
Reformation, we are to look upon them as Schismatics from this Church. So that
upon this very ground of holding and mantaining this Churches purity and union,
they are to be disowned by Gods people. Our Informer will grant that
abstracting from a Ministers being otherwise either censured or censurable, he
ought not to be followed in a Schismatic course to the ruin of a pure
Churches union, but is ipso facto to be left: for upon this ground he pleads
for disowning Presbyterian Ministers abstracting from their being any
otherwise censured. 4. Are there not many Presbyterian ministers neither
convict nor censured, and whom he dare not call scandalous, whose conversation
and walk is both convincing and shining, and such as discovers that Christ is
in them, that they have the masters seal and call to preach the Gospel, who
have entered into this Church by the door, and are standing in a ministrrial
relation to her, yet he pleads for disowning them, merely because their
Ministry is cross to the prelatick union and order. So he must grant that
Ministers may be disowned on this ground of Innovating upon, and standing in
opposition to a Churches established union and order, abstracting from this
formal censure. As for what he adds of Judas, its very impertinently alleged
here, for his theft and other wickedness was as yet secret, and not become open
and scandalous, which excepts him from the compass of this question, which is
anent Ministers guilty of open and avowed scandalls, intrusion into the
Ministry, violent ejection of faithful pastors, and persecution of a pure
Church. None of which can be said of Judas.

But now follows in the next place, his main objection and argument from the
Scribes and Pharisees, he tells us, what great exceptions might have been made
against their life and doctrine, Math. 23. that they were ^mies to Christ,
neglected Judgment, mercy and faith: that they were proud hypocrites, and that
tho all which Naphtali says of Conformists were true (and all sees it to be
true and consequently that he gives them no other characters then what they put
upon themselves, and cannot more be charged with distemper for this, then our
blessed Lord in calling these Pharisees, serpents and vipers, or Paul in
calling the Impostours of whom the Philippians were in hazard, dogs, evil
workers, the concision, whose God is their belly, whose glory is in their shame
though they were (as these pharisees) gross in their lives, and there were
leaven in their doctrine, they were not to be disowned, since although the
Pharisees for doctrine taught the commands of men; and took away the key of
knowledge, Christ in his sexmon on the mount purged the Law from their corrupt
glosses, yet Simeon and Anna turned not separatists, Joseph and Mary went up to
keep the passover, and Christ bids bear them, tho with a c^veat (...) beware of
their leaven, and their ill example. Here he also tells us, that he has no
pleasure to make a parallel betwixt the Pharisees and our preachers in long
prayers, and devouring widows houses, compassing sea and land to make
proselytes, tho we have given too much ground for these comparisons. Ans. 1. To
begin with this last invective (which he insinuats, and Dr Burnet prosecutes
at large in his trifling dialogues) If I should rejoyn that its a foming out
their o^ shame, to make such comparisons, and renders them too like these
wandering stars to whom this is attrib^, It were no great overstreach. Dare he
say that our Lord did simply condemn long prayers, because he condemned making
a show of them; or that faithful ministers their travells to keep poor souls
upon the solid foundation of our sworn Reformation, and recover them from this
plelatick corruption and apostasy, is to proselyte them to be children of hell?
It may be with better ground averred that prelatists who are enemies to either
long or short prayers in the spirit, and plead for dead forms and lyturgies,
and who have d^oured not widows houses only, but Gods house and Church in this
land, and who compass sea and land to proselyte this poor Church to the
Synagogue or Rome, are much liker these precedents in the above mentioned
characters.

But 2. To his argument, The pharisees were scandalous in their life, corrupt
in their doctrine, yet the saints separat not from ordinances, and Christ
allowed to hear them. This man might (if he had been ingenuous) have found this
objection solidly answered and removed by severals. I answer 1. Its more then
he has proved, that the owning of the Pharisees ministry is here enjoined,
because 1. The command of observing what they enjoined, will not necessarly
infer this; we may observe what moral Philosophers, or papists bid us do under
such like restrictions and limitations, upon which people are enjoined to
observe what the Pharisees prescribed; we may observe what civil Rulers bid us
do, but not own them as teachers. 2. There are many things in the context,
which seem utterly to repugn to this inference that our Lord enjoined the
owning or attending of their instructions as ecclesiastic teachers. 1. He bids
beware of their leaven or doctrine Math. 16. 12. joining them with Sadducees
who denied the resurrection, and erred fundamentally, sure not to hear them was
the best way to evite their leaven, 2. It will be hard to prove that they were
Priest Pharisees, since all the Pharisees were not such, as Nieodemus and
Joseph of Arimathea, who were civil Rulers, and consequently any command to
obey them, will no more infer hearing them preach, then such a command as to
council or parliament. The thing commanded is not hearing them as teachers, but
only obebienc^ which may be very properly enjoined as to civil Rulers. 3. The
qualities ascribed unto them, such as their sitting in Moses chair, who was
King in Jesurun, not Aarons who was the Piest, their loving the chief seats in
synagogues, (whereas, if teachers, their chief seat was known, and appropriat
to them) their paying tithes (whereas, if priests tithes were payable to them)
these qualities (I say) seem to import that they were not priests and teachers
by office, that hearing of them, or attending their ministry as such, is
enjoined hearing of and atteding their Ministry as such. 15. 4. Christ bids let
them alone, which sounds like, own them not as teachers. He calls them blind
leaders of the blind, nay he calls them the stranger whose voice the true sheep
hear not, but rather the true shepherd Math. 15. 13, 14, Joh. 10. 4, 5. and
such as shut up heaven against men, and hindered such as were entering; all which
seem very inconsistent with a command of hearing them. 5 Christ spoke to the
disciples as well as the people in this precept. Now its certain that neither
the disciples did eyer hear them, nor could they leave his Ministry, nor is it
found that Christ who came to fulfill all righteousness, taught them to do so,
by his example. Finally the words of this precept have for their scope to
engadge to beware of the Pharisees infectious evils: so that this command to
do and observe what they delivered as sitting in Moses seat, which they did
then possess, is but by way of concession, which supposes only that which he
intended shortly to abolish, and now would have improven for the best
advantadge.

2. Granting that they were to be heard, I deny his consequence, that therefore
Curats in this our case are to be heard also; the cases are very different, and
the disparity when cleared will discover his consequence to be naught, from the
hearing of the Pharisees, to the hearing of Conformists. I offer it then in
these particulars. 1. These Pharisees Ministry was not of it self actually
exclusive of, and a direct intrusion upon the Ministry of faithful teachers.
Suppose they had chased away all Isreal's Lawful teachers, and by perjurious
violence thrust themselves into their rooms, would our Lord have bidden own or
hear them? If our Informer say so he will contradict himself, and overturn the
scope of his reasoning in this dialogue, for he thniks that the ministry of
Presbyterian ministers, is intrusion, and thereupon pleads for disowning and not
hearing them. 2. He pleads for owning Curats as Christ's ambassadors clothed
with his authority to deliver his message, but Christ does here (at least for
any thing he has said from this text) only enjoin to hear the Pharisees
interpretation and decision of that nations Municipal or civil Law, anent the
rules of external righteousness and civil policy, which two are very different.
3. Christ having guarded the Law from their corrupt glosses, and the disciples
from their snares, shows in this precept how to make the best advantage of
that dispensation, now ready to vanish away, since he was shortly to erect a
gospel ministry, and remove all that legal dispensation, and then none of them
were to be heard: But this man pleads for disowning our faithful sent gospel
ministers under a standing relation to this Church, and the obligation of
Christ's standing command, and commission to officiat, and this in favors of
intruding hirelings usurping their places, and opposing these faithful
Ambassadors in their masters work and message. Now who sees not the difference
betwixt these. 4. They were not in a stated opposition to a faithful body of
teachers, acknowledged and owned by the sound Church of Israel and testifying
against them, seeking to root them out, and together with them a reformation,
to which all had recently vowed adherence. 5. There was no badge or Test of
compliance w^b all their abominations particularly appointed and enjoined by
the Rulers, in this act of hearing them, as there is in our case in relation to
the hearing of Curats, rendering (as I said) the not hearing them, and adherence
rather to a faithful Ministry testifying against them, a case of confession,
especially this difference will be apparent, if our National vows and Covenant,
expressly obliging to adhere to these faithful ministers, in opposition to them
and their course of backsliding, be duly pondered.

Next, as for what he says of Simeon and Anna; Joseph and Mary, their
attending the temple Worship at that time; as his argument there from is
removed by what is said, so to clear this further, I add 1. That its wide
reasoning from the godly their lawful concurrence with that Church (now under
the rust of old corruptions) in what was good and sound, to our deserting a
sound Church and ministry to comply with abjured corruptions, and Schismatic
innovators, reintroduced after they have been cast out. 2. Its as wide
reasoning, from their not separating from Gods ancient Church upon the ground
of corruptions, to conclude against non-complyance with a party who are not our
Church (tho they usurp her name) but are opposed and testified against, by our
true Church and ministry. We in this case (as I have said) do not separat from
the Church of Scotland, her Doctrine, Worship, or ministry, but only from
Schismatic backsliders from the union and reformation of this Church. But in
the case of these old saints and worthies, separation from the temple, would
have imported an absolute separation from the ministry and Church of Israel. In
a word, the utter impertinency of all his pleading in this argument, and from
these instances, appears in this, that he supposes that its merely for
Conformists personal faults we disowne ordinances administered by them, as if
they were ther^ by polluted; which has no more truth in it, then that its
merely for Presbyterian ministers personal faults as pulluting the worship,
that he pleads for disowning them, but upon the grounds of the present case and
circumstances, wherein they stand, he pleads for disowning Presbyterian
ministers, and they more justly because of Conformists present case, plead for
disowning them, as is said and cleard above.

After this he cites Mr Durham on Revel. 3. inferring from what is said of the
Angel of Sardis and Laodicea, that a minister as to his case unsound, may be
owned and esteemed as such. But how impertinent this is to our purpose any may
see, for their scandalous carriage in their walk is much more then unsoundness
as to their case, which notwithstanding we acknowledge will not of it self, and
primo instanti warrant separation from ordinances in every case. But we have
cleared that we have much more to lay to the charge of Conformists, then either
inward unsoundness, or outward scandalls simply considered; even their corrupt
Doctrine, their intrusion, their stated opposition to this Church her
principles, union, and Reformation. As to what Mr Durham adds, and our Informer
cites in relation to the ordinances their not suffering derogation in
whatsoever hands they be anent a due ministerial respect to the Pharisees tho
their rottenness was discovered by our Lord: that Judas was to be received as
an Ambassador with other Apostles -- that God makes useful Instruments
sometimes -- and that edification does not necessarly depend upon the holiness
of the Instrument, Act. 3. 12. Matthew. 7. 23. Its utterly remote from our
purpose, as is clear from what is said, for neither can he prove that this
practice is a separation properly such, nor does that case of an Improvement of
the pharisees teaching during that time of the legal dispensation, now shortly
to be abolisht, meet our purpose, nor the case of Judas hid abominations,
correspond with that of avowed perjury and apostasy from the vows and
Reformation of our Church. Nor is there here a supposed prior obligation of
adherence to conformists ministry, preponderating any objection as to their
scandalls. What can this man say, if we shall plead these reasons of Mr Durham,
for adhering to Presbyterian ministers, viz. that ordinances ought not to be
despised in whatever hands they be, that even the pharisees and Judas himself
might be heard, and therefore much more Presbyterian ministers of this Church,
that God can make even graceless men Instruments of good; that the efficacy of
means depends not on the holiness of the instrument. Now will he admit a
conclusion of owning Presbyterian Ministers from these principles; nay, he
thinks that matters stand so with them because of their supposed Schism and
disorder, that for as applicable as these things are to them, yet they ought
not to be heard. And so by his own confession and pleading this will conclude
nothing for him, until his above mentioned groundless suppositions be made
good. Now let me retort of our Informers angry Querie here, how can they
Justify withdrawing people from Presbyterian Ministers, since not so bad as
the scribes and Pharisees, if they have either knowledge or moderation. He must
then of necessity grant, if he will not contradict himself, that all these
grounds will not plead for hearing in some cases, and that the London Ministers
assertion anent the validity of the Episcopal ordination for substance
(repeated here again ad nauseam) falls utterly short of proving his conclusion.
Those Ministers do assert, that the Presbyterian ordination is the more pure
and conform to the scripture pattern, what will he then say to this conclusion,
that upon this ground (and especially because Conformists themselves own the
validity of Presbyterian Ministers ordination) they are inconsequent to
themselves, as well as going cross to scripture and sound reason, in disowning
the ministry of the Presbyterian ministers of this Church, and withdrawing
people from hearing them. Let him pull out this beam from his own eye, and his
answer shall easily serve for us.

The Doubter alleges, that in Math. 23. [We are not bidden hear the scribes
and Pharisees, and that the words will not bear that.] He answers that he
forbids not to hear as we forbid to hear Conformists. Ans. 1. We have seen that
there is more may be alleged from the Scripture as to a prohibition to be
their ordinary and constant hearers at least, (which he pleads for as to
Conformists) then he can allege as to a command of hearing. 2. That the
tollerance or allowance of a hearing of them during that shortly to be abolisht
legal dispensation, is far from coming up to his conclusion of owning curats
in this our case. (...). He answers, that Mr Durham speaks of a ministerial
respect due to these Pharisees, and that without hearing, this ministerial
respect is Lame. Ans. Mr Durhams reason anent a Ministerial respect is in
relation to the Improvement of their teaching, and tho granted in the greatest
latitude he can imagine, will not infer his conclusion of owning Curats in
this case as is already cleared. Admitting that a due Ministerial respect, will
infer hearing in Mr Durhams sense and instance, yet in our case, (which I told
him Mr Durhams assertion will not speak unto) acknowledgment of a man to be a
Minister, and capable of a Ministerial respect in so far, will not bear this
conclusion, else the Informer has in a clap devoured and eaten in again all
this Dialogue in pleading against this Ministerial respect in hearing
Presbyterian Ministers, whose Ministerial authority he acknowledges. 2ly, He
answers, that our Lord enjoins obedience to that which they bid do, and that as
sitting in Moses chair -- and how could that be except the people heard them
teach from Moses chair -- he that bids obey a Ministers injunctions from the
word of God, consequently bids hear him deliver his doctrine from the word.
Ans. We told him that for any thing that he, or any of his fellow pleaders,
have yet offered from this text, these Pharisees might be civil national
doctors and interpreters of Moses Judicial Law, and of (...) municipal Law,
from his civil chair, who was King in Iesurun, which will no more infer a
hearing them teach and preach as Church officers, then our obedience to the
King, Council, parliament and Session, will infer that conclusion. 2. His
parallels as to the command of obeying a Ministers doctrine from the word its
inferring an injunction of hearing him deliver these doctrines from the word,
is (in this case and question) pityfull sophistry and begging of the question,
in supposing that these anent whom this injunction was given, were
Ecclesiastic Ministers, which he has not yet proved. 2. That teaching from
Moses chair, is in this case equivalent to Ministerial gospel teaching and
preaching from the word of God, which he has not proved either, since (as I
said) Gods word contained the Jews municipal Law, which civil Judges might in
that capacity deliver and interpret, in relation to external righteousness
betwixt man and man in things of this life. Finally, granting they were to be
heard teach and expone, which he has not yet made good from the text, it will
nothing help his cause for the reasons often given: so that the separation
which he improves this place against, being his groundless supposition alleged
but not proven by him, and by us disproved by what is said above, and likewise
the application of this hearing the Pharisees to our hearing Curats, being his
bare petitio principii, his assertion after subjoyned viz. that this passage
will stand against us to our conviction as against the seperatists in Queen
Elizabeth's time; is but a piece of his ignorant arrogant confidence; there
being a vast difference betwixt our case, and that of those separatists at that
time, as shall hereafter appear. And beside, Presbyterian Ministers of this
Church have much more to say from this text, for their people's adhering to
them, then prelatists can plead.

The Doubter next alleadges, [that many Episcopal men have entered upon honest
men's Labors, and therefore ought to be disowned as intruders.] He answers 1.
That all are not such, that some Conformists have keep^ their places they bad
before the change, others have entered in to the labors of those that are dead
and transported elsewhere. Ans. Our Informer does miserably pinch and narrow a
sinful intrusion by this description; which himself must acknowledge. For
should a Presbyterian Minister step into his own Church upon the death or
transportation of one of the Curats, who will question that this man will call
it an intrusion according to his principles anent the prelatick Church, and so
he must acknowledge that notwithstanding what he here pleads, the Curats entry
is intrusion according to our principles; beside that the Ministry of those
who have conformed, and were Presbyterially ordained, being an express owning
of the principles* practices and design, of this prelatick schismatic
destroying party, and by their acceptance of collation and presentation, and
concurring in the Prelates pretended Judicatories, a ministry completely of the
prelatick mould, its reductive, if not formaliter, an intrusion; or partaking
with the general intrusion and usurpation upon the pure reformed Ministry and
Church of Scotland, even as a state officer or Magistrate his taking his office
from Invaders, while an army is in the fields against them, does fully and
fitly denominate him an Invader in the exercise thereof, tho it be materially
the same office and employment which he had before. Or as an inferior officer
in an army taking his office and a new commission from an usurping General, and
other usurping superior officers, who are dissolving and betraying the true
army, expelling the true General and officers contrary to their first
commission, does partake in that usurpation. Considering the Church of Scotland
as it stood established in doctrine, discipline, worship, and government, and
her National and solemn vows, surely this course of Conformity is a most gross
intrusion upon her, without so much as a shadow of consent; and so is all
partaking therein by consequence, which no Conformist can acquit himself of;
and therefore according to the tenor and principles of our Reformation, cannot
be looked upon as any of our true Church her Sons and Ministers.

But here our Informer poseth us with some great queries forsooth 1. Whether
Conformists were active in utting Presbyterian ministers, or came in before
they were out, and their places declared vacant. Ans. Whoever is active or
passive in outting them, one thing is sure, they are violently thrust out
contrary to the word of God, and the rules, order, and Reformation of this
Church. So that come in who will, they are Intruders. 1. Because they have come
in upon a charge to which faithful Ministers of this Church have Christ's Keys
and commission. 2. Because come in and obtruded by those who are ingrained
usurpers, thieves and Robbers; I mean perfidious Prelates (often abjured and
cast out of this Church with detestation) and not in the order of this Church,
Nor by her door. A poor man is by a number of Robbers dispossessed of his house,
they put in a seeming neutral, to keep house for them; the poor owner seeks his
possession, and complains of this usurpation, O says the new tennant and
Robbers depute, I am no Intruder, I have a good right, I put you not out, but
found your house empty. Now let the Informer use a little honest application and
answer his weighty Querie. 2. He asks, why will those dispossessed ministers
suffer the people to starve, because they have slept out of their charges. Ans.
The people are starved and poisoned too by those that come in; and these
Ministers are concerned upon their faith to the great shepherd, to endeavor
what they can to save his lambs from the wolves, and give faithful
Ministerial warning of their flocks hazard. Next, he tells us, though a
minister be transported against his will, yet the people should submit to his
successor. True, when for the Churches greater good, he is transported to
another watchtower by her faithful guides, and true Church Judicatories, but
not when the true pastor is chased away by usurping perjured Prelates; and an
intruding hireling brought in as their vicar. Its this man's perted self (to use
his own phrase here) that blurrs his eyes to draw a similitudinar argument from
such an absimilar instance. One thing he did well to add as a proviso, viz the
successors coming in upon an orderly or fair call. And does this man think that
Conformists have this orderly call according to the Reformation and doctrine of
this Church? Nay, is he not disputing against this call, and so if this be a
necessary condition of a Ministers Lawful succession, the Informer is in the
briers of a palpable inconsistency near of kin to a contradiction. As for what
he adds of the necessity of a Ministry, and making the best of what we cannot
help in our superiors, we say, that were the Rulers using their power for
giving one Lawful pastor for another, and in the method of this Church, and
according to the scripture pattern, by Lawful Church Indicatories, these
reasons would say something; but when they have overturned the Reformation of a
Church, and contrary to that Churches vows and their own, are obtruding abjured
prelates, and a number of profane hyrelings as their deputes, to exclude and
ruin a faithful Ministry, his reasons in this case are naught, and speak
nothing to the point. As for what he adds afterward of Ministers, in the year
1648 ejected for asserting their duty to the King, and their submitting while
others were put into their charges. I Answer, he will never while he breaths be
able to prove, that they were deposed for asserting their duty to the King, and
not rather for promoting an ungodly course tending to the Kings ruin, and the
ruin of our Reformation, and for other pieces of their scandalous
miscarriages, by the true Lawful Judicatories of this Church. So that upon
both grounds, the flocks were concerned to submit to such faithful pastors,
as were set over them in the way and method of this Church, and according to
the scripture pattern.

His last answer to this argument of his Doubter anent Conformists Intrusion
is, that Presbyterian Ministers intrusion, is from parish to parish over the
Labors of all the Ministers of Scotland, whereas Conformists intrusion (if it
be so) is but over one parish. Ans. We told him before, that Presbyterian
Ministers, notwithstanding the prelates violence and usurpation, are Ministers
of this Church of Scotland continuing still in that relation to her; So that
the present presecution and violence, as well as backsliding of the Prelatick
schismatics and Innovators, warrands their more enlarged officiating by the
same grounds, upon which the presecute officers of the Church of Jerusalem went
every where pre^ching the gospel, and on the same ground that Ministers
enlarged officiating in the time of our Reformation, was warranted; to which
this case of defection is parallel and correspondent. So that their ministerial
obligation, and the many scripture commands as to diligence in their testimony,
Being by the present state of our Church extended to their officiating in this
manner, their Ministry is no Intrusion, but the Lawful exercise of their
office, received from the great shephered, nor is it upon the flocks who are
under a tie and relation to the present Incumbents as their pastors, but
toward poor starved flocks committed to wolves, who destroy but feed not; and
the Curats pretended Ministry being neither of Christ, nor for him, is still an
usurpation though over the smallest flock; so that his Instance of the pirates
word to Alexander, and citation of the Apostle's caveat Rom 2. 21. is extra
ole^ and reaches himself a rebounding stroke. For who (I pray) have usurped the
name and authority of this Church, and endeavored to have it completely
molded in their way, and to extirpat all faithful Ministers and professors
within the Nation, is it not 14 usurping Prelates and their underlings, this is
a robbery indeed, and with a witness.

Now follows another argument of his Doubter [that Episcopal Ministers are
abjured as depending upon the hierarchy, and therefore cannot be heard without
breach of the Oath.] In what respects the owning of Conformists, especially as
that practice is now circumstantiat, is a breach of Covenant, we have cleard
above, and need not again repeat it. He answers. 1. That Ministers are not
mentioned in that article. But if they depend upon that Ecclesiastical
hierarchy as Church Officers, why are they not mentioned. Next, its enough for
our purpose, that the owning of their Ministry as depending upon prelates, is in
this our case abjured. 2. He tellsus, that dependence on that hierarchy does
suppose, and is to be understood of a hierarchy, made up of all the officers
enumerate in that Article, as the English Presbyterians sense it, which
hierarchy we have not in Scotland. This conceit I have already confuted, and
proved that beside this Article, we are by the first bound to preserve the
established Reformation and Government of this Church, and to adhere to all that
enter into this Oath, in the pursuing of its ends; and not to suffer our selves
to be withdrawn from this Reformation, and our union therein by terror or
persuasion, is an obligation lying upon us in the 6. Article, which does
abundantly (as we have said,) reach the disowning of Conformists.

In the next place he tells us, that to bind our selves to disowne Ministers
depending upon Bishops, is to bind our selves to sin. I Answer whatever may be
said of such an engadgement simpliciter and absolutely considered, yet certainly
to engadge our selves against the reintroduction of Prelacy into a pure Church
reformed from it, and against all dependers upon, and promoters of that
Interest in such a Church, in the capacity of Church officers, and eatenus as
promoting and depending upon it, is both a lawful and necessary engadgment,
necessarly flowing from and dependent upon the abjuration of prelacie it self.
That Ministers tho faulty may be heard, will (as we have often demonstrate)
nothing help his conclusion. Since he can not deny that their faultiness in
some cases may bar their being heard, as he supposes Presbyterian Ministers
faults puts a Lawful stop in the way of people's hearing them. Then he tells
us, that he has showen episcopacy to be a Lawful government which none might
Lawfully adjure, for this we referr the Reader to what is answered on the first
Dialogue where we have proven the contrary, and that it is a government
contrary to the word of God, which therefore we were obliged to abjure.

Lastly he tells us, that by this exposition of the 2. Article we were bound
not to own Ministers who were in office at the taking of the Covenant, but to
extirpat them since they depended upon Bishops as to their ordination still,
even after they had taken the Covenant, unless they renounced their ordination
received from Bishops, and had been ordained a new by mere Presbyters, which
they thought themselves not bound to do by the Covenant, or they were Ministers
without a true ordination all that time, and then all their Ministerial Acts
were null since they proceeded from that ordination. And yet (he says) we
never serupled to hear such Ministers notwithstanding of this dependence upon
Bishops in part, if they disowne Bishops for the future. Ans. What a silly
knack is it which all this tatle is founded upon, viz. Ministers who received
ane ordination from Bishops, or Bishops with Presbyters, in a Church upon which
they had usurped, are still to be looked upon as Ministers depending upon
Bishops, even after Prelacy is abolished, and Presbyterian Government
established in that Church. So poor a notion that I am sure the least
reflection may discover its vanity, ordination being Gods ordinance and
appointment, and the Bishop qua Presbyter being vested with a power in it,
ordination by the Bishop with Presbyters (tho maimed in respect of the Bishop's
arrogated power, which is a corruption adhering to it) cannot by any good
consequence be said to depend in its esse or nature upon the Prelat, and far
less in operari or esse after that corruption is removed and abjured, and
Presbyterian Government set up. Does a soldier or Officers commission or
Military power slow still from a Colonel after he is disbanded? Nay this is too
gross inadvertency. Were Zuinglius, Luther, and other of our Reformers
dependents upon the papacy or popish Prelates after their cleaving to, and
embracing the Reformation? Do not all our divines distinguish the essentials of
their ordination from these corruptions adhering to it, and assert that they
had a Ministry Lawful for substance, and an ordination to their Ministry, tho
coming to them through that impure channel. This man Justifies the Pope's
plea, where is your Ministry (says he and the Romanists) you have no Ministry
but what you have from us? do not our Divines tell them that the Ministry and
ordination it self being Gods institution, we have them from the Lord, now
restored and recovered from their corruptions, and are not dependers upon them
for our Ministry? did all our Reformers Ministerial acts flow from the pope or
papal ordination as such? Let our Informer take heed of this praemunire, for
this dangerous error which he has fallen into, will expose him to the severe
censure of all protestant Churches. 2ly, Hence Ministers who were ordained by
Prelates with Presbyters concurring, were no more bound (yea less bound) to
renounce their ordination simply, then Zuinglius or Luther were obliged to
renounce theirs; especially since their ordination was in a protestant Church,
and under Prelates owning the protestant profession (which our Informers charity
will no doubt esteem a considerable difference) and their not renouncing it
simpliciter will no more make them still dependent upon the Prelates as to
their Ministry, when prelates are removed, then Zuinglius and Luther were
dependent upon the Pope as to their ordination, and the acts flowing therefrom,
after their separation from the Church of Rome, or infer that they did owe
their baptism to the Pope, or the ordination of the popish priest who baptized
them, and were concerned to be rebaptized. So that the popish cause and
interest is much obliged to our Informer, if his pleadings for our prelacy will
hold good; and it is no bad omen that both interests are thus embarked
together in this man and his fellows reasonings for them, and must stand and
fall together, which fortifies our hope and confidence, that as the first has
begun to fall, so the other shall gradually decay, wither, and fall with it.

CHAP. IV.
The Informers answer to the Doubters argument anent separation from a corrupt
Church, and the retorted charge of schism upon Conformists, examined.

OUr Doubt-Resolver will seem ingenuous in offering an answer to some chief
objections against the owning of Conformists, and therefore puts into the mouth
of his personat Doubter, some more arguments, in such a mould as he supposes is
for his best advantadge, which I shall now consider, and deal faithfully with
him and his supposed Doubter, in presenting these arguments, (which he has
disguised) in their genuine strength, and shall examine his answers, which when
weighed in the scripture balances and according to the true state of this
question will no doubt be found as empty and insignificant as any of the
preceding.

The Doubter has another argument [that we are warranted by the word to
separat from a corrupt Church.] This objection he curtly and advantagiously
propones, making his Doubter suppose 1. a confessed separation in this
practice, from a Church to which we are bound to adhere, which this new advocat
has not as yet made good. 2. That any corruptions generally, or such as may
denominate a Church in some measure corrupt, will warrant a separation, which
is a principle we do not own. We acknowledge a Church may be joined with
Lawfully wherein there are great corruptions, and this with Mr Durham and
others on that subject. But as to corruptions, we say, if the contraverted
joining be in that which is clear and necessary duty in the present
circumstances, there can be in this joining no stain, but in so far as a
concurrence with that which is duty out of that complex case, cannot be
performed without a direct compliance with, or stain of these corruptions, then
a proportioned separation is needful in so far as suitable to that exigence;
and yet even in this case we assert that other duties in the fellowship with
that same Church may be owned: and that fellowship is not entirely to be broken
off (upon the preceding ground) in these things wherein there is no such
hazard. But now what says he to this argument, 1. He tells us, we are mistaken
if we think the Bishops a corruption, and that this will not be granted. Ans. I
hope I have made it evident that they are a corruption, and therefore to be
disowned. The 2 answer is, that its a mistake to think that for corruptions,
and even great corruptions, a Church is to be separat from. Then he tells us,
of the corrupted of the Church of Galatia; that in the Church of Corinth an
article of the creed was denied, that there were great faults in the Asian
Churches Rev. 2. 3. and of the great corruptions that were in the Church of
Israel, as is evident in the books of the Kings and Prophets, yet the people of
God were not commanded to separat as long as the substance of the worship was
not corrupted, as it was by Ieroboams calves. Ans. 1. What if Presbyterians
shall borrow this argument from him, and from these instances of not separating
from a Church, notwithstanding of great corruptions, shall plead for all
professors in Scotland their adhering to Presbyterian Ministers and this
Presbyterian Church, as having a worship not substantially corrupted, whatever
other personal faults, or corruptions they may be liable unto, that yet they
are a true Church as to the main, and that therefore they ought to be joined
with, as the Churches of Corinth and Galatia (wherein there were great
corruptions) were still adhered to by professors. What will he say in this
case? I know he will say that its ridiculous for such a party of Schismatics
to call our selves the Church of Scotland. But what if we return this answer to
him again, that according to the Reformation and principles of our Church (out
of which Prelates were ejected, vows against them universally taken on, and
Presbyterial government completely settled therein) Its ridiculous to call a
party of Prelates and their adherents the Church of Scotland, or for them to
usurp her name, who have thus overturned her Reformation. So that until he
make good the above mentioned hypothese: or suppositions, viz. that Conformists
are the true organick Church of Scotland, that this our practice is a
separation properly such; that its merely because of Conformists personal
faults that we withdraw; that we are under prior obligations to adhere unto
Curats with all their corruptions rather then our Presbyterian Ministry and
Church, which is both free of them and contending against them; until these
and such like suppositions be made good, his argument from the preceding
scripture Iostances as to joining with a Church that has corruptions, is a
meet petitio principii, and will not help his cause in the least. Which will be
further evident if we consider in the 2d place, that the case of these Churches
and professors therein was far from ours in relation to corruptions. For

1. The Doctrinal corruptions of Galatia as to the legal Ceremonies, (by the
bad influence of judaizing teachers) tho they were of a large, yet the Informer
will not prove they were either of such an universal spread and tincture, or
strengthened by such an universal acknowledgment, as to make the state of that
Church correspond with his hypothesis in this argument. 2. That error in the
Church of Corinth in relation to the resurrection, appears not to have been
owned by their teachers and Church officers, far less publicly avowed and
obstinatly and presumptuously maintaired by them or any considerable number of
hearers, which makes their case wide from ours, wherein so many preachers who
call themselves Pastors of this Church, and many others, obstinatly and
avowedly maintain our abjured corruptions; the Church of Corinth was in
capacity to censure any handful that owned this error, and to purge out this
leaven, but so is not our Church in this case as to the mantainers of Prelacy
and its other corruptions, so that there is here no remedy but for the sound
part to keep themselves pure from their contagious and destroying course. The
account of both these Churches in the point of corruptions, which is exhibit by
Pareus in his Comment. ^n the 1 Cor. is considerable to this purpose, upon the
12. verse of the 15. chap. he tells us that the Apostle accuses not them all,
but some only, freeing the rest of this crime. Neque enim accusat omnes sed
quosdam inter eos. Reliquos igitur a culpa li^erat. Neque enim paucorum culp*
omnibus est imputanda. Thereafter he shows that some do judge that this was
Hymen^us and Philetus, others, some of the Jewishs Saduces or Heathen
Philosophers who had instilled this poison about the resurrection. And a little
after answering Bellarmines cavil, [that because of these Churches their
corruption in doctrine, therefore pure doctrine is not the mark of a Church]
as the Churches of Corinth and Galatia were without the faith of the
resurrection, and sound faith as to justification. He answers by denying this
assertion. Neque enim (says he) tota Ecclesia Corinthiorum negabat
resurrectionis fidem: sed aliqui tantum, quos redarguebant alij. Idem de
Galatarum Ecclesia sentiendum: qui nec omnes, nec tam (...) errabant in
fundamento, nutabant saltem, utrum fides Christi ad salutem sufficeret -- dicit
enim ibidem, ut and Corinthijs: modicum fermenti fermentat totam mass^m. Ergo
fermentum, non erat omnium sed aliquorum tantum: a quibus tamen omnibus
imminebat periculum, quod Apostolus tentat ab eis avertere. That is, this whole
Church of Corinth denied not the resurrection, but some only who were opposed
by others, the same we must judge of the Church of Galatia, who did neither
all, nor so hainonsly err in the foundation, but by the persuasion of false
Apostles were hesitating, whether the faith of Christ was sufficient to
salvation, or if the circumcision was also needful, for he says in that same
place as also to the Corinthians, a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.
Therefore this leaven was not of them all but of some only, by whom
notwithstanding all were in hazard, which the Apostle endeavors to prevent.
The Dutch annot upon the same place [How say some among you etc.] observe that
this error was not common of the whole Church, but of some only whose names are
not expressed, as 2 Timothy 2. 17. that by shaming them he might not fright them
from conversion. And upon Gal. 5. 9. they show that this little leaven spoken
of, may be either understood of the false doctrine it self, or the men who
promoted this doctrine, who although they were few yet did much hurt, -- and
therefore were to be eshewed. Now, how disproportioned for extent and
infection, these corruptions were unto these of our Church about which our
debate is, is obvious to the meanest reflection, and consequently the Lameness
of our Informers similitudinary argument from the one to the other. Which will
be yet further evident, if we consider. That

3. He cannot make appear, that in any of these Churches there was a formal
legal Judicial enacting authorizing and commanding of these corruptions, and
endeavors used, to exclude and root out all who would not submit to them, by
Barbarous violence and persecution, particularly faithful Ministers for
testifying against the same. Nor can he prove that adherence to these erroneous
corrupters in their Worship, was appointed and enjoined as an express Test and
badge of owning their errors, and renouncing the truth, and all the sound
party adhering thereto, which is so casting a difference, that it quite
invalidats these Instances as to any argument against our practice, for this
destroying backsliding Innovating party of this Church have laid down courses
either to engadge to a formal owning of their corruptions, especially the
faithful Ministry of this land, or else to exterminat and root them out and all
sound professors together with their Testimony.

In a word whatever concurence in duty these corruptions he mentions may be
consistent with, it is certain that the sound professors were called to keep
themselves free of the contagion thereof by all means, and the Church was to
use all endeavors to purge out and rid her self of these corruptions and
corrupters too if obstinat, Paul wished they were cut off who troubled the
Churches of Galatia, that is censured and laid aside as rotten members who were
in hazard to grangrene the whole body. The Officers of the Church of Corinth
are commanded to purge out the old leaven, since a little would quickly leavent
the whole lump. And the Apostle reprehends them for not casting out the
Incestuous man, and enjoynes the sound professors in that Church to come out
from among the unclean and be separat, as they exspect to be received of God.
And our Lord reprehends the Church of Pergamus for not casting out them that
held the Doctrine of Balaam, and the Nicolaitans -- and the Church of Thyatira
for suffering Jezabel to seduce and infect with scandalous errors and practices
the Lords servants. Now the scope of these precepts will say, that when the
case is so circumstantiat, that the Church and sound part can have no access
for removing and censuring destroying corrupters, especially while by violence
endeavoring (after they have departed from a pure Church her sworn Reformation
and constitution) to force all to a concurrence with them, or exterminat the
impolluted remnant, that this sound Church (I say) are to keep themselves free
of their contagion, to follow their duty in opposition to them, and mutually to
strengthen one another therein; which is enough to Justify our practice in
this case. In like manner, the many commands of the Prophets to abstain from
the pollutions of the time, and threatenings for accession thereto, will by
proportion infer this our practice mentioned, and that when a case is such that
no concurrence can be had with Innovators in their worship without the stain of
their sin, and when they are persecuting all that will not concur with them, a
non-union and forbearance is most necessary. Had any corrupting treacherous
Prophets or others of the Church of Israel in concurrence with persecuting
Rulers, enacted universal compliance with some gross corruptions, and ejected
all the faithful non complying teachers priests or prophets, admitting none to
officiat except these corruptions had been formally acknowledged, Let any say
what would have been the faithful prophets decision in this case, and whether
upon the same ground on which they so often dehort from the least compliance with
any sin, they would not have allowed and commanded the faithful prophets and
members of that Church to oppose them, and cleave unto their respective duties,
and unto one another in the following thereof. As for what he adds, that there
was then no command to separat from the worship while it was not substantially
corrupted. I wonder if he will charge a corruption of the worship it self, or
in the substance thereof upon the duties now owned and performed by
Presbyterian Ministers and professors, from whom he notwithstanding thinks its
duty to separat, so that until he prove (as I said) Conformists their better
claim to officiat as Ministers of this Church, then Presbyterian Ministers,
this argument lights heavy on himself, and the censures put upon Novatians and
Donatists falls upon their dividing and destroying party. The case of these
Schismatics being as far from ours as east from west; were Novatians or
Donatists first cast out by a violent backsliding party for not concurring in a
course of backsliding, in overturning a Churches sworn reformation, and were
they enjoined and commanded, to own the course of these backsliders? I think
the Donatists and Novatians their violence against adherers to the union of the
true Church, is a fit emblem of the present practice of Conformists, how can
this Man say, that there were then greater corruptions them now. Can there be
greater corruptions in government then a papacy of the highest degree, as is
their premacy and hierarchy? can there be greater corruptions in practice, then
perjury and such gross prophanity as Conformists are blotted with for the most
part? greater corruption in principles, then Popish Arminian errors etc.

The Doubter objects, [that if we may not separat from a corrupt Church, what
mean these scripture commands enjoining separation, such as 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15,
16. 1 Cor. 5. 11 2 These 3. 6 Rev. 18. 3] We have already said that he deals
deceitfully in making his Presbyterian Doubter assert that we may separat from
a corrupt Church in every case, but this we say, that in whatever case, and in
how far soever; we cannot join with a corrupt Church without the contagion and
stain of its corruptions, in so far and in that case, a separation is
necessary, and falls within the compass of these scripture commands. And that
in this our case, the demanded conformity as to Presbyterian Ministers and
professors cannot be yielded, without the stain of prelatists their sin, is
above cleared. So that he needs not tell us here, that every corruption is not
a sufficient ground of separation. For we have heard our Informer acknowledge
that a Church may be in that degree corrupted, as will render a separation
warrantable; yea and necessary. I could wish he had condescended upon that
degree of corruption, and showen us here the maximum quod sic, and minimum quod
non, as to the ground of this separation, and how far these corruptions may
strike at a Churches vitals, and yet her life and essence as a Church subsist.
And here I would close in a little with this Man, and enquire, that since a
Churches corruptions will (with him) in some cases render a separation
necessary, upon what ground is it necessary, and from what prior principle is
this concluded? sure it must be upon this ground, left union with that Church
blott the soul, and make us share in her sin. So that in this case, we are not
obliged to hold union and fellowship with her when it is infectious, as is most
clearly imported in that command 2 Cor. 6. and if separation be upon this
ground allowed, whether the corruption be lesser or greater, eatenus or in so
far, we are obliged to separat, for Majus and minus non variant speciem rei.
Next, I infer that a non-union to a corrupt party who cannot be called the
Church, or at lest whose being the Church is magnalis and sub judice, will be a
fortiori warranted, and upon lesser grounds then separation which supposes an
anterior obligation of union, and actual union out of this case, and
abstracting from it.

But for these scriptures mentioned, he says they will not prove our point,
and to that of 2 Cor 6. 14. he answers, that our Lord is speaking of separating
from ungodly fellowship with Idolaters, not of withdrawing from christian
assemblies. But does he not enjoin that separation because of the hazard of
Infection by their sin, and why not also from christian assemblies where there
is the same hazard of this Infection? did he not acknowledge that the case of a
Church or christian Assembly may be such, as will render even a separation
necessary. Now if in this case the tender separater should plead this text, and
that corrupt Church or assembly of Christians give our Informers answer, viz.
that it pleads only for separating from fellowship with Idolaters, not of
withdrawing from christian Assemblies, how will he extricat himself, and
reconcile this answer with his concession. But for these texts 1 Cor. 5. 11.
and 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. he says, they are meant only of needless fellowship in
private converse with scandalous persons, but allows not to withdraw from the
public worship because of the presence of such scandalous ones, as if this did
pollute the worship, though it may be the fault of Church guides not to keep
them back. Ans. The ground here is the same (and acknowledged by him) whatever
be the withdrawing which is more immediately enjoined, viz. lest their
fellowship prove contagious, scandalous or in any measure sinful, and so if
fellowship with a Church in her Assemblies be thus infectious, these scriptures
do enjoin a separation upon the same ground; and by necessary consequence from
what he has acknowleged: And therefore this answer is nothing to the purpose,
unless he will retract his concession, that there may be corruptions in a
Church and her assemblies, which will render a separation necessary. Next, as
for what he adds, that ordinances are not polluted by the presence of
scandalous ones. It is not for him, nor against us; since he acknowledges,
there may be a Lawful yea necessary separation from a Church and her
assemblies in worship, tho not upon this ground of the ordinances their
pollution by the presence of scandalous ones: because of the reason which we
have already heard; and we do also upon other grounds then this of a pretended
pollution of the ordinances by their scandals, maintain our disowning
Conformists in their worship to be a duty (as we have heard) even that they are
forcing all to a sinful compliance with them, in a schismatic departing from
the unity of this Church and perjurious overturning the work of reformation,
and will neither suffer Ministers nor professors to join with them in worship,
but with an express aknowledgement (in the intent of our Laws) and owning of
this defection. Sure we are commanded to withdraw from every Brother that walks
disorderly, (which our Informer pleads as a sufficient ground to disowne
Presbyterian Ministers and withdraw from them because of their supposed
disorder and schism, tho the ordinances in their hands are not polluted with
their supposed guilt,) and from all fellowship with scandalous brethren, which
is contagious and may pollute us, Now, are not they walking disorderly and
cross to the doctrine, discipline, and Reformation of this Church? are they not
consequently schismatics? are not their scandals infectious, when they will
suffer no Ministers to possess their charges, or officiat either with, or
without them, or people to enjoy ordinances among them, without direct owning
their defection, and overturning our Reformation, and a professed submission to
their abjured prelacy, as is clear in the acts enjoining Ministers preaching,
and peoples hearing in conformity to prelacy and the supremacy.

For that of Rev. 18. he says, that it enjoyneth a separation from Rome's
corrupt doctrine and Idolatrous worship, but warrands not a separation from a
Church where no such corruption is. I answer, The ground of the command is the
danger of Infection by Rome's sins, as is expressed in the text, which will
consequently hold wherever this danger is, whatever be the the particular sins
from whence this danger flows, for (as I said) majus and minus non variant
speciem and we may add, that other Known rule, a quatenus ad omne valet
sequela. In whatever case an union is unwarrantable and infectious, a
proportioned separation is upon this ground enjoined. Nay, if the conjunction
have but mali speciem or be inductive to sin only, the command of eshewing,
every appearance of evil, will reach this withdrawing, unless the conjunction
be on other grounds an indispensible duty. Now our Covenant obligations, and
our Reformation as itstood established being duly pondered, it will be clear
that Conformists are schismatics and destroying Innovators, and there is no
prior obligation to join with them, but rather to disowne them in this course.
Sure this man holds that fellowship with Presbyterian Ministers in their
assemblies for worship is contagious, and that people are obliged to leave, and
come out from them, tho he dare not lay Idolatrous worship nor corrupt doctrine
to their charge, and so he must acknowledge, that this and such like commands
will warrant a separation upon the general ground here intimat, abstracting
from that special case of Romes Idolatrous worship and corrupt doctrine. Its
very sophistical reasoning from the denial of the special ground and nature of
Romes contagion, from which christians are called to separat, to deny a
separation upon any other contagion to fall within the compass of that precept,
which is to reason from the denial of the species to the denial of the genus.

His Doubter in the next place retorts his charge of separation upon himself,
and alleges [that we have better ground to charge Conformists with schism
because of their departing from the government of this Church, to which we are
still adhering, so that they have gone out from us, not we from them.] We
proved this charge already from the constitution and Reformation of this Church
as it stood established, and our universal vows of adherence thereunto, so that
such as have overturned this work of Reformation, (not Presbyterian government
only) they are properly the first dividers and deserters.

But let us hear how he acquits himself of this charge. 1. He says that their
submission to prelacy is in obedience to the commands of superiors, whom we are
bound to obey in things not sinful, So that their obedience is duty, and
Presbyterians their non submission is disobedience to authority, and Schism
from the Church. But 1. His Doubter alleging that Presbyterial Government is
the Government of this Church, and inferring thereupon that departing from it
is Schism, and that Prelatists have gone out from Presbyterians, not they from
them, which is a very clear consequence, and will clearly infer the departers
to be Schismatics upon any description of Schism which he can assign; And
moreover, this being the great ground upon which this man and his fellows do
charge Presbyterians with Schism, viz. That they are separat from the present
Prelatick constitution, since he offers no formal answer either to the
antecedent or consequent of his Doubters argument, what will the interposed
command of Rulers signify to alter the Nature of Schism, or to make that
practice which is Hactenus upon Scripture grounds Schismatical, to be no
Schism. This I must say is strange divinity, but like enough to that of these
men who make the Magistrate a Pope over the Church, her ordinances, and over
sacred Oaths and vows. 2. We have proved that their submission and obedience in
this point, is a high rebellion against God, in disowning at men's arbitrary
command, the Government of his house appointed in his word, and embracing an
abjured Hierarchy contrary to it, and against which all the nations were
engadged. So that our practice is obedience to God, and a keeping of the union
of Christ's body, and theirs is both perjury and Schism.

He tells us, that he has proved in the first conference Episcopacie to be the
only Government left by Christ, and practiced by his Apostles: So that our
disowning it is Schism from the Scripture Church Government, and that of the
primitive Church, as well as from them. To this I only say, that I hope we have
made the prelacy he pleads for, appear to be a stranger both to Scripture and
antiquity. Again he tells us, that in this charge of Schism, he means it not
only or mainly in respect of Government, but of separating from their
Assemblies for Worship, which is Schism tho the Government were wrong. I answer
1. If he acknowledges that separating from the Government is Schism, why
answers he not our countercharge, that their party did first separat from the
Government of this Church, and that therefore the Schism lies first and
principally at their door; for that which he says of the Magistats command, is
(as we have heard) utterly insignificant to wipe of this charge. 2. This charge
of the first Schism on his part standing good, for any thing he has said, that
which he here adds of our being Schismatics, because of our separation from
their Assemblies for Worship, is like wise naught. For upon this ground of his
Doubter, which he cannot disprove, viz. That they have made the first breach
and separation, they are Hactenus Schismatics, and so are to be disowned in
their worship upon that very account and ground, upon which he pleads fot
disowning Presbyterians Assemblies for Worship tho he can lay nothing else to
their charge, or allege any substantial corruption of the worship. And so the
recocted crambe which he here presents to us again anent the Scribes and
Pharisees, Simeon and Anna their attending the Temple Worship, Zacharias and
Elizabeth, Joseph and Mary their not separating there from etc. Pleads as much
for his Presbyterian Doubter in relation to the owning of our Presbyterian
Assemblies for Worship (and much more) then for him. Since he dare not say that
they are more corrupted then the Church of the Jews was at that time, and so we
may echo back his alas how will you justify this separation of yours, with an
enquiry how he and his party will justify their separation from the true
Ministry of the Church of Scotland? What if a party of corrupt Priests and
Levites had risen up and pursued a course of defection, tending to raze and
ruin all Gods ordinances, casting out all such Priests and Levites as would
not concur with them, and had appointed an acknowledgment of and concurrence
with their wicked defection, to be the only condition upon which they will
admit either priests or people to share in the ordinances? In the mean time a
great body of Priests and people adhering to Gods ordinances, and contending
against them, had been keeping their possession of the temple Worship as long
as they could? I dare refer to our Informer to give judgment in this case and
show, what Simeon and Anna, Joseph and Mary would have done, and to which of
the parties they would have adhered? And let our cause be judged by this.

His Doubter in the next place objects [that Conformists lecture not, and
therefore may not be heard.] Here he but trifles to insinuat that this is
solely looked upon by us as a ground of not owning them. But in so far as in
this our case its a piece of their apostasy from our established reformed
Worrhip, and an express badge of conformity to prelacy, and in both these
respects, flat perjury and breach of Covenant, we look upon it as having its
own influence with other grounds to warrant a non-union to them while standing
in a stated opposition to faitfull Ministers mantaining, this with other pieces
of our Reformation. To this objection our Informer answers, 1. That some
Conformists lectured, and ye^ were separat from. And so might all of them be
upon the forementioned grounds thus disowned and separat from, Although they had
keept a form of this, but I believe they are for signs and wonders among them
who keep the lecture, or own it at all. Next he tells us, of the ancient
reading of the Scripture in the Jewish Church, and of Moses and the prophets in
the Synagogues, Acts 13. 15, 27. and 15. 21. and likewise in the Christian
Church. But what then? who denies this, why, they have (he tells us) the
Scriptures publicly read in their Churches. But I trow the reading is the
better of expounding, and he might have found, that the Levites (Neh. 8. 8.)
read the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused the people
understand the reading; And he dare not say that the ancient public reading of
Scriptures among the Jews was by Gods appointment a dumb reading without
exposition. Why gave God prophets and teachers unto his Church if not for this
end? and faith comes mainly by hearing the Word preached. Why then grew his
reverend Fathers and their conforming Sons, so angry with this Churches
laudable practice of giving the sense together with the reading (comprobat by
that ancient Practice of the Jewish Church, which he pretends) since otherwise
the Text read ane 100. times is still like a kernel under a hard shell. Nay
but he says, if we separat upon this ground we would have separat from the
Church in all ages. Sure not from that Church where the law was expon'd and its
sense given, as well as read, beside that our non-union to our prelatick
Innovators, (or withdrawing too if he please) has this as an appendix with
other grounds, that Conformists in withholding our former lecture or expository
reading from the people, and substituting a bare reading in its place, discover
themselves to be teachers who are keeping close and not opening the seals of
Gods book, and are afraid that their hearers should learn too fast.

In the 3d place, he tells us a tedious story, anent the disuse of our first
authorized method of Lecturing, which was at first only to read one chapter in
the old testament and another of the New with brief explication of occuring
difficulties, but that thereafter we held with one chapter, then with a part of
one, and raised observations -- making it a short sermon, so that its all one
to separat for this, as to separat for shorter sermons, which are, caeteris
paribus, thought better then a long. Then he tells us further (to cloak this
their laziness) that variety of purposes are hardly retained, and procures a
wearying, and that one thing puts out another etc. But what fruitless talk is
all this? If our Churches appointment was of this nature at first to open up
difficulties upon the reading, did she therefore intend to cut off the exercise
of that gift anent practical observations, which is found in experience so
eminently edifying as himself acknowledges in the next page, and the method of
preaching abroad, to which method we are beholden for some excellent
commentaries upon the Scripture, which would probably have been by this time
Entire through the whole bible according to the design and mould projected by
the Reverend brethren and Ministers of this Church, If our Prelates lazy reading
tribe, had not invaded the pulpits of the Lords faithful laborers. Again,
suppose there was as to this method some deviation from the first appointment,
yet since our Church gave a tacit approbation and universally used it, his
censure is too critical and saucy; beside, to plead from the variation in the
practice to a total disuse, is dull reasoning; and whatever the lecture was at
first this is certain, that this universal practice and eminently edifying
piece of public duty, owned by our Church, was presently disused and
discharged by prelates, and its disuse became one of the badges of conformity,
and a part of their mark upon their creatures, and therefore eatenus in all
reason it ought to have its own weight with other grounds, as to disowning
them, in their present state and circumstances. The experience of all the true
seekers of God can disprove sufficiently what he adds, of a tedious nauseating
as the issue of variety of purposes; variety rather taking off, then begetting
tediousness whence the Scripture is composed for this end of such a sweet
variety of purposes and methods. His story of Pembo's defiring to hear one word
or sentence at once, and no more till after a long time, is calculat well to
patronize a reading or non-preaching Ministry; but the many scripture precepts
given to christians anent growth in Knowledge, and leaving the first
principles, and not to be always children in understanding, and likewise the
scripture precepts straightly charging and enjoining Ministers to be instant in
season and out of season preaching, exhorting with all long suffering and
doctrine, sufficiently discovers the ^diculous tendency of this story.

4. He tells us, that suppose it were a fault, every fault will not warrant
separation. We say not that every fault, nay nor this simply considered, will
warrant separation, but that this with many others presumptuously maintained
and avowed, will warrant a non-union unto a schismatic party of Innovators
destroying and overturning a well reformed Church, and rooting out a faithful
remnant of adherers thereto. As for the want of the circumcision and the
passover for sometime in the Jewish Church, which he next pleads as that which
did not cause a separation, not to stand upon the particular impediment of
circumcision while in the wilderness or an inquiry into what special lets
might have had an influence (or a sinful influence) upon the disuse of the
passover, yet Conformists case, who are but a schismatic unsound part of this
Church, rejecting an approved ordinance and duty, in compliance with and
subserviency unto a perjurious course of defection, is so far discrepant from
this, that any may see the disparity. As for that of 2 Kings 23. 22. That there
was not holden such a passover (as that of Josiah) from the days of the Judges
that judged Israel, nor in all the days of the Kings of Israel, nor of the
Kings of Judah. Its only spoken comparativly in respect of the spirituality and
s^lemnity of that passover, and does not suppose ane absolute disuse of this
ordinance through all that time. A learned Interpreter upon this passage does
paraphrase the verse thus, that there was no passover celebrat with so solemn
care, great preparation, and universal joy, the greater because of their
remembrance of their miserable times under Manasseh and Amon. -- And that from
the days of Samuel the last of the Judges, as its exexpressed 2 Chronicles. 35. 18.
None of the Kings had with such care prepared themselves, the Priests and
people to renew their Covenat with God as Josiah now did. And as he will not be
able to prove that out of the case of persecution, invasion, dispersion or
captivity, and the inevitable necessity flowing from these, there was a
warrantable disuse of these holy ordinances, so professors their not separating
from that Church even upon a sinful disuse; will never come home to his
purpose, as is already often cleared 5. He adds, that upon this ground we would
separat from all other Churches, and from our own Church before the year 1645.
And then he would please us again by telling us, that he could wish all sermons
were as Lectures, the chief points of a long text being propounded, which would
be more edifying, then when they rack the text and their brains (a native and
kindly character of his party, and their preaching) to seek matter from their
text to hold out the time. But we have often told him that its not this defect
only, or without the circumstances of our present case, that we plead as a
ground of disowning them. And if he account the Lecture-method of preaching the
more edifying, with what conscience have they deprived Gods people of this
exercise and method of preaching, upon my Lord Bishops orders? It seems his
ipse dixit is the first rule of edification with our Informer and his fellows,
a principle well suited to lawless and Lordly prelacy, which must have all
ordinances mancipated to its arbitrary commands. So that our Informer giving
the supreme Magistrate a papal power over Church Government, and solemn sacred
Oaths and vows, in the preceding Dialogue, and the Bishops a dominion over
Worship in this, puts pityful fetters upon Christ's glorious bride; and as in
this point and most of his reasonings, in begging the question, he but
skirmishes with his own shadow, so in thus wounding our Church, by his
dangerous laxe principles in his pretended healing, but truly hurtful and
trifling Dialogues, he shows himself to be a physician of no value.

CHAP. V.
The Informers answers and reasoning upon the point of Scandal and offense, in
reference to the owning of Conformists, considered. His dangerous principles
both as to civil and Ecclesiastic power in this point. His answer to the
Doubters argument for Presbyterian Ministers preaching in the manner
controverted, taken from the practice of Christ and his Apostles, examined. His
absurd principles ^nent the Magistrates coercive power over the exercise of the
Ministerial office.

Having discovered this man's unsoundness in the points above examined, wherein
we have seen how in opposing the Lords work, his faithful servants their
labors in promoting it, he has dashed against the Scripture and sound
divines, and stated himself in opposition to both. We shall next discover, some
more of his errors, which, are the issues of the former, and of the wicked
design for promoting whereof, they are presented. The first that offers it self
to be considered, is in the point of Scandal. From which we argue against the
owning of Confor^ists as is above expressed. And this grand doubt-resolver will
needs discuss it, but with what success we shall presently see.

His Doubter in the next place offers to him an argument against hearing
Conformists, [taken from the offense and stumbling of many godly, flowing from
this practice of hearing them, since they look upon it as a sin; and tells him
that the Apostle says we must not give offense nor lay a stumbling block
before others.] We have already proposed, and some way improven this argument
from the scandal of the weak in this case. To this he first answers, that when
we are forbidden to give offense, Its meant of not doing that which is of
itself sinful, whereby we grieve the godly, and lay a stumbling block in the
way of others by our evil example; but when we do our duty in obeying God, we
cannot give offense to any, and if they take offense Its their own sin and
weakness, but none is given. As here (he says) its their weakness to offend at
maintaining unity and peace, that this rather gives a good example, and to ly
by from hearing Conformists for fear of offense of the weak, is to omit duty
and harden them in sin. Ans. The Informer offering this reply from the sense of
that scripture generally hinted by his Doubter, seems at first view to restrict
the command of not giving offense, to that which is in it self sinful, wherein
it might easily be made appear that he contradicts sound Divines, scripture and
himself. Especially the passage to which the Doubter referrs being of a far
other sense and scope. But lest this censure should appear too Critical, and
upon consideration of his second answer, I shall not meddle with what he says
here in thesi, or this assertion in it self considered. But to the assumption
and application of this passage in his answer, I return to him this in short,
that he does but here still beg the question in supposing that the owning of
Curats is in this our case a duty and a maintaining of peace and order in the
Church, whereof we have made the contrary appear: and that maintaining the true
union and peace of this Church, is to own her true and faithful Ambassadors,
contending for her reformation, true order, and union against their course of
defection: and so this practice is both sinful in it self and scandalous to
others.

His 2d Answer to this premised argument of his Doubter is, That the Apostle
ordinarily when forbidding to give offense; speaks of the use of liberty in
things indifferent, that it must not be used to the offense of the weak
brother, lest contrary to his conscience he be emboldned to sin, 1 Cor. 8. 10.
Or be grieved because he thinks we sin in doing what we should not, Romans 14.
15. Ans. We shall not much stand upon this, only we here see that the
lawfulness of a thing in it self, will not (according to him) Justify it in
that case wherein, either the weak is emboldned to sin, grieved, or made more
weak and his plerophory hindered.

And that the sincere enquirer for Truth may be confirmed in this sound
persuasion, and guarded against what he after subjoyns, I shall here offer unto
him the sense and Judgment of an eminent Father, and Reformed divine upon this
point. Chrysostom upon Romans 14. Homily 25. Expones all the Apostles Arguments
to the same scope, of the unlawfullness of offending the weak in things
indifferent. Particularly upon verse 13. Si non salvare fratrem (says he)
culpam habet, id quod and Evangelici talenti de^ossor indicat: Quid non faciet
datum etiam scandalum? Sed inquies quod si suopte vitio scandalizatur infirmus?
propter hoc ipsum aequum fuerit, ut illum feras, Nam si fortis esset, tali cura
opus non haberet, nunc vero quia imbacillior est multa etiam curandi diligentia
opus habet, that is, if it be faulty not to save our brother, as the hider of
the talent makes it evident: What will not even the giving of Scandal do. But
you will say, what if the weak be scandalized by his own fault? Upon the same
very ground it is just that you bear with him. For if he were strong then he
would have no need, of such care, but because he is weak he stands in need of
much diligence for his cure. In the next homily, he has many things upon the
rest of the Apostles argument to the same purpose. Upon the 14. ver. I know
nothing is unclean of it self. He offers an objection to the Apostle for
clearing the words. Quid igitur non corrigis fratrem, ne putet aliquid immundum
esse? ^t quid non illum ab ista consuetudine omnibus viribus abducis Why do you
not with might and main withdraw your brother from that opinion and practice (a
thing that our Informer and his fellows make no bones of as to dissentients.)
To this he answers in the Apostles name. Ver^or inquit, ne moerore illum
afficiam unde and subdit: Verum si propter cibum frater tuus contristatur, non
jam secundum charitatem ambulas. Vides quo^ (...) familiarem interea sibi
faciat infirmum Auditorem ostendens tantam illius rationem halere se, ut ne
moestum reddat, etiam quae vehementer erant necessaria, praeciperere non
audeat, sed indulgentia illum ^agis ac dilectione attrahat? Neque enim postea
quam vanu^ exemerat metum, potenter illum tra^it aut cogit, sed sui ipsius
Dominum esse permittit, that is. I am afraid lest I make him sad, and hence he
subjoins, but if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not
charitably. See how tenderly he deals with the infirm hearer, showing that he
has so great a regard to him, that lest he make him sad he dare not command
these things that are most necessary, for he he does not draw and force him
after he has taken away the groundless fear, but permits him to be his own
Master. And upon the 1 Cor. 8. v. 20. He has things to the purpose. On verse
9. Non dixit quod licenti a vestraoffendiculum sit, neque certo asseveraverit
ne impudentiores faceret. Sed, inquit, videte: timore eos abducit, and ne
faciant prohibet: Et non dixit scientia vestra, quod majoris esset laudis,
neque perfectio vestra: Sed licentia quod suberbiae and stultitiae -- non dixit
fratribus sed infirmis sratribus, ut gravius eos reprehenderet quod
nequeinfirmis parcunt and maximefratribus. That the Apostle imputes folly and
pride unto them who offend the weak brethren. Upon the 10. verse -- the
conscience of him that is weak shall be emblodned to eat etc. He shows that the
offender of the weak cannot charge the guilt upon his weakness -- tu enim
imbecilliorem facis duo sunt quae te privant venia, and quod infirmus and quod
frater -- addatur and tertium maxim horrendum -- quod Christus neque mori
propter illum recusavit, tu autem neque ei indulgere pateris. That is, the
offender makes them yet weaker, that two things render such as offend them
inexcusable, the one that they are weak, the other that they are brethren, and
a third crime may be added, which is most horrid -- that thou ^fuses so much as
to spare those for whom Christ refused not even to dye.

Upon 12. verse. When ye so fin against the brethren and wound their weak
Conscience ye sin against Christ. He has these words, quid homine inhumanius
existimari potest, qui ^grotum verberat? Etenim omni plaga gravius scandalizare
est, nam saepenumero and mortem adfert. Et quomodo in Christum peccant? Uno
quidem modo, quod quae servorum sunt ipse pro se accipit. Altero autem, quod in
corpus ejus and membra faciunt qui percutiunt. Tertio quod opus ejus, quod
propriamorte absolvit, ii propria ambitione destruunt. What can be more i
nhumane then that man, Who beats one that is sick? for to scandalize is more
grievous then all strokes for it oftentimes brings death. And how sin they
against Christ? One way, because he takes to himself what concerns his
servants; another way, because they wound his body and members, Thirdly, in
that the work which he accomplished by his own death, they destroy by their own
ambition. Upon the last verse of the chapter, If eating of flesh make my
brother offend I will eat none while the World stands. He says, Hoc Magistri
optimi est officium, suo exemplo erudire quae dicit, Et non dicit sive just,
sive injuste: sed quomodocunque. Sed non dico, inquit, Idolothytum, quod and
propter aliam causam prohibetur: sed si quod licet and permittitur scandalizat,
etiam illis abstinebo, neque una aut altera die, sed tot^ vitae tempore. Non
enim manducabo, inquit* carnes in aeternum. Et non inquit, ne perdam fratrem:
Sed simpliciter, ut non scandalizem: That is, this is the duty of the most
excellent Master to instruct what he says by his own example. And he says not
I will not eat whether justly or injustly: But whatever way I will not. As also
he says not that he will not eat of the Idolothytwhich is forbidden for
another cause. But if that which is lawful and permitted give scandal, even
from these things I will abstain, and not for a day or two, but during my whole
life. For he says I will not eat flesh while the world stands. And he says
not lest I should destroy my brother: But simply lest I should offend him. And
a little afterward having shown, that what the Apostle speaks belongs unto us.
he says, dicere enim quid mihi curandum est, si ille scandalizatur, and ille
perit? Crudelitatis illius atque inhumanitatis est: Atque tunc quidem ex eorum,
qui scandalizabantur, infirmitate id contingebat. In nobis autem non itidem;
Talia namque peccata committimus, quae etiam fortes scandalizant: Nam cum
percutimus, cum rapimus cum trahimur cupiditate, and tanquam servis liberis
abutimur, nonne haec sufficientiasune ad scandalizandum? Neque mihi dixeris
illum calceorum sutorem esse, alterum Corearium Statuarium vero alium: Sed
considera fidelem illum esse and fratrem. Illorum namque sumus discipuli
Piscatorum, Publicanorum, tentoriorum Opificum: Christus einm in fabrili domo
educatus est, and fabri sponsam matrem habere non est dedignatus, and ab ipsis
incunabulis in praesepi ^acuit, neque ubi caput inclinaret, invenit: Et tantum
iteneris confecit ut fatigaretur and ab alijs victum accepit. That is, for to
say, what am I concerned if such a man be scandalized, and such a man perish?
is his inhumanity and cruelty: But some of those who then were scandalized,
were offended through weakness, But soit is not in us: for we commit such sins
which do even offend the strong. For when we strike, and offer violence to
them, and are drawn by our own lusts, and abuse free men as if they were
slaves, are not these sufficient to scandalize them? Say not to me, this man is
a Shoemaker, the other a Tanner, the other a statuemaker, but consider that he
is faithful, and a Brother. For we are the Disciples of those fishers,
Publicans, and tentmakers. For Christ was educat in a tradsmans house, and
disdained not that his mother was betrothed to a tradsman, and himself lay in a
manger for his cradle, neither found he where to lay his head: Was wearyed with
his journey, and received maintenance from others. In which passages, it is
evident that Chrysostom upon the great moral and Apostolic grounds, of the
weak their interest in Christ, his tenderness of them, his dying for them,
their spiritual hazard while their conscience is wounded, their liberty in
Christ, the cruelty and uncharitableness of offending them, demonstrates the
hainusness of, and vehemently inveighes against this sin, and clearly asserts
with the Apostle, that the lawfulness of the practice in it self, affords not
the least warrant for doing of that out of which seth, or whereby the weak
brother it made more weak.

Next, I shall offer the sense of an eminent Reformed divine upon this point.
Pareus upon this chapter does fully confirm our principles on this head. Let
the Informer read his analysis of the chapter, where he will find him digest
the Apostles reasons and arguments against the giving offense in matters
lawful, and learndly prosecutes them in his exposition, which he will find to
be such as do cut the sinnews of the new and dangerous principles in this
point, which the Prelatick formalists do maintain, citing Chrysostom. in some of the
passages mentioned. Which purpose he also prosecutes in his commentary upon
Romans 14. and 15. Chap. Upon the 7. verse anent the pollution of the weak
conscience, he says that this pollution is not so much to be imputed to
themselves, as unto those that did induce them to eat by their ill example.
Upon the 9. verse he shows that the lawfulness of their practice excuses not
abuse in this case, calling scandal, dictum vel factum quo alius deterior
redditur, citing Romans 14. 21. Upon the 10 verse. he shows that the danger and
guilt there pointed at, is the inducing of the weak to imitat the practice with
a fluctuating conscience. Upon the 11. He shows that the Apostle puts together
aggreging circumstances of this sin of giving offense in things lawful viz.
that we ought to edify and not destroy by our knowledge, next that the person
scandalized is our brother. 3. An infirm brother, whom to wrong must be extreme
malice, 4. Which is the greatest of all, that Christ has dyed for the infirm
brother. The same he resumes upon the 12, verse. and explains the sense of
Chrysostom. and Beza as to the wounding of the weak conscience. Upon the Apostles
conclusion verse. 13. He shows that he expresses a resolution of the same
nature and extent with that Romans 14, 21. viz. not to do that whereby our
brother stumbles, or is offended or is made weak. Adding, idem vult intelligi
de toto genere rerum mediarum and licitarum, potius in his se liberate sua
cessurum, quam ut fratrem offendat. Sic the sin tacit ingerit quae est
presentis loci doctrina praecipua: In casu scan dali etiam a rebus licitis
abstinendum esse: Quia tunc sunt illicitae and peccata, per accidens quidem
sednostra culpa, quando quod facere possumus ac debemus, (N. B.) offensionem
infirmorum non cavemus. That is, the same he will have to be understood of all
things lawful and indifferent, that in these we ought rather to cede from our
liberty then offend our brother. Thus he tacitly enforces that point which is
the chief Doctrine of this place. That in the case of scandal we must abstain
from things lawful, Because then they become sins and unlawful by accident,
yet by our fault when we guard not against the offense of the weak, which we
can and ought to do. In the close he says, that the Apostle will have us in
things lawful not simply to eye what is our right, but what charity and
edification do require,

But now let us come to the assumptian and application of our Informers
concession, to the present case and question, are there not many weak brethren
who may be embolded to sin, or (may we suppose) condemn me sinfully if I hear
Curats? Suppose the practice were lawful in it self, what will cure this
malady? Behold a Catholicon presently, We must know (says he) that if the
command of Authority interpose and enjoin the thing Indifferent, then its no
more in my liberty pro tunc. Because (forsooth) I am restricted by Authority,
which makes the thing necessary. Ans. 1. This man charges a great defect upon
the Apostle Paul who in all his discourses upon guarding against offense in
things indifferent, makes no mention of this new case and knack, anent making
the indifferent thing necessary, by the command of Rulers, and exeeming thus
the giving of offense from guilt? But all along he pleads by many arguments in
the places mentioned, that if the thing be indifferent, the case of offense
makes it unlawful. And all his arguments in these passages, which do press the
eshewing of offense are moral and constantly binding (and consequently admit no
such restriction as this) such as Christ's tenderness of the weak, their
redemption purchased by his blood, Christian liberty, the evil of my brothers
doubting, whatsoever is not of faith is sin etc. And he moves objections
against his doctrine, such as, I have knowledge; I have faith -- And shall I be
limited of my liberty, because anther is weak or wilful etc. Such like
objections he moves and answers, but of this exception and restriction anent a
command from Rulers altering the nature of the thing, and loosing all his
arguments in relation to offense, the Apostle mentions nothing.

2. This puts a blasphemous authority, upon the Magistrate; we know the terrible
interminations and threatenings thundered against giving offense, and
discoveries of the dreadful tendency thereof, woe to them by whom offense
comes, Again, better be cast into the sea then offend one of the little ones --
destroy not him, says Paul (with thy offensive carriage) for whom Christ dyed.
Now will the Magistrates command give me sufficient warrant and security in and
for a thing indifferent, to destroy my brother, and, will it list off Christ's
woe and make it lighter then a feather, which is more dreadful then to be cast
into the sea with a millstone tied about ones neck.

3. I would know if this Informer will deny that the Apostolic precepts in
relation to offense and scandal, pressed with important and great motives in
the premised Scriptures; are of ane universal and moral nature, and do reach
and oblige all that own the profession of Christianity in their several
relations and capacities. These precepts founded upon the everlasting and
constantly binding grounds and motives of union, charity and love to the
brethren (the great gospel command) edification, the communion of Saints, (the
very bonds and ligaments compacting and strengthening Christ's mystical body)
none can deny to be of an universal extent, and to be among the grand rules of
Christian practice limiting and directing our carriage in whatever relation we
stand, whether Ministers or people, Masters or servants, Parents or children
etc. And the superior being under the obligation of these great rules (unless
we will make God a respecter of persons) it necessarily follows that they do
direct and limit him in the exercise of his power, so that this being one
Regula Regulans as to all the Magistrate Laws; its must absurd to imagine that
his counter-practice and Laws can loose himself or others from this divine
superior obligation, unless we will deiesie him and make his Law and practice
the sovereign and supreme rule in every point as well as in this. Whence it
follows by necessary consequence that the practice which is offensive,
scandalous, and destructive to our brother, in its present circumstances, and
upon the constant unerring scripture grounds and rules, cannot be altered in
its present quality and state by men's commands crossing the divine Law, but
remains a sinful scandalous practice though a hundred Laws enjoin and
authorize it.

4. Was not Paul's Apostolic declarator that evry thing sold in the shambles
might be Lawfully eaten, as powerful to exeem that action of eating such
things from the compass of offense as the Magistrates Law and authority? Sure he
had at least as much, if not more authority in this point, then the Magistrate,
especially as this Informer expones authority afterward from Acts 15. 28. yet
that same practice, Lawful in it self, and by the Apostle declared to be so,
and accordingly enjoined and authorized by him, must not be used in this case
of the offense, even of the weak and ignorant, but the Apostle himself, though
thus declaring and, (may I say) authoring the lawness of the practice, declares
he will never use nor take it up in this case of offense. I beseech him, was
not the warrantabliness of this practice in it self by the Lords word,
declaring all things to be clean to the clean, and Paul's Apostolic declarator
in this place, as valide to render it, of indifferent, necessary to the users,
as the command of our civil Rulers in relation to this practice under debate,
and a little more, he having the mind of Christ, and being a Master builder of
the Churches. Yet the offending of the weak, ignorant yea or wilful, will in
his Judgment cut short this liberty, and render the practice sinful upon that
ground. But moreover the instance of the brazen serpent will here bite and
sting his cause and argument to death; for it was an eminent type of Christ,
and reserved (and sure our Informer will say warrantably) as a signal monument
of that rare typical cure of the people stung by the fiery serpents in the
wilderness, yet when the people were stumbled, and it became an occasion of
their sinning and committing Idolatry, good Hezekiah brake it, called it
Nehushtan, and is commended for it by the Spirit of God. Now in this man's
principles the interposing of authority for its preservation was sufficient to
keep it from being destroyed, though all Israel should have been never so much
stumbled, and ensnared to Idolatry by it, but the keeping of this monument God
would dispense with in this weighty case. Sure that which rendered the
preservation of it highly provoking, and Hezekiahs breaking of it commendable,
was its stumbling and ensnaring tendency and effects, whatever authority and
acts might have interposed formerly for its preservation. Will the Informer say
that Gideons ephod (which in his intention was only designd for a monument of
that victory over the Midianites) was lawfully preserved when it became thus
ensnaring as the brazen Serpent, or that the preservation of it was lawfully
authorized in this case? surely he will not for shame assert this, and so the
case is here; and he may see in these instances (if his eye be single) that a
practice though in it self lawful or indifferent, yet, when become offensive
in its present circumstance and inductive to sin, cannot in that case be
rendered warrantable by any Laws of the Magistrate.

Finally, our Informer in this as^ertion cosseth found Divines and Casuists as
well as the Scripures, yea and fights with himself. For we have heard from
Chrysostom and Pareus (who are herein accorded by all our writers) that the
action which is in its preseut state and circumstance, scandalous, is, while
clothed with these Circumstances, necessarily evil, and upon many weighty
grounds severely prohibited by the spirit of God in the Scriptures forecited.
So that no power and Laws men of can remove these scripture limits and
marchstones. Next, the great ground and rule anent a scandalous action, and
upon which the scripture motives against it are grounded, is the state,
condition and freedom of the conscience, lest it be hindered in its plerophory,
emboldned to judge without ground; and the person hindered to act in faith, or
induced to act against it etc. So that to assert that the Magistrates command
can invalidat these grounds and principles, and render the action not sanda^ous
which is such otherwise, is to give him a Dominion over the conscience, and
subject it immediately and absolutely to his Laws, which is a principle disowned
by all Protestants. Moreover the Informer himself defines the offense of the
weak brother in things indifferent, an emboldning him to sin contrary to his
conscience, or to judge that we sin when we sin not, citing 1 Cor. 8. Romans 14.
Now if the action be upon this ground and principle necessarily sinful in its
present circumstances, how (I pray) can the Magistrates command render it not
only Lawful; but necessary, as he is bold to assert. Can the Magistrate by his
Law embolden a man's conscience to sin, and yet neither the Magistrate sin
himself, nor the man sin in obeying him? Amesius a better Casuist then he will
tell him (de Consc. lib. 5. cap. 11. Quest. 6. R. 6.) that nulla authoritas
humana, vel tollere potest scandali rationem, ab eo quod alias esset scandalum,
vel peccati rationem a scandalo dato. That is, no humane authority can take
away the nature of scandal from that which otherwise were a scandal, or the
nature and cause of sin from scandal given. And his ground is very
considerable, which does confirm what I have now said. Nullus enim homo (says
he) potest vel charitati and conscientiis nostris imperare. vel periculum
scandali dati praestare. That is, for no man can put imperious commands either
upon charity or our consciences, or exeem from the hazard of scandal given.

But now to fortify this raw and ignorant assertion as to scandal, our Informer
brings Act. 15. 28. -- these necessary things -- from which words of the
councils sentence, he draws ane argument thus, that though of themselves they
were not necessary, but sometimes indifferent, yet by the Authority of the
council they were made necessary for the good of the Church, so [he sayes]
obedience to authority preponderats the not giving offense, as the greater duty
of the two, as divines and Casuists show, and in this case the man who thus
obeyes gives no offense, but does duty, and if any take it, its causeless on
his part, and occasioned through the brothers weakness, so that its scandalum
acceptum non datum, groundlesly taken but not given, and when the Apostle
forbids to use, our liberty to the offense of the weak, he speaks to those who
were not determined by Authority. Ans. What poor ignorant and incoherent
reasoning is this, 1. Its a strange sottish, or rather popish Assertion, that
the necessary things Acts. 15. 28. were made so by the councils authority: For
the text is most express, that the Apostles enjoined this upon weighty
scripturegrounds, and what seemed good to the holy ghost (speaking in the word)
as well as to them, so that the holy ghosts grounds and commands touching the
maintaining of love, and union in the Church, and the great rule of
edification, and not stumbling the weak Jews, were the great and standing
Scripture principles upon which this decree was grounded.

Now to show how our Informer takes the papists here by the hand in this
gloss, let us hear Calvine upon the place -- [praeter haec necessaria] Hujus
vocis praetextu superbe triumphant Papistae, quasi hominibus liceat far leges
quae necessitatem conscientiis imponant -- quia quod deccrnunt Apostoli
necessario servandum esse pronuntiant -- i. e. the Papists triumph proudly upon
pretext of ^his this place, as if men might make Laws imposing a necessity upon
Consciences because what the Apostles decree, they affirm, must be necessarly
kept. -- Then he adds, atqui expedita etc. But the Answer is easy to such a
foolish cavil (so he censures our New Casuist and his fellows in this point)
for this necessity was no longer vigent then there was hazard of dissolving
union, so to speak properly it was an accidental or extrinsick necessity, which
had place not in the thing it self, but in guarding of offense -- which [saith
he) is evident in the speedy laying aside of this decree. Then he tells us,
that when the contention ceased -- Paul shows that nothing is unclean, and
again establishes this liberty Romans 14: 14. And commands to eat freely what
ever is sold. Adding, that the papists in vain do snatch an occasion to bind
consciences from this word and to conclude the Churches power to statute any
thing beside the word of God. Telling us further, that from the word of God the
Council drew this ground of exercising charity in matters indifferent. Then
(says he) in summa, the sum is, if charity be the bond of perfection, and the
end of the Law, if Gods command be that the faithful study mutual unity and
concord, and that every one please his nighbour to edification, none is so rude
who may not perceive, that what the Apostles here commanded is containd in the
word of God. -- And at the close he tells us, Apostol^s ex verbi Dei sinibus
minime egredi. -- That the Apostles would not step beyond the limits of the
word of God.

But 2. This man's Babylonish tongue still wounds himself as well as the truth,
for 1. he acknowlegeth that what the Apostles here decreed, was for the Good of
the Church; which (if he understand any thing) he must needs take it according
to the grounds laid down in this disquisition, specially that which the Apostle
James proposes immediately before his and the rest of ths Apostlee decision
verse. 21. viz. that Moses had in every city, them that teach him, being read
every Sabath day. So that it was needful at that time upon the grounds of
charity, union, and aedification, to beat with the weak Jews in abstaining from
these things discharged by Gods Law, till the ceremonies were honorably
buried. Hence it follows clearly that this abstinence was made necessary upon
these weighty grounds at this time, and not by the authority of the council
only. Neither was the matter enjoynd, of a thing indifferent, made necessary,
by their determination, but upon these grounds, and for the great end of the
Churches good, which he mentions, this abstinence was at this time, and in this
case necessary; And by the Apostles declared to be so upon divine warrant for
what else will he make of that expression. It seemed good to the Holy ghost.
Again, Paul and the other Apostles had no power but to edification, nor any
dominion over the faith of Gods people, and so acted nothing here pro arbitrio
or imperio. So that their sentence, was only a declarator of Gods mindeanent
that which was antecedaneously to their decree hic and nnnc a necessary duty,
although we deny not that the Apostles decision was to have its own weight in
determining the Churches obedience. 2. He brings this passage to prove that
obedience to authority will preponderat the not giving of offense. But so it is
that the great ground of the Apostles decicision here is the guarding against
the offense of the weak Jews, and obedience to this sentence was in not giving
offense, and upon this very ground Christians were to abstain from these meats,
whereas he foolishly distinguishes in this point betwixt obedience to
authority, and not giving offense, as distinct duties, and makes the first to
overrule the second, in plain contradiction to the text, which makes the not
giving offense, to be the great duty, and the foundation of this obedience.

3. This charge will be the more conspicuos, and the Informers inconsistent
prevarications, in this point, if we consider these things in the point of
offense: 1. That every offense through weakness is not sinless upon the
offenders part. The Inform^r himself does (with the Apostle) assert this, who
in the very preceding page from 1 Cor. 8: 10. and Romans 14. tells us, that the
Apostle will not have that which (...) indifferent^ or lawful in it self, used
to the offense of the weak, or imboldening of their conscience to Sin. (...)
That upon this ground it follows that, the Scandal^ acceptum, or offense taken,
as contra distinguish^d by our divines from Scandalum datum, or offen^e given,
is badly and to narrowly described from ^e groundless taking thereof, as if
upon this account it were faultless upon the offenders part, it being certain,
that neither the lawfullness of the thing out of which offense arises, the good
intention of the doer, nor men's commands, nor the weakness, yea or wi^kkedness
of the takers of offense, will free the giver thereof from guilt, unless the
action be in its present state and circumstances a necessary duty: for thus the
distinction could have no place, and there were no Scandalum datum at all there
being no ground to take offense, upon the takers part, and taking this phrase
in the Scripture acceptance as there can be no reason of a sinful action
properly. Nay though the effect should not follow, the giver is still guilty,
as Peter was in giveing offense to our Lord, though that action could produce
no sinful effect in him, for he said to him thou art ane offense unto me. So
that it is beyond debate with all sound divines and casuists, that any dictum
or sactum, action or word, upon which the formentioned effects may follow, if
it be not hic and nunc necessary, is a scandalum datum. 3. That accordingly all
sound divines treating on this subject, in describeing a passi^e scandal in
opposition to that which is given, do not draw their measures or description
merely from the weakness or othere bade disposition of the taker of offense,
but from the state and condition of the action it self, out of which offense
arises, which if not necessary in its present ^tate and circumstances, they
hold the scandal to be is well active as passive; Thus Mr Gilespie Engl* ^op:
cerem. Thus Ames: de Consc: lib. 5. cap, 1. (...), quest 3, Resp. 1, 2. tells
us, that, in omni scandalo ^ecesse est ut sit aliquod peccatum, in every
scandal of ne^essity there is some guilt, because it has a ten^encie to the
spiritual hurt and detrime^ of our bour. And describing passive scandal, which
is without sin upon the givers part, he says that this falls out, cum factum
unius, est alteri occasio peccandi, praeter intentionem facientis, and
conditionem facti, that is when the fact of one is the occasion of another
sinning, beside the intention of the doer, and the condition of the deed it
self. He draws not his description from the intention of the doer only, but
from the condition of the deed it self, which if tending to the spiritual hurt
of our neighbor, is still an active scandal, and no authority of men can alter
its nature or remove its guilt, as we heard him before assert. Mr Durham on
scandal, part. 1, chap 1. describes scandal, that is taken only or passive
offense, that it is such when no occasion is given, but when a man does that
which is not only lawful, but necessary, exemplifieing this by the Pharisees
carping at Christ's actions Matthew. 15: 12. and by that of Prove. 4. 19. where the
wicked are said to stumble at they know not what. Thus clearly asserting that
the lawfulness of the practice, will not wholly lay the guilt on him that takes
offense, unless it be also necessary. 4. The Informer cannot deny, that this
necessity of the action, must be evinced from clear Scripture commands and
cannot be rationally inferred either from the assertion of the practiser, or
the commands of the Magistrate simply, or any supposed Ecclesiastic canon,
since this would evert the Apostles reasoning on this head. So that he is
obleidged to evince the necessity of this practice controverted from other
grounds then he has mentioned, or this charge stands good against him,
esspecially since (as we have said) the Apostles injunction which he mentions
as to the free use of meats, was a greater authoritative determination; then
any which he now alleges to render the practice necessary. And if a practice
lawful in it self, and corroborated by ane Apostolic precept enjoining it,
could not be lawful in the case of offense, far less can the constitutions
he mentions make this practice lawful in such a case. So that our Argument, a
Scandalo, stands good against him upon this point, in answer to which he has
brought nothing but what is contrary to Scripture, casuists, yea and himself.

The charge which he after exhibites against us, of erecting separat meetings
in the houses and fields -- and of our being Schismatics if ever the Christian
Church had any, we let pass among the rest of this man's petulant assertions,
the grounds whereof we have examined and confuted. The people of God in
obedience to Christ's faithful Ambassadors (by Prelates perjurious violence
thrust from their watchtowers) assembling to hear the great Shepherds voice,
erect no seperat meetings, but keep the assemblies of this Church driven by
them to a wilderness, whereof (if the Lord open not his and the rest of his
tribe their eyes) they will bear the sin and punishment for ever.

The Doubter object next, [Christs preaching in private houses and fields, and
peoples hearing therein, inferring that so likewise may we.] This argument our
Informer (according to his usual candor) disguises, we say not that in a settled
peaceable state of the Church, Ministers may preach and people hear in this
manner, but upon supposal of this Churches disturbed persecute condition by a
party of prevailing backsliders, Ministers preaching and peoples hearing, is
warrantable upon the formentioned grounds; both Ministers (upon whom our
Prelates hands have been very heavy of a long time, yea (I may say) their little
finger thicker then their predecessors loins,) sters and people being in this
broken destroyed state of our Church chased, harassed, and denied all ordinary
places appointed for divine worship, nay scarce any place of residence in their
native land free from the fulmina and thunderbolts of Prelates mad rage. But
what says he to this argument, he tells us 1. That tho Christ preached thus,
yet it was not to separat from the Jewish Church, nor did he disowne the
hearing of their teachers, but allowed to hear Scribes and Pharisees with a
(proviso) to beware of their leaven -- that he sent those who were miraculously
heald to the Priests, and did not bid disowne them. Ans. 1. Whatever be
concluded as to Christ's disowning, or seperating the people from the teachers
of the Church of the Jews at that time (wherein the Informer has offered
nothing which will amount to a demonstration of what he affirms, and his
assertion tho granted will not fortify the conclusion he aims at) yet this is
certain and undeniable, (and in so far his Doubters parallel argument stands
inviolable against him) viz. that our blessed Lord preached after this manner
which he condemns. Since he condemns in universum and simply Presbyterian
Ministers preaching, and peoples hearing them in this manner, abstracting from
the disowning of Curats and their Ministry, so that this answer meets not the
objection as levelled against his principles. And he cannot deny but that in so
far as Christ and his Apostles were owned, their ordinary Jewish teachers were
separat from and disowned, but he condemns all owning of Presbyterian
Ministers, and withdrawing from Curats, as ingraind Schism and sinful
separation. This answer is the more forcible, if it be considered that our Lord
had liberty of their Synagogues to preach in, yet he frequently left them, and
preached in private houses and in the fields, and therefore Presbyterian
Ministers may use this liberty, whom (in a piece of cruelty beyond that of the
Scribes and Pharisees to Christ) they have banished from pulpits. 2. As for our
Lords not putting people to separat from that Church or the teachers thereof,
we have already shown how far it is from his purpose, and what a wide
consequenceit is, from a non-separation from the Jewish Church, and teachers
tho corrupt, (while that legal dispensation stood, which was shortly to be
removed, and the Gospel Ministry erected in its place) and from our Lords
tollerance thereof as Gods ancient Ministry, though now corrupt, to which he
was to put an honorable close, to conclude that a people are to disowne a
faithful Gospel Ministry and Church, in compliance with a number of
destroying Innovators ejecting them, and razing a sworn Reformation, which all
that Church are bound to defend. This is such a palpable inconsequence, as any
may upon first view discover it. 3. There was (beside what is said) this reason
in special, wherefore our Lord would not have the Jewish Ministry at first
universally left, because he came as a Minister of the circumcision to confirm
the promises made to the fathers; he was to come to the temple as the Kings Son
and Lord of all the Prophets who went before him, the Law being to go forth
from Zion, and the word from Jerusalem, Jesus came first to his own. Therefore
the Jewish Ministry and teaching, was to stand for a time to make this
apparent, and as Christ's great witness for his authority, and the Doctrine of
the gospel, either for their conviction or conversion; hence he appeald unto
the Scriptures which they heard daily read, and preached, Search the Scriptures
for they testify of me. And when he enjoynd the healed leper to go and show
himself to the Priest, it was to offer the Sacrifice which Moses commanded for
a testimony unto them. So that to make the substituting of the Gospel to the
legal dispensation and ordinances apparent, and its Ministry to the Jewish
Ministry and Priesthood, to which Christ's death and resurrection only was to
put a final period, it was necessary it should be owned in some measure. And
Christ could not wholly disowne it without stopping a great part of his
mediatory fulfilling of all righteousness, for he was as head of the
circumcised people, and as of the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, to
obey the Judicial and ceremonial Law, and therefore he duly attended the
passover and all the solemn feasts, which could not subsist in their exercise,
without the standing of that old Ministry; Now how far this is from our
Question, and inferring the owning of Curats in our case, is obvious to the
meanest capacity. What he says of hearing the Scribes and Pharisees, is
already answered. But now this Informer will offer some special reasons of
Christs-preaching after this manner, to cut short our argument here; the first
is, Because he was to bring in the Doctrine of the gospel, and preach himself
the true Mes^ah, which was needful to be done, and because of the opposition
of his doctrine by the Jewish teachers. Ans. 1. Although he was to bring in the
doctrine of the Gospel into the world, yet as he was sent first and immediately
to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and to exercise his Ministry toward
them mainly (upon which ground at his first sending forth the Disciples, he
commanded them to go to these lost sheep, not in the way of the gentiles) so he
had the synagogues and Temple to preach in, and frequently did so; and yet
notwithstanding went to the fields with great multitudes, and to other places
then these appointed for their ordinary and public Worship; and therefore
Presbyterian Ministers may do the like, who are denied our Conformists
Synagogues or ordinary places of Worship, they being upon important grounds
obliged (as our blessed Lord was) to officiat and bestirre themselves in the
exercise of their Ministry. And therefore. 2. Since he reasons from the
necessity of the Work which Christ was about, and the opposition which he met
with therein from his enemies, these samegrounds pleads strongly for
Presbyterian Ministers officiating in the manner contraverted, because the
preaching of the gospel by Christ's faithful Ambassadors, was never more
necessary, and never met with greater opposition from its enemies; and
therefore upon his own grounds it follows, that Ministers ought to embrace all
occasions of preaching and in any place where they can have access. Sure he
dare not restrict the necessity of the work, and the persecution, from which he
infers the Lawfulness of preaching after that manner, to that particular
necessity and persecution attending the first planting of the gospel, or affirm
that these grounds may never again recur for legitimating of this practice,
since thus he would condemn ou^ first Reformers.

Come we to the 2d Reason which is this, Christ was head of his whole Church,
and was not to be limit in the manner of his. Ministry as ordinary teachers,
but might preach where and when he pleased, since all belonged to his Ministry,
and that none will say that he is pastor of the whole Church, but the Pope, nor
can any mere Man do what Christ did in every thing. But our meetings (he says)
are in despite of the Law, and we add disobedience to our schism. Ans. 1. We
shall easily acknowledge that all Christ's actions are not imitable, such as
those of divine power, as working of Miracles, and the actions of divine
prerogative, as the taking of the ass without the owners liberty, the actings
of his special Mediatory prerogative, such as the enditing of the scriptures,
giving of his spirit, laying down his life, instituting Church officers, Col.
3. 16. Joh. 10. 15. Mat. 28. 18, 19. These are not imitable, nor yet such
actions as were merely occasional, depending upon circumstances of time and
place, as the unleavened bread, the time, and such like circumstances of his
supper. But we say there are actions imitable, as 1. in general Christ's
exercise of graces, which have constant and moral grounds, and are commended to
Christians for their imitation, every christians life (as such) ought to be an
imitation of him the precious mirror of grace, Mat. 11. 29. Learn of me for I
am meek. etc. Ephesians. 5. 2. Walk in love as Christ also has loved us. Joh. 13.
15. I have given you an example that ye should do as I have done. The
christian must walk as he walked. 1. Joh. 2. 6. 2. In particular, Actions on
Moral grounds, flowing from the relations wherein Christ stood, do oblige, and
are examplary unto, those that are under such relations, viz. Christ's
subjection and obedience to his parents, and paying tribute to caesar, do
exemplify children and subjects their duty as in that capacity; so his
Ministerial acts and faithful diligence therein, do exemplify Ministers duty.
Now the question is, as to this manner of Christ's preaching in this case, that
is, not in the ordinary and authorized assemblies of that Church but in the
fields, and in houses, whether the grounds of it will not sometimes recur, and
oblige ordinary Ministers? for its ratio exempli we are to look unto, rather
then the mere circumstances of the Individual act, as Chamier tells us, Tom. 3.
lib. 17. de Jejunijs. And for evincing this in our case our Informers own
answer is sufficient, if we shall but suppose (which neither our Informer nor
any of his fellows have ever been able to disprove) that Presbyterian Ministers
are under a relation to this Church as her true Pastors, and under the
obligation of our Lords commands to officiat accordingly. His grounds are the
necessity of the work and the bitter persecution of Christ's enemies; both which
grounds are still vigent in relation to Presbyterian Ministers as is said.

For what he adds of Christ's acting this as head of his Church, and not limit
in the exercise of his Ministry, as ordinary Ministers, none of which is an
universal postor. It is very insignificant here. For 1. every piece of Christ's
Ministry, his very teaching, and teaching in the temple, was as messenger of
the Covenant, who was to come unto that temple, and in the capacity of head of
his Church, yet are examplary for Ministers duties according to their measure.
2. He dare not say, that our Lords preaching after the manner instanced in the
objection of his Doubter, or his preaching while fleeing from persecutors, was
merely founded upon this ground, and did flow from no other cause and principle
but this viz. that he was not limited in the way and exercise of his Ministry,
for he has already assigned other Reasons of this, viz. the necessity of the
work, and his persecution simply considered, so that if he should assert this,
his 2. answer would contradict his first: and besides, he will not deny, but
that such as were not heads of the Church, and who were in an ordinary
peaceful state thereof, limited in the exercise of their Ministry, did preach
after this manner, for the officers of the Church of Jerusalem Acts. 8. in that
scattering and persecution, went every where preaching the gospel. So did our
first Reformers (not to stand upon that moral precept given to the Apostles,
who were not heads of the Church, viz. when they persecut you in one city flee
to another) and the Informer will not say that they were not to carry the
gospel-message with them in this flight Now that which those who were not heads
of the Church, but Ministers, yea and ordinary Ministers have done the parallel
of and warrantably, surely that Christ did not upon any extraordinary ground
now expired: But such is this way of preaching, Ergo etc* In a word as its
easily granted that ordinary Ministers are fixed and limit to their charges in a
settled state of the Church, so he dare not deny, that a Churches disturbed
persecute condition will warrant their unfixt officiating upon the grounds
already given; and he should know that others then the Pope were universal
pastors, and even in actu exercito, of the whole Church, viz. the Apostles as
himself acknowledged, nor can he deny that ordinary Ministers are in actu promo
related to the whole Church, as her Ministers given to her by Christ, and set
in her. As for what he adds of our meetings, that they are against the Law, he
knows that all the Jews appointed that any who owned Christ, should be
excommunicat. From the violence and persecution of which Law, himself infers
our Lords, officiating in the manner contraverted, and he can easily make the
application to our case, and answer himself.

The Doubter thinks it hard [to be hindered by the Law from hearing the word of
God and other parts of worship, or that Ministers be hindered to preach, i^
being better to obey God then men.] He answers 1. that the Law allows and
commands us to hear the word preach^ in our own congregations in purity, and
defends it, which is a great mercy, and that its better to worship God purely
with the Laws allowance then in a way contrary to it. Ans. 1. Granting that the
Law did allow some to preach faithfully what says this for their robbing so
many thousands of the Lords people, of the Ministry of some hundreds of
faithful Ministers? will a piece of the Rulers duty in one point excuse their
sin in twenty others, and loose the people from their obligation to duty
toward Christ's Ambassadors? This is new divinity. 2. The law allows none to
preach (in the manner he pleads for) but with a blot^ of perjury in taking on
the Prelates mark, and complying with a perjurious course of defection, and
allows none to deliver their message faithfully in relation to either the sins
or duties of the time, which is far from allowing to preach in purity, and in
this case we must rather adhere to Christ's faithful shepherds upon his
command, tho cross to men's Law, then follow blind unfaithful guides in
obedience thereunto, and this upon that same ground of Acts 4. 19. which he
mentions.

But he says, that answer of the Apostles will no way quadrat with our case,
why so? 1. Because the Apostles had an immediate extraordinary call from Christ
to preach in his name, and so were not to be discharged by any power on earth.
Ans. 1. That the Apostles answer suites our case, will be apparent when its
considered, that our answer and Apology which we offer to our adversaries, who
do now accuse and persecute us upon this ground, is one with theirs, their
grounds in their answer, compared with the context, are [that they are Christ's
Ministers and witnesses, employed about the great gospel message, clothed with
his authority, and under the obligation of Christ's commands lying upon them.]
Now will not this quadrat with our case as to the substance of this answer,
dare he say, that the Magistrates Laws can exauctorat a Minister of the gospel,
or take away that ministerial authority which he received from Christ, might
not thus the ministry be put out of the world; Dare he deny that he is a
minister still notwithstanding of the Laws restraint, and standing under a
ministerial Relation to the Church, as the Apostles were, and under commands
and obligations consequently in order to the exercise of the ministry? can the
Rulers mere prohibition loose either ministers their relation pastoral, or the
obligations flowing therefrom?

2. Although the call of the Apostles was immediate and extraordinary, yet this
will not prove that their answer will not suite the ordinary and mediat call in
such a case as theirs, when a minister is under a legal prohibition to preach:
for first, we do not find that the Apostles did plead their extraordinary or
immediate call mainly or only, if at all in this case, but their ministerial
gospel call and message quatalis, the authority of the one, and the weight and
importance of the other, in relation to all Ministers, are constant moral
grounds bearing the conclusion of the same duty and apology as to them: since
the substance of this Apostolic apology lies in this, that they were Christ's
Ministers, clothed with his commission to preach the gospel, which any
faithful Minister may plead in such a case. 2. Tho their call was immediate and
extraordinary, upon which ground they were singularly out of the reach of the
Rulers restraint as to their ministry, yet they were so likewise as Christ's
messengers and ministers simply in a general sense, for majus (...) minus etc.
3. As the Apostles had their power immediately from Christ and not from the
Rulers, which is the great ground why they could not be Lawfully prohibit to
preach, and would not submit their ministerial authority, its acts and
exercise, to the Rulers disposal, especially the gospel-message being of so
great importance, so there is derived from them a ministerial authority in the
Church, independent in its nature and exercise upon the magistrate, as theirs
was, tho the Apostles (as I said) had singular prerogatives beyond ordinary
ministers, and in that respect were singularly beyond the reach of their
restaint. Now this authority was exercised by the Church renitente Magistratu
for several generations, upon the same ground of this independent spiritual
power and the weight of the gospel-message which the Apostles did here plead;

The Informer answers aly, that this prohibition tended to the absolute
supressing of the gospel, and there was then no other way for propagating it
through the world, but by their preaching, but now tho some be silenced, others
are allowed to preach. Ans. 1. This piece of the apology for not obeying the
Rulers mandat, is of his bold putting in, but nothing of it is in the text,
viz. that there were no others to preach the gospel but they. Their Apology as
I said is drawn from their authority, and message simply. 2 I ask him, could
any one of the Apostles have submitted to this prohibition, upon an insinuation
or assurance that the Magistrate would not hinder others to promote the gospel?
if they could not, then he must grant that this anwer is naught, that the
Apostles refused, because the prohibition tended to suppress the gospel: For
the gospel was preached and propagat, though one of them was a little after
taken often the stage, if he say that any one, or more of the Apostles would have
submitted to the prohibition upon their terms, then. 1. He contradicts his first
answer, that their extraordinary immediate call could not be discharged by any
power on earth, and 2. He charges them with unfaithfulness to Christ in laying
up his talents, and laying by his work upon men's command not to preach. Sure
Christ's command and commission tied all his Apostles conjunctly and severally:
Paul said, too to [me] if [I] preach not the gospel, and one Apostles
diligence, could not loose the obligation of the other, and excuse his
negligence. 3. We have proved that there is no warrant from God for Rulers
their immediate arbitrary discharging Christ's Ambassadors to officiat, and
consequently faithful Ministers are not obliged to obey. And upon the same
ground that one apostle could not warrantably suffer the Magistrate to impose a
silence upon him, be cause others were permitted to preach, Its unlawful for
ordinary Ministers to be silent, because others are preaching, and much more
when those who are preaching are declaring themselves unfaithful, and
destroying but not feeding. So that our Informer does but mock God, if not
blaspheme, while blessing him, that authority, is opposite to our disorders, not
to the gospel.

The Doubter next asks him [if the King and Laws can silence a Minister that he
shall not preach the gospel.] He should have added, by his own proper elicite
acts as King or Magistrate, or formally and immediately. But this man must still
shrewd himself in the mist and clouds of deceitful generals, and mould our
arguments in his own disguise, that his simple evasions may appear answers.
Well, what says he to this doubt* His answer is, (I ommit his insignificant
reflection) that Solomon thrust out Abiathar from the priesthood 1 Kings. 2.
27. which was a restraining his priestly power as to its actual exercise, to
which he was bound to submit, so a King may discharge a Minister to exercise
his Ministry within his dominions, which he must not counteract, suppose he
think the King and law wrongs him, especially, when others do preach tho he be
silent. Ans. This reason and instance is a baculo ad angulum, Solomon punished
Abiathar civilly for a capital treasonable crime, which deserved death, telling
him (as the text says) that he was a man of death, or one who deserved capital
punishment, according to the nature of the hebrew phrase, which sentence of
death Solomon (upon the grounds mentioned in that passage) did change into a
sentence of banishment, and by this civil punishment did consequenter put him
from the exercise of his priestly office, which he could not in that case
perform: Ergo he formally and immediately deposed him, and the civil magistrate
may so immediately and formally depose ministers, this is a consequence utterly
unknown to all rules of Logic, or solid divinity. The Instance indeed proves,
that the Magistrate may civilly punish a Minister for crimes, and consequently
cut him off from the exercise of his Ministry, but that he can simply and
immediately, or by proper elicit acts, discharge the exercise thereof, can no
more be proved from this instance, then that the man who gives bad physic, or
hurts the Ministers person, and eatenus stops the exercise of his Ministerial
office, has an authority to inhibit the exercise of his Ministry.

As for our Informers restriction, anent the Kings inhibiting a minister to
preach in his dominions, it is a very poor and transparent sophistical cheat,
for no man ever said that he can exercise any magistratical power upon those
who are without his dominions, whether ministers or others. And thus should his
dominion in Gods providence be streached over all the christian Church, he has
authority (by this courtdivinity) to silence the gospel sound in a clap, and
extinguish a gospel ministry when he pleases, and then this man would do well
to ponder how this consists with the nature and design of Christ's great
commission to his first ambassadors (his Apostles) in reference to the gospel
message, and unto all ministers until the end of the world, and his promised
presence accordingly; as also whether the Apostles, and ordinary ministers
afterward, did warrantably counteract the Magistrates opposition in this
exercise of their Ministry; and what our lords answer would have been, in case
such an objection anent Princes discharging the exercise of their Ministry, had
been offered by the Apostles at the first giving out and sealing of their great
patent and commission to preach to all nations, and whether our Lord would have
told them that their commission did not bind in that case. The Informer is
afraid to set his foot on such slippery ground as to assert that the King can
depose absolutely, but yet averres that he can restrain the actual exercise of
the Ministerial office, and surely if this be granted (in that extent he pleads
for) it will abundantly secure self-seeking politicians from the trouble of a
faithful Gospel Ministry, and they will be content to part with this nicety of
a simple deposing. But if, in the Judgment even of some of his Rabbis, whom I
could name, the most formal ecclesiastical censures do amount to no more then
this legal restraint of the exercise, he does but pityfully resarciat his
lapse, and mend the matter by this whimsey.

As for what he adds of [Beza's letter to the non-Conformists in England, not
to exercise their Ministry against the Queens authority and the Bishops.] The
often mentioned difference betwixt the then State of that Church, and our
present condition, does quite invalidat his proof, since certainly in some
cases the counteracting the Princes command as to the exercise of the Ministry,
requires a very cautious consideration, but had our case in its present
circumstances and latitude as above delineat been propounded to Beza [touching
the overturning the Reformation of this Church (so fully settled by civil and
Ecclesiastic Authority, and confirmed by Oaths of all ranks) by Prelates and
their adherents ejecting all faithful Ministers, who will not be subject to
that course.] Sure Beza who (as we heard) requested John Knox never to let
Prelacy be introduced into Scotland, and all faithful Ministers to contend
against it after it was cast out, would have judged Minsters obliged in this
our case, especially after Prelacy is thus vowed against, to keep their
possessions, to preach the gospel, and testify against such a wicked course, as
well as it was the duty of our first Reformers to preach against the will of
the then Bishops and persecuters; Besides, its the Doctrine and principles of
our Church, that neither the Magistrate nor Prelates censures can loose a
Minister from the exercise of his Ministry; which is above cleared. So that our
Informers great Diana, which he is all this time declaiming for, viz. The
imposing of an absolute silence upon the true Pastors of this Church, that
Conformists only may be heard and ownd, does so stoop and bow down, that the
underpropings of his slender artifice, and poor mean pleadings, cannot prevent
its precipice and ruin.

CHAP. VI.
The nature of Presbyterian Ministers relation to this Church and their call to
officiat therein, vindicate from the Informers simple cavills. Mr Baxters rules
for the cure of Church-divisions impertinently alleged by him. The Testimonies
of the jus divinum Minist. Anglic. And of Mr Rutherfoord in his Due right of
Presbytery anent unwarrantable separation, insufficient to bear the weight of
his conclusion.

THE appearances of our Lords Ambassadors in his message and for promoting his
Interest, have been much opposed by Satan in very various Methods and versatile
disguises in all ages, but that Presbyterian Ministers of a pure Apostolic
Presbyterian Church should be opposed in the exercise of their holy function
and Ministry received from Christ, and this exercise impugned from pretended
Scripture grounds and Presbyterian principles may seem strange, if these latter
days had not produced many such prodigies of errors and wickedness. The
progress of this personat doubt-resolver his impugnations will discover so
much, which we now proceed to examine.

This Informer next alleages That Ministers among us make themselves Ministers
of the whole Church, and the Doubter alleging [That a Minister is a Minister
of the Catholic Church] he Answers from Mr Rutherfoord Due right of Presb.
page 204. That tho a Minister is a Minister of the Catholic Church, yet not a
Catholic Pastor of it, that by ordination, and his calling he is made Pastor
and by election he is restricted to be ordinarily the Pastor of his flock. And
that Mr Durham on Rev. page 106, 107. thinks there is odds betwixt being a
Minister of the Catholic Church, and a Catholic Minister of it, as the
Apostles were and the Pope pretends viz. to have immediate access for the
exercise in all places -- that ^ho actu prime they have a commission to ^e
Ministers of the whole Church, yet actu secund^ they are peculiarly delegated
to such and such posts, But we have made our selves Ministers of all the
congregations of the Country. I answer, this doctrine crosses not our
principles nor practice in the least. For first, when we assert that a Minister
is by election restricted to be ordinarily the Pastor of a flock, and especially
delegat, and fixed to such a post and particular watchtower, it is not so to be
understood, as if there could be nolawful exercise of his Ministry elsewhere:
for first, this were flat independency etc. 2. All (save they of this
persuasion) grant that the Minister receives no new authority as to his
Ministerial acts and officiating in other places, but a new application only.
Hence in the 2d place, is to be understood of the Church her ordinary settled
state under a settled Ministry but when there is a destroying enemy within her
bosom wasting her, and the fathfull Ministry are put from their Watchtowers
and posts, by a number of Schismatic Innovators, who are dissolving her union,
and impeaching her Authority: In this extraordinary case, Ministers more
enlarged and unfixt officiating, is no breach of this Rule; Because 1. In this
case the Parochial constitution is impossible to be held, and God calls not to
impossibilities, and yet his call to preach the Gospel stands and binds, and by
consequence to preach to others then the Ministers parish. The common rule will
plead for this viz. necessitas non habet legem, which this Informer himself
does hold will in some cases warrant the laying by of that which otherwise were
a duty; he knows what his inference is from David's eating of the show bread to
keep from starving, and Paul, and those with him their casting their goods into
the sea to preserve from perishing. So that of necessity he must admit this
rule and answer, upon his own ground. 2. The reasons which did warrant our
first Reformers officiating in this manner (a practice which he dare not say
that the authors mentioned, or any reformed divines do condemn) will warrant
this our practice in this persecute state of our Church, it being clear that
the case of Reformation is parallel to that of a Churches defection, and
persecution, in relation to this practice contraverted, as we cleard from Acts
8. 3. The same great end of the Churches greater good and edificaton, which
warrands fixing of Ministers to their posts in a Churches settled peaceful
state will warrant their officiating more largely and at other posts, when put
from their own in her disturbed, persecute and destroyed coondition by a
prevalent Schismatic, backsliding party. The faithful watchmen seeing the city
betrayed by a party of professed defendents, who are letting in the enemy, do
their duty to the city best in resisting them and running to help. 4. If
faithful Ministers their necessary keeping their posts and the unlawfulness of
exercising their Ministry any where else, were in this case asserted, then it
would follow that a Minister standing in that relation to a disturbed and
destroyed Church, and all his gifts and graces, were useless in that case,
which notwithstanding are given for the good of the Church, but this is absurd;
Shall not the weeping Church be taken by the hand by her true Sons, when she is
wounded and her vail taken away by smiting watchmen. 5. By our Principles the
Prelatick party are Schismatics who have already broke and overturned our
Churches order, and Reformation. Now this Informer will not deny, that in such
a case, the Church may send forth her Ministers to officiat among such
backsliders and Schismatics, for their healing and recovery; he knows upon
what ground Mr Lightoun not long since, sent out some of his brethren to preach
in the West of Scotland. Beside Mr Gillespie will tell him, Miscell. page 23.
That a Schismatic Church has no just right to the liberty of a sound Church,
as to the calling or settling of Ministers. So that in our principles no
Conformists are duly or lawfully called and settled. 6. Our divines do grant
that in extraordinary cases, even the want of ordination it self will not
hinder to officiat Ministerially but that there may be a necessity which will
sustain and comport with the want of it. Mr Gillespy Misc. chapter 4. page 63.
tells us, that in extraordinary cases when ordination cannotbe had, and when
there are none who have commission and authority from God to ordain, then and
there an inward call from God stirring up, and ^ing with the people's good will
and consent whom God makes willing, can make a Minister authorized to
ministerial acts -- That at the first plantation of Churches, ordination may be
wanting without making void the Ministry because ordination cannot be had. And
if necessity will plead this in relation to ordination it self, Ergo a fortiori
this necessity of our Churches destroyed perturbed condition, may much more
comport with ordained Ministers their more enlarged officiating for the help
and recovery of a perishing remnant, by Wolves in sheeps clothing.

Next, this Informer going on in his nauseating repetitions, charges intrusion
upon our Ministers, and enquires, what warrant they have to preach and
administer Sacraments to those of another Ministers charge, being neither
called nor desired by these Minsters. I answer, they have Gods call to preach
the Gospel as Minsters of this Church, and as this call would warrant their
officiating in other parishes upon the lawful Ministers desire or invitation
in a settled serene state of our Church, so in this her ruined and destroyed
condition, the same call abundantly warrands their helping of these
congregations, and such poor Macedonians, who desire their help while under
destroying Schismatics, who have no lawful call to be their Mininisters from
God or this Church.

But here our Informer assaults us with a dilemma; either Presbyterian
Ministers call is ordinary, or extraordinary. Ordinary they have none, since
they are not invited by the Ministers of the congregations to whom they preach,
extraordinary they will not pretend unto. I Answer by a counterdilemma, and
retort his argument thus, either the pretended Ministers of these congregations
have an ordinary or extraordinary call to officiat therein, ordinary they have
none according to the Doctrine, Reformation, and principles of this Church,
being neither called by the people, nor ordained by the Presbyteries of this
Church, if we speak of the generality who are ordained and obtruded by the
Prelates, upon these congregations where they officiat, and for those who were
otherwise ordained and have conformed, we have told him that by accepting
presentation from Patrons and collation from Prelates, they have renounced their
Presbyterian call and ordination and the call of this Church consequently, and
thus do fall under the same consideration with the rest; and for the
exraordinary call neither the one nor the other, will pretend unto it. And when
he answers this dilemma, and by the Scripture-rules, and the Principles, and
reformation of this Church, (which the Informer has not disproved, yea admits
us to suppose in this question) justifies the Curats call to of ^iciat in these
congregations over which they assume an authority we shall produce ours as to
this practice which he condemns. Beside, what answer will he give to such a
dilemma in the mouth of Schismatic congregations, offered unto such Ministers
as the Church sends from their own congregations to officiat among them? And
whatever his answer be, it will suite our case. Then he tells us of acts of
councils condemning this encroachment, as he calls it, But when he shall
exhibit a case parallel to ours, which these acts speak unto, we shall consider
it. For what he adds of the Aberdeen Doctors their charging the Presbyterian
Ministers who preached in their congregations, with a practice repugnant to the
Scripture and Canons of ancient Councils, he should have done well to have
produced these Scriptures which the Doctors alleged: And for ancient Canons, I
think all things in their case considered, it would be a hard task to produce
these Canons stricking against that practice as it stood circumstantiat,
considering their Schismatic withstanding the Reformation of this Church,
their Arminian principles, and defending popish ceremonies which errors they
had openly vented and obstinatly maintaind.

His next charge of ordaining others to perpetuat our schism, is a manifest
calumny, this true organick Church is by this practice, only propagating a
lawful pure Ministry in opposition to their destroying Schismatic course, the
blessed fruits whereof, and its seals upon the hearts of the people of God,
have been conspicuous, and we hope yet further will. And no less gross is that
calumny which follows, anent our great mixed communions, and admission of
ignorant vicious persons unto them, who (he says) by our way cannot be kept
back, there being none admitted at any seasons of this nature (which have been
very rare) but upon sufficient testimonies from faithful Ministers or
elderships. But is he not ashamed to object this to us, whereof his party is so
notoriously guilty, who are known to admit, yea call promiscuously, to fill
their empty tables, (which tender souls dare not approach unto) both gross
ignorants, and notoriously profane to the shame and scandal of Religion, and
the contempt of that holy ordinance; our persuading people not to own
Conformists as the Ministers of this Church we hope does now appear better
grounded then all this Informers persuasives to the contrary. And that we have
been in any measure succesfull in this, speaks out Gods purpose not to leave
wholly our married land.

For that which he cites out of Baxters preface to the Cure of Church divisions
anent the odiousness of Sacrifices presented to God, without love and
reconciliation to brethren, and of making a peoples communion in worship, the
badge and means of uncharitablness and divisions, we th^nk reconciliation and
unionin the Lord needful to acceptable worship, but an association with
scandalous Schismatics and backsliders in their wickedness, we think is no
less dangerous and obstructive to real fellowship with God in duty; especially
since God presses our coming out from among such, and our being separat from
the contagion of their sin, with this motive, that he will receive us. And as
there is a holy brotherhood which we must associat with in order to communion
with God, so there is a congregation of evil doers which we must hate. Yea we
have David's precedence (as is before observed) to hate them with perfect
hatred, and count them our enemies. But who can sufficiently admire these men's
talk of unity and love who having first broken and divided this poor Church
have been these so many years persecuting to the death, yea sweeming in the
blood of the faithful Ministers and professors thereof because hey durst not
join to their way, and conform to their supposed trifles and indifferencies.
Surely prelacy being the grand Idol of Jealousy provoking God against us, and
the fire which has kindled all our combustions, and has opened the veins of
the Lords servants and people to bleed for many years, occasioned such horrid
dispersion and unheard of oppression (...) the Lords Church and people in our
Land, with what f^ces can these upholders of this course look up to the God of
Love and peace, and how can they lift up suc^ bloody wrathful hands to him.

But now his poor half proselyted Doubter confesses that [there is much truth
in what he has heard from this sound Informer forsooth -- And takes leave with
a professed resolution to reflect upon what he has heard from him,] Whereupon he
dismisses him with some of his healing advices, prefacing with an admonition to
seek illumination from God. But had this man been serious in seeking this from
God, he had not vented in these trilling Dialogues such weak notions and
reproaches against Gods truth and people. But since his Doubter returns him no
answer thereunto, I shall make up his want and shortly offer my thoughts upon
them. His first advice, is not to be too confident of our own opinion as
undoubtedly right, but consider what he has said in his three conferences.
Ans. If it be truth which we hold, sure we most hold it by faith in a pure
conscience, and not be wavering and ^ossed children. We acknowledge not the
Cartesian principle, and the popish doubting way as found divinity, and a
confidence of truth is far from a self confidence. As for what is offered in
his three dialogues, I hope it is sufficiently antidoted by what is said above,
so that it needs not in the least demurr our persuasion.

2. He will not have us think the matters of difference to be the substantialls
of Relegion, since persons of both persuasions may keep love and fellowship
without renting the Church and neglecting ordinances, because greater
differences have been; and communion not broken thereby. Ans. If these matters
contraverted be not substantialls, why then have they made such a substantial
bloody contest for them ^anquam pro aris and focis, for so many years, and if
communion must not be broken in a Church upon this account, why have they rent
and overturned our Church, and persecute away so many godly Ministers and
professors for these things, denying all fellowship with them in their worship,
for adhering to their principles, and disowning this course of conformity? had
prelatists suffered Presbyterian Ministers and professors to stand as they were
in this Church, to enjoy their principles, and to follow their respective
duties according to their stations, faithful Ministers to preach, and Gods
people to enjoy the fruits of their Ministry, he might with some color have
pretended to this desire of union and fellowship, but since prelatists have
cast them out, and do so cruelly persecute them for adhering to their
principles, and owning these duties, this pretense is nothing but deceitful
hypocrisy. He adds, that the difference is but a matter of government, and if
we separat for this, we would have separat from all Churches since christianity
began and if Christ held no comunion with a Church, where prelacy was, he has
then seldom had a Church, and has been for many years a head without members.
Ans. This is nothing but a renewed repetition of groundless assertions: for how
proves he that our plea is a matter of government only? surely their course
strikes at the whole of our Reformation, as has been cleared. Again, how
proves he that we would have separat upon this ground from the Church for so
long a time, tho it were granted that our plea were only a matter of
government, since he has not yet produced instances of such a prelacy as we
have, in any Church. Besides, since the Informer pleads for prelacy upon
pretended Apostolical precepts and practices, and yet does here vilify it unto
a mere punctilio, and makes it such a sorry business as persons may come and go
upon it at their pleasure, we may easily discover what nimble Sophisters, and
slippery fingered Gentlemen he and his fellows are as to the retaining and
holding of divine institutions, and that they can easily expose them to sale,
for obtaining easefull serenity and other worldly designs. Or how proves he
that its the government of our Church which they have introduced? or that they
are the Church? or that we are in this practice separating from our Church?
Has not Christ a mystical body in Scotland without prelates? or finally, how
proves he that there is alike ground for Joining to prelacy, introduced by an
Apostat party, after it is cast out, and abjured by all, as there is for
Joining in fellowship with a Church continuing Long under that corruption, and
not purged and reformed from it. The Joining with them in their worship, being
demanded as a badge of our consent to prelacy it self and all the corruptions
attending the same.

3. He pleads for charity, and that we say not Conformists are graceless
because of this difference, he tells us, that for all Corinths corruptions, the
Apostle spends a whole chapter upon Love, and that such as have least truth,
have least charity, that the weak christians who understood not their liberty
Romans 14. in being loosed from the ceremonial Law, had least charity as they had
least truth, and so papists to protestants. Ans. This charge lies most directly
home to himself, and those of his way. Let more then 20. years Law and
practice, in relation to the ruin of a faithful remnant of Ministers and
professors who adhere to the reformation and government of this Church, and
their vows for promoting the same, discover what has been the charity of our
Prelatical party. Beside, whatever be our thoughts as to their state with God,
and without judging their eternal condition, its no breach of charity to know
such as are seducers from Gods way, to beware of sin, and the ensnarings of
such seducers, for which we have so many scripture commands as we have heard,
and the Judgment of discretion in relation to evils which we are to eshew, is
not that uncharitable judging in matters Lawful and Indifferent, which is
condemned, Romans 14. 3, 4. for else we could not act in faith. And the same
Corinthians whom Paul exhorted so much to Love, he enjoined also to come out
from among the ungodly 2 Cor. 6. and to flee the contagion of their sin.

4. He advises to consider the danger of divisions Gal. 5. 15. Mark 3. 24.
since the enemy mocks religion upon this ground, and while each fights with
another, all are overcome, which he illustrats with the story of Scilurus his
sheaf of arrows Ans. Divisions indeed among Gods people are sad, and have had
sad effects, but union must be in truth and duty, and cemented with these
bonds, since it is the unity of the spirit which we must seek Ephesians. 4. 3. and
therefore not in a way of defection and Rebellion against God and in breaking
his Covenant, which is nothing else but a combination against him; It is in the
Lord, that we must be of the same mind, Phil. 4 2. and Christ who prayed so
enixly, for his disciples union, Joh. 17. 21. prayed also for their
sanctification in and by the truth, 17. ver. and that they might be kept from
the evil of the world, 15. ver. And the Apostle Paul who is so great a pleader
for Love and union, would not give place by subjection to deceitful workers,
no not for an hour Gal. 2. 5. The best way to mantain union and preserve the
Gospel (which their dividing innovating course of backsliding has exposed to
so much prevalency and reproach of Papists) is to keep our garments free of
their defilements, and to put away that accur sed thing which has made us so
weak before enemies.

5. He advises his Doubter to acquaint himself with the writings of the old
Non-conformists in England, such as Cartwright, Bradshaw, Ball, etc. Who
testify against the Brownists for their separation from that Church (for which
he says much more might have been alleged then for ours.) Ans. We acknowledge
that these worthy men have done well upon this subject, and that separation
which they wrote against; But our case [anent a Church purely reformed from
corruptions of doctrine, worship, discipline and Government and under universal
oaths of adherence to that reformation infested, encroached upon, and invaded
by a party of Schismatic overturners of her reformation, standing in
opposition to a faithful Ministry, and professors adhering to them,] is so
vastly discrepant from their case, [anent keeping up fellowship with a Church
universally tainted with corruptions, from which she had never been purged,]
that by no imaginable grounds, can a consequence be drawn from the one to the
other. And any consequence relating to us, or application of the pleadings of
these Divines against the Brownists, will properly strike against his dividing
party, who have gone out from the fellowship of this pure Church, to which they
were Joined, and did vow adherence to her constitution and reformation, yet
notwithstansting by them thus miserably rent and destroyed for many years.

As for these Rules of Mr Baxter in his Cure of Church divisions, which this
Informer does afterward commend unto us, we are not much concerned in their
explication or application, since they do not in the least-strike against what
we maintain, therefore we shall briefly run over them. For the first here
mentioned, [anent not making communion with a Church stricker then Christ has
made it] when we disowne dividers and Schismatics renting and destroying a
pure Church, and introducing abjured innovations, we do not narrow these terms
of communion, which Christ has given. For he has commanded us to withdraw
from such as cause divisions and offenses, contrary to our received ordinances,
and not to have fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, to turn away
from Covenant-breakers; And its their dividing party who fall under the censure
of this rule, who make compliance with abjured prelacy the terms of their
communion, and so cruelly persecute all who will not conform to their course of
backsliding. There is no doubt equal danger on the other extreme in making the
terms of our communion laxer then Christ has appointed. For the 2 rule which
he mentions [anent a due impression of the evil of division and discord, and
the reasons and necessity of union.] I think indeed had this Informer and his
party, kept up a Scripture impression of this, they had not for the punctilio's
of their trifling Conformity, so miserably rent this poor Church, and
overturned her Reformation. For the 3. [anent not engadging too far in a
divided sect,] it reaches Conformists, another blow, who have so far engadged
for Prelates and their Interest, that for many years it has been the great work
of our Laws (by the instigation of them, and their Rabbis) to root out all
Ministers and professors of this Church, who do not conform, and own this
course of backsliding. Dare this petulant Informer call adherence to this
Church, her sworn Reformation, principles, and faithful Ministry, adherence to
a divided Sect. For the 4. [anent the difference betwixt a sound and sinful
zeal, and that we be suspicious of our Religious passions] we say, zeal for the
Gospel, for keeping Covenant with God, for reformation from popry and prelacy
(which is the the Test of our zeal as stated in opposition to them) does
convincingly evidence its soundness. For the 5. [anent not being over tender of
our repute, or impatient of men's censures,] we say, to be tender of truth and
duty, and our good name in maintaining it, which is as precious ointment, and
to be tender of not offending and displeasing all who are thus tender, is
nothing but a true and Gospel-tenderness. For the 6. [anent eshewing needless
fellowship with the more censorious Christians] we say, we stand obliged to
keep fellowship with all the godly in all duties, and this charge of over
censoriousness we deny as to our plea against Conformists, neither has he
Informer yet made it good. For the 7. [that we lay not too much weight on
doubtful opinions, nor begin with them] we bless God that in this pure Church,
Gods people have been taught the solid beginnings and first principles, and do
build on that foundation; But we have not so learned Christ, as to put into the
Category of things doubtful, breach of Covenant, abjured Prelacy, and a
Schismatic sinful compliance therewith, For the 8. [anent not admiring or
favoring a preacher for his voice, affectionat utterance, etc. Without solid
understanding,] we say, Gods people with us have been helped not to regard men's
speech, but their power. And as they know Christ the great shepherd his truth,
by his voice from them, accordingly as his sheep to follow them. For the 9.
[anent not rejecting a good cause, because owned by bad men] we say, the cause
we disowne is bad in it self, and we disowne the owners of this bad cause, upon
this ground; And are confirmed in our disowning of it, by the fruits which we
see the owning of it produces in its supporters and abbetors, which are such
as do warrant us according to our Lords command, to avoid and beware of them.
For the 10. [not to follow the bad examples of Religious persons,] we bless the
Lord we are taught to walk by the rule of Gods Word, not by examples of men,
and not to follow even a Paul further then he is a follower of Christ. For the
11. [anent keeping an eye on the state of all Churches upon earth, and
pondering how Christ keeps fellowship with them, lest while we think we separat
only from these about us, we separat from almost all Churches] we say, that we
have looked upon our own Church deservedly, as among the purest and best
reformed, and by the same rule are concerned to keep up fellowship with her, as
knowing that such as renounce fellowship with her, would renounce it with all
Churches. And this we do with a due charity for all Reformed Churches, and
whatever Churches do hold the foundation. But upon these grounds we are bound
to disowne destroying Schismatics, as are our Conformists, who have introduced
abjured innovations contrary to her pure constitution and Reformation, and have
gone out from her fellowship, and by the same consequential reason, from the
fellowship of all Churches. For the last rule which he mentions, [that we count
it as comfortable to be a martyr for love and peace by blind zealots, as for
the faith by infidels] we say, that we own no zeal which is not according to
knowledge, and are contending for the union and reformation of our Mother
against a party of blind fiery zelots, for ane abjured hierarchy contrary to
the Word of God and this Churches vows, in which honorable quarrel that many
have suffered even to bonds, imprisonments, yea death it self, it is our Glory.
As for what he adds [of the English nonconformists, their testyfing against
separation, as a way which God never blessed with peace and holiness though
they dissented from the Ceremonies] I nothing doubt, but that they would have
put the same Character upon the practice of the Prelates and their followers,
had they seen and known all the circumstances of our case. They dissenting from
fellowship in the ceremonies, and eatenus from fellowship in the Worship,
though that Church, had never been purged from them, how much more then are we
concerned to disowne innovations introduced into this Church, after they have
been cast out and vowed against. Suppose that Church, had been (as ours)
Reformed in doctrine Worship, discipline and Government, and a party had risen
up destroying that pure constitution, contrary to all their vows, admitting
none to fellowship without acknowledging of their wicked course, persecuting
and casting out all Ministers and professors, who would not concur? And then
let them tell us what these nonco^ists would have done in this case, surely
upon the same ground that they eshewed a contagion in communicating with the
Ceremonies, they would have eshewed this piece of contagious conformity also.
Especially the express vows of adherence to that supposed reformation in every
piece of it, and of disowning all recesses, all backsliders, and of owning all
adherers to these vows in prusuing the ends thereof, being taken in, and duly
pondered.

After the close of this Dialogue, our Informer will needs strengthen his plea
in presenting unto us, by way of Apendix, some passages of the English
Presbyterians, their Jus divinum Ministerij Anglicani, and likewise in Mr
Rutherfoord his due right of Presbytery, anent the unwarrantableness of
Separation, which as they are utterly alien from our purpose, so (as would seem
in the conviction hereof) he does not so much as offer to draw an argument from
any of them, while propounding these his grand supposed topics, except a
general hint at the close, which is utterly insufficient to fortify his
conclusion, as we shall after show, but leaves the favorable conclusion to be
drawn by his half-proselyted Doubter, or friendly partial reader. However
(although upon the matter any seeming conclusion he might draw from them is
answered, yet) we shall view them briefly, having premised (1.) That he
supposes but has not yet made good, the charge of a sinful separation upon
the people of God in this case, which we have shown to be more applicable to
himself. 2. That the case of separation from that Church at that time because
of her corruptions, is far wide from this case of our disowning Conformists
now, and consequently all his citations will never come home to our purpose,
because.

1. Not to separat from a Church upon the ground of corruptions which have been
long settled in her; is very far distinct from this practice of disowning an
Innovating party introducing corruptions to the ruin of a pure Church, after
they have been seen, and universally cast out, which is the practice he now
pleads for; a stop as to an advance in Reformation, is much different from
backsliding in this case, and especially the joining to a backsliding party who
are not the true Church, is much different from adherence to a Church tho
backslidden. Its a far different case not to leave the communion of a Church
because of some corruptions, and not to join with an unsound party of a Church
drawing back from her Reformation: So that upon a due consideration of the
matter of fact, and Presbyterian principles, its evident that these Testimonies
do level against Conformists.

2. Its a far different case to own the Ministry of a corrupt Church wherein
prelacy is universally owned, and wherein there has been no other way of entry
into the Ministry for many generations but by Prelacy: and to own a party of
Schismatic Intruders introducing Prelacy over the belly of a Presbyterian
Church, and shutting out her faithful Mininistry, surely these Intruders are
in this case the Brownists.

3. Its a far different case to submit to a Ministry merely Episcopal, and to
keep the Worship in a Church long under this Government, and to submit to an
Episcopal Erastian Ministry, and a Church Government fundamentally corrupt,
deriving all its power from an Antichristian supremacy, and mere civil papacy,
after it has been eminently and universally disowned by that Church, and vowed
against, Especially when a backsliding party only do thus usurp over the sound
Ministry, and have ejected them, and this Erastian abomination is set up to
raze this true spiritual Government of the Church once universally settled and
owned.

4. Its a far different case, to submit to an Episcopal Ministry so far as
pure, while Episcopacy is universally ownd, and no obligation is upon any to
disowne it, further then its own corruption in that case will amount to and
infer: and to own and submit to an episcopal Erastian Government introduced by
an Innovating party into a Presbyterian Church against her standing acts,
solemn Oaths and vows universally taken on by that Church against the same,
while a faithful Ministry, and the great part of the people are in Conscience
of their vows contending against it. Surely this superinduced obligation
requires a higher degree of zeal against that defection, and renders it the
more heinous. The high places permitted to David and Solomon before the Temple
was built, are censured in after times; greater light and obligations do in
this case cast the balance.

These considerations do clearly repel any argument which he would draw from
his citations to our case. But now to view them, The English Presbyterians in
that piece do first assert page 10. [that all in the same bounds most be under
the care of the same Minister, and that these limits ought not to be brangled
Ans. This shall be easily accorded, give us our beautiful Church Order and a
lawfully called Ministry and this parochial order shall be observed, and obeyed.

2. (page 11.) [A man under a wicked or Heretical Minister must remove his
habitation rather then brangle parochial order.] Ans Then it follows in their
principles, that when the order and union of a Reformed Church is already
brangled by Innovating Schismatics, whose wickedness and errors are palpable,
men may attend a more pure Ministry without Schism, by clear consequence, sure
he is a loser by this.

3. (page 12.) [to appoint Elders in every Church, and every city, is all one,
and converts in the city must join with the congregation in Churchfellowship.]
Ans. But what if a party in the city call themselves the Church, shut out the
true Minister, and bring in one of their own, must not the true converts own
their first Minister, and oppose these Innovators? Surely this Testimony
rebounds another blow upon our mis Informer.

4. (page 25.) [evil men defacto have been officers, Hophni and Phineas,
Scribes and Pharisees, whose Ministerial acts were not null, and Christ's
commission authorized Judas.] Ans. This will as much plead for owning
Presbyterian Ministers as Conformists: And if he allege that they are
disorderly, Schismatical, etc. and therefore must not be ownd in this case. I
answer ^he must prove this which he has not yet done. 2. He must acknowledge,
that the granting that the Ministerial acts of Church Officers, are not null by
their sins, will not plead for hearing Ministers in every case, until aliunde,
and from other grounds, our obligation to own such men as our Ministers hic
and nunc be made good, which he has not yet done as to Curats. Neither Hophni
or Phineas, nor the Scribes and Pharisees, were rooting out the faithful
Ministry of the Church of the Jews, who would not concur in a course of
defection, after they had laid down a course to overturn the ordinances: which
is the case of Conformists in relation to us, as is evident. Again, state the
question so that Hophni and Phineas, and the Pharisees Ministry could not be
owned without partaking in their sin, then this man must needs grant, that Gods
people were obliged to disowne them, and had disowned them. Now we have proven
this to be our case as to the owning of Conformists.

5. (page 42, 43.) [Israel is called the people of the Lord, even after the
Calves were set up at Dan and Bethel, and Cajaphas was owned as high priest,
though they came to the office by bribry and faction, and the highpriest had an
hand in crucifying Christ.] Ans. The same reply and retortion recurs as
formerly* what will he say if we plead this for presbyterian Ministers, whom he
will not call worse then these mentioned, nor will he say that our Presbyterian
Church is worse then that Church. So that he must grant this will not reach his
conclusion, till more be supposed and proved in this point. Again, tho God in
his sovereign dispensation had not as yet cast off the ten tribes, having a
faithful remnant among them, yet I hope he will not from this plead for owning
the Calves, or the Priests Ministry whom Jeroboam had obtruded, and set up
contrary to Gods institution, and for keeping up that woeful breach in Gods
worship, and in Israel, which was thereby promoted, and this is a fit emblem of
their Innovating prelatick Ministry. Beside that the high priests were men in a
considerable measure deciders and Interpreters of the civil Law, and might in
that respect be owned. But however, it is (as we have said) bad arguing from
the comporting with corruptions in that old dispensation and Ministry
especially when drawing near an end, to the receiving of abjured corruptions
into a Church which has been rid of them, and from a non-separating in the
first case, to conclude against a non-union or non compliance in the second.
And thus neither will Paul's carriage toward the high prist, Acts 23. plead for
adhering to Curats upon the same grounds. For he will not say that Paul
understood not his office in a spiritual sense to be now expired, and that he
was not to be owned as a teacher, who was every way destitute of the truth of
the gospel, and an enemy unto it. Jackson thinks with sevral others, that Paul
said, I knew not that he was the high priest etc. ironically, it being very
improbable, that Paul knew not the high priest, and suppose it were so, he knew
him to be a ruler as his own words discover, so that it was no excuse to say he
knew not the high priest, because as a judge it was against the law to revile
him. Therefore (says Jackson upon Exodus 22. 28.) though they understood Paul as
excusing himself, yet he spoke by way of derision as disdaining he should be
accounted Gods high priest, who carried so. Which (says he) is the more
probable, when its considered how far he was from having any true right to that
place and power to which he pretended, when Christ had abolished the legal
priest hood. Calvine on that place of the Acts says, Its not credible that
Paul-gave him his wonted honor. -- Cum abolita esset adventu Christi
sacerdotij Majestas, and secuta turpis prophanatio, Paulum quasi integra
vigeret, solito honor prosecutum fuisse, qui tunc sub Pontificum titulo nullo
jure dominabantur, after the majesty of the priest hood was abolished by the
coming of Christ, and vile prophanity attending it, that Paul, as if the
priesthood had been standing entire, would have allowed the wonted honor to
such who under the title of Priests were governing without any right or just
title. And having objected to himself, that we must not contemn civil
Magistrates, in his answer he puts a difference betwixt civil Mahistrats and
Church rulers -- Inter civiles Magistratus (says he) and ecclesiae praesules
aliquid est discrimenus -- there is a difference betwixt civil Magistrates and
Church officers, tho the administration of civil Rulers be perverse and
confused yet (he tells us) the Lord will have subjection remain entire. -- Sed
ubi spirituale regimen degenerat sol^untur piorum conscientiae, ne injustae
dominationi pareant etc. spiritual government being degenerat, the consciences
o^ the faithful are loosed from obedience to an unjus^ domination. But our
Informer will say, that I thu^ set the authors of jus divinum minist. anglic.
by the ear^ with Calvin and Iackson as to the sense of this place. I answer,
they do not peremptorly and positively assert that Paul acknowledged him as
high priest, bu^ only, that many think he did. 2. Hence the weight of their
conclusion subjoyned, viz. that corruptions cleaving to Gods ordinances null
them not, is not laid upon this solely, nor positivly at all, even as a
partial, but only as a probable ground. And the conclusion it self when
admitted, will never reach his design as is above cleared. Again, admitting
that Paul acknowledged his providential title, or jus in re as to a civil
office and administration at that time, as it may well have its own weight in
reference to the premised conclusion, civil rule, as such, being Gods
ordinance, which is not made null by corruptions, so upon the the difference of
civil from sacred rule this concession will not legitimat or infer an
acknowledgment of the spiritual part of his administration.

Thus we have seen how well our Informer has acquit himself in his arguing
from the English Presbyterians. Let us next consider, how he reasons from Mr
Rutherfoord in that piece forecited, if at least we may call that which he here
offers a formal reasoning, since he offers not (as I said) any argument from
these citations, but sure we will find that these passages will burn his
fingers. In that piece [scil. Due right of presb. page 220. to 256.] There are
several passages which this man takes hold of, as 1. [He asserts that
separation from a true Church where the orthodox word is preached, and
sacraments duly administrat, is unlawful, and vindicats 2 Cor. 6.] Ans. This
in Mr Rutherfoords sense will plead more for the Presbyterian Ministry and
professors then for Conformists, whom he will not say that Mr Rutherfoord will
look upon as our Church, in such a case as this, since (as we heard) he holds
that in case of such a breach as we have now, the pure Church remains with the
smaller steadfast number, and that the backsliders from truth and purity, tho
the ^reater number, yet really are the Schismatics. And ^n this sense we are
to understand him when he says that this separation as to worship, will not
infer an absolut separation, And his allowing non-union, where there is not
sufficient cause of separation, in the case of purer to be joined with, and his
admitting a partial separation, because of a partial corruption of ordinances
(Peacable plea page 121.) will much more plead for a total non-union in this
our case; and I dare appeal this Informer if Mr Rutherfoords words (Peaceable
plea page 122.) does not suite our case and express such a sense thereof as we
have explaind; and if he would not have applied that which follows unto our
present prelatick party, had he seen our Church in this posture and in her
present circumstances, viz. we separat not from a true Church or her Lawful
Pastors, when we separat from hirelings and Idolshepherds, who will not go
before us, and whether he would not have thought and called Conformists so?
Thus (page 148. concl. 6.) he tells us, we may separat from the worship when we
separat not from the Church. So that its evident, that in Mr Rutherfoords sense
we separat not from the Church of Scotland, nor her worship, while withdrawing
from Curats, in attending the Ministry of Christ's faithful ambassadors.

In the Next place this Informer presents to us these passages further in that
piece mentioned, viz. (page 233.) [the personal faults of others, are not
sufficient ground for separation -- That the disciples thought not the society
unclean for Judas sin, though they knew one of them had a Devil.] Again (page
250.) [It was not Lawful to separat from the Pharisees preaching truth.] (page
253.) [The Godly separated no^ from the Church, when the altar of damascus was
se^ up, things dedicat to Idols, as Lutheran images, are called Idolatry, 1 Cor
10. 34. Idolatry by participation, and the cup of devils, yet Paul command^ not
separation, and the table of the Lord was there.] I answer, this is already
removed by what is said above, as to any conclusion for his cause, which thi^
loose disputer does not so much as offer to draw ou^ upon these citations. 1.
Unless he prove the Conforming party to be the true Church of Scotland, to
which in this case we are obliged to adhere, or 2. If we can prove, that
according to our Churches Reformation, Presbyterian ministers and professors
are the true organick Church of Scotland, though the persecute smaller number
(which according to Mr Rutherfoord is very easy, for he says that in case of
defection, truth as life recools to the smaller hidden part, (Due right page
253.) In either case I say this will plead more appositly for adherence to
Presbyterian Ministers and their Assemblies.

Next, Mr Rutherfoords scope is to prove, that personal faults corrupt not the
worship, which we deny not, but as we have above cleared this falls utterly
short of reaching his conclusion, as to the owning of Curats, until he first
prove his forementioned suppositions, wherein he begs the question, and this
principle or assertion of Mr Rutherfoord will plead more strongly for not
disowning Presbyterian Ministers until this Informer prove his suppositions,
and disprove ours in this debate.

In a word, the impertinency of all his citations here appears in this, that
there is no reason whereby he can ward of this argument its reaching adherence
to Presbyterian Ministers, and inferring a conclusion of owning them, but it
will either, first be retorted upon himself, or secondly, the universality of
the argument, and the conclusion deduced there from, so limited, as utterly to
irritat his design; since he must acknowledge, that there may be a Lawful
separation from a Ministry and ordinances, although not polluted by personal
scandals. And therefore this principle in every case will not infer a
separation to be unlawful, far less a non union, and he must acknowledge that
to argue the unlawfulness of a separation or non-union in every case, or
merely, from this ground [that there is no pollution of ordinances by the
personal faults of Worshipers or administrators thereof] is a gross petitio
principii and ignoratio elenchi; and which his case, supposes many things
which are to be proved, as 1. That Conformists are this Church. 2. That this
practice of disowning them as now circumstantiat, is properly a sinful
separation. 3. That Prelatists have the best right to officiat as Ministers in
this Church. 4. That we have no other reasons for a non-union but this
pretended pollution of ordinances, and that we stand obliged upon this
supposition that the ordinances are not thus polluted, to join to them rather
then Presbyterian Ministers. And since this principle will prove them all to be
Schismatics who disowne Presbyterian Ministers in preaching the Gospel, it
will follow therefrom that our Informer is in this pamphlet pleading for
Schism, or else he must so limit this position, as thereby his conclusion
against us shall be utterly cut off as is said.

Fourthly, he presents unto us that passage (page 254.) where he shows [That
the godly in England tho separating from Bishops and Ceremonies did not separat
from that Church; and approves their doing so, and in keeping communion
therewith in unquestionable duties, the contrary whereof he charges upon these
separatists against whom he reasons, telling us ibidem, that if a Church be
incorrigible in a wicked conversation, and yet retain the true faith, its to be
presumed that God has some there to be saved, -- that Christ himself is where
his ordinances are, and some union with him the head -- that though a private
scandalous brother ought to be cast off, yet not an Orthodox Chuch.] Ans. 1.
The Presbyterians have all this to plead for pleoples adherence to them, until
this Informer prove that the prelatick party are our national organick Church,
which will be ad Kalendas Graecas. 2. Mr Rutherfoord all along states his
question as to separation, from a Church so and so polluted. Ergo he spaks not
of a Schismatic destroying Innovating party, or a separation from them rather
then a sound Church contending against them, which would quite invert his scope
and arguing, and the ground and hypothesis thereof. For I pose this man what if
a party of acknowledged Innovators cast out the true Ministry, and should plead
this passage of Mr Rutherfoords for their schism and the peoples adherence to
them, sure he would charge them with begging the question, as we do Consormists
in this point, and would acknowledge that Mr Rutherfoord pleads nothing for
them.

Fifthly, Mr Rutherfoord says ib idem [We may separat from the Lords supper
where the bread is adored -- and from baptism where the sign of the cross is --
yet we are not to separat from the Church.] Ans. We may hence collect that in
Mr Rutherfoords principles 1. We are to separat from all contagious Worship,
tho not absolutely corrupt. 2. That this is no separation from the Church while
there is a purer Church and Ministry to be joined with, and to which we were
joynd. 3. That a fortiori a non-union unto, and disowning of a backsliding
party, who are not our Church, is warrantable because of their contagious
corruptions, especially when (as is said) the opposition of that party to the
true Church is so virulent. Mr Rutherfoord tells us there, that we separat not
from the Church when we profess to hear the word, and allow the truth of
Doctrine, and do not Presbyterian professors own the true Doctrine of our
Reformed Church, while hearing and and adhering unto her faithful Pastors.
Beside, Mr Rutherfoord tells us, that there may be cause of non-union where
there is not sufficient cause of separation, as Paul separat not from the Jews
till they blasphemed, yet, says he, there was no cause why people should join
to that Church before that time, since they had the cleaner to join with viz.
That of the Apostles -- Ergo in case of a true Reformed Church her being
divided, and rent by a backsliding destroying party opposing her Authority,
union and purity, introducing Innovations into her, contrary to her Reformation
and vows, and casting out her faithful Ministry who dare not comply with their
wicked course, a non-union to them and adherence rather to that faithful
Ministry contending against them, is no sinful separation from the Church, nor
a separation at all by Mr Rutherfoords doctrine. Sure the Presbyterian party
are in our principles the cleanest Church, to whom therefore Mr Rutherfoords
allows to adhere. (page 253.)

But here the Informer presents us another passage in that same place to repel
what is said, viz. that he asserts [there is no just cause to leave a less
clean Church (if true) and to go to a purer, though one who is a member of no
Church may join to that which he conceives purest.] Ans. This makes as little
for him as any of the rest, for 1. He is still speaking of a Church, thus
entirely less pure, in comparison of a more pure. But blessed be God their
prelatick impurity, has not infected all our Church, their being 1000 of
Ministers and professors who adhere to the truth. This man will not say that
this will plead for a peoples adherence to a party of Schismatic backsliders
Intruding upon a pure Church, Introducing Innovations into her, and ejecting
her faithful Ministry as Conformists are now doing; which will be yet more
convincingly clear, if we consider 2. that Mr Rutherfoord lays much weight
upon this, that a man is already a member of that Church which is less pure,
but we cannot be said to be hactenus members of, and on this ground under a
prior obligation of adherence unto, a party of Innovators and backsliders, who
are destroying and ruining the pure Church, but in this case our prior
obligation is in order to adherence to that pure Church and her faithful
Ministry, thus opposed as is said.

But now at last our Informer who has been hitherto silent as to any inference
from his citations, draws out a general conclusion from them, that in Mr
Rutherfoords Judgment and the English divines, neither the personal faults of
Ministers, Nor real faults about the Worship (much less supposed only) will
warrant a separation, which when admitted lifts not his cause one hair breadth
off the dust, as is clear from what is said; since he has proved none of these
three, either 1. That they are the Church of Scotland to which we are bound to
adhere according to the tenor and principles of our Reformation, nor 2. That
this practice of disowning them in this our case, is a sinful separation. Or
3. that we disowne then merely for personal scandals, or some corruption in
Worship. Whereas we have proved that abstracting from both these, we have
ground of disowning them as Schismatic Innovators destroying this Church; and
himself must grant that there may be a non-union unto, yea a separation from a
party ground lesly assuming the name of a Church, though neither their personal
faults do pollute the worship, nor the worship it self be simpliciter disowned,
or else he must yield the cause when this is pleaded in behalf of Presbyterian
Ministers, and for not separating from them: since it is upon this ground, that
all along he pleads for people's disowning them, though he dare not say that
the ordinances are polluted by their supposed scandals.

After this our Informer exhorts his Doubter, to try all things -- and not to
be ashamed to retract what is amiss, as Augustine wrote books of retractions and
Ierom exhorted Ruffinus not to be ashamed to confess an error. Ans. I think
indeed, we are to search all things by the rule of the word, and had he with a
single heart and an eye to the God of truth, searched better, he had not
obtruded upon Gods people (in defense of so bad a cause) such insignificant
arguments for demonstrations. But why exhorted he not his Doubter to hold fast
what is good, as well as to try all things? It is not fit to be ever learning,
and fix in nothing. And no doubt this latter part of that scripture precept,
justifies our opposing their Innovations. But he pleads for retractions, and
its no wonder to see men who have Justified the casting aside such solemn Oaths
and vows unto God, plead for retractions. But if he and his party retract not
such monstrous retractions (the very naming whereof would have made Augustine
and Jerome astonished) the woe threatened against perjury, backsliding, and breach
of Covenant is very near them. His concluding prayer that God bless us with
truth and peace, is good, and heartily accorded, and surely when our Jerusalem
shall have this spiritual prosperity, peace, and truth (which this man pretends
to pray for) within her walls, prelates and their woeful train and corrupt
principles, which have made such sad breaches in her walls, will be without
them. And the prosperity of such as love her, will ruin her enemies.

His Doubters Resolution [to hold fast what is good upon the proof of all
things] makes up his lame advice. And having thus fortifyd the Knowledge of the
serious Doubter in that which this man has been misinforming him about, and
antidoted this poison, we pray that all the sincere enquirers for truth, may
hold it fast against the times errors and defection. The character of schism
presented to us at the close of the pamphlet, is verifyed in the party he
pleads for: since their proud usurpation of the name and authority of this
Church, after they have thus rent and separat from her, demonstrats this their
schism to be superbiaeproles. And in their taking up such gross unheard of
principles anent Oaths, anent Magistracy etc. to maintain and uphold this
usurping hierarchy, they are like to fall under that other branch of the
character of schism, that male perseverando fit haeresis. And because of the
corruptions which it is like to be more and more productive of, It may very
probably become also matter haereseos. The Lord awake for judgment, and send a
plentiful rain to water his in heritance, and revive his work in the admist of
the years, and make his face to shine upon his sanctuary in these lands, which
is disolat, for his names sake.

CHAP. VI.
Animadversions Upon the PREFACE, And title Page.

Having thus examined what this new Casuist has offered in these Dialogues,
we shall here subjoyn some Animadversions upon the Preface prefixed to this
pamplet (1.) His professed design is to let people see the sin and
unwarrantableness of separation as the Epidimicall desease of the time. Ans. I
think indeed it is so. and upon whose side this separation lies, and who has
brought in this flood as he calls it, not since 78 but 62 I hope may be now no
doubt to the impartial discerner. Its no strange thing to see men charge upon
others, that whereof themselves are so eminently guilty, Papists call
themselves the only Catholics and charge Protestant Churches with separation,
just as this man and his Innovating party deal with us, they only must be the
Church of Scotland, and we the Schismatics, though not many years ago it
would have been thought (I believe by many of these men themselves) as strange
a^e absurdity and paradox, to term such a party owning such principles and
practices as they now do, the Church of Scotland, as to affirm that nihil was
aliquid, non ens, ens, or that Zenith was in the situation and place of Nadir:
such ane intoxicating thing is backsliding and sinful self love.

2. He praises Magistrates in the bounds where he is, whose authority together
with his mighty convictions (forsooth) brought back people who went once to
hear Presbyterian Ministers out of noveltie. Ans, ^s no small piece of our sin
and desolation that the Magistrates sword given him for protection of the Lords
faithful Ambassadors in following their duty, according to there solemn
vows to God, should be improven in such a sinful opposition to them. What
peace and order in this Church has attended their monstrous perperjurious
backsliding, were 20 years experience may discover especially to those who
have seen and known the beautiful order of our first glorious ^temple, the
very rubbish, whereof is yet refreshfull in any remains of a faithful
Ministry that is left.

3. Against his modest reluctancie (forsoo^h) some of authority and learning
among his party thought it fit that these his Dialogues should see the light,
because schismatic principles and practices are not laid aside but carried on
and this Informer thou ht it a matter of conscience to discover to such as are
willing to be informed, how unwarrarantable such cours^s are, if Scripure and
even the Doct ine of Presbyterians may be admited to judge. Ans. How he has
fastened this charge of Schismatic principles and practices upon Presbyterian
Ministers and Professors, I leave it to the Impartial to Judge from what is
here replied. And how far any thing which he has affered either from
Scripture, or the principles of Presbyterians, is from reaching the conclusion
which he aims at in these trifling Dialogues; which all who are conscientious
are (we hope) shy this rejoinder, and a respect to truth and duty,
sufficiently antidoted against, and the learned as well as conscientious may
wonder at such prodigiously bold ignorance.

4. He wonders that so many of good note and not of the commons only are
drinking in the principles of Brounists, which have been zealously disputed
against by old nonconformists. Ans. How h^ has made good this charge I refer
it to the persusall of what is here replied, and how far the pleadings of these
Non-conformists whom he mentions are from helping his cause. I must here add,
that its astoninishing to find this man pretending a principle of conscience
for this undertaking, when his conscience could not but tell him, that both
upon the point of Episcopacie, the Covenants, and separation also, he might
have found all and more then he has said fully answered, and that he pitifully
snakes away from our arguments and dar not propose them in there genuin
strength. Nay he does not so much as offer fairly to state the question in any
of these three great points which he pretends to inform us about, but
confusedly shuffles them up for his own advantadge. And upon the point of the
Covenant obligation, he poorly follows the arguments of the Seasonable case,
and some hints from the Surveyer without so much as offering any return unto
what the Apologist has long since repelyd unto them. If this was conscientious
dealing let any Judge? and yet he is not ashamed to tell the world, that
because Episcopacie and the covenants are by people made the great grounds of
separating, therefore he premised his two dialogues concerning Episcopacie and
the Covenants, to show what a sandy ground they are for separation, if prelacie
be found at least Lawful, and the Covenants in evry case not obligatorie,
whereas he has offered nothing either to prove prelacie lawful, or the
Covenant not obligatorie, but what is by several of the godly learned
abundantly answered and fully bafled, sevrall of which (viz. the Apollogist,
and jus divinum Ministry Anglican, he seems to have had before him in writeing
these Dialogues, and yet nather does he touch the answers of the Apologist to
his arguments anent the Covenant, nor dar he scan the pungent arguments of the
London Ministers against prelacie, and likewise there answers to sevrall things
which he has offered for it, and particularly there learned Appendix in the
point of Antiquity, which cuts the sinnews of all his tedious legend of
testimonies, he durst not meddle with. Beside It would seem he has seen
Smectymnus upon this subject, whose learned confutation of the Episcopal plea
as well from scripture as antiquity he passes over sicco pede. And as for
Erastian prelacie, he offers not a jot indefence of it, though his conscience
could tell him that this is one main point of our plea against him. So that
suppose Episcopacie were in its self found Lawful, as he says, yet if
Erastian Episcopacie be found unlawful, his cause and pleading is lame and
lost.

After this he would amuse his reader with a testimony of Zanchie and another
of Blondell which parts the hoofs of his page first as for Zanchie he cites a
passage of his Obser: in suam ipsius confessionem cap. 25. aphor: 10. 11.
wherein he saves first his faith is simply built upon the word of God, Next In
some measure upon the commun consent of the ancient Catholic Church, and that
he believes what has been defyned by holy fathers gathered together in the name
of the Lord -- citra ullam Scripturae contradictionem that these things are
from the Spirit of though not of the same authority with Scripture, then he
adds that nothing is more certain from counsels Histories and writeings of the
Fathers then these orders of Ministers of which he has been speaking to have
been received into the Church, with her entire consent, and what is he to
condemn what the whole Church has aproved. I answer, beside that he should have
set down these gradus Ministrorum which Zanchius speaks of, that his reader
might have known what these degrees were, or whither they were prelatick
degrees or not, which no doubt he would have done had he not found that this
would have marred his intent, (for which cause he does not so much as offer to
English any part of this or of the ensuing testimony) we say, first, that any
who knows Zanchies learning, and what the voice of the first and pure
antiquity is, and how far from giving a testimony to the present Diocesian,
much less the Erastian prelat, of whom none can without extrem impudence assert
that Zanchie is speaking, will esteem this persuasion [that the prelacy now
existant with us has the universal consent of all histories councills and
fathers] to be as far from the thoughts of Zanchie, as its necessary to prove
his point 2. Zanchise ayes his faith simply and mainly leans upon the word of
God, and so whatever the word is found to condemn (as we have proved it does
the present prelacie in many respects) Zanchie will make no bones to condemn it
likewise, own it who will.

The next passage he cites is of Blondell (Apoll. page 193.) who asserts that
(...) belongs absolutely to the government of the Church -- and its anext (...)
to the manner and order of its government, which the Church always thought
permitted to her arbitrament; Nather must we think every thing unlawful which
humane custom of professors has brought into the use of divine things -- That
in such things christian prudence must act its part, that no Church must be
drawn into ane example, that from the general precept (...) Cor. 14: 40* the
Church has full power to follow what is more decent and commodious. Ans. 1. We
have before cleard that with Blondell their diocesian Prelat stands absolutely
condemned in scripture, and in his principles is diametrally opposite to the
divine Scripture Bishop, which evidently concludes his condemning the present
Episcopacie with sole power of ordination and Jurisdiction, -- much more the
Erastian prelat, altering fundamentally the government it self, which he dar
not say that Blondell ever dreamed of. So that though we should grant because
of this testimony, that Blondell will befound to admit a (...) and constant
Moderator, which Its well known is the outmost length he goes, and that the
Churches example and practice here anent may be variable, it falls utterly
short of reaching the lest patrociny to his cause. 2. he cites 1 Cor 14. 40.
anent alterable circumstances of order and decency, about which the Churches
exercise of Christian prudence is conversant, so that he must understand what
he pleads for to be of that nature, but we have showed upon the first Dialogue
how far its contrary to Scripture and reason to include a diocesian Bishop or
Arch bishop within the compass of decency and order there commanded, since
decency and order points only at circumstances of actions already commanded
and circumstances commun to civil and sacred things. And this according to the
general rules of the word, so that none can think Blondell so sottish as to
take in among these, the Diocesian or Erastian Bishop and Archbishop. 3. Since
the professed scope of Blondells learned Appology is to plead for sententia
Hieronomi -- which is that in Apostolic times communi concilio presbyterorum
Ecelesiae gubernabantur, surely whatever Blondell may admit as to the Churches
liberty in relation to a (...), yet the admission of the diocesian prelate
with sole power of ordination and Jurisdiction (which this man pleads for) and
much more the Erastian prelate, would evert both his hypothesis and scope.
Again, he dare not deny that with Blondell the (...) is the Ministerial
scripturall (...) or Presbyterat, so that what he calls the modus rei cannot in
its self, (and consequently in Blondells meaning) be supposed such a modus rei
as destroys the thing it self, and the subject which it affects, as certainly
by the Diocesian (...), much more the Erastian, does the very substantialls of
Presbyters divine power, which this learned author is in that piece pleading
for. And in a word I dare pose this Informer, whither Blondell would not have
thought a national Churches liberty in this point of Custom or alterable
circumstances of decency and order (even tho we should grant that he puts
Episcopacy among these) is tied up and restrained, by sacred solemn Oaths and
vows universally taken on against the same; so that his cause is never a whit
bettered by these blind Testimonies which (as is said) he he durst not
translate, as he professes to do in the rest of his citations, for the
advantage of the unlearned.

The assertion after subjovned by him viz. that the unlawfulness of Episcopacie
was questioned by none of the ancients except Aerius, and rarely by any of the
modern except some of our British divines, that ancient and modern divines
think that prelacie was the primitive Government left by the Apostles] we have
proved to be a manifest untruth. Specially when applied to the prelacy existant
with us; and that it is the consentient judgment of the far greatest part, both
of ancient and modern that there is no difference jure divino betwixt a Bishop
and Presbyter. And that our Prelates now in Scotland are as far different from
the ancient Bishops as east from West, so that no patrocinie can be drawn from
the one to the other. That Blondell professes to vindicat Jerome from that which
he calls Aerianism, who will believe, taking Aerius opinion to be for the
premised Identitie of Bishop and Presbyter; since we have made it appear by
Testimonies of the learned, that both Greek and Latin Fathers held this same
opinion with Aerius. How he has proved Episcopacie [to be the Government which
has best warrant in the word, and has continued without interruption for many
years] we refer it to the reader to judge by what is above replied, wherein we
have made it appear, that as his pretended Scripture proofs for prelacy, and
his answers to our Arguments against it, are most frivolous, so none of his
pretended Testimonies from antiquity do reach his conclusion, nor any shadow
of a patrocinie for our present Prelat now established, whom we have fully
disproved from Scripture, both in his diocesian and Erastian mould. What poor
shadows for proofs does this man grasp at Blondell thought the Scripture
(...) lawful, and its (...) to belong to (...) and good order. Ergo, he pleaded
for the Diocesian Bishop with sole power of ordination and Jurisdiction, and a
Bishop deriving all his power from the civil Magistrate as immediately subject
unto him, which is a very antilogical proof and a mere rop of sand.

Lastly he mainly commends to his reader this Dialogue anent separation
[wherein he says all the reasons brought for it are propounded and answered
without passion which does but alienat the minds. Ans. How poorly this man has
answered the true grounds of disowning conformists, or rather past them over,
and how pityfully he all along begs the question in supposing what he has to
prove, we hope is made sufficiently appear to the Judicious and impartial. As
for passion, its true there is less of this in his Pamphlet then in some other
of this stamp which his fellows have flung out among the people, yet he has
his signal flashes of it [in Justifying Dr Burnets parallel of nonconformists
with Scribes and Pharisees, and in calling them as great and causeless
Schismatics as ever the Church had in any age, nay in his gross malicious
reflecting upon the sufferings of poor Innocents in this land, telling us under
the covert of Cyprians words [that their in expiable sin of discord is not
purged by their sufferings -- that forsaking Christ's Church, they cannot be
martyrs nor reign with him,] which, with what a tincture of malice it presents
its self, let any judge. His conferences he says do bring water to quenchour
flames, but they bring rather fuel to the fire, and wood and hay to uphold
Babell. The Rabbis whom he pleads for have kindled our flames, and the best
way to quench them Is to put these incendiaries to the door.

Next he cites the preface of the Syntag. Confess. edit. Genev. [wherin the
Church of Scotland is commended for her unity as well as purity of Doctrine,
and then he cries out O how have we lost our good name, and the staff of bonds
is broken in the midst of us] but he should have been so ingenuous as to have
told us that we are in the preface of that Syntagma commended for our reformed
Presbyterian discipline as the great bond and cement of our unity, and the
guard of our pure doctrine, and who have broken this bond and sacred hedge I
need not tell him, and what has been the distress, confusion and desolation of
our Church since it was broken, every one now sees; so that he might lament the
loss of our good name upon this ground, and especially of our Integrity where
he a true son and watchmen of this Church. The consequences of our sad
divisions, through the violence and Schismatic intrusion of abjured perjured
Prelates and their underlings have indeed hazarded the standing of Christ's
Kingdom among us according to that of Mark 3. 24. And the biting and devouring
wolves, the Prelates for whom he pleads have hazarded the consuming of Gods poor
remnant Gal. 5. 19. Our Churches dissolution and corruption, and were he as
tender to prevent this, as to preserve there worldly peace and sinful union,
he would have seen Prelacy to be the Idol Jealousy, the wedge driven by the
popish artisans to divide and break this Church, and as the true cause of all
our breaches to be removed in order to healing. The popish invasion does indeed
plead for union of the true Prorestant Church and interest against them, and
consequently to hold out and oppose such arrant upholders and promoters of that
Antichristian interest as Prelates have first and last been found and never more
then now, since popry has never more prevaild then since they were established
(by the confession even of our Rulers) and that without control. While they are
enflaming the powers to the out most height of rage against poor Innocent
nonconfomists, so that union with them who are at so palpable an union with
Rome is not the unity of the spirit which is to be keep in the bond of Peace,
and to be ownd by any that favor the Protestant Interest.

The texts which he presents unto us upon the frontispeice of the Pamphlet will
be found to rebound a deadly blow upon his cause. For that ^assage Psalm. 122.
6. 7. pray for the peace of Jerusalem etc. We also pray for this peace, and in
order to the obtaining of this suit, that the Lord would make up the breaches
in her walls, and remove the treacherous breakers thereof, who, we may say
again and again that in this they have dealt very treacherously, but what peace
with Conformists while their whoordomsare so many. The next text is Psalm 133.
1. behold how good and pleasant a thing it is for brethren to duel together in
unity. It is so indeed and therefore woe unto them (if they repent no^) who
have broken this bond of holy brotherhood, have rent Aarons garment, corrupted
the Covenant of levi, and do avowedly own principles and ways upon which
hermons dew (heavens blessing) cannot be exspected. Therefore this command of
Lovely union engadges to disjoyn our selves from them. For the next text Mark
3. 24. a kingdom divided against its self cannot stand etc. We say, Gods
Church has stood amidst great divisions, is one and entire in it ^f, and will
at last be delivered from all divisions and offenses; and therefore upon the
same ground we are to avoid prelatists who have caused them. For that of heb
10. 25. anent not forsaking the Assemblies, we bless the Lord that such as are
sorroufull for our Churches true Assemblies, and to whom this man and his
fellows reproaches thereof are a burden, have had the Assemblies of Christ's
ambassadors to attend, and that the great Master of Assemblies has not wholly
left them, but has covered a table in the wilderness in this our Churches
fli^ht unto it, to these who with peril of their life are seeking their soul
food because of the sword of the wilderness, drawn out by Assemblies of
Schismatic destroying Intruders, from whom we must depart, and who have
persecut us away for adherance to our sworn Reformation and Covenant with God,
which they have dissound.

The sentence next subjoyned viz opinionum varietas and opinantium unitas non
sunt asustata, does highly reflect upon himself, and the party he pleads for,
who do persecut with fire and sword all who differ in judgment from them in
these things which they aknowledge but tricae and matters indifferent, so that
in this they are (...). For us, we are chased out from them, and can be
admitted to no union with them except we unit in there sin, which throw grace
we are fixtly resolved against. His design [to quiet peoples minds, and setle
them in more peace and unitie] is of it self to good to be presented as a porch
here to such a shattered pasquill, and to be pretended to so bad a cause and in
this place may be not unsuitably assimilated to Solomon's ring of gold in a
swines snout. No doubt solid peace and unity is only to be found in Gods way,
in keeping his Covenant and owning his Messengers of peace (whose feet have
been beautiful even on these reproached mountains and other places where Gods
people assembled, since they have his call and seal to preach the gospel) and
not in following the foxes in a way of perjurie and breach of Covenant as this
pamphleter would perswad.

FINIS.

Courteous Reader.
There being several considarable Typographicall erroures in the first part
especially, thou art desired ere thou read, or in the reading to amend with
thy pen these ensuing, or such like as will occurr unto the in the perusal.

First Part.
Page 5. l. 15. read (...). p. 6. l. 25. r. 28. l. 29. r. inequality. p. 8. l.
18. r. chides. p. 9. l. 2. r. juridical. l. 8. r. high. p. 10. l. 6. r.
Pastors. l. 16. r. dogmatick. l. 35. r. juridical. page 11. for [as the
foundation of] r. influencing. p. 13. l. 30. r. this. p. 17. l. 6. r. (...). l.
24. r. posessed. p. 18. l. 17. r. he. p. 19. l. 32. r. qualifications. p. 21.
l. 7. r. has. p. 22. l. 11. r. tell. l. 20. r. the. p. 25. l. 23. r. with. p.
26. l. 31. r. none. p. 27. l. 1. r. up. l. 7. r. these. p. 28. l. 24. r. unto.
p. 29. l. 26. r. power. p. 31. l. 17. r. there. p. 32. l. 32. r. it. p. 36. l.
26. r. worn. p. 37. l. 9. r. bring. p. 39. l. 13. r. he. p. 12. p. 46. l. 23.
r. Romans 12. p. 51. l. 1. r. Gravari. l. 2. r. Politicorum. Chap. 7. Tit. l. 5.
add. in. p. 59. l. 10. r. wearing. l. 16. add. a. l. ult. r. not. p. 63. l. 9.
r. Oecononemy. l. ult. add. shows. p. 68. l. 7. r. simply l. 33. r. to. p. 73.
l. 22. r. be. p. 76. l. 9. add. is. p. 81. l. 10. r. subject. l. 30. r. of
dominion. p. 82. l. 25. r. Informs. p. 84. l. 1. r. negatively. p. 85. l. 9.
r. this. p. 86. l. ult. r. the. p. 89. l. 13. r. (...). 80. p. 92. l. 4.-l. 32.
r. can. p. 94. l. 33. r. in. p. 95. l. 1. dele. is. p. 96. l. 4. r. he. p. 99.
l. 27. add. is. p. 102. l. 10 for. [the Corinthians] r. Churches. p. 104. l.
13. dele, [as we may after shew] 107. l. penult. r. officers and offices. p.
108. l. 30. r. can. p. 109. l. 9. add, his. p. 114. l. 10. r. thus. l. 32. add.
no. p. 116. l. 11. ad^ according to the series of his reasoning. no. p 119. l.
9. r. this. l. 29. r. inferior. p. 120. l. 30. r. this. p. 123. l. 4. r.
Christian. p. 124. l. 9. r. to gather. l. ^30. dele ry. p. 125. l. 24. r. been.
p. 126. l. 22. r. Spurious. p. 129. l. 1. r. commanded. l. 4. r. Presbytry. p.
131. l. 13. supple. in the proper Scriptural senc. l. 32. r. grad. p. 137. l.
1. dele. had ane office next to that of apostles and doctors. p. 139. l. 20.
r. his. p. 140. l. 21. r. for. p. 148. l. 12. r. supple. Taking it in ane
authoritative Juridical senc. p. 150. l. penult. r. pray. p. 157. l. 14. dele,
apostolik and. p. 162. l. 27. r. circle still. p. 163. l. 9. r. with. l. ult. r.
ceremonial. ibid. r. part. p. 164. l. 31. r. (...). ibid. dele. ane. p. 167. l.
5. r exemplify. p. 170. l. 14. r. Prove. 9. p. 171. l. 14. r laborers. l. ult.
add. we. p. 174. l. 34. r. (...) p. 177. l. 10. r. ubi. p. 177. l, 31. for,
even, r. except. p. 178. l. 2. r. (...). p. 183. l. 30. Ar. it self. p. 186. l.
16. r. and pride. l. penult. add, in. p. 188. l. ult. r. true. p. 191. l. 30.
r. profligat. p. 195. l. 16. r. interval, the, l. 21. r. nothing. p. 196. l. 3.
r. bold. p. 198. p. 199. l. 5. r. what. p. 200. l. 2. dele message, or. l. 13.
add. in. p. 201. l. 33, p. suppositia. l. 33, r. suppositious. l. ult. what. p.
203, l. 17. r. till. 204. l. 6. r. consuetudo. p. 206. l. 24. r. for. 1. p.
211. l. 21. through the. p. 215. l. 25. r. distributively. 217. l. 9, dele, by.
l. 19. add, is. p. 219. l. 6. r. or. p. 221. l. 24, add, the. l. 25. r.
opposed. p. 222. l. 25. r. of. p. 226, r. (...). 227, l. 12, r. (...). p. 229.
l. 24. r. deligatur plebe p. 231, l. 30. r. ligandi. l. ult. in. p. 236. 11. r.
^rum. p. 238, l. 26. r. fit segregatus. l. 27. r. set aside or cesured. p. 241,
l. 20. r. (...). l. 25, r. (...). p. 142, l. 10. r. lowly. p, 143. l. 10. r.
unalterablenes. l. 19, r. harmonious p. 245, l. 7. r. commune p. 246. l. 28. r.
name. p. 247. l. 28. r. office. ibid. r. none. l. 30, r. us. p. 252. l. 3. r.
5. l. 33. supple, and besides. l. 34, r. this. ibid. supple, which is p. 261.
l. 28. r. forgot. 29. r. for. p. 261. l. 26. r. (...): p. 265. l. 10. dele, as
to soom acts. p. 272. l. 6. r. (...) p. 281. l. 9. r. (...).

2. Part.
page 2. l. 15. supple. both. p. 7. l. 24. supple, anno 40. and 41. p. 24. l.
17. r. 1671. p. 62. l. 4. r. this p. 73. l. 2. r. then l. 20. r. cannot. p. 99.
l. 18. r. commissaries p. 117. l. 4. dele. me. p. 124. l. 4. r. consonant. p.
132. l. 19. r. Diaeceseos. l. 21. supple. the.

Part. 3.
Page 2. l. 13. r. our. l. 14. r. or. p. 4. l. 29. r. declared p. 12. l. 13.
supple. and are. p. 14. l. 28. r. do. p. 26, l. 15, supple. ane. p. 28, l. 28.
r. and. p. 29, l. 16, r. of. p. 35, l. 31, supple. (...). 32. r. (...). p. 36,
l. 1, r. motion. p. 37, l. 28, r: fourth. p. 39, l. 32, r. constitution. p. 40,
l. 32, supple comparing this with what he pleads from the instance of Solomon's
deposing Abiathar. p. 48, l. 9. r. by. p. 53, l. 2. r. obligations. p. 59, l,
8, r. intrusion. p. 61, l. 32, add. thereof. p. 64, l. 27, r chousing. p. 67, l.
15, r. petitio. p. 69, l. 25, r. they. p. 73, l. 32, r. (...) p. 78, l ult. r.
Sabinus. p. 81, l. 15, r. the p. 83, l. penult r. relation, p. 84, l. 15, r. no
Bishop. p. 90, l. 21. r. Priest. l. 27; dele. hearing of. p. 28, dele. and
attending their Ministry as such 15. p. 94, l. 11, add, graceless men. p. 95,
l. 4, dele. of. p. 103, l. 18, r. ofl. 23, r scruple. p. 113, l. 1, r.
supremacy. p. 127, l. 28, r. inquies. p. 130, l. ult. r. calceorum. p. 134, l.
12, r. another, p. 138, l. 26, r. authority. l. penult. r. our. p. 160, l. 1,
add. this. p. 162, l. 27, r. Presbyterian. p. 165, l. 17, r. they. p. 167, l.
27, r. for, or, r. again, p. 168, l. r, add, especially. p. 170, l. 10, r.
which notwithstanding is. 179, l. 29, r. Magistrates: p. 181, l. 12. r. a purer
Church. p. 183, l. 16, r. and which does. p. 186, l. 2, r. thousands. l. 16,
r. this. p. 190, l. 11. r. more then. l. 28, r. offered. p 162, l. 8, r.
Smectymnuus. p. p, 162, l. 25, r. the Holy Spirit, dele of ibid. p. pe-

command. p. 76. l. 19. After Ambition, r. The text being most express in it,
that the inequality which they were striveing about, included a dominion and
primacie. p. 77. l. 13. after [touched] add, since our Lord was now
exerciseing, an absolute supremacy over his Church, how then (I pray) will
this argument taken from his example, Suite his Scope and purpose of
dischargeing a Supremacy. p. 79. l. 20. 21. r. thus, did not Christ discharge
ane inequality, in dischargeing a primacie; an inequality of the highest pitch.
p. 79: l. ult: r. Seeming to make. p. 80. l. ult. After [power] add (to use
his way of speaking) p: 81. l: 20: r. and neither despotick nor princely. p.
83. l. 28: 29. r. That Church Officers are of superior or inferior orders or
kinds. p. 84. l: 26. r. A preaching Presbyter or Pastor. l. 31, 32. r. Such
Presbyters have the Scriptural Episcopal authority. p, 85. l. 17, r. Superior
and inferior kinds or orders. p. 87. l. 6, r. After [Church rulers] add, we,
all know how Prelatists and the popish Church apply (...) or Clerus. l. 9.
after [denomination] add, considered in its true extent and import, p. 89. l.
5. r. To the highest ordinary office bearers, entrusted with the Power of the
keys, l. 14, r. Whatever Power of order or jurisdiction, the Scripture Bishop
can lay claim unto. p. 90, l. 1. r. The Scripture Episcopal Power, l. 9: r.
All this Episcopal Authority. l. 25, r. Elders or Bishops in a perfect parity,
and in common, So, l. ult. after [flocks]. p. 91. l. 3. after, [Presbyters]
add, when applied (as is said) to the highest ordinary officers entrusted with
the Power of the keys, l: 12, r. preaching Presbyters or Pastors. So l. 18, l.
32. after [elder] add (he must understand the preaching elder or Pastor if he
speak to the point.) l. ult. and page 92. l. 1. r. When God is pointing out
thereby the highest ordinary officer entrusted with the word and doctrine. l.
5. r. preaching Presbyter, l. 15, r. preaching elders. l. 17. r. this highest
ordinary standing officer often mentioned, p. 92. l. 17. r. When the Word
[Bishop] is applied to the highest ordinary Church officer entrusted with the
Power of the keys. l. 24. r. preaching elder or Presbyter, l. 30. r. the same
highest ordinary officer. l. 37. r. preaching Presbyter, So p. 94. l. 5, and 7.
and 19. So p. 95, l. 5, and 9. p. 97. l. 5, r. preaching Presbyters or Pastors.
So, l. ult. and p. 99. l. 4, and 16, 26. So p. 101, l. 14, and 18. l. 34. r.
that the Pastoral office admitts of different orders, p. 102, l. 28. r.
preaching Presbyters. So. p. 103, l. 6. 21, and 28. So also, p. 104. l. 23. p.
111, l. 30, r. Such different orders of Church officers, l. 34. r. different
orders, p. 120. l. 14. r. his fancied Ecclesiastic Officers specifically
different. p. 122, l. 8, r. of a Superior order and function, l. 11, r. of the
same function. l. 16, r. Several functions, l. 18, r. different functions. p.
124, l. 24. r. as appearing to the Informer Episcopal like. p. 131. l. 13. r.
thus (or of the Scripture sense embraced by our divines, viz. for the Apostles
extraordinary unfixt assistants in their Ministry. So Calvin on the place.
Bucan, loc. 47. de Minist., Muscuius, loc. de minist. verb. page 362. etc. and
the latter part of his Answer seems to admit this) l: 21. r. (which the
Informer will easily grant is not that strict proper sense of the Evangelist,
supposed either in his doubters objection or his answer.) p. 133. l. 31, 32,
33. r. Thus, in the Scripture proper sense, but those that preach the Gospel in
that extraordinary way above expressed, for, as for those that wrote the Gospel,
the Informer will not say they are intended here, and although such may be in
part called Evangelists upon this ground, as Mark, and Luk, Sensu Augustiore,
as Bucan expresses it, ubi supra, yet this is not acknowledged to be the
proper and adequate ^round of this office and denomination, as
contradistinguished in Scripture from Apostles, two Apostles themselves,
Matthew and John, being such Evangelists, p. 139, l. 33, 34. r. So that he does
in these words clearly plead etc. l. ult unto p. 140. l: 6. after [among them]
add, if we consider the entire Series of his reasoning, not only from Christ's
primacy and Supremacy as exemplified in the Aposties (whatever he does
inconsistently here add, as to the division of this princehood among them,
since thus the Apostle John was sole primate, over the Church when the rest
were gone) but also from the moral standing Authority of the Jewish P^hood,
and such a single Supremacy of the High Priest which he denies to be typical,
but of constant use in Government, and his express asserting the equality of
the same Ministry, may admit of inequality (consequently principality, or
primacy as he expresses it) in Government. Thus he [de diverse. grad. ^p. 14.
page 145.] l. 16. r. Had in a prefect parity and in common; so page 147. l 13.
p. 148. l. 31. after elder, add, taking it in an authoritative juridical
sense, as competent to Church officers. p, 149. l. 13. after accuse, add,
taken generally and in its full latitude. p. 152. l. 21. After properly, add,
and immediately entrusted to them. p. 157. l. 12. r. will the Informer deny that
in his sense, or of these divines, these precepts, 1 Timothy 6: 13. and 1 Timothy 5.
21. Joined with the promise mentioned, will not reach, and include every piece
of the Apostolic and Evangelistick office respective, p: 158. l. 10. r. is not
that which simply and absolutely in it self considered they hold to have the
force of a rule, p. 162. line 10. r. different offices and functions, 25: r.
before Ephesus Crete and other Churches were settled in their organick being
and their ordinary and inferour elders. p. 164. l. 13. r. is mentioned in such
ane act of Solemn blessing, thus circumstantiate both as to its subject and
object as this. p. 176. (misprinted 149.) r. From the first Scripture Bishops
or preaching Presbyters, p. 177. l. 30, 31. r. That this Episcopal power over
Presbyters, though far from the Diocesian Bishops power was not till the year
140. p. 190. l. 18. r. Aaron himself [mediatly at least and upon the matter.]
p. 194 l. 12. r. Hanmer p. 197. l, 13. r and expound thy Scriptures which
custom has not known etc. Disowning thus all customary or traditionall
innovations. p. 200. l. 27. r. from Mark the Presbyters, l. 29. r. speaking of
this custom he excludes him. p. 201. l. 2, r. thus, to the Presbyters election
as their act simply, but would have plainly asserted that it was by Mark's
appointment: the simple observing of this practice or custom, and observing it
by his appointment, being quize distinct things; beside that we shall after
show, that Jerome never intended to assert any such thing. p. 203. l. 16. r. The
Church in this Nation. p. 207. l. 7. r. Common counsel, or in a joint parity
and equality, so, l. 1^. ibi^m after. 4 figure, r. if in Jerome's sense the
Apostles etc p. 208. l. 3. r. preaching Presbyters. From, l. 11: to 17. r.
thus, can he make it appear that the Schism in Corinth (from which he draws
the change in Jeroms sense) was anterior to his proofs from. 1 Pet. 5. and
Acts. 20. Much more his proof from John, for the divine warrant of this entire
parity and common joint Government of Presbyters, or that this Schism was not
attended with such absence of the Apostle, as he supposes did influence this
new Episcopal Government in Jeroms sense. p. 209. l. 1. After the word
[nature] add, besides that the passage it self, will never prove either Marks
practice or appointment in relation to this supposed Bishop as is said, p. ^11.
l. 11. r. Upon the ground of this first evasion and gloss, l. 20 r, which in
the two collated passages of Jerome, 212 l. 5. r. that the Apostles in Jeroms
sense did, l, 24. r. by common counsel, or in a complete parity, (thus also. p.
214, l. 24) p. 213. l. 22, r. preaching Presbyters, p. 216, l. 29, 30, to 32,
after [Jerome speaks of] r. thus. So that this Schism was bred while there was
no Presbyterian parity to breed it. He tells us, that in Jeroms sense the
Corinth Schism gave a rise to this change, while Paul was present in Spirit
and Governing them Episcopally (for he will not say that he let go his reighns
of Government upon every personal absence) and therefore it took its original
according to his pleading from the Apostolic Episcopacie. p. 220, from l. 33,
to p. 221, r. he makes him reflect upon Christ's immediate commands and
institutions in point of Government, whereof severals can be produced in the
Evangelick History, as if they were not only altered, but stated in-opposition
to the Apostles institutions and practice therein. For Jerome does thus clearly
oppose to one another, the Dispositio Divina, and Ecclesiae usus or custom in
this passage, as two contrary and inconsistent things, thus he also reflects
upon Christ's institutions as at first practiced by the Apostles before this
change. p. 225. l. 17. r. no such delegation. p. 231. l. 17. r. the present
prince-like power of our Prelates, as Diocesian B. far less their Erastian
usurpations. p. 237, l. 8, 9, etc. r. the ancient Bishops were not all set
over whole provinces, but city by city for the most part (yea several cities
had more) who certainly were not Bishops in that sense, wherein we heard
Theodoret and Oecomen^us denies a multiplicity of Bishops in one city, which
also proves a great variety in the Moold and denomination of Bishops spoken of
by the fathers. p. 238. l. 23, r. set aside, separat, and suspended, So, p.
239, l. 2, p. 247, l. 11, r. a preaching Presbyter or Pastor. l. 35, r. Sect.
I^. p. 250. l. 9. must begin thus. Besides, what can he infer from Calvin's
assertion of the precedence of one at that time? had not Paul etc. p. 251, the
Parenthesis l. 5, 6, 7. r. thus (no less foolishly then maliciously here
improven by Durel, no friend to his principles.) p. 252, the penult line must
be contiguous with the preceding, and run thus, besides that this treatise
entitled etc. p. 258, l. 15, and l. 19, of page 259 are to be joined as
contiguous, p. 261. l. 17. after [Government,] add, and received and submitted
to our Churches pure constitution in point of doctrine and worship, p. 262, l.
25, r. which as early crept into the Church, as the prelacy he pleads for yea
much more early. p. 263, l. 33, 34, 35, r: thus; nor has the Informer proved
that this Proestos, cast in the moold of the present Episcopacie which he
pleads for, was allowed of Blondel, since he holds it to be cross to the divine
pattern, and from Scripture disputes against it. p. 238, l. 21, r. from the
times of the Apostles, and appointed by them. p. 262, from, l. 22, to l. 29 r.
thus: presented under an Episcopal notion to Eusebius, and the Power of Bishops
which then had obtained, whom he too credulously following in his Character and
accounts of them, and (as Irenaeus also does) calling them Bishops in the
Catalogues, might deceive others in nameing them, so, p. 263, from, l. 9, to
11, read, what ever impression of them Irenaeus might be supposed to have upon
the ground of his expressions of them, or might thereby beget in others,
because of the language and custom of their time, yet etc. from l. 14, to 16,
r. the nature, and state of these Church Officers, whom termeing [Bishops] they
were supposed to be such as had then obtained, l. 18, to 25. r. thus; in that
Irenaeus calls them [Presbyters] according to the promiscuous use of the names
Bishop and Presbyter in his time, they prove that these expressions of them
which seem to savor of an Episcopal notion, or what impression he might have,
or others take from him, was a mistake: since according to the Scripture
language etc. l. 26, to 32, r. that what impression Irenaeus might possibly
have of the first moderators, or what Episcopal notion Eusebius might present
them under, upon his credulous reports taken up upon trust (as he says
himself) from his forefathers, were a mistake: and this because the persons,
whom they thus represented, and of whom they meaned and speak, were upon
thematter mere Presbyters. p. 264, l. 21, r. next, if the Informer will strain
these words to plead for his hierarchy even in the Apostles time, and will
affirm that Bucer etc. l. 25, r. he must needs grant that Bucer was obleidged
to take notice etc. l. 30, r. else there will be no consistencie in the words,
if Bucer reckon etc. p. 271, l. 5, 6, r. but as the Informer will find it hard
to prove thisdistinction of the schools to be as ancient as these fathers, so
though it were granted that it was, it is certain that what gradual difference
they admit betwixt the Bishop and Presbyter, they found it etc. p. 281, l. 3,
r. collected by one under the name of Clemens. 2d. Part. p. 5, l. r, r: having
no tincture of Prelacie, but entirely Presbyterial in its mold and members,
according to the then degrees and State of our Reformation. p. 23, l. 7. after
[Seasonable case] r. (and himself in objecting the same afterward, p. 69.) p
29, l. 8, r. in their nature, and originally flows from the Pope, p. 64, l.
30, after [Government] add, whatever defection or liberty of glossing any of
them might fall into or plead for. p. 76, l. penult. read. prael. 3, parag. 9.
p. 78, l. 3, r. of all Oaths of this nature. p. 82, l. 3, 4, 5, r. Not to
detain the Informer in tasking him to prove that this Statute as not being
judicial, but moral, does belong unto the Christian Church: l. 28, 29, r. this
divine frame of Presbyterian Government, which both as to its courts and
officers, comprehends the substantials of Government: p. 83, l. 15, r. prael.
3, parag. 9, 10, l. 23, r. prael. 7, Parag. 6: p. 92, l. 27, r. but such cannot
be the Inf^rmers meaning in this place, nor will his moold of arguing admit
thereof: p. 98, l. 14r. a matter not only of it self indifferent, but a
domestic and private concern l. 22. after [gratis dicta] r. Besides, upon the
supposal that the matter of both Oaths is alike or equal, and that the matter
of the Covenant is indifferent, the parallel will not hold as to a dispensation
with the matter of the one and the other. p. 101, l. 11, after [obligation]
add, for whither we conclude the lawfulness of the matter of this Oath, from
its conform (...) to the divine positive Law, or from the overuling of this
positive precept in this case by a Superior moral command, all is one as to
our defense and argument for the Covenant from this text, p. 115, l. 18, r. The
Informer has not reconc led this either with the command or with the promise
etc. p. 117. l. 15; 6, 7, r. Sure in his opinion their offer of a league, if
strangers, admitted a demurr, and if Canaanites their offering to admit of
terms of peace might have stopped this question, even though inhabitants of
Canaan etc. l. 11, r. So their first offer was a ground of peace, if strangers,
l. 13, r. especially these continued demurrs and renewed interrogatures
recorded in this contexture are considerable, if we consider what is observed
by learned interpreters from v. 8. that they sought peace, etc. l. 17, and
when. r. for when. Par.. 3. p. 35, l 32, r. (...) p. 45, l. 28, r. Presbyterian
Government and the established Reformation of this Church, p. 47, l. 28, r. the
work of the Reformation then established, p. 50, l. 3. for, pamphlet r.
Dialogue: p. 54, l. ult. r. and such things as upon our, and the Scripture
grounds (which the Informer cannot disprove) do immediately in a moral sense
dispose etc: p: 56, l: 33, r: (besides that as to the maine of this Character,
they are all such as we have cleared) he makes etc: p: 57, l: 14, r: which even
as to the Apostle himself, was solemnly sealed, confirmed and commended to the
gentile Church: p. 73, l. 10, r. extending hands, and that not only among the
people, but also in commitiis etc. p. 75, l. 27, r. independents and us in this
point of a ministerial call. p. 76, l. 8* r. that this electiv suffrage
strictly taken or ju^dicially, may be pleaded for as belonging to them. p. 77,
l. 8, 9, etc. r: thus: and as that which is proper to some part of this
organick body (the Church) may in a General sense be said to be the due right
of the Church it self: in like manner, I may this call and election be said to
be the right of the wholl congregation, as including the body of the people and
the eldership, the juridical decisive suffrage belonging to the eldership, and
the Consentient to the rest of the people, as is said. p. 18, l: 9, r. they are
abjured, p. 90, l: 17, 18, r. again, it is obedience that is enjoined, which is
more General and extensive then hearing them as Ecclesiastic officers, and
will not necessarily include it, l. 20, 21, r. sitting in Moses chair who was
King in Jesurum, appears distinct from sitting in Aarons Priestly chair, p.
91, l. 10, 11. r. hence the concession [that they were to be heard] will not
bear a conclusion of hearing Curats, in this our case. For 1. (here add what
is under the second head) then proceed thus, next, say they were to be heard as
Ecclesiastic teachers, the cases are very different etc. then proceed to 1, 3,
4, 5. head. p. 97, l. 9, r. teach and expone in the sense and extent he pleads
for, which he has not etc. p. 103. l. 29. 3. depending as to their ordination,
p. 104. l. 24, r. did the ministerial acts of our Reformers now mentioned flow
etc. p. 105, l. 6. r. did owe the validity of their Baptism, etc. p. 115. l.
27. after [defection] add, and deeper stain of more and more practical
acknowledgements thereof, as to the design and endeavors of the Lawmakers,
p. 118, l. 2. r. Since in this his first reply, taken from their obedience to
the rulers, he touches neither the Antececedent nor consequent etc. l. 30, 31,
etc. r. thus, Since he acknowledges separation from the Government to be
Schism, Sure our counter charge stands good against him, that the first
Separation lies at his Door, it being made good that Presbyterian Government is
both the Scripture Church Government, and also the reformed established
Government of this Church, and this retorted charge, neither he nor any of his
party are able to disprove. For etc. p. 119. l. 30. r. absolute unavoidable
condition: p. 128, l. 33: r. that are very necessary, but allures him rather by
love and tender forbearance: p. 119, l. 6. r. -- Sed licentia, quod
temeritatis; and superbiae and stultitiae (in margin arrogantiae) majoris
videbatur. p. 130, l. 18, r. but I say not (says he) the I dolothyt etc. p.
131. l. 10, r. thus, at that time this came to pass through their weakness,
etc. p. 133, l. 10. r. that in these things he will rather cede from his
liberty (or intermit its exercise) then offend etc. p. 141. l. 33, r. no more
indifferent, but duty, p. 142, l. 15, r. taking this phrase in a moral sense,
and in the Scripture acceptance. p, 150, l. 16, 17, after [Ministry] add, and
did necessarily suppose the same: p: 155. l. penult. r. Ergo. by his
Magistratical Power, he did properly and immediately silence and depose him, and
the civil Magistrate may thus immediately and formally by his Magistratical
Power restrain the exercise of the ministry. p. ^57, l. 2. r. that he can by
his Magistratical Power and by elicit acts immediately restrain ministerial
duties, or that the Magistrate has ane immediate Power over the exercise of
the Ministerial office, to discharge it at his pleasure. p. 164, l. 14, r. 1
one anent whom an inquiry might be stated.

Praef. p. 24. l. 24. r. contention and hatred. p. 26. l. 6. r. come to Bethel.
p. 35. l. 16. r. after the first anent view which I had of it.

Several such might possibly beyet glean^ up: if some passages of Authors seem
to^ generaly cited, or not translated ad verbum. the notoriety of the places
themselves may excuse the first, and the condition of Readers, to whom this is
mainly addressed, may plead for the second. The Pages here quoted are numbered
according the printed Method, but the true Method exhibit in the Index, will
direct the Reader aright.



