A Counter-Essay: OR, A VINDICATION and Assertion of CALVIN and BEZA'S
Presbyterian Judgment and Principles; Drawn from their Writings, in Answer to
the Imputations of a late Pamphlet, Entitled, An Essay, concerning Church
Government, out of the Excellent Writings of CALVIN and BEZA, Attempting to
fasten upon them an Episcopal Persuasion.

Wherein is exhibit their Assertions of Presbyterian Government from Scripture,
and this Authors Perversion of their Doctrine in his pretended Definitions,
Postulatums, and Axioms, imputed to them, is discovered, the Falsehood of his
Propositions and Corollaries, and the Sophistry of his Demonstr^^ons founded
upon the whole, detected: And the Truth confirmed by Counter-Positions and
Demonstrations, exhibited from the Principles of these Divines.

By occasion whereof, some chief Sinews of the Episcopal Pleadings, from the
nature of the Apostolic and Evangelistick Office, the Authority of the seven
Asian Angels of the Churches, etc. are dissolved, and the equal Power and
Authority of Pastors in Government, as the highest ordinary Church Officers
evinced* Exodus 19.16. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
Psalm. 56. 5. Every day they wrest my words. 2 Cor. 13. 8. For we can do nothing
against the truth, but for the truth.

Qui resistit non credit, Adversarius est radio lucis quo penetrandus est; non
aver^t aciem, sed (...) mentem. August, tractat. 27. in loan, (...) haeresis,
no^ recipit quasdam scripturas and si quas recipit, adjectionibus, and
detractionibus ad dispositionem institus sut intervertit -- tantum (...)
chs^ruxit adulter sensus, qantum and corruptor (...). Tertull, de Praescrip*
(...).

^ Lactantius de falsa sapientia, cap. 1,

^ Idem. 'Divinar. Instut. Epitom, cap.6

By a Minister of the true Presbyterian Church of Scotland, estab'lshed by Law.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer To their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1692.

The PREFACE.
THe question concerning the true frame of the Lords Tabernacle, the New
Testament Church, in point of Government, has been a Ball of disput long tossed
in this Island; this Contest might have long since had its exit, and issued in
sound and solid Peace, and union upon this head, had we all with a single heart
and eye, looked to the Pattern showed upon the Mount, and listened to the
discoveries so often made to us, from the lovely Oracles of the Word, Ezekiel.
chap. 43. v. 11. of the form of the House, and the fashion thereof, and the
goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and
all the Ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the Laws
thereof, that we might keep the whole form thereof, and all the Ordinances
thereof, and do them. Had we renounced the wisdom of the flesh, and got the
penitent heart, and been ashamed for all we have done amiss; and, (as the
Author of this Paper well expresses it in his Pre^ace) preferred Religion to
Interest, and the power of Godliness to that of Dominion. But restless
Ambition, and love of Dominion over the House of God, and over their Brethren,
and fellow servants, as they began in the Christian Churches Infancy, and had
an early tincture in the Apostles (though our Lord nipt the first budds of this
bitter Root, and crushed this Cockatrice in the shell, showing them, that humble
Ministerial Diligence was the apex of their greatness) so the fermentation of
this distemper continuing in most men, and by the influence of Satan upon man's
wicked heart, diff^sing it self in after Generations, has been a spreading
gangren, still hindering the reception, and improvement of this Ordinance, of
the Gospel Church Government, whereof Scripture and Experience are irrefragable
witnesses. The Apostle Paul tells us: the mystery of iniquity was working in
his time, and the Embrio of the Prelatical Hierarchy, and a Papistical,
consequently, then formed; which we find after stirring in the counteractings,
and contradiction of a Diotrophes, (that early aspiring Primat,) even unto the
Apostle John. Hence the Apostle Peter in his exhortation to Pastors of the
Church, does so en^xly dehort them from those two grand and Satanical
enchantments, viz. Covetousness, and Lording over Gods Heritage; which no doubt
had its influence for checking these evils for a considerable time. But the
early-sown tears of the Evil one, did by piecemeal discover themselves, first,
in the advance of Beza's humane Episcopacy, the fixed Moderator, or proestos,
which was next, (by the influence of the restless temper) screwed up to the
Satanical, as he calls it, viz. the Diocesion Prelacy, swall^wing up, and
enhansing all the decisive Authority and Power of Pastors in Government; then
the ascension was made to the Archbishops, and Metropolitans^ Office, and
Power, and by an inevitable necessity to the Culmen of the Papal Monarchy at
last. The Lord having in this evening of time, and the days of Reformation, by
the light of the Gospel, discovered the mystery of iniquity, and of the Papal
Hierarchy consequently; and caused his People to hear his call, to come out of
Babylon, and be separated from that detestable Synagogue, the Reformed Churches
has generally had so deep a sense of the con^exion of Popry and Prelacy, that
together with the one, they found themselves oblidged to reject the other; and
in their Confessions, and by the Writings of their most famous, burning and
shining Lights, have witnessed against this corruption of Government, as well
as against that Synagogues errors in point of Doctrine; whereof the Patrons of
Popry are so convinced, that one of them, Nicholas le Maistrie, in a piece,
Entitled, The Restoration of the ancient principality of Bishops, dedicated
to Cardinal Richeleiu, Printed at Paris anno 1633, In the Dedicatory Epistle
informs, that the Majesty of the Pontifical and Episcopal Jurisdiction is so
conjoined, and confederated together, that the enemies cannot so guide their
hands, but with the same audacity, wherewith they assaulted the Pope's Crown,
they likewise shaked the Bishops Myters, and as it were with one bloody Wound
pierced both their sides -- that when, and where the Pope's greatness is
violated, the splendour of the Episcopal is grown contemptible. Hence we see it
comes to pass (says he) by a certain divine assent and counsel, that the
Authority of Bishops should be expelled out of the same Province, out of which
unhappy lust had thrust out the Papal Majesty. By what methods the Episcopal
Hierarchy has been retained in our neighbor Church of England, and what has
been the issues thereof, what wrestlings against it, what disputs and
discoveries of its evils, by the famous Divines of that Church, until it came
to be condemned, and voted against by both Houses of Parliament, and by the
venerable Assembly of Divines at Westminster, anno 1600, we cannot now resume,
nor shall we trace the long tract of doleful effects, corruption of judgment
and practice, barbarous and bloody Persecution, funest inextricable Broils,
and dissentions among all Ranks, advances of Popery, and desolation of our
Church, etc. which has attended (as always before) the late erection of it in
this Land, whereof our honorable Estates of Parliament discovered their deep
sense, in condemning, and abolishing it in the late happy Revolution.

But the Judgment and Writings of so many Divines, and Churches abroad,
stricking against this Hierarchy, being found by the Promotters of that
interest, such a heavy bur^en, and gripping argument, there has several
methods been used to shake off, and dissolve the same: Hence, since the late
erection of prelacy, several Pamphlets have appeared, endeavoring to reconcile
this Hierarchy with the judgment of the Reformed Churches, and the most famed
Writers thereof. But with what success they have managed this work, the
impartial and judicious have sufficiently discovered, and that in this
endeavor, they have been rolling Sisiphus stone which (...) still returned
upon them, and renewed their inextricable Labor.

Among the foreign Divines which have appeared against Prelacy, Calvin and
Beza, being for Piety and Learning, men of chief name, and among the glorious
Cloud of Christ's witnesses against the beast, since the Reformation, such as
not only deserve a place among the thirty, but among the first three, hence it
is, that this endeavor has been mainly fixed upon them; and what ever thing in
their writings might seem to savor of indifferency a^e^t Presbyterian
Government (whereof they are generally acknowledged to have been both by their
Writings and Practices, the strenuous and constant asserters) or to cast a
favorable aspect upon Prelacy, searched out, and by the outmost Artifice of
near drawn Sophistry, and by the most remote consequences, stretched upon the
tenter pins, to reach such a Conclusion. Hence, not only their Commentaries
upon the Scriptures, and diverse Passages of their other Writings, have been
pitifully curtell'd and disjoynted, but their very Missives, and Letters upon
various, and remote occasions from this point, brought in to witness against
their avowed judgment to the World, when disputing and handling this question
ex professo. Whether resp^ct to truth, or partial respect to their cause, that
e^prompted these men to such a practice, is ^asie to judge. If the base visage
and stain of lying and detractions, and false witness bearing in the judgment
even of sober Heathens, and of all men of the most common sense, or morality,
had been with a conscientious conviction duly pondered, they had never
abandoned themselves to such impious folly. The practice of abusing and
counterfiting Writters, for the advantage of their Cause, has been so much
condemned in Papists, (those sl^ves of the man of Sin, given up to the power of
lies and delusions) that Protestants might, even upon this ground, have been
long since ashamed of it. It had been every way a more generous undertaking, to
have offered their Answers to the Pleadings and Arguments of those Divines
against the Hierarchy, and to have endeavored by, fair wrestling, to wring
these Weapons out of their hands, rather thus faintly to abandon the Disput,
and pretending an accord with their Antagonists than upon this head. But what
has been observed of Ignatius writings, that they suffered Martyrdoom when he
was gone, has been the fate (sure) of the Writings of these Divines, which
notwithstanding, have hitherto, and will yet farther speak for themselves.

For the Essays of the Author of this Paper, in this method, I shall not
anticipat, what is performed in the ensuing Reply, by offering here a previous
large discovery of its unsoundness; only, I may be bold to say, never any was
more unhappy than he, in this undertaking, and that upon first reading of the
Pamphlet, these things were obvious, and may be so to any considering Person.
(1.) That the series and structure of his reasoning do clearly involve Calvin
and Beza in contradictions, comparing his inferences with the Passages cited;
and that he thus crosses his character of Excellent, which he bestows upon
their Writings, 2dly, That disguising the Bishop, making Calvin and Beza to
own, by his Epithet of the President Bishop, he would seem to plead only for
the constant Moderator, or Proestos, early brought in, and that he intends no
further improvement of these places of Calvin and Beza; or to stretch their
principles in Judgment to any greater length, yet notwithstanding in the series
of his reasoning, ascribing a pre-eminence in Office, and Jurisdiction to this
President over other Ministers, yea, and such as extends to a whole Province or
Patriarchat; he shows the Inconsistency of this smooth, but foolish pretense,
and has made it as transparent, as the Cristal of the watch, 3dly. Insome of
his citations, particularly in that which is adduced to prove Definition. 4th,
his abuse and mistaks is so very gross and palpable, that any who reads some
lines foreward will find his Inference in terminis contradicted, that it is
truly a wonder how any of common sense, or ingenuity, who ever read the place,
could be guilty of so bold, or ignorant Forgery. 4thly, That either crassly, or
willingly, ^e has been ignorant of, and dis-ingenuously cocealed Calvin and
Beza's distinction of the Ordinary and Extraordinary Church Officers, and takes
his measures of their Judgment, anent the constant Government of the Church,
from what they speak of the Office of Apostles, and Evangelists; whom, all that
ever read these Authors, must needs acknowledge, that they hold to be
Extraordinary and expired. 5ly, That as some of his citations are so palpably
remote, from what he has adduced them to prove, that they do not so much as
relate to one and the same purpose and subject; so all his demonstrations are
founded upon gross mistakes of the subject and state of the question; and thus
in stead of a mounting to demonstrative Arguments (and these so evident as to
be presented in a Euclyds dress of a quod erat demonst^andum) they are pitiful
beggings of the Question, and S^phisms f^ow^ng from the ignoratio Elenchi.

He addresses in his Preface the moderat Presbyterian, but certainly the man
Proselyted to this Persuasion of Calvin and Beza, as pleading from Scripture,
for the Divine Right of the President Bishop, with Pre-eminence in Office and
Jurisdiction over the Pastors of a whole Province, or Patriarchat, (which is
the white of the Mark, that all his proofs are levelled at) ceases to be either
Moderat, or Presbyterian; not Presbyterian, because embracing a Persuasion, and
principles diametrally opposite to that Government; not moderat, because
assenting to the power of a Prelat, which is beyond all limits of equity and
moderation, and encroaches upon Presbyters and Pastors Office and Authority,
allowed them in Scripture, and likewise, because holding no just or moderat
opinion of Calvin and Beza, who never asserted such a thing, but do hold the
quite contrary.

The Author offers his Essay to the Moderat Presbyterian's Censure and
Ingenuity; and I am hopeful, that what is here replied, shall be found such a
just and ingenuous Censure, and Discovery of his mistakes, as do merit his
acknowledgments, and will obtain the same, if he be endued with that
Moderation, Charity, Self-denial, and love to the power of Godliness, which he
has here pro^est; and however, will come under the favorable Construction of a
just and ingenuous Censure, with all who are truly of this frame.

One thing I am fully agreed in with this Author, viz. That if picques and
recentments were kendled into Charity, and prejudices, and worldly designs laid
aside, Religion preferred to Interest, and the power of Godliness to that of
Dominion, the powers of Hell could not make this Protestant Church divide about
Church Government. I am confident, were we all sincerly of this Frame, We
should quickly unite, in acknowledging the true Government of the House of God,
which has had so evident an influence upon the power of Godliness, and jointly,
and zealously oppose that Prelatical Hierarchy, which has had so deplorable an
influence upon profanity and Error, and has been the great bane of both Purity
and Unity in his Church, and I am bold to add, That had we all been so happy,
as to be under the influence of this excellent Soul-frame, here described, we
had never seen such a Pamphlet as this Essay of his, nor any of this nature,
wherein there is so sad a presence of Picques and Resentments, to Charity,
prejudices of Education, and Worldly designs, Interest, and an unlawful
Hierarchical Dominion, to true Religion, and the power of Godliness; and no
doubt, if that Prayer of his for purity and Unity, in order to the ends which
he mentions, be so hearty, as be professes, the discoveries here made, will set
him to endeavor our Union upon other grounds and principles, than these
presented in his Pamphlet, viz. by an adherence to that Presbyterian
Government, now happily restored in this Church, which Calvin and Beza do so
enixly and evidently plead for, as being recommended (to use his own method and
words in arguing) by the Divine institution, the Apostolic practice, the
reception of the primitive Church, and the solemn approbation of a Revelation
from Heaven. Otherwise if he, or such as he, professing Learning and knowledge,
and by the more polite Logic Methods, to plead for Truth, and to lead us in to
the sense of Calvin and Beza upon this head, continue to ply such Artifices,
they will deserve such a lash, and Censure, as I find Lactantius in another
case, put upon a Philosopher, in his time. Nam si qui nostrum affuerunt
quantumvis temporum gratia conticerent, animo ^amen d^risete, ut pote cum
vidissent hominem profitentem se illuminaturum alios, cum ipse caecus esset,
reducturum alios ab errore, cum ipse ignoraret ubi pedes suos poneret,
eruditurum alios ad veri^atem, eujus ille ne scintillam quidam unam vidisset,
quippe cum sapientiae professor, profligare sapientiam niteretur, O Philosophum
adulatorem ac tempori servientem! verum hic pro sua inanitate contemprusest,
qui and gratiam quam speravit, non adeptusest, and gloria, quam captavit, in
culpam reprehensionemque conversa est. Lactantius Lib. de justitia, cap. 2. The
same Lactantius upon this ground, will put this lesson to them, who profess to
study, or teach Wisdom, in reference to Truth and Simplicity in this endeavor.
Est enim nesas eum qui veritati s^ude^, in aliqua re esse fallacem, at que ab
ipsa quam sequitur virtute, discedere. In hac justitiae virtutumpque omnium
via. nullus mendacio locus est. Itaque viator ille verus ac justus, non dicet
illud Lucilianum, homini amico ac familia^i non est mentiri meum, sed etiam
inimico atque ignoto existimabit non esse mentiri suum. Nec aliquando commiter,
ut lingua interpre^ animi a sensu and cogitatione discedet, de vero cultu, cap.
18:

For the Grounds of my undertaking this Reply, and the manner of performance,
take this just and true Account. This Paper was, a little after it came abroad,
put into my hand by a Gentleman, who, together with a Minister, requested my
undertaking the Vindication, of Calvin and Beza, from the Imputation thereof,
which I declineed upon several Grounds, which appeared to me considerable; for
beside my Dissability, and the then public hurry and consternation upon
occasion of the Viscount of Dundee, his prevalency in the North, my own
personal Circumstances were such, as did put considerable Remora's and
Impediments in my way, which might deterr from such a Work as this, being then
far from my Books, liable to many Tossings, and several important Ministerial
Duties, so exercising me, that I could promise my self no suitable
opportunities, or help for this performance; espeicially having upon first view
of this Pamphlet discovered, that as a full and exact perusal of Calvin and
Beza was needful for a satisfying Confutation, so the ^uthors mistakes were so
palpable, that probably it would be reckoned by the generality of all who
should see it, as among those thing -- Quae spreta exolescunt; and like Beslus
in the Commedie be secured from Censure in its own want of worth; or if any
Answer were judged requisite, this Work would be performed by some better hand
than mine, and to much more advantage; and indeed I was once informed, that
this was done by a person of known ability for such undertaking. But being
pressed by the persons before mentioned, to take this Paper to consideration, I
did at some spare hours, mould this ensuing Answer, intending at first my own
private satisfaction only, and of some Friends, which after a considerable times
lurking, I caused Transscribe, and some having perused it, whose judgment I am
bound to reverence, who encouraged to a publication as useful, I have yielded
to this motion, If the Prolixity offend, I have this Apology, that having many
diversions while a Writing, I could but now and then take a little touch of it;
and besides, having at first written the Animadversions, contained in the
second Chapter, and upon a review of Calvin and Beza, drawn out these
Positions, contained in Cap. 1 I judged it would make this Reply more full and
clear to annex them. likeways the Authors Demonstrations being made up of
References to his premised Definitions, Postulatums, and Axioms, this put me
some way under a necessity of a compendious Resuming of what is Answered upon
them; since an Answer to his demonstrations (which are the Elixir distilled
from his former Chapters of Definitions, Postulatums and Axioms, and the main
Projection thereof) made up of mere References, though in it self sufficient,
yet to most Readers would appear too mean, obscure, and superficial. I did also
judge it not improbable, that some Readers would in the first place, if not
only, view what is Replied to his Demonstrations; who thus have a compendious
view, of what is Replied to the whole Pamphlet, presented to them, rendering the
Eversion of his Demonstrations the more convincing and conspicuous, and
likewise the solidity of the Counter-Demonstrations subjoyned.

I have traced the Authors Method, as in the Series of the matter; so likeways
in Tendering the Passages cited only in English, except in some few places. It
seems he mainly Addressed the plain English Readers, and so do I in this
Answer, I hope the Passages cited, will be found justly Translated, and that I
am so far from, designing any advantageous Addition or Interpretation, that on
the contrary, through study of Brevity, the Weight and Emphasis of some places
is obscured.

The slow appearance of this Reply in public, will seem no strange thing to
any who consider the account of this Undertaking, immediately Premised. If what
is here offered, shall be found a Word in season, for Vindicating Truth, and
strengthening the hearts of any sincere contenders for the Faith, I have my
Design in Writing, and the upright Readers also in the Perusal. If this shall
meet with opposition from a proud, hardened, and self-conceited Party of Men,
who continue to state themselves in Terms of Contradiction to the true
Government of this Church, and her just and legal Establishment, as it will be
no surprisal to me (the morning Light of Reformation being to such as the
shadow of death) so, under the safe, and honorable Conduct, and Shield of
Truth, I will not be afraid, how weak soever in my self, to speak with them in
the gate. The weakest Believer, and follower of the Lamb, can do some thing for
Truth, and finds the way of Truth their strength, and the strongest, proudest
Adversaries can do nothing against it. It is certainly a great piece of the
work of our day, to plead for our Mother, according to our capacity, when so
many are pleading against her (and her provocations most sadly) as also to
plead with her, that her Abominations may be put out of the sight of her
provoked jealous Lord. The Adversaries have ( Proteous like) formed themselves
into various versatile shapes, and taken odd measures in opposing her
Restoration. When of a sudden, the Dragon (as it were) was with his Angels
cast to the Earth, Prelacy, and Supremacy, together with the Agents and
Instruments thereof baffled, and pulled down by a Parliamentary Decision, these
men were for some times amused into a silent Consternation. But straight this
Essay pleading for a president moderat Episcopacy, in an Ingine set a-work to
restore and heal the Beast of its deadly Wounds, but this project is found
ineffectual, Presbyterian Government being Established in the hands of
Presbyterians. But behold another Engine and Method of opposition, they do
closely but vigorously assist at this time the Armed Rebels, within and without
the Kingdom. But these men (the Egyptian Reed they lean to) are broken and
brought under, and the Waters overflows this Hiding Place, and Refuge of Lies.
Another method of assulting this Church is, to ply the King with their Oratory,
or if he be inexorable to them, the Church of England must be set upon this
work. and carressed with the outmost Diligence, and Artifices; the English
Service must be set up in Edinburgh, in separat meetings, and Pamphlets spread
through England, stuffed, with Tragical complaints of their Sufferings, and
with whole Legends of manifold lies and calumnies, cast upon our Assemblies,
and the faithful Ministry of this Church, as also upon several persons of
eminency concerned in promoting the Lord's Work. If this will not do, and the
bright beams of discovered Truth, and our Churches innocence dispel this Cloud,
the fruitful invention of these Assailiants sets a-work another project, it is
an old one made new again, take (...) in, let us build with you -- Addresses
are made for receiving them into the Judicatories of this Church, But what wit
or honesty has appeared in their several attempts this way, and in plying this
Engine, Time (whose Daughter Truth is) has already in part, and ere long will
further discover; (though our Church has always witnessed a willingness to
receive them upon terms, consisting with the safety of the Government) This
certainly is a project, that of it self, has much of the Old Serpents subtilty
in it; Traitors within the Walls of City, are the most formidable Enemies. We
all know the story of the Trojan Horse, and who said, Equo ne credit ^eucri,
and -- timeo Danaor and dona ferentes. The feigned Submission of a considerable
number of Hannibals Army to the Romans, when both Armies were standing in
procinctu, and ready to join Battle, proved an efficacious Stratagem, whereby
that subtle redoubted General gave them a great and bloody overthrow, at the
Field of Canna; These new supposed Auxiliaries having thus, because among them
a greater advantage to do them mischief in time of the Battle, than any other
of his Army. I must here add, That the unsound Tincture (in many things) and
dangerous design of a late Paper, bearing the specious Title of, A further
Vindication of the present Government of the Church of Scotland, looks very
like a correspondence with the same project of her Enemies. But He who is
higher than the highest, (whose weakness is stronger than man, and His
foolishness wiser than man) regards, and has an early Eye in the Morning Watch,
through the Cloud, upon the Egyptians. Let us lament after him, and lift up our
ardent cries unto this great Shepherd of the Sheep, in this signal Iuncture of
Difficulties, when the Children are brought to the Birth, and there seems no
strength to bring forth, that he would stop the way against Adversaries, give
His Judgments to our King, holy sagacity to scatter the Wicked with His Eyes,
and bring the Wheel over them; that He would revive His Work, and People,
behold, and visit this Vine, lay yet the Stones of this poor tost-Church, with
fair colors, and her foundations with Sapphires, bring back His Glory to His
House, and Plant His Tabernacle among us for evermore.

A Counter-Essay: Or, a Vindication and Assertion of Calvin and Beza's
Presbyterian Judgment and Principles, drawn from their VVritings. In Answer to
the Imputations of a late Pamphlet, Entitled, An Essay Concerning
Church Government, out of the excellent Writings of Calvin and Beza, attempting
to fasten upon them an Episcopal Persuasion.
CHAP. First.
The Scripture Account of Presbyterian Government Exhibit in some plain
Positions, out of the Writings of Calvin and Beza.
THat we may Exhibit in the beginning, a clear Prospect of the Judgment, of
these Learned Divines, in point of Presbyterian Government, and thereby lay a
solid Foundation of the Confutaion of this Pasquel. We offer to the Reader in
these plain Assertions, this full Account of Presbyterian Government from their
Writings, which are plain, and undeniable Maxims and Axioms, Demonstrating
their Judgment herein from Scripture:

First, The ordinary Officers, which Christ Institute, and the Churches
practice warrands, are Bishops, Elders, and Deacons; we need not Caution what
Calvin means by Bishops, it being obvious to all of common Sense, who do but
read him, that he intends the P^^tor or Minister, Instit. lib. 4. cap. 6. Sect.
11. with Cap. 4. Sect. 1.

2. Evangelists, were next to Apostles in Office, were to preach every where,
and were fixed to no certain determined station; Calvin on Act. 21. 8. Speaking
of Philip the Evangelist, the same he has, on Tit. 1. 5. Nulla certa statio
assignata Evangelistis.

3. Appropriating the Name, Bishop, as peculiar, to one Pastor set over others;
is an abuse of Scripture Language, and the Divine Institution, Coment on
Philip. 1.

4. The reason of this is, that all Pastors or Presbyters, have one and the
same, and an equal Function, and Official Authority, so that Dominion in any of
them over another, is a sinful impeachment of this their equal Official Power
and A^thority, lbid.

5. The passage, Tit. 1. 7. proves abundantly, that there is no difference
betwixt Bishop and Presbyter, the Apostle using both names indifferently, as
Ierom has observed. Therefore the Office being common to all Pastors; it is an
absurd perversion of Scripture Language, to give this Official name (Bishop) to
one, robbing the rest of the Pastors, thereof; Ibidem. And if he quarrel the
robbing of them, of their Official Name, therefore much more the robbing them
of any piece of their Official Power and Authority.

6. The Bishops, to whom Paul committed the Charge of the Church of Ephesus, in
his last farewell, were Presbyters, Bishops of equal authority. Calvin on Act.
20. 28. He observes, That all Presbyters are called Bishops indifferently, and
therefore the Bishops differs nothing from Presbyters; hence he holds, that
both Name and Thing of a Scripture Bishop, is proper to every Pastor.

7. All Pastors have equal right in Ordination, Pastors only Ordain, and not
the People. They have all one and the same Official Power and Function, to
which they are called of God. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 4. sect. 2: Coment. on Phil,
1. 1.

8. The Pastors are the highest ordinary Chruch Officers, Titus his
Evangelistick Authority, in Crete was a Vicarious Transient, unfixt Ministry,
in Paul's place and name, beyond the limits of this ordinary Function of
Pastors; supposing the Church not Exedified, and in this differing from the
Pastoral Office, which does suppose, this exigence of the Churches state to
over. Calvin on Ti^us 1. cap. 5. and 6 verse.

9. This Evangelistick Authority, while existing, was not to wrong, or derogat
any thing, from the consistorial decisive ordianry authority of Pastors, in
Church Government, Ibid. in answer to an Objection:

10. The Apostle had a transient, unfixt Ministry, their Office lay in founding
Churches, and planting Christ^ Kingdom in them; they had no certain limits
assigned them, for the exercise of their Ministry, but were spread the Gospel
through the World; this their Office evanisht, and died with themselves; in
this they differ from Pastors, who are fixed to their Charges, Calvin. on 1 Cor.
12. 28. verse. none of them, had peculiar, proper Charges assigned to the, but
all of them a common Command to Preach the Gospel wherever they came.
Evangelists were like to them in Office, but in different degrees of Dignity,
such were Timothy, Titus and such like, of their subsidiary help, the Lord made
use of, next to that of the Apostles; Pastors, and Doctors are next to them,
and perpetually necessary: without whom there can be no Government of the
Church; wherein they differ from Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, who are
temporary and expired, and not thus necessary for the Churches ordinary and
perpetual Government. There is one Episcopacy, which is Christ's alone, whereof
every Minister of the Gospel has an entire and equal share, Calvin on Ephesians.
4. 11. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 14. But of this further, when we come to
examine the third Definition.

11. The consistorial ordinary Collegiat Authority of Pastors, in ordination
and imposition of hands, is examplified in the imposition of the Prophets hands
at Antioch upon Paul, as Gods standing order and method in point of Ordination.
Neither Timothy, nor any Evangelists authority, was to incroach upon this; and
the Apostolic Precepts to Timothy and Titus, Lay hands suddenly on no man; and
that other, I left thee in Crete, to ordain elders, are groundlesly and
impertinently pleaded, to prove the sole authority of any one Church Officer,
in Ordination or Jurisdiction; but this authority is in the Collegiat Meeting.
Instit: lib: 4. cap: 3. sect: 14 and 15. compared with what is said above.

12. As every ordinary Pastor, de jure, owes a subjection to the Prophets, or
ordinary Pastors in the Lord, so the first Proestotes or fixed Moderators, were
de facto thus subject, and so had no juridical official pre-eminence over the
Judicatiories, Calvin on that place, The Spirits of the Prophets, etc. and
Insti^: lib: 4. cap. 4. sect: 2. at the close, their work was only to moderat
the Meeting, and gather the Votes, etc. Coment on Tit, 1. verse. 5. 6.

13. As Timothy and Titus, their Evangelistick Inspection, was beyond the
limits of the ordinary Office of Pastors, and in respect of its naure, and time
of existency, such as could not be succeeded unto; ( Calvin on Tit 15, 6,
verses, compared with Coment: 1 Timothy 1. and 6. with v. 18.) so what our Lord
enjoins to the seven Asian Angels, does nothing impeach this, even taking them
for single persons, or Presidents, since they were such, as had the rest of the
Minister or Angels, their Colleagues; and not so much as the necessity of a
fixed Moderator, or President, can be drawn from this Assertion, Beza on Rev. 2.
24, 26, verse.

14. The fixing of President Bishops, over Church Judicatories, with Official
pre-eminence over them, gave the rise to Antichrists Oligarchical Tyranny over
the Church, and all the mischiefs thereof, Beza, Ibid.

15. The Presbyterian Government, which John Knox brought into this Church of
Scotland, is the right Order, and true Government of the House of God; the
hedge and wall of the Doctrine, without which it cannot be kept pure: The want
of which Government, is the cause, why the Gospel is preached to many in wrath.
All are to contend for this Government, who wish well to this Church, and to
oppose the Reintroduction of Episcopacy, opposite thereunto, which is the
Relicts of Papacy, and will bring Epicurism into the Church, if admitted, Bez.
Ipist. 79. to John Knox.

16. The pretense of Unity, or curing Schism by this Episcopacy, is a pretense
as false and lying, as it is flattering, whereby many of the best Ancients,
were deceived. Ibid.

17. There was among the Apostles met together, no distinction of degrees, but
only of Order, as in other Ecclesiastical Meetings and Assemblies, until the
humane Episcopacy, was brought into the Church, which shortly turned into
Satanical, Beza on Acts. 1. 23.

18. The Apostles had an immediate Call to their Office, to which Office was
annexed an extraordinary measure of the Holy Ghost, which is Termed Infused;
This immediate Call is the true and genuine Mark of the Apostolic Calling,
which expired with the death of the Apostles themselves, when they had
fulfilled their work in framing Churches. Evangelists were assumed by the
Apostles without the Churches suffrage, because the Churches were not as yet
Constitte, and were sent hither and thither, while the Churches were in
Planting; Such was the Office of Evangelists peculiarly so called, as Timothy,
Titus, Luke, etc. Beza on Galat. 1. v. 1, 2.

19. The Apostolic Office lay in this, to Constitute Churches through the
whole World, by a sort of peculiar right, as appears from Christ's Command, and
their whole History; therefore Churches being Constitute, this Office also of
necessity was taken away; it is therefore a Tyrannical Term, for any to profess
himself, an Apostle by succession, Evangelists being Attendants, and helpers of
the Apostles, as was Timothy, who is by name called an Evangelist, this Office
was therefore Temporary also. The Doctors and Pastors are of perpetual
necessity in the Church- Beza on Ephesians. 4. v. 11.

20. The Brethren mentioned, as with Paul. (Gal. 1. 2.) were the whole
Presbytery of the Church of Antioch, whence this Epistle was written; Beza in
locum. The Bishop^ in Philippi. (Phil. 1. 1.) are the Pastors, Doctors, and
Presbyters, who attend the word and doctrine, and who (as the Greek word
imports) like Sentinels, and Watchmen, do watch over and inquire into the
Doctrine, and the conversation of the Flock committed to them; such were these
in Act. 20. 28. who are sometime called by the general name of Presbyters, as
Verse 17 of that Chapter, and in first of Timothy. 5. 17. This was then of old
the Appellation of Bishop^, until he who was in the Assembly ( Caetu) or
Meeting, was set over the rest of the Brethren, whom Justinus calls the
Proestos, or President, began to be peculiarly called the Bishop; from hence
the Devil began to lay the first foundations of Tyranny in the Church of GOD,
the whole administration and Government of the Church, being as it were with
the name trans^erred upon One, then from the Episcopal Tyranny, it came to
Me^trapolitants, whom they call Archbishops, etc. From Metrapolitants, they
advanced to the first four primary Patriarchs, the Christian Republic, being
as it were divided unto four men, until the fortuitus occasion of the fifth,
because of the Dignity of new Rome; hence arose perpetual Contests, till the
rest ceding, the Contest continued with (...) of Rome and Constantinople, a
Controversy never decided unto tlis day, sometimes the one, sometimes the
other avouching himself the universal Patriarch. The Roman Bishop in the mean
time, being condemned of Falsehood ( falsi) in the Carthaginian Counsel, of
(two hundred and seven Fathers) yet such was the ambition, that (the
Constantinopolitane Patriarch even now is set over the Churches spread through
the East, if they may be called Churches) the Roman has invaded both Churches
and Kingdoms of the West, by a just Judgment, depriving them of their Scepters,
by whose help, he invaded a Tyranny over the Churches. Behold, of how great
moment and consequence it is, to decline even in a hair breadth from the Word*
of GOD. Beza on Phil. Cap. 1. 1.

21. The Presbytrie mentioned, (1 Timothy 4. 14. who imposed hands upon Timothy,
is to be understood of the Meeting or Assembly of Pastors, Bishops, or
Presbyters, at Lystra, who labored in the Word and Doctrine; and by this word
[ Presbytrie] any such Assembly is to be understood, Beza in locum. All Pastors
are servants of that one Legistator, Christ in the Ecclesiastic Office; there
is no d^minion of one over another, he only excells among Ministers, who is
most diligent, and averse from all ambitious usurping over his fellow servants.
Beza in Math. 20. 25. paralelling this place with the 1. Pet. 5. ^. and as his
understanding the A^gel, Rev. 2. 1. of the President, by whom his Colleagues
were to be admonished, will not so much as found the humane Bishop, after
brought into the Church, so that clause Rev. 2. 24. ( viz. to you and the rest)
etc. is to be understood of the A^gel, or President for the time, and the
Assembly of his Colleagues; In which passage, the conjunction (...), or, and,
is necessarly to be understood or read. Beza lbid, from Beza in his Answer to
Sarav. de diversis mi nistrorum gradibus, there are innumerable clear
Testimonies adduceable against this man's design and pleading. He tells us that
the Evangeli^s properly so called, were helpers of the Apostles, in perfecting
the Structure of Churches; distinguished from ordinary Preachers, in this that
for a time they only were set over some Churches to confirm, o^ constitute them
fully, sometimes in one place, sometimes in another, as the matter required, as
appears from Paul's Epistles, Beza, Respon: and caput sextum Sarav No Apostle or
Evangelist was above another, and both these Officers are ceast. Beza ad Cap 9.
Numb 15. apud S^aviam, the term (...) or Leader, which the Apostle uses
thrice, Heb.

13. and which our Lord expones, John. 10. 4. is attributed to Ministers only,
with respect to the Flock committed to them, that the same is to be judged of
the term (Bishop) appears from Act. 8. 28. Hence as the Church shortly after
felt, it was a dangerous custom to transfer the term Proestos, and (...) to
them, who preceded over the Assembly of their Colleagues, not as more eminent
in Degree, but only as being first in order. lbid, Numb. 20. secundum. Sarav.

2. The Office of Pastor and Doctor, are the chief functions of the Church,
perpetually necessary, Beza. resp. and Cap. 11. Numb. 3 juxta Sarav.

3. Such as deny the Office of Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists to be
temporary and ceast, they must either conclude, that the work of building and
completing the Churches, is left by them imperfect and manck, which is most
false, and cannot be said without their reproach, or that afterward, the whole
Edifice is so far subverted, that for its Restitution, we need not only
faithful Pastors, Doctors and Presbyters, but Architects to lay the foundation
again, Evangelists, for the Superstructure; lastly Prophets, and other gifts of
the Spirit, for confirming their Work. Beza. ad Cap. 16. Numb. 3. with Sarav.,
The preserving this Edifice entire, is committed to these perpetual Officers,
Pastors, Doctors, Ruling-Elders and Deacons, Ibid, Number. 10. with Sarav.

4. The Apostles and Evangelists work of preaching, Baptizing and governing the
Church with Pastors and Presbyters, was ordinary, their unconfined Inspection,
Apostolic Authority, in planting and watering Churches, was temporary and
expired. Beza. Ibid. Numb. 11. The ordinary perpetual Government they committed
to Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons. Ibid. Numb. 12. The perpetual form
and Authority of Governing the Church, of teaching and administrating
Sacraments, yea, and of her Restoration and Propagation, is committed to
Pastors, Doctors, and Elders, and remains as thus committed to them, and
prescribed by the Apostles and Evangelists; Yet their infallible Authority of
founding and completing Churches, is ceast with their life. Numb. 13. Their
function and Office died with them, not the form and rule of Government,
committed to Pastors, Doctors, etc. Numb. 14. The ordinary succession of a
perpetual Ministry, is of Pastors, to Pastors, Doctors, to Doctors, Elders, to
Elders, Deacons, to Deacons; Ibid. Numb. 15. The Apostolic Authority differs
from the ordinary and perpetual authority of Pastors, as likewise their gifts,
not only as to Manner and Measure, but in the Nature thereof, from these
promised to the ordinary Ministry Beza. ad Cap. 17. Numb. 2. apud. Sarav.

5. An Episcopal Degree, with some show of Apostolic Authority, is no where to
be found in Scripture, is condemned, Luke 22. 25. gave the raise of that
Oligarchie and Tyranny which came into the Church, and therefore there is no
divine Right left for such a Succession, ad Cap. 16. Numb. 17. apud Sarav. As
the Apostles Gifts are such, so their Power and Authority is not succeeded to,
by any ordinary Church Officers, nor has the Church power to set up any such
Office. Ad Cap. 17. Numb. 3. The pretense of Archbishops, Primates,
Metropolitants, their Succession to Apostles, or Evangelists ( Timothy, Titus,
Mark) and a continuation of their power or authority in the Church, is a
groundless Conjecture, condemned in Sarav. Beza in Cap. 18. Sarav. the same
condemned ad Cap. 19. Numb. 3.

6. The Office of President in Church Assemblies, imports only a right of
Governing, and ordering the common actions of the Meeting, without any command
or rule over the Members thereof, in which Meetings, Ruli^g Elders, are to join
with Pastors; Beza. resp: ad Cap. 20. Numb. 1. The state of this Controversy
is, whether he who is set over the Meeting of Pastors, of any Church, has any
command or power over these his Colleagues, as inferiors by Divine Right. This
is that which I deny Numb. 2. The setting up this Episcopal degree of the
Bishop, above his Colleagues, has been greatly prejudicial to the Church. Numb.
8.

7. These to whom Paul enjoined to deliver the Incestuous man to Satan, when
gathered together, were the Pastors and Presbyters of Corinth, who by
Ecclesiastic Judgment and Censure, were to purge the Church of this Leaven. As
every Church after its first beginnings had Pastors and Presbyters; so it is
not supposable, that Paul who stayed there half a year, and Apollos who
followed him, did not upon the first opportunity, furnish that Church with a
Presbytry. Ad cap 23. Numb: 17: and Numb 2, and 3. Apud Sarav: at large setting
down Ieroms testimony in Epist. ad Oceanum and ad Euagrum Comment. in Epist. ad
Titum, together with the Scipture proofs, anent the Identity of Bishop and
Presbyter, showing that the Bishops superiority over the Presbyters, was
founded on Custom, not Divine warrant; upon which Beza collects thus, this coth
Ierom assert, not in one place only, or few, or as of a thing doubtful, but
often, copiously, and peremptorly, ascribing to Bishop and Presbyter, as one
and the same appellation, so one and the same function, Ad. cap: 13. Numb: 2
and 3.

8. The divine Bishop, or who is institute by divine Right, is the same Office,
with that which is poynted out, by the peculiar name of Pastor, whom Paul
affirms, that the holy Ghost made Bishops to feed the Church of God. Acts. 20.
18. and this is the proper name of them both, in the New Testamen, whereby with
Paul they are distinguished, from Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, which
Officers were for a time only one Ephesians. 4. cap. 11. and from Deacons (2 Timothy
3. Phil. 1.) they are called Bishops, with respect to Souls committed to them.

9. The College, or meeting of these Pastors, and Bishops, together with such
Elders, as Paul calls Governments, (...), are the same who are called the
Presbytry, 1 Timothy 4. v. 14. Beza de Episcop. triplici. initio. Their Office was
to attend the Word and Prayer in public and private, and to govern the Church
jointly, and in common, Ibid.

10. The humane Bishop that is brought into the Church out of humane prudence,
beside the express Word* of God, is a sort of Power given to some one Pastor
above his Colleagues, yet limited by certain Rules and Cannons against Tyranny.
ibid. That this Function was not brought in, from the Word of God, is evident
from this, that we cannot find in the New Testament the least jot, from which
we may draw such a conjecture; for although there is no doubt that all things
ought to be done orderly in the house of God, and that therefore there has been
some President in every meeting (whom John in the Revelation seems to call the
Angel, Justin calls (...) or President) that this President, excepting this
only, that he was the first Moderator in the Ecclesiastic Actions in the
Assembly, had no power over this Colleagues, far less exercised any Office
superior unto them, ibid. Hence as Ierom observes, the Author to the Heb. calls
all the whole Assembly of Presbyters, (...) Rulers, poynting at none of them.
Such for the most part was Peter in the College of the Apostles, etc. If any
such Office had been then existent, or such a power of one over his Colleagues,
this Officer had been by some peculiar name, pointed at in the Epistles,
especially seeing Paul salutes the Bishops, and Deacons of the Philippians in
the plural number; whch since it was not done, it appears, that among these
Rulers, there was none in degree Superior to his Colleagues, and fellow
Bishops, but that the Churches were then ruled by their Presbyters. Every one
of them having equal and alike power, with his fellow Presbyter, etc. ibid.
Thereafter he refutes Ep^phanius arguments, for his humane Episcopacy, as if it
were the Divine. Wherein we see how peremptor Beza was as to this Distinction;
and mentioning Epiphanius argument from that precept (against an Elder receive
not an accusation) to prove Timothy's Episcopacy, he refutes this by many
arguments, calling this the Error of Epiphanius, that Timothy was Bishop of
Ephesus; which he tells him may be convicted of fa^shood from Scriptures; as
mainly from this, that he was Paul's attendant, sent hither and thither and
therefore made Bishop overno one Church; that he was an Evangelist, that Paul
requested him to stay at Ephesus, 1 Timothy 1. 3. v. and for the special end, viz.
to attend that Church, until again recalled, which in the other Epistle he
does, 2 Timothy 4. 9 v. Do thy diligence, to come to me quickly, that when going
to Jerusalem, never to return to Ephesus, he had either (upon Epiphanius
supposition) restored Timot^y to these Ephesian^, or they had sought him again,
being warned of such hazards; or if another was put in his place, he had
peculiarly be spoken him, in that Divine Se^mon of his, but of this we read
not, but only that he admonished the Presbyters, whom he sent for, of their
general and common duty. Thereafter he adds, that as an Evangelist, adorned
with so many and singular Gifts, in degree superior to Prysbyters, and for a
time constitute there, by Apostolic Authority, he did administrat the Affairs
of that Church, and that though it were granted to Epiphanius, that he had some
singular power there, it may be denied, that he could have obtained any power
over the Presbytery of Ephesus, if he did not been an Evangelist, adding this
reason, that Paul himself declares ( 1 Timothy 4. v. 14.) That imposition of hands
was done in name of Presbytry it self, not by the Authority of any one
Superior. After he cit^s Augustine (Epistle 19.) asserting, that by the Churches
custom only, Episcopacy was greater than the Presbyterat, and Chrisostom
saying on the first of Tim. 1, 3. That in Ordination only the Bishop differs
from the Presbyter, that is, says he, (as Theophylact more clearly) in the
ceremony of Consec^ation only; citing also Theodoret, who upon Phil. I. writes,
that of old, the name of Bishop and Presbyter were promiscuously used, as one
and the same. He adds afterward, that Paul did not excommunicat the incestuous
Corinthian alone, by his Apostlick Authority, but by the Authority of the whole
Presbyt^y; and that Peter doubts not to call himself a fellow Presbyter, that
if all eminency of one Pastor over his Colleagues had been forbidden, or rather
never brought in by Men, the ensuing contests about Supremacy, had never rent
the Church, so far is this Device from being a remedy of Schism; and finally he
tells us upon his head, that as this humane Episcopacy came in by a tacit
custom, advancing by degrees, so we must understand of this human episcopacy,
as Antecedaneous to the Satanical, whatsover Justin, Ignatius and other eminent
Writers, do speak of Bishops, or rather of the first Presidents Authority.

10. The Moderator of the Ecclesiastic Synod, or Consistory, who is to ask the
Votes, and moderat the whole affairs, is for ths one end to be chosen by their
common suff^ages, or Votes, which Office must expire and end with the close of
the Synod: Beza in Quest: secunda, referente Saravia page 92.

11. No Scripture truth can be produced for a standing mission of the 70
Disciples, to preach the Gospel, after our Lords Ascension, of a like nature
and continuance, with that of the twelve Apostles, or that they were sent (...)
or immediately; The Apostles Mission, Math. 10. Luke 9, Mark 5. Was not that
which is called peculiarly and properly Apostolic, for which the Apostles were
then wholly unfit, but only a sort of preludie, that all might run to hear
Christ himself, but these twelve Christ a^terward sent by a new Vocation, and
wholly different from the first, for planting Churches through the whole World,
adorning them with a peculiar and abundant grace of the Spirit, both before
his ascension into Heaven, ( John^ ^. v. 22. As likeways chiefly in the day of
Pentec^st, adding more wonderfully the external Signs, of this Legation, from
which Mission the Apostle does therefore begin the rehearsal of the Apostolic
^unction, and of others added thereunto, Ephesians, 4. 10. v. 11. But of these 70
where is there any mention, either about the time of our Lord's Ascension, or
after. That Mission mentioned ( Luke 10) is wholly diverse from that of
Apostles; Institute after our Lord's Ascension. Had the 70. had such a standing
Mission, the Sacred Writers neither would nor could have omit^ed, a matter so
necessary, mentioning only that of the 12 Apostles; and granting it had been,
this will not infer any imparity of power, betwixt them and the 12 Apostles, or
that Christ made them two distinct Orders, or divided them in two Classes; the
after Institution, and addition to the other that is prior, will not prove an
Inferiority in that Mission of the 70, which Luke only commemorates. What
degree will we find, whereby they may be subjected to the 12. Who had a prior
^ission? That the Apostles were assumed by Christ, as domestics, will no more
ground their imparity, with other Disciples, than it will make John superior to
the other Apostles, because a Disciple most dear to Christ beyond other
Disciples, it was the Apostolick^ function, which thereafter gave them a
priority of Order, and also of Power, unto other Disciples, Beza resp. ad cap.
1. Sarav. de diverse. Minist. Evangel. grad. Refuting after the argument, drawn
from the addition of the 70 Elders to Moses.

Now from these passages of Calvin and Beza, how clearly Presbyterian
Government is asserted in its whole Structure and Frame, and the opposite
Fabric of Prelacy subverted, is obvious to the meanest capacity to conclude,
so that to insist in drawing forth Propositions to clear this, s^ems a mere
Battalogy, and an attempt to show the Sun with a candle. Here we have asserted
the extraordinary expired nature of the Function, first of Apostles, secondly
of Evangelists, as such. Next, that the Pastor who labors in the Word and
Doctrine is the highest Officer left by Christ in his Church, who has no
Superior in Church administrations, and therein the Prelates pretended Official
Superiority is flatly denied.

3ly. That no extraordinary Power of Apostles, and Evangelists, can ground a
standing presidencie over Presbyters.

4. That Church Government under the New Testament, is to be administered by
their joint decisive Sufferage.

5. That the Ruling Elder is standing Church Officer appointed by Christ, etc:
And in opposition to this Pamphleters forged Definitions, Postulatums and
Actions, how easy is it from what is premised, to bring forth Calvin and
Beza's counter-assertions, and present these great Divines, as jointly
witnessing him a Liar and Calumniator therein. As first, that there was no
standing pre-eminence in any Church Officer above the Pastor, allowed to Christ
to be continued in the Church, against the definition 3d, and the pretended
proof of definition 2d.

2. That the Angel had no fixed presidency over other Ministers, against what
is pretended definition 3d.

3. That what is set down in Scripture anent the 70 Disciples, sent out after
the 12 Apostles, will not give the least shadow of an Argument, whereby
different degrees of Ministers may be concluded, against the scope of
Postulatum first.

4. That the Inspection of Timothy and Titus over Ephesus and Crete, had no
fixed power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, over these Churches included
therein, in contradiction to Postulatum 2d.

5. That the preheminency of one single person in Office unto other Ministers,
was never by Gods Warrant, retained or practiced by the Church for remedy of
Schism, against the scope of Postulatum 3d.

6. That these first Presidents introduced by the primative Church, were not
preheminent in Office unto other Ministers; whereby the same Postulatum is
again convict of Falsehood.

7. That not so much as a constant President can be warranted, from the Angel
of the 7 Churches; against the scope of Postulatum 4th.

8. That neither Apostles nor Evagelists, their Office did found a standing
official lawful Preheminency, of an ordinary Church Officer, over the Pastor,
in contradiction to the scope of Definition 3d 4. Postulatum 4th. Axiom 2d; And
finally, that this official Preheminent office over the Pastor, has neither a
divine Right, flowing from Christ's immediate Institution, nor Apostolic from
the Apostles doctrine, and practice, or of the Apostolic and primitive Church,
and consequently that the having, not the wanting of such a Government, is
pernicious to the Gospel and Christian Religion, which overturns the scope of
the whole Pamphlet, parti^^larly Postulatum 3d, 4th, Axiom 2d, 3d, 4th.

CHAP. Second.
THe Authors groundless Suppositions and Perversion of these Divines, cleared
in general from the Structure of his Reasoning.
THe Scope of this Author is to prove, that in Calvin and Beza's Judgment, a
president Bishop with a fixed Power of ordination, preheminent unto, and above
Pastors, with a proportioned Power of Jurisdiction over them, is an ordinary
standing Officer appoi^ted by Christ in the Church of the New Testament. This
is clear by comparing Definition 3. with Axiom 2, 3 and 4. and with Postulatum
2, and 3; And this preheminency he makes them assert, as extended to a whole
Diocese, Province, or Patriarchat, as he calls it. For proof of which, several
passages of Calvin and Beza (but of Calvin especially) are adduced.

Wherein in general, his obvious Perversion and Abuse of these Divines, is
evident to any that compares his Assertions, and Citation; First, in that
Calvin and Beza are supposed by him, to hold the Apostolic and Evagelistick
Inspection, and Authoirty, which are supposed in the Scriptures here cited, and
in the passages of Calvin's Institutions here adduced, to be ordinary, and of
perpetual necessity. Thus he grossly perverts the subject and state of the
Question, which is this, What is that ordinary ministerial Authority, and these
Officers, which they hold to be of a perpetual continuing Nature and Necessity?
and not what they might suppose to be de facto, in the Churches infancy,
exercised, by the Apostles or Evangelists; So that if we can prove, that these
Divines, did not judge the Authority and Power of Apostles and Evangelists, or
their formal Office as such, to be of a moral nature, continued in the Church,
or that there are constant necessary Officers succeeding them, in preheminency
or superiority in office, all that he says falls to the ground. To prove this,
first in general, it is evident from what is said, that both Calvin and Beza,
with all sound Protestant Divines, do hold the Offices of Apostles and
Evangelists, and consequently their official Power, as such, to be expired, and
that neither of them are succeeded, in idem officium, eundem ministerii gradum,
this is evident to all who have read these Divines; and for evincing it, I
would but ask this Pamphleter, whether Calvin and Beza do not hold and suppose,
that our blessed LORD was, when upon earth, the Churches visible universal Head
and Monarch, and that the Apostles afterward had an universal, unconfined
Inspection and Authority over the whole Church; and that particularly and
Apostle John, who outlived all the rest, had solly, as an Apostle, an universal
Authority and Inspection over the same; but will he, or any man of common
sense, infer from this, that Calvin and Beza are for a moral standing Primacy
over the Church universal, or a visible political Head, and Deput-Vicar under
Christ? Certainly he would rationally assert this ^ ^erence of a ^apist against
Calvin and Beza to be very gross and impertinent, and no less is his own
throughout this Pamphlet.

2. If these Divines do hold that Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, are the only
standing Church Officers, of a moral nature, perpetual use and necessity; Then
they did not hold the Office of Apostles and Evangelists to be such, or their
proper O^ficial Authority, comp^tent to them, as in that capacity, to be of
this nature; But the first is true, ergo so is the second; the Ma;or is
evident, for this man will not say that Calvin and Beza do hold their Offices,
one and the same with Pastors, and that Apostles and Evangelists were not
distinct from, and superior unto them in their Official Power: The Minor is
evident from what is above adduced from Calvin and Beza; Yea, even from his own
Citation of Calvin, to confirm Axiom third, viz. his Instit. lib. 4. Cap: 6.
Sect: 11. The Primacy of the Roman See takes not its Original from Christ's
Institution, nor the custom of the Ancient Church, as the other Offices have
done, ( viz. of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, cap: 4 Sect: 1) mentioned
already. Now surely if he had judged other Offices perpetual and warranted by
Christ's institution, and the ancient Churches practice, he would not in this
place have mentioned with such Emphasis these three only, and none else, when
in opposition to the unlawful Popish Primacy, he is showing what Offices (...),
and the ancient Churches Custom will allow as warrantable. To show it further,
take this passage of Calvin, (whom I find our Pamphleter does mainly insist
upon) speaking of Philip the Evangelist, he tells us that Evangelists were set
in the middle betwixt Apostles and Doctors, had an office next to that of
Apostles, that they might every where preach the Gospel, for no certain station
was assigned to them; Now to make their Office and Authority ordinary, in
Calvin's Judgment, this Author is obliged by his Argument to say, that he held
them to be fixed to some certain Station, for in Postulatum 2, he holds that
according to Calvin, Timothy in Ephesus, and Titus in Crete, were from the
nature of their Office invested, with a fixed power of Ordination, and
Jurisdiction in these places.

3. If these Divines held the Apostolic and Evangelistick Inspection and
Authority, to be moral and perpetual, then they behoved to hold it such, either
as one and the same with the pastoral Office, and a superior degree thereof, or
as an Office specifically distinct, and superior; But neither of the two can be
said to them: not the first, for we heard them both assert, that all Pastors do
hold one and the same Function, and that none of them have any official
Authority over another, particularly we heard that Calvin, (whom our
Phamphleter mainly appeals to) upon Phil. 1. reprehending the abuse of the Word
[Bishop] in appropriating it to one Pastor only, he gives this Reason; That
from this abused Signification of the Word, there has followed this evil, that
as if all Presbyters, were not Colleagues, called to the same Function, one
has usurped to himself a Dominion over the rest, under pretext of this new
Appellation, So that he holds the Pastoral Official Authority, to be one and
the same in all Pastors, and none to have an Authoritative Inspection over the
rest.

Again, Calvin could not hold this fixed Preheminent Authority to be continued
in the Church, as importing an Office specifically distinct from, and superior
to that of the Pastor.

First, for the Reason already given; for since that supposed inferior Officer
were thus, both an ordinary Officer, and were likewise Eminenter a Pastor. How
could Calvin quarrel a distinction, and peculiarity of a Name to point out a
superior Pastor? or how could he affirm that all Pastors without exception have
one and the same Function?

2. We heard that Beza and Calvin do hold that the Apostles, and Evangelists,
had no fixed Station, over which they were set; and so could not as in that
capacity, have any fixed Power of ordination and jurisdiction.

A second perversion of the Doctrine, and sense of these Divines in this point,
and false Supposition, which this Authors arguing is grounded upon, is this,
that he distinguishes not, their simple Narration of a practice from their
positive Approbation of it; which any man of sense will distinguish in any
Author, and which if confounded, we cannot eschew the horrid Blaspheming of the
Spirit of God in Scripture. To clear this, take an undeniable instance from
Calvin, (whom as I said our Author mainly appeals to) To prove his, 2
Postulatum, viz. that in Calvin's judgment, the Church warrantably retained the
Government of one single Person, preheminent in Office unto other Ministers, he
cites Calvin instit: Cap. 4. Sect. 2. Where Calvin shows, that Presbyters in
all Cit^es, choose one out of their Number, to whom especially they gave the
Title of Bishop, lest from a parity Division might arise; That Jerome says at
Alexandria from Mark the Evangelist, to Heracleas and Dyonysius, Presbyters
always placed one in a preheminent degree, whom they called a Bishop. The same
we heard Beza acknowledge, as to the matter of Fact. Now I say it is gross
Perversion from Beza or Calvin's Narration of this matter of ^act, to infer
their Approbation of the Practice. 1. For that clear demonstrative Reason
already adduced.

2. This cannot be held and obtruded as their Judgment, without contradicting
them in other places, and making them inconsistent with themselves, which this
Author, who holds their Writings, (and that deservedly) to be excellent, must
by all means eschew, for as we heard Beza evidently disown this practice of the
fixed President, and his appropriat Name of Bishop, as giving the rise to all
the ensuing corruptions of the Church Government, so does Calvin evidently on
Phil. 1. forecited, condemn two points of this Practice. First, in setting one
Presbyter in a superior Degree over another, for he affirms they are all
Colleagues, called to one and the same Function, having the same Work, the same
Ordination, the same Official Power and Authority; ergo he ownes a perfect
Parity, and disowns an Imparity in the Offic^, and preheminency in Degree in
one above another, and therefore by further necessary consequence, he disowns
and cannot allow of the Practice of this at Alexandria, as warrantable.

2. If Calvin disowns this Imparity and Dominion, as fomented and having its
rise from the appropriating the Name [Bishop] to one Pastor, rather than to
another, then he disowns the appropriating the Name to this preheminent
Presbyter, as a badge of this Preheminency, and by consequence the practice of
this at Alexandria; but so it is that Calvin (which we also have evinced of
Beza) In terminis, condemns this appropriating of the Name Bishop, to one
Pastor, for the end mentioned, therefore he condemns this practice in so far.
We heard that upon Tit. 1. 7. he collects the Identitie of the Bishop and
Presbyters Office, from the Apostles using both Names indifferently; As also,
(says he) I^rom has observed, and that more has been ascribed to men's
pleasures, and inventions, than did become, in preferring men's habituated
term, to the Language of the Holy Ghost; And speaking of the first Moderator's
early brought in, he shows that the Name of the Office viz. (that of Bishop) is
commune to all; And that to rob the rest thereof, is injurious and absurd, a
perversion of the Holy Ghosts Language, and profane Boldness; and that upon
Act. 20. 28. He concludes that all the Presbyters, have both Name and Thing of
the Scripture Bishop, appropriat unto them.

Here let any rational Man judge, especially from what is above evinced 1
Chapter; If Beza and Calvin make not the Name and Thing of a Scripture Bishop
proper to every Pastor, and consequently condemn not the abovementioned
Official Difference, and appropriating the Name Bishop, to a supposed
preheminent Pastor, above another at Alexandria, as a perversion and abuse of
the Spirit of Gods Institution, and Language in Scripture. And whether it be
not most consonant to Reason, to collect Beza and Calvin's Judgment, upon their
Assertions and Inferences from Scripture, when reasoning the Point ex professo,
rather than from their simple Narration of a matter of Fact, and practice of
the Church.

If he say that his third Postulatum, speaks only of what the Primitive Church
retained in Calvin's Judgment. I answer, First, what will a simple Practice in
it self signify, to infer a Rule and Duty, without any more; Or Calvin's
Narration, to infer his Approbation. 2. Comparing Postulatum 2. and his
Assertion of Calvin's Judgment, anent the fixed Power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction, which Timothy and Titus exercised over other Ministers at Ephesus
and Crete, with Definition 3. Anent and President Bishop, his preheminent
Office, in Ordination over other Ministers, and what he asserts ( Axiom 3 and
4.) viz. that Calvin holds this to be necessary to the very Being of the
Church, it is evident, he must be thus understood, as asserting Calvin
Approbation of the practice. This Man will not deny that the state of the
Question is, what the Church retained upon Divine warrant, in Calvin and Beza's
Judgment. Thus we have laid open his fundamental Mistakes, ad perversion of
these Passages of Calvin and Beza, cited by him; consequently discovered, his
arguing in this Pamphlet, to be founded upon a mere petitio principii, and
Ignoratio Elenchi, and that he intertains himself, and imputs to Calvin and
Beza that Error (which I find as an Error in the first Concoction, marrs the
whole Disgestion of Sarav: his arguings against Beza) viz. That the different
and extraordinary Privileges, of Christ's first Ministers, the Apostles and
Evangelists, does also diversifie the Essentials of the Pastoral Office it
self, so as to infer different standing Degrees thereof, an Error, which though
frequently told of by Beza, he does nothing but repeat in his whole Dispute;
But that our Authors Mistakes may further appear, we do proceed to a particular
Examination of his Definitions, Postulatums, and Axioms, and the Propositions,
Demonstrations, and Corollaries drawn therefrom.

CHAP. Third.
An Examination of the Definitions in Point of Church Government, imputed by
this Pamphleter to Calvin and Beza, wherein is discovered his gross Perversion
of the Doctrine of these Divines.
I Confess, that upon first reading of these Definitions, I was a little
surprised, to find this Man, (who by his Profession, no doubt is skilled in the
Nature and Terms of Definitions) Found these Assertions upon what he here cites
out of Calvin and Beza, and to present them under this Character, but to view
them shortly.

Defin. 1.
The first is this, The Power of Ordination, is that Right in the Governors of
the Church, to separate Persons duly qualified unto the holy Ministry of the
Gospel. To prove this Definition to be Calvin's, he cites instit. Lib. 4. Cap.
4. Sect. 2. annexing these words, this is to be considered, that only the
Pastors, and not the whole Multitude laid Hands on their Ministers at
Ordination.

Answer.
Hence I infer, First, these Governors who have Right in Ordination, are the
Pastors in Calvin's judgment. 2. If Pastors, as such; then all Pastors, for a
Quatenus adomne valet consequentia. 3. Pastors, properly such, having in
Calvin's Judgment one and the same Office, being called to the same function,
and no preheminency in one over another allowed, as we heard him above assert;
Ergo in Calvin's Judgment, all Pastors have the same and equal Authority in
Ordination. 4 The Pastor being with Calvin, the h^ghest ordinary
Church Officer, and the formal Office of Apostles, and Evangelists being
expired, as is above cleared: Ergo in Calvin's Judgment, all who have an
ordinary standing Interest in Ordination, as Church Officers of Christ's
appointment have it equally, and no ordinary Officer of the
New-Testament-Church, has a supereminent and peculiar Interest therein.

Defin. 2
The second Definition is, That the power of Jurisdiction, is that Right, in
the Governors of the Church, to make Cannons which are wanting, or to execute
these already made, for the Regulation of Church Members. To prove this, Calvin
is adduced on Tit. chapter 1 v. 5. The words cited are, we learned indeed from this
place, that there was no such equality among the Ministers of the Church, but
that some one was pre-heminent in Authority and Counsel.

Answer.
In Answer to which, First, I Note the impertinency of this Passage, to prove
the power of Jurisdiction, here Defined, which speaks only of Counsel and
Authority, in Church Governors, not of the Object of it, whereof this
Definition speaks.

2. Since the power of Jurisdiction, is correspondent and adequat to the power
of Ordination, as our Author expressly assert, (Definition 3. compared with
Axiom 2.) an^ withal, since it is made good, that with Calvin, the power of
Ordination is one and the same in all Pastors, as being the highest ordinary
Church Officers; Hence it follows inevitably, That with him the power of
Jurisdiction, is the same, and equal in all Ministers of the Word.

3. The Definition seems too narrow, if we take it as importing, all that is
beyond that Power of Ordination, first described, that is all the exercise of
both the Keys, which will far go beyond the limits of this Description.
Besides, these Cannons must be limited by the general Rules of the Word, in
Calvin's Judgment, for speaking of the Apostolic Decision ( Acts 15.) He says,
they would not step beyond the limits of the Word* Next, for that Pre-eminence,
which Calvin ascribes to those Officers in Authority and Counsel.

I Answer first, What ever this Pre-eminence was, Calvin limits it to that
State and Time of the Church, for he says Tun^, or at that time, wherein those
Offices did exist, which he holds to be extraordinary, there was such an
Official difference, as is mentioned, otherwise, if our Author say he means a
standing Pastoral fixed Authority, he will involve him in a double
contradiction; first, in that he says, The Evangelists were Coajutors of the
Apostles, and fixed to no Station. 2. In that he shows upon the 7. v. of this
Chapter, that there is no Official difference, in the pastoral Office. Again,
Calvin shows upon the same place, that Paul enjoins him not to take an
arbitrary power over this Church, but only to preside over the Elections, as
Moderator.

This will be convincingly evident, to any that will be at the pains to read
Calvin, upon that 5 and 6 verse, For

First, He asserts, That Paul had deputed to Titus, a Vicarious Administration
in his own room, and that the Apostles having a transient unfixt Ministry,
being about to spread the Gospel every where, behoved when going from one place
or City to another, to surrogat fit men to finish what they had begun.

2. He asserts in terminis, that this Vicarious Office and Administration, was
ultra ordinarium Pastorum munus, beyond the ordinary Office of Pastors, and
that the trust put upon him of Exedifying this Church, was of that Nature; and
in this states the difference betwixt his Administration, and that of the
Pastor, which is ordinary, in that Pastors are set over Churches already Formed
and Constitute; But Titus had an Office beyond this, viz. To give this Form to
Churches, not as yet modelled, as to Government; asserting evdently, that the
Evangelistick Office of Titus, in so far as extended beyond that of the Pastor,
did suppose the Church as yet, in fieri, as to its Constitution; Yea, and the
Existence of the Apostolic Office too, upon whose foundation these Evangelists
were to build, and exedifie what they had begun. 3. He asserts expressly, That
the preaching Presbyter and Pastor, is the highest ordinary Officer set in the
Churches. 4. He moves an Objection, whether this power of Titus, did not seem
to infringe the Judicial power of the College of Pastors, or their
consistorial decisive Authority in Government, and Answers, that matters were
not committed to Ti^us arbitriment, to set up what Pastors he pleased, but he
was only to preside over the Elections, as Moderator, etc. as the Consul or
Dictator, who held the Court for gathering the Votes. In all which we see, how
pitifully this man has abused his Reader in this Definition.

Defin. 3.
The 3d Definition is thus, The President Bishop is he, who from his Office,
preheminent to other Ministers, is invested with a fixed power of Ordination,
regulat by Cannons; (to prove this, he adduces Calvin on 2 Timothy 1. v. 6. who
asserts, that Paul himself declares, that he alone, and no other Ministers with
him, laid hands on Timothy) he adds in the Definition, (and of Jurisdiction,
balanced by assisting Ministers,) for proving which part of the Definition, he
adduces Calvin, Instit: lib: 4. cap: 4. Sect: 1. Asserting, That whatever parts
the Consul had in the Senate, the same Office did the Bishop always sustain in
the meeting of Presbyters.

To the First Branch, I answer, That he is guilty here of pitiful Forgery, and
begging the question, evident to any considering person, upon the very first
vie^.

Answer.
For, 1. If Calvin's assertion prove any thing for him, it will prove not only
a preheminent power of Ordination, in this supposed President Bishop, but a
sole Power, competent to none but himself, as his sole Prerogative; because if
he alone (as Paul did) and none else must lay on hands, he, and no other
Minister jure; Ergo, Then this is his sole Prerogative; For certainly the
laying on of hands, must import the Power and Exercise of Ordination, in
Calvin's Judgment, according to that man's pleading, and so this proving too
much, proves just nothing.

Answer 2.
2. I ask, whether this supposed Power of Ordination, is to be balanced, as
that of Jurisdiction, by assisting Ministers, or authoritatively concurring;
yea, or not; (by assisting he must needs mean this, if he hold to that
S^^^ilitude, of the power of the Consul in the Senate, and turn not his
President Bishop, to an Absolute Prince, and his power to a power of Dominion
over the meeting,) if not, then first, How can be suppose the one to be
balanced thus, in Calvin's Judgment, rather then the other. 2. How will this
consist with what he asserts, that according to Calvin, the power of
Jurisdiction is of alike nature, and correspondent to that of Ordination; The
pre-eminence in Office and Jurisdiction, being one and the same, in Axiom. 2.

If this Power of Ordination, is to be balanced in Calvin's Judgment by
Assisting Ministers, how will he make his Proof quadrat to it, viz, That Paul
laid Hands on Timothy alone, and no Minister else; If he infer the Power of his
President Bishop from this Assertion, he must call it a Sole Power.

3. I confess he did well to put in the Clause of a Fixed Power, but he must
add another Clause and Qualification, viz. an Ordinary Power; And if he can
prove from Calvin, that either Apostles or Evangelists exercised a fixed
ordinary Power of Ordination over any particular Churches, his Proof will speak
home to the Point; and if we can prove the contrary from Calvin, he is but
beating the Air, and rolling Ssiphus-Stone in this Matter. Now this our
contrary Proof from Calvin is very easy, for on this 5th Verse, he says, that
Apostolis nulla certa statio erat assignata, that they had no fixed Station,
and consequently neither a fixed nor ordinary Power, thus upon 1 Corinthians. 12.
28. he says, Paul reckons up both perpetual and temporary Officers; the
Temporary was that of Apostles, who were appointed to found Churches, and erect
Christ's Kingdom therein, whose Office shortly after ceast and evanish'd; the
Apostles were appointed to spread the Gospel through the World, and had no
certain Charges and limits of Paroches, but wherever they came, were to deliver
their Message, wherein they differ from Pastors, who are tied to their
Churches, etc. upon Ephesians. 4 11. he tells us that the Apostles Office, was to
Preach the Gospel in whatever place they came into. To plant Churches and erect
the Kingdom to Christ, so that they had not every one peculiar proper Churches
assigned to them, but all of them had a general command to preach the Gospel
where^ver they came. To these the Evangelists were next, and had alike Office,
only in a different degree of Dignity, of which kind were T^mothy, and such
like -- of their subsidiary help the Lord made use next to that of Apostles --
and having thereafter described the Office of the Pastor and Doctor, he adds,
Notandum est ex his officiis quae hic enumerat Paulus, postrema tantum du^
perpetua esse; We must observe, that among these Offices which Paul reckons up,
the last two only, are perpetual, for God did for a time only a^o^n his Church
with Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, but without Pastors and Doctors, there
can be no Government of the Church, Ergo according to Calvin, without the
expired Offices of Apostles and Evangelists, this Government does subsist. At
the Close, he commends Cyprian's Saying, That there is one Episcopacy, which is
Christ's alone, whereof every Minister has entirely a part that none lift up
himself above his Fellow. Thus in Instit. lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 4. speaking of
this place of Paul in describing the New Testament-Church-Officers, he
Characterizeth the Apostles thus, that they were the first Founders of the
Church through the World, in Preaching the Gospel every where: The Evangelists
thus, that they were in Dignity inferior to the Apostles, yet next to them in
Office, and consequently did represent them as supplying their Rooms, such were
Luke, Timothy and Titus; and such like also the 70 Disciples, which Christ
appo^^ted in the second place after the Apostles. These three Functions ( viz.
Apostles Prophets and Evangelists,) (says he which seems most consonant to
Paul's Scope and Words, were not for this end institute to be perpetual in the
Church, but were for some time only, when Churches were to be erected, where
none were before, or to be brought from M^ses to Christ. Then speaking of
ordinary Off^cers, he thus expesseth himself as before, their Fellow-Pastors
and Doctors, which the Church can never want; and the 5th Section he begins
thus, We see what Ministry and Offices in the Government of the Church were
Temporary, and what Offices were instituted to endure continually, etc. From
all which I dare refer it to any man of Candor and Conscience, whether Calvin
hold not

First in general, That the Official Power of Apostles and Evangelists, was
temporary, and expired with themselves.

2. That neither the one, nor the other imported a fixed Inspection over any
particular Church.

3. That both did suppose the Churches in fieri, and were exercised in
erecting, and edifying of Churches accordingly.

4. That neither the one nor the other was to incroach upon, or in that Age by
themselves, or thereafter by any pretended Successors, to derogate any thing
from the ordinary decisive Collegiat Power of Pastors.

5. That herein lies the ordinary necessary Church Government, to be continued
to the end.

Finally, To make it further convincingly evident that Calvin placed the
ordinary Collegiat Power of Ordination in Pastors. In this Instit. (lib. 4.
Cap. 3. sect. 14.) speaking upon that Passage ( Acts 13.) of Paul and Barnabas
Separation, by Imposition of Hands, he shows that the Holy Ghost enjoined this
manner of Separation, even of Perso^^ thus singularly elected by himself, that
by this grave Document, Ecclesiastic Discipline might be preserved, in setting
Men apart for the Ministry, viz. by Ministers joint Authoritative Imposition of
Hands; and ( Sect. 15.) stating the Question anent a Collegiat Power in the
Election of Ministers, whether it ought to have place, or the Minister may be
constitute by the Authority of one, for which (says he) Paul's Word; to Ti^^
(I left thee in Crete to ordain Elders, and his Precept to Timothy, lay hands
suddenly on no man) are Cited, he Answers, they are deceived who imagine that
either Timothy or Titus, had (...) other Power than to moderate-Elections, as
the Consul in the (...) created new Magistrates, by receiving the Suffrages;
which, (...) with what is above said, evidently p^oves, that in Calvin's
Judgment, the Power of Ordination is a Collegiat Power, seated in the Meeting
of Pastors, and exercised by their joint decisive Suffrage.

Lastly, For that Passage here Cited by him. I Answer first, These Words here
Cited are not found on that 6th Verse. lib. edit: mihi M. D. LXXII. Secondly,
Granting them as here set down. 1. Calvin makes it doubtful, whether this Rite
was not in the Churches usual Practice performed by one in Name of the rest. 2.
He holds it debateable, whether Paul speaks not of the Imposition of Hands, in
order to Gifts, where no formal Ordination followed, as Romans 12. 1 Cor. 13. of
of-Ordination; and inclining to the last Opinion, he makes this place parallel
with 1 Timothy 4. verse. 14. upon which place he says, they judge right who take
the Word [Presbytry] collectively, for the College of Presbyters. So that
Calvin will be found to hold, that Paul's Imposition of Hands, though solely,
will nothing derogat from the ordinary Collegiat Power of the Presbytry. 1.
Because the conferring of Gifts thus, was his Apostolic Privilege. 2. The
simple Imposing of Hands alone will import no sole Authority, since ordinary
Pastors might entrust the Ritual Performance to one in their Name. 3. As no
Apostolic Prerogative was in Calvin's Sense to encroach upon the ordinary
Power of Pastors, and consequently not this of Paul's sole Imposition of Hands,
though supposed, so his Supposition anent the Presbytries Authoritative
Concurrence in this Action, clearly overthrows our Pamphleters pleading and
scope.

To the proof of the second Branch, anent a fixed preheminent Power of
Jurisdiction, in this President Bishop, which our Author endeavors to evince
from Calvin Instit. lib. 4. cap. 4. sect. 2. It Is answered (beside what is said
above) That 1. the Word (always) is not found in all that Section. 2. Calvin
clearly asserts, that this Titular Bishop had no dominion over his Colleagues,
but what parts (not whatever parts) the Consul had in the Senate, to report
Matters, ask Votes, Consult, Admonish, govern the Action by his Authority, and
see it Execute, which was by Common Council decreed; Ergo, his Office was not
so preheminent in Calvin's Judgment, as to Infringe the joint Collegiat,
Decisive Power of Presbyters, to whose Votes, he was tied; and what differed
this from that of a Moderator, if we except his being fixed.

Next, Whatever Power he might Exercise beyond that of a Moderator, Calvin
tells us, that this was Humano consensu inductum pro temporum necessitate, by
Humane Advice and for the times Necessity; therefore he holds it not to be
received for a fixed divine Appointment, citing Ierom for the Judgment of the
Ancients on this point, who asserts upon the Epistle of Titus, the Bishop and
Presbyter to be one, and the then Bishops, to have had this preheminency from
Humane Custom, and not Divine Institution. 3. He acknowledges, ( Sect. 1.)
that whatever sincere Aims the Ancients had, in conforming to the Scripture in
their Church Government, yet they keep not that Path-Rode exactly, but had
their Abe^^ations from it, and in a Word, toward the Close of that second
Section, he tells us that this President Bishop, was subject to the Assembly of
his Brethren; so that a fixed preheminent President Bishop, having an Authority
preheminent over the Votes and Suffrages of Presbyters, and not subject to the,
with a peculiar Title of Bishop, as thus preheminent, was not received by the
Church de facto in her first purest times, far less jure divino; and never
after Warrantably, or as a Divine Officer in Calvin's Judgment; from all which
it is demonstratively evident, that our Pamphleters 3d Definition, is none of
Calvin's, but a Chymera of his own Fancy. We come then to the 4th Definition,
which is this.

Definition 4.
The Angel of any Church Representative, is the President Bishop over other
Ministers, within their respective Diocese, Province, or Patriarchat. To prove
this, Beza is adduced on Rev. 2 c. 1, and 24 v. To the angel, that is to the
President, as whom it behooves, especially to be admonished, touching these
matters; and by him, both the rest of his Colleagues, and the whole Church, v.
24. But unto you, that is, unto you the Angel, the President and the Assembly
of your Colleagues, and to the rest, that is, to the whole Flock.

Upon this we need not much insist, the absurdity of his Scope and Inference,
being abundantly evinced from what is above touched, and is obvious to the
meanest.

Reflection 1.
How proves our Pamphleter from Beza's words, That these Angels did climb up so
high as the Patriarchs, this cast even of Diocesian and Provincial Churches,
will hardly, if at all be found, till 260 years after Christ. 2. How proves he
from these words, that Beza esteemed every Representative Church, to be either
that of a Diocese, Province, or Patriarchat? he must have Lyncian-Eyes, that
will see this in these words of Beza. 3. Granting, that by ( Angel) Beza
understands one single person, who was especially to be admonished, and his
fellows by him; How proves he from these words, that he was in Beza's Judgment,
a fixed, constant, far less a preheminent Bishop, with a fixed official
Presidency over other Ministers? May not all this be verified of a Moderator,
pro tempore, or a Speaker of the Parliament, viz. That an Epistle from the
King, to the Synod or Parliament, is especially to be addressed to these
Presidents, and by them to be communicated to their Colleagues, or fellows. 4.
Had this man pondered, what Beza asserts, in his Treaties de Episcopa^u
triplici, ane^t the Episcopus divinus, humanus and Satanicus. He would have
kept off this fantastic conceit; For we find Beza therein exclude, as beyond,
the limits of the Divine Bishop, whatever power in Government, is assumed, by
any beyond that of a Pastor; and that he acknowledged no preheminency or
presiding in any Pastor, which encroaches upon the Decisive Power of his
fellows, to be allowed of God. Finally, To convince yet further, of the folly
of this Citation, out of Beza, let us hear how in the same place, he antidots
this man's washpish extraction out of his words, for after he has Exponed that
Clause (...) (to the Angel) to the President, he adds, Sed hinc statui
Episcopalis ille gradus, etc. But that Episcopal degree which was afterward
brought into the Church of God, certainly, neither can, nor ought to be hence
concluded, nay not so much as the necessity of the Office of a perpetual
President, as the thence arising Olligarchical Tyranny, whose Head is the
Antichristian Beast, now at length, with the most certain ruin not of the
Church only, but of the World also, makes manifest; so the Beza (as is from
hence above cleared) holds the very fixed Moderator to be an humane invention,
and the poisonous Egg, out of which Antichrist was hatched. Add to all this,
that Beza by this man's acknowledgem^nt, calling the other Ministers, the
Colleagues of this President, does in that very term deny to him, a
super-eminent fixed Authority over them; and Calvin (whom he will not say, Beza
does in this point contradict, since he acknowledges their Writings on this
Subject excellent) expones Colleagues, to be such as have one and the same
^unction, and upon this very ground reprehends (as we heard above) the making
the name Bishop peculiar to any one of them; from all which, the forgery and
vanity of this Definition, and of the preceding, as relating to his Scope,
does convincingly appear.

CHAP. Fourth.
Wherein this Pamphleter is examined upon, and expostulat with, anent the
impertinency, of his pretended Postulatums, drawn from Calvin and Beza.
HAving thus discovered how insignificant this man's pretended Definitions, are
to found and fortify his ensuing Propositions and Demonstrations, we do proceed
to examine that which he calls his Postulatums, the first whereof is thus.

Postulatum 1.
That the seventy Disciples (from among whom Matthias was called to be ordained
one of the twelve Apostles) were persons in holy Order in the Ministry. To
prove this, Calvin is adduced on Luke 10. 1, 16. v. whose words are these,
after the Apostles had returned to Christ, he sent more secundary Preachers,
and this is the great commendation of the outward Ministry, that Christ
declares, That whatsoever honor is given to his faithful Preachers, is given
to himself.

Answer.
In Answer to this, we need not contend much in Thesi, anent what is asserted
to the Office of the 70 Disciples, only we may advert here, some things that
will Castigat and Check his Scope in this Postulatum, as that Calvin asserts,
that they were only as it were secundary Preachers, not simply secundary
Preachers; he says also, Nulla illis proprie commissa fuit legatio, no Legation
or Mission was properly intru^ed to them (which we heard Beza also above
assert) Bus as Christ's Aparitors, were sent to prepare the peoples hearts to
receive his Doctrine.

Next I observe, that though by his inserted Parenthesis, he would have it
believed, That Calvin holds Matthias to be one of the s^verity Disciples, yet
his Citation out of Calvin, is utterly remote from proving it, Calvin touching
nothing of this in his Discourse of the seventy; and in Acts 1. upon v. 21. and
the two last verses, where it was very proper to insert this, he has not the
least hint of it; Nay, in answering that Objection, why did they not remit it
to God? to choose one out of all the multitude, without a previous designation
of these two, he has no such thing either, though it was most pertinent here to
mention it. In a word, Calvin's Principles above-evinced, anent the
extraordinary, personal, expired power and inspection of Apostles and
Evangelists, as such; and anent the Pastor his being the highest ordinary
Officer in the New Testament Church, and his clear and positive assertion of
the same equal Function, and official authority of all Pastors, whether he take
the seventy Disciples, to be ordinary, or extraordinary Church Officers; It is
evident even to a Demonstration, that his words cited in this Postulatum, will
bear no conclusion, of his owning such a standing Subordination among
Ministers. as this man imputes to him; but that his Doctrine, and Principles
utterly overthows the same. Proceed we to the second Postulatum, which is thus.

Postulatum 2.
That Timothy in the Church of Ephesus, and Titus in the Church of Crete, were
from their Offices preheminent to other Ministers, invested with a fixed power
of Ordination, and Jurisdiction, regulated by Cannons, and balanced by
assisting Ministers, To prove this, he cites Calvin, 1 Timothy 1. 18. v. asserting
that Timothy was not one of the common Ministry, but one next to the Apostles,
who in the frequent absence of Paul, was in his place. Also, on Tit. 1. v. 5.
where he says, That besides the ordinary Office of Pastors, Titus had this
charge, That he should constitute a certain Form of Church Policy and
Discipline, and likewise ordain Ministers over the Churches.

Answer.
To this I answer in general, that it is already made good, from clear and
positive Assertions of Calvin, that the Office both of Apostles and
Evangelists, is expired, and that no preheminent Office, over that of the
Pastor, is in his Judgment continued in the Church; so that whatever
preheminent power over ordinary Pastors, Calvin may suppose, at this time
existent in Timothy or Titus, it will never reach this Pamphleters conclusion,
anent his asserting a moral standing pre-eminence, in any ordinar Church
Officer, over his Colleagues, which is the point he undertakes to prove.

2. Particularly, if he will prove any thing to his purpose from Calvin, he
must show us his assertion anent a fixed, and not only so, but likewise, (as is
said above) an ordinary Power, or of a Moral perpetual Nature, in Ordination
and Jurisdiction, over other Ministers, and exercised by Timothy and Titus;
which that Calvin disowns, is evident thus.

1. They whose Office, and Official preheminency consequently, was
correspondent unto, and of a like extent with that of the Apostles, these had
no fixed Presidency over any one Church; but in Calvin's Judgment, the Office
and Official Pre-eminence of Timothy and Titus, was of this nature: Ergo. The
Assumption is proved from this, that Calvin asserts, (as is above evinced) the
Evangelists Office to be next that of the Apostles, and that their work was to
Preach the Gospel every where, and supply the Apostles rooms, when going from
one place to another.

2. They whose official Pre-eminence, and formal Office, supposed the Churches
in fieri, and was appointed for assisting the Apostles in Exedifying them, they
had in Calvin's Judgment, no fixed moral or standing Preheminency over Ministers
and Churches; else we shall suppose the Christian Church in its model of
Government to be still (with him) in fieri, and the Apostolic Office formerly
existent, which we heard above, both Calvin and Beza disown; but the Office of
Timothy and Titus, in Calvin's Judgment was such, as we heard also above. Ergo.

3. They whose Official Power, is expressly by Calvin distinguished, from that
power which is ordinary and of perpetual necessity in the Church Government,
their supposed Preheminency lays no foundation for a fixed moral president,
preheminent Bishop, over Ministers, as of perpetual necessity in the Church,
unless he will make Calvin in contradiction to himself, assert one and the same
Office, and Power to be ordinary, and extraordinary, perpetual and temporary,
continually necessary, and not necessary; but so it is that Calvin thus
distinguishes the Office of Evangelists, from the Pastoral perpetual Office, as
we heard above. Ergo.

4. They who by their Office were fixed to no particular Station, or Church in
Calvin's Judgment, they had no fixed preheminent Power, in Ordination and
Jurisdiction over other Ministers; else they should be by their Office, fixed,
and not fixed. But so it is that in Calvin's Judgment, Timothy and Titus were
set over no particular Station, as we heard him above assert. Ergo no
Evangelists properly such, were in Calvin's judgment fixed to any particular
Station; as we heard him above assert. But Timothy and Titus were the
Evangelists properly such, as we heard also him affirm. Ergo.

Finally, so absurd is this man's assertion here, that his pretended proofs out
of Calvin, furnishes sufficient Weapons to overthrow it; For,

First, If Timothy was none of the common ordinary Ministry, but the Apostle
Paul's Depute, sustaining his place in his frequent absence, then (as we heard
Calvin above argue and assert) his Official Inspection, was neither ordinary,
nor fixed, over any one Church; Ergo, It laid no foundation in Calvin's
judgment, for a moral fixed President Bishop, with Official standing
Preheminency, over Ministers and Churches, as he would make Calvin affirm.

2. That Office or Charge, which was beyond the limits of the ordinary power of
Pastors, that Office and Power in Calvin's judgment, is extraordinary and
expired; but such was in his judgment the Power and Office of Titus at Crete,
as his second passage adduced, by our Pamphleter makes it evident, and several
other places of Calvin, of which above. The Major is evident in this, that with
Calvin, The Pastor laboring in the Word and Doctrine, is the highest ordinary
Officer of a necessary standing nature, as we heard him above assert. The Minor
is evident in this plain assertion set down, by this man himself.

3. If we shall compare these places adduced by him, with Calvin's Comment: upon
the whole Context, this man's absurd imposing upon him will be further evident;
Calvin shows in the Argument of the first Chapter, that many things at Ephesus
were wanting, which needed Paul's interposed Authority to set in order; and
upon the 1. verse, as also in this Argument, he shows, that it was not to
Timothy alone he wrote; and upon the 3. verse, that, that Churches necessity
forced Paul, to demit such a dear Coajutor to supply his place there, and upon
this 18 verse he tells us, that for this end Prophesies went before on Timothy,
because he was appointed to hard and great matters, for (says he) he was not, e
vnlgo, of the ordinary class and rate of Ministers, but next to Apostles, that
therefore he had need of a singular Testimony, that it might appear he was
chosen of God himself, that then it was not ordinary or common to be honored
with Elogies of Prophets, but in Timothy there were peculiar Causes, therefore
God would not have him set about his Office, but fitted with prophetic
Oracles, nor to be admitted by men, until approved by his own Voice, as it was
with Paul and Barnabas when sent to teach the Gentiles. In which words let any
man judge, whether Calvin does not hold his Office extraordinary, both upon the
account of his Mission, his peculiar Gifts, and the nature of his work and
Inspection, as upon the same ground, he holds the Office of Apostles to be
such. In the Argument of the Epistle to Titus, he shows that Paul hasting else
where, entrusted to Titus the prosecuting of his own Work, and this as to an
Evangelist, who was not of the ordinary rate of Ministers, that Paul wrote to
him to arm him with his own Authority, upon the 6 v. that he was set by the
Apostle, as the Moderator in the ordination of Pastors, that that work might be
orderly done, and upon the 7 v. he expressly asserts the Identitie of the Bishop
and Presbyters Office as the same, and upon the 5 v. asserting the same thing,
he shows that he had no arbibitrary Power in this matter, but that of a
Moderator, that sustaining Paul's room, and having his place as it were assigned
to him, the Apostle will have him acknowledged as his Vicarious Substitute,
that Paul leaving that place, left Work for others, as he was at Corinth the
Master Builder, but others built on his Foundation, the Church still standing
in need of Pastors for her increase. But least we take Titus work to be no
other than what is competent to ordinary Pastors, he presently rids Marches
thus, Sed ultra ordinarium pastorum munus, etc. but beyond the ordinary Office
of Pastors, Titus had the care of constituting the Church committed to him;
Then (as is above-observed) he distinguishes him in this, from Pastors, who are
set over Churches reduced unto Form; But Titus (says he) had a Work beyond
this, even to form Churches not as yet molded, etc. And after stating the
Question, whether Titus had not in appearance a Kingly Power over the College
of the Pastors, and their decisive Authority, he answers, as is said above,
that his Power was not arbitrary, but that of a Moderator etc. Here let any
judge, if Calvin assert not that Titus his Inspection, and work was
extraordinary, as suited to that Exigence, Case and Time of the Church, and
consequently that it was Temporary and not fix^d, as that of the A^ostle Paul,
whose Deputy he now was, and likeways that his power did not take away the
collegiat decisive Suffrage of Pastors, over who^ he was for that Exigent only,
to exercise an Evangelistick Inspection, and to act the Power and Office of a
Moderator, from all which the Impertinency and Falsehood of this man's Assertion,
is satis super que evident. Proceed we to the Third Postulatum which is thus.

Postulatum 3.
That for the avoiding of Schism, the Primitive Church retained the Government
of one single person preheminent in Office unto other Ministers. This is proved
by Calvin, Instit. lib. 4. cap. sect. 2. where he asserts, that Presbyters, out
of their number in all their Cities, did choose one, to whom especially they
gave the title of Bishop; lest from a Pa^ity (as uses to be) Divisions might
arise, Ierom says, at Alexandria from Mark the Evangelist, to Heraclas and
Dionysius; Presbyters always placed one in a preheminent Degree, whom they
called a Bishop.

Answer.
The absurdity of this Inserence, from Calvin's Assertion, is above fully
cleared, and that Calvin ownes not a president, with a power in Ordination and
Jurisdiction, or preheminent unto other Ministers, or a power Paramount unto
their Collegiat, Decisive, Suffrage, and consequently, no warrantable practice
of the Church hereanent, as this man absurdly infers from his Words, to make
which evident,

First, I enquire, What he means by the Government of one single person, and a
pre-eminence in Office; neither Matter, nor Words, being so found in this
passge of Calvin here cited? If he mean such a Power as does no whit encroach
upon Pastors, Decisive, Conclusive Suffrage and Government, suppose he be fixed
in this Sense, he is but a Moderator, and then I would know, how is the
Government in this one single person, and his Office preheminent, and above
that of his Fellows? ^f his Office be so singular, and preheminent of that of
Pastors; that it does infringe their Decisive, Conclusive Suffrage, or
imports a sole Pre-eminence in Ordination and Jurisdiction, as he must needs
hold, and does assert ( Axiom 2. compared with Definition 2 and 3.) This to be
Galvin's Judgment, Calvin in the very next Words gives him the Lie, for he adds
immediately, neque sic in hon^re and dignitate superior, etc. neither was he so
Superior, as to have Dominion over his Colleagues, but what Power the Consul
had in the Senate, to enquire the Votes or Sentences, etc. Again this man
acknowledges in his Citation, to prove Definition 3. That Calvin asserts the
Power of this President Bishop, to be like that of the Consul in the Senate, but
will he dare to say, that the Government of the Senate, in Calvin, or any
knowing man's Judgment, was confined to the person of the Consul.

2. We said above, that Calvin acknowledges, the Ancients their aberration from
the Scripture Rule, in their Church Government, and that this Custom in his own
and Ierom's Judgment, was brought in humano consilio, and pro temporum
necessit^t, by humane Advice and Counsel, and according to the times exigence,
wherein he clearly distinguishes, this from a Divine Institution, authorizing a
divine Office of Gods Appointment, for he presently cites that place of Ierom
upon Titus, (mentioned above) wherein he shows that by divine Appointment, the
Church was governed by Presbyters in common; And that the then Bishops power
was only by Custom, not authorized by divine Appointment; So that our
Pamphleter will never be able to conclude, from these words, Calvin's
Recommendation and Approbation of this practice, but on the contrary, Calvin
and Ierom both, does suppose what ever thing in this practice, was an
incroachment upon the Presbyters divine Power, was a humane Device and sinful
Usurpation, which would be convincingly evident to any that considers.

3. That this Practice of appropriating the name [Bishop] to one, is (as I did
above clear) in terminis, condemned by Calvin, as an abuse of the Holy Ghosts
Language, and making way for one Pastor, his encroaching upon the Power of his
Colleagues. We told him that upon Phil. 1. 1. having asserted the Identity of
the Bishop and Presbyter, he tells us, that this place is made use of by Ierom,
to prove Presbyters Divine Paritie, he adds, postea invaluit usus, etc.
afterward Custom prevailed, that he whom Presbyters set over their collegiat
Meeting, was only called the Bishop, but this had its Original from the custom
of Men, but is not at all grounded upon Authority of Scripture. In which words,
this practice (which our Pasqueller would make us believe has Calvin's
Approbation) is clearly Reprobat, as an Aberration from the Rule, and
Institution which first took place, and no man can be so irrational, as to
imagine that Calvin would put this Censure upon the singularity of the name
Bishop, as appropriat to one Minister, and not also upon the singularity of an
Official Pre-eminence, which this man pleads for. Two words more I add on this,
that if this man will allow Calvin any Interest, and consent in, and to the
Confession of the French Church, he is there told by Calvin, that the true
Church ought to be governed by that Policy, which Christ has ordained, viz.
that there be Pasters, Presbyters, Elders and Deacons, and as to a preheminent
fixed Presidency, they do thus in terminis disowne it. Again we believe that
all true Pastors wherever they be, are endued with equal and the same Power,
under one Head and Bishop CHRIST JESUS; Thus expressly disclaiming this
preheminent Power in Ordination and Jurisdiction, (which our Pamphleter makes
Calvin own)* or any supposed President or Pastor, with official power over his
Colleagues, and that upon the same ground of Cyprian, which we heard mentioned,
and approved of Calvin, viz. That Christ has in him the original sole
Episcopacy, whereof in a perfect Parity, he has imparted to every Minister an
entire and equal share.

Next, I offer to him the sense of the famous Doctor Reynolds, upon these words
of Calvin, in his Letter to Sir Francis Knolls, cited at large ( Petri. Hist.
part 3. page 400 and 69, 70, 71.) upon Ieroms words, a Marco Evangelista, the
Doctor proves, that by the Decree of the 4th Counsel of Carthage, cap 3. anent
Presbyters interest in Ordination, (which proves, says he, that Bishops
ordained not then in all places alone, although Ierom says, Quid facit excepta
ordinatione, etc.) And by Ierom's proving Bishops and Presbyters to be all one
in Scripture, and even in the right of Ordination. 1 Timothy 4. 14. That Ierom
could not mean Bishops, in Alexandria to have had this sole Power. And as for
that place of Calvin (instit: lib. 4. cap. 4. Sect. 2.) cited then by Doctor
Boncroft. (anent whose Sermon he wrote that Epistle) he shows, that Calvin
relating the practice of choosing one to proceed, and giving him the Name of
Bishop, does notwithstanding show that he was not above the Presbyters in
Dignity and Honor, or to rule over them, but was appointed only to ask the
Votes, to see that performed that was agreed upon by common consent; And having
showed that this was brought in by consent of Men, in Ieroms Judgment, he adds
that Ierom otherwhere shows, how ancient the Custom was, from Marks time to
Heraclas, etc. In which words of Calvin (says the Doctor) seeing that the Order
of the Church has evident relation to that before described, and that in
describing it, he had said the Bishop, was not so over the rest in honor, yet
he had rule over them, it follows that Mr Calvin does not so much as seem to
confess, on Ierom's Report, that ever since Mark's time, Bishops have had a
ruling superiority over the Clergy: Adding, that it may easily be made appear
from many places of Ierom and Calvin both, as well as from this passage, it is
evident that neither of them does affirm Bishops to have had all that time,
such a Superiority as Boncroft, fathered upon them. Wherein the Doctor clearly
affirms and proves, that neither of these places of Ierom or Calvin, would
bear, either an Assertion of this matter of Fact, viz. the forementioned
President his exercising a sole Episcopal Authority, or their approbation of
the Government, of one single person, preheminent in Office unto other
Ministers, as this Pamphleter suggests. Proceed we to the 4th Postulatum, which
is this.

Postulatum 4.
The 7 Angels of the seven Churches written unto in the Book of the Revelation,
are encouraged against all the devices of the Ungodly, upon condition of their
continuing faithful in their Administrations. To prove this Beza is adduced on
Rev. cap. 2: 26. My Works, that is he who shall faithfully perform the work
laid upon him; for he bespeaks the Assembly of Pastors, in the person of the
President, to whom he promises Victory against all the Wicked, if he rely and
trust in the Authority and power of that True and only Head of the Church. To
which I answer.

Answer.
First, we have proved upon Definition 4, that Beza's taking this Angel for one
single person, by whom the rest were to be admonished, will infer in Beza's
Sense no pre-eminence in Office, and Authority over his Colleagues.

2. That Beza disownes even the inference of the necessity, of a fixed
Moderator, as necessary following upon his Assertion; Yea,

3. That he holds this practice of the fixed Moderator to be founded only upon
a humane Custom; and such a Custom as gave a rise to Antichristian Tyranny; and
consequently that the Ministers of these Churches, are owned by Beza as
Colleagues, of equal Power and Authority with the President, though by him
immediately be-spoken, and so by clear and necessary consequence further, their
continuing faithful in their Administrations, can import nothing more in Beza's
sense, in the words here cited, then a faithfulness in the exercise of their
joint Collegiat Power and Authority, which Beza holds, was our Lords
Institution, and then existent. Thus we have seen this man's Postulatums, as
insufficient to found his Conclusion, as the Definitions. Proceed we now to his
next Section of Axioms.

CHAP. Fifth.
THe Axioms in point of Church Government, imputed by this Pamphleter to
Calvin, examined, and found impertinent to fortify his Scope and Conclusion.
The first of these Axioms is this.
Axiom. 1.
THe regular Call of any Minister already Ordained, is from an Office of an
Inferior, to another of a preheminent Station. To prove this, Calvin is adduced
on 1 Timothy 3. 13. saying, That because in one or two Centuries, after the Death
of the Apostles, it was the constant Custom, that from the Order of Deacons,
the Presbyters were chosen, therefore commonly they have exponed this place, of
the advancement to a superior Degree.

First, as to the pertinency of this Citation, to prove the Axiom as here set
down, I answer.

Answer.
First Calvin has no such words, that it was the Constant or Universal Custom
in these Centuries, to Ordain Presbyters, after this manner, as this man would
insinuat, all that Calvin says, is that invaluerat usus, this practice came in
use and prevailed, through process of time, but it might be so, though it was
neither universal nor constant, through all times and places.

2. Calvin disowns both this Custom as constant, and necessary, and likewise
the Exposition of this passage, of, and its Application to such a Custom, as is
evident to any that will read him upon that place, for to these words here
cited, he adds, quasi Apostolus, as if the Apostle called to the Honor of the
Presbyterat, such as have acquit themselves faithful Deacons -- then adds,
although I do not deny, that the order of Deacons may sometimes be a Seminary,
out of which Presbyters may be taken; Yet I do more simply take Paul's words,
that they are worthy of no small honor, who do well acquit themselves in this
Administration, because it is not a base, but a very honorable Office; so that
what ever this man would make of this Axiom [that the regular Call of a
Minister already ordained, is from an Inferior to a supereminent Station]
Calvin does neither absolutely hold this, as always necessary, and cons^quently
the Axiom is not true in his Judgment, nor does he hold, that the practice as
to matter of fact, was constant and universal.

3. Giving, not granting, that Calvin held the Custom, to have been throughout
these Centuries, to ordain none Presbyters, but such as were before Deacons,
unless he can prove, that Calvin held the Custom to be founded on divine
Warrard, this will only prove that Calvin held it to be an humane Custom, and
consequently alterable; ergo in Calvin's Judgment, this cannot found a Maxim or
Axiom, at to that which is always necessary to be done.

4. Granting the utmost which Calvin's words may be drawn to, when stretched
upon the Tenter-pins till they crack, viz. that every Presbyter or Minister,
must be first a Deacon before he be Ordained, ergo what? I would fain know by
what Logic he would fasten his grand Conclusions to this Principle, viz. That
there are different degrees in the Pastoral Offi^e; And that, one may and ought
to be a fixed President Bishop over them, with a preheminent fixed power of
Ordination and Jurisdiction. Again what means he by [any Minist^^] if all
Church Officers under the New Testament, as he needs must? since he holds there
are various sorts of Ministers under the New Testament, Apostles, Evangelists,
Pastors, Deacons, who have all their formal Successors according to Calvin; How
does he infer Calvin's Judgment, as to the regular Call of all, from what he
Asserts as to the practice of one? Again what calls he [a Minister already
ordained?] Can there be any Minister or Church Officer who is not ordained?
Ordination being relative to some Church Officers Administration. Finally, what
means he by the [regular Call] of this ordained Minister? If his Instalment
into a higher Office, then this is formally his Ordination; So that Axiom will
run thus, the regular Ordination of any Minister already ordained, is from an
Office of an Inferior, etc. But this is both redoundant in sense, the
Ordination of one already ordained, being necessary from a lower to a higher
Station, and likewise impertinent to his Scope and Design, viz* to prove that
none were ordained Pastors, who were not first (in Calvin's Sense) ordained
Deacons; If by [regular Call] he mean the Call to the exercise of his Function
else where, then he would make Calvin with the Independents, to put a New
Ordination, for a new Application of the Office. Thus the Maxim as here set
down appears impertinent to his Scope, impertinent as to a Discovery of
Calvin's Judgment in this point, yea, and hardly reconcilable to sound Sense.

Axiom. 2.
The 2 Axiom, the pre-eminence in any Office, includes a proportioned
Jurisdiction, over the Officers, who are under them. For proof of this Axiom we
are referred to Definition 2, and 3.

Answer.
To which I Answer, We have upon these his two Definitions made it good, that
this pre-eminence in Office, and proportioned pre-eminence in Jurisdiction,
which Calvin in the places therein cited, supposes competent to the Apostles,
and Evangelists, was in his Judgment, neither.

First, a fixed Pre-eminence and Jurisdiction, nor 2. Ordinary, or such as is
of a moral standing Nature, of constant use and necessity, in
Church Government; But that in Calvin's Judgment, it was such as did expire,
with the persons of these extraordinary New Testament Officers; And that 3.
That this Pre-eminence in Office and jurisdiction, while these expired Offices
did exist, is by Calvin asserted to be cumulative unto, not privative of, the
ordinary Collegiat Authority of Pastors, in Ordination and Jurisdiction, and
was not to encroach upon this their standing essential Interest, and Power in
Government; which in Calvin's sense, necessarily continues their fixed
Privilege to the end.

So that in a word, if he should apply this general Maxim, to these necessary
Officers, which Calvin holds to be of perpetual use, viz. Pastors, Elders,
Deacons, it shall be easily admitted, but without the least help to his design;
If he apply it to his supposed fixed President, with Official Pre-eminence over
Pastors, (as his Marginal Proofs do oblige him) Calvin in the places above
cited, denis such an Officer, and the Maxim and Axiom, consequently founded
upon these two definitions, is none of his.

Axiom* 3.
The Divine Right is manifest in that Ecclesiastic Government, which is
instituted by Christ, continued by his Apostles, retained in the primitive
Church, and approven from Heaven by Revelation; in sub^^^^iencie to any end,
wherein the wel^ being of Christianity is nearly concerned. This is proved by
Calvin instit. lib. 4. cap. 6. Sect. 1. His words are, (We have not before
touched upon the Primacy of the Roman See, whence the Papists strive to prove,
that the Catholic Church is only with them: Because it has not taken its
original from Christ's Institution, nor the custom of the Ancient Church, as
the other Offices have done, ( viz. Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, Cap. 4.
Sect. 1.) mentioned already.

Answer.
This Maxim needs not a very long animadversion, since the scope he drives at,
is not in the least reached by it, nor our cause prejudged, restricting it
unto, and confining it within the limits of that place of Calvin here cited,
viz. That the Church Government by the Officers mentioned in the close of this
citation, has its original from Christ's Institution, was continued in the
Apostolic, and Primitive Church, for moral standing ends.

But 2. Comparing it as here worded, and understood by him, with his first
Corollarie, wherein we have the knack of his Project, and improvement thereof,
we must a little further animadvert, and observe here; That,

First it exceeds the limits of this Citation of Calvin, in that clause of
[approbation from Heaven by revelation] which in the forementioned Corollarie,
he understands of an express, and formal delineation, in the Epistles to the 7.
Churches of Asia, upon his supposition, or rather distortion of Bezas meaning,
anent the Office and Authority of the Angel written unto; for either he must
understand it, (as it is evident he does in that Corollarie) of an approbation,
Thus specifially distinct from both the preceding Clauses, and so the
assertion is none of Calvin's in this place, or else if it be the same, with
what is said of Christ's Institution and continuation by his Apostles, and the
Primitive Churches Retention, this Clause is pitifully redoundant, and a mere
Battollogy, which this Pretender to such exact concisness should be ashamed to
be guilty of.

2. We said already, that Calvin holds, that the Primitive Church, did in
several things degenerat, from Apostolic purity, and Institutions, in point of
Government; so that in his Sense, the Primitive Churches practice, simply
considered, will not make a complete and just Square for Government. If we
compare what he says, chap. 3. and 4. initio, This will be evident, for he
tells us in the place last mentioned, that hitherto he has spoken, of
Church Government, and Officers, as purely institute by God in his Word;
insinuating, that the ancient Church, had quickly her additions, so that Calvin
makes not the Ancient Churches Retention, any part of the Rule simply, but
makes it Regulable by the Divine Warrant and Institution. I may add, that as
Calvin's citation makes no mention, of the end of this Institution, whatever may
be gathered from it, so it is certain, that in all reason, and in Calvin's
Principles, the Church Government, which has an entire Divine Right, must be
commensurat, not to any only, but to all the ends, wherein the well being of
Christians is concerned.

Fi^ally, when Calvin (as is above hinted) in stating the distinction betwixt
the Ecclesiastic Officers, which have a Divine Right, (I mean, a moral
standing Right, as Church Officers of perpetual necessity) and such as have it
not, but are founded upon the Churches custom, which Calvin distinguishes, from
this Right, when I say, speaking of the first, he referrs us only to these
mentioned, it is certain, he excluds this man's supposed Successors of Apostles
and Evangelists, in a standing preheminent presidency, over ordinary Pastors;
and consequently holds, that the immediate end, grounding a necessity of
Apostles and Evangelists, their Institution, being temporary, and passing off
with that exigence of the Churches infant state, the necessity, consequently of
these Officers, and of their formal Official Power, and Authority, is expired
also, with this its end, which laid the foundation thereof.

Axiom 4.
The want of that Government in the Church, which is of Divine Right, is
pernicious to the Gospel, and Christian Religion. This is proved by Calvin
(Instit. lib. 4. cap. 8. Sect. 2.) The words cited are, for neither the light,
and heat of the Sun, meat or drink, are so nourishing, and sustaining this
present life, as the Apostolic and Ministerial Office for preserving a Church
upon Earth.

Answer.
This Axiom is no doubt very sound, and consonant to Calvin's judgment, and of
all sound Divines, and therefore taken in a sound sense, can be easily
admitted, without the least prejudice of it to our cause. But

Answer.
2. Taking it in the Sense and Intendment of this Pasqueller, and comparing his
scope in this, and the preceding Citation, which is to prove, that Calvin
makes an Apostolic standing pre-eminence, and Official Presidency, in
Ordination and Jurisdiction over Pastors, of as perpetual necessity for
preservation of the Gospel, and the Gospel Church, as the Pastoral Office it
self; We say, he offers violence to Calvin, and pitifully involves him in
Contradictions.

First, in that he makes him to hold the Apostolic Office, to be perpetually
necessary, for the Churches being, and consequently not expired, but ordinary,
in express contradiction, to what we, heard Calvin above assert.

2. He sets him by the ea^s with himself, in his former citation, wherein
Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, are said to be the only Officers, which have
a divine standing Right of perpetual necessity; unless he will say, that Calvin
holds the Apostolic and Episcopal Office, to be in a formal Sense, one and the
same, which assertion is above convicted of falsehood* out of Calvin's words, in
several clear passages, wherein it is evinced that Calvin holds, the Bishop and
Presbyter to be all one, and their Offices to be in this distinguished from the
Apostolic and Evangelistick, that the one is ordinary and perpetual, the other
not; the one imports a definite charge over a fixed Flock, the other not; the
one is suited to the Churches state when exedified, the other to its Infant
state, and in fieri, etc.

3. For the passage here cited, or rather mis-cited by this Man, take a full
account of Calvin's mind thus: In libro quarto, capite quarto, In the 1. 2, and
3. Sect. He speaks of the end, use and necessity of a Gospel Ministry in the
general, of Christ's giving to men a Vicarious Ministry, supplying the want of
his visible presence, adding several reasons, viz. To show his condescendency
to our weakness. 2. To inure us to humble obedience. To be a Bond of Love and
unity, while some teach and others are taught, exponing and applying that of
the Ephesians* 4. 5, 6, 7. Sect. 2. He gathers hence, that the Ministry of Men, is
the chief Nerve, whereby the Godly coheres in one Body; That thus our Lord
shows himself present, and puts forth the Power and Virtue of his Spirit, thus
grow we up (says he) if Preaching be vigent among us, if we receive the
Apostles, despise not the Doctrine off^red to us, adding the words mis-cited by
this Pamphleter, (as in cap. 8 Sect. 2.) viz. That neither light of the Sun,
meat or drink, etc. are so needful, as the Apostolic, and Pastoral Office,
that is, in so far as the Apostolic Office contains the Ministerial or
Pastoral Materially, and Eminenter, and so has derived from it, a perpetual
standing Gospel^Ministry, and Ministerial Authority, necessarly to be
continued, and propagated in the Church, till the end of time; In which respect
our Lord promised his presence, with his Apostles, and their Successors, in the
Gospel Ministry, and Legation, until the end of the World.

Thus I say, the Apostolic and Ministerial Office, may according to Truth, and
in Calvin's principles, be said to be perpetually necessary for the Church, but
without any advantage to this man's scope and design, a^ is obvious to the
meanest reflection. But least our Pasqueller, quarrel this as my Commentary, for
his further conviction in the clearing of this Point, let me detain the reader
a little further in the view of that Chapter.

Sect. 3. He shows the dignity of the Gospel Ministry, by the Scripture
Elogi^^, that their feet are beautiful ( Isa. 52.) That the Apostles are
called, the light of the World, and the salt of the Earth, ( Matthew. 5. 13, 14.
v.) He that hears you, hears me, Luke 10. 16. Then citing the 2 Corin: 3. and
9. v. He says* The Apostle shows, there is nothing more glorious, and
excellent in the Church then the Gospel Ministry, since it is the Administration
of the Spirit of Righteousness, and life eternal. Nihil Evangeli^ Ministerio in
Ecclesia, magis pr^clarum. Then ( Sect. 9.) beginning the second part of the
Chapter, he descends to speak particularly, of the Persons to whom Church
Government is committed, they are nominat (says he) by Paul, first Apostles,
secondarly Prophets, thirdly Evangelists, fourthly Pastors, lastly Doctors.
Then he adds, ex quibus, duo tantum ultimi ordinarium in Ecclesia mu^us habent,
That is, of whom the two last only have an ordinary Office in the Church. Then
discoursing of the Grounds and Reasons of the extraordinary peculiar Function,
of Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, he adds, sequuntur Past^re^ and Doctores
quious carere nunqua^ pote^t Ecclesia, there follows Pastors and Doctors whom
the Church can never want, clearly distinguishing them in this, from these
expired Functions of Apostles and Evangelists.

Then descending to speak, how the Apostles are succeeded as to a perpetual
standing Ministry ( Sect. 5. 6. 7.) He begins Sect. 5. thus, videmus quae in
Ecclesia reg^^ine ^empor^ria Ministeria fuerunt, at que ideo instituta ut
pe^petuo duraren^; We see what Offices, or Administrations in the Church
Government were temporary; or expired, and what Offices were institut to be of
perpetual c^ntinuance. And at the close of this Section, he positiv^ly asserts*
(which at one dash cancells all this Pamphl^ters pi^iful suggestions here)
t^hat Pastors, [s^ting aside the Apostles extraordinary Priviledges] eandem cum
Apostolis sustinuit Provinciam, has the same employment, and perpetual pastoral
Office assigned to them with the Apostles.

Then offering to clear further, what this Office and Province is, he does
accordingly ( Sect. 6.) reason thus, That the Apostles Patent and Commission,
bearing the preaching of the Word, and the Administration of the Sacraments, as
the substantials and main piece of their Office, the Pastors are properly their
Successors, in their Official Power; That Paul said not of himself only, but of
Pastors, (let a man so account of us, as Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of
the Mysteries of God; And that (in Titus 1. 9. v.) the Bishop must hold the
faithful word, and by sound Doctrine teach and convince the gainsayers; lashing
expressly Prelates who pretend to succeed Apostles, and yet neglect the great
work* while holding (says he) idle dignities, -- And near the close of ^his
Section, he shows, that this Pastoral Office, in relation to the Administration
of the Word and Sacraments, includes and imports the preservation, and
exercise, of the Discipline and Government of the Church.

Thereafter ( Sect. 8) he proves from Titus 1. 5. Phil. 1. 1. Act. 20. 17. That
the Office of the Bishop, Presbyter and Pastor, is one and the same, Section 5.
He proves, that the Election of Pastors, is by his Colleague -- Pastors with
the Peoples consent.

Now the Man that shall need any further demonstration, than this Plain-reading
of Calvin, to convince him, that it was the perpetual Pastoral Office, in
relation to the Administration of the Word and Sacraments, and the appendant
Power of Jurisdiction, and Church Government included therein, which he asserts
to be of as perpetual necessity in the Church, as the Sun, and Meat and Drink
are to the World, and not the formal temporary Office of Apostles, and
Evangelists, as such, or as including any Superiority over the Pastoral Office,
the Man, I say, who needs any further proof of this, than what is above
touched, has a crack in his intellectualls, and may be set to his Horn Book
again.

CHAP. Sixth.
THe Propositions and Demonstrations drawn out by this Pamphleter, upon the
premised Definitions, Postulatum^, and Axioms, (as the great projection and
scope thereof) examined; the the unsoundness thereof discovered, and the
Antitheses of his Propositions established, and his Demonstrations everted, by
Counter-demonstrations, from Calvin and Beza.

Having thus evinced to the conviction of the judicious and impartial, the
pitiful mis-application, and forgery of all this Mars Citations, out of Calvin
and Beza, to fortify his scope and design, in these assertions, which he calls
Definitions, Postulatums, and Axioms; His Demonstrations drawn from them do
fall by course, as the Superstruc^ure when the Foundation is razed. His
Principles being found unsound, his Demonstrations, (the birth of them) will
appear lighter then vanity; And like the little bag which Children finds in the
Fields, and call the witch-ball, will be found to evaporat into Smoke with a
small touch.

The first Proposition he undertakes to Demonstrat from his Positions,
above-examined, is,
That the 12 Apostles were president Bishops, over the 70 Disciples.

Answer.
In general, I may again animadvert here, that if by being President Bishops,
be understood the Apostles univeral directive Authority and Inspection
necessarly connected with, and sounded upon their insallibility, as being so
many living Oracles, from whom the mind of Christ was infallibly to be sought,
both by Ministers and People, as to every point of their respective duties,
such a Presidency will be easily admitted; but in this respect he does
foolishly restrict, or imagins, that Calvin and Beza, does this restrict their
Presidency or Episcopacy to the 70 Disciples, for thus they were president
Bishops, over the universal Church, both Ministers and People, and that while
they lived; In the same respect, and upon the same ground, upon which they had
this presidency over the 70 Disciples, they had it universally over all, both
in the judgment of Calvin (as is above evinced) and of all sound Divines. And
in whatever respect he can alle^dge Calvin, to hold their Presidency, to be
universal, over the 70 Disciples, it is easy to prove that he holds this
Presidency, to be universal over all Churches and Ministers; and therefore if
he will from hence infer, successors to them in Calvin's judgment, he would make
him hold twelve moral standing Primats, and universal Patriarchs or Popes, with
infallible directive power over the whole Catholic Church.

2 I observe, that by asserting the Apostles, to be mee^ President Bishops, he
would make men believe that he pleads only for a moral standing fixed
Presidency; But (as I did above touch) he pleads by this first Proposition and
Assumption, for a standing moral Prelatick Dominion, over Church Judicatories
served up to the highest Peg. Follows the Demonstration, whereof the first
Proposition is,.

Major.
The President Bishop is he who from his Office preheminent to other Ministers,
is invested with a fixed Power of Ordination regulat by Canons, and of
Jurisdiction, balanced by assisting Ministers. For proof of which, he adduces
definition 3.

Answer.
This Proposition, as here worded, we did above dis-prove, and did show, that
according to his design in this Citation of Calvin, he must add both a sole
power, and likewise an ordinary power; that this place of Galvin will neither
prove his holding it fixed, nor an ordinary power in the Apostles, both which
we have found Calvin does disown in several places above cited. Besides the
above-evinced inconsistency of the two Branches, of this Proposition, compared
with his pretended proof; so that the Major appears naught. The assumption is,

Assumption.
But in respect to the 70 Disciples, who were all in the holy Ministry (by
Postulatum first) and from among whom Matthias was called to be of the twelve
by ( Postulatum 1.) The sacred College of the Apostles, had a fixed
preheminency, (by Axiom 1.) invested with the power of Ordination, regulated by
Canons, (by Postulatum 1. and Definition 1.) and of Jurisdiction balanced by
assisting Ministers; (by Axiom 2)

Answer.
Not to resume what we have animadverted, upon his Assertion anent the 70
Disciples and Calvin's silence as to Mathias in both the places cited by him,
and his Comment upon Mathias Election; As for that which he asserts from Axiom
1* anent the College of Apostles, their fixed pre-eminence, the Axiom itself
asserts the regular Call of any Minister already ordained, is from an Inferior,
to a Superior station, we did show the impertinency of Calvin's citation to
prove this, and that he neither simply asserts this matter of fact, as he sets
it down, nor gives his approbation of it, so that this Axiom is none of Calvin's.

2. For his inference from it, that the 12 had a fixed Preheminency over the
70, who sees not its remotness? Behold, the visage of this Reason, Calvin says,
that the Church sometimes choosed Presbyters, out of Deacons, ergo he ass^rts
that the 12 Apostles had a fixed Pre-eminence over the 70 Disciples.

3. If by [Fixed] he mean a pre-eminence ordinary, and to be continued, we have
proved that Calvin denies and disowns this, in the places above cited, and
asserts as evidently as man can speak, that the Apostolic Official
Pre-eminence, as such, was neither Fixed, Limited, nor Ordinary; that they were
invested with a power of Ordination regulat by Canons, he tells us is proved by
Postulatum 1. and Definition 1.

The Postulatum says, that the 70 Disciples were in the holy Order of the
Ministry, and how he has proved this from Calvin, we have above seen,
especially with relation to Mathias; Where we told him that Calvin's assertion
of the Sameness of the pastoral Function in all ordinary Pastors, and the
extraordinary expired Nature of the Apostolic Inspection and Authority, cutts
off his inference of such a standing Subordination among Pastors, as he imagins
him to hold.

Next, what a Rope of Sand is this, the 70 were inferior to the 12 Apostles,
ergo they had a fixed ordinary power of Ordination over them; and (forsooth)
regulated by Canons.

He next proves this by Definition 1. Which asserts that the power of
Ordination, is the Right of Governors of the Church to separate persons duly
qualified to the Ministry; This Calvin asserts, is proper only to Pastors,
which we proved, does infer clearly against this man's Design, Calvin's asserting
the Pastor to be the highest ordinary Officer, and the expired extraordinary
Nature of the Apostolic and Evangelistick Offices, together with the equal
Function of all Pastors, which Assertions of Calvin does render this Inference,
Ergo the Apostles were invested with an ordinary power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction over Pastors, to be transmitted to the Church, (which is this man's
Scope and Conclusion upon the premised general Assertion of Calvin, anent the
right of Church Governors) to be a mere non sequitur, and an ergo, baculus
stat in angulo.

The Apostles Preheminency in jurisdiction balanced by assisting Ministers, he
proves by Axiom 2. which he refers to Definition 2 and 3. Upon which i^ the
examination of his Citations, we have proved, that this supposed Apostolic
Preheminency is with Calvin neither Fixed, nor ordinary, or of a moral standing
Nature, but did expire with these extraordinary Functions; and that in Calvin's
principles, it was cumulative unto, not privative of, the ordinary standing
collegiat power of Pastors, which is to continue to the end; besides the
inconsistency wherein we have observed, he involves Calvin in his Collections
upon the place cited by him. Follows our Pamphleters grand Conclusion of his
Demonstration.

Conclusion.
Therefore the 12 Apostles were president Bishops over the 70 Disciples, which
was the thing to be demonstrated.

Answer.
If he mean an infallible directive power and presidency as Apostles, it is
easily admitted by Calvin; But then, as I said, he foolishly restricts it to
the 70 Disciples, which was over the whole Church both Mini^ters and People. If
he mean a standing moral ordinary perpetual Presidency, especially relative to
the 70, and wherein ordinary Officers were to succeed them, we have proved,
that he will as soon squise Water from a Flint, as either premises or
conclusion from the places of Calvin referred unto, in the two Propositions of
his Demonstration.

And unto his Demonstration and proposition, I do from what is above evinced,
oppose his Counter-demonstration, and Antithesis of his Position and
Conclusion. The Proposition is.

Proposition.
The Apostles were not fixed President ordinary Bishops over the 70 Disciples.

Demonstration.
They whose pr^sidency was not fixed to any Church or Station, nor Ordinary, but
Extraordinary, and universal over the whole Church, both Ministers and Flocks,
these had no fixed ordinary moral presidency, over the 70 Disciples. But the
Apostolic presidency was of this Nature, in the Judgment of Calvin; ergo the
Apostles were not ordinary fixed president Bishops over the 70 Disciples. The
Major is evident, for to be fixed, and not fixed, ordinary and extraordinary
Presidents, yea, and in relation to the 70 Disciples only, and to the whole
Church, Ministers and People, cannot consist. The Minor is cleared above,
wherein it is evinced, that Calvin ass^rts the Apostolic Inspection, to be
both Universal, Extraordinary and Unfixed. Hence we may safely conclude, ergo
the Apostles were not ordinary president Bishops, or in a proper and formal
Sense over the 70 Disciples, which was to be proved. Come we to the second
Proposition, which is this.

Proposition 2.
Timothy was a president Bishop over the Church of the Ephesians, and Titus
over the Church of the Cretians.

Answer.
Before I come to his Demonstration, I again enquire, first if he mean such a
Bishop as has a preheminent Power in Ordination and Jurisdiction, or a mere
President, who is only to ask the Votes, and gather them, and thus a Moderator
allenarly? This last he will not say, for it would clearly cross his
Demonstration, and if the first, why calls he him by this discriminating
smoothing term [President Bishop] and not rather Diocesian or Patriarchal
Bishop; as he holds that Calvin and Beza do own the designation and Office?
Is^ he no more than a President who has a preheminent Official Power, yea,
according to his forecited Collection from Calvin and Beza) a s^le power in
Ordination and Jurisdiction over Pastors.

2. Since he will not say that Calvin will disowne the Apostles Episcopal
Presidency over Timothy and Titus, as over the 70 Disciples, who with Calvin
might be Evangelists, he should rather have ascribed to the Apostles, a moral
standing Arch-Episcopacy or Patriarchat; for certainly a president Bishop, over
such a great President Bishop as Timothy and Titus, merits that Name.

The first Proposition of his Demonstration, is thus.

These are president Bishops who are from their Office preheminent unto other
Ministers, invested with a fixed power of Ordination, regulated by Canons, and
of Jurisdiction, balanced by assisting Ministers. To prove which we are
referred again to Definition 3.

Answer.
We did upon this Definition collated with his proof out of Calvin, discover
this man's pitiful Prevatication, and his involving Calvin and himself in
palpable ^nconsistencies. We did also prove from several places of that learned
Divine, that he denis this fixed and ordinary standing Presidency, both to
Apostles and Evang^lists, and holds that such fixed Presidents, as the Church
did after set up, did not infringe the collegiat power and Authority of
Pastors, but were subject to them; And that Calvin disowns an official
preheminency in any Pastor over another, and expressly a peculiar Designation of
Bishop, as an abuse of Scripture language, and contrair to the Divine
Institution. So that the Major of his Demonstration, and this Definition
whereupon (as the preceding) it is grounded, appears to be a rotten Fabric,
and a bowing Wall, and tottering Fence.

I cannot but further observe, that he makes this goodly Proposition,
containing his Definition of the president Bishop, serve both Paul, and the
other Apostlesturn, for proof of his Episcopal Presidency, and likewise Timothy
with the inferior sort of Bishops, thus equi-parating them, and shaping their
Episcopacy with one and the same Standard and Measure; The place of Calvin
which speaks of Paul's sole Imposition of Hands upon Timothy, whereby he would
fortify this part of the Definition, relating to Ordination, serves also with
him for Timothy's like Episcopacy, giving thus to them both a sole power in
Ordination; And how consistent this is with Calvin's Sense of the power of the
Apostles and Evangelists, any who have read Calvin can easily judge.

Again (which makes good Jest) left Paul his first and high Bishop, and his
Scholar the younger Bishop Timothy should (...) deborded, and play the wanton,
and run out of their Circle, both Demonstrations, and Difinitions has a
prudent Limitation annexed; That their power must be regulat by Canons, and
well balanced by assisting Ministers; and yet Paul and Timothy's sole power in
Ordination seems paramount to these Canons, and far to counter-ballance all
Ministers Authority. Follows the Assumption of his Demonstration.

Assumption.
But Timothy in the Church of Ephesus, and Titus in the Church of Crete, from
their Offices, had a preheminency over other Ministers, invested with a fixed
power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, regulat by Canons, and balanced by
assisting Ministers; For proof of this we are referred to Postulatum 2.

Answer.
For evincing the Falsehood of this Assumption, I do refer to what is answered
on that Postulatum; wherein we have made it appear, that with Calvin the
Official power and preheminency of both Apostles and Evangelists, being
expired, and dying with their persons, our Pamphleters Inference of Calvin's
asserting a moral standing Official Preheminency among Pastors, is most absurd.
That with Calvin the Apostolic and Evangelistick Preheminency being neither
fixed nor ordinary, his Inference of a fixed and ordinary Preheminency, upon
what Calvin asserts of the power of Apostles and Evangelists, is obviously
impertinent and groundless; We did also offer some Topics and Arguments, from
Calvin's Doctrines and Principles, as to Apostles and Evangelists, which do
clearly demonstrat the absurdity of his Collection, in this Postulatum from the
words of Calvin annexed thereunto; as that with Calvin, the Official Power of
Timothy, and his Inspection, was in extent Correspondent to that of Apostles,
that it did suppose the Churches in fieri, as to their Organick Mold and
Constitution; As likeways the Existence of the Apostolic Office, that Calvin
expressly distinguishes, the official Presidency or Preheminency exercised by
Timothy and Titus, as being extraordinary, from the ordinary and perpetual
necessary Official Power of Pastors; Likeways that with Calvin, neither Timothy
nor Titus were fixed to any certain particular and determinat Station; and are
in this distinguished from ordinary and perpetually necessary Church Officers.
We did also show that the place of Calvin, whereby he would fortify his
Postulatum, does palpably overthrow it, both in his asserting Timothy to be the
Apostles Depute, sustaining his room, and none of the ordinary Ministry, and
likeways in his express asserting his Power to be beyond the limits of the
ordinary power of Pastors. So that the Assumption of this Demonstration, is
also false, as the Major Proposition, and none of them Calvin's, but a couple of
fantastic Chymeraes of his own brain. The Conclusion.

Conclusion.
Therefore Timothy was a president Bishop over the Church of the Ephesians, and
Titus over the Church of the Cretians; From what is said upon both Major and
Minor appears to be a Cretian, idest, a lying Conclusion, and to have neither
Geometrical or Logical Measures, though our Pasquiller adds unto it (as unto
the former, and likeways the ensuing) his ( quod erat demonstrandum) to make it
appear so It has neither vim consequentiae, nor a fixed ordinary moral
standing Preheminency of Timothy and Titus, over these Churches, neither having
any truth in it self, nor in the least following upon, or, being deduceable
from any place of Calvin, which this Man has cited, but rather the contrary.
Which I make good, in the Antithesis of this Proposition, and counter
demonstration ensuing.

Antithesis. 2.
Neither Timothy nor Titus had in Ephesus or Crete, a fixed ordinary Episcopal
Preheminency, over Ministers and flocks in the judgment of Calvin.

Demonstration.
They whose Official Pre-eminence, or Presidence over these Churches, was
Transient, and Temporary, supposing the existance of the Apostolic Office, was
for modelling Churches as yet in fieri, as to their organick Being and
constitution, and in all these respects, is expressly by Calvin distinguished,
from the ordinary Official Power and Authority of Pastors, which is moral and
perpetually necessary for Church Government, these Officers had in Calvin's
judgment, no fixed moral standing Pre-eminence Episcopal over these Churches.
But the Official Presidence, and pre-eminence of Timothy and Titus, at Ephesus
and Crete, was of this nature in Calvin's judgment. Therefore neither of them
had, in his Judgment, a fixed ordinary Episeopal Pre-eminence over these
Churches, which was to be proved. The Major Proposition none can deny, who will
not offer to reconcile contradictions, and involve Calvin therein.

The Minor has been abundantly proved, from clear and positive assertions, of
Calvin in the places above cited. The conclusion is clearly de^uced.

Proceed we to the next proposition of our Author.

Proposition 3.
The Fathers of the Primitive Church were President Bishops,

Answer.
Here it is worthy of this Man's serious thoughts, how he has proved, or can
prove, from any places of Calvin and Beza, that they honor none with this
Epithet of Fathers of the primitive Church, but his supposed President Bishops;
were all the ancient famous Divines, or Writers of the primitive Church, the
knowledge of whom has reached us, such President Bishops, thus Authorized, as
he imagines these Fathers were, in Calvin and Bezas judgment, sure he will not
dare to assert this, and so the subject of the Question in this Proposition is
uncertain. If he say, that he means these Fathers, who had this Official Power,
and by this Description distinguishes them from other Fathers, besides that he
is liable to the former inconvenience, of imputing a notion and Phrase to these
Divines, which they own not, the Proposition thus seems rediculous, it being
equivalent to this, the President Bishops were President Bishops.

-- Come we to the Demonstration, whereof the 1. Proposition is thus

Major.
The Primitive Church retained the Government of one single person preheminent
in Office unto other Ministers, this is proved by Postulatum 3. which asserts,
that for avo^ding of schism, the primitive Church retained the Government of
one single Person, preheminent in Office unto other Ministers, which is proved
from Calvin's asserting ( instit. lib. 4. cap. 4. Sect. 2.) That Presbyters in
all Cities choose one, to whom especially they gave the name of Bishop; That
Ierom says, that at Alexandria from Mark the Evangelist to Heracleas and
Dyonysius the Presbyters placed one in a Preheminent degree, whom they called a
Bishop.

Answer.
I have at large upon that Postulatum, evinced the Impertinency, and falsehood
of this Collection from these words of Calvin; as likewise in my general
animadversions upon the whole Pasquel; I did show the inconsistances into which
he involves Calvin, and himself also, in this assertion his impertinent
inserting Calvin's approbation of the jus, from his simple narration of the
matter of fact, and practice of the Church. I did also show, that if he make
Calvin allow merely of a constant President, he crosses his scope of making him
assert the Government to be in this President, if he make him assert more, viz.
A sole Pre-eminence in Ordination and Jurisdiction, (as is clear he does,
comparing Axiom 2. with Definition 2. and 3.) Calvin gives him the lie, in
asserting, that this President or Moderator at first set up by his brethren,
had no power over his Colleagues; but such as the Consul had in the Senate, to
ask the Votes, etc. That he thus absurdly makes Calvin assert the Government of
the Senate, to have been in the Person of the Consul. I did also offer unto him
Calvin and Ierom's Judgment in this point, thus, that as there was an early
aberration from the Scripture path, in the matter of Government, so
particularly, that this President or Proestos, was brought in humano consilio,
and, protemporum necessitate, by humane advice and counsel, and according to
the times exigence, whereof as to Calvin, we offered two convincing proofs. 1.
In that Calvin immediately after the words cited by this Pamphleter, makes
mention, and approves of Ieroms Testimony upon Titus, asserting the Bishops
power, in so far, as above that of the Pastor, to be founded upon custom only,
not divine appointment, asserting also the identity of the Bishop and Presbyter
by divine Right, and the Official parity of all Pastors. And 2. that this
Practice of appropriating the term Bishop to one, as a badge of an Official
Power, of one Pastor, above another, is in terminis condemned by Calvin, as an
abuse of the Holy Ghost's language, and contrair to the equal Official Power of
Pastors, asserted in Scripture; All which we fortified by the assertion of this
Divine parity of Pastors, in the French Confession: and by the learned account
both of Calvin and Ieroms judgment in this matter, exhibit by Dr. Rynalds; So
that this Major Proposition, is palpably false and groundless. Follows the
Assumption.

Assumption.
But the Pre-eminence in Office, includs a proportional Jurisdiction over the
Officers, who are under them, (by Axiom 2.) and the Power of Jurisdiction is
fixed in the President Bishop, by Definition 3.

Answer.
To the first part of the proof, Pre-eminence in Office includs a proportional
Jurisdiction, over the Officers who are under them, by Axiom 2. which refers to
Definition 2. and 3. I Answer; We have upon these his two Definitions, here
referred unto, fully discovered, That the places of Calvin annexed unto them,
do not fortify, but does overthrow this Power, of the moral standing President
Bishop, which therefrom, he undertakes to prove; we have also discovered the
absurdities, and inconsistancies which he involves Calvin and himself into, by
these his Definitions; we discovered that the place of Calvin annexed to
Definition 2. speaks of Authority it self, not of its Object, defined by him,
That Calvin holding the Function, and Official Power of all Pastors, to be one
and the same, and consequently their Power of Ordination; and the power of
Jurisdiction, being with this Pamphleter, commensurable thereunto, in Calvin's
sense, that learned Divine must consequently hold, the Power of Ordination, and
Jurisdiction, to be one and the same in all Pastors, which clearly everts this
man's scope, and his sense of th^s^ places of Calvin cited by him; we also
proved, that the Official Pre-eminence, supposed existent among
Church Officers, in that place of Calvin annexed to Definition 2. is by him
expressly limited to that time and case of the Church; And that upon Tit. 1. v.
5, 6. He asserts Timothies inspection to be transient and unfixed; and in this
commensurable to that of the Apostles; And that asserting likewise Timothie's
Office to be beyond the ordinary power of Pastors, he does in both respects
contradict, the scope of this this Definition, and would thus twice contradict
himself if it were otherwise.

Upon Definition 3. asserting in this President Bishop, a fixed Power of
Ordination regulated by Canons, and of Jurisdictions, balanced by assisting
Ministers, (proved by Calvin's asserting, that Paul only laid hands on
Timothy,) 2 Timothy 1. 6. And that the Bishop had the power of the Consul, (
Instit. lib. 4. cop. 4. Sect. 1.) I have made appear how pitifully this man
stumbles and prevaricats. 1. In making Calvin assert a sole power, in this
President Bishop, as well as a fixed power. And that 2. in making the Power of
Jurisdiction, to be balanced by assisting Ministers, and not annexing this
Clause to the Power of Ordination, he either restricts it to this Power of
Jurisdiction, imputing this to Calvin a Chimerical assertion of his own
forgery, and involves Calvin and himself in a Contradiction, in that he
asserts, that with him the Power of Jurisdiction is of like nature and
correspondent to that of Ordination, the pre-eminence in Office and
Jurisdiction, being one and the same by Axiom 2. or if both Power of
Ordination, and Jurisdiction, be held thus balanced by our Pamphleter, we have
discovered that in betaking himself to this shift; he would be but out of the
pit into the snare, incidit in s^yllam cupiens vitare Charybdin, for thus he
overthrows his proof from Calvin's assertion, that Paul and none else laid hands
upon Timothy. 2. We have also made appear, that in his 3 Definition, he says
nothing to his purpose and scope, unless he qualify the Power of this supposed
President Bishop, not only with the property, and adjunct of [fixed] but also
with that of ( Ordinary) both which that Calvin disowns in the Apostles and
Evangelists, we proved from clear places, both of his Commentaries and
Institutions.

And for his other proof of that Definition, taken from Calvin's equiparating,
the power of this President. Bishop, with that of the Consul; We did disprove
it, not only from Calvin's explication, that it reached only the gathering of
the Votes, and seeing the Sentence execute; but likewise, from his plain and
positive assertion, that this Proestos or President was subject to his
Colleagues, whence by inevitable consequence, it follows, that he had no such
Official Pre-eminence over them, as this man alleges Calvin does hold.

3. Again, whereas the fixing of this Power in the President Bishop, is, as the
other branch of his Assumption, proved by Definition 3. What we have said to
disapprove his scope in this 3 Definition, does sufficiently evert this Branch,
of the Assumption grounded thereupon

4. Finally, upon Axiom 2. referring to both these his Definitions, we have
evinced, that this Pre-eminence in Office, and proportioned-preheminence in
Jurisdiction, which Calvin in the places therein cited, supposes competent to
the Apostles and Evangelists, was neither first Fixed, or secondly Ordinary,
nor such as is of a moral standing nature, but did expire with the Persons of
these extra^rdinary Offices; and that 3ly. During the existence of this
extraordinary Pre-eminence, in Office and Jurisdiction, it was in Calvin's
judgment, cumulative unto, not privative of, the ordinary collegiat authority
of Pastors, in Ordination and Jurisdiction; So that, that Axiom, as understood
by this man, of a supposed moral standing preheminent president Bishop over
Pastors, we have fully proved, in the places above cited, that Calvin does
disown it, and consequently, the Assumption of this Demonstration as none of
his. The Conclusion is,

Therefore the Fathers of the primitive Church, were President Bishops.

Which does appear from what is said, to be a mere, yea a gross non sequitur;
both Major and Assumption being palpably false, taking this President Bishop,
in the extent and nature expressed in both these Propositions. And hereunto his
Proposition and Demonstration, I shall oppose these two An^itheses, and
Counter-demonstrations. The first Proposition is.

Proposition 1.
None of the Fathers, who were the first Proestos, or Fixed Moderators, had de
facto the Government in their Person, or an Official Pre-eminence in
Ordination, and Jurisdiction, over their Brethren, in the Judgment of Calvin
or Beza.

Proposition 2.
None who assums this in after times, were allowed of these Divines, as to
their pretended jus, or as having a Divine Warrant and Institution. The
Proposition is proved thus.

Demonstration. Major.
They who according to Calvin and Beza, were only togather the Vo^es, moderate
the Actions of the meeting, and were subject to the meeting, or Church
Judicatory, as being chosen by them, these had not the Government in their
Persons, or a Fixed Official Preheminency of Ordination and Jurisdiction over
the same.

Assumption.
But the Presidency of the First Pro^st^^e^ or Moderators, was in these Divines
Judgment of this nature. Therefore these first Proesto^e^, or Moderators, had
no Official Preheminency, in Ordinati^n and Jurisdiction over their Brethren,
or the Government of the Judicatories in their Persons, as is said. The Major
is clear, and is ^ounded upon the Nature and Rule of oppos^ta; For to be
subject to he meeing, and to gather the Votes only, and that by their own
Election and Choice, cannot consist with having a f^xed, yea, (according to
this man's pleasing) a sole Official Power in Ordination and Jurisdiction ^v^r
them. The Assumption is above cleared, from the expres^* Assertions, of these
Divines, wherein it is made good, that Calvin asserts, that this Moderator or
Fixed President, at first brought in, was only to moderat the Actions of the
meeting, and was subject to them. The same we heard Beza assert, in speaking of
his humane Epis^^pacy, as subsequent to that which had the Divine Warrant. The
Conclusion is legitimatly deduced.

The 2 Proposition, viz. No^e who assumed this sort of Presidency, in
aft^^t^mes, viz. An Official Prehemi^ency in Ordination and Jurisdiction over
Pastors, were allowed of Calvin or Beza, as having a Divine Warrant, is thus
proved.

Demonstration.
These Divines, who disallow of any s^rt of Dominion in a single person, over
Church Judicatories, who maintain the equal Function, and Official Power of
Pastors therein, who dis^wn the very first continuing fixed Moderator as a
humane invention, and do hold that even this fixed Moderator ought to be
subject, to the consistorial judicial Votes o^ ^is Brethren, these do disown a
Fixed Official Pr^h^minence, in Ordina^ion and Jurisdiction, in any ordinary
Pastor over Church-Judicatories, and do condemn such as assumed this; but
Calvin and Beza do disallow of this Power above expressed, in any pastor above
his Brethren. Therefore they disallow of these who in after times assumed this,
as having no divine warrant. The Major is Evident upon the same ground on which
the former first Proposition is bottomed, which if any deny, they will
necessarily involve them in Contradictions. The ^ssumption is evident, from the
above cited places of Calvin and Beza. We heard Calvin clearly ass^r^ the equal
Official power of pastors, and that even extraordinary Offices, were not to
encroach upon this power; That the first Proestetes were only to gather the
Votes, and were subject to the Meeting, we also heard that Beza calls this
Fixed Moderater the ^pisiopus humarus, as dist^nguished from the first divine
Bishop, and asserts, that the setting of him up, was an a^eration, and (...)
from the Divine Rule, and that which gave the f^rst rise to Antichristian
Tyranny; we also heard, that he disown even the inference of a Fixed Moderator,
from the Angel of the Churches; we have also frequently Observed, how that
Calvin disowns the peculiarity of the very name ( Bishop) to one Pastor, as
giving the least semolance of any difference in the Official power and function
of pastors. The Conclusion therefore of their disowning this Official
preheminent power in Ordination and Jurisdiction, assumed, or rather usurped in
after times, evidently and necessarily fo^lows; yea, is so evident, that Beza
in his Treatise de Episcopatu triphci, calls the Bishop assuming, in after
times this pre-eminence in Ordination and Jurisdiction over Pastors, the
Satanical Bishop, and the poisoned egg, out of which Antichrist was hatched.
Come we to the 4th Proposition of our pamphleter, which is this thus.

Proposition 4.
The president Episcopacie is approven by Christ, in the Book of the Revelation.

Answer.
Upon the Proposition it self, I shall only here again animadvert, and remind
the Reader of this man's pitiful palpable ^orgery and abusive Sophilirie in
covering himself, and his design all alone g^^der the Cloud, and playing with
the general terms of President Epis^^p^cie, to give some semblance of truth
unto his proofs, as knowing that Calvin and Beza do express themselves
modestly, of the first Proestotes, or Fixed Moderators, who first took place,
but his Mediums and Methods of arguing, do sufficiently unmask his pitiful
folly, for they do make these Divines plead for a Hierarchial Diocesian, or
Patriarchal Prelat of the highest degree, with a fixed sole Power of Ordination
and Jurisdiction; yea, shape^ out after the measures of Apostolic Authority.
The first Proposition of his Demonstration, whereby the premised assertion, is
fastened upon Beza, is thus. Demonstration.

Proposition 1.
The seven Angels of the seven Churches, written unto by St. John in the Book
of the Revelation, are encouraged against all the devices of the ungodly, upon
condition of their continuing faithful in their Administrations; for proof of
which, we are referred to Postulatum. 4.

Answer.
1. This Proposition in it self considered, we may safely admit, without the
least prejudice to our cause, or help to his design. We might on the by here
tell him (as our learned Mr. Gilespie admonished some of his fellows) that the
Scripture Saints, (we may add, and inspecial, such an eminent Saint, and
Divine, as the Apostle John) needs no titles of Honor out of the Popes
Callendar, and was acknowledged such by the Churches, before this Canonizing
came in use. And enquire whether our Author uses to prefix St. to Aaron when
he names him, who is called the Saint of the Lord, together with Moses, and
other old Testament Saints, and what ground of disparity and difference he can
assign. But to pass this.

2. Since he referrs to Postulatum 4. where we have the same Proposition with
an annexed Sentence of Beza, on Revel, 2. 26. v. Where he expons, My Works, etc.
of the faithful performance of the works laid upon this Angel, and shows that
the Assembly of Pastors, are bespoken in the person of the President, to whom
victory is promised, if he rely upon Christ's power, etc. I shall here only
resume what we have answered upon that 4 Postulatum, viz. That Bezas taking the
Angel for a single Person, is the utmost conclusion he can draw from this
passage, wherein as Beza differs from the ordinary current of Interpreters; So
we have evinced the gross palpable folly, and forgery of this man's design and
inference here-from, viz. That Beza ownes this president Bishop, which he has
shapen out, and described, since he cannot conclude from these words, that Beza
asserts his Official Pre-eminence and Authority, over his Colleagues, which we
told him, is so Demonstratively evident, that Beza, disowns even the very
inference of the necessity of a fixed Moderator, as following upon his
Assertion, anent the president Angel, expressly adding this Proviso and
Caution, to guard against any mis-application, of what he says anent the
Angel, his being a single person; and thus in terminis gives this Pamphleter
the lie, as if by a Prophetic Spirit, he had forseen this forgery, And holding
the very first fixed Moderators, to have been the humane Custom, subsequent and
opposite to the first divine appointment, and practice of the Official complete
parity among Pastors, our Lords enjoining the Pastors, faithfulness in their
administrations, and bespeaking them thus in the person of the President, we
told him, will therefore in Bezas sense and words, import no more, then a
faithful exercise, of their joint Collegiat Power and Authority, which Beza
holds, was our Lords Institution, and at this time is existent. So we see the
Major is naught. The Assumption is

Assumption.
But the Angels were President Bishops over other Ministers, within their
respective Churches: For proof of this we are referred to Definition 4. Where
we are told that the Angel of any Church representative, is the President
Bishop over other Ministers, within the respective Diocese, Province, or
Patriarchat, which is proved by Beza, Rev. 2. and 24. His words are, To the
Angel, that is the President, whom it behoved especially to be admonished, and
by him his fellow Colleagues -- To you the Angel, the President and the
Assembly of your Colleagues.

Answer.
We have upon that Definition fully discovered the folly and impertinency of
this inference from the words of Beza, and this Man's palpable shameless
imposings upon him, as if these words, would bear the Conclusion, of his owning
a President Bishop, with an Official, yea, sole Pre-eminence in Ordination and
Jurisdiction, over ordinary Pastors, of as high a nature as he supposes the
Apostle Paul exercised, which appears by Definition 3. compared with its proof,
this his arguing, we said is, a shameless imposing, both in that he supposes
Beza to hold these Angels to be Patriarchat, Provincial, or Diocesian Angels or
Bishops, above 260 years, before such a mold and cast of Churches was existent,
as likewise, that every representative Church is Provincial, Diocesian, or
Patriarchal, and inferring this high Patriarchiall or Diocesian Prelat, with
sole power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, from Bezas simple assertion of a
president Angel in whom the rest of the Pastors were bespoken, yea and bespoken
as his fellow Colleagues, viz of equal Official Authority in Bezas sense,
unless he will make him contradict, not only himself, but Calvin, who expons,
and understands Colleagues thus; yea, and all this contrair to the express
caution of Beza, in the same very place, who asserts, that this his sense and
exposition of the President Angel, will not so much as bear the Conclusion of
the necessity of a fixed Moderator, which he holds to be a humane invention,
and that the Prelat of this Man's mold (and pleaded for by him, by these
distorted citations) gave the rise to the Antichristian tyranny. If this be not
shameless imposing, let any rational man judge. The Conclusion is*

Conclusion.
Therefore the President Episcopacy is approven by Christ in the Book of the
Revelation. To which our Pamphleter adds his usual -- quod erat demonstrandum.

Answer.
Therefore the president Angel or Moderator is thus approven in Beza's Sense,
who has other Pastors, his Equals and Colleagues in Official power and
Authority, is easily admitted; But ergo in Beza's Sense, the very fixed
Moderator, far less the Diocesian Patriarchal Prelate, with sole power of
Ordination and Jurisdiction, is approved; Is a Chymerical Conclusion, which (as
some Mushroms that Pliny speaks of) grows without a root, and has no Support
of either Major or Minor to fortify it. And here again, I oppose this
Antithesis, and counter-Demonstration, unto the preceding.

Proposition.
The president Bishop with Official Preheminency, and fixed power of Ordination
and Jurisdiction over Pastors, is in Beza's Sense, not approven by Christ, or
bespoken by him in the Book of the Revelation, in the person of the
Asian-angels.

Demonstration.
These Angels, who in Beza's Sense were bespoken only as Presidents, and
Moderators, to whom the other Ministers of these respective Churches, were
Colleagues of equal Official-power and Authority, and in so far only owned of
Christ, these were not be-spoken and owned by him as such president Bishops,
who had an Official preheminency, and a fixed Official power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction over these Pastors or Ministers.

Assumption.
But these Angels were in the first Sense only be-spoken by Christ, and owned
by him, according to Beza.

Conclusion.
Therefore the president Bishop with Official power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction over Pastors, was not in Beza's Sense bespoken by Christ, or
ordained by him, in the Book of the Revelation in the person of any of the
Asian-Angels, which was to be proved.

The Major is clear and necessarly true, by the rule of Opposits; which if we
deny, we cannot free our selves, or Beza from a contradiction, it being
impossible that he could bespeak them both ways, because these Offices are
inconsistent in the same persons, and at the same time. The Assumption is thus
proved. If Beza own these other Pastors, as the Fellow-Colleagues of this
president Angel, and will not own him, so much as necessarly a fixed
Moderator, which he holds to be a humane Invention, ascribing also to Satanical
Invention, the President with official preheminency in Ordination and
Jurisdiction over Pastors; Then in Beza's Sense, these Angels were not
bespoken, and owned of our Lord, as having any Pre-eminence of this nature, but
as Moderators only. But the first is evident, and has been made good from
several places of Beza; Therefore so is the other.

CHAP. Seventh.
Wherein is discovered this Pamphleters perversion of the Doctrine of Calvin
and Beza, in his Corollaries imputed to them, and the unsoundness of his
Demonstrations, brought to fertifie the same.
HAving thus examined this man's Propositions, and Demonstrations, and
discovered the unsoundness of both, and their utter insufficiency, to fortify
his Design in this undertaking, wherein it does palpably appear, that as he
has wronged the Memory, and perverted, and calumniated the Doctrine of these
Divines; so that he has also penciled himself with ugly Colors of a
Calumniator, and that of such Persons and Writings, as he acknowledges
excellent. We do now proceed to consider his Corollaries and Demonstrations
brought to fortify them, which we will find to be of the same calumnious and
sophistical Stuff with the preceding. The first of these Corollaries is thus.

Corollarie 1.
The president Episcopacyis of divine Right.

Answer.
This Corollarie of it self and abstracting from his Method of proof and Scope
therein, is no doubt sound, and might be admitted, and understanding this term
PRESIDENT aright, and laying aside the Propositions, Axiom and Postulatum,
discovering his Sense thereof, we might admit the whole Demonstration ensuing,
but considering his Scope and Manner of proof, let us here remember how he
understands that Office, which he smooths over with the term of President
Episcopacy, viz. (as is above cleared) such Episcopacy as imports a fixed
Official-Preheminency, and is invested with a fixed, yea, a sole Power in
Ordination and Jurisdiction over other Ministers, as may be easily evinced, by
comparing Definition 3 and 4, with Axiom 2, and his Citations for proof
thereof. Now let us hear the Demonstration.

Demonstration.
The Major is, The divine Right is manifest in that Ecclesiastic Government
which is instituted by Christ, and continued by his Apostles, retained in the
primitive Church, and approven by Christ, by a Revelation from Heaven, for
Subserviency to any end, wherein the well-being of Christianity is nighly
concerned. For proof of which we are referred to Axiom 3. whereof this is a
Repetition verbatim.

Answer.
This Proposition safely understood, may be easily admitted, keeping closs to
that Citation of Calvin, annexed to Axiom 3, viz. that Church Government by
Officers mentioned in the close of that Citation; has its Original from
Christ's Institution, was continued in the Apostolic and Primitive Church, for
Moral standing ends. What we did further animadvert upon this Axiom, touching
the unsuitable Phrase of [any end] and the redundancy of that Clause of a
[revelation from Heaven] and touching Calvin's everting his Scope in pleading
for Successors of Apostles and Evangelists, in their formal official Power, and
that he mentions only Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, as of a moral standing
Necessity, and consequently as only authorized by this divine Right, So above.
The Assumption is large, and tottered with a number of his pitiful References,
to what is above examined. It Is thus.

Assumption.
But the president Episcopacy was instituted by Christ, (by Proposition 1.)
continued by his Apostles; (by Proposition 2) retained in the primitive Church,
(by Poposition 3) and approven by Christ by a Revelation from Heaven, (by
Proposition 4) for avoiding of Schism, wherein the well-being of Christianity
is nighly concerned; (by Postulatum 3.)

Answer.
1. For the first Branch, proved by Proposition 1. wherein it is alleged, the
Apostles were president Bishops, over the 70. Disciples; we have above everted
this Proposition, and his pretended Proofs, and discovered its absurdity, and
that he does most impertinently restrict the Apostles Presidency, as Apostles
to the 70, and imagins Calvin to hold this, that the Apostles presidency;
respecting the whole Church, Ministers, and Flocks, he will thus in the Sequel
and Series of his Reasoning, make Calvin to assert twelve moral standing
Primates or Patriarchs over the universal Church, with infallible directive
Power over the same. We have also in opposition to his Proposition, demonstrat
that the Apostles were not fixed ordinary president Bishops, over the 70 in
Calvin's Judgment; so that this main point of the proof of his Assumption,
appears naught. I cannot but again observe, that with this man, the president
Episcopacy, which he imagins Calvin to hold, as of a perpetual necessity, is
Paul's sole Apostolic power in ordination and Jurisdiction, and consequently
his primitive Fathers, must be of that same Shape and Mold succeeding in, and
thus continuing this formal apostolic official Power, and how absurdly any man
imputs this to Calvin or Beza, as their Judgment, and how hypocritically under
the simple notion of a President Bishop (which Calvin and Beza do acknowledge
creeped early into the Church) is above evinced.

Answer.
The 2 Branch of the Assumption is, that this president Bishop was continued by
the Apostles; for proof of which we are referred to Proposition 2. Touching the
president Episcopacy of Timothy and Titus, over Ephesus and Crete; This
Proposition together with the pretended proofs thereof, we have above examined
and everted, and proven that with Calvin, the Evangelistick official Inspection
of Timothy and Titus over these Churches, was (as that of Apostles) neither
fixed nor ordinary, but suited to that Exigence and Infant-state of the Church,
and died with their persons, and have herein consequently discovered the
Absurdity of this man's Inference, of an official standing Preheminency among
Pastors (who are by Calvin distinguished, from both Apostles and Evangelists,
as Officers perpetually necessary and ordinary, from Officers extraordinary and
temporary) in their official Power. In opposition whereunto, we have
demonstrate this Antithesis; Neither Timothy nor Titus had in Ephesus or Crete
a fixed ordinary Preheminency over Ministers and Flocks, in the judgment of
Calvin.

In the third part of the Assumption we are told, that this president
Episcopacy, was retained in the primitive Church by Proposition 3.

Answer.
The Falsehood of this Proposition is above demonstrate, and the Impertinency of
his Citations to prove it, taking this president Bishop, as here described by
him; in opposition to which, we have made good these two Propositions.

1 That none of the Fathers, who were the first Proestotes or fixed Moderators
had the Government in their Persons, or an Official preheminency in Ordination
and Jurisdiction over their Brethren; in the Judgment of Calvin and Beza.

2. That none who assumed this in after times, were allowed of Calvin or Beza,
as having a Divine Warrant, For a further discovery of his Impertinencies, in
the proof of this 3 Proposition, so above.

The 4 Branch of the Assumption is, that this president Episcopacy, is approven
by Christ, by a Revelation from Heaven; for which we are referred to Propostion
4.

Answer.
This Proposition we have also clearly everted above, and fully examined its
proof, and discovered his palpably absurd ridiculous Inference of Beza's owning
this Diocesian, Patriarchal, Provincial Bishop, (for thus ^e explains this
President in the places referred to,) from his simple assertion of a President
Angel, who had the rest of the Ministers for his Colleagues, in the Official
Power of Government, especially Beza disowning the very Inference, of the
necessity of a fixed Moderator, as following upon his assertion, as is said
above; In opposition to which forgery of this Man, we have made good this
Proposition; that the president Bishop, with Official Preheminency, and fixed
power of Ordination and Jurisdiction over Pastors, is in Beza's sense, neither
approven of Christ, nor bespoken by him, in the Angels of the Churches.

The 5. and last Branch of this Assumption, it respects the end, of this
supposed president Bishop, his pretended Institution, continuance, retention,
and approbation, above expressed, viz. For avoiding of Schism, wherein the well
being of Christianity is nighly concerned. This is proved by Postulatum 3.

Answer.
This Postulatum is above examined, and what we have said thereupon, is resumed
upon Proposition 3. in the Demonstration whereof, this Postulatum is adduced to
prove the Major Proposition, in opposition to which, we have offered and proven
the two Propositions above expressed; So that Calvin clearly disowning the
appropriating the name [Bishop] to this one President, as contrary to Scripture
language and Institution, his narration of this matter of fact, in reference to
this end of avoiding Schism, cannot (as we have often told him) import or
infer, his approbation thereof, unless we will make him fall in that Sin, which
Paul affirms, does expose to just Condemnation, viz, an Approbation of evil,
that good may come of it.

Conclusion.
The President Episcopacy is of Divine Right; does thus appear groundless and
absurd, taking this President Episcopacy in his sense, above expressed, the
proofs thereof being found false and frivolous. And to his Corollary, I do
oppose this Antithesis and Demonstration ensuing.

Counter-Corollarie.
The President Episcopacy pleaded for by this Pamphleter, is not (in the sense
of Calvin and Beza) of Divine Right. To prove which I offer a
Counter-demonstration, pressing his steps, and tracing his method thus.

That Episcopacy which is not institute by Christ, continued by his Apostles,
retained in the Primitive Church, nor approven by Christ, by a Revelation from
Heaven, for subserviency to all, or any end, wherein the well being of
Christianity is nighly concerned, is not of Divine Right. This Proposition is
his own, and therefore he cannot deny it. The Assumption shall be, the
Antithesis and Negative of his own thus.

But the President Episcopacy, pleaded for by him, and not instituted by
Christ, (as we proved upon Proposition 1. and in the Demonstrated Antithesis
thereof) nor continued by his Apostles (as is proved in the Antithesis of
Proposition 2. now retained in the Primitive Church, (as is proved in the
Antithesis of Proposition 3.) Nor approven by Christ by a Revelation from
Heaven (as we have made good in the Antithesis of Proposition 4,) for the
avoiding of Schism, wherein the well being of Christianity is nighly concerned,
(as we have made good upon Postulatum 3. and resumed upon Proposition 3.)
Therefore the President Episcopacy, pleaded for by this Pamphleter, is not of
Divine Right, which was to be proved, The 2. Corollarie is thus.

Corollarie 2.
The want of the President Episcopacy is prejudicial to the cause of Christ.

Answer:
We need no more resume, what this man understands by the President Episcopacy.
Let us hear the Demonstration.

Demonstration, Major.
The want of that Govarnment in the Church, which is of Divine Right, is
pernicious to the Christian Religion; for which we are referred to Axiom, 4.

Answer.
Upon this Axiom, I have told him, that as of it self, it is found and consonant
to the Principles of Calvin, and all found Divines, so taking it as restricted
to his scope expressed, in his citation of Calvin, (instit. lib. 4. cap. 8.
Sect. 2.) anent the necessity of the Apostolic and Ministerial Office, for the
Churches Preservation, wherein he supposes him to assert, an Apostolic
standing preheminency, and Official Presidency in Ordination and Jurisdiction,
to be of equal perpetual necessity, with the Pastoral Office it self, we have
in Answer to this told him, that as he has mistaken the place of Calvin; which
we have put in its right room; so these words may be soundly understood of the
Ministerial Office, as continued in that of the Apostolic Materially and
Eminenter, from which a Ministerial Authority, and Office of perpetual
necessity is derived. In which sense, our Lord's promised presence with his
Apostles, to the end of the World, is to be understood; We have also
demonstrate this, and this only, to be Calvin's sense, by a large account of the
series and contexture of Calvin's discourse, in the Chapter where this passage
stands, so that Calvin does palpably contradict this man's sense, of the
president Bishop. Calvin asserting the temporary expired state, and nature of
the Apostolic Office, as above that of the Pastor, and likewise (in the
citation of this Pamphleter immediately preceding) that Bishops, Presbyters,
and Deacons, are the only Officers, that have a Divine standing Right, of
perpetual necessity; That as Calvin makes the Bishop and Presybters Office one
and the same, so he makes it in this distinct from the Apostolic and
Evangelistick, that the one is ordinary and perpetual, the other not, the one
imports a fixed Charge over a definite Flock, the other not, the one is suited
to the Churches state when exedified, the other, to its state in fieri, etc.
Thus we have both admitted the Major, in a sound sense, and everted it in his
sense.

Assumption.
But the President Episcopacy, (understand this still according to his mold and
pleading) is that Government which is of Divine Right.

Answer.
This Assumption I deny, for proof whereof, he referrs to the preceding
Corollarie, immediately before everted, and upon which we have demonstrat the
Antithesis of the Conclusion, which this man draws out in his Demonstration,
brought to fortify the same. Thus his Assumption is found naught.

Conclusion.
Therefore the want of the President Episcopacy, is prejudicial to the cause of
Christ, evanishes into smoke. To which I oppose (as before) this Antithesis and
Counter-Corollarie.

Counter-Corollary.
The want of the President Episcopacy, pleaded for by this man, is not in the
sense of Calvin and Beza, prejudicial to the cause of Christ, or the Christian
Religion. For proof of which, I offer a Demonstration in his own mold thus.

Demonstration.
The want of that Government, which in the sense of Calvin and Beza, has no
Divine Right, or Warrant, is not according to them prejudicial to the cause of
Christ, or the Christian Religion. This is his own Proposition upon the matter,
for if this Divine Right be the adequat ground, rendering this want pernicious,
then the negation of this Divine Right, must have the contrary effect, and in
sound methods of reasoning, bear the contrary Conclusion, by the Rule of
Opposits. I subsume.

Assumption.
But the President Episcopacy pleaded for by this man, is a Government of the
Church, which has no Divine Right, in the sense of these Divines. This I proved
in his own mould, as he refers, for proof of this Divine Right, to the
preceding Corollary; I refer (for evincing this negative) to the confutation
of his Positive or Affirmative, and the discovery of its falsehood, immediately
premised. Whereupon I draw out a contradictory conclusion to his; therefore the
want of the President Episcopacy, pleaded for by him, is not in the sense of
Calvin and Beza, prejudicial to the cause of Christ, or the Christian Religion,
which was to be proved; or if he will listen to another Demonstration, he may
have it thus.

Demonstration, Major.
If the Churches having the President Episcopacy pleaded for by him, being the
sense of Calvin and Beza prejudical to the cause of Christ, then the Churches
want of it, cannot be thus prejudicial.

This Major I am hopeful, common reason and learning will not suffer him to
deny, Since the denial thereof, would cause so many clear Rules, of even
natural, far more this Gentleman's acquired and habitual Logicks. I subsume.

Assumption.
But so it is, that the existence of that President Episcopacy, (which he
pleads for) in the Church, is, in the sense of these Divines, prejudicial to
the cause of Christ. This I prove thus; That Episcopacy which in their sense
imports, an usurped unlawful Dominion over Pastors, and impeaches their
Authority allowed them of God, which has thus given a rise to the destructive
Antichristian ^yranny over the Church, the existence of that Government in the
Church, must needs be in their Judgment prejudicial to the cause of Christ.
This Proposition I am confident, he will not deny. I subsume.

But the President Episcopacy which he pleads for, is in the judgment of
Calvin and Beza, of this nature and issue. Therefore it is in their Judgment
the Churches prejudice, to have been burdened with this Government. The Minor
is above fully proved, First as to Calvin, in that as he clearly asserts, all
Pastors to have one and the same Function, so the encroachment of one under the
peculiar title of Bishop, upon this their equal Authority, we heard him
expressly condemn upon Phil, 1. And next for Beza, we heard him clearly assert,
that the Episcopus humanus, and the begun encroachments thereof, upon the
Collegiat Authority of Pastors, in Churches Government, gave the rise to the
Oligarchical and Antichristian tyranny, which was the native issue and effect
thereof. (upon Rev. 2. 24, 26) And let any judge, if an Episcopacy, with such a
pretended Ap^stolick Official preheminency in Ordination and Jurisdiction, over
Pastors, as this man has shappen out, be not of this mould in Beza's and
Calvin's Judgment, so that we may again safely conclude upon the whole, that
therefore the existence of this President Bishop in the Church, (to which our
Pamphleter has endeavored to draw the Patrociny of Calvin and Beza, in these
distorted places, above examined) is by them condemned as an Idol of jealousy,
prejudicial to the Cause of Christ, and the Christian Religion, which was to be
demonstrated.

FINIS.

