The FORM OF AN ADDRESS, Expressing the True Sense of the Dissenting
Protestants of ENGLAND.
WE are a PEOPLE diffused through His Majesty's KINGDOM, whom the LAW does not
otherwise know, than so as to account our very CHARACTER, by which we must
distinguish our selves, our CRIME, and animadvert upon Us for it. And have not
the Advantage of being in any formed Legal Society; whereby, under one common
Notion, acceptably to apply ourselves to His Majesty, as others, to whom their
Circumstances in these Respects are more favorable. That any should, undesired,
take upon them to speak unto his Majesty, the Sense of the Rest, though it
should fall out to be most strictly true, would not be reasonable or
satisfying; That it should be allowed Us to send Delegates from all Parts, to
meet and represent our Common Sense, were a Privilege none will be so little
modest as to ask; That any therefore should Address themselves in the Name of
All jointly, is impossible; And to do it for themselves singly, were
inconsiderable and presumptuous. But were it possible or permitted to Us to
represent our common sentiments, they would certainly admit to be conceived
after this following Tenor.

To the KING'S most Excellent MAJESTY.
The humble Representation and Address of Your Majties Subjects in this your
Kingdom of ENGLAND, who dissent from some Rites of Religion, established and
commonly practiced therein.
May it please your Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects are most deeply sensible of
Your Majesty's heavy Displeasure, which because it so peculiarly falls upon Us,
and for Causes therefore that we must suppose are understood to be peculiar to
Us, whereof Nothing offers it self to our Conjecture, but either our Different
Sentiments and Practices in the Matter of Religion; or, That we are thought not
to be duly affected toward your Majesty's Authority and Government.

We do therefore in all Humility prostrate our selves at the Footstool of your
Royal Throne, and most humbly represent Our unfeigned Sense concerning both to
your most Princely Consideration and Clemency; We do with ingenuous Freedom
and Sincerity acknowledge to your Majesty, That there are some RITES and MODES
in the public RELIGION and Worship, which We sensibly find it is Our great
Temporal Infelicity not to be satisfied with, and a greater difference in
Religion is not to be generally imputed to Us, nor can be the Cause of a
general Displeasure toward Us: Besides, that hereupon also We have been wont
to worship GOD in such a Way, as, according to the information of Our
Consciences, We apprehend agreeable to the DIVINE WILL. Nor can it enter into
Our Minds That this can be the cause of Your Majesty's peculiar Displeasure
toward Us. Your Majesty's declared aversion to afflict your Subjects merely
for their CONSCIENCES in Matters of Religion: And Our own great Experience
hereof, cannot allow Us to admit any such Thoughts. Your Majesty knows there is
such a thing as Conscience in man, which he has it not in his power to command
and alter as he pleases, it being its Office, under GOD, to command and govern
him. Those of Your Majesty's Subjects, whose Practice in Religion is more
agreeable to Your own Royal Persuasion, cannot, without great Uncharitableness,
be supposed so generally to have chosen it, in design to please Your Majesty,
but from the former Disposition of their own Minds, apprehending it more
pleasing to God. Wherefore since all men's Minds are not of one Complexion more
than their Bodies are; and Our Minds are irresistibly led to apprehended a Way
of Religion somewhat different to be more pleasing to the DIVINE MAJESTY. We
cannot but conceive ourselves entitled to your Majesty's Grace and Favor
herein, on the same common Reason with the rest of Your Subjects: For since no
man did ever account, That Religion could have any other proper Design than the
pleasing of GOD, and, That Your Majesty well knows, Those RITES and MODES of it
from which we dissent, are not immediately commanded by GOD himself: and
therefore, That he cannot be displeased by their not being Urged upon Us: We
think ourselves bound to judge, That Your Majesty (accounting it your Part to
provide for the pleasing of GOD, in the first place) will be much better
pleased with our worshipping him without them, than either with our wholly
forbearing any solemn Worship of GOD, or Worshipping him with them against our
Consciences, both which would certainly displease him. If We should thus
declare our selves to Your Majesty, That it is indeed the settled apprehension
of Our Judgments and Consciences, That We should most highly offend God, if We
did in all things fall in with the allowed way of Worship (which We generally
do, as far as We can apprehend it lawful) but yet, in complaisance to Your
Majesty, we are willing to abandon Our Consciences, and incur the Divine
Displeasure; We cannot doubt but We should hereby render Ourselves justly
detestable to your Majesty, and to all Mankind. And whereas it is acknowledged,
not only by all the Divines of the Church of England, but universally by all
Christians, That it is an indispensable Duty of natural Religion to worship GOD
in Assemblies: If it be possible, can we hope to please Your Majesty, by
resolving against such worship of GOD, when that We ought so to worship him is
confessed and agreed on all hands; But the doing it in the use of the RITES and
MODES which We scruple is so doubtful and disputed a thing, and by Us feared to
be sinful: Could we any way more provoke Your Maty than by refusing our natural
rightful Homage to the Supreme RULER, whose Vicegerent you are? Or, If We
should tell the reverend Fathers of the Church, We are ready to come into their
Communion against Our Consciences, would That qualify Us for their Communion?
Or, can We think Dissimulation were more Venial? and the professing that to be
according to our Consciences which is really against them? We cannot therefore
but apprehend it were a VVrong to Your Majesty never to be atton'd for, if we
should ever have allowed ourselves to think our mere Dissent in the Matter of
Religion were the thing for which Your Majesty appears so much offended with
Us. And,

May it please your Majesty,

As to the Matter of Our LOYALTY, We make this sincere Profession. That the
same Conscience which constrains Us to Dissent from so many of Your Majesty's
Subjects in some Circumstances of Religion, does most strictly oblige us to
agree with the most dutiful and loyal of them in obeying to our utmost Your
Majesty's Laws in all things else. And not only to obey, but endeavor to
preserve your Majesty's Authority and Government, with the hazard of all that
is dear to Us, together with your Royal Person, your Honor, Interest, Rights
and Prerogatives, and the SUBSTANCE of the established Religion, which is
common to Your Majesty, and Your Kingdom with Us. Nor, if all the rest of Your
Majesty's Subjects were called, in reference to all these things, to express
their Duty to Your Majesty, apart from Us, (of which Exclusion we should have
as impatient a Sense, as to have our own Limbs torn from us) we should never
decline so laudable a Contention as to Vye with them in all Expressions of that
noble Kind. Nor should they ever be able more zealously to abhor or oppose any
whatsoever Plots, Confederacies, Associations or Conspiracies contrary hereunto
than We. Neither can we suppose That Your Majesty's sober minded Subjects will
be so Unequal as to reproach Us with the Bloody Contests of former days, which
happened before, probably, the greater part of Us were born. The stated and
published Occasions whereof had no connection with the matters of our present
Difference and Dissatisfaction; and wherein yet there are some of Us still
surviving That took part with the Crown, and not many that had other
participation, than in the Miseries that from thence descended in common to Us
with the Nation: The Reports and Histories whereof we never read or hear but
with horror, still feeling within ourselves, even at this distance, the
Convulsions, Fears and Dangers of our Country, at length returned to its former
settled state by Your Majesty's glorious Restitution, whereto considerable
numbers of Us (as we believe your Majesty does not forget) joyfully contributed
their utmost and not useless Endeavors. And after the Instruction given to all
Your Majesty's Subjects of whatsoever Denominations, by the Divine Providence
which restored Your Majesty to the glorious Throne of Your Ancestors in so
peaceable a way, and by Your Majesty's Authority and Example, with the Prudent
Determination of the Orders and States of Your Realm, for the abolishing the
Remembrance of those unnatural Contentions: We account, That both the sense of
our Duty and our Interest, and even Time it self should dispose all our Minds
so far to bury them in an everlasting OBLIVION, as that no Seeds of future
Animosity should thence remain among Your People: With the entire Body of
whom, as we are most strictly united, not only in all the Affection and Duty to
Your Majesty, which both Your Sacred Rights and Your Royal Goodness do claim
from us, but also in all the SUBSTANTIALS of the best Religion that ever any
Nation enjoyed: So we doubt not but in due time Your Majesty's great Wisdom
and Goodnes^ will find-out proper means of effecting an Entire UNION among all
your Subjects, in those lesser things also, which that they are the Occasion of
any remaining Difference, we can but Lament (as we do with very sensible Grief
and Sorrow) but cannot Remedy.

In the mean time we most humbly beseech Your Majesty, That we may stand right
in your Majesty's gracious Estimation and Acceptance, and shall ever continue
daily Supplicants for all Divine Blessings upon Your Royal Person, Family and
Government.

London, Printed by Th: Dawks, for Edw: Powel, at the White Swan in
Little-Britain, 1682.


