THE Hierarchical Bishops CLAIM TO A Divine Right, TRIED AT The SCRIPTURE-BAR.

OR, A CONSIDERATION of the Pleadings for PRELACY, from pretended Scriptural
Arguments, Presented and Offered By Dr. SCOTT, in his Book entitled, The
Christian Life, Part II.

A. M. D. D. in his Enquiry into the New Opinions, etc. And by The Author of
the Second Part of the Survey of Naphtali. --

Exposing their Bold Pervertings of the Scriptures pleaded by them; and
Vindicating the Sound Sense of the Scriptures brought in Debate, from their
Scope, and the Judgment of Protestant Writers.

The Whole issuing in a clear Discovery of the Solid Grounds of Presbyterian
Government, in opposition to Prelacy.

By THOMAS FORRESTER, Minister of the Gospel, and Principal of the New College
in St. Andrews.

ISAI. 9.6. -- The Government shall be upon his Shoulder --

HEB. 3.5.6. -- Moses -- Faithful in all his House as a Servant --

But CHRIST as a Son over His own House.

EDINBURGH, Printed by James Watson, on the North-side of the Cross, M.DC.XC.IX.

To the Right Honorable, PATRICK Earl of MARCHMOVNT, Viscount of BLASONBERRY,
Lord POLWARTH of POLWARTH, REDBRAES, and GREENLAW, etc. LORD HIGH CHANCELLOR Of
the KINGDOM of SCOTLAND.
MY NOBLE LORD,
THAT these Sheets do appear in public, under the Patrociny of Your Lordships
Honorable Name, Flows from the same Motives offered in the late Dedication of
this Nature. Not to insist upon the Proofs of your Lordships undeserved Respect
to me, or my more, immediate and Personal Knowledge, than many others of my
Capacity, of your Lordships Christian Fortitude, and Unbyassed Stayedness in
such a Trial of your Faith and Patience, and Juncture of searching Trials, as
may Justly be called the Persecutionis turbo* The Affinity of the Subject, and
Scope of this Work, does Justly Plead for the same Patrociny. As Pastors are
set for the Defense of the Gospel, have a special Concern in the Vindication of
Opposed Truth, so the Magistrate according to his Capacity, being a Keeper of
both Tables, has by his Office an unexceptionable interest in this Important
and Honorable Employment. It is an additional Argument, in point of Equity and
True Honor, that the Writings Examined, do highly asperse, and cast a base
Imputation upon the Nations Authority and Laws, as if Erecting and Maintaining,
yea, and engaging His Majesty in the Maintenance of a Government of the Church,
cross to Apostolic Institution, and the Churches Universal Practice, such as
is eversive of True Unity and Order, a Nursery of Novel Bigotrie, tending to
Revive the late Bloody Broils, infesting these Kingdoms. None will doubt, when
the Honor of the Nation is thus Wounded, Rulers Concern in a Just Vindication*
But the Ground appears yet of a Higher Import and Elevation, if it be supposed,
that the Government Aspersed, is that Divine Frame, appointed by the Ascended
Savior of the World, Recorded in his perfect Testament, and Sealed with his
Blood, and the Exercise of his Kingly Office, as Political Head of His Visible
Church. Who will doubt in this Case, that this King of Kings requires of
Rulers, a Proof of their Faithfulness to him, in a Suitable Vindication and
Assertion of this His Interest?

The High and Honorable Character, wherewith your Lordship is Dignified, has
no doubt made upon your Heart, such an Impression of the preventing Goodness of
GOD, as will excite to a due endeavor of the Best improvement thereof, and the
Scriptures of GOD presents many strong Arguments to this Scope, in the
Instances of such, who have been fitted for the most Eminent pieces of Services
to GOD's Church in their Generation, by preparatory Trials, in His Furnace of
Affliction, and sometimes unexpected promotions have had such a Comfortable
Issue. We know by whom Hamans Mischievous Plot was defeated, and what Argument
Mordecai made use of, to excite to Act for this great Interest, when Carnal
Wisdom and Prudence offered a strong Disswasive; that Glorious (...), who owns
Promotion to places of Eminency as his Prerogative, who changes the Times and
Seasons, removes and sets up according to his Pleasure, has told us, that he
knows them by Name, Surnames them, hol^^ their hand, and has a special Eye
upon them, whom he calls, for his Servant Jacobs sake, to do him Service. It is
Considerable, that one of the best of Men, and best of Rulers, had this in a
sadly wrong Step, Objected, as an Aggravation of Guilt, that GOD had Raised him
up when he was little and low in his own Eyes. There is a time when GOD, not
only gathers the Outcasts, but confers Honor upon them, He has his Fire in
Sion, and Furnace in Jerusalem; at that Furnace He sits as a Refiner, intent
upon this Work. To be brought forth out of this Furnace of Affliction, as Gold,
in proof of GOD's having Chosen a Man in the same, is a great and pregnant
Blessing, but to be brought forth as a polished Instrument of signal and
Honorable Services to him, and His Interest, is a double and Crowning
Blessing, especially when Tentations upon the right and left Hand, are vigorous
and strong. The Promoting of the Glory of this Great and Gracious GOD, in
Maintaining and Contending for His Truth and Interest, the true Established
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government of this Church, is that which in
the first place, is to be intended, and all other Concerns in a due
subserviency thereunto* It is worthy of Observation, which is Recorded of one
of the Wisest Men and Rulers, that his First Care was, the Building the House
of GOD, he finished it in Seven Years, but was in Building his own House,
Thirteen Years thereafter; and when this work was wholly perfected, 1 King.
6.37, 38. 2 Chronicles. 8.1. his preparing his Store Cities, his Fenced Cities, and
taking Care for his Tribute and Navy, was his Secondary and reserve Work. The
Jewish Historian, Josephus, has this Remark upon it, and gives us this
account, viz: That this First work of Solomon's was by GOD's special Assistance,
perfected in so short a time, but the Palace though its Magnificence was
Inferior to the Temple, yet the Materials thereof, not being so long prepared,
and the House being to be Built for the King, and not for GOD, it was the more
slowly brought to Perfection.

That the whole of your Lordships Walk in this Eminent Station, may Demonstrat,
to the Refreshful Observation of all the Lovers of our Sion, that GOD has
Preserved and Polished your Lordship in all preceding Trials, to be a
Honorable Instrument of Raising of this decayed and desolate Church, a
Successful Maintainer of Equity and Justice, and that this your Faithful
acquittance may yield Solid Peace, Embalm and make Savoury your Name in
after-Generations, and be found a Successful mean of entailing the Choicest
Family-Blessings upon Your Lordships Posterity, is the Serious Prayer of,

MY NOBLE LORD, Your Lordships Devoted and most Humble Servant, T. E.

The PREFACE.
WHAT the Israel of GOD had to Complain of, many times from my Youth have they
Afflicted me, has been the Lot of the Gospel Church from its Infancy, and of
GOD's Church in this Nation in special, since the Rising Light of Reformation
(that dayspring from on High) has Shined upon her; And as the Gospel Church,
so Ours in special, has been Entitled to that Ancient Ground of Boasting in
GOD, That they have not prevailed against her, though the Gates of Hell, in
order to this prevalency, has taken Crafty Counsel, and Satan has Acted, both
as the Old Serpent, and Roaring Lion; Intermixing, in his Agents and
Instruments, Policy and Barbarous Violence, Craft and Cruelty, to Compass this
Design of her Ruin. Her true Gospel-Government, as well as her Doctrine and
Worship, have been frequently assaulted: But the First, as the Hedge of the
other, has been, in a peculiar way, the Eye sore of the Ungodly and
Licentious; and in various and subtle Methods opposed, both in the Principles
and Practice thereof; and notwithstanding that other Reformed Churches have
shared with her, in this piece of Trial (this Point of Church Government having
for a Considerable time exercised the Pens of Contending Parties) yet, as our
Church has beyond several others, arrived at Gospel Simplicity and Purity
herein, and tasted of the Sweet Fruits of this Government, in preservation both
of Unity and Purity, in Point of Doctrine and Worship; so the Maintaining and
Contending for this Point of Truth, appears to have been the work and
Testimony, in His Infinitely wise Providence, in a singular way Assigned to her,
by her Head and Lord, that Faithful Witness and great Testator: Which is a
Testimony so much the more Honorable, because of its special affinity with his
own, singularly attested in his Death and Sufferings, whose Confession of his
Kingly Office, and consequently his being the Political Head and Governor of
his Church visible, was his special Martyr-Witness, Sealed with his Blood, the
ground of his Accusation and Sentence, whereof his Triumphing Cross bore the
Honorable Title and Superscription.

And as all Truths have in all Ages, gained by Opposition, the apparent
bruising of them by Debates causing the Savor, like that of Sweet Spices, to
be the more Fragrant, so the true Frame of GOD's Tabernacle, in Point of
Government, the Principles and Rights of a True Gospel Ministry, have from the
Lively Oracles of GOD's Word Shined more Clearly in the solid Defenses thereof,
exhibit by many Godly and Learned Divines, against opposers on all hands, as is
very well known to such as have sincerely inquired into this Controversy.

What Reproaches our Churches Government and Reformation has been Loaded with
since the late erection of Prelacy, and particularly, since the Representatives
of our Nation, wearied of this heavy and Bloody Yoke, shoke it off, Restoring
and Asserting, together with our National, this our Spiritual and Church
Liberty, is Apparent to all Observers: So that the LORD's Servants, in their
Endeavors to Advance this Building and Restoration of our Churches True
Government, have been called, as the Builders of Jerusalems Walls, to hold the
Weapon and the Tool; yet (for which He that Inhabits Isreal's Praises, is to be
for ever Blessed) the Defense has been attended with such Glorious Success,
that, in the Judgment of the truly knowing and impartial, the Adversaries have
found that they have been in this opposition, Kicking against the Pricks, and
that the Truth and Cause of God, which we own, is such a Burdensome Stone, as
has quite born down and broken their Strength. I do not mean it, as if every
one of that Parties lying Pamphlets has had a particular Return; this were an
unsuitable and endless Work, and but too much to Honor these empty Squibs and
Crackets (as a Learned Man called such Writings) but sure I am, whatever in the
Writings of our Antagonists, and of our late Scots Episcopalians in Special,
has any show of Argument against our Cause and Principles, either from
Scripture, from Divine Reason, or History, has had a full and Evident
Confutation.

That I have thus appeared, while many of our Church are in this Respect
silent, of whom, in Point of Ability, it may be truly said, that their
Gleaning is beyond my Vintage, has proceeded from no such Disposition and
Inclination this way, as influences some to show themselves, but as from a
sincere Love to Truth, and the Cause of GOD; So by the influence of such a
preventing Series of Providential Excitments, as have some way cleared my Call,
and Issued in this Appearance.

Dr. Scots Writings upon this Head, which I understand to be much Current and
Esteemed by disaffected Persons, and those of most considerable note in this
Corner of the Nation, having been brought to my Hands; I was moved by the
desires of some, to offer Animadversions upon the same, which I Judged might
have their own use and advantage with such Persons; and while Writing them, I
had put into my hand two other later Pieces; the one bearing the Title of The
Fundamental Charter of Presbytrie Examined and disproved* The other written by
A. M. D. D. and bearing the Tittle of An inquiry into the New Opinions Chiefly
propated by the Presbyterians in Scotland. The first I found to be merely
Historical, with a long and bitter Preface against the Reverend Principal of
the College of Edinburgh; the Authors Choler, it seems, being awakened by the
smart of the many Baffles which that Party have had from his Pen. The other of
a more Arguing Strain, but of such a virulent tincture and Popish Composure,
that the Author might seem rather a Person in some of the Popish Orders, than
any bearing the Character of a Protestant Minister, if the General Designation
of A. M. D. D. had not led the common, and (as far as I could Learn) the right
Conjecture, to fix upon Dr. Monro, Sometime Principal of the College of
Edinburgh. This Piece I found to be directed against the same Reverend Persons
Writings, but in such a superficial and trivial Method that there seemed little
or nothing of weight in it, but that which the Wise Man tells us, is weightier
than the Sand, the Fools Anger. However, I found, because of the connection of
Purposes, some ground to bestow a few spare times in examining his Scripture
Arguings in Point of Episcopacy, which after the Finishing my Animadversions
upon Dr. Scott, I set about; not knowing at that time, of any other so employed
(though I much desired it) but shortly after, came out Mr. Rules Judicious and
full Confutation of this Piece; as also a little before, of the Preface of the
other Pamphlet entitled The Fundamental Charter etc. And about the same time,
Mr. Jamison's Learned and Elaborate Piece entitaled Nazianzeni Querela, etc.
containing a Review and Confutation of what is considerable in both Pamphlets;
so, that what I might further attempt upon any of these Pieces appeared
Fruitless, and but actum agere; yet considering, that according to the
Principal's Compendious way of Writing, he touched that Authors Scripture
Arguments, in Point of Episcopacy, more briefly, I resolved the more to enlarge
my Review of what he had thus presented. After these Sheets had for some time
lain by me, and a motion was made to make them public, having also seen the
Second part of the Survey of Naphtali, I resolved, because of the Connection of
Purposes, and that this Author appears to have more closely argued this Point,
than several other Episcopalians, to add to the other two, a Consideration of
his attempt upon Presbyterian Government, which the haste of the Press,
together with other urgent duties, obliged me to perform more briefly, yet I
hope, with some Satisfaction to the Intelligent.

That these Authors are presented in such an Order, viz. the Later before the
more Ancient, has proceeded from the Connection of References from the one to
the other, and the Method wherein Providence directed the Writing of these
Replys. For the Point of Antiquity (critically Scanned on both sides in this
Debate) I found no neeessity here to dip in it; that being performed as to A.
M. D. D. already; and for the third Author, he does not meddle with it, and so
much the better, only I have touched it a little with Dr. Scott; there being no
particular Reply, for what I know, to his Writings on this Head, though all
that he has Offered this way, has been upon the Matter, fully Answered by
Presbyterian Writers. The Truth is, I have always judged, that this Debate
might arrive at a more satisfying and speedy Issue i^ upon clear stating of the
Questions and Points Controverted, the Dispute were managed by a clear formal
Arguing upon Scripture Testimonies allennarly.

One thing I must not omit to advertise the Reader of. I found after this was
written, reports passing of A. M. D. D. his Death, which I understood to be
afterward called in Question; but since it is now Confirmed, the Reader will
excuse those Passages that do more directly address him as alive, as indeed he
was, in the time that this was Written, and some thought I had that this might
probably come to his hand.

I shall detain the Reader no longer from the perusal of these Sheets: Adding
only my serious Prayer, that the GOD of Truth may by his Holy Spirit, lead his
People into all Truth, advance, and more and more revive His Work, and by the
light of his Glorious* Gospel dispel* Antichristian darkness, refresh his
suffering Churche^^ abroad, now in the Furnace, excite his people to a due
Sympathy with Sufferers, and quicken their Zeal against the great Whore, the
Beast, drunk with the Blood of Saints, imprint upon his Churches in these
Islands, a due Sense of their Solemn Vows and Engagements for Reformation in
Doctrine, Worship* Discipline and Government, that being ashamed for all our
backslidings and breaches, and looking to Him whom we have peirced, with a
Mourning Eye, we may see his Pattern of the House, in all its Ordinances, and
his Tabernacle being reared up among us accordingly, the Lord may be one, and
his Name one, he may own the Lands, and dwell in them as Married Lands, his
Sanctuary being in the midst of us for ever more.

A REVIEW OF Dr. Scott's Pleadings For the Divine Right of EPISCOPACY. In his
Book entitled, The Christian Life, Part II. Vol. 2. Chap. 7. Sect. 10. from
Page 388.
CHAP. I. The Doctor's stating of the Question, Examined: Together with his
first Argument taken from the Institution of our Savior.
BEING about to Examine the Pleadings of this Doctor, for the Divine Right of
Episcopacy; it is necessary, that we first view how he states the Question. All
do know that a right Understanding of the State and Terms of the Question, is
indispensibly needful for the Decision of any Controversy. To give then, the
state of the Question in the Drs. terms, which he represents in a distinct
character page 388. He thus exhibits the Claim of both Parties; having told us,
that the Presbyterial and Episcopal, are the two main rival Forms of Church
Government, pretending to Divine Institution: The Presbyterian, says he, is
that which is seated in an Equality or Parity of Church Officers: The
Episcopal, is that which is placed in a superior Order of Church Officers,
called Bishops, to whom the other Orders of Presbyters and Deacons are subject
and subordinat. The Latter of which, he undertaks to prove, to be the true form
of Government institut by our Savior: And that 1. from our Saviors
Institution. 2. From the Practice of the Holy Apostles. 3. From the punctual
Conformity of the Primitive Church to both. 4. From our Saviors declared
Allowance and Approbation of the Primitive Practice in this Matter.

First, As to the State of the Question: I find the Dr. does pitifully
prevaricat and mistake his Measures. 1. In representing Presbyterian
Government, as consisting in a parity of Church Officers; whereas, it is
evident, we own and maintain a Beautiful Subordination, both of Officers and
Courts in Church Government; that Parochial Sessions are subordinate to
Presbytries; Presbytries to Provincial Synods; Synods in a National Church, to
National Assemblies: Thus likewise, we hold the Pastors Office, to be above
that of the Ruling Elder; the Ruling Elders Office, above that of the Deacon:
Tho upon most solid Grounds, we maintain against Prelatists, an Equality in the
Pastoral Office: And that among the New Testament Officers, both Ordinary and
Extraordinary, there is a Partity, in their own kind, no Apostle above another,
no Evangelist above another (both which Offices taken in a proper formal Sense,
we hold to be expired) Thus as to Ordinary Officers, no Pastor above another,
nor Elder, etc. 2. He represents Episcopal Government, as feated in a Superior
Order of Church Officers, called Bishops, to whom the Orders of Presbyters and
Deacons are subject; but does not particularly condescend upon the Nature of
that Superiority, which in stating the question, should have been premised, and
whether he understands it of a Superiority Specifical or Gradual, and in Order
or Jurisdiction, or both: However, the Dr. in the strain of his Dispute, gives
us to understand, that he takes the Superiority of the Bishop, as importing
such an Absolut and Essential Interest in Government, as leaves the Pastor
nothing but the Doctrinal Key; wherein he disowns Two Points of a Concession,
owned by many, if not most Episcopalians: (and in so far discovers the
Singularity and Unsoundness of his Pleading) First, That the Bishop, is no
Officer, properly or essentially distinct from the Presbyter, but only an
Officer made distinct for order of Government: Thus K. Charles I. in his
Conference with Mr. Henderson, who certainly had the Sense and Judgment of all
the English Episcopal Doctors, at that time: And the present Bishop of
Salisbury, in his last Dialogues, authorized by our Episcopal Church, and
published in Defense thereof, in K. Charles II. Reign, 4 th. Conference, page
310, 311. tells us, That he is not clear anent the Notion (as he calls it) of
the distinct Offices of Bishop and Presbyter, and acknowledges the Presbyter,
to be of the highest Office in the Church, telling us, That the Prelat is but a
different Degree in the same Office: And he gives this Reason of his Judgment,
That since the Sacramental Actions, are the highest of Sacred Performances, he
cannot but acknowledge, that such as are empowered for them, must be of the
highest Office in the Church: And thus expressly disowns the Drs. Distinction
betwixt a Bishop and a Presbyter, as a mere groundless Notion, and by
consequence the whole Foundation of his Pleading. Secondly, Our Scots
Episcopalians, and many of the English, plead for such an Episcopal Power, as
is managed in conjunction with Presbyters, and profess to own only such a fixed
Presidency of the Bishops over the Pastors, in Government, as allows them a
Share and Interest therein, and do consequently disown what the Dr. asserts,
That the Bishop is the Sole Subject of Government. Let any peruse Bp. Honyman,
part 2. Survey of Naph. Bp. Burnet ubi supra, Bp. Lightons Two Letters, in
reference to the Case of Accommodation; yea Bp. Hall himself, in the Defense of
his Remonstrance, presented to the Parliament of England, against Smectymnuus,
printed An. 1641. And this will be convincingly evident, the Bishop, in that
Defense, is so angry at the Word Sole, in the Debate about the Bishops Power
and Authority in Government, that he desires his Presbyterian Antagonists, to
keep their Sole, for the use of their Shoes. It is then clear, that in the
State of the Question, or Ground of this Debate, the Dr. is not one with his
Fellows, which will be further discovered by Examining the Grounds he walks
upon.

The Divine Right of Episcopacy, See page 388, 389, 390, 391.
he endeavors, First, to prove by the Institution of our Savior: And his
great Argument is, That Christ in His Lifetime, institut two Orders of
Ministers, viz. That of the Apostles, and the Seventy Disciples, whose Office
he proves to be subordinat to that of the Apostles, from this Ground, That they
are mentioned a part as Distinct, and the Apostles placed first in the
Catologue. Ephesians: 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.28. That the Scripture mentions the Twelve, and
the other Disciples distinctly, and the Twelve as Chosen out from among the
Disciples, and by this Call and Ordination of Christ, separate to distinct
Offices from the Disciples; that the Apostles immediate Successors, were chosen
out from the seventy Disciples, for most part: Thus says he, Simeon the Son of
Cleophas succeeded James at Jerusalem; Philip Paul at Caesarea; Clement Peter
at Rome, by the Testimony of Dorotheus, Eusebius; And that by the same
Testimony of Eusebius, together with Epiphanius and Ierem, Matthias was one of
the Seventy, that was Chosen and Ordained by the Apostles, to succeed Judas in
the Apostalate, Acts 1.16. And a Succession says be, in Office supposes the
superior Power in the Person, in whose place another succeeds, and that the
person succeeding, had not that Power and Office before his Succession. That
these Disciples were instructed with Ministerial Authority, he proves from Luk
10.16. compared with v. 1. where not only we find that our Lord sent them
before His Face, but shows that such as heard them, did hear him, etc. As also
from this, That Ananias one of them, Baptized Paul. Acts 9.18. Philip, another
of them, the Eunuch Acts 8. and also preached the Gospel.

Answer. This Discourse and Argument, with reference to the Drs. Scope, with a
very ordinary Attention, will appear, to be but a beating of the Air, and to
consist of Magisterial Dictates, instead of proof: For First, it is evident,
That the generality of all Protestant Divines, and Churches, yea many
Episcopalians themselves, do hold that the Office, of Apostles and Evangelists
is expired, and died with their Persons, so that neither the one nor the other
admitted of a Succession: And indeed the thing it self is evident, and by our
Divines proved from the Apostles immediate Mission, unconfined Inspection,
extraordinary Gifts, etc. And that the Evangelists Office, did suppose the
existant Office of the Apostolate, and did consist in a planetary Motion, to
Water where they Planted, and bring Reports of the State of the Churches to the
Apostles, and Commissions from the Apostles to the Churches; as they make
evident in the many Journies, up and down, of Timothy and Titus, in order to
this end. So that upon this Supposition, tho a Subordination were granted; yet
if both Offices are expired, it can found no Argument for a Subordination among
ordinary Officers, or essentially distinct Orders, in the Pastoral Office,
which is the Point he has to prove. This will be convincingly clear, upon Two
Grounds. (1.) That the body of all Protestant Divines, do hold, That neither
Apostle nor Evangelist, had any fixed Posts or Charges, and so consequently,
the one could not Succeed the other therein, nor could any ordinary Officer
Succeed either of them, in this their Function. And (2.) That the Office, as
well of the one, as the other, was suited to that Infant State and Exigence of
the Church; the Apostles Work being to found Churches through the World, to
plant the Gospel Government and Officers therein; and the Evangelists Work to
Water their Plantations, as is above expressed. And therefore, that State and
Exigence of the Church, being gone off, so are these Offices, suited thereunto.
And among many other Proofs, I would fain know, what he, or any of his
Persuasion, will look upon as the Scope and Intendment of their Gifts recorded
in Scripture, viz. Their Gifts of Tongues, Gifts of Healing, raising the Dead,
striking with Death, and extraordinary Judgments the Obstinat, as Peter,
Ananias and Saphira; Paul, Elim^s the Sorcerer, etc. if not thus to Discriminat
their Office. If sutab^e Gifts be the Badg of an Office, as, to be apt to
Teach, is of the Pastoral Office, (it being certain that the Gifts and the Work
bears a proportion one to another, and the Office has a relation to both) then
certainly, Extraordinary Gifts and Works, must be the Badg of that Office,
which is Extraordinary: So that the Drs. Proof of fixed, standing, distinct
Orders and Degrees among Ordinary Church Officers, from this Instance, is quite
overturned, if the Office, either of the Apostles, or of the Seventy be found
Extraordinary.

Next, the weakness of the Drs. Proof, further appears, in that, instead of
Proving, he takes for Granted without Proof. First, That the Apostles had a
Superior distinct Mission, from that of the Seventy; for nothing of his
pretended Proofs, give the least shadow of this. The Dr. acknowledges they were
sent to Preach, as the Apostles themselves were, and for what appears from
Scripture, with the same Authoritative Mission, since the Seventy were sent out
after the Twelve, and superadded to them, Luke 9.1, 2. etc. and 10.1, 2, 3.
etc. And for the Point of Succession (of which afterward) the Dr. affords no
shadow of Proof, of either of these Two. (1.) That there were Successors to the
Apostles, in their formal Office of Apostolate. (2.) That these his supposed
Successors, were of the number of the Seventy Disciples, for which he must
offer a Divine Scripture Proof, or he says nothing. Again (in the 3d. place)
Tho we should grant to the Dr. that these Seventy were placed in Inferior order
to the Twelve Apostles; yet so weak is his Cause and Pleading, that even upon
this Supposition, it is utterly lost and ruined, unless he can make it appear,
that these Seventy had in their Commission, the Doctrinal Key only, but no
interest in the Government, which is his Supposition all along, as to the
Pastoral Office. Now, it is evident, beyond contradiction, that all which the
Dr. has offered in this Argument, amounts not to the least shadow of a Proof of
this point, viz. That the Twelve Apostles were the only Subjects of Church
Government, had both the Keys committed unto them only, and that therein the 70
Disciples had no interest, having the Doctrinal Key only entrusted unto them:
And therefore this is utterly remote from his Conclusion, viz. That our Lord
established such ordinary Officers, as are called Bishops, in a superior order
to Pastors, as specifically distinct from them, intrusting the whole Power of
Government to the First, as well as the Power of Order, and nothing at all
thereof to the Second, but the Doctrinal Key only.

Before I proceed, See page 392.
let us hear what the Dr. answers to the Objection, taken from the Apostles
Extraordinary office: His Answer is, That this is a begging of the question,
since we allow that Christ institut the Office, but gave no signification, that
it was but for a Season. But First, How comes the Dr. thus to beg the question,
in supposing, that we acknowledge our Lord gave no such Signification? He should
know that we own, and can make good the contrary: And the current of all
Protestant Divines, owning the Apostolic Office, to be extraordinary and
expired, must and do by necessary consequence hold, That the Temporary Nature
of the Office, has in the Scripture Accounts thereof, our Lords implicit and
consequential Intimation, that the Office was not to Continue, but to Expire
with the Persons who carried it. The Dr. may thus prove quidlibet ex quolibet,
if allowed to draw a Conclusion from a Concession, which is not ours, but by
him falsely imputed to us. Next, the Office it self, in its Nature and End,
being, as is said, Temporary (and owned so, by the Body of all our Divines) It
necessarly follows, that our Lords Institution, terminat upon and relative to
the Office, was likewise thus Temporary, and determined to a certain Season: As
under the Law, Gods Institution of Sacrifices and other Levitical Ordinances,
being to represent Christ's Death, the very Nature of the Institution, did
determine the Continuance till Christ's coming, and offering Himself, and no
longer: As likewise the shadowing Typical Priesthood of Aaron being thus
limited, did expire at his Death. Nay, our Lord in commanding His Apostles to
Preach to all Nations, to every Creature, and instituting them universal
Officers of the whole Catholic Church, in actu exercito, both planted and to
be planted, to which they had an immediate Relation, and instructing them, with
extraordinary Gifts of Tongues, of Miracles, etc. did thus ex natura rei, and
from the Nature of the Institution it self, discover His design, as to the
transient Office, thus institut, and that being suited to that Exigence of the
Church, it was to pass off with the same. Sure, should a Papist plead for the
Perpetuity of Extreme Unction, because of the Apostles anointing with Oil, or
for the continuance of such Gifts, as the Dr. will acknowledge expired, because
of our Lords Institution, and giving the Gifts, and no where Intimating that
they were to be for a Season, and that these Gifts were joined to the
Apostolical Office; he would answer, That the temporary transient Nature of the
Gift it self, now comprobat by the Event, discovers the temporary Design
thereof, and that it was not to Continue; and that therefore, there was no
need, that our Lord should have given such an express Declarator, in the
Institution, or Collation of the Gift: Which Answer, he may bestow for us, upon
himself, as to the Point in hand.

Again, to discover further the Inconsistency and Self-contradicting Method of
his Reasoning upon this Head, let it be enquired what he means by a Successor
to the Apostles. If he mean a Succession to their Office, in its Nature and
Extent, as delineat in Scripture, then he runs himself into gross Absurdities:
For, 1. He must thus hold that our Lord Institut, and that de facto, there
succeeded Twelve Patriarchs, with an universal, unconfined Inspection over the
whole Catholic Church, to be continued therein, with a Collateral and Equal
Power. 2. If he say this (as he needs must, if he speak to the Point, and
consequentialy) he will contradict what he asserts of their immediate
Successors, from among the 70 Disciples, viz. Simeon Son of Cleophas, his
succeeding St. James at Jerusalem; Philip, St. Paul at Cesarea; Clement, St.
Peter at Rome. For if these Persons succeeded the Apostles in their unconfined
Inspection over the whole World, where Churches were planted, or to be planted;
how comes he to assign them fixed Stations at Jerusalem, Cesarea, and Rome? If
their Ministry was confined to these Posts, how could they succeed the Apostles
in their universal Inspection? And consequently how could they succeed them in
the Apostolic Office? To say that a Person fixed at such and such Posts,
succeeds the Apostolic Office, which was of this universal Extent, makes as
good Sense and Harmony, as to say, that the Person, who is installed Dean of
Canterburry, succeeds to the Archiepiscopal Chair thereof, and the
Metropolitick Office of that Prelat, and his Primacy over England. 3. I would
know, whether the Dr. in this Argument from Succession, does equiparate and
make parallel his adduced illustrating Instances, viz. the Succession of
Matthias in the place of Judas, with these other Instances of Simeon, Philip
and Clement, at Jerusalem, Cesarea, and Rome? If he do not, then his parallel
Argument, as to the Point of Succession, is by his own Confession, like the
Legs of the Lame, not equal; it being palpably absurd to prove the Succession
by Instances, while the Persons instanced, as succeeding, are not of the same
and equal Power and Authority: If he say, That he understands Successors, in
the same Apostolic Power; then I would fain know, how he will parallel the
Authority of Simeon, with a fixed Post at Jerusalem, Philip at Cesarea, Clement
at Rome, with the Succession of Matthias, in the Apostolic Office, by the
Divine Appointment, without the least hint of any fixed Station, but with an
universal Inspection, as the other Apostles had.

But to proceed to the other Branch of the Dilemma: If he mean by Successors to
the Apostles, a Succession in a supposed Superiority over Presbyters, in a
certain Precinct, not unto their Office and Authority every way, or with
reference either to their Gifts, their immediate Mission, their extensive
Authority in the Planting and Watering of Churches (as some Episcopalians, who
speak more cautiously than the Dr. do express and limit this Succession) then
it is easy, to make good that the Dr. in this Branch of the Answer, is as much
in a Praemunire, and that his Answer may be easily broken with a Wedg of his own
setting, and that his Adversary may easily pull his Spear out of his Hand and
Kill him with it* For, 1. His Answer to those who alledg the Apostolic Office
and Power, to be Temporary as suited to the Necessity and Exigence of that Time,
and Case of the Church, without intention of deriving it into a Succession, is,
First, That this is said without so much as a plausible color of Reason: p.
392.
And if there be no plausible color of Reason, in denying a Succession to the
Apostolic Office, the Dr. in embracing this Answer, is without all color of
Reason. 2. He tells us, That we acknowledge our Savior institut the Apostolic
Office, and that in His Institution He gave no Intimation, that it was but for
a Season, and that thus in calling the Apostolic Office such, we presum to
make Christ's Institutions Temporary, without producing the Intimations of His
Will, and that upon this Ground, we may repeal all Institutions of
Christianity. etc. But I pray, whether does not the Dr. in this Answer, make
our Lords Institution of the Apostolic Office Temporary, as in its Nature
suited to that Exigence of the Time, and Infant State of the Church? And
whether, he is not upon his own Ground, obliged to produce the Intimation of
our Lords Will hereanent? And if he cannot produce it, or rather does hold it
clearly intimat in the Nature of the Office it self, then the Dr. must either
confess our Exception and Answer to his premised Argument, about a Succession
to the Apostles, to be valid and sound, or this his Answer and Evasion to be
naught, and that he is therein contradictory to himself, and liable to that
Absurdity, wherewith he charges us, viz. Of making temporary, and cassing all
our Lords Institutions, and overruling the Will of God by arrogant
Presumption: Which is the high-flown Imputation, the Dr. puts upon our Answer.

But to bring this Matter to a short Issue, and to strick out the Bottom of his
great Notion and Topic. The Power of the Keys, or the Power of Order and
Jurisdiction, lying in authoritative Dispensing of Gospel Ordinances, viz. The
Preaching of the Word and Administration of the Sacraments, together with the
appendent Power of Discipline and Government, which was the substantial and main
Piece of the Apostolic Authority and Office, and to be derived in a
Succession, as necessary for the Churches Preservation, in all times; we hold
to be seated properly in the Pastoral Office, which succeeds to that of the
Apostles, in the respect, and for the end mentioned, and in point of this
Authority and Power, we hold, that any Pastor is equal to an Apostle; which,
beside many other Reasons, that might be adduced, appears demonstratively, by
this Scripture Ground, viz. That it is evident in Scripture, that the Apostles
in the first Constitution of Churches, planted Presbyters or Pastors therein,
as the highest Ordinary Officers, to feed with the Word and Government, Acts
14.23. Tit. 1.5. with Act. 20.17. 1 Cor. 5.4, 12. v. compared with 2 Cor. 2.6.
etc. And not only so, but left these Presbyters or Pastors, as their immediate
Successors, committing the whole Government to them, in their last Farewels to
the Churches, without the least hint of a Superinstitution of any Officers of
an higher Order, Act. 20.17.18.28. 1 Pet. 5.2, 3, 4. compared with 1 Thessalonians.
5.12, 13. etc. Hence it may be thus Argued, These, whom the Apostles placed as
Chief, in the first Constitution of the Churches, and left as their immediate
Successors, in their last Farewels, which they gave to the Churches, these have
no ordinary Officers, superior to them, in the Church, by Divine or Apostolic
Warrant: But the Apostles placed first, Presbyters or Pastors, feeding
immediately with the Word, Doctrine and Government, as their proper immediate
Successors, and to these they committed the Churches, in their last Farewels:
Therefore, the Pastor has no ordinary superior Officer to him, in Church
Government, by Divine or Apostolic Warrant.

Thus, we see the utter Insufficiency of the Drs. Proof, from this Argument,
anent the Seventy Disciples, which may save us the labor of pursuing such
Advantages, as the Exact and Critical Disputant might have against him, in his
way of handling this Argument. It is not clear from his Discourse, whether he
place these Seventy Disciples in the Office of Evangelists, or of ordinary
Ministers: If he suppose and assert the First, the Strength of his Argument, is
sufficiently Refuted, by what is said above: it being palpably absurd, to infer
different Degrees of the Pastoral Office, from the Superiority of Apostles to
Evangelists. If the Second, the Consequence is as absurd; the many Prerogatives
of Apostles above ordinary Pastors, making such an Inference, palpably
ridiculous. His Proof of the Succession of these Seventy to Apostles, in their
Office, upon which he founds his Assertion of the Subordination of the one to
the other, is drawn from the Succession of Simeon to James at Jerusalem; Philip
to Paul at Cesarea; Clemens to Peter at Rome: In which he palpably falls short,
as to two essential Points thereof. 1. He offers no Divine, but an Human
Testimony, as to this Matter of Fact, viz. of Dorotheus, Eusebius. 2. He offers
no Proof from Scripture, that the Persons instanced, were of those Seventy,
mentioned Luke 10. whom our Lord sent forth after the Twelve Apostles. That the
Apostles were chosen from among the Disciples, or that they are first named in
the Catalogue of Church Officers Ephesians. 4. is a pitiful hungry Proof: For the
Dr. will not say, that the Seventy were not also taken from among the number of
Disciples, or that all coming under this general Denomination, were Church
Officers. And as to the other point of the Nomination of the Apostles first in
the Catalogue of Church Officers, even supposing it will import some special
Prerogatives of these Twelve, it is utterly remote from proving either, First,
that these Seventy might not have been in the character of Evangelists, and
consequently had a correspondent Authority, eo nomine: Or Secondly, That
supposing them by their Mission, to have had the same extensive Authority with
the Twelve Apostles, that the foresaid Prerogatives of Apostles did enervat
this their Authority and Commission, which was immediately from our Lord, as
well as that of the Apostles, and in its Nature and Extent, never retracted or
limited, for any thing can be seen in Scripture. For what the Dr. objects anent
the Superiority of the Apostles over the Seventy, as being in Office, not in
Power and Jurisdiction: To which he answers, That the Office including the
Power, must import a Superiority in Power. It is, 1. here impertinent to the
Purpose and Point, he has to prove: For upon supposition, that both Offices
were Extraordinary and Ceast, even admitting a Superiority of Apostles to the
Disciples, it will never prove essentially different Degrees in the Pastoral
Office, as is said. And 2. Admitting some special Prerogatives, in the
Apostolic Office, above that of the Seventy, with a special respect to their
Gifts, the Jurisdiction and Power, of both the one and the other, with a
general Respect to Church Government, and the great and standing Ends thereof,
might notwithstanding be of the same Nature and Extent. It is also here very
noticeable, how the Dr. prevaricats, p. 393. and falls off the Hinges of the
Point, when he makes it to ly in this, That our Lord appointed a Superiority
and Subordination between Ecclesiastic Officers: Which in general, he cannot
but know, that Presbyterians do accord unto, since we hold the Pastoral Office,
to be above that of the Elder; and that of the Elder, above the Deacon:
Whereas, the State of the Question, and the Drs. Undertaking therein, is anent
a superior Order of Officers called Bishops, to whom the Order of Pastors is
subject and subordinat; or essentially different Functions in the Pastoral
Office, or Degrees thereof. Now to prove this special, specifical Subordination
instanced, from a Subordination of Ecclesiastic Officers in general, is to
argue, a genere ad speciem affirmative. Est animal; Ergo est homo. By which
Reasoning, our poorest Tyrones in the Logicks, would thus derid their Fellows
(I shall not say the Dr. for good Manners sake) Es animal; Ergo es brutum. And
so, I dismiss the Drs. first Argument.

CHAP. II. The Drs: Second Argument, taken from the Practice of the Holy
Apostles, Examined.
THE Second Argument, whereby the Dr. undertaks to prove the the Divine Right
and Institution of Episcopacy, is from the Practice of the Holy Apostles: And
this he prosecutes at large, from p. 393. to p. 404. His Proofs, may be thus
generally summed up, and run to this issue, viz. That the Apostles, did not
only exercise that Superiority in their own Persons, which their Office gave
them over the inferior Clergy; but also derived it down, with their Office, to
their Successors: And that therefore, they look not upon the Institution of
their superior Office of Apostolate, as a temporary Expedient only, but as a
standing Form of Ecclesiastic Government, to be handed down to all succeeding
Generations.

In Answer to which, I do observe, that the Dr. holds the Apostolic Office, in
a Formal Sense, and in its proper Nature, with all its Ingredients, viz.
immediate Mission, universal, unconfined Inspection, infallible directive Power,
their Apostolic Power of Coertion by Judgments, their Gifts of Tongues and
Miracles, etc. (all which were included in the Apostolic Office) to be an
ordinary standing Function in the Church, and succeeded unto, in this its whole
Nature and Extent, and as he expresses it, Handed down to all succeeding
Generations. Wherein, as the Dr. palpably contradicts, not only, clear
Experience of all Generations, the body of all Protestant Divines, yea all Men
of Sense, that have ever bestowed their Thoughts upon this Subject; Differ: of
the time page 14.
but also his very Fellow-Pleaders in this Cause: One of their late Writers of
no small Repute, in answer to this Objection, viz. That the Apostles
Superiority over the Seventy, was Extraordinary and Temporary, grants, That in
some Things their Privileges were Extraordinary, and to Cease with themselves,
instancing their immediate Calling, their sending to all Nations, their
Infallibility, their Gifts of Tongues, or whatever was necessary for the first
Founding of the Christian Church. Clearly contradicting the Drs. absurd
Assertion of a Succession to the Apostolic Office, without all Limitation. But
its no strange thing, that Midianites deal Strokes among themselves, when
encamped against Israel.

By that Superiority, which their Office gave them, over the inferior Clergy,
he must needs understand an Official Superiority, proper the Apostles as such,
and without any Restriction, as is said; since he makes the Apostolic Office,
to be institut by our Lord, as Ordinary and Perpetual, and the Practice of the
Apostles, in this pretended Derivation of their Office ^o Successors, to be
pursuant to the Institution of our Savior. He holds, there was nothing of the
Office of Apostolate, of a Temporary Nature, or as suited to the Exigence of
that Time, that it was the very same Office, without any Restriction or
Limitation, which they did transmit unto Successors. Thus he expressly p. 394.
Now to raze this Foundation of the Drs Proof, let these Things be considered.

First, That our Divines, do Harmoniously assert the extraordinary Nature of
the Apostolic Office as such, and that they could not be Succeeded to, in idem
officium and eundem gradum: Particularly the Learned Polanus, in his Syntag.
lib. 7. Cap. 11. P. (mihi.) 537.338.539. reckons up these their Prerogatives,
beyond ordinary Church Officers (1) Their immediate Institution by Christ;
therefore Paul was called from Heaven to be an Apostle. (2) Their immediate
Mission to Teach. (3.) Their Universal Legation to Plant and Found Churches:
through the World, 2 Cor. 11. (4.) Its visible Badg, Viz: conferring the Spirit
by Laying on of Hands. (5.) Immunity from Error in Teaching. (6.) Their
singular Right of Spiritual Coercing the Rebellious, and extraordinary
Authority hereanent, and extraordinary Spiritual assistance. 2 Cor. 10. (7.)
The Gift of Foretelling Things to come, Romans 11.25, 26. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. (8.)
Their extraordinary Authority beyond any Successors, as being over the whole
Church, etc. It would consume much Time and Paper to set down the vast number
of Testimonies correspondent to this, and the thing were Superfluous: All who
are acquaint with our Writers, being convinced hereof. From hence, we may thus
Argue; They whose Call, whose special Work and Duties, whose Qualifications for
their Work, are ceased, their Office is ceased, and they are not Succeeded
therein: But the Apostolic Call, special Work, and their proper
Qualifications, are ceased: Ergo, etc. The Major is evident, it consisting of a
sufficient enumeration of ingredients to make up an Office, and further
undenyably Confirmed by this* That our Divines take in these very things,
mentioned in the Definition of an extraordinary Office, and as the evidences of
it. The Assumption is as evident; the Appostles Call was immediate; who will
deny that this is ceased? Their special Work and Duty as Apostles, was to Plant
Churches, and the Gospel Ordinances and Government among them, throughout the
World, and that by a special Commission entrusted to them; of all which
Churches they were in an immediate Sense, and in actu exercito Officers, And
what Church Officer, dare now arrogat that to himself? Their Gifts and
Qualifications were extraordinary, such as the working of Miracles, Gifts of
Tongues, infallibility in Doctrine: And can any deny that these are ceased?

Secondly, Hence, as whatever he would draw the Episcopal Pre-eminence from,
will necessarly fall within the compass of these expired Prerogatives; so,
several of the Prelates pretended Prerogatives, are contrary and repugnant
thereunto; such as their exercising an ordinary Power in fixed Diocesses; the
Appostolick Inspection was Unfixed and extraordinary, and they were Officers,
in actu exercito, of the whole Church. Next, the Bishops account themselves
sole Pastors of the Diocese, tho Pastors are therein Ordained and Fixed; For
they are the Fountains, from whom the Power of Order and Jurisdiction in the
Diocese is dierived, and the Exercise of both depends upon their Lordly
Disposal: And this Preheminency, no Apostle ever claimed, their Office being
only a Declarative, Executive Ministry, not a Lordly Dominion. Besides, the
Prelates negative Voice and sole Decisive Power in Judicatories, is point Blank
contrair to the Apostles Carriage in that Synod, Act 15. In which the Question
was stated and debated, in the ordinary way of Disputation, and the Ordinary
Officers did concur and join with the Apostles, in Authorizing and enjoining
the Decrees. And further, the Bishops, the ordinary Officers, yet deny a
Subjection to the Prophets, in greater or lesser Assemblies of the Church,
whereof they are professed Officers, and yet we find Paul asserting Universally
and indefinitly, That the Spirits of the Prophets are Subject to the Prophets.
1. Cor. 14.32. Nay we find himself receiving Imposition of Hands, and sent out
by a Presbytrie, upon a special Gospel legation, which did consist not of
Fellow-Apostles, but of Prophets and Teachers, Act. 13.1, 2.3. But to what
Assembly of Prophets, are Prelates Subject, either as to their Life or Doctrine?

Thirdly; As to the perpetual ordinary Power given to the Apostles, and
transmitted by them to the Church, They did neither claim, nor exercise
Superiority over other Ministers, but we find them, accounting them Brethren,
Partners, Fellow Laborers, and themselves Fellow-Elders with them, and as to
the Pastoral Charge, their Equals; For, that ordinary Power, the Apostolic
Office contained Eminenter, which they transmitted to others. But it is
evident, that as they planted Elders, with equal Power in the Churches, so in
their last Farewels, they committed (as is above cleared) the Government unto
them, without any hint of Imparity in its exercise. Act. 20.28. Tit. 1.5. 1
Cor. 5.1. Pet. 5.

To which, we may add in the Fourth place, that the Apostles Discharging
Lordly, Dominion and Preheminency amongst Ministers over the Lord's Flocks, or
among themselves; And the Apostle John condemning* expressly this in Diotrophes,
will infallibly prove, that they neither allowed in others, nor exercised
themselves, any such power, else their Doctrine would contradict their Practice.

Hence, its infallibly clear, that to make good the Drs. Proof of a Succession
to the Apostles, by Instances, which he here undertaks, there are two Points,
he must clearly prove and make good, as the Affirmer. 1. That these pretended
Successors, did de facto exercise and hold the Apostolic Office, in its whole
Nature and Extent, as above delineat. 2. That de jure, the Apostles, by their
Doctrine and Practice, did devolve such an Authority upon them, to be
perpetually transmitted to the Church, by Succession. And therefore, if in
either, or both these, he fall short in his Instances of a pretended
Succession, he but beats the Air, and loses his Design of proving, That the
Apostles communicated the same Office to Successors, which our Savior had
communicated to them; which in terminis he asserts p. 394.

This being premised, let us see how the Dr. proves by Instances, the
Succession of Apostles to Apostles, as an Office still to be continued in the
Church. His first Instance of Succession, is that of St. James in Jerusalem,
whose Succession, in an Apostolic, or Episcopal Pre-eminence there, he labors
much in the Proof of, page 394, 395, 396, 397. But. first, tho this Matter of
Fact were granted, that James the Apostle or Evangelist (not to stand here to
discuss which) did exercise his Ministry or Apostolate there, how will it prove
a Succession to the Apostolic Charge and Office in the Drs. Sense, as above
delineat? And where is his Proof of any of the Apostles devolving this Charge
upon him? To prove either, or both these, (as the Dr. here does) from any
Scripture, or History, which suppose James to be in Jerusalem, in the exercise
of his Ministry, requires to make the Reasoning valid, such rules of Logic, as
hitherto, has not been heard of. What a strange Fantastic Proof is this?
Scripture affirms James to exercise his Ministry at Jerusalem: Ergo, he had
devolved upon him, by the other Apostles, the Apostolic Office, in the same
Nature and Extent, as exercised by them, and committed to them, by our Savior,
and this as a perpetual Function in the Church. This is such Arguing and Rope
of Sand-connection, as any may laugh at; and it is evident to common Sense,
that tho the exercise of James's Ministry in Jerusalem be granted, yet the
Instance is as far short of being a demonstrative Proof of what the Dr. asserts
and aims at, and reaching his Conclusion, as the Pigmey's Arm, is to fetch down
Ulysses Helmet.

See p. 394.
The Dr. in handling this instance, endeavors to prove that the James spoken of
Gal. 1.19. and called the Lords Brother, was none of the Twelve: Wherein he
contradicts good Interpreters, as might be cleard by a multiplicity of
Instances, if need were. The Belgic Divines, upon the Place, take him to be
the same mentioned Mark. 10. And upon Act. 12.2. They show, that after James
was killed, this James spoken of here, is he, who left behind him the Epistle
of James, and is called the Lords Brother: And upon v. 17. They affirm, that
this was James the less. The Authors of part 2. Pool. Annot. upon Gal. 1.19. Do
assert, That he was one of the Twelve Apostles, paralelling this passage
touching James, with Mark. 6. The Drs. Proof, that he was not an Apostle,
because Paul reckons him a part from the Twelve. 1 Cor. 15.5.6.7. is utterly
insufficient. The Authors of Part 2. Pool. Annot. draw no such Conclusion upon
that verse, but insinuat rather the contrar: And the Dutch Divines are
peremptor, that the James mentioned in that Text, was the Apostle James, and
one of the Two, in the Catalogue of Apostles. The Drs. Proof, from his being
mentioned a part from the Twelve, is a pitiful lax Conceit: For, if the Apostle
saying v. 7. That our Lord was seen of James, then of all the Apostles, will
prove that James was not of the number; his saying v. 5. That our Lord was seen
of Cephas, then of the Twelve, will by the same Reason prove, that Peter was
none of the number. The Doctor would needs have him the Thirteenth Apostle, and
the first that was made an Apostle, after the Twelve. I had thought, that
Matthias was the first Person made an Apostle, after our Lords Ascension, to
make up the number of Twelve and supply the room of Judas, and that Paul was
next added by our Lords special Call from Heaven; but when, or where, or by
whom, another James, than either of the two mentioned by the Evangelist, was
Constitut a Thirteenth Apostle, is a Point, I am sure, far surcharging the Drs
Ability to prove, and his proofs here adduced are such, as the simplest may
Laugh at: page 394.395.
Whereof this is one. That the Scripture makes it evident, that this James had
the great Pre-eminence in the Church of Jerusalem: And next, That in the
Council Act. 15. he gave the Decisive Sentence, calling it his Sentence. v. 19.
and determined the Controversy, after that Peter, Paul and Barnabas had
declared their Judgment: Which Argues, says the Dr. that he had great
Authority and Pre-eminence in that place. An odd proof, I must confess. Behold
the Visag of this Argument! The Apostle James spoke last in the Council of
Jerusalem, he called the Judgment he delivered upon the Question, his Sentence,
after others had spoken, the Controversy came then to an Issue: Ergo, he was
of Special and Eminent Authority in Jerusalem, beyond any of the Apostles; And
this, as a supernumerary Thirteenth Apostle Constitut by the rest to succeed in
that Office, and derive the Office of Apostolat to after Generations. It is
indeed a Question to me, whether this Assertion and Conclusion it self, or the
Dr's Method of deducing it, be more absurd; But sure I am, both are, and that
in an eminent degree. The Dr. has so wonderful a value for Prelacy, that he
will needs have this new supposed Bishop of Jerusalem, preferred upon that
account, by all the Apostles, to themselves, and set up in the Chair to presid
in the Council, as the Worthiest, yea, and that his very Judgment, upon the
account of his high Prelatick Office, outweighed all the Apostles Sentiments,
and ended the Controversy, as he expresses it. Such a conceit this is, and
Fantastic account of that Scripture, as I dare challenge the Dr. to show if
it ever came in the mind of any Protestant Writers. It would have suited the
Drs. serious Thoughts to ponder, whether that which was delivered by others, in
this meeting, and in special by the Apostle Peter, was not their Sentence, as
well as that delivered by James, and whether both these Sentences of Peter and
James, were not the same, and delivered upon the same Scripture Grounds; and
whether the delivering of a Sentence or Judgment in a Judicatory, which the
Meeting finds equitable, and do accord to, upon Grounds offered by him, and
some others, speaking before him, can conclud an Episcopal Authority over the
Meeting.

But to proceed, the Dr. (ibid) Argues further, from the Apostle Paul his going
in to James, mentioned Gal. 2.9. Upon the account of his supposed Episcopacy at
Jerusalem, although none of the Twelve, and that he is upon this account preferred
to Peter and John, and had the Priority of them both, in the Church of
Jerusalem. A conceit sufficiently refuted by a recitation. What! The Apostle
Paul, become so high a Prelatist, that a New Constitut Bishop at Jerusalem, is
by him preferred to Pillar-Apostles, as having a Priority above them in that
Church. I had thought that our Blessed Lord, recommended and Authorized his
Apostles, as the Universal Doctors of the whole Church, before this time, as
the Foundation and Pillars thereof; So they are called by the Apostle Paul,
Ephesians. 2.20. And that the Lord, in Sealing them solemnly by the Spirit, the day
of Pentecost, at Jerusalem, from whence the Law was to go forth, had
recommended them as his highest Doctors and Apostles, both to Jerusalem, and to
all the Churches; and that Peter and John's Ministry had the First and Eminent
Seals there; yea and that the Apostleship of the Circumcision, was especially
committed to Peter, and consequently his Apostolical Authority at Jerusalem
singularly conspicuous, weighty, and acknowledged, where his Ministry was
chiefly exercised, and this by the Apostle Paul's own acknowledgment Gal. 2.7.
And that he paid so great deference to this Apostle, that he went up to
Jerusalem, to see and visit him, Gal. 1.18. Besides that, the Dr. supposing
this James not to be one of the Twelve, is cross to the current of Protestant
Writers and Commentators, as we have said. As for Paul's going into James, with
the Elders Act. 21.18. Which the Dr. says will prove, that James was of
greatest note and Figure in that Church; If the Dr. mean his exercising his
Ministry there at that time, and that he was of eminent Note among the Elders,
or ordinary Ministers: As who can doubt of this in respect of his Apostolic
Office? This is easily accorded; But the Drs. Inference from this, that he was
of greatest Note and Figure among the Apostles, yea and, eo nomine, as Bishop
of Jerusalem, and moreover, as in the Capacity of a Supernumerary Apostle and
Bishop, added to the Twelve, he will as soon squeeze Water from a Flint, as
draw it from this Scripture. The Dr. tells us P. 395.396. That, as what he has
said, renders it highly probable, that James was Apostle at Jerusalem
peculiarly, and had the Priority of Peter and John therein, so the Testimmonyes
of early Antiquity, advances this probability to a Demonstration. Whereupon, he
Cites Hegesip. and Eusebius. Lib. 2. Cap. 23. Clement. Lib. 2. Cap. 1. and some
others. That James, whom the Dr. takes not to have been an Apostle, till
constitut Apostle and Bishop of Jerusalem, appears to the Dr. upon the
pretended premised Scripture Grounds, upon this account, preferred to both
Peter and John, tho Pillars, has so exposed his Understanding of the
Scriptures, as does much save the Labor of an Adversaries discovering his
Nakedness in this Point. Besides, it seems with the Dr. that Human Testimonies
of Antiquity, and of Human Writers, puts the Cape-stone upon, and compleats
Scripture Proof; So that, what was upon the Scripture proof, but probable, upon
the high accession of Human Testimonies, is with him advanced to a
Demonstration: But the Dr must be minded, that if his pretended Divine Proof,
which must be both of the Factum and the Ius, as to James's Episcopacy, obliges
him to draw his Demonstration of both from Scripture, and if by his
acknouledgment, all his Scripture Proof, amounts but to a probability, his
pretended Demonstration, made up by the patchment of Human Testimony, added to
the Divine, as giving the Demonstrative evidence and Strength thereunto, is a
Demonstration like to the Feet of the Image of Clay and Iron, which could never
make one entire piece, and cleave together.

Next, For his Testimonies, the Dr. cannot but know, that in the Judgment of
Famous Protestant Divines, this Proof, from the Testimonies of Fathers, and the
Denomination of Bishops by them, put upon Eminent Ministers, and even some in
the Apostolic times, is a very slippery and uncertain Proof. The learned
Scaliger will tell him ( Prolegom. in Chro. Eusebius.) That, ^tervallum illud ab
ultimo capite Actorum, etc. The Interval from the last Chapter of the Acts of
the Apostles until the midst of the Reign of Trajan, in which Tract, Quadratus
and Ignatius flourished (let the Dr. observe this, as to Ignatius here Cited by
him) may be truly called with Varro (...) or obscure, wherein nothing that is
certain, has come to our Hands, concerning the Affairs of Christians, except
some very few things, which the Enemies of GOD, has catched up by the way, such
as Suetonius and Corn. Tacitus: Which gap, that Eusebius might fill up, he drew
somethings without Discretion, and choice out of the Hypotyposis or Examples
of, I know not what Clement (for he is not that Learned Clement that wrote the
Strommata) and out of the Five Books of Hegesippus, a Writer no better. Let the
Dr. observe this, as to Hegesippus and Clement here Cited by him; Yea and
Hegisipus himself, as he shows, lib. 3. Cap. 28. Holds that immediately after
the Apostolic Age was gone, tunc impii erroris conspiratio, per seductionem
eorum qui alienam Doctrinam tradebant, initium caepit; Error began to Spring
and advance. The Learned Iunius, controv. 3 lib. 10. Cap. 23. Not. 3. Mentions
and proves an equivocal acceptance of the Word Bishop, in the Writings of the
Ancients. The Learned Whittaker also will Inform the Dr. (De Pont. Quest. 2.
Cap. 15.) That, Patres cum Iacobum Episcopum vocant, etc. The Fathers, when
they call James, Bishop, or Peter, take not the Name of Bishop properly, but
they call them Bishops of those Churches, wherein they stayed for a time. He
adds, That it is absurd to say, that the Apostles were Bishops, since he that
is properly a Bishop, cannot be an Apostle, the Bishop being set over one
Church, and the Apostles, Founders and overseers of many Churches. Yea, he is
so Bold, as to add further, (without craving Pardon of such as are of our Drs.
Judgment) That, non procul* distat ab insania, etc. It differs little from
madness to say, That Peter, or any other Apostles were Bishops. And to this
purpose he speaks at large, Cap. 3. Sect. 9. making good his Assertion from the
unfixed extraordinary Nature of their Office, who were to follow the Spirits
conduct, toward all places, wherever they were called. The Dr. might have also
learned from Fran. Iunius ( Contr. 3. lib. 2. Cap. 5) the cause of the Error
and mistake of the Ancients, in terming the Apostles or Evangelists Bishops,
and drawing from them Supposititious patcht Catalogues of Bishops, which are
found contradictory to one another, Viz. That such Ministers, as they found in
the Church Records, more famous, such they culled out, to make up their
Catalogues, even tho they were contemporary, and those they named Bishops, in
conformity to their own times; whereas, says he, there were many Bishops or
Presbyters at once appointed by the Apostles in the Churches. Hence has
proceeded this Confusion in the Catalogues; for instance. they make Peter
Bishop of Rome, and having a Seat there (a Fable contradicted by many of the
Learned. and proved by them, to be such) but whether Clement was First or
Third, and who, or in what Order, next after Succeeded them, whether Linus, or
Anacletus is never yet cleared. Some make Titus Bishop of Crete; some
Archbishop; some Bishop of Dalmatia. Timothy and John, are made, by many
Bishops, in the same Post, at the same time. Some say, Polycarpus was First
Bishop of Smyrna; some make him to Succeed one Bucolus; some make Aristo*
First. Some give Alexandria one Bishop; some Two at once. See Append. ad jus
Divinum Minist. Evang. Clearing this at large. The Dr. also should have done
well, to have considered the important difficulty offered by Josephus Scaliger,
about the Succession of the Bishops of the Church of Jerusalem (related by
Didoclav. Cap. 4. P. 123.) wherein he proves Eusebius Relation to be contrary
to our Lords Prophecy anent the Destruction of Jerusalem, and to Iosephus's
History. As likewise, what this Learned Author, has observed and written, to
invalidat the Credit of Eusebius's History, and the discovery he has made of
his many gross Errors therein, as well as in other Points. So that our Dr. and
his Fellow-pleaders, might have observed this their grand Magazin, to be but a
corrupt Treasure, and Poisoned Fountain. How Fabulous is the Epistle of Christ
to Agbarus King of Edessa, related by him? That which Philo the Jew wrote of
the Esseans, a Sect among the Jews, Eusebius affirms that he Wrote it of
Christian Monks, which Scaliger (in his Elencho tri Haeresii) has convict of
falsehood, out of Philo himself. He proves Peter's Crucifixion at Rome, by a
Tomb-proof. In the Computation of Times, Scaliger, observes his gross Errors.
Nay, which is more considerable, he discovers gross ignorance of Scripture, in
saying that the Cephas reprehended by Paul, was not the Apostle Peter, but
another of the Number of the Seventy Disciples. To which might be added, many
things in his personal Carriag and Qualities, which does weaken the Credit of
his History, as his presiding in the Council of Tire, against Athanasius, and
standing upon the Arrian side. Scaliger in his Thesaurus temporum (Animad. P.
268) Sets down the Testimonies of the Ancients, concerning his Errors, and
Arrianism, wherein some affirm that he died. When he Wrote the History, he was
in the Judgment of some an Arrian. And even admitting the unexceptionableness
of his History, when first Written, yet that it has been corrupted by some
ignorant Impostor, is by Didoclav. Cap. 4. P. 111. Demonstrat from this, that
he makes mention of Sozomen, who was born an Hundred Years after his time. Had
the Doctor also Perused the Learned Reynolds, he might have found that in his
Epistle to Sir Francis Knolls, he proves at large, from Chrysostom, Ierom,
Ambrose, Augustine, Theodoret, and many others, both Ancient and Modern Authors,
that in Scripture Presbyter and Bishop are all one. The Epistles of Clement, of
the first Century, are very pregnant against the Divine Right of Prelacy;
particularly his Epistle to the Philippians, wherein he makes but Two Orders of
Ministry, Bishops and Deacons, which he says, the Apostles set up to propogat
the Ordinances to Believers. But I am too prolix, in a Matter of it self, clear
and plain, and which, we may probably have occasion again to touch: Only before
I part with the Drs. First Instance, I cannot but in this place observe, and
again leave it to the Readers consideration, that the Dr. affirms this
Apostleship, which James did derive from the Twelve, was only an Episcopal
Inspection of the Church in Jerusalem: A strange Apostleship indeed! and so very
far unlike and disproportioned to the Apostolic Office, that he might as well
affirm, that any Curat of the Church of England, when set over a Flock or Cure,
has an Episcopal Authority committed to him.

The Drs. Second Instance, to prove the Apostles committing their Apostolic
Authority to Successors, is taken from Epaphroditus Philip. P. 397
2.25. Who is Styled the Apostle of the Philippians, Citing Ierom on Gal. 1.19.
Who shows, that others were Ordained Apostles, as Epaphroditus; And Theodtret,
holding that he was Constitut their Bishop. I answer 1. Tho his Episcopal
Authority over this Church of Philippi were granted to the Dr. it will never
come up to prove his Point and Assertion of devolving the Apostolic Office
upon him, but rather proves the contrary; it being evident, both from the
Nature of the Thing it self, and in the Judgment of Judicious Divines, that
these Two Offices are incompatible and inconsistent, and it is a greater
degrading of the Office of Apostolat, as it stands delineat in Scripture, to
restrict it to any Particular Church, than to make the Primat of England, Curat
of any Parish. 2. The Dr. does grossly mistake this Denomination of
Epaphroditus, while making it Import his being their Bishop, as is obvious to
any that Reads the Text, and will view Commentators upon the place, as might be
easily and at large, made appear, if our intended brevity did permit. The
Belgic Divines upon the Passage, tells us, That the Word Apostle signifies
one, who was Called and sent forth by Christ himself, to Preach the Gospel
through the whole World (meaning in its Strict and Proper acceptance) for
clearing which they Cite Gal. 1.1. Ephesians. 4.11. And here the Dr. may observe, how
they take the Nature and Extent of the Apostolic Office. Then they add. But
here it is taken more largely, in General, for one, who is sent forth by any
one to act any Thing in his Name, or for him: He was by the Philippians sent
unto Rome to Paul, to carry him that which they had Contribut for his
Maintinance, Citing Chap. 4.18. Where the Apostle shows that he had Received
what was sent by Epaphroditus: Which discovers the Folly of the Drs. gloss.
They add; That if it be rendered, their Teacher, the Word is sometimes taken
so, in a General Sense, for any kind of Teacher. Romans 16.7. Where the Phrase of
Note among the Apostles, does import, among them, who Preached the Gospel here
and there, paralelling this with that of 2 Cor. 8.23. Where the Phrase of
Messengers or Apostles in the Churches, is ascribed to other Brethren, together
with Titus, and imports only Messengers and Teachers. So, That although the Phrase
of your Messenger or Apostle, were in this place admitted to import a Pastoral
Relation to Philippi, it is as far from coming up to a Proof of the Drs. Gloss,
as East from West. Grotius upon the place shows, that Graece loquentes (...)
vocabant qui sacras pecunias colligebant atque portabant, at Diximus ad Math.
10.2. (...) Dixit Ignatius: That the Word Apostle, is here taken late or
largly, and for Honors cause, put upon this Person, as a Minister only, is
Asserted by Erasm. Simplicius, Vorstius: That he is thus called, quia missus
fuit cum Eleemosyna; and that this is Confirmed by the ensuing Clause of
Ministering to the Apostles wants, has a large Harmony of great Judgments; Thus
Zanch. Simp. Estius, Beza, Collating this with 2 Cor. 8.23. For what the Dr.
adds ( ubi supra.) of Ierem and Theodoret; It is easily answered, that the Word
Apostle ot Bishop, is by them used in a General Acceptance, as might be
cleared from many Passages of the Fathers, especially Ierom, holding that
through the Apostolic times, communi Concilio Presbyterorum Ecclesiae
gubernabantur; Thus in his Comment. upon Titus, where he proves this from Phil.
1. Act. 20. Heb. 13.17. 1 Pet. 5. And if the Word Apostle in Scripture, have
this General Acceptance, as we have heard, why not also in the Writings of the
Fathers?

The Drs Third Instance, (P. 398) is of Titus, and some others, whom the
Apostle 2 Cor. 8.23. Calls Messengers, or in the Greek, Apostles of the
Churches, which the Dr. takes to hold out their Apostolic Authority over the
same, and will not have the Phrase to Import their Relation to these Churches,
whose liberality they carried. Thereafter, he Insists upon the Instance of
Titus, whose Episcopal Authority over Crete, he endeavors to prove from the
Epistle written to him. To the Instance, First in the General, I Answer, that
the Drs. Sense of the Passage Cited, is but his own Imagination, without the
least Shadow of Ground in the Words or Context, especially taking it to Import
an Apostolic Authority, in his Sense, as might be cleared by multiplied
instances, if needful. We heard that the P^lgick Divines take the Phrase to
Import Teachers in a General Sense. The Authors of part. 2. Pool Annot. Thus
Sense the Passage, Viz, That the Apostle calls Titus his Fellow-helper in the
Business of the Gospel; for the others, he tells them, they were such, as the
Churches thought fit to make their Messengers, and had the Credit of the
Churches, whose Messengers they were, since the Churches would not have
Instructed them, if they had not Judged them Faithful. Both which Senses stands
clearly cross to that which the Dr. Grounds upon. And to discover further, the
weakness of his Reasoning, even granting that this Text would Import a Fixed
Episcopacy of Titus and these other Messengers, over some Churches, how does it
prove the Apostles devolving upon them, the entire Apostolic Office, in the
same Nature and Extent, as it was committed to the Twelve, by our Savior? The
Dr. will never be able to knit this Antecedent and Consequent, by Scripture or
Divine Reason: And this being the Point, he is all along undertaking to prove,
any may see how palpably he mistakes and misses his Mark, in these Instances.

But now to examine the Drs. proof of Titus's Episcopacy, these Things I do in
general premise, which do cut the Sinews of his, or any others Arguings for the
pretended Episcopacy of Timothy or Titus, over these Churches. 1. In Churches
already constitut, this Authority, was not solely seated in them, they were
only to go before the Churches, in wholesome Counsels, in relation to the
planting of Ministers; not to do as they pleased, excluding others, as
judicious Calvin expresses it, Instit. lib. 4. cap. 3. since Paul himself,
neither imposed Hands, nor Excommunicat alone in Churches constitut: And a
whole College of Apostles, had the ordinary Elders going along with them, in a
Synodal Procedure, Act. 15. far less, could Timothy or Titus, assum this
Episcopal Pre-eminence, who were inferior to Apostles. 2. After the Church of
Ephesus was Exedified and Completed, in its Organick Being, and after Timothy
had gotten his Charge, as to Ordination and Jurisdiction in Ephesus, in the
first Epistle directed to him (wherein the Dr. and his Fellows, hold him to be
instructed with Episcopal Authority) Paul committed the whole Episcopal Power
and Charge to the Elders, before Timothy's Face, in his last Farewell to that
Church, calling these Elders, the Bishops, and enjoining them the Exercise of
their Authority, as appointed by the Holy Ghost, and this without the least
Hint of any Inspection or Authority, that Timothy had over them hereanent, or
of any relation they had to him in this Matter; thus Act. 20. And the same
Judgment by necessary consequence, we must make of Titus, since the Dr. and his
Fellows draw their proofs equally as to both, from these Epistles. 3. In these
Epistles themselves, their Power stands so described and circumstantiat as to
Ordination and Jurisdiction, over these Churches, as it clearly excluds an
Episcopal Pre-eminence and Authority: For, First, As Diocesan Bishops, they
ought to have been designedly set and fixed as Officers in these Churches; but
the contrary appears in the Text [ I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus]
says Paul to Timothy. And again to Titus, [ I left thee at Crete -- and to set
in order things that are wanting] Which words point at an occasional, transient
Employment there, not a fixed Instalment. Secondly, In these Epistles, they are
both called back, without the least intimation of their returning. Thirdly, If
their Power was Episcopal and Ordinary, then in the Apostles Prescriptions and
Rules, anent their Successors, the Power and Authority of these Successors,
ought to have been described, and Rules given, touching the Gifts, Call,
Ordination, etc. of the Diocesan Bishop, especially, since the Dr. holds, that
the Description of, and Authorizing such a Bishop, is the great scope of both
these Epistles, and he will not say, that this Office was to die with Timothy
and Titus: But so it is, that the Apostle prescribs no Rules for any Church
Officer, higher than a Pastor, and supposes still that he is the highest
Ordinary Church Officer, in all his Rules and Prescriptions, in point of Church
Government, delivered either in these Epistles, or any where else in Scripture.
Fourthly, As Timothy is expressly called an Evangelist 2 Timothy 4.5. and
consequently Titus is supposed to hold the same Office; so this Office in the
Judgment of Protestant Divines, is acknowledged and held to be Extraordinary
and Expired, as that of the Apostles: The Work and Exercise thereof, consisting
in a planetary Motion, to Water, where the Apostles Planted, to bring
Instructions from the Apostles to the Churches, touching the Duties of both
Pastors and People, and Reports of the Churches State, to the Apostles. So
their Office, supposing the Churches, in fieri, as to their Organick Being, in
a great measure at least, and also the Existence and Exercise of the Apostolic
Office, they must needs be, as the Apostles themselves, Extraordinary Officers.
And in special, Timothy and Titus, accompanying Paul in his Travels, and
continual planetary Motion, being so clearly held out in Scripture, concluds
the Impossibility of their being fixed to any Station, and proves that
Character given to them by Ambrose, as Evangelists, viz: That they did
Evangelizare sine Cathedra. Their continual planetary Motion, is by some largly
described from the Apostolic Epistles, and the Acts of the Apostles: Thus,
first Timothy is found at Berea with Paul, Act. 17.14. then at Athens v. 15.
thence Paul sends him to Thessalonica 1 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2. Then having been at
Macedonia with Paul, he came to him to Corinth Act. 18.5. Then he is with him
at Ephesus, and thence sent to Macedonia Act. 19.22. whether Paul went after
him, and was by him accompanied into Asia Act. 20. He is with him at Troas v.
5. and at Miletus v. 17. where Paul gave the Elders of Ephesus, their last
Charge, as the Bishops of that Church: And after this, he is found either in
Journeys, or absent from Ephesus; For, after he is found a Prisoner with Paul
at Rome, being mentioned as his Companion in these Epistles, written while Paul
was there; as the Epistle to the Philippians Philip. 1.1. Philem. v. 1. Col.
1.1. And he is never found again at Ephesus; But toward the end of the
Apostles Pilgrimage, is sent for to Rome. So, Titus is found at Jerusalem,
before he came to Crete, Gal. 2.1. thence is sent for to Nicopolis Tit. 3.12.
then to Corinth: Then he is expected at Troas, 2 Cor. 2.12, 13. and meets with
Paul at Macedonia, 2 Cor. 7.6. whence he is again sent to Corinth, 2 Cor. 8.6.
And after this, near the time of Paul's Death, is found at Rome, from whence he
went, not to Crete, but to Dalmatia, 2 Timothy 4. 10. And after this, is not heard
of in Scripture. So that, whether we consider, 1. The various Journies. 2. The
order of them. 3. The time spent in them. 4. The nature of their Employment,
which was, as the Apostles Co-adjutors, to negotiat the Affairs of the
Churches, where they traveled, and especially the Scripture-silence of their
being Bishops of any one Church; their supposed Episcopal Authority in these
Churches of Ephesus and Crete, does palpably appear to be an Anti-scriptural
groundless Fiction. This Conclusion upon the premised accurat Search and
Scripture account of Timothy and Titus, is thus inferred by the reverend and
learned Divines, in their Conference at the Isle of Wight; The Authors of Ius
divinum minist. Evangel. In whose Words, I have represented this Account, both
because of the judicious Concisness thereof, and also because these Pieces, are
but in few Hands.

These things thus premised, its easy to discover the Absurdity of the Drs
reasoning from his Third Instance, to prove an Apostolical Authority Devolved
upon Titus. His Proof is from Chap. 1.5. For this Cause left I thee in Crete,
that thou should set in order the things that are wanting, P. 398
and Ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed thee.] From whence the Dr.
First Argues* That Paul gave him the Supreme Judgment in things that were
wanting, with an absolut Power to Reform and Correct them. It is Answered. 1
mo. Tho an Episcopal inspection over this Church were granted, the Dr. is
infinitely behind in his Proof of Paul's devolving upon Titus, an Apostolical
Authority, in the Scripture Sense and Extent, as we have often told him. 2 do.
Upon supposition of that, which we have before made good, Viz: That both Paul
as an Apostle, and Titus as an Evangelist, had extraordinary Offices, and suited
to such a Case and exigence of the Christian Church, as is now gone off, this
direction and Command, proper and peculiar to the one and the other, as Apostle
and Evangelist, and supposing this Exigence of the Church, can lay no
Foundation of the Duty of Ordinary Officers. 3 ti^. By what consequence can the
Dr. infer an Episcopal Authority and Inspection, from these prescriptions to
Titus, unless he can prove the absolut seclusion of Ministers from the Work
here enjoined, or any interest therein, in Churches Constitut? For, as for what
they did in the Constitution of Churches, in fieri, is not to the purpose (I
mean in respect of the Organick being) especially, since we find that the
laying on of Hands in Ordination, and the Authority thereof, is in Scripture
held out, to be competent to a Presbytrie, which they exercised upon Timothy
himself, one of our Drs supposed Apostles or Bishops, and that tho Paul was
present 1 Timothy: 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6. So that it is evident, that neither Timothy
nor Titus, were instructed with any singular Episcopal Authority in this
Matter, among Churches Constitut in their Organick Being. In the 4 th place,
the Drs absurd Assertion of a Supreme and Absolut Power, to Reform and Correct,
drawn from this Passage, does obviously appear to the meanest Reflection: For,
1. The Apostles themselves, arrogat no absolut or supreme Power; Paul disowns a
Dominion, and asserts a Ministerial Authority only competent unto him, 1 Cor.
4.1. 2 Cor. 1.24. I had alwise thought, that in the Judgment of all
Protestants, yea of all Men of Sense, who ever read the Scriptures, there is
none has a supreme Judgment, or absolut Power over the Church of God, but He
who is the Churches Head and Husband, there being but one Lord, and all
Ministers being Brethren, one Master of the House of God, who has Dominion
over the Ordinances, under whom, even Apostles, are but Stewards and Servants,
which I suppose, none, if not this Dr. will deny. 2. Its strange, that in
reading this Passage, the Drs. Eyes and Thoughts, could not fix upon and ponder
the important last Clause of the Words, viz, [ As I had appointed thee] which
does very clearly suppose and import, both the Apostles superior Authority to
Titus, and his restricting him to his Rules, and authorizing Information in
this Matter: And how these can consist with Titus's supreme Judgment herein,
and absolut Power, will suit the Drs. greatest Skill to prove and demonstrat.
In a word, this odd Inference of such a supposed Power in Titus, is disowned by
all sound Interpreters, as might be easily made appear: And in special, the
Belgic Divines, tells us, upon this Passage, That Titus. was not to perform
this by his own Authority, and good Pleasure only, (as the Dr. holds,) but
according to the Order, which the Apostle prescribed, and did observe himself;
paralelling this with 1 Timothy 4.14. where it appears, that the Elders concurred
with Paul, in Timothy's Ordination: And this last Clause of the Verse, they
render [ As I commanded thee]

The Drs. Second Proof of Titus's Apostolic Authority, is, ( P. 399) That he
is authorized to ordain Elders in every City: And there being Presbyters and
Elders in Crete, left by the Apostle, before Titus was left there, who yet had
no power to Ordain, else Titus's power of Ordination had been in vain, and an
invasion of their power as a Preshytry: Therefore, this power of Ordination,
was competent to Titus only, not to Presbyters; especially, since it is
extended, not only to Ordination of Elders, but also to Rebuking with
Authority, to the Correction of Offenders, with the Rod of Excommunication,
chap. 2.15. To Admonish Heretics, and to Reject them from Communion of the
Church, if obstinat, chap. 3.10. From all which, the Dr. concluds his Apostolat
in the Church of Crete, to be the same that the first Apostles themselves had,
in the several Churches planted by them. I Answer, 1. The Dr. does nothing but
here again beg the Question, and argue ex ignoratione elenchi, and this one
point being but supposed, That the Office of Apostles and Evangelists was
Extraordinary, (and we may justly suppose it, having above made it good) this
Arguing appears mere puerile Sophistry. But 2. To come more closly to the Drs.
Arguing: As for the laying on of Hands in Ordination, we have told him, That it
is a Presbyterian Act, competent to mere Presbyters: And therefore, neither
Timothy nor Titus, could have a Sole or Episcopal Authority therein, unless the
Dr. will make the Scripture inconsistent with it self. Next as for his
Authority in his Rebuking and Censures, supposed in these Directions. I answer,
That neither can this be Titus's sole Prerogative: For, either it is meant of a
private Rebuke, and this every Christian has Authority in, [ -- thou shall in
any wise, Rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him. Levit. 19.17.] or
of a Ministerial Rebuke, and this is competent to every Minister of the Word,
Isa. 58.1. 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. Tit. 1.13. 2 Samuel 12.7. And besides, Institutions and
Reproofs of Church Officers, will not prove a fixed Episcopal Power. Prophets
Rebuked, but had no Jurisdiction over Priests; nor Paul over Peter, tho he
reproved him. Moreover, we find the Authority, to receive Accusations, and to
Correct Delinquents by Reproofs and Censures, competent to the Juridical Courts
and Church, Mat. 18.16, 17. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. Gal. 6.1, 2. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. In which
places, a judicial Rebuke and Admonition, is attributed to the Juridical Court
of Pastors, not to one Prelat, not, uni, but unitati. 3. As for the Drs.
Notion, of a supposed existence of Elders in that Church, who had no power of
Ordination, ibid.
else this Prescription, which the Apostle gives Titus to Ordain, had been
fruitless, and an Invasion of their Power, in the Drs. Judgment. I deny his
Consequence as having no twist of a Connection: For (1.) Upon supposition of
Apostles or Evangelists extraordinary Offices, Paul's instructing Titus, and his
Authority in Ordination thereupon, was a power and Authority, Cumulative unto,
but not Privative of the Ordinary Officers and Elders their standing, and
ordinary Authority herein: It being certain, that this Authority of Apostles
and Evangelists, as is above described, could not bevoided, whatever advance of
Gospel Ordinances there was in Churches, these extraordinary Officers, had
still their Authority and Inspection vigent. I suppose the Apostle Paul had in
the presence of Titus (the Bishop of Crete in the Drs. sense) ordained
Ministers or Elders in this Church, will he own the consequence, that this did
nullify Titus's Authority herein, as Bishop? Surely not: And thus he must
acknowledge our Plea to be clear, as to the reserved Authority of Pastors or
Elderships, notwithstanding of the Apostolical Prescriptions instanced. (2.)
Elders once ordained, its true, have power to ordain Elders; yet the been esse,
did call for the Inspection and Direction of such highly gifted and
extraordinary Officers as Evangelists, and their interposed Authority in that
infant-state of the Church, wherein Apostolic Precepts and Rules, in reference
to Government, were to be delivered to the Churches, and practiced accordingly.
And in a word, the Dr. neither has, nor can prove, that Titus did ordain here
alone, or solely perform any other authoritative Act, where Elders were
present, and the Churches reduced to an Organick Mould and Form; which is the
consentient Judgment of sound Protestant Divines. Judicious Calvin upon the
place, will tell him, That Titus here acted only as a President or Moderator,
which is clearly evinced from the Authority and Power of Elderships asserted in
Scripture. And we may retort upon the Dr. thus; If neither Apostles nor
Evangelists (extraordinary and highly gifted Officers) did exercise their Power
to the prejudice of standing Elderships, or juridical Courts of Pastors, much
less ought any ordinary Church Officer, arrogat such a Dominion and Authority
over the Courts of Christ, and Judicatories of His Church, when the Office of
Apostles and Evangelists is ceased. I need not here stand further to tell the
Dr. That the power of Excommunication, is by the Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 5.
supposed to be competent to a Presbytry. And therefore, Titus could have no
Sole and Ordinary Authority herein. For what the Dr. adds of the Testimonies of
the Ancients, P. 400.
touching Titus's Episcopacy at Crete, such as Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 4. etc. it
is sufficiently Answered already, and we need not repeat.

The Drs. Fourth and last instance, to prove the Divine Right of Episcpacy,
ibid.
from the Apostles practice is of the supposed Episcopal Authority of Timothy
over Ephesus, and that not only over the Laity to Command and Teach. 1 Timothy
4.11. to receive or reject Widows. 1 Timothy 5.9. etc. But also over the Clergy,
to take care for their Provision 1 Timothy 5.17. Not to admit Deacons, but upon
trial, nor Ordain the Elder, till a good acquittance in the Deaconship. 1 Timothy
3.10.13. to receive accusations, put the Guilty to shame, 1 Timothy 5.19.20. And
to exercise this Jurisdiction, without Preferring one before another, v. 21.
which could not be without a Jurisdiction over them. He has also ascribed unto
him, an Ordaining Power, as to the laying on of Hands. 1 Timothy 5.22. All which
Authority, that it was given him by Paul, for a standing Form of Government,
the Dr. proves from this Ground, because it was after the Presbytrie was formed
and settled there, and after Paul's great Labors in that large Church for
Three Years; And therefore, he may be supposed, not only to have Planted a
Presbytrie there, as in other Churches. Acts 14.23. but also to have reduced it
to much g^eater perfection, than any other; And by consequence Establishing
this Authority in a single Person, is such a Form of Government, as the Apostle
must needs have understood and intended to be of of that Nature, as was to
continue as a Pattern to other Churches.

It is Answered. 1. There is nothing here of a New Argument, but a Repitition
of the former, and a New Begging of the Question, Viz. The ^tanding ordinary
Office of Apostles and Evangelists; which we have above convict of Falsehood.
But 2. (To come a little closer to the Drs. New Instance) since he presents
here some Actings of the Power of Order, which he acknowledges, tho performed
by Timothy, and enjoined to him by Paul in that Church, yet are likewise
Competent to Presbyters or Pastors, Viz: Teaching, etc. which together with
other Actings of the Power of Order, he makes common to Pastors, and at large
discourses this. P. 427 428.429. etc. I would fain know how the Dr. will
diversifie these in this Instance, and show, that the enjoining to Timothy in
this place, such an exercise of the Power of Order, as is above expressed, will
give him no peculiar Interest therein, but jointly with the Presbyters; and yet
that the Commands in point of Jurisdiction, are delivered to him peculiarly,
and not to them. Where will the Dr. show this distinction and difference in the
Apostolic Precepts to Timothy? It should seem the ordinary Rule will take
place here, non est distinguendum, ubi Lex non distinguit; since the Precepts
are equally delivered, and without the least Intimation of such a difference or
distinction: The person who makes the distinction, seems Chargable with
arrogant Anti-scriptural Boldness.

The Dr. pleads, P. 401.
that the Apostolic Precept. 1 Timothy 5.22. [ Lay Hands suddenly on no man]
prescribes a standing Rule in Point of Jurisdiction. Viz: that the Prelat has a
sole interest therein, secluding Presbyters wholly from any Authority in this
Matter: For this he makes the Bishops peculiar prerogative. P. 436.437. etc.
And he draws his great Proof in this place, from the Apostles addressing this
Precept to Timothy, not to Pastors or Presbyters. Now, what if any shall lash
the Dr. with his own Argument, and Plead from the Apostles Solemn Charge to
Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.1.2. [ Preach the Word, be instant in Season, cut of Season]
and several such Precepts, relative to General Ministerial Duties, or Actings
of the Power of Order, such as a Right behaving in the House of GOD, 1 Timothy
3.15. To be a growing Minister in the Words of Faith 1 Timothy 4.6. To exercise
himself to Godliness. v. 7. To be examplary to Believers in word and
Conversation, etc. V. 12. To give attendance to Reading, Exhortation and
Doctrine; not to neglect, but to stir up his Gift; to Meditat upon the things of
God, and give himself wholly thereunto; to take heed unto himself, and to the
Doctrine, and continue in them, v. 13.14.15.16. with 2 Timothy 1.6. That such
Actings of the Power of Order, are proper only to the Bishop, and such
Ministerial Duties peculiar to him; So that Presbyters or Pastors have no
Interest or concern therein, because these Precepts are pecu^iarly addressed to
Timothy, not to them: What Answer and evasion can he have to save him, from a
Contradiction and inconsistency with himself? If his own Argument be good
against us, upon the forementioned Ground, why not the very same Argument in
this Case against himself? The Drs. only Answer and evasion, which he can have,
is, That these Commands, as to the Exercise of the Power of Order, or
respecting Pastoral Duties in general, tho peculiarly addressed to Timothy, yet
could give him no peculiar or sole Interest therein, because Presbyters are
elsewhere in Scripture Instructed with the same Power. But 1. In this Answer,
he breaks his Argument all in pieces, the Strength whereof is drawn from the
peculiar addressing these Precepts to Timothy; But here he acknowledges that
the peculiar Address will bear no such conclusion of Timothy's sole Interest in
the Duty enjoined. And 2. If he say, that the Bishops peculiar Interest and
Jurisdiction, is elsewhere evident in Scripture, who sees not, that he but
pityfully beggs the Question, and baffls his own General Argument: And further
he should know, that the Presbyterians stand upon an advantageous Ground with
him in this Point; For we hold, and can prove that the Power of Jurisdiction is
prescribed and competent to Presbyters, since the Scripture shows the Power of
Ordination, to be seated in a Presbytrie, 1 Timothy 4.14. with Act* 22.5. Luke
22.66. Matthew. 18.17. Consequently, correspondent Actings of a Jurisdictional
Power. All that watch for the Peoples Souls, are in Scripture, held out to have
a joint Rule over them, Heb. 13.17. In the Church of Thessalonica, the
Laborers in the Word and Doctrine, jointly fed and labored, jointly censured,
and as the (...) Rulers, were to be submittted to and obeyed. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. So
it was in the same Church of Ephesus, Act. 20. So with these Elders or Bishops.
1 Pet* 5. And I would fain know, why the Drs. Notion and Argument, from the
peculiar addressing of Precepts, will not hold good in our Case against him,
upon the ground of these and such like Scriptures, where the Power of Order and
Jurisdiction, is jointly ascribed to Presbyters, without the least hint of a
Superior Authority herein, or their Precarious dependence upon any Officer, of
an higher order? Moreover, will the Dr. be bold to affirm^ that what was
prescribed to Timothy, in Point of Order and Jurisdiction, was confined within
the Church of Ephesus, and not rather to be exercised through all other
Churches, as the Apostle enjoined him? And if this last must needs be asserted,
upon the Ground of his Evangelistick transient employment through the Churches,
as is above, from Scrpture evinced and delineat, it follows by inevitable
consequence, that the Addressing of these Prescriptions to him, while at
Ephesus, can infer no peculiar Relation he had to that Church, but respected
the Exercise of his Evangelistick Office in other Churches, as well as there;
especially since the Apostle here enjoins him, to do the Work of an Evangelist.
i. e. of such an unfixed transient Minister, as is above described, not the
work of a Prelat, over this Church; If the Dr. deny this, he will advance him
to a Metrapolitan over several other Churches; or else must quite his plea. But
finally, to Raze the Foundation of the Drs. Notion and Argument, which he draws
from Paul's Constituting a Presbytrie at Ephesus, and reducing it to a greater
perfection than in other Churches, before Timothy had these Prescriptions, P.
401. sub finem
in point of Government, Adddressed unto him therein; From whence the Dr.
concludes, that the Apostle established the Government to continue by a single
person, presiding over Clergy and Laity. Besides the exceptions above touched,
to which this is lvable, I would, First know of him, whether this P^esbytrie or
Presbytries, so perfectly Constitut in his Judgment, had not an essential and
inherent interest and Authority in such Actings of the Power of Order, as
himself acknowledges competent to them, such as Teaching and the like? And if
so, as himself does hold and suppose, notwithstanding of the Addressing of
Precepts to Timothy hereanent, why were such Precepts addressed to Timothy? Why
was not this left to the perfectly Constitut Presbytrie, and Precepts only in
Point of Government addressed to him? (Especially since its known, the Bishops
do not much concern themselves in Teaching and these other Ministerial Duties,
expressed in the Precepts abovementioned) And if the Prior Authority of a
Constitut Presbytrie hereanent, was no Just Ground to stop the Apostles
Precepts to Timothy, in the Power of Order, and such Ministerial Duties, as are
contained in the forementioned Precepts, nor can infer Timothy's sole Interest
therein, why I pray, shall this Reason be valid in point of Jurisdiction? What
will the Dr. Answer, if one should improve his own Argument thus?
Notwithstanding of Paul's great pains in Preaching and Constituting a perfect
Presbytrie (to use his own term) and that there were many Pastors, gifted to
Preach and admonish, yet the Apostle afterward in his Epistle to Timothy, gave
this Commandment to him, not to them: Therefore this is proper and peculiar to
the Bishop only. And sure I am, whatever Answer he can give to this, which has
any Sense or Consonancy to Scripture, will loose and Answer his own Argument
against us. In a word, its easy to retort this Argument from a Priority of
time, and show that when pertinently improven, it stands upon our side against
the Dr. and his Fellows. Which retortion, I thus offer; After Timothy had
received these Instructions in the Church of Ephesus, with reference to the
Clergy and Laity, (as he speaks) the Apostle Committed the whole Episcopal
Charge to the Elders or Ministers of Ephesus, as to both Order and
Jurisdiction, without the least hint of any Interest, that Timothy had in or
over them herein, or of any precarious dependence of these Elders and
Ministers, upon him, in the exercise of this their Power, notwithstanding that
Timothy was present with them, when the Apostle gave this Charge, and that it
was his last farewell-Charge, when never to see their Faces more. Now, if the
Apostle had given Timothy a standing Episcopal Authority before, and Constitut
him their Bishop, what a pityful inconsistency, retraction and contradiction
was it to his former Doctrine and practice, in the Instalment of Timothy, to
devolve his whole Authority upon these Elders, Commanding them as the (...) or
Bishops (...) to Feed and Rule? Surely if the Argument from Priority of time,
be valid, it must be signally so in this Case, wherein it is strengthened by so
many Corroborating Circumstances of the Sacred Text, and (to use the Drs.
expression, and Address him in his own words) ibid. [ this Constitution was to
be a Pattern to all Churches, and to be sure, the Government, now at last
Established, at Ephesus was such as the Apostle intended should continue.]

The Dr. will needs have this Practice of the Apostle Paul to proceed upon the
express Institution of our Savior, P. 403.
consequently to found a Divine Right of a Subordination of Ecclesiastic
Officers, since the Apostles ordained other Apostles, and Bishops to presid
over the Churches. But sure, looking to his Scope and Pleading, nothing could
be said in a more inconsistent Mould: For, he cannot but acknowledge, That the
Institution of our Savior did relate to the Apostolic Office, in its whole
Nature and Extent, as above delineat, viz. To found and plant Churches through
the World, to establish the Gospel Government and Ordinances in them, and this
with extraordinary Gifts, and infallible directive Authority, as Christ's,
immediately sent and first Ambassadors: Yet the Apostles supposed prosecution of
this Institution, he maks to consist only in setting some certain Bishops over
particular Churches, with an ordinary and limited Power (for I hope, he will
not make them all universal Patriarchs) Now, how exactly these Bishops are
shapen to the Pattern of Christ's institut Apostles, any may judge; yet he will
have them, not only Bishops, but Apostles, properly so called, such as were the
first Apostles, and as succeeding them, in their formal Office: Besides, in
speaking of this Divine Right, he tells us, His Arguments pleads for a
Superiority and Subordination of Ecclesiastic Officers: Which is a General,
easily accorded by us, as is said, and no way will come home, to prove his
supposed distinct Offices in the Pastoral Charge. The Dr. tells us, ( ibid)
That if the ordaining of Presbyters, be an Argument of the perpetuity of the
Office, as we hold, why not the Apostles ordaining Bishops, as good an
Argument, for the perpetuity of that Office? I answer, when the Dr. shall make
it good, that the Apostles ordained Bishops of his Mould (...) or Church by
Church, as we can prove, and it is evident they did ordain Ministers or Elders;
or make it appear, that the Apostle gave to Timothy or Titus, any Rules, for
the Ordination of his supposed Bishop, or for his Qualifications, as in that
Capacity, as it is evident he prescribs Rules anent the Ordination and
Qualification of the Pastor, in both these Epistles; then, and not till then,
the Drs. parallel Argument shall be admitted: But till then, we must send it
back to the Dr. with a Censure of Impertinency, till it be returned with a
Testimonial of a better proof, than of his bare Assertion, and ipse dixit.

The Dr. enquires, how we can argue a perpetual power of Ordination in the
Church, P. 404.
from the Ordination of Timothy and Titus, (citing Ius divinum Minist. Evang.
p. 159.167.) if the Office they were ordained to, were not perpetual? And if
perpetual, then so is Episcopacy nothing different therefrom. Answ. We hold the
Ordination instanced, to examplifie a Presbyterian Ordination, as well as in
General a Power of Ordination in the Church: Timothy's Ordination, having this
Scripture account, that it was by Laying on of the Hands of the Presbytrie;
which Power and Authority of a Presbytrie, the Apostle Paul's presence, and his
Imposition of Hands, tho supposed, does rather Strengthen than invalidat, since
neither the Eminent Gifts of Timothy, nor his designment for such an Eminent
Office, nor Paul's Imposition of Hands, the Great Apostle of the Gentiles, did
Swallow up, or exclud the Presbytries Ordinary Power and Authority, but Timothy
must pass through this Door of a Presbytries Authoritative Ordination and
Imposition of Hands, in order to the Exercise of his Office; therefore, much
more does this Authority belong to the Presbytrie now, when the Office of
Apostles and Evangelists is ceased. And for Titus's Ordination in an active
Sense, or his Ordination of Elders, the Apostle tells him expressly, Chap. 1.5.
(the Passage wherein the Dr. places his Chief Strength) that it was to be
performed [ according to the Apostles appointment] which appointment in the
Sense of our Divines, is none other else, than that which himself examplified,
and is Intimat. 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6. i. e. with Authoritative concurrence
of the Presbytrie or Eldership; So that Titus had no Episcopal Authority
therein, notwithstanding of his Evangelistick extraordinary Office; And this is
invincibly made good in opposition to the Drs Design, and pleading, in that the
Apostle, in the same very Text, wherein he enjoins Titus to ordain Elders, does
identify and make one and the same, the Office of the Bishop and Elder, which
were a mere implicantia in terminis, if the Apostle in this Precept did
Authorize or enjoin the Drs. supposed Prelatical Power in Ordination, as
Competent to an higher Order of Bishops, Superior to Prerbyters. For the Drs.
asserting the Office of Episcopacy, and that of Timothy, to be one and the
same; he therein beggs the Question, and supposes what he has to prove: The
Office of the Prelat and Evangelist, being so vastly different, as we have
already made appear; And therefore, his Reason and Argument is pitifully absurd
from our assertting the Power of Ordination, as inherent to the Church, upon
the Ground of the Apostles Ordaining Presbyters and Evangelists, to conclud the
standing Office of Prelatical inspection or Ordination.

The Dr. should also know, that the asserting that a Church Officer, such as an
Apostle, has an extraordinary Authority conversant about Ordination, can
neither infer, that the Power of Ordination, it self, is extraordinary and
expired, nor that every Person Ordained, has an ordinary standing Function;
Which, the ^postles extraordinary Authority in the first Planting of
Presbyters, while the Churches were in fieri, as to their Organick Being, their
Ordaining Evangelists extraordinary Officers, together with their exercing
extraordinary Gifts and Authority, as well in their Actings of the Power of
Order, and Preaching with Miraculous Gifts of Tongues, and Confirming their
Doctrins with Miracles, as in Point of Jurisdiction, their Extraordinary
Censures above expressed, does evince and make evident. The extraordinary Mission
of the Twelve Apostles, has derived from it a Ministry and Ecclesiastic
Authority diffused and spread among all the 'Church Officers in the World, none
of which does Succeed them, into the same formal Office; So Timothy's
Evangelistick, extraordinary Authority, is derived, handed down into, and
seated in a Presbytrie, tho the Evangelistick Office is extraordinary, and as
such, not Succeeded unto. The Service and Work of Teaching and Governing, to
continue in all Ages, and in all times, does not render the Apostolic Mission
or Commission ordinary, nor infer their being Succeeded in idem Officium and
eundem Ministerii gradum, the ordinary Power being Institut and settled in the
Hands of ordinary Officers, by a New warrant and Commission, according to the
Scripture Rules of Ordination. The Office of Moses, was not rendered ordinary,
because many Works of Government exercised by him, were recommitted to the
Elders of Israel; and so the Case is here. The Evangelists extraordinary Office
and Commission (necessary, as that of the Apostles, for the First founding of
the Churches, for Watering the Apostles Plantation, Building up the Churches,
in their Organick being, and settling all the ordinary Officers thereof) is
changed into the Presbytries ordinary Collegiat Power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction, which we find was in the Apostolic Church exercised, and even in
this of Ephesus.

For the Drs Proofs from Antiquity, P. 402 403.
upon this head, and touching Timothies Episcopacy over Ephesus, they are
sufficiently obviat by what is said above, and in special, by what we have
offered and evinced anent the Fathers various acceptance of the Names of
Bishop and Apostle. The Dr. brings an Anonymous Author, to prove that Timothy
was Enthroned (forsooth) Bishop of the Metropolis of Ephesus by Paul: A pityful
Proof indeed, and fit only for a nameless Author! It being evident by the best
searchers of Antiquity, that the Office of Metropolitans, had not a Being till
several Ages after Timothy. For Chrysostom his asserting that Timothy was
entrusted with a Church or whole Nation: If we shall assert that this is
applicable to his transient or temporary Evangelistick Trust, in correspondence
to the extensive Office of Apostleship, it says nothing to our purpose. And the
Dr. should know that Chrysostom upon Tit. 1.5. makes the Office of Bishop and
Presbyter one and the same, and therein cuts the Sinews of the Drs. design and
arguing. For other Authors, who do call Timothy, together with other Bishops,
then in being, Apostles, which the Dr. further Pleads, it does sufficiently
evince, what is said above, of their improper, equivocal acceptance of the
Term, since no person of Sense, who ever Read the New Testament, can take the
Office of Apostle, as delineat in Scripture, to be applicable to Timothy, far
less to ordinary Bishops, fixed in certain Posts. Nay, the Dr. himself, and in
contradiction to himself, does unawares bewray this, in his Greek Citation of
Theodoret, who asserts that the Twelve Apostles, were more strictly called so,
or rather, according to the Truth of the Greek (...). Apostles according to
Truth, or in very deed; Clearly importing, that the Name appropriat to other
Officers, was but used (...) or improperly, as any Minister or Messenger of
Christ may be thus called; And if this be Theodorets general Rule, as the Dr
calls it, that the Twelve Apostles were only such, according to Truth, he does
consequently assert the Drs pleading for the Bishops, as succeedanous Apostles,
and as holding and having derived unto them their entire Office, to be not
according to Truth; So that he did not well to raise this Ghost. As for the
Story or Fable of the Prince of Edessa, which the Dr. next presents out of
Eusebius, to whom (he tells us, that) Thaddeus was sent by St. Thomas, and
called an Apostle by Eusebius: His Denomination, as it is of it self, of no
weight, to prove the Drs assertion, (as is clear, in the like instances) So,
this is so generally acknowledged to be a Fable, and Eusebius thereupon so
Censured by Judicious Divines, that the Doctor has been far to seek for his
proofs, when catching up so pityful stuff as this. And thus we proceed to the
Drs next Proofs.

CHAP. III. The Dr's Third Argument considered, taken from an alleged punctual
conformity of the Primitive Church, to Christ's Institution, and the Apostolic
Practice, in Point of Episcopacy.
THE Dr's. Third great Proof, P. 404.
for the Divine Right of Episcopacy, is^drawn from the punctual and universal
Conformity (as he calls it) of the Primitive Church, to this supposed
Institution of our Savior, and the Practice of the Holy Apostles, in this
Matter But, if the Dr's Proof of a Conformity, be no better, than his Proof, of
this supposed Institution, and Practice of our Savior, and his Apostles, and
amount to no more, than what he has made appear upon these Points, we need not
fear his Proof: However, before I engage the Dr. upon this head, and examine his
Proofs, there are two things, I would premise, as that which the Dr. is obliged
to prove. (1.) That the Office of Apostolat, in its entire Nature, as Institut
by our Savior, and for its proper ends expressed in Scripture, was transmitted,
by the Apostles unto the Church, as a standing Office to continue, till the end
of Time, And (2) That the Primitive Church, and in an Universal consent and
Practice, did homologat this Institution, and Embrace the same. And when the
Dr. has proved both these, erit mihi magnus Apollo; and will far outstrip his
Fellows, whoever have pleaded in this Cause. And if he fall short of his proof,
of either, or both, he losses his labor.

Before the Dr. come directly to his Proof, he moves an Objection, Ibid.
That our Savior did Institut the Superior Order of Twelve Apostles, to
preside over the rest of the Church Officers, yet with an extraordinary
Commission, which he did not intend they should derive down to the Church, as a
Perpetual Model of Government, but was limited to the persons of the Apostles,
and to expire with them. That the formal Office of Apostolat, in its Nature and
ends, as delineat in Scripture, did expire with the Apostles themselves, is the
consentient judgment of Protestant Divines. The Dr. says, this is an Objection
of Adversaries, and indeed, if he account such his Adversaries, as assert this,
he has entered the Lists, with a strong party, who probably will prove too hard
for him. Well; What is his Answer to this Objection? He Tells us; That this
Office was not Limited to the Persons of Apostles, since he has proved, that
they derived, it to others, which had it been appropriat to their Persons, they
could not have done, without violating their Trust, and exceeding the bounds of
their Commission. How the Dr. has proved the derivation of the Apostolat, by
the Persons of the Apostles to other Succeeding Apostles, we have seen above,
and do refer the Reader to the premised discoveries of the utter insufficiency
of his Proof, this way: And indeed, the derivation of the Apostolat to
Successors, could not have been done without violating their Trust, and
exceeding the limits of their Commission; Their Commission being to Disciple
and Teach all Nations, to found the Gospel Church, and Plant the Gospel
Ordinances therein, and that with an infallible directive Power, as living
Oracles, and immediate Ambassadors of the King of Saints; So, that the
attempting to Substitut Successors, in this work and Office, had been both an
unfaithful over-stretch of their Commission, as contrar to its Nature and end,
and an endeavoring of that which was impossible, unless he will say, that the
Work of laying the Churches Foundation, and delivering our Lords mind, as to
the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government thereof, is a work, that could
be twice done; Which, as it repugns to the common sense of all men, so to the
many Precepts delivered to the Churches, anent holding fast the received
Ordinances, and contending for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, and
building upon that Holy Faith and Foundation laid by the Apostles. Nay further,
it does evidently appear, that the Apostles exercising themselves, and deriving
to others such an Episcopal Primacy, as the Dr pleads for, had been a gross
impeachment of their Faithfulness, in the Execution of their Trust. (1.) In
their exercising and transmitting a Power, in its very Nature, distinct, from
what our Lord allowed and enjoined them, Viz. A Lordly Dominion, not a
Ministerial Service and Stewardship only, which, as we have heard, the Apostle
Paul disown the one, and assert the other; so we find the express and personal
Prescription of our Blessed Lord, in point of this Nature of their Power. The
Dr. will not disown that the Prelates he pleads for, and, as he pretends,
exemplified in the Apostolic Office, have both the Name and thing of a Lordly
Dominion, yea, and that not in Spirituals only, in which respect, they own the
Designation and Character of Spiritual Lords, but likewise, a Lordship and
Peerage in Civil Government, and such a Dominion, as Princes of the Gentiles
exercise; And that our Blessed Lord did expressly Discharg this to his Apostles;
As also, that the Apostle Peter in his Masters Name, discharges a Lording over
Gods Heritage, or Church, or the Cl^rgey, as the Greek word, with some will
sound, I suppose the Dr. will not deny, or if he do, the Proof is very easy
and evident. (2.) Had the Apostles exercised, or derived to Successors, such an
Episcopacy, as the Dr. pleads for, they should have unfaithfully in their own
persons, straightened the Apostolic inspection, and carried an Office
incompatible with it; unless the Dr. will undertake to reconcile
contradictions, he cannot deny this: For, as Apostles, their Ministry was of an
unfixed, indefinit, Universal Nature; As Prelates they behoved to be fixed to
such and such Posts, so that thus they should have unfaithfully torn out a part
of their Commission, in exercising an ordinary Ministry, in particular
Diocesses, whereas, their Commission was to exercise an extraordinary unfixed
Ministry toward all the Churches, planted and to be planted. Again, in
transmitting such a Prelacy to others, their practice should have contradicted
their Prescriptions, in Point of Church Government, and the Offices and
Officers thereof, wherein there is not the least Intimation of such an Officer,
nor any Rules given, for either the Qualifications or Ordination, of any higher
Officer, than a mere Pastor or Prerbyter. I shall only add, (3 ly,) That it is
evident in the Apostles Doctrine and Practice, that they own the Ministers of
the Word, as to the perpetual Pastoral Charge, and in the ordinary Power of
Government, their equals, as their practice in Ordination and Jurisdiction
among Churches Constitut, which is above discribed, does make evident. And it
were strange, that Evangelists should be^instructed with Episcopal Pre-eminence
in such Churches, who were inferior to Apostles; That Timothy who was ordained
by a Presbytrie, concurring Authoritatively, tho Paul was present, should usurp
Pre-eminence over a Presbytrie, tho inferior to an Apostle, and that whereas
Presbyters did concur, pari passu, with a whole Presbytrie of Apostles, in
every piece of a Judicial Act and Decree, wherein was put forth, both the
Diatactick, Critic, and Dogmatick Power, and Authority in Church Government,
yet an Evangelist inferior to any of the Apostles, should take Episcopal
Pre-eminence over a Presbytrie in this Matter.

For the Drs. proofs from Antiquity upon this Head, that we may understand, how
well he has laid his Measures, for reaching his Scope and End, let it be
remembered what it is, he undertaks to prove, viz. The Churches universal
Reception of the Office of Apostolat in its entire Nature, as a standing
necessary Function in the Church, to be transmitted to after Ages, with the
same Authority and Commission, as delivered at first to the Twelve: For, this
is that which the Dr. directly and designedly pleads for, from that passage of
Scripture, where Our Lord said to his Apostles, As my Father has sent Me, so
send I you. And according to this Rule, let us examine his Instances. His first
proof (P. 406) is from St. Clement who mentions, in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, three Orders of Ecclesiastical Officers, whom he calls the High
Priest, the Priests, and the Levits; which Words says the Dr. can be no
otherwise understood, than of the Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacons. A strange
proof, and an odd Explication indeed! How does the Doctor prove, that Clement,
did any otherewise express himself, than with this Allusion to the Old
Testament Church Officers, signifying that there are diverse Officers, in the
New Testament Ministry, as in the Old? Again, How comes the Dr. to explain him,
of Bishop and Presbyter, in the Singular, and Deacons in the Plural? And how
does this correspond to Clements expresion of High Priest, in the singular, and
Priests in the plural? Will the Dr. own the Primacy of an High Priest, over
the Christian Catholic Church, as of the Church of the Jews? Or be bold to
Averr that Clement Asserted this? Moreover, the Drs. Explication of Clement,
viz. That he means by the High Priest, the Bishop, by the Priests, the
Presbyter, etc. Baffles his Design, and cuts the Throat of his Cause and
pleading: For if Clement looked upon the Presbyters or Pastors, as holding an
Office and Authority, corresponding to that of the Priests, under the Old
Testament, then certainly, he did hold them to have a necessary Essential
Interest in Government, such as the Priests had: For the Dr. will not be bold
to say, that the Sanehedrin, made up of Priests, had not a governing Power, or
that it was Monopolized in the person of the High Priest, as he affirms, it is
in the person of the Bishop, secluding the Presbyters. And further, to
discover, how the Dr. has abused his Reader, and forefeited his Credit in this
Citation, let us take Notice, that Clement, to remove the Sedition, raised by
the Corinthians against their Presbyters p. 57.58. tells them, how God has
alwise appointed several Orders in his Church, which must not be confounded. In
the Jewish Church, he appointed an High Priest, Priests and Levits; and then
tells them, that for the times of the Gospel, Jesus Christ, sent his Apostles
through Countries and Cities ((...)) in which he Preached and constitut the
first Fruits (approving them by the Spirit) for Bishops and Deacons, to those
who should afterward believe. From which Words, the learned Authors of the
Append. Minist. Evang. Have long since concluded, against the Dr. and his
Fellows. 1. That in the first and purest times, the custom was to choose Bishops
in Villages (...) And how small little Apostles these were, I need not tell the
Dr. and such for Authority and extent of Power, as are many Pastors now in
Scotland. 2. That Bishops and Deacons, are the only Orders of Ministry, owned
by Clement, as planted by the Apostles, the first Primitive Church ((...))
Which shows the Drs. palpable Forgery, in making Clement to assert three
Orders, of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons. Clement adds p. 57. That the
Apostles, by Jesus Christ, knowing that contentions would arise about the Name
of Bishop, and being endu'd with perfect knowledge, they appointed the foresaid
Orders, Viz: Bishops and Deaeons. Upon which, the Learned Authors of the
Apendix, do further note. (1.) That by Name, we are not to understand the bare
Name, but the Honor and Dignity, as the word is taken, Philip. 2.9. Ephesians. 1.21.
The Controversy among the Corinthians being about the Dignity of Episcopacy,
and the Deposition of their Godly Presbyters, p. 57.58. (2.) That the only
remedy appinted by the Apostles, for the Cure of all Contentions arising about
Episcopacy, is, by Committing the Care of the Church to Bishops and Deacons, in
Clements Judgment: What ever Remedy of Schism, the Church afterward applied,
in setting up one Bishop over another, Clement tells us, that the Apostles,
endued with perfect knowledge of things, Ordained only Bishops and Deacons.
Whosoever shall Peruse him p. 57.62.69.72. will find, he clearly asserts the
first and purest Primitive Church, to be Governed by Presbyters, without
Bishops. Besides, that he uses the Names of Bishop and Presbyter promiscuously,
and supposes them to be one and the same, throughout the whole Epistle.

The Dr. brings next Ignatius upon the Field, P. 406.407.408.
Whose Six Epistles, written on the way to his Martyrdom, he tells us, are
express for the derivation of this Superior Order from the Apostles; So that we
have no other evasion, but to alledg, they are Counterfeit, from which
imputation, they have been Triumphantly vindicat (so he expresses it) by a
Learned Pen; And that therefore, no Man of Learning, without exposing his
Reputation, can call them in Question. Who this learned Pen is, who thus
vindicats them, the Dr. has not thought fit to let us know, and if he mean Dr.
Pearson, as probably he does, he should know that his pretended Vindication,
was confuted by a learned French Divine, Dally, and his Proofs convicted of
Forgery; So that the Dr. exposes his Understanding and Modesty in this
Assertion, That the Vindication is Triumphant: And as for the Drs.
Re-vindication, this Author should know the learned L'Rooque, a Famous Pastor
of the French Church, replied to Dr. Pearson and Dr. Beveredge, in defense of
Dally, upon the Point of Ignatius's Epistles, and being again opposed by Dr.
Pearson and Dr. Beveridge, prepared and had almost finished his Second Defense;
which, by the importunity of the Favorers of Prelacy, was concealed. Of which,
see the Learned Mr. Iamison, in his Piece, called Nazianzeni quaerela, etc.
Part 2 d. Page 112: So, that the Dr. has no reason to speak so bigg, and call
this vindication Triumphant. None can deny, several, of these Epistles fathered
upon him, to be Spurious, as his Epistle to the Blessed Virgin, and his two, to
the Apostle John (not to mention that of the Virgin Mary to him) and for the
Six mentioned by the Dr. he should know, that as Learned Pens as he can
mention, have made appear, that they are depraved and Corrupted, if the Dr.
will allow Usher, Arch Bishop of Armagh, and the Learned Rivet, Videlius and
Cook, in his Censura patrum, to be reckoned among that Number. Yea, Baronius
himself, the great Popish Historian, who (as Causabon holds) presents from
these Epistles, the Papists refuges, for several of their Errors yet
acknowledges that somethings therein are defective, in curia librariorum: The
Man was not so happy, as to light upon the more polit Coppies, found out by our
Dr. and his Fellows. In the forementioned Appendix, the Dr. might have seen
several Reasons, adduced, to prove these Epistles not to be genuine: Such as
(1.) That diverse things quoted out of these Epistles by Athanasius, Gelasius
and Theodoret, are either not found in them at all, or found altered and
Changed. (2 ly.) That they Charge the Holy Martyr, with supercilious Pride, in
extolling his own knowledge (Epistle to the Trallians) as reaching the Orders of
Angels, Archangels, differences of Powers and Dominations, Thrones and Powers,
Cherubims and Seraphims, etc. Which none will believe, to have fallen from the
Pen of so Humble a Martyr; nor can any but acknowledge, that it is as far from
the Simplicity of his times, in an arrogant self-boasting, as East from West.
And (3 ly,) His strange and anxious defense of the Episcopal Hierarchy, wherein
he (these forged Epistles rather) goes beyond all bounds of Truth and Modesty.
The Learned Authors of the foresaid Appendix, have given several instances
hereof, which do palpably evidence, such ^n Anti-scriptural Popish Strain, as
no Man of Sense, can impute to this holy and early Martyr: Nay, none, who owns
the Scriptures of Truth, but must needs accuse of Error. For instance (among
many others) in the Epistle to the Trallians, he affirms, The Bishop to be
possessed of all Principality and Authority, beyond all, etc. And how will the
Dt. make this accord with that of the Apostle? 1 Cor. 3.5. Who then is Paul?
and who is Apollo? but Ministers, by whom ye believed. In the same Epistle, he
enjoins a Reverence to the Bishop, as to Christ, as the Holy Apostles has
commanded: But where is this commanded? In the Epistle to the Magnesians, he
enjoins, that nothing seems Right, that seems not so to the Bishop, For what is
contrary to his Judgment, is enmity to God. The Apostle Paul, spoke with more
caution and Modesty, when he enjoined thus, Be ye followers of me, as I am of
Christ. In the Epistle to the Philadelphians, he enjoins the Princes, the
Emperor, etc. and all the Clergy, to obey the Bishop; and this at such a time,
when there was no Christian Emperor or Prince, nor many Years thereafter. In
the Epistle to the Smyrneans, he says, The Scripture says, Honor God and the
King, but I say Honor God as the Author and Lord of all things, and the
Bishop, as the Prince of Priests, etc. He affirms, they are guilty of greater
punishment, that do any thing against the Bishop, than they that rise up
against the King. Thus preferring them above Kings. Yea, he says, That such as
do any thing, without consulting with the Bishop, is a Worshipper of the Devil.
And what Censure these sayings put upon the Reformed Churches, Governed without
Prelates; yea what repugnancy is therein, to the Holy Scriptures, I think may be
obvious to the Dr's meanest reflection; So, that he might have been ashamed to
bring for his proof, such spurious Epistles ^ Yet he is bold to cite some of
these Passages, particularly in his Epistle to the Trallians and Magnesians,
although he is forced (I suppose for very shame) to smooth the expressions, and
curtail them: For instance, in stead of that Expression in the Epistle to the
Trallians, wherein he asserts the Bishop to be Possessed of all Principality and
Authority beyond all, as much, as it is possible for Men to be Possessed of (as
it is truly translated out of the Greek) The Dr. Represents only this. P. 407.
what is the Bishop, but he who has all Authority and Power? Which, although it
be much the same, with what is above rehearsed, yet is far short in extent and
Expression. But if the Dr. has so high a veneration for these spurious
Epistles, I would fain know, how he will reconcile this and such like
Expressions, with that one Scripture, Romans 13.1. Let every Soul be subject unto
the higher Powers, etc.? Unless the Dr. will deny the Bishop to have a Soul, he
cannot exeem him from the obligation of this Command. And if he be thus
subject, how is he Possessed of all Principality and Authority, beyond all, as
much, as is possible for Men to be Possessed of? Or how will the Dr. make this
accord, with that Interest and Authority of the Civil Magistrate, not only in
Civils, over all his Subjects, but also in the Church and Kingdom of Christ,
which the Dr. in the same Book, owns and asserts? He also Cites the Epistle to
the Magnesians, wherein, ibid.
Obedience to the Bishop is enjoined, and contradicting him in any thing
discharged: which the Dr. will not deny to be cross to that limited Obedience,
which the Scripture enjoins to be given, even to Parents by Children; Who are
Commanded to Obey them in the Lord only. Moreover, he Cites the Epistle to the
Philadelphians, wherein, it is affirmed, that such as belong to Christ, are
united to the Bishop, such as are not, are cursed: And what censure this puts
upon the Reformed Churches, and how it Anathematizes, them, as not United to
the Bishop, I need not tell the Dr. nor what a black Theta, he marks himself
with, in the Judgment of the Reformed Churches, if owning such an absurd
assertion. I cannot stand upon many things, that might be further noticed, to
evince the impertinency and Fooleries of these Citations: Only, it is very
worthy of our observation, that the Dr. in his Citation of his Epistle to the
Magnesians, obliges us, in a piece of Ingenuity, in expressing Ignatius's
commending [ Obedience to the Bishop and the Presbytrie, etc,] which seems to
allow the Presbytrie, a Commanding Authority, together with the Bishop, (as
several of his Fellow-Pleaders in this Cause, smooth the Episcopal Power) but
this I am sure, is cross to the Drs. Scope and pleading, who enhances all the
Power of Government, in the person of the Bishop, excluding wholly, all
Presbyters, from any Interest therein. So, that the Dr. in this unwary
Citation, contradicts Ignatius and himself, and makes Ignatius inconsistent
with himself. In his next Citation of his Epistle to the Ephesians, wherein,
Reverence is enjoined to the Bishop, as the Person appointed by the Lord and
Master of the Family, P. 408.
to be his Steward: He has again Wounded himself; For to be a Steward having a
subaltern Service and Ministry, under the Authority of the Master, and tied up
to his Orders, is point blanck, contrare unto, and toto coelo different, from
that Principality of the highest Degree, before ascribed to the Bishop, and
owned by the Dr. as his, and Ignatius's Sense of the Episcopal Office. Sure, to
be a Prince, and a Steward in Government, are distinct things, and entirely and
wholly opposite, if we will take the Apostle Paul's word for it, who disowns a
Dominion, and in stead thereof, and in opposition thereunto, owns a Stewardship
in God's Family, and humble Sevice or Ministry. 1 Cor. 4.1. 2 Cor. 1. Ult.

But now, the Dr. plyes us with Inferences from these Citations; Whereof the
first is, P. 408.409.410.411.
That these Epistles were Written, not above Eight or Nine years, after the
Decease of St. John, and yet Bishops are supposed to be in all Churches,
appointed by Christ and his Apostles, and they were looked upon as no Members of
the Church, who were not Subject to them; That they were necessary in the very
Constitution of Churches, so that they were not within the Altar, but without
it, who were not subject to them: And therefore, it may be concluded, there
were no Churches without them. I Answer, that Ignatius wrote his Epistles early,
no body will doubt, but that such trashie stuff and anti-scriptural Fooleries,
as are above rehearsed, was written by Ignatius, and was his Sense of Church
Government, no Man of Sense, or who has any Respect to the Memory of that
Martyr, will believe: And we find the contrair is asserted, and made good by
several of the Godly Learned. Not to stand upon a more critical Answer, and to
challenge the Dr. to prove the Universal Sense and Practice of the Primitive
Church at that time, from the Sense and Sentiments of this Author, tho
admitted, unless he could prove by some Authentic Acts, the Judgment of the
whole Church, to be correspondent thereunto, and that none, who either wrote
not, or whose Writings may be lost, were of contrary Judgment, which he neither
attempts to prove, nor will ever be able.

The Drs. next Inference is, P. 409.
That since, there were Bishops so early in this Age, presiding over the
Churches, they behoved to receive (several of them, at least) their Episcopal
Orders from the Apostles, since Ignatius, at the writing of these Epistles, had
been Forty Years Bishop of Antioch, an eminent Church, planted immediately by
St. Peter; It being the constant practice of the Apostles, to ordain Elders in
all the Churches they planted, etc. Ans. The Dr. has not made good from these
Testimonies, that there were, de facto, and de jure, such Prelates, as he pleads
for: Nor can he, from this Ground, perswad any rational Man of this, unless he
could evince two Things, which he will do ad Calendas Graecas. 1. Not only,
that what is asserted in the Passages above rehearsed, was the genuine Sense
and writing of Ignatius, but likewise the Sense and Judgment, as well as the
practice of the whole Church at that time. 2. That this supposed Judgment and
Practice anent such an Officer, as the Bishop, is correspondent to the
Scripture Account, and Sense of the Church Officers, mentioned in the New
Testament, and the Apostles Doctrine and Practice in point of Church Government,
and the Institution of the Officers thereof, which he will also find another
insuperable Difficulty. Again, his Reason here, is very odd, whereby he
fortifies this Inference, viz. That the Apostles ordained Elders in all the
Churches they planted: For, if the Dr. hold these Elders to be Bishops, (as he
needs must, if he speak consequentially) I would fain know, First, What shadow
of Proof, he can give for this, and how he can suppose that all the Scripture
Elders were such? For, if this be asserted, then it follows, that Bishops were
set up, when there were no Elders to presid over, contrary to the Sense and
Pleading of his Fellows, except Dr. Hammond. And next, I would know, how the
Dr. upon this Supposition, will keep off the Rock of a Contradiction, and that
both to himself, and Ignatius? Since he makes Ignatius to distinguish the
Bishops and the Elders, and himself holds, that the Elders with St. James at
Jerusalem, when the Apostle Paul, went in to them, were mere Presbyters or
Pastors. Again, if the Dr. argue from their ordaining Elders, to their
ordaining Ignatius a Bishop, as he thus disowns Dr. Hammonds Arguments and
Notion (who takes still the Elders for Prelates) so, he is obliged to prove the
super-institution of Bishops over these Elders in every Church, not to suppose
it only, else in his principles, these Churches, where, mere Elders, were
placed, were manck, and wanted the power of Jurisdiction. And since, he has
produced nothing from Scripture, that proves such an institution of Bishops, or
such ordinary Officers fixed to certain Diocesses, his Dream of Ignatius, is as
easily rejected by us, as affirmed by him. We read of a Church of Antioch
planted by Paul, and of an Eldership and Company of Teaching Prophets there,
who imposed Hands upon Paul and Barnabas, when sent out among the Gentiles, and
are consequently supposed to be the subject of a Jurisdictional Power and
Government: But of the Apostle Peter his planting an Hierarchical Prelat, of
the Drs. Mould, in either of the Antiochs, the Scripture is utterly silent: And
a Supposition necessarly ensuing hereupon, viz. That the Apostles planted
Churches with different Moulds of Government, sufficiently discovers the
Absurdity of such an Opinion. As for Chrysostom (Tom. 5. edit. Savil. p. 99.)
his admiring of Ignatius Dignity, obtained by the Hands of Apostles, P. 409.
laid upon him. It is a very blunt and headless Proof of that Episcopal
Dignity, which the Dr. alleges: For, does not the Dr. think, that the Office
of the Scripture Bishop, is a great Dignity? And he should prove, not suppose
only, that Ignatius was by the Apostles installed a Bishop of his Mould, or
that Chrysostom understood this Dignity in his Sense, which, as he offers not
to do; so, if attempting it, he could not choose, but set Chrysostom by the Ears
with himself, who (as is above cleared) asserts the Identity of the Office of
Bishop and Presbyter. The same I repone, to what the Dr. alleges (P. 410) of
Polycarp, his supposed Episcopacy in Smyrna; as also, what is made good by many
Protestant Divines, viz. That the Fathers and Ancients, used the Name of
Bishops, in a general Sense, that the first (...), or Moderators, had no
Authority, over the Presbytrie, tho ordinarily thus termed. And which clears
this to Conviction, Polycarp, himself, in his Epistle to the Philippians, makes
but two Orders of Ministry, viz. Elders and Deacons, as the Apostle Paul does,
in his Epistle to the same Church, and exhorts them to be subject to the
Presbyter, as unto God and unto Christ. And sure the Dr. will not make him
cross this in his practice: so that he falls utterly short of proving an
Episcopacy of his Mould, much more a derived Apostolat, from these blind
Testimonies.

The Dr. adds, That it cannot be imagined, that all Churches would have
universally admitted Bishops in Ignatius's time, ibid.
the Apostles being alive, had not some of them derived their Authority from
the Apostles immediately. But, 1. The Dr. has given no shadow of proof, for
this universal Reception: For I pray, what proof is this? Such and such Authors
say, there were Bishops in such and such Posts, or rather put this general name
upon such Persons; Therefore, the Christian Church received the Hierarchical
Prelat universally, or the Prelat with sole power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction, as an Officer of Divine Institution. For besides, that the Dr.
will never prove, from the bare Assertion anent Bishops, that they were of his
Cut and Mould (the contrary being apparent, especially in these early Times)
And many Fathers asserting the Identity, of the Office of Bishop and Presbyter,
he must prove and instruct the universal Judgment and Practice of all the
Churches, as to the Reception of the Hierarchical Bishop, of his Mould, before
this Assertion can be made good. 2. The Dr. cannot deny Scripture Instances, of
the very early Reception of Corruptions in the Church, both under the Law, and
Gospel. As, in the times of the Old Testament, he knows the early Reception of
the Idolatry of the Golden Calf, by the Church of Israel, together with Aaron
himself, but Forty Days after the delivery of the Law from Mount Sinai: And
besides, many such Instances in the Old Testament, we have Scripture Instances
of the Devils sowing his Tares, early in the Church of the New Testament, such
as the Error about the Resurrection, the worshipping of Angels, Justification
by the works of the Law, the necessity of Circumcision, and other Ceremonies,
the Error of the Nicolaitans, etc. And look a little forward, in the early
times of the Church, we will find Errors and Traditions pretended to be
received from the Apostles, and owned by some of the Fathers themselves, which
notwithstanding, the Dr, cannot but acknowledge to be Errors; Such as the
Mill^nary Error, the Error of Children's receiving the Lords Supper, etc.
whereof afterward. The Dr. thinks it inconsistent with the Churches veneration
to the Apostle John, that they should receive a new Order of Men, without his
Authority. But this Universal reception of such an Order, as the Dr. supposes,
is not yet proved: Besides, that the Dr's. supposition of this impossibility of
such a corruption, early creeping in, because of some Apostles (or even of
John) yet alive, he will find not to be solid, when he ponders duly, the
working of the Mystrie of iniquity, and the Seeds of a Papacy, even in Paul's
time, and a Diotrophes seeking Pre-eminence, even in John's time, yea, and
directly contradicting and opposing the Holy Apostle. The Dr. should know, that
it is not the slippery Principle of a supposed impossibility of this Nature,
while the Apostles were alive, that we must found our Persuasion upon, but the
lively Oracles, and living Doctrine of the Apostles, is our Rule; and whatever
Doctrine or practice is cross thereunto, tho all the Church should receive it,
yea tho an Angel from Heaven Preach it, we ought to reject it, and might call
that Angel accursed.

For what the Dr. adds out of Bishop Tailor, of Episcopacy, Sect. 18. That de
facto, the Apostles with their own Hands, Ordained several Bishops over
Churches, Viz: Dion. Areop. Bishop of Athens, Caius, of Thessalonica, Archippus
of Coloss, Onesimus of Ephesus, Epaphroditus of Phillippi, Titus of Corinth,
etc. I Answer, the Dr. does well to add the Caution [if Credit might be given
to Ecclesiastic History] And truly this History, must be of mighty force,
that must be believed against clear Scripture, and the Credit and belief
founded thereupon, must needs be distinct from that Faith which God allows;
Nay, the Drs. Credit of such History, must needs set him at odds with himself:
For as to the First, we find the Apostle Paul enjoining the Church of
Thessalonica, Obedience to their Pastors jointly, as their Spiritual Rulers and
Governors, without the least hint of any Super-eminent Prelat, and enjoining
to these Rulers Authoritative admonition of the Flock. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.14. And
will this Bishop and our Dr. Charge such a Contradiction, upon the Apostle
Paul, as to settle a Presbytrie of Pastors in that Church, with Authority to
Rule and Govern, while this Authority and Power is entrusted unto one Bishop,
or to take it afterward from them, and put it in the Bishops Hands? How, I
pray, shall we believe such History, against such plain Scripture? And whether
I pray, deserves most our Credit, the Apostles Divinly inspired Epistle,
enjoining Obedience to the Pastors of that Church of Thessalonica, jointly, as
their Spiritual Rulers and Guids, or an after- Apocryphal History, declaring
that this Authority was by the Apostles appointment, monopolized in one Bishop,
either at that time, or thereafter, set up, and Ordained by Paul? Whether, are
we to believe the Scripture account of the State and Government of the Church
of Ephesus, as entrusted by Paul, in his last farewell, to the inspection and
Government of the Elders jointly, as the Bishops thereof, Authorized by the
Holy Ghost, or an Historical account of Onesimus, as their sole Bishop, who had
this Power Monopolized in him, in Contradiction to the Apostles last
prescriptions unto that Church, either at that time or thereafter: I dare pose
this Dr. or any man of Sense and Candor upon it; And whether upon such ground
as this, we might not cast off all Divine Institutions, and receive all
fopperies and Superstitions, which Man's wicked Heart by Satan's influence might
suggest? The like might be said of Philippi, the Apostle in the Preface of his
Epistle to that Church, saluting the Bishops, as their Pastors in common,
calling all the Ministers, Bishops, and thus applying to them that Name and
Office, which the Dr. and his Fellows, will needs appropriat to a Prelat: And
sure, Paul, writing by instinct of the un-erring Spirit of God, gave not empty
complemental Titles to these Pastors or Bishops, but supposes them to have a
standing joint Authority over that Church, as the Spiritual Guids and Rulers
thereof. And it is a fearful and Gross imputation upon the Wisdom of God, to
suppose that either now, or afterward, such a pretended Prelat, as the Dr.
maintains, either had, or was to have by Divine appointment, all this Authority
of the Pastors, enhansed and monopolized in him: And if we will admit of after
suposed Decrees and Fables of this Nature, opposite to Scripture, we may make
them, (as some Papists blaspheme them) a Nose of Wax. Again, If the Dr. adhere
to this fantastic Apocryphal History, he crosses his own Pleading from
Scripture, and wounds his Cause to Death with his own hands; For, we have heard
the great strength of his Scripture Argument, as touching the Apostles setting
up succeedanous Apostles and Bishops, in correspondence to Christ's Institution,
lies in the supposed instalment of Timothy, Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus,
Bishop of Crete, and that the instructions addressed to them, in Point of
Government, P. 398.399.400 etc.
in these Epistles, are a clear indication yea, and Demonstration, (in the Drs*
Sense and Pleading) of this supposed instalment of the one and the other, by
the Apostles, in these their pretended Diocesses of Ephesus and Crete, and we
know, how much the Dr. labors to prove the consentient Judgment of the Fathers
hereanent. Now, if the Dr. will hold with Bishop Tailor, that the Apostles with
their own hands, installed, not Timothy, but Onesimus, Bishop of Ephesus, and
Titus, not Bishop of Crete, but of Corinth, what is become of all his pleadings
from Scripture, for their installment elsewhere? The Dr. says, The supposed
Instalment of Titus and Onesinus, p. 410.
at Ephesus and Corinth, and that by the Apostles own Hands, is most certain,
if we believe Ecclesiastical History. And if most certain upon this Ground,
then most certain it is. 1. That the Drs. Pleadings for Timothy's and Titus's
Instalment at Ephesus and Crete, is most false, and all his pretended Scripture
Proofs, by his own Confession mere wind and lies. And 2 ly. That all the Dr's.
Testimonies of Fathers, and pretended Historical accounts hereanent, are
Fabulous Dreams. I know no imaginable evasion the Dr. has, but to allege
their after-instalment in these places, by the Apostles: But the Dr. must give
a Scripture-account, as well as Historical, of this matter, ere a door can be
opened to him for this Refuge. But to proceed.

The Dr's Third Inference is, P. 410.411.
that the Bishops of this Age were looked on, as a Superior Order to Presbyters,
Ignatius commanding Presbyters to obey them, according to Christ's Institution.
Ans. we have heard what Judgment we are to make of these Epistles, and
consequently what a sandy Foundation, the Dr. builds this inference upon.
Again, if the Dr. will make Ignatius consistent with himself, he must needs
disown this Inference and Opinion of him; For, in his Epistle to the Trallians,
he enjoins them to be Subject to the Presbytrie, as the Apostles of Christ, and
calls the Presbytrie (...) A Court and Conjunction of Apostles of Christ; And
in the same Epistle, he call the College of Presbyters (...) making the
Bishop, thus their Fellows in the Government, and nothing else. And how far
this is from the Dr's. supposition of Ignatius Judgment, about the Hierarchy,
and the Practice of the Church, in this Point, let any Judge.

The Dr. proceeds to his Proofs, from the next Age, further, as he tells us, P.
411
from the Scripture Antiquity: And no doubt the more Dark in this Point. He
tells us of Justin Martyr, in his Apology to the Emperor Antonius, who speaks
of a (...) or President in the Church, who Consecrat the Bread and Wine, gave
to the Deacons to distribut to the present, and to be carried to the absent:
And that this (...) was Bishop, he tells us, appears by Dionysius Bishop of
Corinth, his Contemporary, who used the Names of (...) and Bishop
promiscuously. A sorry Proof, no doubt! The Churches had a President, or these
called by Justin so; Therefore, Bishops with sole Power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction, and holding the entire Apostolic Office: Again, these
Presidents, are called sometimes Bishops, and gets that general Name;
Therefore, they were such Bishops, and of such a Mould, as the Dr. pleads for.
What Arguing can be more insipid and Vain? But if the Dr. put a due Value upon
the Argument drawn from Epithets, as Pointing at the Office and Authority of
the Persons thereby designed, what thinks he of the Spirit of GOD in Scripture,
his Denominating Pasters (...), etc. as we have above cleared. One would think
this as strong a Proof of their Episcopal Authority, as this of the supposed
Bishops, drawn from this Epithet of Justin and Dionisius. I might further
Argue, and press the Dr. thus; If these Scripture Denominations do prove and
argue, an Essential Interest and Authority in Church Government, competent to
Pastors, they do by necessary consequence, overturn the Peculiarity of a (...)
or Presidency ascribed to the Bishop, as set over Pastors, and enhancing all
this Authority, and do by further consequence infer, either that Fathers
contradicted the Scripture, if attributing this Prostacie to the Bishops, in
the Dr's. Sense; or, that, if they speak according to the Scripture Sense and
acceptance of the Word, they must needs mean the Pastor only, and not his
imaginary Prelat: And so, whatever Sense, the Dr. embraces of Justin and
Dionisius, his Cause and Pleading here is lost, and falls to the Ground.
Moreover, if the Dr. stand to this supposed account of the Bishops Office,
offered by Justin, he will make the Administration of the Lords Supper,
peculiar to him, against the Dr's. own Sense and Pleading, who acknowledges
that Preaching of the Word, and Administration of the Sacraments, are the
proper Duties of the Pastoral Function, whereas, here, it is made peculiar to
the Bishop, to Consecrat the Bread and Wine. Besides, that the Dr. here
apparently approves the carrying of the Sacrament to the absent; a seed of
gross Popish Superstitions. But I am weary of this pityful trash.

As for the Dr's Citation of Eusebius. lib. 4. Cap. 23. And the Five Books of
Hegesippus (the Fragments whereof, P. 412
he says, are in Eusebius's History) anent the Succession of Bishops of Rome;
Anicetus, Soter, Eleutherius, succeeding Sucessively; and of James Bishop of
Jerusalem, succeeded by Simon Cleophae, Eusebius. lib. 4. Cap. 22. And thereafter,
that Dionisius Bishop of Corinth, in his Epistles, mentions Publius and
Quadratus, Successive, Bishops of Athens, and several other Bishops, in their
Respective Sees. It is Answered, this is abundantly obviat and removed, by what
is premised. First, Anent the suspected Credit and Faith of his vouchers, whom
(as we have heard) the learned does Censure and disown; which has no small
confirmation from this, that Eusebius himself, in the Proaem of his History,
Professes, that he is entered into a dark Desert, having no footsteps of
Historians, going before him, but only some petty Narrations, which certain
persons, in certain times and places, have left. And for Hegesippus (whose
Fragments the Dr. Confesses, is all Eusebius's Foundation in this Point) he is
by most Famous Protestant Writers acknowledged fabulous, and unworthy of
Credit; besides, that, no parts of him are now Extent. As for the Catalogues of
Succession, which the Dr. mentions, Ibid.
we have heard how shattered they are, and inconsistent with themselves, and
Censured consequently by the Learned, as deserving no Credit. Next, as we have
heard out of Iunius, the Ground of this fancied Succession, Viz: That the most
Eminent Ministers, for Moral Respects, found in Church Records, were insert to
fill up these spurious Catalogues, and termed Bishops, in conformity to the
times, wherein this distinguishing Name and Office obtained, tho they were mere
Presbyters, and for most part contemporary, one with another, So, we have from
the same Iunius, made appear, what the design was of these Catalogue-drawers*
Viz. To prove against Heretics, that the Christian Church had retained the
Seed of the true Doctrine, and the traduces Apostolici Seminis, as it was
called, but not to point out or assert, a Succession of our Dr's supposed
Hierarchical Prelates. And therefore, in the Third place, the Dr. says nothing
to the purpose, unless he can prove that by Bishops, they meant the Prelates of
his cut and Mould, with such an absolute Apostolic Authority, as he suggests,
which, until he make good, he does but ^ea^ the Air, and ^egg the Question*
For, since the Fathers are found to use the Names of Bishop and Presbyter,
indifferently (as the Prelatis^^ themselves acknowledge) it is palpably absurd
and Sophistical Reasoning, to conclud from the bare Name and Title of Bishop,
which the Fathers make use of, their assertion of the Prelatical Office, which
the Dr. pretends. The Folly of his reasoning then appears by this irrefragable
Reason, that we find the Fathers calling such persons Presbyters, whom he
imagins Bishops in his Sense. Irenaeus in his Epistle to Victor (Cited by
Eusebius. lib. 5. Cap. 23.) calls Anicetus, Pius, Higinus, Telesphorus, Xistus,
Presbyters of the Church of Rome, Presbyteri illi qui te praecesserunt, the
Presbyters that went before thee. Thus also he expresses himself, Nec
Polycarpus Aniceto suasit, ut servaret qui sibi Presbyterorum quibus
successerat, consuetudinem servandum esse dicebat: Tertullian also, Apol. Cap.
39. calls the Presidents of the Churches Seniores, or Presbyters, when he
says, Praesident probati quique Seniores.

For what the Dr. adds of Irenaeus, his seeing Polycarp, and hearing him
discourse of John the Apostle, P. 412.413.
who affirms, he could reckon up the Bishops Ordained by the Apostles to his
own times, reckoning Eleven from Linus, to whom, he says Peter ^and Paul,
delivered the Episcopal Power of Governing the Church. It is Answered, That
this is abundantly obviat, by what is now said of the promiscuous use of the
Names of Bishop and Presbyter, and the intendment of the Fathers, in such
recitations. Yea, and from Irenaeus himself convict of Folly, in that he
ascribes the same Authority to Presbyters, lib: 4 Cap. 4.3 qua propter iis, qui
in Ecclesia sunt, Presbyteris obedire opportet, his qui successionem habent ab
Apostolis, sicut ostendimus, qui cum Episcopatus successione charisma veritatis
certum, secundum placitum patris acceperunt. Reliquos vero, qui absistunt a
principali successione, and quocunque loco colliguntur, suspectos habere, vel
quasi haereticos and malae sententiae, vel quasi scindentes and elatos, and
sibi placentes, etc. Thus also lib. 4. Cap: 44. he expresses himself, ab
omnibus talibus absistere opportet, adhaerere vero his qui and Apostolorum,
sicut diximus Doctrinam custodiunt* and eum Presbyterii ordine sermonem sanum,
and conversationem sine offensa praestant, ad Informationem and correctionem
aliorum. From which Passages of Irenaeus, the Authors of the Appendix before
mentioned, do infer. 1. That Presbyters were called and owned by him as
Successors of the Apostles: And I may add, that if called so by the Fathers,
the terming of Prelates, Successors of the Apostles, is of no weight to prove
the Dr's design. 2 dly. That they are also called Bishops. 3 dly. That the
Apostolic Doctrine is Derived from the Apostles by their Succession. 4 ly. That
there is nothing said of Bishops in the former place of Irenaeus, which is not
said of Presbyters; and therefore, such places cannot prove, that the Apostles
Constitut in the Churches, Bishops, distinct from Presbyters. The Dr's two
Countrymen, Dr. Reynolds against Heart Chap. 2. and Dr. Whittaker de
Pontificatu quaest. 2. Cap. 15. have long since informed him, of the Fathers
improper use of the word Bishop, when applied to Apostles, and the unsuitable
absurd appropriating such an Office unto them. In a word, in the forementioned
Appendix, Prop. 7. Page 123.124.125.
the pretended Succession of Bishops from the Apostles, is fully baffled, from
several Grounds. 1. The Homonymie of the Word Bishop, these of the first and
later times, being of a different Mould, as to their Office and Power; the
later being Diocesian, the first not so, since the Church was first governed by
the common Council of Presbyters, and the Succession being drawn from the
(...), or the First Ordained Minister, as among the Athenians, there were nine
Archontes or Chief Rulers, equal in Power and Authority, yet the Succession of
Governors there, was derived from one who was the Chief (...), not to diminish
the Authority of the rest sed ut minus impedita esset temporum enumeratio (as
Iunius expresses it) and for the same end was the Succession in these
Catalogues drawn from the first Ordained Minister, or the present Moderator and
President. 2 ly. That the Catalogues, the nearer they come to the Apostles
times, runs in the greater confusion and uncertainty, and contradicts one
another; some calling Clement the first Bishop after Peter, some the third, and
the intricacies about the Order of Succession in Linus, Anacletus, Clemens, and
another called Cletus, are inextricable. Some (as we have above made appear)
calling Titus Bishop, some Archbishop of Crete, some Bishop of Dalmatia;
Timothy and the Apostle John, are by some said to be Bishops of Ephesus, at the
same time. Thus also Polycarp, is said by some, to be the First Bishop of
Smyrna, by others to Succeed one Bucolus, and another affirms that Aristo was
Prior to both. Some say, that Alexandria had but one Bishop, and other Cities
Two; others, that there was but one Bishop of one City at the same time. What
uncertainty and contradiction is here? Iunius resolves the doubt, Controv. lib.
2 Cap. 5, Not. 15. viz. That these, or some of these, were Presbyters, Ruling
the Church in common; but the following Ages, fancying to themselves, such
Bishops as had then obtained in the Church, fell into the Snares of Tradition,
-- supposing, according to the custom of their own times, that there could be
but one Bishop in one Church at once, which, says he, is quite cross to the
Apostolical times. 3 ly. Upon the former grounds, and in correspondence, to
this account of Iunius, they do infer, That these Authors make the Catalogues
speak, according to the language of their own times, in which, there was a
distinction betwixt Bishop and Presbyters: And therefore, do call such as were
before them, Bishops, whereas they were not so properly -- And the after-
Bishops succeeded these supposed First, no otherways than Caesar did the Roman
Consuls. 4 ly, The Catalogues resolving in Apostles or Evangelists, do appear
absurd, viz: That of Rome, into Peter, that of Alexandria, into Mark, that of
Ephesus, into Timothy, that of Crete, into Titus, since neither Apostles nor
Evangelists, were Bishops in a formal Sense, and having an Universal
Commission, and extraordinary Office, could be Succeeded in neither the one,
nor the other, tho in some part of their work they might, by ordinary Officers,
as by Men of another Order, but not as one Brother Succeeds another in the
Inheritance. And this does fully remove what the Dr alleges out of Clem.
Alexand. Strom. P. 413.
6. And the Passage Cited by Eusebius out of him, and from his Book (...)
touching a distinction of Bishops and Presbyters, and anent Presbyters not
having the First Seat or Class in Ecclesiastic orders, and that the Apostle
John returning from Patmos to Ephesus, Visited the Province, partly to Ordain
Bishops, and partly to set a part such for the Clergy, as were pointed out by
the Spirit. For, granting some distinction to to have crept in while these
things were Written, and (as Augustine expresses it) secundum honorum vocabula
quae Ecclesiae usus obtinuit; the Bishop was greater than the Presbyter,
Episcopus Presbytero Major, yet this will never prove either. 1. That this
distinction was from the beginning, which we find Augustine in this way of
expressing himself, contradicts. Or, 2 ly, That there were Bishops of the Drs.
Mould, in a continued Line from the beginning; and far less, that the Apostle
John set up such Prelates, since the Ancients: (as we have heard the Learned
Iunius observe) spoke of the Apostolic times, in the Mould, and after the
manner of their own. And surely, if we acknowledge the late distinction of
Clergy and Laity* (as we needs must) to be far remote from John's time, we must
consequently acknowledge that this Author spoke his own Sense, and the Language
of his time, rather than the Sense or practice of the Apostle John.

The Dr. next Generally Cites Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, for this continuance
(as he calls it) of Apostolic Superiority from the Apostles themselves, P. 414.
whose words, he tells us, he needs not Recit, since Presbyterians acknowledge
Episcopacy received about the year 140. Ans. As for the continuance and
derivation of the Apostolic Office, in a Succedaneous Episcopacy, which the
Dr. has been fencing for, we deny it, and have found his proofs utterly
insufficient, and that nothing he has adduced from the Fathers or Scripture,
can give the least shadow of a sound Proof of this Point. As for our
acknowledgment of the Episcopacy introduced, about the middle of the Second
Century, the Dr. should know that* we acknowledge that Beza's Episcopus humanus,
or Episcopus praeces, was about this time set up, and obtained in the Churches,
and that (as we have heard) the First ordained Minister, in a sort of
Prostasie, or fixed Moderatorship had some deference eo nomine, and the next in
order, was set up to moderat in the Meetings, when he was removed by Death, or
otherwise, and had the Tittle of Bishop given to him; and this was (as Ambrose
Phrases it) multorum Sacerdotum judicio constitutum, or by the Judgment and
appointment of the Presbytrie; Presbytri says he, unum ex se electum in
excelsiore gradu collocatum Episcopum nominabant. So, that in Ambrose's. Sense,
he had this fixed Prostasie, or new Name, as their Mouth and Moderator for
Orders sake, and this by the free choice of the Presbytrie; which shows the
folly of the Dr's. inference of a supposed existent Hierarchy, of his mould,
from the nominal distinction of Bishop and Presbyter, in the Passages of
Clemens and Eusebius, and others generally mentioned, or from these (...),
being set in a higher Seat than Presbyter^s For, upon the Constitution above
rehearsed, and confirmed by Ambrose, both these might be; Yet without any
Impeachment of Pastors or Presbyters, decisive Authority in Judicatories,
unless the Dr. will say, that because the Moderator of an Assembly, has a
peculiar Name and seat, and a deference upon that Account, He has therefore an
Office and Authority paramount to that of the Assembly, and such as inhances
their decisive suffrage. Besides, the Dr. odly inferrs from our acknowledgment
of this first human Prostasie, our granting a derivation, or continuance, or
even introductiion at that time, of his pretended Office of Apostolat, as he
calls it, and in the Nature and extent he pleads for; who sees not, that these
are toto Caelo different? Tho in the next Passage, the Dr. seems to retract
this, ibid.
telling his Reader, That tho we acknowledge an Apostolic Superiority, yet we
deny that they left any to Succeed them in that Power. But, since he gives this
our acknowledgment of the First Episcopacy, as the reason, why he needs not
Cite his Authors Particularly, to prove the derivation and continuance of
Apostolic Superiority at that time, he clearly supposes this; and therefore,
speaks confusedly and inconsistently, in the premised account of our Judgment
and concession.

Well, P. 414.415.
what further aocount gives the Dr. of Presbyterians Judgment in this Matter?
He adds, We hold that the Church was every where governed by the common Council
of Presbyters, but this form of Government, being found inconvenient, as giving
too much occasion for Schisms and divisions, it was at last Universally agreed
upon, that one Presbyter should be chosen out, to presid over all the rest: and
that this was the beginning of Episcopacy, for which, he says, we Cite the
famous Testimony of Ierom, antequam Diaboli instinctu, etc. Where I find the
Dr. either wilfully, or ignorantly misrepresenting our Cause and Principles.

First, in alleging, that we hold, that this Form of Government, by common
Council of Pastors or Presbyters, was found inconvenient, or not suited to the
ends of Government, because it gave occasion for Schisms and Divisions. A gross
and lying imputation: For, all do know, that we hold this Form of Government to
be of Divine appointment, and the Government established by the Apostles: And
it were a strange inconsistency and contradiction to the Scriptures of Truth,
to hold, that this Divine Government, appointed by God, in the Scriptures of
the New Testament, and enjoined unto the Gospel Church, was not suited to all
the times thereof, and to the great ends of Government, and could of it self,
give a rise to Schisms and divisions: What a gross imputation were this, upon
the Divine Institutions, and opening a Door, to lay them all aside, upon
pretense of eventual inconveniences? I dare challeng this Dr. or any of his
mind, to instance any Presbyterian Writer, who ever asserted this. For, if he
say, we homologat Ierom, and approve his Testimony, who affirms, that upon
occason of Divisions, the Government was altered, and immutata ratio, as he
speaks, it is a pityful and palpably absurd inference, to argue upon this, that
either Ierom, or we, do impute this providential issue, and Man's sinful abuse
and miscarriage, to the Divine Institution it self; And if the Dr. own such a
consequence, he will justify all such abuses, and Ieroboams Plea, for setting
up his Calves at Dan and Bethel, because he judged it could not consist with
the safety of the Kingdom, which God had given him over Israel, that the Ten
Tribes, should go up to Jerusalem to worship, after the Kingdoms were divided.

Secondly, He says, We hold that upon this occasion, it was universally agreed
upon, Ibid.
that one Presbyter should preside over all the rest, which was the beginning
of Episcopacy. And this appears as dark and confused an Account as the former:
For, 1. As to the Office of a President or Moderator, whose Work is to be the
Mouth of the Meeting, to gather the Votes, and moderat the Procedures, we hold,
that the very nature of all Government, essentially requires this, and
consequently Church Government, and that this was alwise and necessarly
practiced, as in all Church Government, so, since the beginning, and is
examplified in that first Christian Council Act. 15. wherein we judge it
probable, that the Person presiding, was the Apostle James: And therefore, its
gross Nonsense to say, we hold this Presidency, to have been first introduced
upon occasion of Schism. But next, if the Dr. by [ by a President over the
rest] mean such a (...) as is either advitam, or who has such a Presidency as
encroaches upon, or inhances the Decisive Votes of Pastors, this indeed we
acknowledge with Ierom, came in Paulatim, and by peice-meal, tho at first, he
was but a mere President, advitam, and had some Honor and deference upon this
account. And this, we hold was the rise of that Prelacie, which in Process of
time swallowed up all the decisive Power of Pastors, and their exercise of
Government. But the Dr. badly represents the Matter, ( P. 415.) when he calls
this [ a Choosing of one to preside over the rest] which is applicable to any
President of a Judicatory, or mouth of a meeting, or unto a speaker in
Parliament.

ibid.
Thirdly, The Dr. says we hold [ that this remedy was Universally agreed upon]
If he means, that upon occasion of Schisms, we hold that this custom of the
fixed President, with Authority and deference, as above expressed, came in by
degrees, and became Universal, in Process of time, (as additional corruptions
ordinarily do) this is easily accorded. But if he mean, that we hold, there was
a Formal General Council decreeing this (as the Dr. with his Fellow-Pleaders,
fasten this gloss upon that Passage of Ierom [ prospiciente concilio -- and --
toto orb decretum] he should know, that we disown such an Opinion, and have
sufficiently made it appear, that Ierom intended no such thing, since in
collating his two Testimonies, viz: his Comment upon the Epistle to Titus, and
his Epistle to Evagrius, the contrary is evident; For, Ierom makes this a
Consuetudo, or Custom, and says it came in Paulatim, or by Degrees. And no man
of Sense, can but distinguish betwixt a gradual reception of any Practice
spreading it self, and growing up to a custom, and a practice taking its rise
and Original from a formal joint Decree of a General Council.

The Dr. having set down some part of one of these Testimonies of Ierom, ibid.
alleges, that we hold or guess (as he expresses it,) that this Universal
Decree, was about the Year 140. We hold indeed with Blondel, that about this
time, the forementioned (...) took place, but that we hold or guess, it was by
an Universal Decree, is the Drs. groundless imputation, which he can Justify
from none of our Writers. Let any Peruse the Learned Iunius his account and
explication of this Testimony de Clericis Cap. 15. Not. 16.) together with the
Authors of the Ius Divinum Minist. Evang. (Part. 2 d. P. 56.57.) and the
Appendix thereto (P. 102. 103.) and this will be convincingly apparent.

Well, P. 415.416.
what says the Dr. to this Testimony? Having given out our Sense of Ierom's
words (wherein he contradicts his former Gloss) his First exception is, That
Ierom being Born but about the Year 330, is a Witness far short in Antiquity to
these early Witnesses which he has adduced: That he is a Hundred Years after
Origin, three Hundred after Cl^ment, and one Witness, must not stand against so
many early Harmonious Witnesses. We have made it appear, that none of the Drs.
early Witnesses, give a Relevant Testimony to the Point, and These, he
undertakes to prove, viz. the derivation of the Apostolic Office, in its
proper formal Sense, to an Order of Ordinary Officers Superior to Pastors, and
inhancing their whole Authority in Government: We have made appear, that all
that his Testimonies amounts to prove, is only a General designation of
Bishops, made use of by the Ancients, and at most a supposal of some deference,
and fixed Presidency, which they had in Judicatories: And who sees not, that
this is utterly short of proving what he intends? So, that his Witnesses are
mute in our Cause, and speaks not to the Question and I^^errogatur.

The Dr. from P. 433. to P. 447. asserts, and endeavors to prove that the
Bishop, has for his peculiar prerogative, annexed to his person and Office as
Bishop. 1. The Legislative Power, which he calls the Essence of Government, in
the very same manner, as he supposes, the Apostles possessed and exercised it. 2
dly. The sole Authority to Consecrat and Ordain. 3 ly. The whole Authority of
Spiritual Jurisdiction, to Cite, Examine Judge, Censure, and absolve
Delinquents. 4 ly. To Confirm the Baptized. From all which, he, as intirly
excluds all Pastors in Meetings, never so frequent and formal, and allows them
no more Interest in any of these, than if they were no Church Officers at all,
So, that their meddling in the least, with these his supposed sole prerogatives
of the Bishop, is in his Judgment as gross Antiscriptural encroachment, and
stepping beyond the Duties and limits of their Function and Office, as if they
should invade the Kings Authority and prerogative. Now, the Office of the
Bishop being of this Nature and extent, in the Dr's Judgment, let any Person of
Candor or Conscience, give sentence upon it, what the Witnesses before adduced
by him, do say to prove this, and what strength there is in their Testimoneis,
to reach this conclusion. Again, 2 ly. As the Drs. pretended early Witnesses,
are but general and ambiguous in their Testimonies, and consequently can make
no Faith in this Matter, so, they are so far from being unanimous, as he calls
them, that upon the contrary, several of them (as is above cleared) do give
Witness against him: Particularly, Clemens and Ignatius, two of his most
Ancient Witnesses; Augustine and Ambrose imputing also (with Jerome) the
Episcopal Presidency, which obtained in their time, to the Churches Custom, not
to Divine Appointment, do thus cast a contradicting blot upon his supposed
Testimonies: Ambrose acknouledging in special, that non per omnia convenient
Apostolorum scripta ordinationi, quae nunc est in Eeclesia Comment. in Cap. 4.
ad Ephesians. And tho it be controverted, whether this was the true Ambrose, yet we
must tell him, with the learned Professors of Saumur ( De Episcop. and Presb.
Discrim. P. ( mihi) 300. These. 19.) that he was Coetaneous with, or rather more
Ancient than Ambrose, being Cited by Augustine, who was Ambrose Disciple, as an
Holy Man ( lib. 2. ad Bonif. Cap. 4.) which Epithet, he would not have put upon
a person of small account, or one hetrodox. 3 ly. The Dr. knows that Jerome
holds not the parity of Bishops and Presbyters, as his private Judgment only,
but least he, or any else suppose this, he proves it by Divine Testimonies of
the Apostles Writings, yea and gives the same Sense of them, which Presbyterian
Writers do: And therefore, the Dr. must acknowledge him in so far, acting a
Divine Witness, not giving a human Testimony only, and that he more than
^utweighs his Human Testimonies, else he is obliged to examine his Pro^fs and
Answer them, and show if he can, Ierom's Sense of these Scriptures to be
disowned by any of his Authors, which he does not so much as attempt. All who
have seen Jerome's Testimony, do know, that he Reasons this Point of the
Identity of the Office of Bishop and Presbyter from Scripture, least any should
take this to be his private Opinion [ Putat aliquis, says he, non
Scripturarum, sed nostram esse sententiam, Episcopum and Presbyterum unum esse]
the one Name importing the Age, the other the Office of the Pastor. Then he
goes through these Scriptures, Philip. 1.1. Act. 20.28. Heb. 13.17. 1. Pet.
5.2.3. Drawing out upon the whole this Conclusion, that the Bishops Authority
and Superiority to Presbyters, was rather by Custom, than any true dispensation
from the Lord. But of this again.

The Drs. Second Exception is, ibid.
That Jerome being a Presbyter himself, speaks in his own Cause, and in a warmth
of Passion, to curb the insolency of some pragmatick Deacons. Ans. Jerome
reasoning, both in this place Cited, and the Epistle to Evagrius, this Point,
from Scripture, and exhibiting the Divine Oracles, the Apostles Doctrine and
practice, for what he holds, speaks the mind of God, and no Passion, and until
the Dr. Answer his Scripture-reasonings in the Forecited Testimonies, he is
liable to the Charge of imputing to the Scripture and to the Apostles, Passion
and Partiality. As for his being a Presbyter himself; what then? can no
Presbyter speak truly and impartially upon this head? Besides, he knows that
several of his Witnesses for Episcopacy, and whom he most Esteems, are by him
supposed Bishops of his high Hierarchical Mould, and how shall we receive their
Testimony in their own Cause? And why may not we impute to them partiality and
Passion, and reject their Testimony, unless their Episcopal Chair has, as that
of the Pope, a supposed infallibility anne^ed to it? So, that the Dr. is put to
this Delemma, either to quite his great Episcopal Testimonies, as insufficient
upon his own Ground, or admit this of Jerome. It is the same way from Athens to
Thebes, and from Thebes to Athens.

The Dr's Third Exception is, ibid.
That Jerome elsewhere owns the Bishop's Superiority, whereof he exhibits, First
this Proof, that in his Dialogue Advers. Luciferians, he gives this Reason, why
one not Baptized by the Bishop, received not the Holy Ghost, because the Holy
Ghost descended on the Apostles: Which, the Dr. says, makes it plain, that he
placed the Bishops in the same rank, with the Apostles. A strange Proof indeed!
First, we heard, that Jerome Reasons the Point from Scripture, that the Bishop
and Presbyter are all one; and therefore, it is odd from Jerome's Naming a
Bishop, to understand him of his Hierarchical Bishop. Again, Jerome says [ quid
facit excepta Ordinatione Episcopus, etc.] what does the Bishop, except
Ordination, which the Presbyter does not? (A Clause and Passage, we find the
Dr. much harping upon) but in his gloss upon this Testimony, he does in
contradiction to himself, and Jerome also, appropriat to the Bishop, the
Administration of the Sacrament of Baptism. What if one Reason thus, against
the dispisers of this Ordinance? Such a Person is not Sealed by the Spirit,
because not Baptized by a Pastor; for the Holy Ghost Descended on the Apostles.
Will the Dr. disown this Reasoning? Or, will he own the Inference, that
therefore, Pastors, are equal to Apostles? Or, say it were such a Reasoning;
such a Person, or Persons, cannot be Converted or Sealed by the Spirit, not
having heard the Converting Word Preached by a Pastor, since the Apostles thus
Converted, and Ministered the Holy Ghost; Will any (but such as draw Reasons and
Illustrations beyond the Moon, as this Dr) infer that the Pastor is thus equal
unto Apostles? Will the Dr. in good earnest affirm, that the Person who
performs such Acts of the Power of Order, as the Apostles did perform, and with
the saving Blessing of the Spirit, is upon this Ground equalled in Office to
the Apostles? If so, he must make all Faithful Pastors thus equal, and overturn
all his Reasoning from a supposed Succession of Bishops to the Apostolat.

The Dr's next Proof is drawn from Epist. 1. ad Heliod. where he says, ibid.
the Bishops are in place of St. Paul and Peter. And so, say we, are all
Faithful Pastors (whom Ierom makes one with Bishops, according to the Scripture
acceptance, and at large makes it good) in the place of Apostles, as to the
exercise of an ordinary Ministry, and the Power of Order and Jurisdiction,
Essential and necessar to the Church, else, our Lord had not promised His
presence with His Apostles to the end of the World, when He sent them out, and
Sealed their Patent to Preach the Gospel, and Disciple all Nations to Him. Of
the same Stamp, is that which he Cits of Ierom on Psalm. 45.16. ibid.
That in stead of the Apostles (gone from the World) we have their Sons, the
Bishops, the Fathers, by whom they are Governed. For, I pray, will this Dr.
either assert 1. That Ierom held, that the Power of Government and Authority
Ecclesiastic, died with the Apostles, that the Power of Order and
Jurisdiction, was not to be preserved, continued in the Church, and Exercised
by ordinary Church Officers, and in this respect enjoined in the Fifth Com^and,
which Commands Obedience to all Lawful Governors (and so are Ministers called
in Scripture) under the Character and Denomination of Fathers. Or 2 ly. Can he
deny that Ierom holds, that except Ordination, (or rather the Rituals of it) at
that time appropriat to the Bishop, the Pastors and Presbyters performed all
Acts of the Power of Order and Jurisdiction? And that therefore, in Ierom's
Sense, Pastors, are such Sons and Successors of Apostles, and have both Name
and thing of the Scripture Bishop. As for his Epistle ad Nepot. asserting that
what Aaron and his Sons were, that are the Bishops and Presbters. Ierom in this
allusion, in point of Government, asserts only, that God has under the New
Testament, as under the Old, fixed a Church Government and Church Officers: And
giving the Dr. the advantage of this Sense, that Ierom, including the degenerat
Custom of his time, insinuats the premised difference betwixt the then Bishops
and Presbyters; I pray, what says this to the Dr's. scope? viz: To prove from
Ierom's allusive Phrase, and expressing himself thus, The many Essential
differences, which he places betwixt Bishop and Presbyter: No man of Sense can
draw such an inference; For 1. Ierom's Judgment, founded upon so many clear
Scripture Grounds, as to the identity of Bishop and Presbyter, when asserting
and Disputing this Point, ex professo, ought in all Reason to preponderat any
such General allusive Expressions, and as a Comment. Expound the same, in a
Sense most consentient to his Judgment, if we will but allow him the Common
privilege of all Men, to be the best Interpreter of his own Sense. 2 ly. The
Dr. himself must acknowledge this, else he will make Ierom plead for a Gospel-
Aaron, or Universal Patriarch, if the Words were taken in a strict Literal
Sense, as tending every way to equiparat the Government of the Church under the
Old and New Testament.

The Dr. inferrs from this Passage, P. 417.
Therefore, as Aaron by Divine Right, was Superior to his Sons, so is the
Bishop, in Ierom's Sense to his Presbyters. But he might as well infer;
Therefore, as there was one Aaron, set over his Sons, and all the Priests and
Levits of the Church of Israel, so, ought there to be, in Ierom's Sense, one
Supreme President over all the Christian Church. Besides, 2 ly. The Dr. dare not
say, that Aaron's Sons and the Priests had no Essential interest in Government,
and that it was inhanced and Monopolized in the person of Aaron, as he holds
(and insinuats, that Ierom also holds) that it is [thus Monopolized in the
Person of the Bishop. Ierom asserts, that Presbyters and Bishops are all one,
Iure Divino, consequently, that they have the same Essential interest in
Government. So, that whatever President he may suppose set over them by their
Choice, yet it neither does, nor can enhance, nor seclude this their Power.
Thus we see, that the Dr's alleged Contradiction in these Passages, to his
premised Testimony, anent the identity of Bishop and Presbyter, is but his own
imagnation: Besides, that one of his Degree should know, that no simile, is to
be strained beyond the Scope of the Author making use of it, else it were not a
simile. The Dr. asks, ibid.
whether Ierom, is more to be Credited, when speaking without a Bias, or when
speaking partially, and in his own Cause? I Answer by a Counter-query, whether
Ierom's full and larg account of his Judgment, when Disputing a Point, ex
professo, and from Scripture, is more to be believed, and laid hold upon, as
expressing his Sense, than a general dark allusive expression, when under no
such Circumstances, and prosecuting no such scope and design, and which of the
two ought to preponderat? And so I dismiss the Dr's Third Answer.

His Fourth exception to the premised Testimony is, That the translation of
the Government from the common Counsel of Presbyters, ibid.
to one Bishop, must be in Jerome's Sense, Apostolic, since it was made, when
it was said, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo's; And therefore, this Decree, must
needs have been made in Paul's time. Ans. The Dr. might have seen this
Fantastic exception long since removed: First, By Junius, in the passage,
forecited ( scil. de Cler. Cap. 15. Not. 16.) where, he at large expones this
Testimony, and removes this gloss [ tria distinguit tempora, Hieronymus, says
he, etc.] Ierom distinguishes Three Periods of time; one, wherein the Church
was Governed by common Counsel of Presbyters: The second, wherein there were
divisions in Religion, and it was said among the People, not at Corinth. only,
I am of Paul, etc. For when these things were said at Corinth, the Church was
Governed by the common Counsel of Presbyters; as appears 1 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 1.
The Third and last, wherein one chosen out from among the Presbyters, was set
over the rest. And every one of these times, says he (that I may speak with
the Vulgar) had their own latitude. Iunius here, informs the Dr. that this was
not said at Corinth. only, but among the People [ malum non Corinthi solum] --
It was. says he, a public evil. He adds that Paul himself prescribed no such
remedy to the Corinthians: And and afterward ( Not. 17.) he tells us, that
Ierom says, That after it was said among the People, this Change was made, but
not, that this human Prostasie began at that time, viz: of the Schism, but
after that time. To this Judicious account of the learned Iunius, I shall add
another of the famous Whittaker ( De Eccl. quest. 1. Cap. 3. Sect. 29.) where
he thus obviats and removes the Drs. Quible upon Ierom's forementioned
Testimony, he says not, it was Decreed by the Apostles, that one Presbyter
should be set over the rest; This he says was by the Churches custom, not the
Apostles Decree -- Then Jerome adds, let the Bishops know, that it is rather by
custom, than Divine appointment, that they are set over Presbyters. Had the
Apostles, says Whittaker, changed the First Order, and set Bishops over
Presbyters, and forbidden the Churches to be Governed by their common Counsel,
truly, this had been the ^ords appointment, because proceeding from the
Apostles of Christ, unless we will ascribe to Custom, not to Divine
appointment, what they decreed: But the Apostles being alive, there was nothing
changed in that Order; For the Epistle was written when Paul, was in Macedonia,
etc. The Dr. may in these accounts, see his Error. Jerome, in the forementioned
Testimonies, proving a Scripture parity of Bishop and Presbyter, through all
the Apostles times and writings, and even to John's time, the surviver of them
all, could not be so bruitishly inconsequent, as to make the Schism at Corinth,
the occasion of the Change of Government, so long before his Testimony from
John, yea before Paul's farewell Sermon to the Elders of Ephesus, from which, he
draws another of his Proofs, but he speaks of an human Custom coming in
Paulatim postea, piece and piece, and by degrees, long after these times, and
but alluds unto that division. 1 Cor. 1 (where again the Dr. may see the Error
of taking strictly his alluding Phrases) expressing it, in the Apostles words,
not of their times; For, as we heard Whittaker observe, the Apostles never
appointed such accressent Power of Prelates over Presbyters, as a Remedy of
Schism, among all their Prescriptions of the Remedies of this evil, Romans 16. 1
Cor. 3. Whittaker also, will tell the Dr. that this was a Remedy worse than the
disease.

The Dr. adds, to confirm his Sense of Jerome's Words, that Jerome (in his Book
De Eccles. Script.) shows, that after the Lord's Ascension, James was Ordained
by the Apostles, Bishop of Jerusalem, Timothy by Paul, Bishop of Ephesus, Titus
of Crete, Polycarp of Smyrna, So, that he must either mean an Apostolic
Decree, or else, he must contradict himself. Ans. Not to detain the Dr. to
prove this Book to be Jerome's, which some hold to be spurious, this is easily
removed by what we have above offered, and even from Whittaker, of the Fathers
general, improper, ambiguous Speech of Bishops, and their various use of this
epithet, terming such Persons, who did for some time Officiat in a place,
whether extraordinary Officers or ordinary, the Bishops thereof, after the
Denomination and custom, which had then obtained, whereof instances have been
above exhibited. Jerome speaking of the Alexandrian Succession, says, the
Presbyters chused out one to preside [ a Marco Evangelista] and terming Mark
thus (not merely, upon the account of his being a Writer of the Gospel, which
is the strictest acceptance, but in the Judgment of those, best acquaint with
his Writings, an Evangelist, as a transient, unfixed Preacher of the Gospel) he
must needs account Timothy and Titus of the same Office; And therefore, not
Bishops in a formal Sense, nor set up in such a manner, and for such an end,
which were Cross to their Office, as I have above made good. Besides, that it
seems odd and inconsistent with common Sense, that immediately after the Lords
Ascension, such Persons were set up, in the Office and Character specified, and
cross to this whole Testimony of Jerome; For thus, there could be no time for
Presbyters governing by common counsel, nor the Schism to grow up thereupon,
both which, Jerome's Testimonies does suppose, in distinct Periods of time, as
we heard Iunius observe; So, that the Dr. speaks very bluntly and
inconsideratly, when he tells us, ibid.
That either Ierom must mean a Decree Apostolic, immediately after our Lord's
Ascension, or else expressly contradict himself. This Alternative of the Dr's. I
say, is pityful inadvertency; For, should Ierom speak of such an Apostolic
Decree, as he imputes to him, he must needs directly contradict himself, in
Asserting the Churches Government, to have been for a time [ communi consilio
Presbyterorum] And a Schism growing thereupon: For, in the Dr's Sense, there
was never such a Government, or an occasion of Schism existent. Besides, That
this Gloss of the Dr's. makes Ierom say, that the Apostles changed the Divine
appointment, to make way for an human form; For, Jerome holds the Government, by
common Council of Presbyters, to be founded upon Divine Institution, and that
which Succeeded, upon human Custom only. The Dr. therefore, and all else, who
would accord Jerome's Testimony, with what he here Cites, must understand his
words in the sense, I have offered, which, as is said, is the Sense and
Judgment of famous Protestant Divines.

The Dr's Fifth exception is, That had this change of the Government from
Presbyterian to Episcopal, P. 417.418.
been in very deed; it must either have been made by the Apostles, or
thereafter: If we say, by the Apostles, its strange, there is no mention of it
in Scripture.But to this, the Answer is easy and ready, that we own no such
Sense of Jerome's words, nor can they admit the same, as I have already made
good. Well, but the Dr. pushes us with the other horn of his Dilemma, viz. ibid.
That if we say, it was made after the Apostles, or about the year 140, how
comes it, that such a Decree* relative to an Universal Change of the Government
from one kind to another, is not mentioned in Ecclesiastic Antiquity? There
being no such Decree heard of, and Clemens, Ignatius, Hegesippus, Irenaeus,
Dionysius of Corinth, who lived in that Period, are so far from taking notice
of this, that they maintain the uninterrupted Succession of Bishops, from the
Apostles. I answer, this other push and Horn of the Dr's Dilemma, is as far
from harming us, as the other; For it is grounded upon the Dr's own groundless
fancy, and distorted Sense of Jerome's words, as if by [ toto orb decretum] he
had meant a formal general Decree of a Council: Which fantastic conceit,
several Learned Divines have refuted, from the Tenor and Scope of Jerome's
words. Jerome says [ prospiciente Concilio -- and toto orb decretum] not in any
formed Council, either in the Apostles time, or afterward, but he means, when
through the World, it was said among the People, I am of Paul, etc. [ postquam
alii Corinthiorum more Dementati in parts discerptae sunt] (as Blondel
expresses and expounds it) it was Decreed among the People, or in and among
particular Churches through the whole World. Decreed through the whole World,
is all one with by the whole World, which is distributively to be taken.
Jerome's words evince this; For, the Council's Decree representing the whole
World, would have been all at once, but Jerome says, this change came not in
simul and semel, but paulatim, by degrees, and that the after Prostasie came in
Consuetudine, or by custom, which points at a gradual coming in. Thus, we have
seen the Dr's fancied absurdity evanish. I might add, that the Churches speedy
defection from the Apostolic Purity and Institutions in point of Government,
will not appear strange to any, who considers Scripture Instances, of as great
and more speedy Defections: Witness, that of Israel's worshipping the Golden
Calf, so shortly after the Promulgation of the Law; And the early workings of
the Mystery of iniquity, in the New Testament Church, and affectation of
Episcopal Primacy, in the Apostle John's time, etc. Of which already. For what
he adds of the Testimonies of Authors, as to the Succession of Bishops, from
Apostles, at Rome, Jerusalem, etc. we have already discovered fully, what a
mean and chattered proof this is, and that the pretended Succession is liable
to unanswerable exceptions, and terminating in Apostles or Evangelists, whose
Office is extraordinary, and expired; the fabulous vanity thereof, is in this
convincingly apparent.

The Dr. tells us, That Irenaeus, while at Rome, might as well know Peter's
Successors there, P. 418, 419.
as we may know, who succeeded Bishop Whitgift, in the Chair of Canterbury, he
being no further distant from the one, than we from the other. But truly, were
there no greater Certainty of the one, than of the other, I should confidently
Challenge that Matter of Fact as Fabulous: And had that Chair, had no other
Successors of Whitgift, than the first Pastors or Bishops of Rome, it had been
an empty Chair. And were there as great Uncertainty of an Archbishop Whitgift
at Canterbury, and as many famous Contradictors of this Matter of Fact, and of
his Successors, as in this case of Rome, the Succession would merit no Man's
Belief. For the Dr's. Assertion of the Clearness of Jerusalem and Romes
Successions [which he says is as clear, as any thing in Ecclesiastic History]
he therein crosses the Judgment of Learned Protestants, who have made the
contrary appear, as is above evinced. The Accounts of this supposed Succession,
being Contradictory one to another, and sometimes Persons Contemporary, made
Succedaneous therein, yea, and the very Name and Office of Persons designed,
being of a various and different Nature and Signification, some of these
pretended succeeding Bishops, being mere Presbyters. But says the Doctor, ibid.
who will question an ancient Monarchy, because of some Defect of the
Historical Accounts of its Succession. I answer, The Original of the Monarchy,
being clear in History, and also the Successors of the first, in Point of an
Historical Faith, this will not be questioned: And when the Dr. shall let us see
the Bishops of his Mould, set up by the Apostles, and present to us the
Scripture Escutchions of their Power, together with clear Historical Accounts
of their first Successors accordingly, we shall admit his parallel Argument,
else it is a mere non sequitur.

The Dr. in the next place, tells us, That the Story of Jerome's Universal
Decree, ibid.
being Unattested, and Contradictory to all Antiquity, it must needs be looked
upon, as a mere Figment of his Fancy. But from what is said, its evident, that
the Dr. instead of Impugning the Decree, which Jeroms Testimony speaks of, has
been, in all that is premised, but Fighting with his own Shadow, and a Figment
of his o^n Fancy, and has never touched his Meaning and Scope, nor has shown
any, much less all Antiquity, against what Jerome asserts.

ibid.
The Dr. demands an Instance of any Church of another Form of Government, than
Episcopacy. Which Demand he might have found sufficiently answered by
Presbyterian Writers, who have made appear, that the first Apostolic Churches
were Governed Presbyterially. The Authors of the Jus Divinum Regim. Eccles.
have long since exhibit clear Scripture Proofs of this, which the Dr. should
have Answered, before he had made such a Challenge. Besides, the Multitud of
Fathers, who maintain the Identity of Bishops and Presbyters, will go far in
this Proof. And if Blondels Demonstration from Antiquity, ( Apol. Sect. 3. P.
308. etc.) that Bishops came not in till the year 140. hold good, surely all
the existent Churches in that Period of Time, are so many Instances of such a
Government. And for this Church of Scotland, we have its first Presbyterian
Government, attested by Johan. Major. de gest. Scot. Lib: 2: Fordons
Scotochron: Lib: 3: cap: 8: Blond. Sect 3. That from the year 79. till 430. it
was Governed by Presbyters without Bishops, and that in that year, the Bishop
of Rome sent Palladius, as our first Bishop; So, that we had our Union to the Sea of Rome, together with Prelacy.

We come now, to the Dr's last Exception to this Testimony of Ierom, ibid.
wherein he reposes great Confidence, Ushering it in with an especially
Considering: Well, what is that under his Consideration, the Dr. will Amuse us
with, and Arrest our Thoughts upon? This Conceit, says he, reflects odiously
upon the Wisdom of our Savior, and his Apostles, in Devolving the Government
upon Presbyters common Counsel, which was the Occasion of sundry Schisms and
Divisions, for Removal of which, the Church found it needful to dissolve those
Presbytries, and introduce Episcopacy in their Room. But the Doctor might have
found this his Conceit and Notion long since removed, and that his supposed
Reflection, depends not upon any Words of Ierom. Ierom says, That [ Diaboli
Instinctu] by the Devils Instinct, there fell Divisions and Factions, one
saying, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo, and that thereupon, this
Remedy of setting up fixed Presidents, was fallen upon. Which the Learned
Whittaker has told the Dr, was a Remedy worse than the Disease: And Ierom
himself, distinguishes this Humane Custom, from the Divine Institution. Now,
where is the Dr's Consequence? Because Jerome says, that for preventing Schisms
at that time, the Government was changed, does he therefore charge this, upon
the Apostles Government, or Christ's Institution? He may as well say, that a
Man's asserting Corruptions to be in the Church, will infer his imputing them
to the Ordinances. Was there not Discord among the Apostles, under Christ's own
immediate Government? But did this Discord, or the Record thereof in Scripture,
reflect on His Holy Government? Paul and Barnabas divided and parted asunder,
but does Luke, in Recording this, charge it upon the Apostolic Government?

To make the Folly of the Dr's Inference, yet further to appear, let these
three things be considered. 1. He confesses that Jerome asserts, that the
Apostolic Government of Presbyterian Parity, was the Occasion only of these
Schisms. Therefore, say I, he makes it not the Cause: If the Dr. assert this,
he will pitifully expose his Learning, in not distinguishing these things,
which are so obviously distinguishable, and reflect upon our Savior, in
saying, he came not to send Peace, but a Sword and Division, to kindle Fire
upon the Earth, to set a Man at Variance against his Father, and to make those
of a Man's own House, his Enemies; as if His Holy Doctrine, were the Cause of
these Evils. Paul tells us, that his Corruption and Sin, took Occasion from the
Commandment, and was irritat by the Law; but prevents so gross a Mistake, as to
suppose any Imputation upon the Holy Law thereby. Is the Law sin? says he, God
forbid. He abhorrs the Consequence as absurd and blasphemous. 2. The Dr. holds,
that Jerome asserts, The Church found it necessary upon this Occasion, to change
the first Government, P. 419, 420.
by the Common Counsel of Presbyters, and (as he expresses it) to Dissolve
Presbytries, and Introduce Episcopacy. Wherein he abuses Ierom, and pitifully
Wire-draws his Words, offering a mere Distortion of them: For, [1.] Ierom
speaks only, as is above cleared, of an Innovating Custom, growing up by
Degrees, not of a Government introduced by the whole Church, upon Ground of
Necessity. [2.] He makes Ierom assert, that upon the first Introduction of this
Custom, Presbytries were wholly dissolved, which is most cross to Ieroms
Meaning; For, even in his own time, long after the first Origin of this
Custom, he says [ quid facit, etc.] what does the Bishop, except Ordination,
which the Presbytrie does not? So, that in the first Introduction of this
Episcopus Praeses, Ierom could far less suppose a Dissolution of Presbytries,
or total Abolishing of their Authority, as the Dr. foolishly suggests, but only
such a fixed President or (...), who, as in that Capacity, had a Deference, and
the Care committed to him, but not so, as wholly to exclud Presbyters Decisive
Suffrage. Again, in the 3 d. place, what ever may be said of this
after-Practice and Frame of Government, Ierom expressly denies a Divine Right,
or Ius to it, and distinguishes it, from the Truth of the Divine Appointment,
which first took place: So, that, tho we should grant to the Dr, that in
Ierom's Sense, the whole Church, by joint Determination, had simul and semel
made this Alteration, it is evident, that he charges the Error upon the Church,
as a Recess from the Divine Path, but not at all upon the Divine Appointment it
self, which he diligently distinguishes from, and sets in Opposition to this
Custom and Practice of the Church. So, that the absurd Reflection upon the
Apostles Government, and the Wisdom of our Savior, the Dr. may see to be
lodged nearer home, viz. not only upon these, who first brought in this Human
Prostasie, (especially such, as Scrued it up to an Hierarchical Primacy, which
is so cross to the Apostolic Parity) but also, and in a singular manner, to be
chargeable upon these, who uphold it, after its many Evils are discovered.
Ierom asserts only the Matter of Fact, viz. That this Imparity, was brought in
for Remedy of Schism, but leaves the charg^ of Reflecting upon the Apostolic
Government, upon the Authors of this Innovation; And upon the Promotters
thereof, it must still ly.

ibid.
The Dr. alleges, That Iorom approves of this, as a Wise and Prudent Action. An
odd Approbation indeed! To approv^ a Custom or Action, as Wise and Prudent,
which he holds to be opposite to the Divine Appointment. For his proof, viz.
That Ierom asserts the Safety of the Church to depend upon the Authority of the
High Priest or Bishop, to whom, if Supreme Authority be not given, there would
be as many Schisms as Priests. As the Dr. has pointed us to none of Ieroms
Writings for Proof of this, so (as we have cleared above) Ierom and the
Ancients, in such Allusive Expressions, intend nothing else, but a Distinction
of Offices in the Gospel Ministry, and to assert the Authority thereof. Blond.
Sect. 3. P. 135. shows out of diverse Councils, their expressing the Gospel
Ministry, under the Character of Priests and Levites. And I dare referr it to
this Dr, or any Man of Sense, if a grosser Contradiction or Nonsense, could
ever fall into any Man's Thought, than to hold the Necessity of an Hierarchical
Bishop, with Supreme Authority, and yet the Necessity of a Divine Appointment
to the contrary. That which the Dr. calls the Unavoidable Consequence of Jerome
's Hypothesis, viz. That the Church had gone to Ruin, ibid.
if a Wiser Form of Government, than that of Apostles, had not been taken up,
to supply its Defect. We have made appear, to be a very easily avoided
Consequence, and by no Twist of Reason, to be deducible from Ierom's
Hypothesis, and that the Dr, in drawing such a Consequence, has, in stead of
Ierom, involved himself, in absurd Deductions. He calls this Testimony of
Jerome, ibid.
the only considerable Objection, against the Universal Conformity of the
Primitive Church to Episcopal Government; And therein discovers his small and
slender Reading in this Controversy, since he might have seen in Blondel,
Salmasius, and many others, many more considerable Objections; And this one, we
have found so very considerable, that it has quit baffled, and born down the
Dr's mean and inconsiderable Answers. But to proceed.

In the close of this Section. (P. 421.) the Dr. flies high in these his
supposed victorious Answers to Jerome's Testimony, telling us, that the
Apostolic Superiority of Bishops, being handed down by Testimonies, from Age
to Age, its as unreasonable to reject the same, as the Canon of the Scriptures,
thence derived. The Dr. here discovers, what Spirit he is of. I had alwise
thought, that the Divine Impression of the Scripture Canon, the intrinsic
infallible evidences of a Divine inspiration, had been the great ground of the
Churches reception, not its being handed down to us, from former generations,
or the First receivers; And that our Divines, had alwise distinguished, the
Church and former Generations Testimony and recommendation, from the innate,
Essential evidences of its Divine Authority, as to the Ground of our Faith and
reception. But however, I shall tell him, that he should have exhibited, as
full and Divine proof and unanimous recommendation of all the Churches, for his
hierarchical Prelacy, as there is for the Scripture Canon, before he had
offered such an high flown notion.

Before I part with the Dr. upon this head, I must needs (tho I have a little
before, touched it) take notice of two pieces of signal unsoundnness and unfair
dealing in this Matter of Jerome's Testimony. First, That in all his
Animadversions, and muster of Episcopal strength against it, he does not in the
least, take notice of Jeroms Scripture proofs, of the parity of Bishop and
Presbyter: in correspondence to our Sense and Pleading. Upon Philip 1.1. He
argues, That many Bishops are saluted by Paul in that Church; and that it could
not have many of the Diocesian stamp; That therefore, the Apostle speaks
indifferently of Bishops and Presbyters, as one and the same. That Act. 20.
Paul called the Elders of Ephesus, Bishops, set up by the Holy Ghost; and that
therefore he owned the Elders of that one City, as Bishops. That in the Epistle
to the Hebrews, the care of the Churches is divided among many -- obey them
that have the Rule over you, for they watch for your Souls. That Peter, called
so from the firmness of his Faith, exhorts thus the Elders -- the Elders which
are among you, I exhort, who am also an Elder, and Witness, of the sufferings
of Christ, Feed the Flock of God, which is among you, not by constraint, but
willingly, etc. These things I write, says Ierom, to show, that among the
Ancients, Bishops and Presbyters, were one and the same, and that by little and
little, the care was devolved upon one. Now, what says the Dr. to these his
Arguings upon the Apostles Doctrine? If they are not found, why does he not
discover his mistake? If they hold good, the Dr's exceptions evanish unto Wind.
As for instance, That Ierom is too late a Witness; that he is a Witness in his
own Cause; that he talks otherwise, when not biased with partiality, etc. For,
if these Reasonings be sound, his Witness, is both a most early and Divine
Witness, and in the cause of God and Truth; And whatever other Testimony he may
be supposed to give, this Divine Testimony ought to be preferred, wherein there
can be no partiality, unless the Dr. will impute partiality to the Divine
Oracles, and the Decision of the Holy GOD of Truth, in this Point. This also,
answers the Drs quible, about a Decree Apostolic, as the Ground of the Change
of Government, and that Ierom could mean no such thing, since none can be so
brutish, as to impute to the Apostles, a contradictory Decree to their own
Doctrine. As also, that other exception of his, evanishes, upon this Ground,
Viz. That no such Decree of the Church was Recorded; And that therefore, there
was none such: For, say, it was either a Decree, or gradual Custom, if cross to
the Apostolic Doctrine, it ought to be rejected. Thus, also appears the Folly
of his last exception, That he imputes to the Apostolic Government, that it
occasioned Schisms. For, upon supposal of the soundness of Ierom's Scripture
proofs, the parity of Bishop and Presbyter, being the mind of Christ and his
Apostles, this Government could never give ground to Schisms, nor could the
Church warrantably alter it, upon any such pretense; So that, whenever, and
by whomsoever the change was made, it was made contrary to the revealed will of
the great Lawgiver.

The Second Point of unsoundness, the Dr. is Chargable with, is, that in the
beginning of his discourse upon Ierom's Testimony, he professes, that he will
not disput with us, the Sense of this Passage, but allow it to bear our Sense;
Yet in several of his Answers, he impugns our Sense: Especially his 4.5. and 6.
and not only our Sense, but the Sense of sound Protestant Divines, as is above
evident. His Conceit about Ierom's making the Decree or Custom, he speaks of,
to be the Schism at Corinth (which is his Fourth exception) and his
Supposition, That Jerome by [ toto orb decretum] understands a formal joint
Decree of the whole Church, not a gradual Custom, and that Jerome makes the
Church to redress upon necessary grounds, the Government appointed by Christ
and his Apostles, and thus to impeach his Divine Wisdom (which are his other
exceptions) All these, I say, as they are Distortions of Jerome's sense, so
directly opposite to the Sense given by us, and by all sound Divines; yea, and
such, as have been long since refuted by Protestant Writers, in Answer to
Popish glosses and exceptions, with whom our Dr. and his Fellows does here join
Issue: So that, we may judge of the affinity of both their Causes, by the near
cognation of their Pleadings.

CHAP. IV. The Dr 's Fourth Argument, Examined, taken from our Savior's
alleged allowance and Approbation of Episcopal Government, in his Epistles to
the Seven Asian Churches.
WE do now proceed to the Dr's last Argument, to prove, P. 421.
That the rightful Government of the Church is Episcopal, taken from our
Saviors Allowance and Approbation thereof, in his Seven Epistles to the Seven
Churches of Asia, directed to the Seven Angels, called Seven Stars in His Right
Hand, or the Seven Lights of the Seven Churches, Rev. 1.20. and 2.1. And in
every Epistle, owned as his Angels and Messengers. The Dr. tells us, that if he
can prove them to be Seven Bishops, presiding over Clergy and Laity of these
Churches at that time, they are unanswerable instances of Christ's Allowance and
Approbation of the Episcopal Order. This trite and often Baffled Argument,
taken from the supposed Episcopal Power of the Seven Asian Angels, has been so
frequently scanned and tossed by Writers, on this Controversy, that the Dr.
since he makes here such a Parade, should either have brought some new Strength
upon the Field, or offered an Answer, to the many clear returns, given to this
Argument.

However, to clear our way, in examining what the Dr. says upon this head
(which is nothing else, but some Old Musty stuff repeated) I premise two
things. 1. That the Collective Sense of the term, Angel, is most suitable to
Scripture, and the Scope of these Epistles. 2. That allowing the Angels to be
single Persons, will nothing help the Drs. design and pleading.

For the First, that the collective Sense of the term Angel, is most suitable
to Scripture, and the Scope of these Epistles, appears thus. 1. This suits best
the Style of this Book, which is by mystic visional Representations, to includ
many individuals: As one singular, so all the individuals of the Church, both
Members and Officers, are represented by One Candlestick; And why not also, all
the Ministers, by one Angel? A term which of it self, and in this place imports
no Jurisdiction properly, but is immediately referred to the Angelical frame and
qualities of Ministers. 2. This is also suitable to the style of this Book, as
it is Epistolare; the Address, may be to one, but it will give no Authority to
that one over the rest; As an Address from the King to a Speaker in Parliament,
will give the Speaker no Jurisdiction and Authority over his Fellow Members.
When our Lord said unto Peter only expressly, not to the rest of his
fellow-Disciples, I will give unto thee the Keys, etc. who but brutish and
partially affected Papists, will conclud, that he was Prince or Primate over
the Apostles? And that they had not, and even by this promise, an equal
Authority with him, in the use of the Keys? This the Dr. must acknowledge,
unless he will justify the Popes Pleading from this Text. 3. This is suitable
to Scripture Prophetic Writings, and to this Book, as such, to represent many
Individuals, by one singular. The Four beasts, the Twenty Four Elders, do not
signify so many individual persons: The singular Names of Woman, Beast, Whore,
Dragon, signify a collection of many individuals. So the one, Spirit of God, is
called the Seven Spirits, with reference to his manifold operations. Dan. 8.20.
One Ram, signifies many Kings of the Medes and Persians. He that will not
hearken to the Priest, Deuteronomy. 17.12. i. e. The Priests in the plural. So, the
Priests Lips should keep knowledge, and the Law sought at his Mouth Mal. 2.7.
Here also, the Priest for Priests, in the Plural. Blessed is that Servant, whom
the Lord, etc. i. e. Those Servants. Particularly, as to the term Angel; It is
said, Psalm. 34. that the Angel of the Lord encampeth about the Godly. i. e.
many Angels, since they are all Ministering Spirits to them. 4. It is suitable
to Scripture, and this Book, to represent an indefinit number by a definit:
Thus all Iudahs Adversaries, are represented by the Four Horns Zech. 1.18. All
the Godly and the Ungodly, are represented by the Five Wise, and by the Five
Foolish Virgins. The Seven Angels standing before God, Represents all the
Angels. Chapter 8. of this Book; for in Chapter 7. mention is made of all the Angels,
who do thus stand. And with the same indefinitness, we are to understand the
Septenarie number, frequently elsewhere; as the Seven Pillars which Wisdom Hews
out Prove. 9. The Seven Pastors or Shepherds, Micah. 5. The Seven Eyes Zech. 3.
And in this very Book, Chapter 4.5.15. The Seven Candlesticks, Lamps, Viols. 5. As
we find the Scripture, and this same Apostle, First, Naming a Multitude, and
then contracting it into a Singular, as 2 Ioh. 7. v. -- Many deceivers are
entered into the World -- Then -- This is a Deceiver, and an Antichrist. And
sometimes, the Individual in one Sentence, turned into a Multitude, as 1 Timothy
2.15. She shall be saved i. e. the Woman bearing Children, if they continue in
Faith and Charity, i. e. such Women, in general. So, this single Angel, is
turned into many, and spoken to, in the Plural, in one and the same Epistle.
Thus Rev. 2.24. -- Unto you, I say and unto the rest in Thyatira. Rev. 2.10. We
find John changing the singular Angel into a Multitud^; Fear none of these
things, which thou shall suffer: Behold the Devil shall cast some of you into
Prison, that ye may be tried. In a word, what ever Characteristick of this
Angel, the Dr. shall produce, we can make it appear, to be applicable to
Presbyters or Pastors. First, Is it a Commission to Preach and Baptize? This,
he will grant, belongs to all Pastors. Is it the Power of Ordination? The
Scripture shows us, that this is Seated in a Presbytrie, 1 Timothy 4.14. Matthew.
18.17. Is it the Ruling Governing Power? All Ministers are such Angels; All
that Watch for Souls, do Rule over them, and all Laborers in the Word and
Doctrine, have an equal joint Interest in Feeding, Censuring and Ruling in the
Churches, over which they are set, Heb. 13.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. And People are
accordingly to submit themselves to them. Therefore, this Prostasie and Ruling
Power, is no sole Prerogative of a single Angel, or supposed Bishop. Thus, it
was with the Church of Ephesus, Act. 20. And it is much more suitable to
understand the Angel of Ephesus, of a Plurality of Ministers, to whom, in a
plain Scripture, the whole Government is found entrusted, rather than to
Explain that plain Text by a Metaphor, and contrary thereunto, to set up one
Angel, or Di^cesan Bishop over that Church, with sole Power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction. The Dr. will find this our Sense of the Angel, to be no new
Opinion, when he considers that Augustine. Homil. 21. upon this Book, thus takes
it, Expounding the Angel of Thyatira, the Praepositi Ecclesiarum, or Governors
of the Churches. So Aretas, Lib. 1. Cap. 1.2.9.10. Primas. in Apoc. Cap. 2.
Ambros. Ambert. Anselm. Pererius, Victorin. Tirin, Haym. Bed. Perkins. Fox in
his Meditations on the Revelation, page 7, 8. Pilkintoun Bishop of Durham, in
his Exposition of Hag. Chapter 1. v. 13.

The second thing, I premise is, that the Dr. has no advantage, tho it be
yielded, that the Angel, is a single Person: For, 1. He may be the Angelus
Praeses, or the Moderator Angel, not the Angelus Princeps, or the Lord Angel
yea, and the Praeses or Moderator for the time, as a Speaker in Parliament.
Ephesus had many Angels ( Act. 20.28. 1 Timothy 5.17.) of equal Authority, who
were made Bishops by the Holy Ghost, and set over that Church accordingly, and
they are spoken to, in the Plural, though the Angel is named in the Singular
Number. 2. This Angel, is said to have no Jurisdiction or Superiority over the
rest of the Ministers, nor can the Dr. show, where this Angel is spoken to,
with reference to Ministers as subject to him, which notwithstanding, is his
begged Supposition, and Petitio Principii, all along in this Argument. 3. The
Parochial and Diocesan Division of the Churches, were long after this, and not
until the 260 year after Christ, in the Judgment of best Antiquaries. 4.
Nothing is required of this Angel, but that which is the common Duty of all
Pastors. Finally, suppose it were granted to him, that a Superiority were
imported in Naming this Angel, it may be a Superiority of Order, Dignity, or
Gifts, and in such Moral Respects, not of Power and Jurisdiction.

The Dr, in Order to this his Scope, proposes generally the Method of his
Proof, showing, That he will prove that they were single Persons. ibid. and P.
422.
2 ly, That they were Persons of great Authority in these Churches. 3 ly, That
they were the Bishops or Presidents of these Churches. Before I examine his
Proofs, it is pleasant to consider, how well this Undertaking of the Dr.
answers his Scope, which all along in this Dispute, is, to prove a Succession
of ordinary Officers, in the Office of Apostolat, as he calls it, and in their
whole Power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, excluding Pastors, from the least
Interest therein. By his Principles, these supposed Succeeding Prelates, are the
sole Governors of Churches, have the sole Legislative Power (wherein he says,
the Essence of Government consists) the Power of Consecration and Ordination to
Ecclesiastic Offices, and that of the same Nature and Extent, as he supposes
the Apostles had it, by virtue of their Apostolical Mission. The Bishops also,
have, by his Principles, the sole Executive Spiritual Jurisdiction, Monopolized
in them, as their peculiar Prerogative, viz. (as the Dr. explains it) to Cite,
Examine, Admonish Offenders, Exclud from, or Admit to Church Communion, Censure
or Absolve, Bind or Loose. The twelve Thrones to Judge Isreal's Tribes, promised
to Apostles, he understands of the Authority of Judging, and of all Spiritual
Jurisdiction in the Church Visible, committed to them, and by them to the
Bishops, as their only Successors, in this Authority. To which, we may add, the
Confirming of the Baptized, by Imposition of Hands, which he also ascribes to
them, as their sole Prerogative. This the Dr. at large insists upon, from P.
433. to P. 438.

Now, to prove all these Prerogatives of the Bishops, and this Extensive Power,
so paramount to all Authority, or Interest of Pastors in Government, as it
renders them mere Ciphers without a Figure, from the seven Asian Angels;
Because they were single Persons, or of great Authority in the Churches, or
President-Bishops in these Churches, is such a Proof, as the Simplest may Laugh
at. For 1. Will any Man think, that their being Saluted as single Persons, will
prove this Extensive Authority? Why may not a Senate be Saluted in the Consuls,
a Parliament Addressed in the Chancellor, or the House of Commons, in an
Epistle to the Speaker? 2 ly, Say, that they were Presidents, and admit, that
they had Deference and Authority as such, as the Consul in the Senate, will
this suppose, or by any Shadow of Consequence or Connection, infer, that they
had such a Power, as is here described, and such as swallows up wholly and
absolutely, all Authority of the Members of Church Judicatories? Nay, the Dr.
will as soon join the Poles together, as unite this Antecedent and Consequent.
Besides, in calling them Presidents, he discovers this, and confutes himself,
since the Term, both Name and Thing, in all Languages, and in the Sense of all
Men, is appropriat to such, as are set over Juridical Courts, Civil or
Ecclesiastic, the Members whereof, are still supposed to have a Decisive
Suffrage, and Interest in the Government. Again 3 ly, The Dr. says he will
prove, that they were Persons of great Authority in these Churches. But, if he
speak to the Point, and prosecut his Scope, he must call it Absolute and Sole
Authority, entirely exclusive of all Interest, which Pastors, or any other
Church Officers, may claim therein.

Come we to the Dr's Grand Proofs, First, That they were single Persons, he
proves from this, That they are mentioned as such -- the Angel of Ephesus, the
Angel of Smyrna; And thus all along Addressed in the Singular Number -- I know
thy Works -- I have a few things against thee. Ans. This Argument is abundantly
removed, by what is premised, anent the Collective Sense of the Word Angel,
which our Lords Addressing the the Epistle to one Angel, does no whit Impugn,
in the sense of sound Protestant Divines. For further clearing this, let us
hear the Belgic Divines, upon the Text, To the Angel, i. e. to the Overseer,
Inspector, or Pastor of the Church -- This is set down here in the Singular
Number, either, in regard of their whole College, as Mal. 2.7. Under the Name
of Angel in the Singular, the whole College of Priests, was to be understood;
or because that some one, had the Presidency among them, in Order, by whom it
was to be communicate to the rest, as appears by Act. 20.17, 28. That there were
more Elders or Overseers, in this Church of Ephesus, whom Paul charges in his
last Farewell, to take heed to themselves, and to the whole Flock, over which
the Holy Ghost had made them (...)* i. e. Overseers, for to Feed the Flock. So,
that it is groundless, from hence to infer, an Episcopal Authority of one
person above the rest: For, the verry matter it self, written here to the Angel
of the Church, is Written for a warning to the whole Church, as appears by v.
7. here, and above Chap. 1.11. The English Divines, the Authors of Part Second,
Annot. going under the Name of Pool, thus sense that Passage, Rev. 2.1. To the
Angel, it appears from Act. 20.17. That there were more Ministers there than
one, but they were all Angels, and from the oneness of their business, they are
called one Angel. And upon Chap. 1.20. they tell us, That certain it is (...)
signifies no more, than is commmon to all Ministers, viz. to be Gods
Messengers, and move upon his errands. That we are to understand here, the
Doctors, Pastors and Ministers of the Church, is the sense and Judgment of
Cluverus, Dr. Lightfoot. Cluverus takes notice, that the Change of the Number,
v. 10.19. Argues, that the Epistle is not directed to one Person. And Dr.
Lightfoot shows, that this Tittle, is with allusion, to that of the Minister of
the Synagogue, whose Office was publicly to read and expound the Prophets,
unto the People, as these Ministers were to Read these Epistles, in the public
Congregation. Thus also Piscator, understands the whole Pastors of the Church.
From whence, and from many others, which might be added, it is evident. 1. That
the collective Sense of the word Angel, is Judged by them consonant to
Scripture, and to the Scope of the Epistles. 2 ly, That even supposing some
speciality, in the Address to one person, this does import a simple Presidency
only (especially in the sense of the Belgic Divines) and that they do entirely
join with us, in the Grounds, we have offered, against the Dr's supposition of
an Hierarchical Bishop; and particularly from this, that the Angel, is
sometimes addressed in the Plural. That Ground which the Belgic Divines, and
others insist upon, taken from the Matter of the Epistles, is important; and
that our Lord addresses to all the Angels of the Church, as concerning them,
Rev. 1.11. Write, says he, to the Churches of Ephesus, Smyrna, etc. And at the
close of every Epistle -- Hear what the Spirit says to the Churches: And
therefore, when it is said, I know thy Works, etc. -- this thou have, etc. We
must understand the whole Company of Ministers, and the whole Church; because
the punishment or reward, is proposed to the whole: And the Dr. will not say,
that for the sin of one Bishop, the Gospel is to be removed, when other
Ministers, and the Church it self is free from his evils.

The Dr. alleges, That the Angel is alwise addressed in the singular number.
ibid.
And to that which is adduced to prove his being addressed in the Plural; he
Answers, That in these Passages, he writes, not only to the Bishops personally,
but to the People, under their Government and inspection; so he understands
that of Chap. 2.10. -- The Devil shall cast some of you into Prison,
paralelling it, with v. 13. Antipas slain among you, and v. 23. -- And all the
Churches shall know, etc. But, first, (not to stand upon the Drs. begging the
Question, in a supposition cross to his scope) the paralells, are not every way
alike. When the Lord says -- all the Churches -- and slain among you, etc. the
Scope and Mould of these expressions, makes it evident, that both Ministers and
People, are spoken of: But when immediately after, addressing the Angel, in the
Singular, he adds -- the Devil shall cast some of you, into Prison, changing
the Singular Angel into a Plural, it appears, that the Ministers are more
directly included, as the adduced parallel, 1 Timothy 2.15. Discovers. But not to
insist upon this.

In the next place, the folly and inconsistency of his gloss and discourse, in
this Answer, is several ways apparent: For First, He will have these Passages
-- I know thy works -- I have some what against thee, etc. addressed Singlely to
the Angel; From the singularity of which Adress, he collects, the Bishop's
single and absolute Authority over these Churches. But I pray, what Sense will
the Dr. make of this? Will he say, our Lord knew the Works only, of one single
Bishop, of no Ministers else? That one Bishop Labored at Ephesus, none else?
That one Bishop at Ephesus, fell from his first Love, no Church Officers else?
(A pityful imputation, the Dr. puts thus upon Timothy, the supposed Bishop of
Ephesus, in staging him, as the only Apostat of the Church) The same may be
applied to his other Instances. -- I have a few things against thee, Viz, one
Bishop, no Ministers else. -- Remember, whence thou art fallen, viz. The Bishop
fallen only, none else. -- Repent and do thy First Works; this only addressed to
the Bishop, none else concerned in this Duty, but his Lordship. If he say, that
these things are spoken to the Bishop, as chiefly concerned and interested;
Then, besides his begging the Question, he losses his Plea, and quite ruins all
his Pleading from a supposed singularity of the Address, to conclud the
singularity of the person Addressed: And thus including Ministers, as concerned
and interested in the prescriptions, in point of Government, he cuts the
Windpipe of his grand Topic and notion here.

But Secondly, we see, when he is forced to acknowledge from the Plural Mould of
the Address, that more than the Bishop, are spoken to, he gives us a fair
acknowledgment, in these terms, That the Bishops, are not only written to,
Personally, but also the People under their Government and inspection. But I
pray, why not also Ministers and Pastors also bespoken, as well as the People?
The Dr. asserting, That both Clergy and Laity, are under the Bishop's
inspection. And it being supposible, that in these Churches, especially at
Ephesus, there was at this time, a College of Pastors. How come the Dr. when
he supposes the Address to overstretch the person of the Bishop, and to includ
more, to assert That it reaches the People only, and not to the Pastors also?
This, I must confess, is odd Sense in Divinity; in these great Evangelistick
Precepts and Reprensions, the Lord Addresses not solely the Bishop, but the
People under him, yet not one word to Pastors. I had thought, that the Clergy
and Laity being distinguished by the Dr. P. 421. and both the one and the
other, in his Sense, under the Bishops Government and inspection, when he makes
the Plural Address, to go beyond the Bishop, he would have cast an Eye, upon
the under-Clergy, or Ministry, before the People, as concerned before them, in
these important duties, or supposed Transgressions. But, we may easily discover
the knack of the Dr's policy in this; For Pleading in his Second Argument, P.
423.
That an Authority, in reference to Church Government, is clearly imported, in
several of these directions or reprehensions, particularly, those addressed, to
the Angel of Pergamus and Thyatira, in reference to Juridical Trial, conviction
and Censures: He was afraid, least by this means, he should have opened a door
for Ministers claim, to the Bishop's incommunicable prerogatives, had he
extended the plural Address to them, as well as to the People.

Thirdly, The Dr. having told us, That in such plural Addresses, the people
under the Bishop's Government, P. 422.
are included, gives for instance, that Passage, Rev. 2.10. The Devil shall
cast some of you into prison. I should verrily think, he was here concerned to
specify the Clergy and Laity, and include both: For, it seems in his Sense,
all the Pastors were safe, from the Thunderclap of this warning (I know not by
what shield, except that of the Drs. fancy) and there were no prisons there for
Pastors, this being only spoke to the People. This charge of gross folly, upon
his Mould of Reasoning (and it is gross enough, at all will) is the more
evident, in that Answer to the Objection, taken from that phrase, Chap. 2.25.
-- unto you, and unto the rest in Thyatira; from which passage, we plead for a
plural diversifying Ministers and people, under distinct Comma's. The Dr. will
admit it by no means, to to be meant of any, ibid.
but the People, making the term, you and the rest in Thyatria, one and the
same, as distinguishing only the sound from the unsound part. in that Church.
So, that it is evident, the D,. appropriats the Plural Phrases to the People
only, and consequently, is exposed to the forementioned absurdities, in his way
and method of pleading. That, that Passage Chap. 2.10. does reach the Pastors,
is upon several important grounds, made good by Mr. Durham, upon the place, as
1. from the remarkable change of the singular number, to the Plural. 2 ly. That
his was a searching trial to the Church, whereof, it was her concern to be
warned. 3 ly. That the preservation of Some, was as signal a consolation in
such a Trial, as Isai. 30.20.21. See others cited by Pool Critic. upon the
place.

The Dr. enquires, If Angels had not been single Persons, why are they not
mentioned Plurally, as well as the People? This Querie, confirms what is now
imputed to him: That they are mentioned Plurally, we have already made good, in
the premised Instances. Yea the Dr. himself, answers himself, acknowledging
that there is a Plurality, bespoken, in the Person of the Angels, so, that he
is not, only Personally Addressed. But the Dr's strange Fetch, is, that he will
allow a Plurality of the People, to be Addressed and spoken to, in one singular
Bishop or Angel, but none of the Pastors at all: For which Notion (I had almost
said Nonsense) no imaginable ground can be given, but the Dr's good Will to
his Hierarchical Bishop, whom he would fain shape out of this Scripture, which
we see, so rejects and baffles his Endeavors, that instead of any evident
ground of Answer from the Text, he must needs embrace an Airy Notion of his own
Brain.

Thus to that pregnant Passage, Chap. 2.24. which we adduce to prove the Angel,
ibid.
to be Addressed Plurally, viz. To you, I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira:
Where there is a clear Distinction made betwixt the Plural you, viz. the
Pastors, and the rest in Thyatira, viz. the People. The Dr. has no other Shift,
but that pitiful one, viz. That the Ancient Greek Manuscripts, leave out the
Conjunction (...), and Read it, To you the rest in Thyatira, distinguishing the
Seduced, from the not Seduced; And therefore, cannot be meant of the Angel, who
is always Addressed in the Singular Number. But, 1. This Shift baffles most of
all the old Greek Copies; the Reading he embraces, being supposed Mantytecla's
Manuscript, baffles all the Episcopal English Clergy, concerned in our last
Translation, who, notwithstanding all their Zeal for Episcopacy, as appears in
their various and unsound Translation of the Term (...), yet durst not make
this Adventure with the Dr, but with the Current of Ancient Copies, Read the
Text, with the Conjunction: Notwithstanding, that in their Preface to the
Reader, they assert their Diligence, in Searching the Original Text. I need not
stand here to recount, the large Testimony and Cloud of Witnesses, the Body of
Protestant Divines, Translators and Interpreters, all concurring in this our
Sense and Reading, in Contradiction to the Dr's Conceit and Exception. See
Paraeus, Arethas, Ribera, Dr. More, who expressly takes the you, to import the
Pastors; Beza, etc. But, 2 ly, This Conjecture and Answer, is clearly Cross to
the Text: For, (1.) The Adversative, but, in the beginning of v. 24. clearly
limits the you here, and distinguishes it from the you, meant of the People, in
the close of v. 23. (2.) The Conclusion of this verse, clears this to
Conviction -- I will put upon you, none other burden -- hold fast -- Pray, by
what Logic, will the Dr. exclud Ministers, and includ the People only, in this
Plural Phrase? Were no Ministers kept unpolluted? Or, were there some other
burdens, to be put upon them, than what they had already? And are they excluded
from holding fast' till Christ come, what is received from him, and only the
People concerned herein, as contradistinct from the Bishop? Sure I am, such
absurd Consequeuces, might cover with Blushes, the Asserters of this Opinion. I
might add, that even granting the Dr, the Advantage of this Gloss, and leaving
out the Conjunction, and admitting with Grotius, that thus the Sound are
distinguished from the Unsound in this Church, the Dr. would be pitifully
puzzled to prove, that none of the Clergy, as he calls them, is in both these
Classes, and consequently, that the Plural Phrase, does not stand for us, even
in this Discriminating Sense: But this, we insist not upon.

To proceed to the Dr's second Proof, (p. 423.) of our Lords Allowance and
Approbation of Episcopal Government in these Epistles, viz. That they were
Persons of great Authority: This he proves from the Title of Angel, showing
them to be Persons of Office and Eminency; Christ also, Directing to them the
Epistles, to be communicate to their Churches. To which, he adds another Proof,
taken from the Authority, which is supposed to be exercised by some of these
Angels, and competent to others; He gives Instance, of the Angel of Ephesus,
trying the false Apostles, which imports a Juridical Trial; the Blame laid upon
the Angel of Pergamus, for having them that held the Doctrine of Balaam, and of
the Nicolaitans, which shows his Power to have cast him out; upon the Angel of
Thyatira, for suffering Iezabel to Teach, which shows, that it was in his
Power, and that he had Authority to eject her and her Followers. Ans. The Dr's
Proofs of Authority in these Angels and Churches, in reference to Government,
are good and sound, and accorded to by all Divines. But he has left behind him
two Points of his Proof, in reference to his Scope, which are (to use our
Scottish Proverb) the Tongue of the Trump, and without which, all his
Discourse, is but like Sand without Lime. 1. He says, "They were single Persons
of great Authority: But he has not yet made good, that they were single
Persons, nor offered to Answer the pregnant Grounds pleaded by our Divines, to
prove the contrary, and that the Collective Sense of the Term Angel, is most
suitable to the Scripture, and the Tenor and Scope of these Epistles. 2 ly,
Supposing them single Persons, he has not proved, either from the Title of
Angel, or their Authority imported in these Epistles, that it reached any
further, than that of Presidents; or that the Authority here Instanced, was
Monopolized, and so inhanced in them, as to exclud entirely, all the Pastors
therefrom. The contrary whereof (besides the Proofs we offered in the
beginning) we heard the Belgic Divines make out, and give Instance,
particularly, with reference to Ephesus; to the Elders or Ministers of which
Church, Paul committed the whole Government, as the propper Governors and
Bishops thereof, Act. 20.28. And therefore, even supposing the Angel, a single
Person, he cannot be supposed, in Contradiction to that Scripture, to have had
such Authority and Power, as did Inhance, or Exclud that of the Pastors and
Bishops of Ephesus, so clearly therein asserted and held out. The Dr.
acknowledges, That what our Lord writes, is not to this Angel personally, but
also to the People, P. 422. But I pray, how will the Dr. set up his
March-stone, and show us the Limitation of these Instructions, in Point of
Government, distinguishing the Person of the Bishop from the Pastors, since,
neither the Supposition, that the Bishop is a single Person, will prove this,
nor the Honorable Title of Angel, (as the Dr. calls it) a Title suitable to
all Pastors, who are Angels and Messengers of the Lord of Hosts, by their
Office; Nor, can the Dr. flee to the Refuge of the Authority supposed in these
Prescriptions, without a palpable begging of the Question. And as for the
Communicating of the Epistles to the Churches, as Directed to them; This is so
suitable to the Angelus Praeses, or to any President, or Mouth of a Meeting,
that it has no imaginable Strength, to bear the Weight of the Dr's Conclusion.

The Dr's. Third and last proof, of our Lords approbation of Episcopal
Government in these Epistles, and that the Angels, were Bishops of these
Churches, and Presidents thereof, is drawn from the Testimony of most Primitive
Antiquity (as he calls it) for which he Cites the anonymous tract of Timothy's
Martyrdom mentioned, P. 424.
Bibleotheca patrum, N. 244. Showing that John, Two or Three years after his
return from Patmos, assisted with the seven Bishops of that Province, he
assumed to himself; the Government of it; which Seven, were the Angels here
here Addressed; these Churches lying within the Lydian or Proconsular Asia, of
which Ephesus was Metropolis: And therefore, these Seven Bishops, by whom he
Governed the Province of Ephesus, are the Seven Angels, all within that
Province. He adds; That Austin call the Angels of Ephesus, praepositos
Ecclesiae, Epist. 162. and the Seven Angels, praepositi Ecclesiarum, Comment.
in Rev. That Ambrose in 2 Cor. 11. referring to these Angels, tells us, that by
Angels, are meant the Bishops. Ans. 1. Since the Dr. calls these Angels,
Bishops and Presidents over these Churches, in propounding this Proof, if he
intend only Presidents, he will fall utterly short of his design and scope of
evincing that Episcopal Power, which he ascribs to them; a President, and one,
who has all Authority, Monopolized in him, being quite distinct things: If he
intend by Presidents of the Churches, such as are set over it in a general
Sense; Are not all Pastors in Scripture, called such, as are set over God's
People, and have the Tittles of (...) If the Dr. will have them such Presidents
over the Churches, as had monopolised and enhanced in their persons, all
Authority of Government, a President being of far larger extent, and surely
with a relation to a Church, it is not all one, to say, such a person is
President of a Church, and a Sole President: As it it is not all one to say,
such a man, is Minister of London, and the Sole Minister. For, all Ministers in
the Scripture Sense, are Presidents over the Churches. But 2 ly. since the Dr.
draws his supposed demonstrative evidence of the power and Authority of these
Seven Angels, addressed by our Lord, in these Epistles, and of the nature and
extent of that Office, which is indigitat by the term Angel, and consequently
the meaning of the prescriptions, given to them, from Primitive Antiquity (as
he calls it) I would know* whether the Dr. will own this Principle, that
Antiquity, or even that which he calls Primitive (or the First human Testimony,
secluding the Scriptures, or of the First Ages, after the Canon of the
Scriptures) is the infallible Rule and Commentary, for understanding the
Nature and Office of Church Officers, mentioned in Scripture. If the Dr. will
not own this Principle, his evidence by his own confession; is no evidence;
For, an evidence, which will fail and not reach the conclusion, is no evidence
at all; and in the best construction, no proper evidence without restriction,s
and limitations added. If the Dr. hold the Affirmative, then I would urge him
thus.

First, If Men's Testimony, or the Churches Primitive practice, tho never so
early, must be the Key and Comment in this Case, of the Scripture Sense, of the
Character and description of Church Officers, and able solely to found our
Faith and persuasion hereanent, why may not also, human practice and profession
of the Church, simply considered, determine our Faith and prectice, as to every
Scripture Truth, and duty therein held out? For, the Dr. can assign no
difference, nor upon admitting the antecedent, show the least shadow of a
ground, which will limit and enervat the consequence.

Secondly, If this be admitted, I would know, whether he will not thus set up
an higher tribunal, than the Scriptures, as to the ground and Rule of our Faith
and practice, and in opposition to the Apostle Paul. 1 Cor. 2.4. make our Faith
stand in man's Wisdom, not in the Wisdom of God and his Power; and in
contradiction to the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet 1.20.21. make the Scriptures of a
private Interpretation, as if the Prophecy had come by the will of Man: For, if
I must believe no otherwise, anent the Office of these Angels, and the
Scriptures pointing out the same, than according to the human Testimony of
after-Writers, or the Testimony and Practice of supposed Bishops, their
pretended Successors; then the custom and practice of fallible Men, becomes the
(...), the ratio, and demonstration, a priori, the great and chief ground, why
I believe Scriptures, to have such a Sense, and no other. And thus we will give
Men, a Dominion over our Faith, which resolves ultimatly into an human practice
and Testimony of fallible Men: A Principle, which no sound Protestant will own.
Besides, that the proof of the Assumption of the Argument, and to instruct this
Matter of Fact, and that all Primitive Antiquity, (as he calls it) does testify
for the Bishop, which he has shapen out, would inextricably baffle his
endeavors, as is above cleared: It being evident, that as, the Writings of
many of the First Writers, are lost, and not a f^w corrupted; So, many, Eminent
for Piety and Learning, have written nothing in the First Ages, which are
therefore generally acknowledged, to be very dark, in the Matter of Fact. The
Affirmative proof, lying upon the Dr. he is obliged to make it appear, that
neither the one, nor the other, has contradicted his supposed Testimonies, else
he but beats the Air, and has said nothing to the purpose.

Thirdly, The Scripture (as has been proved) ascribing to Pastors, the Power
of Order and Jurisdiction, and even to the Pastors or Presbyters of the Church
of Ephesus, (the Angel whereof, is First here addressed,) Act. 20.28. Compared
with 1. Tim. 4.14. 1. Pet. 5.2.3. 1 Cor. 5.4.5. When this Scripture account of
the Office and Authority of Pastors (which, surely is Antiquity, prior to the
Dr's most Primitive Antiquity, and of far greater veneration) stands cross to
his pretended Primitive Testimonies of the Bishops* Power, and both are laid in
even Balances together, which of the two, will preponderat? The Dr. for shame,
will not say the Second; Hence I infer, that he must either accord his Human
Testimonies with Scripture, or quite this Plea. And next, he must acknowledge,
that he stands obliged to Answer the premised Scripture accounts of the Pastors
Office, and our Arguments drawn therefrom, before his Human Testimonies deserve
the least value or notice.

Again, Fourthly, We may here ply ^he Dr, with a Notion and Argument of his own
Mould, The Dr. thinks it strange, how we can suppose the Church, to have so
suddenly altered the Government, from Presbytrie to Episcopacy, if Presbytrie
was her first Government. But I would ask the Dr, since its evident in
Scripture, that Pastors and Presbyters, have both the Name and Thing of the
Scripture Bishop, and consequently Episcopal Authority ascribed to them, yea,
and in the premised Scriptures, several such paralells, its actual Exercise
supposed to be inherent in, and competent to them: And in special, since the
Elders and Pastors of the Church of Ephesus, are enjoined by Paul, in his last
Farewell, to exercise Episcopal Authority jointly over that Church, without the
least Hint of any Episcopal President over them, and this after all his
Prescriptions to Timothy, and the Exercise of his Evangelistick Office there;
whence came all this sudden Universal Change in John's time, that all this
Episcopal Authority, competent before, to Pastors of Churches, and particularly
of Ephesus, is Monopolized in the Person of one Bishop? How came all the
Churches of Asia, to be so suddenly cast in this Mould? And to press the Querie
a little further, if there was such an Universal Authority of Bishops in John's
time, and thus acknowledged and attested by all the Primitive Antiquity, as the
Dr. pretends, yea and acknowledged by Ierom himself, as well as by Augustine and
Ambrose, how comes Ierom to say, that even in his time, the Elders were subject
to the Bishop, by Custom, not Divine Dispensation (Comment on Tit.) and on
Isai. 3. that they had in his time [Caetus Presbyterorum) a Meeting or Court of
Presbyters, which he calls an Apostolic Senate? How comes a Presbytrie to be
mentioned in the Council of Ancyra, Canon 18? How comes Ambrose (or, a Father,
Coetaneous to him) upon Ephesians. 4. to assert, that after the Church was enlarged
[caepit alio modo gubernari] it began to be Governed after another manner; than
at first; and -- that [ non per omnia convenient, etc.] the Government of the
Church, in his time, was not every way suitable and square, to the Apostolic
Appointment? How comes Augustine ( Epist. 10.) to assert with Ierom, that by
Custom of the Church, Episcopatus was major Presbyterio? How comes Firmili^nus
( apud Cyprian. Epist. 78.) to assert, that the Pastors or Presbyters
[possident ordinandi potestatem) possesses the Power of Ordination; And these
Presbyters, he calls [ Praepositi] Presidents or Rulers, using that very Term,
from which the Dr. draws the Episcopal Authority of these Angels? Yea
Chrysostom on 1 Timothy asserts, that [inter Presbyterum and Episcopum inter est
ferme nihil] there is almost no difference betwixt the Bishop and Presbyter;
and that which is spoken by Paul to the one, agrees also to the other. Now, if
there be such Harmony in the Testimony of the Ancients, in point of the Bishops
Power, as the Dr. pretends, I would fain know, what means this immusical
Jarring, and palpable Contradiction to his Assertion, and even by these very
Fathers, whom he brings for his Vouchers?

Hence, Fifthly, it appears that the Dr's Proofs from these Testimonies, and
his pretended Argument, from all Primitive Antiquity, is pitifully Lame, and
short of his Design, upon two important Grounds. 1. That his Witnesses, are not
Harmonious, several of them, giving a palpably Cross Testimony to him. 2. In
that they do not assert that sole Authority of Bishops, and that absolute
Inhanced Power, which he alleges: For, no Man of Sense, can draw this
Consequence, from the general Name of Bishops, used by him, or from a simple
calling of them Presidents, will conclud them to be such, as he pretends, yea,
and not such de Facto, far less Iure Divino, since in other places, they are
found clear and positive in a contrary Assertion: And therefore, unless the Dr.
will Stage these Fathers, whom he mentions, as the most Arrant,
Self-contradicting, Non-sensical Fools, that ever Spoke or Wrote, he must needs
acknowledge, with us, that they use the Term Bishop, in a general Sense, and as
common both to such (...) or Presidents, as had then obtained, and to other
Pastors. So that in such Characters, appropriat to such Persons, they could
neither understand, an Episcopal Presidency, founded upon a Divine Right, and
Apostolical Institution, as the Dr. pretends, nor such an absolute Power, as
swallows up and Inhances all Authority of Pastors in Government, which he also
asserts.

This considered, with what is above offered, does so fully cut off the Dr's
third Argument, which he prosecutes, P. 424, 425, etc. that nothing needs be
further added, as there might be with Advantage, if a particular Examen, were
made of his Citations. The Folly of his first Headless Testimony appears, in
that it makes the Apostle John to assume a new Archiepiscopal Chair, or Primacy
over the Asian Churches; The Sottishness of which Conceit, and the Contrariety
thereof to the Scripture Account of the Apostolic Office, is evident to any of
common Sense, since the Apostles, by virtue of their Office, which extended to
all Churches, planted and to be planted, were Ministers thereof, in actu
exercito, and yet this Apostle must be assisted with seven Bishops, forsooth,
to support his new Archiepiscopal Chair over that Province. The Citation speaks
of a Province in general, which the Dr. will needs have, to be that of Ephesus,
and the seven Angels, must be these seven Bishops, by whom he governed that
Province. Again, the Angel is called by Augustine, the Praepositus or President;
therefore, he was an Hierarchical President, as the Dr. has shapen out: What
Consequence is this? As to what He adds out of Ignatius and Irenaeus, in
reference to Polycarp's Episcopacy over Smyrna, from Eusebius ( Lib. 4. Cap.
15.) and Polycrates's Episcopacy over Ephesus ( Lib. 5. Cap. 24.) we have
spoken to it already, and to the Credit to be given to these supposed Epistles,
as likeways to Eusebius's History. Besides, that in Eusebius ( Lib. 5. Cap.
23.) Irenaeus calls Anycetus, Pius, Heginus, Telesphorus, Xistus, Presbyters of
the Church of Rome [Presbyteri illi qui te praecesserunt] We also, did show,
that he thus expresses himself further [ Nec Polycarpus, Anyceto suasit, ut
servaret qui sibi Presbyterorum quibus successerat, consuetudinem servandam
esse diceret] We have also already made appear, that Polycarp his supposed
Bishop, disownes the Office and Doctrine imputed to him by the Dr, since,
Writing to the Philippians, he ownes only Bishops and Deacons, as the two
Orders of Ministry, and persuades the Philippians to be subject to their
Presbyters and Deacons, as to God and Christ. To which we may add, that Bishop
Bilson himself, acknowledges ( Perpet. Gov. P. 158, 159.) that Elders at first
did govern by common Counsel. For what he adds of Eusebius's Testimonies, anent
the existent Bishops in several of these Churches, when John wrote to them, it
is abundantly removed by what is said above, in reference to the Sense and
Acceptance of the Term Bishop, by Ancient Writers, as likewise by that which
we have often observed of Eusebius himself. The Dr. adds a Passage of Paraeus,
which we shall take notice of, he tells us, that Paraeus proves out of Aretas
Caesariensis, that Antipas the Faithful Martyr, mentioned Rev. 2.13. was Bishop
of Patmos, immediately before the Angel of that Church, P. 426.
to whom John wrote, and that that Angel, was one Gaius who (as he proves out
of Clement) succeeded to Antipas, in the Episcopal Chair. Paraeus, says indeed,
that these of Pergamus, had cruelly slain Antipas, but adds [ quis fuerat, ex
Historia parum constat] that there is no Light from History, who he was. He
adds [Aretas Pastorem ejus Ecclesiae fuisse sensit sub Domitiano fortem fidei
assertorem, etc.] that Aretas thinks he was Pastor of that Church, and under
Domitian, a Strenuous Asserter of the Faith, and Burnt in a Brazen Bull. He
adds, that he to whom our Lord wrote, might be tempted to lay aside his Office,
for fear of the like Punishment, etc. But what the Dr. adds of an Episcopal
Chair, and of his Name, Paraeus says nothing, neither does he ascribe to
Antipas any other Office, than that of Pastor, seeming to take these Churches
for Congregational. And if the Office, to which the Angel succeeded, was that
of a Pastor only, where is our Dr's Episcopal Chair, which he here assigns him?
Besides, Paraeus affirms the History to give no certain sound, touching the
Office and Character of Antipas: Neither does he mention any thing of Clement.
The Authors of the second part of Annot. under the Name of Pool, do affirm,
That no Ecclesiastic History, makes mention of Antipas, and that he seems to
have been a Person of obscure Note; And that no History giving Account of him,
has inclined some to think this Epistle, is wholly Prophetical, and that
Antipas signifies all such, as oppose the Pope, as if it were the same with,
Antipapa.

The Dr's Conclusion upon the whole of this his discourse and Argument from the
Seven Asian Angels, P. 426.
is, That it being apparent, that there were Bishops, presiding in each of
these Churches, when John wrote, consequently they had the Government of these
Churches committed to them, since he Writes to them as Governors and Overseers
of these Respective Churches; So, that they being Bishops, our Savior, in
these Epithets, allows and approves of the Episcopal Order. But, by what is
above replied, it is evident, that nothing which the Dr. has adduced, amounts
to prove the existence of any such Bishops, as he has shapen out, in one, or
all of these Churches: And therefore, our Lords writing to these Angels, gives
not the least shadow of allowance or approbation of that Episcopal order,
which he asserts. And so, P. 427.
to the Dr's Sum of all (as he expresses it) viz: That the Episcopal form, is
of Divine Right; upon Ground of our Saviors Institution, Seconded by the
Practice of the Apostles, and conformity of the Primitive Churches; and our
Lords express approbation We may confidently repone, from what is above
replied, that it is evident, that the high-flown Hierarchy, he pleads for, has
no Foundation* either in our Lords Institution, or the Practice of the
Apostles, is noways Authorized by the Conformity of the Primitive Church, or
our Saviors Approbation, in his Epistles to the Asian Churches, but as opposite
to all these, is by the Churches of Christ, to be rejected and disowned.

CHAP. V. The Dr's Scripture Proofs of a Fourfold Ministry or Prerogative of
a Bishop, as Superior to a Pastor, in Point of Government, considered.
THE First Prerogative of the Bishop, as contradistinct from a Presbyter, P.
433.
is (with the Dr.) to make Laws and Canons, which is the Essence of Government,
and supposes a Legislative Power, else, faith he, Christ's Wisdom is impeached,
if he left a Governed Society, without a Legislative Power.

I need not stand to tell the Dr, That by consent of Protestant Divines, the
Churches Power, is not properly, Nomothetick, Architectonick, Legislative, but
Ministerial, and declarative of Christ's Institution, in reference to
Ordinances, the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government of his House.

The Dr. proves this Authority (P. 433.434.) from the Apostles Power, Act. 15.
Determining the Controversy anent Circumcision -- And says, That in their
Decree, they exercise a Legislative Power, laying upon the Churches, to abstain
from what was not prohibited by any standing Law of Christianity: That, as the
Apostles and Primitive Bishops, made Laws by common consent, for the good of
the Church in general, so, by their own Authority, for particular Churches, to
which they were more particularly related. Here is, I must say, odd and
confused stuff. First, The Dr. supposes, that the Decree, Act. 15. had no
previous Scripture Foundation, contrar to the express tenor and scope of the
place, where it is evident 1. That in this Disquisition, there are Grounds of
the Sentence laid down, yea and Scripture Grounds. 2 ly. The Sentence runs in
these terms, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost ( viz. speaking in the Scripture)
and to us. 3 ly. Upon these previous Scripture Grounds of Charity and Union-and
the esehewing the Offense of the weak Jews (apparent in the debate and
disquisition) the things enjoined; are termed, necessary things, and thus
supposed materially such, antecedaneously to the Decree. Hence 4 ly. The Dr. in
saying, That this Abstinence (he must understand it in the present Case and
circumstances of time, place and persons) was never prohibited by any standing
Law of Christianity; ibid.
expugns from being Laws of Christianity, all our Lords Precepts, in point of
Love and Unity, and the eschewing the Offense of the little Ones: For, these
Rules did clearly found this Abstinence, and ground the necessity thereof, in
the present Case and exigence.

Again, in the nexplace, The great point, the Dr. has to prove, is That this
supposed Legislative power is the Bishops sole prerogative, secluding Pastors:
This he proves by the Apostles, together with the Elders and Brethren, their
coming together, and determining this matter. One would think, this makes fair
to prove the contrary. The Apostles here, meeting with, and taking into the
disquisition and Decree, and into every step of the procedure, the ordinary
Ministers, and Elders, as persons interested and concerned, and who are found
to concur with them in enacting and enjoining the thing Decreed, in order to
the Churches Obedience. Ay, but the Dr. tells us, ibid.
That by consent of all Antiquity, by these Elders, we are to understand the
Bishops of Judea; for which he Cites Dr Hammond on Act. 11. A Dr. no doubt, of
a like soundness with himself. But 1. If the Dr. adhere to Dr. Hammonds notion
of Elders, he must Esteem them Bishops, where ever mentioned, and deny the
existence of any Pastors (the true Scripture Bishops) at this time; wherein our
Dr. will, and must needs justle and deal strokes with Dr. Hammond: For (to omit
other instances) he holds the Elders present with James, when Paul went into
him, to be Pastors, over which, James, as Bishop of Jerusalem, did preside. 2
ly, None can imagine these Elders to be Bishops of Judea, without the most
ridiculous Forgery imaginable: For, in the context, it is evident, that at this
time, the Apostles were but founding and gathering Churches in Judea, settling
Churches therein, and taking inspection of them, by their Apostolic Authority;
And therefore, it is a strange fantastic conceit to imagine Churches by this
time grown up to a Diocese in Judea, and of such a bulk and number, as to have
Diocesan Bishops set over them, yea and Diocesan Bishops, of so considerable a
Number, as the Elders may be rationally supposed to be at this time, and in
this meeting; yea, and these, besides the far greater Number of Ordinary
Teachers and Pastors, which this Man will not deny, the Apostles, to have
ordained, where Churches were planted. Again, why, I pray, the Bishops of Judea
only gathered here, in order to this general Decree for all the Churches, and
no Bishops of the Gentile Churches, which, he will say, were by this time set
up? Besides, that looking to the occasion of this debate, anent the
Circumcision, which had its rise from some of them that went from Judea, as
from the Apostles, and thus troubled the Churches, the design of the Gentiles,
appears evidently to be, to send Paul, to the Apostles and Elders, residing at
Jerusalem, without the least hint, of any more enlarged Advertisement of
others, than such, as were there, at that time. Again, the Dr. says, That
Apostles and Primitive Bishops, made general Laws, for the whole Church, and
Bishops, particular Laws, for their particular Churches: ibid.
Thus (says he) Paul gave Rules to the Corinthians, for more decent
communication of the Lords Supper. Strong reasoning indeed, and hanging well
together! First, he supposes the Apostles made by their Apostolical Authority,
the general Rules for the whole Church, as proper to them, with concurrence of
ordinary Bishops; the ordering of particular Churches, being peculiar to the
ordinary or Primitive Bishops: And presently, to prove this, he puts the great
Apostle of the Gentiles, into the class of Ordinary Bishops, in giving Rules to
this Church of Corinth, and wisely supposes, that Paul's Apostolic
Prescriptions about Right and decent Communicating, concerned only this Church
of Corinth, and were Authorized and enacted by no Apostoick Authority, nor by
the Apostle Paul, as in that capacity. To this scope, the Dr. with as much
Sense and soundness, instances Paul's giving Laws and Canons, to the Churches
of Galatia, contradicting therein, the Relation of these Canons, to particular
Churches, since they did respect both the Churches of Corinth, and the Churches
of Galatia. Of the same nature. is that which he here mentions of Paul's Charge
to Timothy and Titus (1 Timothy 5.7. Tit. 1.5.) touching the redressing disorders,
and supplying defects in these Churches. For, besides, that Paul exerced an
Apostolical Authority in these Directions to the Evangelists (extraordinary
Officers, as Paul himself) which clearly excludes, Director, and Directed, from
the compass of the Dr's Argument he will not deny, several of these directions,
at least, to have been of universal concern and necessity, and in this respect
also, as remote from his Design. The Dr. adds, That what the Apostles and
Primitive Bishops did, to be sure, they had Authority to do, P. 435.
and whatsoever, Authority they had, they derived it down to their Successors.
That Apostles and Evangelists, exercised a Lawful Authority, is indeed very
sure, and no less sure, than the Dr's Argument here, is loose and unsure, from
Apostolical directions to Evangelists, to conclud the Nature and Mould of the
supposed Episcopal Authority of Prelates, in reference to making Laws (as is
above evinced) since the Dr. cannot shape out, nor by any twist of reason and
sound consequence, infer his supposed Hierarchical Prelat, with sole Power of
Ordination and Jurisdiction, from the Office of either Apostles or Evangelists.

The Dr will not have any Officer beneath a Bishop, to have been allowed
suffrage, P. 435.436.
in any of the First Four General Councils; yet immediately after (some way
retracting and correcting himself) he allows them a place in General Councils,
but tell us, it was only for debate, and preparing the Matter of Laws; but the
form of Laws, he says, proceeded from the Bishops suffrage. This is pretty.
First, The Dr. will never prove, that in the First Councils, there were Prelates
of his stamp and Mould. Next, its strange, that in Councils, Presbyters were
sitting for Conference, and as no members. I would fain know, if the Dr. will
say, that these Elders meeting with the Apostles, Act. 15. (which he will, no
doubt, acknowledge, was one of the best Molded Councils, yea, and a Standart
for after-Councils) were no Members, but called and meeting for conference
only, since in the Scripture account, and three fold Partition of those that
met, Viz: Apostles, Elders Brethren, there is an entire joint concurrence,
with the whole procedure, viz: both in the Disquisition, the Sentence, the
decretal Epistle and Appointment, in reference to the Churches obedience. It
does also suit the Dr's consideration, to show, how it can consist with reason,
and the Nature of a Church Judicatory, that such persons, as are no Members,
nor fit to be Members, are, in tuto, to prepare Matter for Laws, and take share
in debates. But the Dr's Forgery here is evident. For 1. If Presbyters
concurrence in Ordination, was Authoritative, not by consent only, and they
imposed hands as proper Ordainers, even when Bishops had obtained Power in
Judicatories, by confession of Episcopalians themselves (see Dr. Forbes Iraen.
lib. 2. Cap. 11.) I would fain know, why such Ecclesiastics or Church
Officers, as had Authority, to Ordain, which is one of the greatest Acts of
Ministerial Authority, had no Authority in enacting Laws in Councils, but sat
as Ciphers. 2 ly. The Dr. will find Antiquity against this deputed kind of
conferring or consulting Power, which he allows to Presbyters in Councils,
without Authority, in enacting Laws. Chrysostom (hom. 17. on Matthew.) calls
Presbyters expressly [ Christi vicarios] Christ's Vicars or Deputes: And its
strange, that such to whom Christ entrusted this Vicarious Power, had no
interest and Authority in enacting Laws in his Church, and in the Government
thereof. Cyprian ( lib. 4. Ep. 8.) shows, that [ Dominus Sacerdotes in
Ecclesia, etc,] the Lord condescended to elect to himself, Priests or Ministers
in the Church (the Dr. will not say, that he put this designation only upon
Prelates.) And did he elect and constitute them for no interest in the
Government thereof? Nay, on the contrary, the Judgment of the Ancients, is
clear in this, that the Power of external Jurisdiction, and consequently, the
Authority of enacting Laws or Canons, was common to Bishops and Presbyters.
Ignatius in his Epistle to the Trallians, called the Presbytrie [ Senatum Dei]
Gods Court or Senate [ and non consiliarios solum] (as our Dr. makes them) [ sed
and assessores Episcopi] not his Advisers only, but his Authoritative
fellow-Counsellors; And I hope, such (he will grant) as are in this Character,
have interest, not only, in preparing matter for Laws, but an essential
Official Right, in the Authoritative enacting of them. Irenaeus ( lib. 4. Cap.
44.) calls them [ Principes] Princes or Chief: And if such, in his Judgment,
the forementioned Authority is clearly by him, attributed to them. Augustine (
Sermon. 6.) calls the Brethren in Eremo [ Patronos, Rectores Terrae] And what
pitiful Patrons or Rectors are they, who have no Authority in enacting Laws?
Chrysostom asserts expressly (on 1 Timothy 1. hom. 11) That they presided over the
Churches, as Bishops, and received together with them, the Office of Teaching
and Governing the Church. And if this, with the preceding Testimonies, give
not the Lie to the Dr's forementioned distinction, anent Presbyters sole
consulting interest in Councils, and upon the Bishops Call allennarly, without
any Authority in enacting Laws, let any Judge. Chrysostom, moreover, in the
beginning of that Homily, stating the Question, wherefore the Apostle, after he
had spoken to the Office and Duty of Bishops, passes over to Deacons, omitting
the order of Presbyters, returns this Answer and Reason, Because, betwixt the
Bishop and Presbyter, there is almost no difference, and because, that unto
Presbyters also, the care of the Church is committed. And what he said
concerning Bishops, the same things also do agree to Presbyters. And if, with
the Dr's good leave, I might draw an inference from Chrysostom's assertion, I
would thus subsume; But so it is, that the Authority of Government, and the
enacting of Laws in Church Judicatories, is by the Apostle ascribed to the
Scripture- Bishop, whom he mentions: Ergo, the same Authority and Power is by
the Apostle, ascibed to Presbyters, in Chrysostom's Sense. Gratian (in Decret.
Cause. 16. Quest. 1. Cap.) shows, that [ Ecclesia habet senatum Presbyterorum] A
Senate of Presbyters, without whose Counsel, the Bishop can do nothing. They
were not then called at the Bishops pleasure for debate only, and preparing
matters (as the Dr. pretends) but were the [ sine quibus non] in the enacting
of the Laws themselves. The Dr. makes Prelates to enhance all decisive suffrage,
in Judicatories, yet Cyprian ( Ep. 6. and 28.) professes, He neither could nor
would do any thing without the Clergy. And the Fourth Council of Carthage,
condemns the Bishop's Decision, unless Fortified by their Sentence. So far was
it, that the Bishop's sole Suffrage, gave the Strength and Formality to Laws,
that they were null, without Presbyters Authoritative Concurrence. This is
clear, by so full a consent of Antiquity, that we will find; That neither in
Censuring of Presbyters: Nor 2 ly, In Judging the conversation, or Crimes of
Church Members: Nor 3 ly, In Excommunicating or Receiving of Penitents, Bishops
could do any thing without Presbyters. Tertulian (Apolog. Advers. Gentes) shows
us, That the Churches Exhortations, Castigations, and Divine Censures, were put
forth by the [ Probati quique Seniores] who did preside; the accused Person
being brought into the Congregation. And this Authoritative Sentence of
Presbyters, was more approved, than when passed by one Man: As when Syagrius
and Ambrose, passed Sentence in the same Case; The Church was unsatisfied with
the Sentence of Syagrius, because he passed it [ sine alicujus Fratris
Consilio] without the consent of any of his Brethren: But were pacified with
the Sentence of Ambrose, because says he [ hoc judicium nostrum cum Fratribus
and consacerdotibus participatum processerat] This his Sentence proceeded
jointly from him and his Fellow- Presbyters or Ministers. Yea, the very
Admonition of Offenders, were not given by the Bishops alone, but by the Elders
( August. De verb. Apost. Sermon. 19.) Thus also, Origin contra Celsum lib. 3.
Excommunication it self, Tertullian tells us, was vibrated by those that
labored in the Word and Doctrine; and the Presbytrie, that delivered unto
Satan, as Jerome shows, ( Epist. ad Heliod.) So ( Epist. ad Demet.) they also
Received and Absolved the Penitents. Cyprian ( Epist. 12) shows that this was
the custom [ nec ad communicationem venire quis possit, nisi prius ab Episcopo
and clero manus illi fuerit imposita] such as were Excommunicat, returned, not
to Church Fellowship, before hands were laid upon him by the Bishop and Clergy.
And writing to his Charge, anent lapsed Christians, he tells them [ exomologesi
facta, and manu iis a vobis in poenitentiam imposita] After Confession, and
laying on of the Presbyters hands, they might be commended to God. And such as
returned from Heresy, and were to be Received in the Church at Rome, in the
time of Cornelius, Cyprian tells us ( Epist. 6. compared with 46.) they came
before the Presbytrie, and Confessing their Sins, were Received. Now, if
Presbyters had such Authority, and the Episcopal Power was of this Nature, and
thus Limited, let any Judge, how the Dr's Assertion can subsist, viz: "That in
Judicatories, Pastors had no decisive suffrage.

For the Dr's after-discourse, (P. 436.) anent the Civil Sovereigns Decrees, in
case of a supposed interfeiring with the Churches Legislative Power (as he
calls it) I shall not (it being some what out of our way) much digress in
examining the same, tho I judge it very lax and liable to considerable
exceptions, yea, and hardly reconcilable with it self, or sound sense and
Divinity. The Dr. holds, That the Churches Legislative Power, cannot reach to
control the Civil Decrees. And yet holds, That these Decrees cannot
countermand Gods Laws. Now, the Dr. will not say, that the Churches Legislative
Power, is not founded upon, and Authorized by Gods Laws; nay, he positively
asserts, that it is. He adds, "That next to the Laws of God, the Sovereigns
Laws; are to be obeyed. And thus makes the Law of God, the overruling Law, the
Regula Regulans, and paramount to those of the Sovereign: And therefore, by
good consequence, from this Assertion, the Churches Legislative Power, in
exhibiting and declaring Gods Laws, must likewise be thus Paramount thereunto,
and first obeyed; Especially, if he stand to that instance of his, Act. 15. as
exhibiting the Platform and Standart of Church Laws, wherein, the enacted
Canon and Decree, is said to be, the mind of the Holy Ghost, and thus a Divine
Law, the Authority of God, being thereto interponed. Yet, in the very next
Words, he lays down this Assertion, That next to the Laws of the Sovereign, the
Laws of the Church, are to be obeyed: And so here, these Civil Laws, are set in
an higher Sphere, and made Paramount to all Church Laws, and this without any
exception or Limitation, whether they be consonant to the Divine Law or not, or
any Limitation of Consonancy to the Divine Law, in the Laws of the Church. The
person, who will reconcile and soudder these, must in my apprehension, be
better skilled, than all Vulcan's Gimmerers, and no doubt, better seen in
logical Rules and subtilties, than I. So much for the Dr's. First Prerogative
of a Bishop, as distinct from a Presbyter, in the Power Legislative, and of
making Canons.

The Second Peculiar Ministry and Prerogative of the Bishop above Presbyters,
P. 436.437.438.
the Dr. tells us, is, To Consecrat and Ordain to Ecclesiastic Offices.
Thereafter, the Dr. spends much discourse upon Christ's Mission of the Twelve
Apostles, as the Father sent him, including a Power of Ordination of others,
which he Confirms by Luke 24.33.36. Mark. 16.14. Matthew. 28.16. Which
Commission, he tells us, was transferred Originally upon the Apostolic Order;
So, that Ecclesiastic Commissions, were either given by the hands of these
First Apostles, or by such Secondary Apostles, as were by them admitted into
Apostolic Orders, and these Secondary Apostles, were the same with Bishops.
Ans. We need not spend time in resuming what is said already, in Answer to
this. There Is no doubt, but our Lord gave a Power of Mission, and of Ordaining
Ministers, to His Twelve Apostles* A Power to Plant Churches, through the
World, and a Gospel Ministry, and Ordinances in them: But, that by virtue of
this their Mission, they were to transferr their Apostolic Office and
Authority, to ordinary Succeeding Officers, is the (...), the Quaesitum, or
Question, which the Dr. still beggs and supposes, but will never be able to
prove, from either the Nature and intendment of their Mission, or the Power and
Authority of Succeeding Officers, whom they Ordained, as we have above evinced.
The Dr's Proofs are pitifully claudicant; he tells us, That tho the whole
Disciples were present, the Apostles only Imposed hands upon the Seven Deacons,
Act. 6. And why not? The Authoritative Imposition of Hands in Ordination, is no
doubt proper to Ecclesiastic Officers; not to the People; but where were the
Succedaneous Bishops here, who had solely this Power, tho Ministers were
present? The Dr. has let us see no shadow of this, from the Text. He next
tells us of Paul and Barnabas Ordaining Elders in Antioch, Iconium and Lystra.
A mighty proof! The Apostles in planting Churches, ordained Ministers in them:
Ergo Suceedaneous Bishops, have an Apostolic Authority of Ordaining, derived
to them solely, as their peculiar Prerogative above Pastors: This Consequence
is denied. If the Dr. own these Elders for Pastors, it should seem, they had an
Ordaining Power, else the Apostles settled these Churches in a very mank frame,
and lame posture, and wanting the Essentials of an Organick Church. If the Dr.
allow them an Ordaining Power, he crosses the Scope of a proof of Succeedaneous
Bishops, with Power of Ordination, set up by the Apostles, since thus he
ascribes it unto Pastors: And if he deny it, he is liable also to the same
absurdity, and that mentioned above, and will cross his Notion of the Bishops
Office ascribed to the Elders of Jerusalem, who met with the Apostles in that
Council Act. 15. Besides, if the Dr. put an Episcopal Mitre, upon these Pastors
or Elders, and make them Bishops in his Sense, it is very odd, that among these
little new gathered Churches, such highly Authorized Diocesan Prelates were set
up, before any Pastors, for Feeding with the Word and Doctrine. For discovering
the folly of which Gloss and Assertion, I dare appeal to the Current of
Interpreters. Or, if the Dr. imagine the strength of his Proof, to ly in this,
that these Officers were Ordained by Apostles, solely, he should know, that as
we all allow an extraordinary Power in Apostles, in Churches, not yet
Constitut, not competent to Ordinary Officers, so, his Assertion is anent an
ordinary Power of Succeedaneous or Secondary Apostles (as he calls them) as
sole and singular in Ordination.

But the Dr. finds a Difficulty in his Way, viz. That Paul and Barnabas were
ordained Apostles of the Gentiles by certain Prophets and Teachers in Antioch,
P. 438.
Act. 13.1, 2. To which he makes this Return, That these Prophets and Teachers
had, no doubt, received the Apostolic Character, being ordained by the
Apostles Bishops of Syria: For otherwise, says he, how could they have derived
it? And this Notion, the Dr. reposes such Confidence in, that he tells us,
There is no doubt, but they had this Character. But truly, whether the Insipid
Folly of the Objection, or of the Return here made unto it, be greater, is a
Question to me. First, That Paul and Barnabas, were at this time, and in this
Action, ordained Apostles of the Gentiles, I believe few (if ever any) except
the Dr, did imagine. I had always thought, that it is evident to any, who reads
the Account and Story of Paul's Conversion, and Call to the Apostleship, by the
Lord from Heaven, that when thus called, he was called, in a special manner, to
the Apostleship of the Gentiles -- I have appeared unto thee, says our Lord --
to make thee a Minister, and a Witness -- delivering thee from the People, and
from the Gentiles, unto whom I send thee, to open their Eyes, etc. Upon which,
the Apostle immediately set upon this Work of Preaching to them, Act. 26.17, 18,
19. The Apostle also tells us, ( Gal. 1.15, 16, 17.) that when it pleased God,
who separated me from my Mothers Womb, and called me by his grace, to reveal
his Son in me, that I might preach among the Heathen, or Gentiles; immediately I
conferred not with Flesh and Blood: Neither went I up to Jerusalem, to them,
which were Apostles before me. Compare this with Ephesians. 3.8. Hence, its odd to
suppose, that either he or Barnabas, were at this time ordained Apostles. For,
Barnabas, that he was an Apostle, looking strictly to the Description of
Apostles, some may doubt; but supposing him such (he being joined with Paul,
under that Character, Act. 14.14.) we read of his Officiating, and for what can
be understood from Scripture, in the same manner, and by virtue of the same
Office, as the Apostle Paul, to the Gentiles, before this time: For ( Act.
11.22.) he is sent to Antioch, by the Church at Jerusalem, for Confirming and
Watering the Church gathered there; And v. 25, 26. he goes to Tarsus, to seek
Paul, and brings him to Antioch, and Taught there a year with Paul, where the
Christian Name first took place. Next, the Dr. finding himself puzzled, with
his Notion of a supposed Ordination of Paul and Barnabas, to their Apostolic
Office, by mere Prophets and Teachers, has no Shift, but to allege, they were
by the Apostles ordained Bishops of the Churches of Syria, since they could not
else, have derived the Office of Apostolat. A pretty Evasion indeed, from a
Fantastic Objection! First, these Prophets and Teachers, are taken to be such
Ministers and Teachers, who had also the Gift of Prophecy, Vigent at that time.
So, Pool. 2 Vol. Annot. Diodat. upon the place, says, they were such, as had
the Gift of Expounding publicly the Resolutions of the Christian Faith, by
infallible Conduct and Inspiration of the Holy Ghost; paralelling them with the
Prophets spoken of 1 Cor. 14.29, 32. who, the Dr. will not doubt, are enjoined
Subjection to the Prophets there established: And with these, spoken of 1 Cor.
12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. He adds, that it was an extraordinary Degree of
Ecclesiastic Office, and singular for these times, yet inferior to that of
Apostles, and in many, accompanied with Divine Predictions. The Belgic Divines
upon the place, do show, That some, take the two Words, Prophets and Teachers,
for one and the same thing: Others, distinguish them thus, that Prophets were
those, who by Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, had extraordinary Gifts, to
foretell things to come, and to expound the Holy Scriptures: But Teachers, were
such, who had an ordinary Calling and Gifts, to Instruct and Govern the Church,
in the Worship of God. And this place also they parallel with 1 Cor. 14. and
Ephesians. 4. And the Command of the Holy Ghost, mentioned Act. 13.2. viz. [ Separat
me Barnabas and Saul] they Paraphrase thus, That they were separat from the
Service of this Church, where there were other Teachers enough, to send them to
the Gentiles, whereunto the Holy Ghost ordained them from the beginning, citing
Act. 26.16. And v. 3. which mentions the Laying of the Prophets Hands upon
them, they Paraphrase thus, Not thereby, to choose them to be Apostles,
whereunto they were before chosen, v. 1. and Act. 9.15. but to strengthen them
in this sending to the Gentiles, by Prayer and Imposition of Hands. Grotius
takes them to be such Prophets as Agabus. So Cornel. a Lapide, to be such as
had the Gift of Prophecy; paralelling this place with 1 Cor. 14. They were
such, as by the Influence of the Spirit, foretold things to come: So Menochius,
That they were Expounders of the Scripture, by the Spirits Revelation: So
Lorinus, A Lapide, Piscator: The last of whom, takes them to be the same with
Teachers. All which, how Cross they are to the Dr's Character of these
Imposers, and the Persons, upon whom Hands were Imposed, together with the end
of this Action, is obvious to the meanest Reflection. In Correspondence to the
foresaid Account of Diodat. and the Belgic Divines, we may further notice this
particular Account of Pool. Annot. That Paul and Barnabas being called to be
Apostles already, the Laying on of Hands did signify, 1. Their being set apart
to this particular Imploymentt, hey were now sent about. 2 ly, The Approbation
of the Church to their Heavenly Call they had. 3 ly, Their Praying for Gods
Blessing upon them, and Success upon the Work they went for. But these Prophets
ordaining them to be Apostles, and that, as in the Capacity of Bishops of the
Churches of Syria, is a Dream, much, if not, only beholden to the Dr. himself.
Again, the Dr. does no way eschew his supposed Inconvenience by this Answer;
For, if these his supposed Bishops of Syria, were only of the ordinary
Succedaneous lesser Size, how could they derive an Apostolat, of the Primary
and first Order, as he calls it? unless the Dr. make them entirely one, which
he sometimes (tho in this, inconsistent with himself) disownes, as we heard
above, when he ascribes to the Apostles a Power, to make general Canons to the
whole Church, to the Bishops, only to their particular Diocesses.

But the Dr. finds another Objection, viz. That those Officers, who Imposed
Hands on Paul and Barnabas, are called Prophets, not Apostles or Bishops. ibid.
He Answers, That so was Judas and Silas, Act. 15.32. and yet v. 22. they are
said to be Rulers among the Brethren, as he Translates (...) i. e. says the
Dr. Bishops of Judea. I commend the Dr's Invention and Sagacious Scent:
Wherever a Word savouring of Rule is found, appropriat to any Church Officer,
straight he claps an Episcopal Mitre upon his Head. But this Term being
appropriat to such Persons, and in such Circumstances, as will not admit this
Office and Character, but are supposed mere Pastors or Presbyters, the Dr's
Consecrating Skill fails him. His Friends, the Episcopal Translators of our
English Bible, smelled out no Prelacy, nor Ruling in this Term, but Translat
the Word, Chief Men, Primarios, Praecipuos, Estimatos, and Honoratos; thus
Erasmus, Vatablus, Beza, Piscator, Camerarius, Drusius. Or Ecclesiastico munere
fungentes; so Beza. Chief Men, then, may be understood thus, that they were
persons, as, in Ecclesiastic Offices, so, of Moral Eminency for Parts and
Piety; which the Dr. will not deny to be applicable to Men of the same Office,
and that such discriminating terms of one from another, will infer no
distinction therein. Besides, some might alledg, that if he will allow Members
of the Church visible, the Scripture epithet of Brethren, and of the
Brotherhood, which Denomination, we find applied unto them, 1 Pet. 2.17. That
upon this ground, Pastors or Presbyters, who have a Rule appropriat unto them,
and are termed as in that capacity (...) both the one and the other, may very
well come under the Character of Rulers and Brethren, and by consequence, that
the Relation of the one to the other, may well come under this complex* Phrase
of Rulers among the Brethren, especially, since in the Council, Act 15. the
Elders and Brethren are distinguished, as Church Officers from private Church
Officers from private Church Members. Again, the (...), and even among Brethren,
does evidently and frequently in Scripture, reject the Dr's Mitr'd Notion:
Particularly Heb. 13.7. where they are spoken of, in the Plural, as over that
Church, both in Ruling and Feeding by Doctrine: And v. 17. they are in a
Plurality, supposed both to Rule and watch for Souls; And v. 24, they are
distinguished from the Saints, under this Denomination: And consequently, in
all the Three Passages, put under the Character of, Rulers among the Brethren,
but as having all a Relation to this Church, and actually and jointly Ruling
and Feeding by Doctrine: Consequently, they are such Rulers among the Brethren,
as are all Faithful Pastors; And therefore, of a quite distinct Character, from
his supposed Ruling Prelates.

The Dr. affirms, That Ordination was confined to such as were admitted to the
Apostolat; ibid.
as the laying on of Hands in Ephesus, was by Paul committed to Timothy, upon
whom, he himself imposed Hands; And unto Titus at Crete, whom he left to Ordain
Elders 2 Timothy 1.6. Tit. 1.5. To this we have spoken at large, and need not here
stand upon a prolix resuming of what has been offered in Answer thereunto.
Only in a word, we may see, that the Dr. Shoots short of his proofs, which is
obviously evident to any that considers, that he neither proves, nor can prove,
these his groundless Postulata and suppositions (without which he misses his
mark, and his Argument has no imaginable Foundation) such as 1. That, the
Offices of Timothy and Titus, were ordinary, and the same with his described
Hierarchical Prelat. This, we have already disproved, and by clear Scripture
evidence, made the contrary appear. 2 ly. That the Apostles Precepts, in point
of Ordination, to Timothy and Titus, did import their sole Authority therein,
in Churches constitut, so, as to seclud all Authority of Pastors or Presbyters
in the same, even where they were settled, and could concur. The contrary
whereof, we have also made evident. Again, whereas the Dr. thinks to strengthen
his Plea, in telling us, That the Apostle by Imposing Hands on Timothy,
Ordained him, an Apostle or Bishop of that Church. We have evinced the folly of
this alledgeance, and that the Apostles imposing Hands upon Timothy, rather
strengthens, than impugns the Presbyterian Cause. Since, 1. It is evident, that
the Presbytrie, (and consequently, Ordinary Pastors, whom the Dr. wholly
excluds from Ordination) laid Hands upon Timothy. 1 Timothy 4.14. and had an
Authoritative interest therein. And 2 ly. That the Text mentions Paul's Laying
on of Hands, in order to Gifts; but the laying on of the Hands of the
Presbytrie, in another Mould and Phrase. Hence, its easy, to cut the Sinews of
the Dr's Arguing with a Notion of hii own, set down, but a few Lines above. He
enquires, how could the Prophets at Antioch, derive an Apostolat to Paul and
Barnabas, if they had not been of that Character? Now, I would ply the Dr. with
this Counter-query, how could Imposition of Hands, and Authoritative
Imposition, be performed by Pastors, and Ministerial or Evangelistick
Authority, be derived by them, together with Paul, to Timothy, if Pastors were
not of such a Character, as had an Ordaining Power? Here is a Query, founded
upon the Dr's own medium, and his Answering satisfyingly the second, will clear
him in Answering the First. Hence, what he adds, (P. 438, 439.) viz. That
through the whole Scripture History, Ordination is performed by those of the
Apostolic Order, or by secondary Apostles, as he calls them does in this
appear groundless: For, here we find the Power of Ordination, seated in, and
exercised by a Presbytrie. And we have told him and above evinced, that tho we
suppose Paul present, and imposing Hands with them, it rather confirms, than
invalidats our Argument from this place, for Pastors and Presbyters Power in
Ordination. Not to insist upon the Dr's recent instance of Prophets and
Teachers Authoritatively Imposing Hands upon Paul and Barnabas; which (tho not
importing a formal Ordination) yet, considering the circumstances and context,
viz. The Persons Imposing hands, scil. Pastors and Teachers, the Persons upon
whom they imposed Hands, scil. Apostles, together with the end and design, i.
e. their being solemnly set a part and Blessed, and thus sent out upon a special
Legation, its an Instance strongly pleading (and as we use to say a majori ad
minus) for a Power of Ordination in Pastors, in relation to Ordinary Church
Officers. And whatever may be said of instances, as to Ordinary Pastors, in
these Infant-times of the Church, rare, when extraordinary Officers, such as
Apostles and Evangelists, were existent, and their Offices vigent, the
Episcopal Authority, so clearly and frequently, (as we have proved) ascribed
and apropriat to Pastors, does certainly includ this Authority of Ordination,
as essential thereunto.

The Dr. adds, That if we Consult Primitive Antiquity, the best Interpreters of
Scripture, ibid.
in Matters of Fact at least, we will alwise find, the Power of giving Orders,
confined and Limited to Bishops. I need not much digress to tell him, that the
after-practice of Churches, is acknowledged in matters of Fact (and even by
Eusebius himself) in a great measure dark and uncertain, and is also
acknowledged, and found much opposite to Scripture: And therefore, a slippery
and unsound ground and Comment, as to Scripture Matter of Fact, and in order to
such a conclusion. I might add, that if the Dr's Reasoning hold good, it is in
point of Right, as well as in matter of Fact, the sure and sole Comment upon
Scripture. But for this bold and Universal assertion of the Dr's, it is easily
convict of falsehood, by what is above offered. The 4 th. Council of Carth.
Canon 22. Decrees, That the Bishops Ordain not without the Clergy. And if we
suppose this Canon obeyed, there wanted not abundance of conformable instances.
In Cyprians time. the Pastors had the Power [ manum imponendi] of Ordaining,
Ep. 78. And in Egypt, in absence of the Bishop, Ordained alone, as Ambrose on
Ephesians. 4. asserts. Besides, what is at large made out to this scope, by our
Writers, in reference to the Chorepiscopi, and this for a very considerable
extent, both of time and place. Cyprian Ep. 33. Writing to his Charge,
certifies them, That Aurelius was Ordained by him and his Colleagues, who were
present with him. And least the Dr. start at a supposition, that Cyprian,
called Presbyters his Colleagues, let any peruse Ep. 33. and this will
convincingly appear. We have told him before, that Firmilianus says of them,
that Rule in the Church [ quod Baptisandi, manum imponendi and Ordinandi
possident potestatem] and who these are, he shows a little before, viz. [
Seniores and praepositi,] We have also told him, that Chrysostom himself, was
found accused (in Synod ad Quaercum Ann. 403.) that he had made Ordinations,
with the Sentence and company of the Clergy. And in the forecited Council of
Carthage ( Canon 21.) it is enacted, "That the Bishop Ordain not without the
Clergy. And Canon. 2. Presbyters are enjoined to Impose hands with the Bishop.
The Authors of Ius Divinum Minist. Evan. in the Appendix, together with
Smectymnus, and several other Presbyterian Writers, have exhibit so many clear
instances of this, that we need only refer the Reader to their Learned Labors,
for the discovery of the Drs. folly, in this Assertion. In the close of his
discourse, upon this point, he tells us, That this is so undeniable, that tho
Ierom equalize Presbyters with Bishops, yet he is forced to do it with an [
excepta Ordinatione] Ans. If we should suppose Ierom to speak of the general
custom of that time and place, and neither absolutely nor Universally, as to
the practice or Matter of Fact, far less of of a Divine Right, the Dr's.
undeniable proof is soon overturned; but especially its Razed, when we tell
him, that Ierom's [ excepta Ordinatione] is well enough understood of the
Bishops ordinarily assumed Chief interest, in the rituals of Ordination, tho
Presbyters (as is above cleared) did entrust this to him, as having a joint and
essential interest in the thing it self.

The next peculiar Ministry of the Bishop, which the Dr. assigns, is, P.
439.440.441.
The execution of Spiritual Jurisdiction, viz. to Cite, examine Offenses before
their Tribunals, to admonish the Offender, exclud from Church Communion, or
receive upon Repentance. The Dr. discourses at large, in proof of a Spiritual
jurisdiction Established in the Church, and proves it soundly from Matthew.
18.16.17.18. Expounding that Clause, tell it unto the Church, of a Delation, in
Order to an Authoritative admonition, and from those Passages in the context,
If he neglect to hear the Church, let him be as a heathen, etc. and that other,
whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, etc. Concluds well
a Power in the Church of excluding from, and admission into Fellowship; Citing
that Parallel, Math. 16.19. I will give unto thee, the Keys, etc. which he
also well explains by what is said. Isai. 22.21, 22. anent the Key of the H^use
of David i. e. the Government of his Church, committed to our Lord, in the Type
of Eliakim's substituting to Shebna, who was over the Household. He expounds
well, the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, of the Government of the Church, and
the Power of Binding and loosing, of admission to, or exclusion from Church
Fellowship. All this is easily accorded.

But now comes the main Point, P. 442
and the Cardo questionis, This Power, says the Dr, is wholly deposited, in
the Episcopal Order. This is soon said, but to prove it, hoc opus, hic labor
est. It were superfluous, here, to remind the Reader, how the Dr. understands
the Episcopal Order, or how far, in a sound Scripture Sense, of the Episcopal
order, this assertion might be admitted. But to the Point, the Dr. proves his
Assertion, from this ground, that in all the forecited places, it was only to
Apostles, that our Lord derived this Jurisdiction, they alone being the
Stewards, to whom he committed the Keys and Government of his Family, to whom,
alone he promised Twelve Thrones, to Rule and Govern his Spiritual Israel, as
the Chief of the Trib^s Governed the Natural Israel, Math. 19.28. Upon which
ground he tells us, that the Heavenly Jerusalem, has the Names of the Twelve
Apostles upon its Gates, Rev. 21.14. etc. And the Twelve precious Stones, v.
19.20. Do in his Sense, denote the Power and dignity of the Church. As also,
the 144 Cubits of the Walls Measure, amounting to Twelve times twelve, he takes
to denote the Apostles equal Government of the Church. From all which, the Dr.
thrusts out, as his project of the whole, his former Notion and Topic of [ our
Lords lodging this Jurisdiction, in those of the Apostoliek Order, derived,
from the Apostles] which, says he, was administrat accordingly, either by the
Apostles immediately, or by the Bishops of the several Churches, to whom they
communicate their Order. Ans. All this (in so far, as relates to the Dr's scope)
is nothing but a repetition of what is already Answered. I shall easily accord
with him in this, that, as our Lord placed and left in his Church, a Spiritual
Jurisdiction, so, his Apostles, were the First and immediate Recipients of this,
from himself. I do likewise consent to the Dr. in this, that this Spiritual
Authority, was to be continued in the Church, and Transmitted to fit
Administrators, and was not to die with the Apostles. As also, there is no
doubt, that they were to deliver our Lords mind, and the Standart, and
continuing measures and Rules of all the Ordinances of the House of God, the
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government thereof, in which Respect, they are
called the Churches Foundation.

But in all this, the Dr. has not laid one Ground-Stone of his proof, which (as
we have often told him) lies Chiefly in these two Points. 1. That the Office of
Apostolat, in its entire nature and extent, and as exercised by the Twelve, was
by our Lord, intended for an ordinary Function and Office, to be thus continued
in, and transmitted to the Church, and devolved on Successors, who were
accordingly to exercise the same Office and Power. 2 ly. That these Successors
were so invested with this Apostolic Power and Office, as they had the whole
Government, the Power of Order and Jurisdiction, monopolized in them, in so far
as the Pastors and Presbyters, appointed and set up by Apostles, in the
Churches, had only the Doctrinal Key, entrusted to them, but not that of
Government; whereas, both the one and the other, were committed to these
supposed succedaneous Apostles. Now, its evident, that if the Dr. prove not
these, he says nothing; And that both these, are unsound and Antiscriptural
Suppositions, we have already made appear. (1.) From the many evidences, and
clear Scripture discoveries, of the extraordinary expired nature of the
Apostolic, and Evangelistick Office. And (2.) From the Apostles intrusting and
transmitting to Pastors or Presbyters, and devolving upon them, both the Keys
of Doctrine and Government, as their proper and imediat Successors; as also from
clear Scripture Grounds and instances, which do evince their actual exercise of
the same.

But next, to examine a little more closely, the Dr's Proofs, I would gladly
know of him, or any of his Persuasion, whether they do not look upon, and
understand that Text, Math. 18. as containing a constant Fundamental Law and
Rule, given to the Christian Church, to prescrib the Method of removing
Scandals, as also, the proper Subject of the Keys, and Iurisdictional Power,
and of that Power in special, which is called Critic? The Dr. holds, That
Christ here, established a Jurisdiction in the Church; he also acknowledges,
That the Church here meant, has Power of Authoritative Admonition, and the
Binding and Loosing Power, since he holds it to be the same with that Binding
and Loosing Authority, which our Lord promises to Ratify in Heaven, John
20.23. Matthew. 16.19. He understands by this Jurisdiction, this Authority and
Exercise of the Keys, pointed at, in these Paralells: Nay, he acknowledges, P.
443. That in the Forecited Passage, Matthew. 18. our Lord institut the Power of
Censuring: And I need not tell him, that Words of Institution, of any
Ordinance, are the proper Standart and Measure thereof, and the Pattern showed
upon the Mount. Now, what is meant by the Church, the proper Subject of the
Keys, in the Dr's Sense and Pleading, is the Question. The Dr. will not say,
it is the Political Magistrate, as some have alleged; for he holds, That our
Lord spoke this to his Church, as a distinct Society, and having distinct
Officers, from the Kingdoms of the World. And whereas, some have alleged, that
we are to understand this Church, of a Jewish Sanehedrin, the Dr, in the whole
Strain and Scope of his Discourse, disownes this, for he asserts, That in this
Text, our Lord is speaking to the Christian Church, and establishing a
Spiritual Jurisdiction therein. Neither, can he understand, by the Church, the
whole Collective Body, according to the general Notion of the Word; for, the
Dr, in the Strain of his Discourse, makes this Power and Authority, peculiar
and proper to Church Officers, as is evident in his Paralells above-rehearsed,
and the Church Representative, to be the proper Subject of that Jurisdictional
Power, here enjoined.

Now, all this being evident in his own Pleading; since the proper Subject of
this Power, is, by our Lord expressed (who knew best how to express it) by the
Word (...) or Church, I would fain know, by what Warrant, the Dr. can can make
this Term, peculiar to one single Person, viz. a Bishop, so, as it must be
holden to express his sole Prerogative? Or, where will he show, or make it
appear, that, in any Greek Author, Sacred or Profane, the Word (...) denotes
one single Person? If he say, that by the Church, the Community of Church
Rulers or Bishops, is to be understood, viz. that all Bishops in common, and
every Bishop apart, has this Power and Authority. I Answer, this, understood
of Scripture Bishops, or Church Officers in general, and of such Church
Officers of particular Collegiat Churches, is easily accorded; But, if he mean
of his Hierarchical Bishops in Bulk, and of every one of such a part, he both
Beggs the Question, and Crosses the Scope of the Place. For, 1. Howsoever we
take the Term (...) or Church, whether for the Church Universal, to whom
Officers, and a Government, is given immediately, or for particular Churches, to
whom, in a mediat Sense, the same Government and Charge is given, we must, of
necessity, understand it to be given to such parts of this whole, as do come
under the Denomination, and partake of the Nature of a Church, and according to
the Dr's Sense above-evinced, an Imbodied Society, or Juridical Court, must, in
that Statute, be understood, which can never be applicable to a single Person.
And besides, this would invert our Lords Method of Procedure, and the Gradation
here held out and enjoined, which is (as the Dr. himself acknowledges) from one
to two, or more, and the last Result, and ultimat Appeal, is to the Church, or
the Imbodied Court of Officers, with whom the Jurisdictional and Critical Power
is lodged. 2 ly. Granting that this Jurisdictional Power, in Order to the first
Planting of Churches, was, for this end, at first lodged with the Apostles, yet
the forementioned great Rule and Fundamental Law (as above Sensed, and in a
great Measure, by the Dr. himself) will still evince, that the Apostles were
not to Exercise it, to the prejudice of the Authority given thereby to the
standing Officers, and ordinary Authorized Courts of the Christian Church,
unless they can be supposed to have had a Power Paramount thereunto: For,
wherever a Christian Organick Chuch was gathered, by virtue of this Precept,
tell the Church, the Scandals were to be delated to the Officers thereof, who
consequently, according to the Nature and Tenor of the foresaid Law, are
supposed to have the Binding and Loosing Power, whatever Apostolical Authority
might reach in Churches not Constitut, or in way of Apostolical Direction to
Churches Constitut, as in the Case of the Incestuous Corinthian, yet this was
not Privative of, but Cumulative to, the ordinary Power of Collegiat Organick
Churches, as is often told him.

I might further urge the Dr. with this, that that Passage, John 20.23 cannot
but be extended to a Doctrinal, as well as Iurisdictional Remitting or
Retaining, Binding or Loosing, the Doctrinal Key, as well as Jurisdictional,
being Primarly given to Apostles, to be by them, derived to Successors. Our
Lord, in his Gift to Apostles, divided them not; And therefore, neither were
the Apostles to divide them, in Devolving this Power upon, and Committing this
Authority to Successors: And since the Dr. acknowledges, that the Apostles, by
virtue of our Lords Commission, Devolved upon Pastors the Doctrinal Authority,
and Committed to them that Key, (thus P. 427, 428.) why not, I pray, the
Jurisdictional also, both being inseparably tied together? Nay, the Dr.
himself, upon the Matter yields this, for he tells us, ( ubi supra) That the
Command, Go Teach all Nations, Math. 28.19. did reach Pastors, as the Apostles
Successors in this Ministerial Duty, and that Preaching, was one of the
principal Employments, belonging to the Apostolical Office. And if the Apostles
were to commit to Pastors, one principal part of their Office, why not also the
less principal? Besides, that the Command [ Go Teach, or Disciple all Nations]
will clearly includ the Jurisdictional, as well as Doctrinal Key. P. 428.
The Dr. adds, ( ibid.) That yet this Command of Preaching, was not restrained
to their Office, since inferior Officers Preached, as the seventy: Yet he adds,
That none Preached, but either by immediate Commission from Christ, or
Apostolical Ordination. But, I pray, were any in his Sense, otherwise allowed
to exercise Discipline, but in this method? Why will not the Dr. allow the
exercise of Discipline to the Seventy, and such a Mission of Rulers,
consequently? For Timothy (whom, together with the Seventy, he probably Judges,
to have held, an Evangelistick Office) he pleads, had Authority, both to Teach
and Rule: And the Teachers, Act. 13. he holds to be Bishops; So, that in his
Sense, Government being annexed in these instances thereunto, the Lord did
extraordinarly call, in these times of the Church, some persons, who were not
Apostles. Therefore, his Reason is insufficient to prove, that the Power of
Government and Preaching, being Eminenter, contained in the Apostolic Office,
they did not commit the Ruling Authority to such, to whom the Preaching work
was entrusted. Once more to reflect upon the Passage, tell the Church, we will
find our Sense and Pleading, correspondent to judicious Interpreters Dic
Ecclesiae, is, coram multis, inquit liber Musar. (...) Justinius. And that the
person may have a punishment inflicted of many, 2 Cor. 2.6. and the rebuke may
be before all, 1 Timothy 5.20. And that the person Offending may be moved by the
consent and multiplicity of those rebuking him: So Grotius, who shows us, that
it was the practice among the Jews, after the more private admonition, to bring
the Matter to the Multitude (...) to the Court of Judges, who have the Power of
binding and loosing, as distinct from the multitude: Thus Camero, Simmachus,
Beza. To the Presbytrie, representing the Church, whereof mention is made. 1 Timothy 4. 14 Piscator, Beza, Camero: And these whom Paul cal's (...) 2 Cor. 2.6.

But to proceed with the Dr, he tells us next, P. 442.443,
That none, but such as are of the Aopostolick Order, can pretend to the
Jurisdictional Power, since it was First lodged in the Apostles, and by them
immediately exercised, or by the Bishops of the several Churches, to whom they
communicate their Authority and Order. But one should think, that such to whom
they committed the Chief and principal part of their Office, as they did to
Pastors, by the Dr's Confession, to such they did commit their Order, in so
far, as unto ordinary succeeding Officers, and that together with this, the
other subservient part of Ruling, was also committed; both Keys, being in
their Nature, as above hinted, so inseparably connected: And he cannot give one
instance of the Apostles giving the First to Successors, without the Second:
Nay, the instances are clear of their committing both to Pastors. The Elders or
Ministers of Ephesus, are entrusted by the Apostle Paul (...)* and (...) both
to Feed and Rule, as Bishops Authorized by the Holy Ghost, over that Church,
which command, is by the Apostle laid upon them, when taking his last farewell
of the same, and not a word is dropped by the Apostle, of either the one or the
other to Timothy, their alleged Bishop. The Apostle Peter enjoins the Elders,
as their Fellow-Elder, to Feed and Rule, and exercise Episcopal Authority over
the Flocks: A clear Demonstration, compared with the preceding Instances, that
these Elders and Ministers, were the Apostles proper and immediate Successors,
in both Offices of Teaching and Ruling. So, that the Dr. may here see, in this
Scripture-Glass, the Portraiture, the clear Image of the Scripture- Bishop, and
the Authentic and Original Character of the Office of these Pastors and
Bishops of the Churches, to whom the Apostles committed the Preaching and
Ruling Work, viz. the Preaching Pastors or Presbyters. Shall I add a Caution,
and acknowledge to the Dr, they were not the Bishops of his supposed Order,
since the Apostle discharged them to be Lords; because, in these simple times
of Christianity, the Apostles themselves, were rude, and not yet acquaint with
the Grandeur of Spiritual Lords and Lordships, in the House of God. But least
the Dr, do think this odd, that I do hold the Work of Preaching, and
Administration of the Sacraments, an higher Point of Episcopal Authority, than
Ruling, at least, if I may add, only Ruling, which he knows, the Bishops
arrogat to themselves solely, not meddling much with the first, and that I hold
the Governing Power, to be appendant upon, and consequent unto the Power of
Order, in Preaching and Administrating the Seals of the Covenant; I must tell
him, that if this be an Error, A great one has led me into it, and one of the
Dr's most eminent Primary Bishops, who, I am sure, had a Divine Authority for
his Office, and an Infallibility in Teaching besides; It is even the great
Apostle of the Gentiles, who gives to Timothy this Precept, [ The Elders that
Rule well, count them worthy of double Honor, especially they that Labor in
the Word and Doctrin] wherein, it is evident, the Apostle allows the Laboring
in the Word and Doctrine, the higher Honor, above Ruling, yea and Ruling well.

But to prove, that the Apostles committed this Iurisdictional Power only to
the Bishops of their Order, the Dr. brings the Instance of Paul's pronuncing the
Sentence of Excommunication against the Incestuous Person, P. 443.
1 Cor. 5. showing that he, as present in Spirit, had Judged, i. e. says the
Dr, pronunced Sentence, concerning him who had done that Deed: And v. 4, 5. he
orders them, to declare and and execute his Sentence. But, that the Current of
the Context runs Cross to the Dr's Pleading, is several ways evident. For, 1.
The Apostle blames this Church, that this Sentence was not passed before, and
that they saved him not the Labor of this Prescription or Appointment, in
performing their Duty, Antecedaneously thereunto. It is evident, he checks
them, that this Person, was not by an Ecclesiastic Censure, of such a Nature,
as is here intimat, put away, and taken from among them, v. 2. 2 ly, He writes
to them to do it, and this, as an Act of their ordinary Authority, proper to
them, as Church Officers, viz. Authoritatively to deliver to Satan, and that,
when by the Authority of our Lord, they were met together; the Body of
Professo^s, being also concerned in a Consent to this Ejection. And therefore,
they were not to meet merely to Declare or Witness, what the Apostle had done
before. 3 ly, He thus expostulats, v. 12. Do not ye Judge them that are within?
A convincing Proof, that they had Power to Censure all, that were within that
Church, by an Intrinsic Authority, proper to them, as Officers thereof. 4 ly.
He calls this Act or Sentence, 2 Cor. 2.6. A Censure or Punishment, inflicted
of many, viz. the Church Officers, not a Declaration of his previously passed
Sentence. I hope the Dr. will not fall into such a blunt Conceit, as to make
one and the same, the Declaration of a Sentence, passed by another, and the
formal Passing of a Sentence, or Inflicting of a Censure or Punishment, which
if done warrantably, as is here supposed, does necessarly import Authority in
the Persons Acting. Inflicted of many, says the Apostle, i. e. Not by all the
Multitude, as Independents Judge, nor by one Person or Bishop, as the Dr.
Dreams. As for his Expounding Paul's Judging this Person Censureable, to be his
Pronuncing Sentence, it is a very gross Distortion; For, Paul, as an Apostle,
infallibly Inspired by virtue of his Apostolical Directive Authority, and in
special, as having the Care of the Gentile Churches upon him, 2 Cor. 11.28. had
Power to Direct and Prescribe Duty to either Members or Officers of any
Churches. And therefore, if the Dr. will draw this Act to Exemplify Episcopal
Authority, he draws upon himself two gross Absurdities, 1. That Paul had, and
Exemplified a standing lawful Episcopal Authority, wherever such Prescriptions
were exercised, and to whomsoever they could reach; And this Reaching over all
Churches, his Care being thus extended (as is above cleared) the Dr. makes him
a standing Primat, and Patriarch over them, Exemplifying a sort of Patriarchal
Primacy, to be Transmitted in the Church. 2 ly, That his Apostolic
Prescription, of the Duties of Church Officers, was not Cumulative unto, but
Privative of whatever Authority and Interest in Government, they might acclaim,
or in the Exercise of the Power of Order. And thus, suppose the Bishop of the
Dr's Mould, set over the Church of Corinth, had neglected his Duty (as these
Officers, are here found faulty in this point) Paul's Apostolic Direction, in
the Dr's Sense and Pleading, nullifies his Power, and proves he had none: Or,
supposing an Archippus, or negligent Minister, had needed his Apostolical
Direction, to perform such Acts of the Power of Order; as were proper to his
Function, Paul's Prescription of Duty, by the same Reason, swallows it up, and
makes it null. Certain it is, that neither could the Apostles divest themselves
of this directing Power, of Judging upon neglect of Duty, which had been a
divesting themselves of their Office, nor can they be supposed, without the
grossest Consequences, striking at the Root of all Church Authority, to have,
by their directing or judging Power, exauctorat such, to whom the Direction was
given, of their Power and Interest, in their respective Duties, whether as
Members or Officers of the Churches. Pool. Anot Vol. 2. Expound this 4 th v. of
the Power and Authority of Christ, concurring with them, while gathered
together. And upon v. 5. Expounding the delivering to Satan, of Excommunication
and casting out of the Church; They give this Reason, [ because the Apostle
speaks of an Action, which might be, and ought to have been done, by the Church
of Corinth, when they met together, and for not doing of which, the Apostle
blames them] Thus clearly Asserting the Intrinsic Authority of the Church
Officers of Corinth herein, and upon the same Grounds, which we have Asigned.
To the same Scope, do the Belgic Divines, Expound this whole Passage,
paralelling it with the great Precept, Matthew. 18.15. Both upon v. 4, and 5. and
upon 2 Cor. 2.6. touching the Subject of this Jurisdictional Act, viz. That it
was Inflicted of many, they Expound of Church Governors or Officers. Diodat.
upon Chap. 5. v. 4. thus Senses the Words, That they were to perform this, as
the Lords Ministers, by Authority received from Christ, and that the Command is
directed to the Pastors and Conductors of the Church, being gathered together
in Ecclesiastical Judgment, having the Apostles Declaration, instead of his
Voice and Vote. And to obviat such a Notion and Fancy, as that of our Dr. upon
this, he adds, That this was, without doing any prejudice, to the ordinary
Ministry of the Church of Corinth: And that Paul uses his Apostolical Power
Modestly, only to excite the other, ( viz. the ordinary Power of Pastors) and
to strengthen it. And he Expounds v. 7. not only of Purging out this Incestuous
Man, but all such Scandalous Kind of People, who by their Infection, might
plunge again into the Ancient Corruption, etc. And upon. v. 12. Do not ye Judge
them, that are within? He says, That it is certain, that a Judge cannot
exercise his Jurisdiction, but only over those, that are within his Precinct,
and subject to his Tribunal -- Clearly Asserting a Spiritual Tribunal, in this
Representative Church. To the same Scope, he Expounds the last verse. The
English Annot. upon v. 2. of this Chap. in Correspondence to the Exposition and
Answer premised, and in Opposition to the Dr's Reasoning, do show, That the
Apostle finds fault with the Corinthians, for that they had not Excommunicat
this Incestuous Person, before he had Wrote unto them, and Charged them so to
do, because the Fact was Notorious, and the Church Scandalized. And upon v. 4.
(which mentions the Power of Christ) they show, That the Power of
Excommunication and Absolving is Christ's, and the Ministry thereof only
Committed to the Governors of the Church. And the delivering to Satan,
mentioned v. 5. they Expound by that Parallel, Matthew. 18.17. We need not spend
time, in multiplying Instances of Sound Expositors, in opposition to the Dr's
Sense of this place. That there is here, an Allusion to the Jewish Synagogue,
is the Consentient Judgment of the learned, viz. in their Way of Excluding and
casting out the Scandalous: Thus Grotius, Estius, Hammond, Simplicius,
Piscotor, Beza, etc. Pareus, Paralelling, v. 5. with 2 Cor. 2. 6. shows, that
the same Persons, are Authorized to Comfort and forgive him, who inflicted the
Censure, viz. the Church Officers. What we have said, might be further
improven, from the end of the Action, which was the purging out the Old Leaven,
and taking the Scandalous Person from among them, and the Character of the
Censure it self, called a Punishment inflicted of Many, in Opposition to the
Dr's Design and Argument. But the thing it self is obvious; And therefore we
proceed.

The Dr. Adduces next, Paul's Threatening not to spare. 2. Cor. 13. P. 443.
But to proceed with Ecclesiastic Censures; And his mentioning Two or Three
Witnesses, to establish every word, according to the Words of our Lord, when he
Institute this Power of Censuring Matthew. 18. And v. 10. of 2 Cor. 13.
Threatening Severity, according to the Power given him, to Edification; And to
come with a Rod: He must needs, says the Dr, mean Apostolical Censures and
Excommunication, to be Execute, and Performed in his own Person; in which
Respect, he delivered Heretics of the Church of Ephesus to Satan, 1 Timothy 1.20.
It is Answered, First, all this is easily removed, by the often Adduced
Distinction, of the Apostles ordinary and extraordinary Authority, and of a
Cumulative and Privative Exercise thereof. Although the extraordinary Power, upon
fit Emergents, such as, either the supine Negligence of Ordinary Church
Officers, or the more endangering spread of Offenses, or obstinacy of
Offenders, or a defect of the ordinary Church Officers, in whom this Power was
Lodged and Seated, was alwise in readiness, and to be Exercised for the
Churches good and Edification; yet nevertheless, this Exercise (as we have
often told him) was never exclusive of, nor derogatory unto the Churches
ordinary Intrinsic Authority, nor, (except in Cases mentioned) or
Extraordinary Emergents, without the actual Concurrence of the ordinary Church
Officers. And if, as the Dr. says, the Apostle here insinuats a method of
procedure, suitable to our Lords Institution. Matthew. 18. It could not be
otherwise. Besides, he Threatens this severity, as a proof of his Apostolic
Power, 2 Cor. 13.3. which some understand of his Miraculous Power, to inflict
Bodily Afflictions: Others, of his Power to cut off, from the Communion of the
Gospel Churches; thus Pool. Annot. And if the Dr. will allow, that by
mentioning Two or Three Witnesses, he ties himself to the Method of procedure,
which our Lord Institute, Matthew. 18. he must by Parity of Reason, allow the
other part of the Institution, touching the Juridical or Censuring Church, to
have its own place therein: And that Consequently, the Apostle was to take
along the Authoritative concurrence of the Church Officers of Corinth, in this
procedure. But the truth is, he quite mistakes the Passage; For, in that Clause
of Two or Three Witnesses, the Apostle Intimats only, the certainty of his
coming the Third time: He had taken up thoughts of, and was preparing for his
Journey, and giving them previous warning of his coming, he alludes to that of
Deuteronomy. 19.15. to ascertain them thereof accordingly; Thus Pool Annot. and
Interpreters generally: He had been at Corinth once Act. 18. Afterward, he had
twice purposed and promised to come; once, in the 1 Ep. Chap. 16.5. And now
again here; And then he adds, in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses, etc. Thus
Belgic Annot. Diodat. thus senses this Clause, in the Mouth of Two or Three
Witnesses, etc. The meaning is, says he, these Three warnings of my coming
shall be, as so many Witnesses, by which (if ye do not amend,) you shall be
sufficiently convinced of incorrigible Rebellion, to proceed to a sentence,
already penned 2 Cor. 10.6. [ cum jam bis terve id dixerim, tandem ratum erit]
thus Grotius. As for the Apostles threatening sharpness of Censure, v. 10. And
his Apostolical Rod 1 Cor. 4.21. It receives the same Answer, by the
forementioned distinction of the Apostles ordinary and Extraordinary Power, and
the cumulative and privative exercise thereof. And if the Dr. will not take
this from me, may I hope, he will from a far greater: The Learned Iunius, in
Answer to Bellarmin, pleading much to the Dr's Scope and Sense, from this
Passage of the Apostle -- Shall I come unto you with a Rod? offers the same
distinction ( De Council. lib. 2. Cap. 16.) of the Ordinary and Extraordinary
Rod [ secundum illam, etc.] According to the common ordinary Rod, says he,
Peter was a fellow Presbyter, 1 Pet. 5. but according to the singular and
extraordinary, he stroke dead Ananias and Sapphira. He adds, in respect of this
common Rod, Paul says, 1 Cor. 5. You being gathered together, and my Spirit,
in the Name of the Lord Jesus; But, as to this singular one, he says, Shall I
come unto you with a Rod? 1 Cor. 4.21. This common Rod, he denies, to have
been, in the Hand of any one Man, whether Apostle or other, or that they had
any sole or singular Prerogative, in Churches constitute. Grotius and others,
do here take in the same, which Iunius mentions of the extraordinary stroke,
either the inflicting of Death, as upon Ananias and Sapphira, or Blindness, as
upon Elymas; or Diseases. The Belgic Divines, join together, the Exercise of
punishment and Discipline, in this Clause. While I have been mentioning Iunius,
I must upon this occasion, show, that in opposition to the Dr's. Pleading, in
Relation to Successor- Bishops to Apostles, by Testimony of the Fathers, Iunius
will tell him ( De Clericis Cap. 14. Not. 15.) that this is not to be
understood of a Succession from Christ's Institution [ quia nunquam instituit
Christus ut Apostolis secundum gradum in Ecclesia Succederetur] Christ never
appointed Successors to the Apostles, according to Degree: And that the Fathers
understood it of a Succession [ ex simili, non ex pari] of similitud, not
Parity; And a similitud Secundum quid, or imaginary, according as Bishops, were
then Molded. The same Answer and distinction above Rehearsed, ibid.
serves for what he Adduces of Paul's delivering Hymenaeus and Alexander to
Satan. 1 Timothy 1.20. And that this is the Sense of Sound Divines, appears, in
that this is made Parallel with 1 Cor. 5. wherein the Apostles Extraordinary
Authority, is by them distinguished from the Churches Ordinary Power.

As for his further Proof, from the Apostles deriving this Spiritual
Jurisdiction to Timothy and Titus, P. 444.
the pretended Bishops of Ephesus and Crete, and their supposed singular
Authority and Censures, and Judicially Cognoscing upon Ecclesiastical Causes,
which he draws from these Passages. 1 Timothy 5.19, 20. Tit. 3.10. We have above
spoken to it at length, and provenfully, that the Evangelistick Function of
them both, who were fixed to no particular Posts, together with the clearly
supposed Power of Church Judicatories, when Established (as is evident in
several Paralells) and of the supposed Concurrence, consequently of ordinary
Officers with them, in the Nature and Scope of these very Instructions
themselves, does clearly eve^t his Pleading. For what he adds of the Censuring
Power of the Angels of Ephesus and Thyatira, Rev. 2. What we have made already
good of the Collective Sense of the word Angel, and the Insufficiency of
admitting him, to be a single person or President, to bear the weight of his
Conclusion, discovers the Vanity of this his Repeated Notion, in this place.

The Dr. adds, P. 444, 445.
that the Bishops of the Primitive Ages, were the sole Administrators of
Spiritual Jurisdiction. This we have above, convict of untruth. And whereas he
tells us further, that they ordinarily admitted their Presbyters Concurrence for
Advice; we have made appear, that their Concurrence, after Bishops were set up,
yea, and by Confession of Bishops themselves, was Authoritative, not for Advice
only. P. 445.
The Dr. will needs have Cyprian to challenge a singular Authority of
Excommunication ( Ep. 38, 39.) But, if he will not set him by the Ears with
himself ( Ep. 6, 18, 28.) where he professes, he neither could, nor would do
any thing, without the Clergy, and ( Ep. 78.) where he shows, that Presbyters,
had the Power of Imposing Hands, and of Ordaining; and unless also, he can
disprove what is made good anent their Ordaining alone, especially in Egypt,
in absence of the Bishop, what we have touched anent the Chorepiscopi, their
Authority and Power herein, which is at large made good by our Writers, the Dr.
must acknowledge, that he misses his Mark, in this Citation. Cyprian also is so
far from challenging a Cathedral Authority of sole Censuring (as the Dr. wou^d
make him) that ( Epist. 33.) he ownes the Presbyters, as his Colleagues, even in
the Point of Ordination, and disownes any such usurped Authority. In the
Ordination of the Confessor Aurelius, he thus expresses himself [ hunc igitur
fratres dilectissimi, a m^ and a Collegis qui presents aderant ordinatum
sci^tis] Thus also ( Ep. 58. speaking of the Pastors) he expresses himself [
Ego and Collegae and Fraternitas omnis] And ( Ep. 6.) showing his earnest
desire to meet with the Pastors, while absent from them, he gives this Reason [
ut ea quae circa Ecclesiae gubernacula utilitas communis exposcit, tractare
simul and plurimorum examinata limare possemus] And speaking there, of the
turbulency of some persons, he says, they were such, as [ nec a Diaconis nec a
Presbyteris regi posse, etc.] Upon which, Pamelius has this Note [ hinc non
obscure colligitur ad huc Carthagini -- prerogativam illam Presbyterorum and
Diaconorum primitivae Ecclesiae, qua communi totius Presbyterii. i. e.
Presbyterorum and Diaconorum collegii, consilio administrabantur omnia ab
Episcopis] Citing thereafter, Ignatius's Epistle to the Trallians, wherein he
enjoins Subjection to the Pastors or Presbyters, as to the Apostle of Christ.
And least the Dr. allege, this imports no more than a Consultive Power,
Cyprian ( Ep. 18.) having mentioned what was written by Lucian, in name of the
Confessors, which they desired to be communicate to the Presbyters; and (as he
expresses it) [ per me collegis omnibus innotescere] to be by him made known to
his Collegue-Presbyters, he adds [ quae res, cum omnium nostrum concilium and
Sententiam spectat, praejudicare ego and soli mihi rem communem vindicare non
audeo] Thereafter, he shows that having sent Letters of Copies to many
Colleagues, he had an acquiescing Answer in this his purpose. To which we may
add, what is above touched of Cyprians Judgment in receiving the Lapsed ( Ep.
12.) and several other places) that the Pastors or Presbyters had a necessary
interest therein, does by necessary consequence, infer, that they had the same
interest in the Sentence, as in the Absolution. As for the 38 Epistle, which
the Dr. Cites, I find nothing in it, that will conclud what he asserts, having
perused that Epistle: That which he seems to take hold of, is, that expression
of Cyprian [ accipiat sententiam quam prior dixit, ut abstentum se a nobis
sciat] upon which Passage, the Annotator upon Cyprian, doubts whether he means
Excommunication properly and strictly so called, or not; or rather, that which
we term the Lesser, of a Suspension from Ordinances for some little time [ quo
elapso, says he, Presbyterium de Contumacia vel Paenitentia eorundum
judicabat, etc.] Moreover, speaking of Felicissimus, he says to the Presbyters
[ cum post haec omnia -- nec vestra autoritate and presentia fractus, etc.]
clearly pointing at the Authoritative Interposing of the Pastors, in this
Matter. And that he does not mean the stricter Excommunication, seems by this
probable, that speaking of several Delations of his Crimes, which the Delators
had offered to prove, he adds [ quae omnia tunc cognoscemus, quando in un^m cum
Collegis pluribus permittente Deo, convenerimus] which speaks his reserving a
further Censure, to a more full Enquiry into the Cause; yea, and this Enquiry,
he will not undertake, but with the Authoritative Concurrence of Presbyters,
called by him his Colleagues. And in the Matter of Augendus, his Corresponding
Guilt with this Felicissimus, he says [ sciat se in Ecclesia nobiscum, non esse
Communicaturum] -- and [ Sententiam ferat si ultra cum co perseveraverit] i. e.
upon Supposition of his continued Contumacy: Wherein, it is evident, that no
Sentence is passed upon this Person, as the Dr. alleges; and that in the
Censuring of both, Cyprian supposes a necessary Interest of the Pastors or
Presbyters. And the ensuing Epistle, pointing out the actual Censuring of these
two, with several others, not mentioned in the preceding Epistle, confirms
what we have said.

The Dr. will needs have the fifth Canon of the first Council of Nice, P. 445.
to suppose a Power of Excommunication, to be solely in the Person of the
Bishop. But, besides, that the Words he cites, are remote from proving it, the
Presence of Presbyters, being therein presupposed, it is evident, by several
Testimonies of Ancient Fathers, as well as by that Act of the fourth Council of
Carthage mentioned, that Presbyters did Authoritatively concur, in Ordination
and Censures (for which, see Smectym. Sect. 8. and Ruffin. Hist. Lib. 10.) See
Council Antioch, Canon 10. Council Ancyr. Canon 13. And determined against this
sole Usurped Authority of the Bishop, either in Censuring Presbyters, or in
Judging the Conversation and Crimes of Church Members, or in Excommunication or
Receiving Penitents. We have also heard, that the fourth Council of Carthage,
Canon 23. condemns the Bishops Decision, unless fortified by the Sentence of
the Clergy. This is so evident, that the Dr. is forced to clap his Wings
closer, and Correct himself, adding, That afterward, to prevent Abuses, in the
fourth Council of Carthage, it was Decreed, that the Bishop, should hear no
Man's Cause, but in Presence of the Clergy, and that his Sentence should be
void, unless Confirmed by their Presence. Well then, to Correct Abuses, issuing
from his supposed Canon of Nice, here is, by his own Confession, a
Counter-canon, Decreeing the contrary: And where is now his bold Assertion, of
the Universal Practice of the Church, founded upon a Divine Institution, which
Patronizes this supposed Power, of the Hierarchical Bishop? And if we may ply
the Dr, with his own Weapon and Argument, and present to him, a Dish of his own
Preparing, how does he here make a Divine Institution Comprobat by the Churches
Universal Practice, a Seminary of such Abuses, as this Council found necessary
to remove? Likewise, how does this Council, by its Censure, Lash the supposed
Practice of Cyprian, and puts among the forementioned Abuses, to be necessarly
removed? Ay, but says the Dr, The Sentence in this Case, was the Bishops, not
the Clergies. I Answer, if they were sine quibus non, in the Sentence, by what
Shadow of Ground, can he assert, that it was solely the Bishops? And we heard
above, Cyprian in Express Contradiction to the Dr, Assert, that not the
Concurrence only, but the Sentence, is properly the Clergies, as well as his.
Moreover, if a Parallel Argument, in Point of Ordination, which the Dr. also
does appropriat to the Bishop, may be Judged valid in this Case, as no doubt it
is, we have made appear from Canon 2. of the Fourth Council of Carthage, that
they Decree in this Case, that ( omnes Presbyteri presents manus suas Iuxta
manus Episcopi super caput teneant cum Presbyter ordinatur) And the Dr. cannot
deny, that ex natura rei, and in the Scripture Sense, Imposition of Hands, in
this Action of Ordination, is Authoritative, not Consentient only, and supposes
the Actors to have this Badge of the Ordaining Power, I mean it, in a
Ministerial Sense, as it is competent to all Church Officers. We have also told
him, that Dr. Forbes, as Learned an Episcopalian, as our Dr. in his Iraen. lib.
2. Cap. 11. holds, that ( Non tantum duntaxat ut consentientes (ad consensum
enim sufficient suffragia, and plebs etiam consentit nec tamen est ejus manum
imponere) sed tanquam ordinantes, seu ordinem conferentes, and ex potestate
ordinandi divinitus accepta gratiam ordinato hoc adhibito ritu apprecantes)
That not only as Consenting, which is proper to the Vulgar, who cannot Impose
Hands, but as Ordaining or Conferring Orders, and by a Divine Authority, they
do in this Action or Rite, pray for Grace to the Ordained. Which contrary
Testimony of our Scottish Episcopalian, not only, in Point of Fact, contradicts
the Dr, but from this Rite of Imposing of Hands, concludes upon solid Grounds,
Presbyters Authoritative Concurrence in Ordination. So that, comparing our Dr's
Concession, with Dr. Forbes his Sense, in Point of Ordination, and with what we
have evinced of Presbyters Authoritative Concurrence in Government, in the
Sense of the Primitive Church, the Dr's Pleadings for the Prelates sole
Interest therein, is sufficiently overturned, yea, and the Inconsistency
thereof, with it self, discovered. For what he adds of Cyprian his Asserting,
that a Bishop of his Metropolitick Church, might ( pro Episcopatus vigore and
Cathedrae autoritate) have Chastised a Deacon, without Appealing to the Synod:
The Dr. has pointed us to no particular place of Cyprian, where this is found:
And upon Supposition of what is clearly supposible in Cyprians time, anent the
Presbytrie their Deference, and Entrusting the Execution of some Censures, to
the President-Bishop, who had then obtained, such a Minut-Matter, as the
Chastising of a Deacon, might well fall within the Compass of the then Bishops
Deputed Authority, which will abundantly Salve this Expression, from Wounding
Pastors or Presbyters Essential Interest, in Censures and Government. Besides,
that Cyprian owning so clearly, Presbyters Essential Interest. both in
Ordination and Censures, in the abovementioned Epistles, viz. 33.58.75.
compared with 12. and 46. does clearly evince, he owned no such sole Authority
of the Prelat, as the Dr. alleges; Which is correspondent to the Testimony
cited of Tert. Apol. advers. Gentes, cap. 39. Ambrose Epistola ad Siagrium.
Considering further, the Smallness of the Charge of Prelates, in the first Rise
of the Episcopus Praeses, who had their Charge, confined often to little Dorps or
Villages, and that the Pronunciation, or Execution of Censures or Sentences,
was, in a Deference to the then Bishops, appropriat unto them, by the
Presbytrie, who still retained an Essential Interest in Cognoscing upon the
Cause. The forementioned fifth Canon of the Council of Nice, which mentions the
Separation from Communion by Bishops of the Province, and by the Bishop from
the Congregation, and the Convention of Bishops of the Province, for Cognoscing
upon the Cause, if Dubious, does no Whit favor the Dr's Conclusion, of a
Spiritual Jurisdiction, wholly Seated in the Bishops, the Radical Authority,
being still, in the Presbyters, or Consistorial Meetings of Pastors.

The fourth Peculiar of the Bishop, as distinct from a Presbyter, the Dr. tells
us, is; To Confirm the Baptized, which, after their Instruction in Christian
Faith, was always performed by Prayer, and Laying on of Hands, P. 446.
upon which, the Party Confirmed, received the Gift of the Holy Ghost. Tho,
upon the first Institution of this Imposition, extraordinary Gifts followed, as
of Tongues, etc. Yet, says he, it was not therefore intended as an
extraordinary Ministry, to cease with those extraordinary Gifts, no more than
Preaching, attended with those extraordinary Miraculous Operations. The
Function it self, cannot cease, no more than that of Preaching; Because the
extraordinary Gifts and Effects are gone, and Christ promising a continual
Communication of the Spirit to his Church, he must be supposed to continue it,
by this Ministry of Prayer, and Imposition of Hands, and the ordinary
Operations, the same way, that extraordinary were. Hence the Apostle puts the
Laying on of Hands, in the same Class, with Baptism, Heb. 6.1, 2. and makes it
one of the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ: Therefore, it must be intended
for a standing Ministry in the Church. Ans. I shall easily grant to the Dr,
that in the beginning of the Gospel, and in the first Apostolical Times of the
Christian Church, there were sometimes extraordinary Effects, and Efficacy of
Gifts, attending the standing Offices and Functions, which are to be continued
in the Church, and the Duties of Prayer and Preaching: As also, that we have in
Scripture, Exemplified the Gifts of the Spirit, attending the Imposition of
Hands; As likewise, that there is an ordinary Communication of the Spirits
Gifts and Graces, in and by Christ's Instituted Ordinances. But all this is far
remote from the Point in Question, and reaching the Dr's Assertion and
Conclusion, viz. That Christ has Institute Confirmation of the Baptized, after
Instruction, by Imposition of the Hands of a Bishop, as his sole Prerogative,
and in the Capacity of an Officer, superior to a Pastor, in Order to the
Persons further Confirmation in the Faith. Any, with half an Eye, may discover,
that this has no imaginable Connection, with what the Dr. here offers.

As for that Text, Heb. 6. it has no Shadow of a Proof of what he brings it
for. Its true, there has been several Comments given of that Clause of [
Imposition of Hands] but none of them, favors the Dr's Fancy and imagined
Sense. Some have taken it, to be meant of a Ceremony adjoined to Baptism it
self, for a Sign of Blessing and Consecration to God. Some have taken it, says
Diodat, for Laying Hands on such Catechumeni as had been Baptized, for
Confirmation of their Faith, or as a Badge of Renewing their Covenant, in Order
to Partaking of the Lords Supper: See Pool. 2. Vol. on the place. Certain it
is, the Laying on of Hands, was either for Healing Diseases, Mark 6.5. Luke
4.4. Act. 28.8. Or Communication of Blessings, Matthew. 19.13, 15. Or
Communication of the Gifts of the Spirit, to such, as were separat to Gods
Service, in the Church, Act. 6.6. and 17.6. and 13.3. So 19.5, 6. Hence, some
under this Expression, take in all the Spirits Gifts, whereby we are Renewed,
Increased, Strengthened and Built up to Life Eternal. See Pool. Annot. The
Belgic Divines, understand it of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, in the Primitive
Church, imparted to Believers in general, Act. 8.16, 17. And especially, in the
Institution of Ministers, in the Church, 1 Timothy 4.14. Where this Laying on of
Hands is attribute to the Presbytrie. Dr. Owen, takes this Clause of Imposing
Hands, to import a Description of Persons, to be instructed, in the other
Fundamental Principles, but to be no Principle it self. He also holds, that in
those days, it did commonly accompany, or immediately follow Baptism, Act. 8.14,
15, 16. and 19.6. Withal, he shows, that when Baptized Children, gave an
Account of their Faith and Repentance, which others had done before they were
Baptized, they were admitted to the Communion of the Church, the Elders
thereof, Laying their Hands on them, in Token of their Acceptance, and Praying
for their Confirmation in the Faith. (An Account of this Matter, given also, by
many of the Learned) He distinguishes a fourfold Imposition of Hands. The 1.
Peculiar to our Lord, in Way of Authoritative Benediction, as when he owned
little Children, to belong to his Covenant, he laid his Hands on them. Mark
10.16. The 2 d. In Healing of Diseases Miraculously, Luke* 4.4. Mark 16.18. The
3 d. In Setting apart, to the Work and Office of the Ministry, 1 Timothy 4.14. and
5.22. The 4 th, In Collation of Supernatural Gifts of the Holy Ghost, Act.
8.17. and 19.6. Now, that none of all these, comes home to the Dr's Strained
Exposition of such a Ceremony or Ordinance, peculiar to a Bishop, in the Sense
he has offered, is evident beyond all contradiction: For, taking it to import
the Spirits Work, in a Figurative Allusion to this Imposition, or for
Ministerial Imposition, I mean in the Ordination of Pastors; In both Senses, it
quite rejects the Dr's Gloss; And even taking it in the most favorable Sense
to his Scope, viz. To import an Imposing Hands upon, and Praying for the
Baptized, either at Baptism it self generally, or upon the Adult, who were
Baptized, it is beyond all contradiction, that in this case, it was joined with
that Sacrament, and consequently performed by the Admistrator of that
Ordinance: Or admit, that it was an Imposing of Hands upon Baptized Children,
sometime after their Baptism, when grown up, to give an Account of their Faith,
before their Admission to the Lords Supper, the very Nature of the Action it
self, does evince, that in its purer and Primitive Practice, and before Clogged
with Additional Corruptions, the thing was performed, by the Elders and
Ministers of the Church: And the Dr. cannot show, either from Scripture, or
pure Antiquity, that this was peculiar to a Bishop of his Cut and Mould. Again,
it is a strange and most unaccountable Notion, to assert, that such as have
Authority to Preach the Word, and Administrat the Sacraments and Seals of the
Covenant, and in special Baptism, whereby Persons are to be Discipled and
brought to Christ, (which was the great Commission of the Apostles themselves)
should notwithstanding have no Authority to Administrat such an Appendix of
Baptism, and Confirming Rite, as this is supposed to be* That such, as have
Authority to lay the Foundation, can put no Hand to such a supposed
Superstructure: Nay, that such as have Authority to dispense the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, that great Sealing, Faith-Confirming Ordinance, have no
Interest in the Administration of such a Confirming Ritual, as this is.

Besides, in the 3 d. place, it is easy to destroy the Dr's Argument, with his
own Notion and Pleading: ibid.
He pleads, That tho the extraordinary effects of Gospel Administrations be
ceased, yet such Functions and administrations continue, as are means of the
Spirits ordinary influences, Gifts, and Graces; since our Savior has promised
to the Church, a continual Communication of his Spirit. Now, dare the Dr. deny
a continual Communication of the Spirit, in and by the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments? If these be to continue, and for the great ends of Conversion,
Confirmation, and grouth in Grace, and in the Hands of Pastors, as the proper
Authorized Dispensers of these Ordinances, which are the Ministration of the
Spirit, by what Shadow of Ground, can the Dr. seclud them from any interest in
this his Ministration of the Spirit? He tells us, that Christ now Communicats
ordinary Operations in the same way, that he did the extraordinary: And he will
not deny, that he did Communicate the Extraordinary, by the Word and Sacraments,
concredited to all Ministers, I mean in the external Administration, and why
not also the ordinary by the same Persons and Dispensers?

Again 4 ly. The Dr. adds this his supposed strong proof, and corroborating
Argument, P 447
especially (says he) considering, that this laying on of Hands is placed by
the Apostle, in the same Class with Baptism. Hence I subsume, if in the same
Class, it must be so, as a Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, as Baptism is
(so he calls it) and as having the same Authority with Baptism, as an Ordinance
of Christ, and a mean of dispensing the same influence of the Spirit; And if
so, how will the Dr. Assign a Shadow of Distinction, as to the Administrators,
and make it appear, that two Ordinances of so near a Cognation, and both Acts
of the Power of Order, of such an Affinity in their nature and scope, should so
vastly differ in the Instruments of Administration, that the one is peculiar to
the Office of Apostolat, and a Succeedaneous Prelat, Forsooth, the other not,
but may be Administat by a Pastor. He tells us, "The Apostle put both
Ordinances in one Class; but the Dr. in this, crosses the Apostle, and sets up,
in this respect, Confirmation in the higher Class.

Here, I would offer to the Dr. or those of his Persuasion, Amesius's Answer to
Bellarmin's Argument, for this Right of Bishops: One of his Arguments, for the
Divine Right of Episcopacy, and of Bishops, above Presbyters, is -- [ Soli
Episcopi, ut Ordinarii Ministri, etc.] Bishops only, as Ordinary Ministers, can
Confirm the Baptized, as also Consecrat Temples and Altars, Citing, Act. 8.
Amesius returns him thus the Protestant Answer -- [ De Consecratione Templorum
-- non laboramus, etc] We value not the Consecration of Temples and Altars,
whited Walls, may be the sole Consecraters of Walls and stones; but for
Confirmation of the Baptized, in so far as it seems to have any thing of Divine
Right in it, and is thus looked upon, it does equally agree to Presbyters and
Bishops: This says he, may be sufficiently proved from the Canon Law it self (
Did. 95.) and is evinced by this Reason of Ierom, what is greater than Christ,
or what may be preferred to his Body and Blood? He adds in Answer to that of
Act. 8. that ^he Apostles were no Bishops, nor sent unto an Ordinary
Confirmation ( Bellarmin. enerv. Tom. 2. P. ( mihi) 110) I need not enlarge
upon any deductions from this Passage, nor insist in showing the Dr. the
Correspondence of this Answer, with what is above offered. We may adduce
another Venerable Countryman of his, Cartwright, Answering the Rhemists,
Pleading for this Sacrament of Confirmation, from this Text, tells the Iesuit^,
That the Apostle means no Sacrament, much less Confirmation after Baptism, but
by a Trope or borrowed Speech (a Metonymia adjunctis, as he calls it) the
Ministry of the Church, upon which, Hands were laid; which appears, says he,
in that, whosoever believes not, that there ought to be a Ministry, by Order,,
to Teach and Govern the Church, overthrows Christianity, whereas if
Confirmation of Children, were a Sacrament, as it is not; yet a Man holding the
rest, and denying the use of it, might notwithstanding, be saved. Upon this
Testimony of Cartwright, we may very probably Conceive, that the Sense, he
gives of that Passage, is the General Sentiment and Judgment of Protestant
Divines in his Day: And to this Scope, we find many of the later Protestant
Divines expound it, as might be easily made appear. I need not add, how obvious
it is, that the Drs. Opinion and Gloss, has no small influence upon the
hardening the Papists, who make Confirmation a Sacrament. See for Cartwrights
Sense of this place, Gomarus, Simplicius, Pareus, Mr. Dickson, etc. Among whom,
Gomarus shows, that the Imposing Hands upon the Baptized, is a Practice later
than the Apostles. But to proceed.

The Dr. in Confirmation of this his Gloss and Conceit, adduces the Instances
of the Holy Ghost coming upon these of Ephesus, ibid.
Act. 19.5. After Paul laid his Hands upon them: And of the Samaritans, Act. 8.
who, although Preached unto, and Baptized by Philip, and Converted by his Ministry,
yet St. Peter, and St. John, were sent to lay Hands on them, upon which they
received the Holy Ghost, v. 17. From whence he inferrs, that therefore this
Ministry of Confirmation, appertained to Apostles, since Philip a Preacher, a
worker of Miracles, a prime Deacon, and if we may believe Cyprian, an
Evangelist, and one of the Seventy Two, would not presume to assume it, but
left it to the Apostles. I Answer in general, these Texts are, by the current
of all Protestant Divines and Interpreters, understood of the Miraculous Gifts
of the Spirit, and the apparent extraordinary signs thereof, attending the
imposing of the Apostles Hands, which in that time and Case of the Church, was
a proper Badge of the Apostolic Office; and therefore, can have no force, to
prove an ordinary standing Ordinance, appropriat to ordinary Pastors; Since in
this Case, the proper sole end of this Action, was the forementioned special
effect, which is not now to be expected, and also the persons acting, did
therein exercise an extraordinary function and Authority, as Apostles. Hence
this singular Gift, at this time exercised, can no more be pleaded, as laying a
ground for the standing duty of ordinary Officers, than Anointing with Oil, by
the Apostles, which had the Miraculous effect of healing, at that time. Upon
the First Text mentioned by him, the Belgic Divines do show, that the coming
of the Holy Ghost, upon the laying on of Paul's hands, is to be understood of
the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost, presently after expressed. And their
Prophesying, is by Diodat. exponed accordingly, of a supernatural evident
Divine inspiration. To the same Scope, it is exponed, by the English
Annotators. And indeed, the Text it self, makes it so evident, that none can
call it into question, and considerable it is, that they all parallel this place
with that Act. 8. Grotius upon the place, tells us, that [ Baptizati erant ab
alio Christiano, sed Deus ad commendandum munus Apostolicum, non ante iis
Spiritus sui dona communicare voluit quam Apostolica manus eos tetigisset] Thus
also Simplicius, Camero, and Piscator Epones this effect of the Imposing of the
Apostles Hands, with reference to the extraordinary influences of the Spirit.
Again, in the fourfold premised Division of the laying on of Hands, mentioned
in the New Testiment, we find only, that the Imposition of Hands, in the
Ordination of Pastors, is that which has a clear standing Warrant and design;
the other three mentioned, having an extraordinary end, not to be now expected.

But further to urge this, the Dr. says, That tho the extraordinary effects are
ceased, P. 446.
yet the ordinary institut means of the Spirits influences remain. Now, as to
this Point of the Apostles imposing Hands upon the Samaritans (the Passage,
which the Dr. mainly insists upon, and improves) I would fain know, if he will
deny, that these Samaritans, Baptized by Philip, upon their professed Faith and
Conversion, which in many of them, no doubt, was real, had not received the
Spirit, in his ordinary gracious influences? If they had, then, the the
Apostles imposing Hands thereafter, he must grant, was either, with a special
respect to the forementioned Miraculous evidences of the Spirits Seal, or it
was useless, and to no purpose at all. The Belgic Divines, upon v. 14. of this
Chap. Do show, That the Apostles were sent to settle convenient Order in this
Infant Church, and strengthen them; And therefore not merely, for the end of
Imposing Hands, as the Dr. alleges; and upon v. 15. mentioning the Apostles
praying that they might receive the Holy Ghost, they do thus Paraphrase it,
namely in a visible and Miraculous manner, as often happened in this Church,
Act. 10.45. and 19.6. 1 Cor. 14.27. for otherwise they had already received the
Holy Ghost, seeing no man can believe, without the Holy Ghost, Romans 8.9. 1 Cor.
12.3. Diodat. to the same Sense, understands the Holy Ghost here, of the
external and Miraculous evidences of his Grace. Pool Annot. vol. 2. thus
Paraphrases v. 14. as pointing out the Apostles Confirming the Doctrine, and
constituting a Church, in Samaria, by Apostolical Authority. And the Clause of
receiving the Holy Ghost. v. 15. they expound of these extraordinary Gifts of
Tongues, Prophecy, working of Miracles, as Chap. 10.45. And upon that Clause,
v. 16. [ for as yet he was fallen upon none of them] They show, that it is
plain, the Holy Ghost, is not here meant, as the Author of saving Graces; For
so, he was fallen upon all that did believe, Faith being the Gift of God, but
he was not yet bestowed, as the Author of these extraordinary Gifts, mentioned
Chap. 2.38. Piscator upon this 15. v. Shows, That the Spirit given here, does
not denote Sanctification, or Confirmation in Grace, but the extraordinary
Gifts of Tongues and Prophecy, etc. as appears from the use of this Phrase,
Act. 10.45. and 19.6. As also from this, that these Gifts were conspicuous to
Simon. The Imposing Hands, mentioned, v. 17. Dr. Lightfoot understands in the
same Sense [ non Denatat, says he, dona interna Gratiae Sanctificantis atque
confirmantis, omnibus piis collata, sed dona extraordinaria aliquibus duntaxat
exhibita] And v. 18. which mentions Simons seeing this conferring the Holy
Ghost, is Interpreted of his seeing by this visible sign of the Gift of
Tongues, pointing out the Spirits inward Operation. So Chrysostom, and out of
him, Corn. a Lapide. From all which, it is evident, in opposition to the Dr's
Pleading. 1. That this Imposition of Hands, was not the sole end, for which the
Apostles were sent to Samaria. 2 ly. that there was no need of it, in order to
common Gifts of the Spirit, or an ordinary Confirmation in the Faith thereby. 3
ly, That this Action of Imposing Hands, was a special Badg of the Apostolic
Office, and that therein was put forth, an extraordinary Apostolic Official
Power, competent to no Ordinary Officer. 4 ly. That it was put forth, and
exerced at this time, in order to such a transient extraordinary effect, as is
not now to be expected, since, in that Infant state of the Church, it did
respect the Confirmation of the Doctrine of the Gospel, the Confirmation of
Believers, and was to be a Divine attestation of the Apostles Mission and
Authority, in this extraordinary manner. All which, cuts off the Dr's design
and Pleadings from this Scripture.

And whereas he alleges, that an Extraordinary effect, at that time, will not
prove the Ordinance it self, to be ceased, no more, than Preaching, sometimes
attended with such effects. I Answer, when the Ordinance, or mean, is in
Scripture held out, with respect to ordinary standing Effects, as Preaching has
for its great end, the Faith, Conversion and Edification of Hearers, till all
the Elect are brought in, this is true; But when the mean or Action, is in its
Circumstances, found to be solely, with respect to an extraordinary end, not to
be now expected, and to be performed by persons in an extraordinary Office, as
a (...) and Badg thereof, this does cast the scales, and shows the Action, not
to be imitable, nor to found, warrant, or exemplify an ordinary standing Duty.

And whereas the Dr. adds, That tho Philip, was a Worker of Miracles, P. 447.
yet this Action of Imposing Hands upon these Believers, was not performed by
him. It is Answered, Suppose he did Work Miracles, yet in this Case and Time,
for the greater Honor of the Apostolic Office, and the Glorious Confirmation
of the Gospel Testimony by them, who were Honored to be its first Heralds,
and eminently Sealed with the Spirit, for this great End, God would, upon these
grounds, have this reserved to them, who (as we have heard above) were sent to
settle convenient Order in this Infant Church, further to strengthen Believers,
and to give this Church its fit Organick Frame, according to the Gospel Rules.

I shall not stand to improve an Argument, some would be apt to bring against
the Dr's Pleading, viz. That this Ceremony, as described by him, seems to
encroach upon the Rights and Nature of the Holy Sacrament of Baptism: Only, it
is worthy of our Observation, which Cartwright brings against the Rhemists,
upon Act. 8.17. Pleading for the Sacrament of Confirmation, he tells them, That
they are justly Charged with Incroaching upon the Possession of the Holy
Sacrament of Baptism, which Sealing up unto us, not only the Forgiveness of
Sins, but also, both the Burial and Mortification of the Old Man, and the
Resurrection and Quickening again of the New Man; And in a Word, the whole
Putting on of Christ: It is manifest, that this Sacrament of Confirmation,
which Vaunts it self of Strength and Courage given thereby, to the Vanquishing
of the Devil, makes Forcible Entry upon the Due and Right of the Holy Sacrament
of Baptism. He adds, That our Lord, in his Care, to bring the Gospel
Sacraments, to as small a number, as might be, must be supposed, rather to Seal
many Promises with one Seal, than one Promise, with many Seals, or one and the
same Promise with two Seals. How far this Pleading of Judicious Cartwright,
strikes at the Sinews of the Dr's Argument, upon this Head, is obvious enough.
To this I shall add a Testimony, or two, which fully confirms our Pleadings, in
Opposition to the Dr. on this Head: The one is, of the Professors of Saumer (De
5. Falls. Dict. Sacrat. These. 7. P. ( mihi) 242. [ Si impositio manuum in eum
finem instituta fuit, ut Donorum miraculosorum collationem comitaretur,
cessantibus illis Donis cessa re ipsa debuit. Et si soli Apostoli ea virtute
praediti fuerunt, ut Spiritum illum miraculosorum Donorum autorem fidelibus
communicarent, debuit in eorum personis subsistere manuum imponendarum
potestas] Thus they, in Impugning the Sacrament of Confirmation: Adding, That
as the Apostles had no Command in this Point (as is most probable) so, if they
had, the Scripture is purposely silent of it. For which they, give this Reason
[ ne ritum istum cum Sacramentis, quorum institutionem nobis disertissime
tradidit, perperam confunderemus] The next Testimony, is of Turretin, ( part 3.
quaest. 31. De 5. falls. Sacram. P. (mihi) 615. Par. 5.6.) When he is offering
Reasons against this Bastard Sacrament; his First, touches the Action or
Ceremony it self, thus [ primo, says he, quia non habet institutionem Divinam,
ne -- quidem ut sit, nedum ut Sacramentum dici possit] that there is no Divine
warrant for the Action and Ceremony it self, Viz: of Imposing Hands, upon the
Baptized, by a Bishop, as he has formerly discribed it, far less, that it ought
to be esteemed a Sacrament. His Fifth Reason is thus. [ Derogat Baptismo: quia
juxta Doctrinam Pontificiorum, sequitur Baptismum non efficere nos plane
Christianos, cum tamen jam ante Baptizati in nomine Patris, Filii, and Spiritus
Sancti, in communionem ejus admissi simus, and per Baptismum Christo inseramur
-- sequitur in baptismo non dari Spiritum Sanctum ad robur and augumentum
gratiae; quasi baptismo non obsignetur nobis gratia Spiritus Sancti
corroborans, aeque ac sanctificans] Which is in Sum, that Justifying,
Sanctifying, corroborating Grace, being Sealed up in Baptism, this Ceremony
encroaches upon its Nature, when obtruded as a Sacrament. And thereafter ( Par.
6.) Asserting, that the very Rite it self, cannot be shown from Scripture, he
thus Answers the Objections taken from Act. 8.15. and 19.6. which are our Dr's
grand proofs [ Apostoli quidem adhibuerunt (...) seu manuum impositionem ( Act.
8.15. and 19.6.) Sed cum id factum constet invisibili dispensatione Spiritus
Sancti pro Ecclesiae nascentis condition, and quidem ex promisso Speciali,
clarum est ritum extraordinarium, eoque temporarium solum fuisse, cujus usus
una cum aliis miraculis desiit] Adding upon the Text further, in Confirmation
of this. 1. That the Spirit, in this extraordinary manner, to those already
Baptized, consequently such as were made partakers of his common operations,
Act. 8.16. 2 ly. That the Spirit is said (...) illabi and irruere. v. 9. Which
is proper to the Spirit of Prophecy, not of Sanctification; as also, Act.
10.44.46. He is said to fall upon them, so that they spoke with Tongues:
Adding, that it is not unusual in Scripture to represent extraordinar and
invisible Gifts, by the name of the Spirit simplely, as Act. 19. does prove
against Bellarmin. Spalatensis (de Repub. Lib 5. bap. 5. Number. 10.) proves from
a multiplicity of the Ancient Fathers, that for several Ages, the Ceremony of
Confirming, was a Ceremonial Rite of Baptism it self, not distinct from it.
Remarkable is that of Ierom adversus Luciferianus, That Confirmation by the
Hands of the Bishop, is a Ceremony belonging to Baptism [ Ita tamen, says he,
ut ne que necessaria sit, neque quicquam illa per se spiritualiter efficiat,
sed quod ei a quibusdam tribui solet ut det Spiritum Sanctum, id totum
perfectissime haberi in solo Baptismo, lege tamen Ecclesiastica eam adhibere
propter solum honorem quendam externum Episcopalis Dignitatis] So, that in
stead of any Spiritual use, Ierom makes it an empty Badg of Episcopal vanity.
The Learned Bucer, in his Censure of the Book of the English Liturgy, does at
Large show, the unsuitableness of this Ceremony, to the ends for which it is
pretended, or the supposed Primitive Patterns. And we find it largely
paralelled, by Didoclavius, with the Popish Confirmation, both in respect of
the supposed Grace which it gives, the Sign, and the Words adhibit therein, the
Administrator thereof, etc. ( P. ( mihi) 358.359.360.361. etc.) who also gives
proofs from Antiquity, that this was not alwise reserved to the Bishop, even
when this Ceremony had obtained in the Church; Thus P. 363. Cyprian Epist* ad
Iubajanum, asserts the Custom of offering such, as were Baptized, to such, as
he terms Praepositi, in order to their Prayers, and laying on of Hands with
Prayer: That by Praepositi, he means in general, the Ministers of the Church,
and not the Bishop, is clear by many Passages of Cyprian, particularly Epist.
3. Par. 1. and Epist. 69. Par. 4. where he calls the Successors of the Seventy
Disciples, Praepositos, as well, as these of the Apostles: So, likewise Epist.
62. Par. 1. and Epist. 65. Par. 4. Thus also Epist. 21. Par. 3. The
Confirmation he speaks of, in the First Passage Cited, is that used in the
Apostolic Church, for the giving of the Holy Ghost, for which, he Cites Act.
8.14. This is further noticeable of Dr. Lightfoot, viz. That he shows, that
Imposition of Hands, was not given, but only to such, as were ad Ministerium
Ordinandi, and was not given ad Sanctificationem, sed ad Dona extraordinaria.
See Answer to the Principles of the Cyprianick Age, P. 53. who also Cites
Piscator, Beza, Grotius, as thus Expounding the Passage Controverted. Festus
Hommius, Disput. Theolog. 46. These. 1. Having shown, that the Apostles used
this Ceremony of Imposing Hands, for Confirming their Doctrine, by visible and
Miraculous Gifts of the Spirit, adds. [ Haec Dona, quia ad tempus tantum in
Ecclesia viguerunt, bodieque ut Ecclesiae non amplius hoc modo necessaria,
cessarunt, etiam ritus ille eum in Finem ne^^debet servari, nec potest
adhiberi] And These. 2. speaking of the Commendable custom of the Primitive
Church, that the Catechumeni, when become Youths, and ineunte adolescentia,
were presented to be Confirmed, it was by Exhortation and Prayer; and for this
end, they were presented, says he, Ecclesiae Pastoribus, and dismissed with a
Blessing.

The Dr. holds this Ministry of Confirmation, (P. 446.) to be performed by
Prayer, and laying on of Hands; The Party Confirmed, receiving the Gifts of the
Holy Ghost. And what Gifts, I pray, were they, which the Dr. Asserts, were
alwise conferred by this Ceremony, and (as he expresses it) received thereby?
Sure, not the ordinary Gifts: For, he will acknowledge these received, in the
Sacrament of Baptism; The Extraordinary, he Acknowledges are ceased: And if
neither Ordinary, nor extraordinary Gifts, are thereby conferred, I know not
what the Dr. can make of it, unless he make it, a sort of adjutory, further
Confirming, Symbolical, ritual Accessory to the Sacrament of Baptism, and a
renewed Representation and Seal of the same privileges, as are Sealed thereby;
And then it should seem, it is brought within the stroke and reach of
Cartwrights Arguments and Reasons against the Rhemists, above rehearsed; and
that it falls within the compass of such a vain and ludicrous sign of Episeopal
vanity, as is above expressed. Ierom, in the forementioned Epistle, adversus
Luciferianus, thus lashes this supposed prerogative of the Prelat, That if not
by a necessity of Law, but for the Honor of the Episcopal Office, the Spirit
is given, their Case is to be Lamented, who in little Villages, or remote
places from the Diocese, have been Baptized by Presbyters, and prevented by
Death, before the Bishops visit. Beda, expressly upon Psalm. 86. ascribs this to
vanity. And Calvin ( Instit. Lib. 4. Cap. 19.) thus lashes the Papists, that so
many of their Flocks, being deprived of this supposed necessary Confirmation [
patiuntur in suo grege Semi-Christianos, quorum imperfectionem mederi facile
erat] they admit many of their people, to be but half Christians, whose
imperfection, they may easily remedy. And how far this is applicable to the
Dr's Case, I need not stand to subsum.

Its true, the Dr. does not in express terms, call it a Sacrament, yet seeing
P. 447. he holds it is by Divine warrant, placed in the same Class with
Baptism, and made one of the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and in his
sense, appointed still to continue, as a standing Ministry, for Communication
of the necessary influences of the Spirit; Its left to the judicious to
consider, whether it fall not clearly, within the compass of Cartwrights
Reasons, and of others above rehearsed, as inferring its unlawfulness, and in
special, an appeal is made to the Judicious, to ponder, how the appropriating
of this Ceremony to a Bishop, for the great ends mentioned, can come within the
compass of these Fundamental Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, without the
Knowledge and Belief whereof, there can be no Salvation. The Dr. I must needs
say, advances not only Prelacy it self, but this supposed privilege of
Prelates, to an high pitch, in this Reasoning.

For what he adds of the Character and Quality of Philip, ibid.
and of Cyprians Opinion, of his being one of the Seventy two Disciples:
Whether he he was Deacon or Evangelist, it is all one in this Case, since the
Action here performed by the Apostles, was proper to them, upon the Grounds
already Assigned; and the account of their approach to Samaria, after this
begun Ministry of Philip, is so represented by Protestant Divines, as wholly
overthrows his pleading, and Razes it to the Foundation.

For, What the Dr. alleges, anent the constant Exercise of this supposed
privilege of Bishops, ibid.
in the Primitive Church. As he has produced no Testimony of either Councils or
Fathers, in proof of this, but only wraps up the Matter in a Confident general;
So, he is forced immediately in the next words, to make a sort of Retraction,
telling us, That in later Ages, there are Instances produced, of Presbyters,
that Confirmed. But least he should seem to fall foul upon his large Assertion
immediately premised, he must needs lenify this, and mix Water with his Wine,
adding, That they Confirmed only in the Bishops absence, and by his delegation;
and that it was in the later Ages. We see these Charitable Lords, became at
last, Liberal, in parting with some Prerogatives, admitting such as could only
perform the mean Service of Baptizing, to the High Episcopal Dignity of
Confirming. But the Account we have given of this Matter, sufficiently
discovers his unsoundness, and prevarication in this Point, and that as the
Practice he pleads for, had never any warrant from Scripture, or prime
Antiquity, so, what Imposition of Hands might have been practiced in a supposed
conformity to the Apostles Pattern, was performed by the Elders or Ministers of
the Church. And therefore, in opposition to the Dr's fair Conclusion (as he
calls it P. 448.) that this Confirmation, or Imposition of Hands, was Peculiar
to the Apostles in the Original, and their Successors, the Bishops, in the
continuation of it. We may in the Confidence of Truth, oppose this Antithesis,
or Counter-Conclusion; That the Apostolic Confirmation, which he instances,
was so peculiar to the Apostolic Office, and so appropriat to extraordinary
expired effects, as therein the Apostles could have no Successors: And that
their Successors, in all the necessary duties and Offices of a Gospel Ministry,
are the Faithful Pastors, laboring in the Word and Doctrine, to whom, as the
Apostles committed, what was in their Office, ordinary and necessary to be
continued in the Church, So, upon such Principles and grounds, in such a
manner, and for such an end, in their Doctrine, delivered to the Churches, as
does quite overthrow, the Hierarchical Prelat he Pleads for, as no Plant of the
Lords Plantation.

FINIS.
A Full REVIEW and EXAMINATION OF DOCTOR MONRO's Scripture-Pleadings, Upon the
Point of EPISCOPACY, In his late Book, entitled, An Inquiry into the New
Opinions, chiefly propogated by the Presbyterians of Scotland:
CHAP. I. The Dr's* Unsound and Impertinent Reflections upon our first
Reformers, as to their Judgment in point of Church Government, Exposed:
Together with his Unsound and Popish Method in his Answer to the Argument
against Episcopacy, taken from Mat. 20.25. And with the parallel Texts.
TO Examine in the better Method, what this Dr. produces, against us, it is
fit, that we First view, what he represents as our Assertion, and which he
boldly Charges with Error and Novelty, and as one of those Opinions never heard
of, for 1400 Years after our Saviors Incarnation: It is thus, That we affirm
our Savior has appointed his Church, under the New Testament ( whether
Provincial, National, or Oecumenick) to be Governed by the several Classes of
Presbyters, acting in a perfect Parity, and owning no Subordination to any
higher Officer in the Ec^lesiastick Senate, above a Presbyter, in the modern
and current Notion of the Word.

That which I mainly desiderat here, is. 1. The term of [ several Classes]
appears obscure, not pointing at the Beautyful Order and Subordination of
Judicatories, which we maintain according to the Nature of all Government,
consequently of Church Government. The Classes and excerpted Classes, is an
invidious, independent term: We own the Congregational Church represented by
the Pastors one or more, with the Congregational Eldership: The Presbytrie, a
Judicatory Superior to this, made up the Pastors of the Congregations, together
with Ruling Elders: The Provincial Synod, superior thereunto, consisting of the
Ministers of the Several Presbytries, with Ruling Elders, in the Precincts of
the Province, to which the proportioned number of Presbytries are subordinat,
and wherein they are represented: The National Church, made up of a convenient
number of Ministers and Elders, from every Presbytrie therein, to which the
Provincial Synods are subordinat. Which Model of Government, has been so fully
Cleared from Scripture, by many Learned Pens, that he cannot stand before the
evidence of Divine Authority, and Reason, offered for the same; And which any,
who have Read, may see the vanity of his empty Pamphlet. 2 When he tells us of
Presbyters, Acting in a perfect parity, he insinuats, as if We held no other
Presbyter, than the Pastor, and that all who come under this general Name or
Character, have by our Principles, the same interest in Church Government;
which, if he mean of Government in its whole Extent, viz, that Power, which is
called the Diatactick, Critic and Dogmatick, its a gross Falsehood: For, we
distinguish an interest in the last, which is proper to Pastors, from that
interest in the first two, which we allow to Ruling Elders. 3. When he tells
us, We own no higher Officer, in the Ecclesiastic Senate, above a Presbyter in
the modern Current Notion of the Word, he speaks in the Clouds, and confusedly,
not specifying, what is that Notion of the Word, which he calls Modern and
current, and which we own as of the Divine Appointment and Signature. We hold,
that the Pastor, laboring in the Word and Doctrine, and to whom is Committed
the Doctrinal and Jurisdictional Key, is termed also in Scripture, the Elder or
Presbyter, and that he is the highest ordinary Church Officer of Divine
Appointment; and this with the Body of Protestant Churches and Divines. We also
hold, that the Scripture points out an Elder or Presbyter, that Rules only, and
is inferior to the Labourer in the Word and Doctrine, as having no interest
therein; and this Notion of the Word we hold, and can make good to be the
Scripture, as well as Modern Notion. If this Dr. in calling it the Current
Notion of the Word, intend that which is the general Sense of Divines, he seems
here to Charge them all with Novelty and Singularity, since all, who hold this
Notion of the Word, and understand the Presbyter, in the Sense above expressed,
must needs own him to have such interest in Government, and the same Authority,
which we Assert: And therefore, Cross to the Dr's Notion, which he is not
pleased directly to specify.

The Dr. without distinction, or setting up his discriminating Marchstones, as
to the extension of time, calls the days, wherein this Notion of the Presbyter
is become current, days of Separation and Singularity, differing in this from
the Uniform Testimony of Antiquity; And the Critic has here much to say, in
proof of his Charging with Singularity and Separation, and a dangerous
Separation from the Uniform Testimony of Antiquity, the whole Body of Reformed
Churches and Divines, since in their Confessions, and the Current usage of
their Writers, they thus understand and make use of the term Presbyter. As
also, that upon other grounds, he Charges them, with Singularity and
Separation, since he calls these days such, absolutely, abstracting from this
particular Cause: And what dangerous Consequence, this Doctrine is of, and how
highly reflecting upon the Churches, will suit his serious, second, and more
sedat Thoughts, when in a better frame and humor.

The Dr. adds, That, in this we differ from the first Presbyterians among our
selves, who Declare in their Confession of Faith, that all Church Policy is
Variable, so far were they from Asserting an Indispensible and Unalterable
Right of Parity. But, in this, he has Abused his Reader, and any that but reads
that Confession, may easily discover his Impudent Forgery and Imposings: For,
First, In the ninteenth Article of that Confession, Assigning the Notes of the
True Church, they present these three, (1.) The true Preaching of the Word of
God, as he has revealed himself, in the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles.
(2.) The right Administration of the Sacraments, annexed to the Word and
Promise, to confirm it to our Hearts. (3.) Ecclesiastical Discipline, uprightly
Ministered, as Gods Word prescribes, whereby Vice is repressed and Virtue
nourished. And giving Instance of this in particular Gospel Churches, they add,
Such were in Corinthus, Galatia, Ephesus, and other places, wherein the
Ministry was planted by Paul, and were of himself named the Churches of God,
citing on the Margin, 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Cor. 1.1. Gal. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.1. where Paul
ownes them, and names them as Churches; and to prove they had a Ministry and
Ecclesiastic Discipline planted therein, they further cite, Act. 16.9, 10. and
20.17, etc. pointing us to Paul's last and farewell Charge to the Elders or
Pastors of Ephesus, wherein he entrusted the Government thereof to them, as the
only Bishops thereof, set up and Authorized by the Holy Ghost: And such a
Church, they profess the Protestant Church in this Realm to be.

From this Account of the Confession, it is evident, 1. That in the Sense of
our first Reformers, Church Government and Discipline, rightly Administered, is
an Essential Mark of the Church. 2. That it must not be according to Men's
Invention, or Rules of Worldly Policy, but according to the Prescription of the
Word of God: Thus, clearly asserting, that the Word of God, prescribes the
Rules and Measures of it, and consequently determines, what Government and
Discipline it is, else there could be no Appeal to that Rule. And look, as, they
make the Word of God, the Standart and Rule of the true Doctrine, in the first
Note, so, of Discipline and Government, in this third: Hence, as, none can,
without extremest Impudence assert, that the Word leaves us to Waver, and at an
Uncertainty, as to the true or false Doctrine, or that it is not perfectly
contained in the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, Appealed to, in that
first Note, so, without the same Impudence, neither can this be alleged of the
Discipline or Government; anent the Rectitude whereof, and its Divine Measures,
the same Appeal is made. 3. When exhibiting Scripture Instances, they mention a
Ministry established by Paul in the Churches, and in special, such a Ministry
or Eldership, as had the Government established and lodged with them, in a
Parity of Pastors, as the Church of Ephesus, when Paul gave them his last
Charge, to Feed and Govern jointly, as the Bishops set up by the Holy Ghost,
they clearly assert the Divine Warrands of Presbyterian Parity.

Next, for that Passage, which the Dr. takes hold of, in Art. 21. (which he
durst not point his Reader to, as knowing that the very Reading, would discover
his Forgery) that which they affirm, is thus expressed. Not, that we think any
policy or Order in Ceremonies, can be appointed for all Ages, times and places,
etc. Its evident, that it utterly rejects his absurd gloss, and impertinent
groundless inference: For, 1. They are not speaking of the Species and form of
Government, but of these things, which Councils has a Power to determine in,
yea, peremptorly affirm, that they have no Power or Authority to make that to
be Gods Word, or the true interpretation thereof, which was not so before, by
his Holy Will, and by clear Consequence, that no Councils can alter or change
that Ministry and Government, which in Art. 19. They affirm the Apostles
established. 2. Having mentioned the Confutation of Heresies, and giving a
public Confession of Faith, according to the Word, as one great. design of
General Councils, they assign the Second, which is to Constitut good Order and
Policy, to be observed in the Kirk, that all things be done decently, and in
Order, citing 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently and in order:
Wherein Paul prescribs this general Rule to be applied to the particular
circumstances of that Church -- Then they add, Not that we think any Policy and
order in Ceremonies, can be appointed for all Ages, Times, and places --
Adding, That when Ceremonies foster Superstition, they ought to be removed:
Wherein, it is evident, as the Meridian Light, that that Policy, which they
hold alterable, is not the Government of the Church, appointed by the Apostles
in the Word, or that Ecclesiastic Discipline, therein prescribed: For, this
they make a Note of the true Church; and to call this alterable according to
the difference of Times and Places, were so gross a contradiction, as no Men of
Sense, could fall into, much less the Godly and Learned Compilers of that
Confession. But, by this alterable Policy, they mean, such as Rel^tes to the
variable Circumstances of particular Churches, and such appointments
thereanent, as God has left to the Regulation of the Christian Prudence of
Church Governors, according to the general Rules of the Word; of which Rules,
that instance they exhibit, 1 Cor. 14.40. has the prime place. So, that the
Dr's Inference, that therefore, the Authors of the Confession, held not an
indispensible Divine Right of Parity of Pastors or Presbyters, has no
dependence upon that Passage, which he Cites, nor has any Subsistence, but in
his own imagination.

The Dr. adds (P. 13) That the First Presbyterians pleaded only, that their New
Form, was not repugnant to the Economy of the New Testament Church, and
Primitive Institution; that it came nearer to the Original Model of Churches:
But never affirmed, that the Christian Church, by the Original Authority of our
Savior, and his Apostles, ought to be Governed by a Parity of Presbyters, and
that no Officer in the Church, higher than a Presbyter, could pretend, to any
share in Ecclesiastic Government. I Answer, the Dr. has not exhibit to us,
these Presbyterians, whom he calls First, and who thus pleaded. We heard, that
our very First Reformers, Pleads for that Government, they were settling, as a
Divine Ministry and Government, according to the Word, and deriving its
Original Pattern from the Apostles Plantation of Churches, such as Ephesus had,
when Paul gave his last directions to that Church. To which Original Pattern,
they hold, that all Churches ought to be squared and Subordinat. And if we
advance a step further, to our Books of Discipline, we will find the Divine
Right of our Government Asserted, in most Material Points thereof.

The Peoples interest in the Election of Pastors, in their Call, and in their
Admission, is Asserted in the First Book of Discipline, Head 1. with the
Explication.

In the 7 Head of Ecclesiastic Discipline, the highest Censure of
Excommunication, is attributed to the Ministry, as their Duty and Privilege
(not to the Prelat) and all Preachers, without exception, are declared Subject
to Discipline; and the Subjection of all Preachers to the Prophets, in their
Doctrine, is Asserted in the 9. Head of Church Policy, upon that special Point
of Propesying and interpreting the Scriptures. All which, cutts the Sinnews of
the Prelates Exercising Power over Pastors, Establishing their Essential Divine
Right of Government.

In 2 Book of Discipl. Chap. 1. The Divine Right of Church Government and
Policy, is Asserted, and its distinction from the Civil. The unlawfulness of
Ministers, assuming Name or Thing of Lordship. Again, The extraordinary expired
Function of Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, is Asserted. The identity of
the Pastor and Bishops Office, as the highest ordinary Function, together with
the Relation thereof to a particular Flock, is Asserted Chap. 2.

Moreover- Chapter 7. initio, the Ruling Elders Office, and Congregational
Eldership, are Asserted.

Ibid. Our Church Judicatories, Congregational, Provincial, and National, are
Asserted.

Chap. 11. The Unwarrantableness of the Office of Bishops Assuming Authority
over Pastors, and a Lordship over them, and over Christ's Inheritance, is
Asserted: And such Bishops, as refuse Subjection to the Established Discipline
and Government of Pastors, are appointed to be deposed from all Function in
this Kirk. Likewise, Patronages, as crossing the Peoples Right, in Election of
Pastors, are condemned as a Corruption of Popery, Chap 12.

Now, the Divine Right of the Courts and Officers, we own, in opposition to
Prelacy, being thus Asserted in these Books of Policy, and in the Judgment of
the Compilers thereof, drawn forth from the Fountain of the Word; the Model
also, presented and described in these Books, amounting to a specific form of
Government, and eversive of Prelacy, the Compilers, also, as is said,
presenting it as the Divine and Scripture Pattern; they must needs hold it to
be a standing Form, appointed by our Lord and his Apostles. Again, if the Dr.
hold, that the New Testament Economy, contains a specific standing Form of
Government, and a Standart for all Churches, while time lasts, then such a
Form, as with Respect to the main, is asserted to be consonant thereunto, is
asserted in so far, to be, not only allowable, but necessary: And this, the Dr.
must needs admit, unless with Papists, he will make Scriptures themselves, a
Nose of Wax, and the New Testaments Prescriptions, in Point of Government, and
its Economy, versatile, and so Lax and General, that it discovers no Species
of Government. Besides, if these Reformers affirm, the Pastor, to be the
highest Church Officer, Iure Divino, and that he is all one with the Preaching
Presbyter, then by necessary Consequence, they must needs hold, that by
Original Authority of Christ and his Apostles, all Churches ought to be
Governed, by a Parity of Presbyters or Pastors, and that no Ecclesiastic
Officer, above a Presbyter, can pretend, to a share in Ecclesiastic
Government. These Assertions, are of so close and clear a connection, that if
the Dr. attempt to cut this Gordian Knot, he will fall into such a shameful
Assertion, as to affirm, that an Officer, not allowed by Christ, but condemned
by his own Original Authority, and that of his Apostles, has notwithstanding, a
share in Ecclesiastic Government. Besides, the dull inadvertency of this
Assertion, appears in this, that he holds our Reformers did plead, that their
Form was allowable, and not repugnant to the New Testament Economy, and yet
not such, as was recommended by our Lords Original Authority to all Churches:
For, if he hold, that the New Testament Economy, is a clear fixed Standart and
Model for all the Churches, then, whatever Frame of Government is not Dissonant
or Repugnant, is conform and consonant thereunto, and consequently, not only
allowable, but necessary. And if our Lords Original Authority prescribed this
Economy, as a Standart and Rule for Church Government, in all Ages, that Model
that comes up to this First Standart, in so far as it comes up to it, is that
which the Church is to imitat in all Ages, unless he will say, that all Ages
are not to imitat this Pattern, showed upon the Mount. And in special, our
Reformers hold, that our Savior in the Original Prescription of this Pattern,
presents the Pastor or Preaching Presbyter, as the highest ordinary Church
Officer. And therefore, it is no rashness to affirm, that in all times of the
Church, such an Officer as a Prelat, Superior to Pastors, is forbidden and
Condemned. The Dr. says, That; tho our Reformers affirm, their Government was
not repugnant to the New Testament Economy, they were not so rash as to affirm
the Church ought to be thus Governed in all Ages. So, its with this Grave
cautelous Dr, rashness to affirm, that a Government suited to the Divine
Pattern, is for all Ages, consequently a precipitant Assertion to affirm, that
our Lords Pattern is the just Standart for all Ages. The Dr. will be satisfied,
That we plead for our Judgment in Government (which he calls a New Notion) as
probable, but cannot endure, that we plead for an absolut infallible Right, and
require obedience to it, as due to infallible Authority; This, he says, is
worse,, than speculative Enthusiasm. I Answer, if we can produce no Scripture
Warrant for that Government we own, we shall be satisfied it come under the
Character of a New Notion; But, if we can make it appear, to be the Government
recommended in the Scripture-Oeconomy and Pattern, then, as being founded upon
Infallible Authority, we justly challenge Obedience to it; and while this Light
is shut out and rejected by the Dr. and his Fellows, they are justly
Chargeable, in so far, with Speculative, yea, and Practical Enthusiasm. The
Dr's. pretended Rhetorical Flourish, whereby he would set off this Charge upon
Presbyterians, taken from the similitud and allusion to the person, who should
threaten to knock him on the Head, unless he will affirm, against his Reason and
Senses, that he sees such Armies in the Air, as are pointed out to him; Is but
a fantastic Flash of his own Airy Imagination, for we impose nothing
Arbitrarly or Imperiously upon his Reason, or any of his way, but challenge the
utmost attention, and best Exercise of their Sense and Reason, to that
Scripture Light and demonstration of our Government, which we offer from the
Word, which, had he seriously searched and pondered, with an Eye to God, the
Father of Lights, he had been otherwise, and better employed, than in flinging
out such Squibs and Crackets into this Country, and in writing his folly and
ignorance, in such an Airy Childish Pamphlet as this is. He adds ( P. 14.) "
That it were better to fall into High-way-Mens hands, than amongst such
Spiritual Robbers. But he commits this Robbery upon himself, while shutting his
Eyes against that Scripture Light, which has been offered upon this Point. And
he knows, by what numerous cruel Laws, and Barbarous execution thereof, in the
late Reigns, he and his Masters, our Scots Prelates, endeavored to knock down
the reason and Conscience of many Thousands of this Nation, both Godly and
knowing, in an Imperious obtrusion of their ungodly Hierarchy upon them, and
many wicked Vows and Oaths for upholding it.

The Dr. next alleges; That we vainly boast of a Divine Institution of our
Government, and unanswered Writers in its defense, but when put to produce
Arguments for it, we have have nothing but perplexed Probabilities, intricat
consequences from wrested Scriptures, to offer, contrary to the Uniform
suffrage of the Ancients, etc. Ans. what Divine Warrant we plead for the Divine
Right of the Courts and Officers we own, is so well known to such as are
acquaint with this Controversy, and how solid our Scripture-proofs are, and
consonant to the Sense, both of Ancient and Modern Writers, that this Man's
flanting boast, can make no other impression upon them, than of his procacious
vanity. Had he intended as a Champion indeed for his Cause, to Fight, not to
bragg, in this Pamphleting Bragadocio, which any may see to be ad pompam, non
ad pugnam, he should have fairly and formally encountered Ius Divin. Reg.
Eccles. Ius Divin. Minist. Evang. Smectym. with its Vindication. Mr. Baynes
Diocesan Trial, in Answer to Dounham. Didoclav. Cap. 4. And the
Scripture-Pleadings of many Foreign Divines, against the Hierarchy, and for
the Parity of Pastors; and then to have boasted (having discussed their
Arguments) at the putting off of his Armor.

But now, that we are come to the Point, the Dr. (P. 15.) tells his Friend,
That he can give but a short History of our Arguments, for the Divine Right of
Parity: And good Reason; since he is for little slight Skirmishes, not for the
Shock of more close and dangerous Encounters. Our Arguments, he reduces to
three Heads. 1. The express Command of our Savior. 2. Consequences from Texts
of Scripture. 3. Testimonies of Ancient Writers. I shall not insist in
Criticizing upon the Dr's general Partitions: Only, as for what he offers anent
our Saviors express Command and Institution of Presbyterian Government and
Parity of Pastors, he should have done well, to name the Authors, who assert
this, ere he had so confidently ascribed this Assertion to Presbyterians. No
doubt, had he dealt fairly, in a particular Condescendance upon our Arguments
drawn from Scripture, for Parity of Pastors, and offered clear Scripture
Replies to them, Presbyterians would have thanked him, for his Diligence, in
endeavoring their further Light and Conviction on this Head. But to prevent
his Mistake, or any else of his Persuasion, I must further add, that, as for
the Argument from Antiquity, however he and his Party do magnify it, stuffing
their Books and Pamphlets therewith, instead of more solid Scripture Reasoning:
And although, we are not afraid to try their Strength, in this Method of Arguing,
yet Antiquity, or the Testimony of Humane Writers, is none of the Foundations,
upon which we do build the Ius and Divine Right of the Government we maintain,
but the Lively Oracles, the Scriptures of Truth allenarly: And we look upon the
Testimony of Antiquity, or of Ancient Writers, as an Accessory Humane
Illustration, in some Matters of Fact, but no proper proof, or to be ranked in
eodem genere, with the first, and as tending to refute the Charge of Novellism,
wherewith the Dr. and his Fellows, are bold to asperse our Principles in this
point.

The Dr. now falls upon the first Head of Arguments, taken from a supposed
express Command of our Savior, anent the Parity of Pastors, exclusive of the
Jurisdiction of a Bishop (I heartily wish, he had here, specified and defined
this Jurisdic^^on) He tells his Friend, (p. 16.) We prove this from Matthew.
20.25. which, he says, we insist upon, more than Foreign Presbyterians, and
he professes he will hear our Argument from hence, calmly and deliberatly, with
Reverence and Attention. He adds the paralells, Luke 22.25. Mark 10.42, 43.
Naming in the Margin, the Reverend Mr. Dickson, and the Answer to the
Iraenicum by G. R. Our Argument from hence, the Dr. represents thus, That the
Officers of Christ's House, were by his own express Command, established in a
perfect Equality, even in such a Parity, as excludes the Power and Jurisdiction
of any higher Order, than that of a Presbyter, in the Modern Notion.

Before I come to represent the Dr's Answer to this Text, (premonishing again,
what is before animadverted upon the Term of express Command) I shall, First,
Show what we plead from it. Secondly, That our Pleading is Consonant to the
Sense of Sound Divines.

For the first, It is apparent in the premised parallel Texts, that the
Tentation of Ambitious Emulation among the Disciples, ha^ prompted them to a
Sinful Contest about Primacy, or which of them should be greatest, to prevent
the Mischievous Effects whereof, our Savior Cautioned and Rebuked them,
Discharging them expressly, the Lordly Grandeur of Earthly Rulers, to Exercise
Lordship and Dominion one over another, in Opposition thereunto, Commending
Humble Ministerial Service, and Spiritual Diligence in their Stewardship; both
which he enforces from his own Exemplary Humility. Hence, we infer, 1. That our
Lord discharged Superiority and Inferiority among Officers of the same kind,
so, that none are greater than another in their Office, no Apostle, no
Evangelist above another; that a complete Parity in their Official Power, is
commanded: And therefore, by clear Consequence, a complete and entire Parity
among Pastors; And by further clear evidence, we argue, that superior and
inferior Degrees among them are discharged. 2. That whatever Priority of Order,
be allowed among Officers of different kinds, we conclude, that our Savior, in
these places, discharged Dominion and Principality, in any of them, of whatever
kind, all Masterly Power, such as Civil Governors Exercise; There being one
Master of his Family only, whereof all Ministers are Brethren and
Fellow Servants: Because, in Exemplifying what he discharges, our Savior gives
the Instance, in such Rulers, as are called Benefactors, or Gracious Lords, and
in Opposition thereunto, Commands an Humble Ministerial Service, not a sort of
warrantable Dominion, as the parallel, 1 Pet. 5. makes it evident. So, that, he
gives here, the Lord-Prelat, two Deadly Wounds, (1.) In that he makes himself
an Officer of an higher Order and Degree, than the Pastor, holding himself, to
be a Pastor, specifically distinct from the Preaching Presbyter: Thus Dividing
and Cutting out the Pastoral Office, into Antiscriptural, Distin^t, Official
Kinds, whereas, our Savior discharges this, among Officers of the same kind.
(2.) In that he Lords over his Brethren and Fellow-Pastors, and that both, in a
pretended Spiritual Capacity, arrogating a sole Power in Ordination and
Jurisdiction, a Masterly Power and Principality over Church Judicatories, and
likewise, in assuming the Earthly Lordship, Place and Grandeur, which is
expressly here discharged. Now, if from what is said, it be evident, that such
an Office and Officer is discharged, the Prelates Office is unlawful. and an
Official Parity in the Pastoral Office, clearly concluded. And that it may
appear, that this is no Novel or distorted Exposition, let us

In the second place, view what Patrons it has. To begin with the Belgic
Divines upon Matthew. 20.21. they show, that the Occasion of the Contest, was the
Apostles Ignorance of the Condition of Christ's Kingdom, to which they were
called viz. Not to a Worldly Rule, but to Serve and Suffer. And upon v. 2^ they
show, that all who are called to the Ministry of the Church, are discharged a
Worldly Rule. Upon Luke 22.25. they assert a Lordship and Worldly Power to be
forbidden; paralelling this with 1 Pet. 5. which discharges a Lordship over
Gods Heritage. The English Annot. on the place of Matthew. show, That the Lord,
to appease their Contention, told them, they were not to expect Worldly
Greatness and Dominion in following him, and whoever usurps this, affects that
which God has not given -- that they were to look after a Life of Teaching and
Laboring, not Lording, citing 1 Pet. 5.3. And though, in a general Sense, they
assert, there are Orders among Ministers, generally considered, viz. Apostles
above Evangelists, Pastors above Elders, yet the Prohibition of all Worldly
Power to Ministers, they do here assert, and whatever Power is opposite to a
Laborious Service and Ministry. Diodat. on that passage of Matthew. shows, That
our Savior bespeaks the Apostles, as Ministers, showing, that they ought to
place their Dignity, not in Worldly Lordships, but Humble Faithful Serving for
the Salvation of Souls. And that our Lord discharges Worldly Greatness, as
inconsistent with his Spiritual Kingdom, in that passage of Matthew. is asserted
by the Authors of Pool's Annot. part. 2. who also, upon Luke 22. do assert,
That our Lord discharges Ministers to Exercise a Dominion or Lordship, such as
is forbidden 1 Pet. 5.3. Not as being Lords over Gods Heritage, citing also 2
Cor. 1.24. where Paul disownes a Dominion. Pareus upon that place of Mat.
shows, That it is not a Civil only, but Ecclesiastic Dominion, which is here
forbidden, or a Lording over the Church, as Peter, says he, commands the
Presbyters, not to Lord over the Flocks committed to them: Joining as parallel
to this 2 Cor. 1.24. where Paul uses the simple Verb (...) lest we apprehend
its only Tyranny, that is discharged. He shows, that our Lord Reasons from the
Condition of the Apostles, who were not to be Lords, but to Teach, to be
Subject, to Serve the Church. 2. From the Dignity of the Ministry, which
consists in a Faithful Service. 3. From his own Example who had Humbled
himself, to Minister to all, etc. Whittaker Answering Bellarmins Glossings upon
this Text, to save the Popes Supremacy, tells him, That comparing Matthew and
Luke together, and considering that Luke uses the Simple, not the Compound
Word, in expressing the Dominion, which is discharged, would have his Disciples
understand, that they have nothing to do with Dominion: Thus he, de
Ponsificatu, quest. 1. Turret. part. 3. quest. 16. these. 4. cites Luke 22. with
the parallel, 1 Pet. 5. as enjoining a Ministry, and discharging all Dominion
in the Church. These. 5. he shows, It was not the Ambitious Affectation, but the
Power and Dominion it self, which the Lord discharged, opposing to it, and
commending in its place a Simple Service and Ministry. And These. 6. He shows,
That the Question among the Disciples, was not about a violent Domination, or
violent Ways of obtaining it, but the Lordship and Dominion it self, which he
simplely discharged; proving it from Lukes using the simple Verb. And that
passage, he that will be great, he shows, is to be understood, not of a Real,
but Imaginary Affected Greatness. He also shows, that Christ's Reasoning from
his own Example, Non argumentatur a pari, sed a majore ad minus, argues not
from a sameness, but from the greater to the less -- If I your Lord, do
minister and serve, much more ought you, who are indeed Servants, who have no
Jurisdiction over one another, to lay aside all Thoughts of Domination, as when
he said, if I your Lord, have washed your feet, you much more, Ioh. 13.14. He
after, reasons this same point, from Christ's discharging them to assume
Masterly Imperious Titles, showing them, that there is but one Master in the
Church, etc. Shall I add, what Iunius has upon this Text against Bellarmins
Glosses, de Pontificat. Lib. 1. Our Lord said of the thing it self, they
Exercised Dominion -- He spoke not of the manner, after this or that manner --
but not so ye, says he, its a simple denial of the thing proposed. Bernard
Writing to Eugenius, expones this passage, and of 1 Pet. 5. as striking against
all Dominion, and enjoining a Ministerial Care in Opposition thereunto. And
Whittaker on the passage, tells Bellarmin, that its not Humility in Dominion,
that is here enjoined, but Dominion it self, is forbidden. Let us add
Cartwright against the Rhemists, upon these passages, who reasons at large,
that its not Ambition nor Tyranny, but the Dominion of great Ones over their
Vassals and Inferiors, which is here forbidden, showing that in this, the
Ecclesiastic Office, differs from the Civil, that it admits not of Dominion
and Principality, as the Civil Government, nor the outward Pomp and Superiority
thereof. And the Argument from Christ's Example, he thus expones, in Opposition
to the Jesuits Glossings and Scope, It does not follow, says he, that because
Christ their Lord and Master, had Rule over them, therefore, they being
Fellow Servants, should have Rule one over another, but it follows rather, that
for as much, as he their Lord and Master humbled himself to the basest Service,
therefore, they should be ashamed to be Lords and Masters over one another:
Thus, says he. Cyprian alleged by Gratian (Distinct. 10, quoniam id vid.)
expones this place, Not of Pride and Ambition -- but of the several Acts and
distinct Honors betwixt both the Powers. And upon the parallel Luke 22.24. he
asserts against the Jesuits, that Majority and Superiority among the Apostles
was reproved simplely, not a Tyrannous Affectation of Rule. We might multiply
Protestant Writers to a Voluminous Bulk, upon this Head. For Calvin and Beza's
Sense upon the place, I need not mention them, these are the Dr's Adversaries;
Only I must notice their Correspondence with the Body of Protestant Divines, in
this Sense and Account of the place exhibit. Yet I must add one Novelist more,
Chamier de Oecum. Pont. lib. 10. cap. 3. who upon this passage represents the
Popish Glosses, anent our Lords discharging only the Manner of Aspiring to
Greatness, not the Dominion it self, which he refutes in the same manner, and
from the same grounds, as Iunius and Whittaker. But now it is time, to return
to the Dr.

From what is premised, it is no hard Matter to discover the Vanity of his
Evasions. First, He tells us, p. 17. That our Lord supposes Degrees of
Subordination among his own Disciples, as in other Societies; And therefore,
directs Ecclesiastics, who would climb to the highest places o^ the Church, to
take other Methods than these used by the Grandees of the World; he that
deserves Preferment in the Church, is to be Servants of all; So that this
refers to the Method of Promotion, not to the Extirpation of their
Jurisdiction: They were not to aspire to Dignity and Honor by Force and
Violence, and the Arts fashionable in Secular Courts, but by Acts of Modesty,
Humility and Self-denial. Ans. 1. For what he says of Christ's supposing Degrees
of Subordination; If he mean it in general, among Church Officers, its
admitted; If among the Disciples, or these here Addressed, in this Speech of our
Savior, he Beggs the Question, and Contradicts the Sense and Pleading of
Protestant Divines, upon this passage, who (as we have heard) do hold that
Majority and Superiority among them, was here discharged, and a complete Parity
of Official Authority enjoined. The Clause, Not so among you, we heard that
Turretin, with others, do hold absolutely to discharge this supposed Inequality
of Power and Dominion, which he proves from the Nature of the Phrase, collated
with Paralells: And we have also found, that Pareus (as might be cleared in
others) do extend this, even to an Ecclesiastic Superiority. 2. If the Dr.
draw this Supposition of degrees of Subordination, from that Clause, He that
will be great and chief, as is evident he does; Then I Charge him First, With
Crossing the Sense of Sound Divines, upon that Text, who in Pleading against
the Papists, tell them, that our Lord said not, He that by my Allowance is
great, but he that will be great. I confess, some do understand here a true
Greatness, viz. in Virtue and Reward, a true Ministerial Greatness; And this
Sense also baffles the Dr's Gloss of an External Greatness, the Unsoundness
whereof, further appears, when we ponder what our Savior enjoined, in
Opposition to the Worldly Grandeur discharged, viz. to be their Servant, over
whom this is affected, which is further evident in the Alternative Branch of
the Parallel, 1 Pet. 5. whereby Sound Divines do clear and expone this Text:
For, that which the Apostle opposes to, being Lords (the thing prohibited) he
expresses by, being Examples to the Flock, importing an Holy, Humble,
Ministerial Service. Again, I do Appeal to all Men of Sense, who understand
this Controversy, whether the Dr. does not in this Answer, stand upon the same
ground with Bellarmin, (de Pontif. cap 1.) in Defense of the Papacy: His Answer
is, that a Primacy is not here discharged, but rather supposed, since our Lord
says, he that will be chief, etc. And that therefore, an Ambitious Lust of
Overruling, is here only prohibited, such as is among the Kings of the
Gentiles. Whittaker Answering Bellarmin, quarrels him, as Abusing and Wresting
the Text, since, instead of admitting Dominion it self, to be discharged (as he
makes evident, and even out of Bernard) the Jesuit holds, that Ambitious
Affectation only is forbidden, the Modus Rei, not the Object, the Manner of
Seeking, not the Thing it self, and that he admits the prohibited Lordship,
with the supposed or pretended Qualification of Modesty and Humility: And if
the Dr. says not here the same, let any Judge by his Words; For, he tells us,
that such as would climb up to the highest places in the Church, (and who
knows, how high these highest places mounts in the Dr's Fancy; None will doubt,
to a Metropolitan's Office at least, over a whole Nation: For this he ownes)
must not take Methods of Force and Violence, as usually Worldly Grandees, but
advance by Acts of Modesty, etc. So, that in the Dr's Sense, and Bellarmin's,
the Popes Mitre is never touched by this Text, it being the Modus Rei, the
Manner of Seeking and Affecting, not the Object of highest Places and greatest
Dignities, which our Savior here discharged. Nay, the Dr. in this Pleading,
stands so Antipode to Protestant Arguments, that he fixes the Popes Mitre
faster, which I prove thus; If that which the Contest was about, and the desire
of it was Lawful in the Object, then a Primacy was Lawful in the Object, and
only the Method of Seeking Discharged. The debate among the Disciples, was, who
should be the Chief, and have the highest place in the Church under Christ; And
the Dr. says, This Climbing up to highest places in the Church, is in it self a
Lawful practice, flowing from a Lawful desire and emulation, so that a Man set
his Steps right, and climb regularly: And will any Papist deny this? who knows
not that their Writers Condemn many Popes violent and bad Methods to get into
the Chair? The Dr. tells us expressly (P. 17) that the Text refers only to the
Method of Promotion: And if so, then by infallible consequence not to the
Promotion it self, tho even extended to a National, yea or Oecumenick Primacy
(as is said) If any object, that the Dr. holds, that this preferment was to be
in the Church, and that the person aspiring is enjoined to be Servant of all,
so, that it is neither a Civil, nor Ambitious Grandeur, which he allows: I
Answer, Papists will allow the First, and Popes pretends the Second, even to be
Servus servorum Dei, while he Possesses his Primacy: And the Dr. holds, its
such a Service of all, as can consist with the Metropolitans Mitre, or a
National Primacy overall; And upon this supposition, I would whisper the Dr in
the Ear, what if in the disposal of Supreme Providence, the whole Christian
Church should be confined to that Nation, or the Nation extended to the Limits
of the whole Church, what is then become of poor simple Protestants Pleadings
from this Text, against an Universal Patriarch, or Primacy, over the Christian
Church? The Dr must expugne and disown these, as Novel Glosses and New Opinions
of Presbyterians. One reflection more, I add upon the Dr's Answer, and do
Charge him with Sophistical Shuffling and Confounding the Terms and State of
the Question. When the Controversy was Stated among the Apostles, which of
them, should be Chief and greatest, and have a Primacy over all the rest, in
Christ's Church and Kingdom, and when our Savior bespoke them, in the terms
above expressed; the Question is, what that was, which our Lord in this
reprehension did Discharge, and what in the positive Injunction, he allowed? In
Answer to this, the Dr. holds, that that which the Lord Discharged and
prohibit, referrs only to the Method and Manner of Seeking and affecting, not
to the Object it self: For, he tells us, The Text referrs to the Method of
Promoti^n, even to the highest places. Now, this is exclusive, it referrs not
then to the Object: And what was that Object, I pray? The Text says, it was,
who should be Chief: But when the Dr. Represents, what this prohibition reaches
not unto, and is allowed, (for he holds, that our Lords words, contain a
negative Prohibition, and positive Precept) he thus Represents it; That our
Lords words, refers not to the extirpation of their Jurisdiction; which is as
far a leap from the Point, as any can be. Their Apostolic Jurisdiction was
never the Question, but an absolute Primacy; and none were ever so brutish, as
to imagine, that the Prohibition, did in the least reach, far less, tended to
extirpat the same. But the Dr. behoved to hide the other Branch of the Question
in the Clouds, and was ashamed to speak it out, which yet the sequel of his
reasoning does, viz. that this Negative precept, reaches only to the manner of
Promotion to a Primacy or Supremacy over the Church, not to the Primacy or
Supremacy it self.

The Dr's next Answer (P. 18.) resolves in a Question: If the Apostles
understood the Lords Precept in our sense, how came they to exercise
Jurisdiction over all subordinat Ecclesiastics, during their Life, in all the
Churches, they planted? Did they cross our Lords Institution, who perfectly
understood his meaning? Ans. I might here retort his Question and Answer, in a
Counter-query. If the Apostles understood our Lords Precept, in his Sense, as
prohibiting only, an ambitious violent manner of aspiring to Principality or
Chief places in the Church, but not the Thing it self, how came it, that none
of them, in such Modest Method, as he prescribs, sought that Greatness or Chief
Power? Were they Frighted from the Lawful use of their Jurisdiction, which the
Lords prohibition touched not? Were they so Brutish, as not to reach his
meaning? yea, whence was it, that in their Doctrine and Practice they disown all
dominion, and Prelatical Principality in the Church, and all outward grandeur
and greatness, as inconsistent with their Office, and the Office of all Gospel
Ministers? But to the Topic and ground of the Dr's Argument, I Answer
directly, that the Apostles, as they understood, so they practiced our Lords
Precept, in the sense we own. 1. In that they practiced a complete equality of
Official Power among themselves. This I hope, he will not deny, or if he do,
its easy to set all Protestant Divines in pursuit of him. 2 In that they never
exercised, nor attempted to seek any Civil Greatness or Dominion, such as the
Prelates he pleads for, do own as competent to their Office. They knew, that
their Lord, when but desired to give advice in a Civil Cause, gave this return,
who made me a Judge? And declined the Employment. And that therefore, neither
they, nor any of their Successors, were to be Civil Counselors, and Spiritual
Peers, in Parliaments and Princes Courts. 3. They disown all Dominion in one
Pastor over another, and discharged it earnestly: Thus the Apostle Peter, to be
Lords over Gods Heritage, 1 Pet. 5. Thus also Diotrephes, affecting a
Pre-eminence, is rebuked by the Apostle John: And Paul owns himself, and other
Apostles, as Stewards only in the House of God, and disowns a Dominion, as we
have heard.

Next, As for their Jurisdiction over subordinat Ecclesiastics, which is the
Substratum of the Dr's great Answer and Question, I do deny: First, that they
exercised any Episcopal Jurisdiction, properly taken, over them. Secondly, such
a Jurisdiction as did Cross this Precept: The Proof of both these, will fully
discover the vanity of the Dr's Second Reply

And First, that the Apostles exercised no such Episcopal Authority over
Ecclesiastics, or Churches planted, as the Dr. pleads for, is evident thus. 1.
Their Apostolic Authority connected with their Infallibility in Teaching,
reached to prescrib Duty to the Members and Officers of Churches, consequently
was cumulative thereto, not privative thereof, which appears in their enjoining
the exercise of Spiritual Jurisdiction, as inherent in Church Officers, as
Excommunication, 1 Cor. 5. And their owning a Spiritual Jurisdiction and
Authority in Pastors, both in the designations of Rulers, Governors,
Overseers, Bishops, attribut to them; As also, in their frequent enjoining the
Peoples obedience and subjection to them, as in that capacity Heb. 13.7.17. 1
Pet. 5.2.3. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.2. The Apostles did not as the Prelates, invade the
decisive Power of Pastors in Government, but took along their decisive Votes
and concurrence, as we find in that Council Act. 15. where its evident, that in
every Point, the Elders or Ministers, conccurred with the Apostles, in the
Disquisition, Sentence, and decretal Letter. 3. As the Apostles planted
Churches with Pastors or Preaching Presbyters, instructing them with Authority
to Feed and Rule, as Bishops or Rulers, set up by the Holy Ghost, so they
committed the Government of the Churches to them, in their last farewells,
without the least hint of Super-institut Officers of an higher Order: So, that
the Apostles instructing Pastors with such Authority, commanding its exercise,
enjoining the Churches obedience to them, exemplifying and Authorizing their
interest in highest Judicatories, yea, making even Evangelists, as Timothy,
pass through the Door of Presbyterial Ordination, in order to the exercise of
his Office; Not to insist upon, even Apostles submission to the Authoritative
Imposition of the Hands of Prophets and Teachers, when sent out upon a special
Gospel Legation: To which we may add, the Apostles owning Pastors, as Brethren,
Fellow-helpers, Fellow Laborers, Co-Presbyters or Elders. It follows
inevitably. (1.) That as to the Perpetual Pastoral Charge, the Authority of
Preaching the Gospel, the Administration of the Sacraments and the appendent
Jurisdictional Power (which by the Apostles Doctrine, is a Lower Step to this,
and connected therewith) they own the Pastors or Preaching Presbyters, their
Equals, and their proper Successors in this Ministerial Authority, consequently
the ordinary Church Officers of the highest Order, to whom they committed the
Keys of Doctrine and Discipline. (2.) That the Exercise of their extraordinary
Apostolic directive Power and Authority, which they could not divest
themselves of, while alive, did no whit impeach the standing Authority of
Pastors, nor did it includ any Jurisdiction properly over Churches, constitut
and Molded in their Organick being. By [ Jurisdiction properly] I mean such as
is of a standing necessity, in order to the Churches Edification, in all times,
or such a Jurisdiction over Churches, as may be supposed paramount unto, or
privative of the Jurisdictional Authority of Pastors, and of Organick Churches.

Secondly, That the Apostles exercised no such Authority over the Churches, as
did cross our Lords Precept and Prohibition, is evident, in that. 1. Our
Savior discharged Imparity among Church Officers of the same kind, and
therefore, this could not impeach the Apostles Authority over ordinary
Officers. 2. Our Lords instructing them with such a measure of the Spirit, as
was suitable to the First founding of the Churches, and with Authority, as his
living and infallibly inspired Oracles, to plant Churches, and the Gospel
Ordinances and Government therein: Unless the Dr. will say, that our Lords
Precept did cross and contradict his design, he must needs ackdowledg, that the
Apostles in exercising this directive Power and extraordinary Authority, over
ordinary inferior Officers, could not cross this his Precept and Prohibition,
they being our Lords immediately called, infallibly inspired, and extraordinarly
Gifted First Messengers, in order to this end. Thus we have seen the vanity and
insufficiency of the Dr's Second Answer. But there is no end of Vanities.

The Dr's Third Answer, is Prefaced with a very big and high Flown swelling
boast. That which, he says, baffles and exposes our Argument to all intents and
purposes, is, that our Lord did that himself among them, which now he Commanded
them to do one to another; And the doing of this, one to another, in obedience
to his Command, could not infer a Parity, unless we Blasphemously infer that
Christ and his Apostles were equal: For, our Lord recommends, what he enjoins
from his own constant and visible Practice among them, that he their Lord and
Master was their Servant: And therefore, it became the greatest among them, to
be Modest, calm and humble toward their Brethren, which would qualify them for
Ecclesiastic Promotions. This poor and mean Answer and Reason of the Dr's, is
a notion, for which he is beholden to his Popish Masters; And being here
subjoyned to such big words, brings to mind, some Poetic Phrases. Quid tanto
tulit hic promissor hiatu -- And
Projicis ampullas and sesquipedalia verba -- And that of
Partu^iunt montes nascetur ridiculus mus.
There Is no doubt, that the Dr. has as much exposed and baffled his own
Judgment and Reputation, in this thrasonick weak Answer, as in any thing else.
But to the point, First I must tell him, that if this Argument tending to prove
from this Text, our Saviors discharging Lordly Dominion in his Church, and
inferred from his own exemplary Humility, be bad and fallacious, it has long
since deceived the best and ablest of Protestant Divines, in Reasoning against
the Papists and Papacy? And if this his pretended Baffling Answer be so Mighty
and Invincible, as he pretends, Bellarmin and the Popish Adversaries, have long
since Baffled our Divines Arguments with it; For all know, it is the very same
with theirs; And I must add, that it seems, the Dr. is so highly in Love with
this Popish Notion and evasion, that he has not concerned himself to notice
what Baffling Replies, Protestant Divines have returned to it, wherein they
have discovered, what an insipid impertinent evasion it is, to save the Popes
Mitre, from the stroke of this our Lords Prohibition and Precept; and
consequently that of Prelates, whereof we have already exhibit some instances. I
have told him, that Turretin (no doubt, one of our Dr's new Minted Novelists)
makes it appear, that the Argument from our Lords Example, is an Argument, non
a pari, sed a majore ad minus. If I your Master, be as one that serves, much
more you the Servants, ought to eshew all Lordly Dominion: As when he washed
the Disciples Feet, and thus recommended Love and Humility toward one another,
since he their Lord and Master had done so. I know not if it be true, that this
Man rode in the Popes Guards, but sure I am, he fences fiercely for his Mitre.
He says, our Savior did that himself among them, meaning his Exercising a
Principality and Supremacy over his Church: For, in the Sentence, he puts the
Words [ He] and [ Them] in Emphatick distinct Characters, and consequently
holds, that what our Lord thus Exemplified, is still to be imitat in his
Church. Thus, his Answer and Reasoning, runs clearly to this Issue; That which
I command you, I have done; And therefore, that which I command you, is
consistent with a Supremacy over my Church, which I have Exercised and
Exemplified. And here the Popes Holiness, has a fair Plea from the Venerable
Dr. If Christ did that himself, which he enjoined his Disciples here, then the
doing of what he enjoined, was consistent with a Supremacy: The Connection is
clear; Christ as Supreme Head, and in that Capacity, Exercised the same
Humility, Self-denial, and Meekness, which he here enjoined. But for more
direct Answer, I do again tell him, that our Lords Scope, in proposing his own
Example, is to Antidote their inward Pride, the Root of this Desire of Unlawful
Dominion, and powerfully to recommend Humility and Self-denial, as the most
excellent Remedies thereof. So, that his first Argument runs a fortiori, thus,
If I your Lord and Master be as one that serves, and am such a Pattern of
Self-denial and Humility among you, much more ought you to Study Humility, and
to Guard against all Usurped Dominion and Authority, one over another, who are
Fellow Disciples and Servants: As he Reasoned, Ioh. 13. If I your Lord, have
washen your Feet, much more ought ye to wash one another Feet.

Again, in the Dr's Mould of Answer, I find two gross Points of Inadvertency,
which hardly any ordinary Capacity, could fall into, if we suppose the Person
serious, and attending to the Matter in hand, and very ill beseeming one, who
sets to his Name, a D. D. and Chartells this whole Church. 1. In that he will
needs have our Lords Precept and Prohibition, to be levelled against an
Ambitious Principle or Design, but not at all to reach (rather to allow) that
Effect and Expression thereof, which our blessed Lord, in down right Terms does
prohibit, viz. that Dominion mentioned in the Text, and which they were
contending about: Thus setting in Opposition, things which are Subordinat, as
if the Dr. had forgot the common Maxim, Subordinata non Pugnant; And, as if a
bad Principle, could fall under a Prohibition, and not the bad Practice, the
Issue thereof. What a Childish Conception and Weakness is this? 2. He imagines,
that our Lords Argument of Humility (while Pressing his Apostles, to eshew
Unlawful Dominion one over another) drawn from his Practice, will infer his
Arguing a pari, and a Supposition of his Equality with them, if we shall
exclude the Dr's Hypothesis of a Warrantable Supremacy and Dominion; An
Imagination than which, nothing can be more Sottish; the Argument running
clearly a majore ad minus, from the greater to the less, and the very Basis and
Topic of it, supposing and inferring the quite contrary Conclusion and
Assertion. So, that the Dr's. Arguing that upon this Ground, as above Sensed,
we would make Christ and his Apostles equal, has no more Twist of Reason in it,
than if one should infer, from our being dehorted from Strife and Vain Glory,
and enjoined Humility and Love, because Christ made himself of no Reputation,
and humbled himself to Death, the absurd Conclusion of the Equality of his
Disciples and Members with himself. The Dr. gives this Sense of our Lords Words
and Argument, in the premised Scriptures; If I your Lord and Master was your
Servant, it becomes the greatest among you, to be Humble toward Subordinat
Brethren, which will Qualify you, for Ecclesiastic Promotion. This carries
with it, such a clear Supposition of the Warrantableness of a Greatest or Chief
among them, as I dare promise him, the Popes Approbation of his Commentary, it
being the very same, with that of his great Champion, Bellarmin, who tells our
Divines, that a Dominion and Supremacy, is here rather supposed than forbidden,
and only Humility in it is Exercise enjoined. But the Dr's petty Novelists,
Protestant Divines, have told him, that if this Gloss were true, then our Lord
rather Inflamed than Quenched their Ambitious Desire of Dominion and Greatness,
one over another, since, Reprehending only the Unwarrantable Method of Seeking,
he thus Tacitly Recommended the Thing it self, as Lawful and Desirable. But
once more, I would fain know of this Dr, whether our Lord did not command an
Equality or Official Sameness of Authority Apostolical among the Apostles? Or,
if he thinks indeed, that one was allowed to be in this Respect, Prince and
Supreme over the rest? If he hold this last, then I dare Appeal to all
Protestants, whether he has not left our Camp, and is in the Tents of the
Papists. If he own, that our Lord here enjoined an Authoritative Official
Equality of Power, among the Apostles, then I would know, what his Sense is, of
our Lords Argument, Pressing and Recommending this Equality, from his own
Example; And whether his Assigning this Sense, and giving this Account of our
Lords Reasoning, will Blasphemously infer, that Christ and his Apostles were
equal. So, that the Dr, must either quite this Sense of our Lords Words, and
consequently the Sense exhibit by Protestant Divines, or acknowledge the
Absurdity and Futility of his own Argument and Answer, and that he falls by the
Rebound of his own Blow and Weapon. But I am tedious in a Matter of it self
plain.

To proceed therefore: The Dr. (P. 19.) is so taken with the Invincible
Strength of this his Answer, that he falls into a Compassionat Regrate, for his
Presbyterian Brethren, telling his Reader, That its very sad, that any should
be so infatuated, with their new Schemes of Parity, as to allege such Texts,
which if understood, in their Sense, degrades our blessed Savior, to the
Degree of one of his Disciples; For, what he Commanded to the Apostles, he
Practiced among them himself. If I were to give Way to such a Retaliating
Regrate, as this would tempt some unto, I would Echo it back, in telling him,
that its very sad, that a Man, who is bold to Chartell this whole Church, and
sets his Name with a D. D. to such a bold Pamphlet as this, should (in a
pretended Pleading for Episcopacy, and Answering a Presbyterian Argument
against it, in the premised Scriptures,) so betray his Cause, and Proclaim his
Folly, as to Charge with infatuation the Body of Protestant Divines, in their
Pleadings against the Pope, and Support his Mitre, in pretending to plead for
Episcopacy. As to our Lords practicing himself, what was Commanded to them; I
have already demonstrat the futility of this Notion, and what an Egyptian Reed
it is, to support his Conclusion. Our Savior practiced Humility, and called
the Apostles to such an exercise of it, as did suit that Humble Ministry he
enjoined them, and was opposite to that Proud Dominion and inequality they were
affecting. And this wise Critical Dr. with this his new Sword, will needs cut
the Gordian Knot of the Argument, here made use of by our Lord, when exciting
to Humility and Parity, such persons, as are of unquestionable equality, in
point of Official Power, denying the Strength of all such reasoning. He tells
us, that what our Lord enjoined, was toto coelo, different from Parity. And
thus, must be antipode, and in the highest Line of opposition thereunto, and
consequently a Primacy: And this Confirms that which before I Charged upon him,
anent his owning a Primacy among the Apostles. He says, They were not to
exercise their Jurisdiction, as Lords of the Gentiles, by a Spirit of Pride and
Domination, but in an engaging behavior of Charity and Humility. Yet still the
Dr. supposes, their Jurisdiction included a Supremacy and Chiefness of Power,
one over another; And so here is good sound Popish Pleading: But Protestant
Divines have long since Taught his Reverence, that all Earthly Dominion it
self, and worldly Pomp is forbidden, all Greatness and Grandeur, whether Civil,
or pretendedly Ecclesiastic, and this as opposite to the Nature of their Power
and vocation, which is a Spiritual Laborious Service and Ministry, for the
Salvation of Souls; And thus stands in contradiction to all sort of Domination
and Lordship. Moreover, he apparently falls into a pityful inadvertancy, in
identifying Civil Dominion, with a Spirit of Pride, there being a Lawful
Commanded Civil Dominion, appointed of God: And if he Object, that the Princes
of the Gentiles, whom our Lord instanceth in, thus exercised it: As the Mould
of his Phrase, will not admit of that defense, so, our Saviors instancing such
Gentile Princes, as were called Benefactors, or Gracious Lords, and in Luke,
using the simple, not the Compound verb, which points at a Civil Rule and
Dominion simplely considered, entirely excludes this his subterfuge, and shuts
up this postern: Whittaker has long since told him ( De pontif. quest. 1.)
that the word, which Luke makes use of, is applied to denote Lawful Rule, and
that all the Princes of the Gentiles were not such, as did Tyranically
Overrule, or Reign unjustly, and that the Clemency and Justice of many of them,
is Celebrat. And both he, and Iunius (ubi sup.) does show, that it is the
Dominion or Lordship it self, not the unwarrantable Exercise, or manner of
attaining, which our Lord here Condemns.

For that which the Dr. adds (ibid.) of Paul's answering his Episcopal
Character, when the Care of all the Churches was upon him, in employing his
Episcopal Power to Edification: I have already told him of what Nature that
Care was, and how it differed from the pretended Inspection and Dominion of
Prelates. His care of the Churches, was an Apostolic directive Inspection,
suited to his Extraordinary Office and Gifts, which no ordinary Officer can
pretend unto, and in its exercise, so far from Exemplifying a Prelatical
Dominion, that both in Doctrine and Practice, he baffles it out of the World, in
enjoining the highest Acts of Jurisdiction to Pastors or Presbyters; as these
of Corinth 1. Cor. 5.
, enjoining the whole Episcopal Authority to the Elders or Pastors of Ephesus,
in his last farewell to that Church Act. 20.
, ascribing the Power of Ordination to a Presbytrie, though himself was present
in the Action 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6.
, Identifying in his Epistles to the Philippians, to Titus, the Name, Office
and Qualifications of Bishop and Presbyter Philip. 1. 1. Tit. 1.6.7.
, disowning all Dominion in the House of God 2 Cor. 1.24.
, Ascribing to himself, a Ministry and Service only 1. Cor. 4.1.
, so far was he from Arrogating to himself, a Spiritual Lordship in God's
House, or a Civil Peerage in the State, such as the Prelates, whom the Dr.
Pleads for, do usurp. And, if in all these, he answered his Episcopal Character
(as who will doubt, but he did) and obeyed this injunction of our Savior, by
consequence, he condemned the Prelatical Character, so many ways opposite
thereto. Besides, he pronounced a woe upon himself, if he Preached not the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. and Preached it in Season and out of Season: Thus
enjoining Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.1.2. And therefore, pronounced a woe upon
non-Preaching Prelates, who look upon this as no part of their work. He
preferred the Labourer in the Word and Doctrine, to the Person who Ruled only, 1 Timothy 1.17. And thus Preaching Pastors, to non-Preaching Prelates, who look upon
their pretended spiritual and Civil Rule, as the proper Characteristick of
their Office, and Preaching but a little piece of supererogatory. Work, but no
exercise of their Prelatick, Office and but obiter to the Actings of their
supposed Grandeur. He enjoined Christ's Minister and Soldier, to beware of
ingadging in Worldy affairs, if they would please Christ, who has Chosen them
to be his Soldiers, 2 Timothy 2.4. And thus condemned Prelates holding Stat
Offices, as pleasers of men, of Princes, of themselves, and not of Christ.

He tells us next ( P. 20) That the Fathers of the Church advanced above their
Brethren to Ecclesiastic Power, had this Notion of their dignity, that they
were the Servants of others. As for the advancement of Ancient Fathers, we say,
that, as the equality of Pastors, is Christ's Pattern upon the Mount, and that
(as Ierom expresses it) the Apostolic Churches, were Governed communi
Presbyterorum consilio, so the First Fathers or Bishops, were fixed Moderators
only, and had no Jurisdiction above their Brethren, and even when this Usurping
Jurisdiction above Pastors was Gradually Advancing, some of the best Bishops,
as Cyprian particularly, owned the Pastors as their Colleagues in Government,
and were far from the fastuous Pomp and absolut Dominion of the Prelates, whom
the Dr. pleads for. And if any of them held this Notion of their pretended
Dignity, when their Power came to the length of incroaching upon that of
Pastors in Government, they held but an empty Chimerical Notion, Contradictory
to their Practice; As the Popes Notion of his being Servus Servorum Dei.

The Dr. ( ibid.) returns again to his Post, telling us, That it appears, from
what he has said, we have no Shadow of Argument for our new Doctrine, from the
Texts above instanced. Thus the Protestant Pleadings therefrom, against the
Papacy, has no Shadow of Argument with him. But whether our Arguments, or his
Answers, be most Substantial, is left to the Reader to Judge, from what is
said. He tells us, That Wallo Missalinus, Glances at this Text, but lays no
great Stress upon it. But the Dr. has not exhibit either his Words or Argument;
as neither Beza's Reflection upon the Passage, in his larger Notes: Tho he
tells us, (as some great Discovery forsooth) that Beza holds, That all kind of
Jurisdiction is not here forbidden, but such as is joined with Imperious
Bitterness and Domination. And what he would make of this, I would fain know.
Did ever any imagine, that all kind of Jurisdiction is here forbidden? Did our
Lord discharge all Government in his Church, by this Precept and Prohibition?
As for Beza's expressing thus, that which is forbidden, it is evident to any,
who are acquaint with his Writings, that he holds all pretended Spiritual
Jurisdiction, which is joined with Domination, or Lordly Rule, of one Pastor
over another, to be a Sinful Abuse of Jurisdiction, and consequently to fall
within the Compass of what is prohibited in these Texts.

I proceed to another Notion and Answer of the Dr's: We are told next, (ibid.)
That the Hierarchy and Subordination of Priests, was established by Divine
Authority in the Jewish Church: If our Savior had pulled down that Ancient
Policy, and commanded Equality among Presbyters of the New Testament, he would
not have stated the Opposition betwixt his Disciples and the Lords of the
Gentiles, but between the Mosaic Economy and the Disciples of the New
Testament. Here the Dr. obliges us, in affording still more Light, in taking up
his Judgment and Principles in Point of Church Government, viz. in his Sense,
the Jewish Policy, by our Lords Warrant, was at this time standing, as the
exact Standart and Platform for the Gospel Church Government; And therefore,
we need not doubt what he means by Chief Places, and Dignities and Honors in
the Church, and that he holds, that our Savior did not forbid, but supposed
the Lawfulness of a Chief Rule and Principality, of one Disciple over the rest
in the Church. Nay, (P. 27.) he is clear and positive in this, That that
Hierarchy, the (...) whereof was divided in a Supreme and Subordinat Priests,
was never abrogated (consequently stands imitable and imitated) in the New
Testament. I think the Dr. will find the clearest Pattern at Rome of this his
Holy Standing Hierarchy. In Answer whereunto, I need only say, That the
standing Policy of the Jewish Church, never abrogat; but continuing as the
Measure and Standart of the New Testament Church Government, is so notoriously
known, to be the great Popish Argument for the Papal Hierarchy, pleaded by all
the Antichristian Rabble and Locusts, who stand up for this Monster and Mystery
of Iniquity, and so Universally condemned by all Protestant Churches and
Divines, that there needs no more to Stigmatize a Man, as of that Number, in
their Judgment, than such an Assertion. That all our Divines, do hold the
Abrogation of the Jewish Church Policy, is so clear, that it would Load much
Paper, but to Recite their Names. Rivet. Cath. Orth. Tract. 2. Quest. 4. brings
in his Jesuit, Ballaeus, with this Argument in his Mouth -- That because one
High Priest under the Old Testament, had the Chief Government; therefore, it
ought to be so in the New: And tells him, that there is Multiplex Abusus, or a
manifold Abuse and Corruption in this Pleading. He shows him further, that
every thing in that Dispensation, reaches not us; that the High Priest was
Typical of Christ, as the Apostle shows, Heb. 7. That if a Parity of Government
were pleaded, there should be a Dedication of one Family for the Ministry, as
there was for Priests and Levites, etc. Turret. Part. 3. Quest. 16. These.
15.16. After he has set d^wn the Judgment of the Ancients against a Primacy in
the Church, he brings in the Solution of the Popish Objection and Argument,
taken from the Government of the Church under the Old Testament, which he
Baffles from several Grounds; such as, 1. The Extent of the Christian, beyond
that of the Jewish Church. 2. That the High Priest had no absolute Authority
over that Church, being subject to the Jurisdiction of the great Sanhedrin,
Deuteronomy. 17.11. 3. That what Authority he had, was Typical of Christ's, the High
Priest of the New Testament. Wallaeus de Function. Ecclesiast. P. (mihi) 470.
brings in this Objection against Parity of Pastors, taken from the High Priest
under the Old Testament, and the twenty four Orders of Priests, over whom there
were Presidents: And thus Answers, That these things were partly, Typical,
partly Political; that there was a Priority of Order here, not an Essential
Difference of Power and Authority; that they all Governed the Church by Common
Counsel.

But for the Abrogation of this Ministry, and that it was to be no Standart for
the Gospel Church, I will produce and offer again to the Dr's Consideration,
that one Text, Heb. 7.12. -- The Priesthood being changed, there is made of
Necessity a Change of the Law, viz. The Policy suited to the State of that
Church, must be changed also. The Text asserts, that the Priesthood, or their
particular Frame of Church Officers being changed, or abrogat, there is
therefore, a Change or Abrogation of the Law, i. e. the Legal Ordinances,
respecting both their Worship and Government. Pool. Part. 2. tells us, That
this Change referrs to the Expiration of the Aaronical Order, to which the
Hebrews were not bound; for that a better Priesthood and Law, were to fill up
its Room -- That the Mutation of the Priesthood, required a Change of the Law
-- That God determined that both Priesthood and Law should expire together.
English* Annot. on v. 11. assert the Abrogation of the Legal Priesthood,
together with the Covenant ( viz. the Legal) and by clear Consequence that
Policy. The Belgic Divines upon the place, do show, That the Levitical
Priesthood, was many ways involved with the Legal Dispensation of the Covenant;
and therefore abolished with it. Diodate shows, That the Priesthood, and all
the Ceremonial Worship of the Tribe of Levi, was to give place to Christ's, in
whom was accomplished all the Reality and Truth, and he is now both Priest and
Lawgiver. Bilson (an English Bishop) shows the Reason, why that Policy cannot
stand under the New Testament ( Perpet. Gov. Chap. 2.) viz. That the Tribe of
Levi was not subject to another, and had its special Governors -- That the
Books ^f Moses containing their Mould of Civil Government, the Levites were on
the Benches with the Judges -- That the Offices of the Sanctuary, and the Rites
and Ceremonies thereof, were various -- That all, except the Levites, being
restrained therefrom, this required several Degrees ^f Administrators, in this
Diversity of Offices and Services -- But the Word and Sacraments, Concredited
to all Ministers, without Distinction, are of one kind, and admits no
Difference of Administration: And therefore, no different Degrees of Ministers.
Thus, we have seen, what good Harmony, our Dr. keeps in this his Notion of the
Jewish Po^icy, with the Sense and Judgment of Protestant Divines; And how this
Famous English Bishop, has Checked him for the same.

But now, to come more closely to his Argument, If that Policy had bee^ pulled
down, our Lord would, in Commending Parity to Presbyters, have stated the
Opposition betwixt the Jewish Economy, and that of the New Testament Church,
not betwixt his Disciples, and that of the Gentile Princes. Ans. 1. That this
Economy was to end as Typical, with other Typical Ordinances, is made good;
And if the Dr. admit, that it was to be removed in any Measure, and as Typical,
he stands in so far, upon the same Grounds with us, and is obliged to Answer
this Notion, or acknowledge it naught. 2. The Dr. himself, in his Way of
Arguing, Answers himself; He says, That our Savior designed to discharge and
prohibit, a Violent Secular Way of Aspiring to Greatness, such as is
Fashionable in Secular Courts, and that the Disciples were prohibited to
Exercise their Power by a Spirit of Pride and Domination. And the Dr. will not
say, that this was the Method of Attaining Offices in the Jewish Policy, or
their allowed Practice, God having subjected the same to his own Holy Rules and
Measures: And that consequently, what our Lord prohibited, and even according
to the Dr's Sense and Expressions, was only and fitly represented by the
Dominion of the Princes of the Gentiles, which he holds to be of this Nature,
and thus Exercised, and who did not understand Gods Law or Measures, either as
to the Attaining or Exercise of Government. But 3. I must tell him, that in
Commanding Parity among Ministers, (for otherwise, we own an Imparity and
Subordination, among Church Officers in general) our Lord could not state an
Opposition betwixt them, and the Priests of the Jewish Economy, there being no
such Dominion among them, as he here discharged; As we heard Wallaeus assert;
None of them had an Episcopal Dominion, or a sole Decisive Suffrage in
Ecclesiastic Courts, or such a Negative Voice therein, as the Gentile Princes
Dominion did import, and Prelates assume and Exercise. The Learned Iunius ( de
Cler. Cap. 24. Not. 13.) makes evident, and will inform the Dr, That par
Consortium fuit Honoris, and Potestatis inter Sacerdotes, sed Ordine impari,
qua Familiarum, qua Temporis suspectu, penes concessum Sacerdotem, ex Lege fuit
ordinaria Iurisdictio Ecclesiastica. -- That there was a like Share of Honor
and Power among Priests, though in a different Order, partly, in respect of
Families, partly, in respect of Times: The ordinary Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction,
belonged to the Assembly of the Priests, according to the Law. Hence, we may,
by clear Consequence, infer, that it belonged not (in the Sense of Iunius) to
the High Priest, nor to any of them solely. Now, where there was such a well
ordered Parity of Power and Government, among these several Orders of Divine
Appointment, it was very unsuteable to Exemplify such an Arbitrary Dominion
thereby, as the Dr. here supposes, and such a Civil Greatness and Supremacy,
as the Apostles affected. Besides, the Dr. and we, does both hold, a
Subordination of Courts and Officers, under the New Testament, wherein both
Oeconomies were alike, and there being under the Old Testament Economy, no
such Headship and Soveraignity, as is said, the stated Opposition betwixt the
two Governments, could not so well correspond to our Lords Scope in this
Precept and Prohibition.

But finally, the Dr. cannot but acknowledge, that the Distemper, the Apostles
now Labored under, was their Fancy of a Temporal and Earthly Kingdom of our
Lord, admitting of Worldly Dignities, and Degrees of State and Honor, as the
Kingdoms of the World; which is the Notion, that the Jews to this day,
entertain of the Messiah Kingdom, understanding in a Literal Sense, the
Magnificent discriptions thereof, exhibit by the Prophets. Hence, the People
came to make our Savior a King, and were mainly Stumbled at his Humble and low
Estate, and (which is to this purpose very considerable) we find the Disciples
themselves propose that Question to him, after his Resurrection, will thou at
this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel? So, that its clear, that the
Ambitious affectation of Earthly Grandeur, Pomp, and the greatness of this
Worlds Potentats, was the distempering Principle, leavening the two Brethren,
and which prompted them to propose to our Savior the Suit, which excited their
Fellow-Disciples emulation against them, and gave occasion to the Precept under
debate. And hence, the opposition was most fitly stated betwixt the Honor and
Offices of Christ's Kingdom, and that of the Kingdoms of the World, and Earthly
Potentats, and it was needful, that our Savior, should thus show the
Disciples, the Distinction betwixt his Kingdom, and the Kingdoms of this World,
as himself asserted to Pilate, Ioh. 18. Besides, the Pomp and Corruptions of
the Kingdoms of the World, being to continue in after-Generations, and
consequently, the tentation thereof, endangering the inflaming of this Ambition
in Church Officers: But not the Jewish Economy, now to be abolished; the
opposition, which our Lord stated, was most fit, and suitable to his Scope.

Upon what is here offered, we may see the inconsequence and insufficiency of
what the Dr further adds, in Confirmation of this his Notion, P. 21. viz: That
our Lord did state the opposition betwixt the current Doctrine and his own, when
he would direct in better Morals; And therefore, if he had forbidden
Subordination, and Degrees of Priests, and Established Equality, he would have
Stated the opposition, betwixt the Model of the Temple, and that of the
Christian Church. This is no Reason. For 1. We deny that our Lord enjoined an
absolute Parity of Church officers, but among those only of the same kind; he
did not forbid all Imparity and Jurisdiction among Church Officers. 2 The
opposition betwixt the Tmple-Model, and that of the New Testament, could
neither so well suit the Apostles distemper and tentation, nor our Lords design
in this prohibition and Precept. There was (1) A Subordination and jurisdiction
required therein, so in the New Testament dispensation. (2) Ministers therein,
were to attend their Charges diligently, so also, in the New Testament Church.
(3) None of them had an Imperious, arbitrary or Civil Rule over their
fellow-Priests, and thus it is with Ministers of the New Testament Church. The
Moral Law being the constant Standart of Truth and Duty in all Ages, our
Savior, who came to fulfill all Righteousness, and establish the Law, was
therefore concerned to vindicat the same from corrupt glosses; but this bears
no proportion to his Scope in the Case of the Disciples, that old Ministry and
Policy, being now ready to evanish.

The Dr. proceeds to another Text, and tells his Reader, that we Cite 1 Pet.
5.2.3. to serve the same design. We have made appear, that our design in
pleading this and the preceding Texts, is the same with that of Protestant
Divines, and that the design, the Dr. serves in his Glosses and Answers, is
Popish (as to the intentio operis, at least) a design to support the Popes
Triple Crown, with Bellamin and his other pleaders and Advocats. Our Argument
from this Text, against the Prelatical Hierarchy, is this: Looking to the
Apostles scope, he, first, dehorts Ministers (and none will doubt all ordinary
Church Officers) from the evils they are constantly tempted to, viz.
Covetousness, Lordship, usurpation and Dominion over Gods Heritage (evils of a
close connection and cognation) that they do not Act the Diotrephes, seeking
Pre-eminence over their Brethren, or affect a Masterly Dominion over the
People; for that both comes under the Denomination of Gods Heretage, none will
doubt. He likewise dehorts from Reluctance, at their Laborious employment.
Next, there is a positive exhortation presented to Ministers, viz, that they be
examples to the Flock, that is, that the Graces they Preach to others, shine in
their Walk, and in special that of Meekness and Humility, which most nearly
Resembles their Glorious Master, the great Shepherd of the Sheep, that this
appear in their conduct and Government, as that of his, who leads Gently, and
would not have Ministers to Rule with Rigor, as those Reprehended Ezekiel. 34.4.
Hence from the Scope and contexture, it appears. 1. That the Pastor, Laboring
in the Word and Doctrine, being here addressed as the Apostles Co-presbyter and
Fellow-elder, is owned by him as the highest ordinary Church Officer, and that
this Apostle now shortly to put off his Tabernacle, does Aaron-like, invest
him, in his Robe ^or highest Sphere of an Ordinary Minister. 2 He enjoins them
to exercise Episcopal Authority; As also Paul did the Elders of Ephesus. Act.
20. which must respect Ordination and Jurisdiction, in the full extent thereof,
and their equal interest therein. 3. All of them are discharged to Lord it, or
exercise a Dominion over one another, or over the Flock, but to exercise a
humble exemplary Ministry. Hence we further infer against the Hierarchical
Prelat. (1.) That the Apostle ascribing this comprehensive Authority to
Pastors, which comprehends both the Doctrinal Key, and that of Jurisdiction;
For, I hope, our Episcopal Brethren, will acknowledge that the (...) or
Episcopal Authority and inspection, includs both, he cuts off the Hierarchical
Prelates pretended super-Inspection, paramount thereunto. Hence (2) The Pastor
being found thus discribed, and installed in this comprehensive Scriptural
Episcopal Authority, the Hierarchical Prelates Office, which swallows up this
Power and Authority of Pastors, and arrogats to it self solely, the Name and
thing of a Bishop, is discharged as unlawful. (3) We argue a minore ad Majus,
against that Office from the Text thus; All Masterly power of Pastors over
their Flock is discharged, Ergola Fortiori, much more that of Prelates over
Pastors themselves.

Now, for the Judgment of Protestant Writers, in corespondence to this our
Sense, we might exhibit a great cloud of Witnesses, but of the whole, we offer
only these few instances. The Belgic Divines make this, 2. v. parallel with
that which is enjoined Act. 20.28. to the Elders of Ephesus; as to the
Authority and exercise of a joint Episcopal inspection, competent to Pastors:
And the 3. v. they Translate [ not Exercising Dominion] the very same thing
which our Lord prohibit to his Apostles. Pool. Annot. 2. Part. does also make
the Command in this 2* v. praralel with Act. 20.28, and Ioh. 21.15.16. and
Paraphrases the Command, as importing both to feed and Rule, and enjoining the
exercise of the Doctrinal and Jurisdictional Key jointly, yea and hold it to be
of such a Nature, as to the main designs of the Gospel, as was enjoined to
Peter himself, and his Fellow-Apostles. The Clause of [ taking the oversight]
they expone thus, being Bishops, or acting as Bishops over it, superintending,
Inspecting and Watching over it ( viz. the Flock) paralelling this with Act.
20.28.29. where such Pastoral Episcopal Feeding and Rule, is enjoined in Paul's
farewell to the Elders or Ministers of Ephesus. The prohibition or negative
part of the Precept, v. 3. [ not as being Lords] they Expone of not exercising
such Lordship and Dominion, as temporal Lords; paralelling this with Matthew.
20.25, 26. Luke 22.25. as also with 2 Cor. 1.24. where Paul disowns Dominion;
and with 1 Cor. 3.5. Who then is Paul? or who is Appllo? But Ministers: Yea,
even Grotius, Comerarius, Menochius, expone the Command of Feeding, v. 2. as
importing Government or Rule; paralelling this with Ioh. 21.15, 16, 17. Act.
20.28.29. The Clause of [ taking the oversight*] is generally understood of
superintending and acting the Bishops, Episcopum agentes. Beza, Piscat, Valla.
Erasm. Gerard, says, its an allusion to their Name, as if the Lord enjoined
them to be Answerable to it. The ensuing Verse, is understood of imperious
Dominion over GOD's Church: Thus Piscat. Menoch. etc. Turret. ( Institut.
Theol. Part. 3. Quest. 16. These. 8.) produces the same Text, collated with 2
Cor. 1.24. as proving a prohibition of all Lordly Power to Ministers, showing,
that this is the prerogative of Christ the Chief Sheepherd, and that in
opposition to such Lordly Power, Pastors, are called Ministers, Messengers,
Servants, Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Maccov. from this Passage Collated
with Act. 20.28. concludes the identity of the Episcopal and Pastoral Office.
Loc. Commun. Cap. 82. P. 845. The Eng. Annot. upon the place, do show, "That
such a Magisterial carriage is forbidden, as is Taxed, 3 Ioh. v. 9. in
Diotrephes Love of Pre-eminence.

But now, What is the Dr's. great Answer to this Text? He says, Its the
Apostles Commentary upon our Saviors Words and Commandment. This is very true:
He next adds, That it forbids the Spirit of Pride and Insolence, as a thing
very unsuitable to all Power and Authority in the Church. To which I Answer, it
is certain the Word (...), is Parallel with Matthew. 20. Luke 22. where Peter
learned the prohibition, and imports Dominion, but not Tyranical Dominion
properly; It being made use of by the LXX. to express Lawful Dominion. 2. We
have told him, that the positive part of the Precept, refuts his gloss, which
the Apostle does not thus express in the Dr's. Sense [ not proudly or
insolently Domineering] but using Dominion moderatly, as the Apostle would have
presented the Precept, if a Lawful Lordship had been allowed, but he adds in
the other Branch, in expressing what is enjoined [ being examples to the Flock]
enjoining thus to Feed by Example, and an Humble Ministry; And this is opposite
to all Dominion whatsoever, and does not discriminat one Dominion from another;
as is also evident in the positive part of the Parallel Precepts abovementioned.
We have also told him, that the instance and Illustration, drawn from such
Princes of the Gentiles, as were accounted Gracious Lords, and the simple word
of Rule used by Luke, in the parallel, confutes this Gloss, and does demonstrat,
that it is not proud insolent Dominion, or a Dominion secundum quid, and thus
qualified, which is only here forbidden, but Lordship and Dominion,
simpliciter, the desire whereof did notwithstanding proceed in the Apostles,
from some remainders of Pride, and in their Case, could not be exercised or
assumed without a fastuous insolency, it being Diametrically opposite to the
Nature of their Holy Office and Function. So then, I argue against the Dr. from
his own Principle and Gloss; If Peter thus understood our Lords Precept, Matthew.
20. and Luke 22. in this Sense, that Pride was the Principle of their desire,
and of that greatness they sought, and that the exercise of this greatness was
prohibit, as the very emanation of insolent Pride, and if with all, he coppied
out this his Precept to Ministers, from that great Command of his Lord, and
took his Measures therefrom, he could not but look upon Pastors Lording over
the Fl^cks, as proceeding from Pride, and the very practice and exercise of a
Domineering Tyranny; yea, he could not but put under this Character, whatever
exercise of pretended Ministerial Authority, goes beyond the Limits of that
humble exemplary Ministry, that Ministerial diligence and service of the Lords
Flocks, which is enjoined in the positive part of his Masters Command, exactly
coppied out in this his Apostolic Precept. I further remark, that the Dr.
holding out the Sense of the Apostle, as terminating only in this General,
discharging Pride and Insolency in Government, without condescending upon the
extent of the Negative and positive explication of the Precept, and the Nature
of that Power, here specified and Discharged, as Flowing from this Pride and
Insolent Disposition, and but only showing, that it is a Pride unsuitable to all
Power and Authority in the Church, leaves room for even a Monarchy and
Patriarchat, and the setting up of such a Dominion in the Church, as may be
supposed in an abstracted Sense, and in its general Nature, Lawful; and thus
still saves the Popes Mitre, from the Touch of this prohibition. The Dr. holds,
That our exposition of those Texts, was never heard of, till these latter days.
Thus with him, the Papists only have hit upon the true Ancient Exposition, and
Protestants have missed it. Amongst many other confuting Instances, he might
have minded the abovementioned Passages of Bernard to Eugenius, lib. 2.
Apostolis interdicitur Dominatus; Ergo tu tibi usurpare aude ut Dominans
Apostolatum, aut Apostolicus Dominatum.

CHAP. II. A Confutation of what the Dr. offers in Answer to the Presbyterians
Argument, for Parity of Pastors, taken from the Official Identity of Bishop and
Presbyter, in the Scripture Account of the Pastoral Office.
THe Dr. by this time, has finished his first easy Task of Discussing our
Argument from Christ's Institution. He will next fall upon our Argument from
Scripture Consequences. And, that his Work here, may be as easy as the first,
and least, he should break his Word to his Friend, in giving him a large
History of our Arguments, on this Head. Of them all, he is pleased to Single
out one, taken from the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter; which he says, fills
all our Books: Citing Smectym. Ius Divin. Minist. Ang. Unbishopping Tim. and
Tit. Altar Damasc. Durh. Dissert. But surely, any who have Seriously and
Impartially perused these Authors, and compares what they have written, with
that which this Man pretends to Answer, may Laugh at his Prodigious Folly, in
Boasting of an Answer to Books, which he appears never to have read or
understood. It were good for him, that the Authors, he paints his Margin with,
were out of the World, that the Ignorant, or such as never saw them, might
believe, that this Personat Champion, had made a mighty Baffling Assault upon
them; But, all such as are acquaint with their Writings, will easily discover,
that he is here, Acting a Pedantick Nomenclator of these Authors, and no more.
The Argument from the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter, (I mean an Official
Identity) I acknowledge, is improven by these Authors, and other Presbyterian
Writers, and am content to try Issue with him upon this Head, but the Dr, I
find, is so Loose and Perverse a Disputer, that he does not so much as offer to
propose one of their Mediums and Arguments to the Scope.

He alleges, We Argue from the Homonomy of Names of Bishop and Presbyter, in
the New Testament, to prove the Sameness of the Office, and that the Clergy of
the New Testament, are Dichotomised into Bishops and Deacons only, in some
Texts: And thus in some Ancient Writers. That we thus exclude the Authority of
a Bishop above a Presbyter, tho the Offices themselves be as much
distinguished, in several Texts of the New Testament, as is possible. He holds,
(P. 22, 23.) That we found the Solidity of our Demonstration of the Identity of
Bishop and Presbyter, merely upon the Confusio Nominum, which he represents in
a distinct Character, as our only Topic; To which purpose, he tells us we cite
Act. 20.17, 28. Philip. 1.1. Tit. 1.6, 7. and several other places. There needs
no more, than the Reciting of this, to discover this Man's Precarious Vanity,
and Ignorance of this Controversy, since, all that are acquaint with it do
know, that it is not the Sameness of Names simplely, and in its self
considered, which the Presbyterians ground upon, tho this have its own
Secondary Weight, but the Sameness and Identity of the Qualifications,
Ordination, Work, Duties, and every other Essential of the Office; Which is an
Argument, with more Demonstrative Nerves, than that of the Sameness of Names.
Presbyters, being in Scripture, called and owned, as Rulers, Governors,
Overseers, Bishops; And both Ordination and Jurisdiction appropriat to them,
without the least Hint of Imparity among them, in the Exercise thereof, Tit.
1.5. Act. 20.17, 28. 1 Pet. 5.2.2. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 14. Heb. 13.7, 17. 1 Cor.
5.12. 1 Timothy 4.14. Now, if it be thus, sure the Conclusion of the Identity of
the Office, clearly follows: And had this Man perused these Authors, he might
have discovered, that their Arguments run to this Issue, and are not merely
Bottomed upon so slight a Ground, as he would make such believe, whose
Knowledge is of a like Size and Measure with his own: Yet, so weak is his
Cause, that his Answer cannot stand before this very Argument, as he propounds
it, at least with a due Respect to the Scope of the Places Cited; which will be
evident to any, who will compare their Writings, with his Reasoning in this
Pamphlet.

To give a Summary and Brief Account of our Arguments, from these Scriptures,
cited by him, and consequently of this Dr's Fantastic Vanity and Trifflings
in this Matter. From Act. 20. We thus Argue, First, That the Apostles solemnly
declares to the Elders or Pastors of that Church of Ephesus, that the Holy
Ghost had constituted them Bishops over the Flock. Whence we collect, (1.) That
the Pastor is the true Scripture- Bishop. (2.) That by his Office, he Feeds and
Rules the Flock, and has the Doctrinal and Jurisdictional Key committed to him
by the Holy Ghost. Next, it hence follows, that whatever Authority, Power and
Jurisdiction is imported, in the Name, Bishop, falls within the Compass of this
Solemn Command, given to these Elders or Pastors, who are enjoined (...) So,
that this being essentially and entirely included in the Pastoral Office, the
Diocesan Bishops (...) and (...) or pretended Paramount Inspection over them,
evanisheth as a mere Chimaera, especially, since it excludes and inhaunces this
Authority of Pastors. (3.) It is evident that this Charge was given to the
Elders before Timothy, now present with Paul, and was posterior to the first
Epistle directed to him, for at Writing thereof, the Apostle was at Macedonia;
And the Sacred History informs us, that he came thereafter to Miletum with
Timothy, and gave the Elders this Charge. In a Word, this Charge and Command
was Paul's last Solemn Charge, for, after this, they were to see his Face no
more: So, that these being the Apostles last Thoughts (to speak so) and
Testamentary Instructions, in Point of Church Government, we have here the the
Samplare and Pattern, showed by this great Apostle, upon the Mount, of this
Divinely Inspired Model and Instructions. And since, the Episcopalians, will
not call the Gospel Church, a Speckled Bird, and her Government of diverse
Cuts, they must acknowledge, that the rest of the Apostles gave the same
Directions; As 1 Pet. 5. with 2 Pet. 1.14. does furher clear.

From hence, we further Argue, First: These Bishops who Feed and Rule the Flock
immediately, are the Apostolic Bishops, and these only: Ergo, the Hierarchical
Prelat, is no Apostolic Bishop, 1. Because his pretended Episcopacy is over
the Pastors, he is Pastor Pastorum. 2. He has a Relation to no Flock, as such.
We Argue, Secondly, from the Text thus: These Apostolic Bishops, have both the
immediate and entire Episcopal Inspection and Power over Christ's Flocks
committed to them, by God, both the Doctrinal and Jurisdictional Key: And
therefore, the Hierarchical Prelat stands Condemned upon a double Ground, 1. As
Snatching away the last from Pastors, and Arrogating it solely to himself. 2.
In Tearing and Breaking asunder the Bond. wherewith Christ has Tied these
Keys; And this in a double Respect, (1.) In the Case of the Pastor, to whom he
leaves only the Doctrinal Key. (2.) With Respect to himself, who is obliged,
ex Natura and Ratione Officii, or from the Nature of his Office, to Preach the
Gospel to no Flock, but to Govern only. Thirdly, All this Scriptural, Episcopal
Jurisdiction, is by the Apostle, ascribed to these Pastors or Bishops of the
Holy Ghost, in Presence of Timothy, while there is Altum Silentium, of any
Interest he had over them in this Matter; Whence, it may be inferred, 1. They
are declared and supposed the Highest Ordinary Officers of that Church, having
a Collegiat joint Authority therein. And 2. By clear Consequence, it follows,
that nothing here enjoined them, inferrs or does include a Precarious
Dependence upon him, in these Duties, or his Supereminent Inspection over them.
3. By further necessary Consequence, this Authority being thus declared by the
Apostle, and recognosced after all the Precepts delivered to Timothy, in the
first Epistle written to him, it cannot be supposed to contain any
Super-eminent Episcopal Charge over these Pastors, but a Transient
Evangelistick Inspection only, to pass off, with that Exigent: It being
infallibly clear, that there can be no Inconsistency or Contradiction, betwixt
this last Farewell Charge to the Pastors of that Church, and his Directions to
Timothy, while residing therein. Finally, It is hence infallibly concluded, 1.
That the Apostles themselves Exercised no such Jurisdiction over Churches
constitute in their Organick Being, as is properly and formally Episcopal, or
of the Hierarchical Mould: This Episcopal Authority being committed to the
College of Elders, as their Essential Right and Privilege. 2. That the
Apostles did not Substitute the Hierarchical Prelates, or Diocesan Bishops, as
their Succedaneous Substitutes, upon their withdrawing, unless we will make the
Apostle Paul, to Model this Church, in a Mould Hetrogeneous to other Churches.
And in a Word, it hence follows, that whatever may be pleaded, as to Matter of
Fact, neither this, nor any Church else, could ever after, Iure, divest
themselves of this Authority, (I mean the Church Representatives, or Officers
thereof) in setting up such a Proestos or Prelat, whose Power did encroach upon
this their Authority allowed them by God.

From Tit. 1.5, 7. The Presbyterians Argue, not merely from the Promiscuous
Use, or Identity of the Name Bishop and Presbyter, but from the Nature and
Mould of the Apostles Reasoning, and the Connecting Particle and Illative
(...), which points at the very Topic and Ground, upon which the Apostle
concludes that which is his Scope; which necessarly inferrs an Official
Identity of Bishop and Presbyter, not a Nominal only: For, thus his Argument
lies; The Presbyter or Elder, must be so and so Qualified, for such must the
Bishop be: So, that the Stating of an Official Distinction betwixt the two, as
different Orders of Ministers, breaks the Force of the Apostles Argument, there
being no Soundness in such Reasoning as this, Inferior Officers must have such
Qualifications, because such are proper to the Superior Office. No doubt, the
Holy Ghost, who thus Reasons, ascribes to them, not only the same Name, (and he
knew best, how to express the Nature of the Things by fit Words) but likewise
the same Qualifications, Work, and Office. Episcopalians will not disowne it,
that the Bishop has distinct Qualifications and Work, from that of the
Presbyter or Pastor; So that, they must either acquiesce in this our Sense of
his Words, while purposely describing the Presbyter and Bishops Qualifications,
Office, and Duties, or Blasphemously impute unto him Incongruity of Speech, and
Unsoundness in Reasoning; And therefore, the Office of the one, and the other,
is clearly supposed one and the same.

From Philip. 1.1. Where the Apostle salutes a Plurality of Bishops of that
Church: We infer, 1. Their proper Episcopal Relation thereunto. 2. That they
could not be Diocesans, (1.) Because the Deacons, the lowest Officers, are
immediately subjoyned to them; And Prelatists will not say, that there were no
Pastors in that Church, but only Diocesans. (2.) It is impossible there could
be a Plurality of Hierarchical Bishops therein, and by clear Consequence, the
Pastors and Presbyters are supposed the Highest Ordinary Officers of that
Church, Exercising a joint Collegiat Power in the Government thereof.

If I should adduce the Judgment and Testimonies of Protestant Divines, upon
these Passages, correspondent to our Sense and Pleading, it were a large Work.
The Belgic Divines, upon Act. 20.28. from that Clause [ the Holy Ghost has
made you Overseers] do plead as above; For, having told us, that in the Greek
it is Bishops, and that from this the Word Bishop is derived; they add, That
these are v. 17. called Elders of the Church; from whence it appears, that in
the Holy Scriptures, there is no Difference made betwixt Elders and Bishops,
pointing to Philip. 1.1. upon which Passage, they show, that this Term is
common to all Governors and Overseers in the Church; referring again to Act.
20.17, 28. together with 1 Timothy 1.3. Where they show, That Timothy was
appointed to continue at Ephesus, not as Bishop, but as Evangelist for a time,
to Confirm the Church. Upon Chap. 3. v. 1. they show, That the Word Bishop, is
to be understood of all Overseers and Teachers of the Church without
Difference, as appears* in the following Description, compared with other
places, citing Act. 20.17, 28. Philip. 1.1. Tit. 1.5, 7. Diodat. on Act. 20.17.
shows, That by the Elders, we are to understand the Pastors and Conductors in
v. 28. Upon which Verse, he shows, That the Word signifies Overseer, Guardian,
etc. And represents the Duty of a true Pastor of the Church, without any
absolute Dominion, only for the Profit and Good of the Flock, Philip. 1.1. he
paralells with Act. 20:17, 28. 1 Timothy 5.17. Understanding therein the Ministers
of the Sacred Governing Senate, 1 Timothy 3.1. he understands of the Bishop or
Pastor, who has the Charge of Teaching and Governing the Church. On Tit. 1.5.
the Elders, who are immediately after called Bishops, he understands of such
Pastors and Conductors, as were to be placed in Churches, where was a Competent
Number of Believers. Pools Annot. Vol. 2. understands, Act. 20.17. as speaking
of such Elders, as are Governors and Pastors of the Church: And shows, that
the Term and Title, respects not their Age, but their place. And upon v. 28.
they show, That the Overseers there mentioned, are the same, who are called
Elders, v. 17. and were certainly such as had the Government and care of the
Church committed to them. Upon Philip. 1.1. By Bishops, they understand Pastors
and Teachers, asserting that the Name and Office of Bishops and Pastors was all
one, in the Apostles days; and do Cite for Confirmation of this Act. 20.17.28.
1 Cor. 4.1.2. 1 These. 5.12.13. 1. Tim. 3.1. 1 Pet. 5.1. 2. Tit. 1.5. Heb.
13.17. Iam. 5.14, 3 Ioh. 9. The very Passages we make use of, showing that this
is the Sense, both of Ancient and modern Interpreters. Thereafter, they confute
at large Hammonds Notion of Presbyters, who takes them for Diocesan Bishops.
Upon 1 Timothy 3.1. They show, That the Term, Bishop, is the proper Title of
Gospel Ministers, pointing at their Honorable Work and Employment; and
Paralels this with the Title of Angel, mentioned Rev. 2.1. Upon the last Clause
of v. 2. where the Bishop is enjoined to be apt to Teach, they show, "That he
must be neither an Ignorant nor lazy Person. Eng. Annot. upon Act. 20.
understand the Elders, v. 17. of the Governors and Pastors, paralelling it with
these Elders of Jerusalem, mentioned Chap. 11, 30. Upon v. 28. they show, That
the term Episcopus or Bishop, is here to be understood of the Pastor of the
Church, and Minister of the Word, as elsewhere: Also upon Philip. 1.1. on that
Clause, [ the Bishops and Deacons] they show, That the Synod of Nice, did
forbid Two or more Bishops, to have their Seats in one City: And before that,
Cornelius Bishop of Rome, upbraids Novatus with Ignorance (as Eusebius. lib. 6.
Writes) that he knew not, there ought to be but one Bishop in that Church, in
which he could no be Ignorant, there were Forty Six Presbyters. And Oecumenius
and Chrysostom affirm this of Philippi: In one City it cannot be supposed (say
they) there were more Bishops in that restrained Sense, as the word was
afterward taken. Here therefore, by Episcopi and Diaconi, we are to understand.
the whole Ministry at Philippi, consisting of Presbyters, to whom the
Government of the Church was Committed: And Deacons, who not only had the Care
of the Poor, but also Assisted Ministers, in their Ecclesiastical Function.
Upon 1 Timothy 3.1. they show, That the Term Bishop, does properly relate to the
Flock; referring to Philip. 1.1. And having showed, that Antiquity did
appropriat this Term to Diocesan Prelates, and consequently, as it relates to
Pastors; But that they Disowne this, as not being the Scripture Acceptance, is
evident, not only, from that Reference to Philip. 1.1. but also, from this,
that the Clause of [ Desiring a good Work] they parallel with 1 These. 5.13.
where, after the Apostle has v. 12. enjoined a due Deference and Subjection to
such, as Labored among them, ( viz. In the Word and Doctrine) he enjoins to
Esteem them Highly in Love for their Works sake, asserting thus the Bishops [
good Work] to be one and the same with that of the Pastor, and consequently the
Office. By the Elders, mentioned Tit. 1.5. to be Ordained in every Church, they
understand the Pastors to be Ordained, where there was a convenient Number of
the Faithful: And the Apostles Reason v. 7. [ For a Bishop must be Blameless,
etc.] they parallel with Philip. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.1, 2. Thus clearly Corresponding
our Sense and Pleading for the Identity of the Bishops and Pastors Office, from
these places.

The Professors of Leyden, Disput. 42. at large Correspond with our Sense and
Pleading from these Passages, They assert the Extraordinary Expired Call and
Office of Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, and that the Pastors, D^ctors,
Elders, and Deacons, are the only standing ordinary Church Officers; Thus These.
17.18, 19, 20. etc. Ascribing to Pastors, the Authority of Government, as the
Highest Ordinary Officers of the New Testament, These. 25.26. These. 29. From
Act. 20.28. they show, that the Apostle calls the Pastors of the Church of
Ephesus, Bishops, set up by the Holy Ghost, paralelling this with 1 Timothy 3.2.
where (they tell us) the Bishop is described from such Qualities and Effects,
as the Apostle Peter enjoins and ascribes to his Fellow Presbyters, 1 Pet. 5.1,
2. Adding, that in the Epistle to the Philippians, Chap. 1. v. 1. under the
Name of Bishops, for whom the Apostle prays for Grace, he understands such [
qui Philippi Verbo and Gubernationi praeerant] who had Inspection of the
Doctrine and Government, distinguishing them from the Deacons, who were set
over the Churches Treasure. Adding, that Tit. 1.5. such, whom the Apostle Named
Presbyters, v. 7. he calls Bishops [ non correlate ad Presbyteros tanquam ad
Secundarios, sibique Subordinatos Praesules, sed ad Ecclesiam Vigilanti ipsorum
Curae atque Inspectioni Commissam, non enim alicujus in alios Ministros
Autoritatis aut alicujus prae aliis Prerogativae, sed s^lius istius Curae ac
Vigilantiae Respectu, Episcoporum Titulo in Sacris Literis Insigniuntur] That
the Bishops are called such, not with Relation to any supposed Subordinat
Bishops or Presbyters, but to the Church committed to their Vigilant Care, in
which Respect alone, they have that Title in Scripture, but not upon the
Account of any Prerogative or Authority, which one Minister has over another.
Which, how clearly it asserts our Judgment, Principles and Pleading upon these
Texts, in Opposition to the Hierarchical Bishop, and for the Parity of Pastors,
is convincingly evident. But, let us hear their Inference, These. 30. which is
thus [ Non ergo ex Divino, sed ex Humano Instituto aliquis post Apostolorum
tempora, aliis ex Ordine Presbyterorum fuit Authoritate praepositus, atque,
Episcopus dictus ex singulari Prerogativa, sicut post Hieronimum, non-nulli
quoque Pontificii confitentur nominatim. Lombard. Lib. 4. Distinct. 24.
Gratian. Did. 93. c. Legimus and Did. 25. c. olim. Cusanus de Concord.
Cathol. Lib. 2. Cap. 13. Citing first Ierom on Tit. 1. and ad Evag.] In sum,
that the Setting of one Presbyter over another, in a supposed Supereminent
Authority and Peculiar Prerogative, under the Character and Designation of a
Bishop, is an Humane Invention only, without any Divine Warrant, as not only
Hierom, but several Popish School Men, have acknowledged.

The Professors of Saumur, speak also our Sense here fully. Syntag. These.
Theolog. de Diverse. Minist. Evang. Grad. These. 7. They hold the Office of
Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists to be Extraordinary and Expired, making
peculiar to them, their immediate Call, Infallibility in Teaching, their
Universal Legation to all Churches, their Extraordinary and Miraculous Gifts,
etc. The Pastors and Doctors Office, they hold Ordinary, and affirm they are
the same with Presbyters planted in every Church. These. 16.20. de Episcop. and
Presb. Discrimine. These. 7.8. they show, that the Apostles placed Presbyters,
Church by Church, for the Government thereof, citing Act. 14.23. and 20.17, 28.
where they Collect, that these Presbyters were Commanded (...) to take heed to
the Flock, and are called (...) from which they infer, that it belonged to them
to Watch over, Inspect, to see unto, and take Care for such things, as tended
to the Conservation, Propagation, and Growth of the Church: Adding [ Quod fieri
sine Regiminis Cura and Potestate non potest] which could not be performed,
without the Care and Authority of Government. These. 9. They assert, that
Pastors being thus in the beginning Constitute by the Apostles, they did
according to the Apostles Command, and from the Nature of the Office Entrusted
to them [ ex Officio sibi ab Apostolis demandato] Govern the Church [ Communi
Consilio] by Common Counsel (according to Hierom's Phrase) (Communibus
Suffragiis, Communi Solicitudine and Cura) by Common and Equal Suffrage and
Care. Adding ( Nullus tum eorum in reliquos Sym-Presbyteros Autoritatem,
Potestatem, Imperium aut Iurisdictionem habuit, sed par and equalis Cura and
Solicitudo omnibus and singu^is in totum Gregem competebat) that in these First
times, no Presbyter or Pastor, had Authority, Power, or Jurisdiction over his
Fellow-Presbyters, but the same, and alike Care and solicitude over the whole
Flock, was competent to every one. These. 10. they show, That tho there was one,
who, as in every College, or Juridical Court, was Primus or President, yet
that Primatus was (Ordinis duntaxat non Authoritatis, Potestatis, Dominii,
Imperii, Iurisdictionis, sic enim non fuissent Sym-Presbyteri, quomodo passim
vocantur in Patrum Scriptis) of Order only, not of Authority, and not importing
a Iurisdictional Power, and Dominion; For, thus they had not been Colleagues, or
Co-Presbyters, as they were every where called in the Writings of the Fathers.
These. 14. they show, That things being thus Constitute by the Apostles, as
every one of these Presbyters had not only the Authority and Power of Preaching
the Word, and Administration of the Sacraments ( Verum etiam pari Iure, pari
Autoritate, ad Ecclesiae Clavum and Gubernaoula sedebant, quam ut dixi, Communi
Consilio, Communibus Suffragiis regebant) That with the same Authority also,
and Equal Jurisdiction, Ministers did sit at the Churches Helm, and Governed
her by Common Suffrages. Adding ( Quod hinc liquot, quod omnes communiter, and
Presbyteri and Episcopi, pariter in Scriptis Apostolicis, adeoque Vetustioribus
Scriptoribus, vocantur promiscue) That Pastors are called both Bishops and
Presbyters, promiscuously in the Apostles Writings, makes the preceding
Assertion apparent. Then they add the Scripture Proofs thus ( Id quod sati^
manifestum ex loco, Act. 20.28. Ubi Ephesinae Ecclesiae Presbyteri dicuntur ^
Spiritu Sancto constituti Ecclesiae illius (...), tam ex Philip. 1.1. Ubi
Apostolus Epistolam suam inscribit Ecclesiae illius (...) nulla fact^
Presbyterorum mentione, quos Episcoporum nomine isthic procul dubio intelligit;
Nunquam enim plures fuerunt in eadem Ecclesia Episcopi, ex quo Episcopus
singularem habuit ac praecipuam supra Presbyteros Autoritatem atque Potestatem,
ejusque Manus distinctum fuit a Presbyteriali Munere atque Ordine) That the
Parity of Bishop and Presbyter appears from Act. 20.28. where the Presbyters of
the Church of Ephesus, are said to be Constitute Bishops of the Church by the
Holy Ghost; As also from Philip. 1.1. where the Apostle inscribes his Epistle
to the Bishops and Deacons of that Church, making no mention of Presbyters,
whom without doubt, he understands by the Name of Bishops: For, there were
never more Bishops in the same Church, since the time that the Bishop had a
Singular Power and Authority above Presbyters, and his Office was distinguished
from the Order and Office of Pastors. Then they add These. 15. ( Id ipsum
manifestam ex 1 Timothy 3.2. Opportet Episcopum esse irreprehensibilem, etc. nulla
mentione facta Presbyteri: Nam si alias tum fui^set Episcopus alius Presbyter,
Paulus isthic Presbyterum non omisisset, sed adjecisset eadem in Presbytero
requiri, vel si alia aut pauciora in eo requiri voluisset, id procul dubio
monuisset, alioqui ea in part Officio suo Defuisset) That the same appears
from 1 Timothy 3.2. A Bishop must be blameless, etc. without mentioning the
Presbyter: For, if the Bishop and Presbyter; had been then distinct, Paul,
would not in this place, have omitted the Presbyter, but would have added, that
the same things were required in him, or if he would have required either other
or fewer things in him, he would, without doubt, have admonished hereof,
otherwise, in so far, he had been wanting in his Duty. They add ( Idem liquet
ex Tit. 1.5, 7. Nam ubi dixit Titum se reliquisse in Creta, ut istic
constitueret Presbyteros (...) docet quales essent illi Presbyteri (...) inquit
(...)) That the same is apparent from Tit. 1.5, 7. where, after the Apostle had
said, that he had left Titus in Crete, to place Presbyters in every City, he
shows, how these Elders must be Qualified; A Bishop must be blameless.
Asserting, These. 17. that this may be demonstrated from the Monuments of the
Ancient Church; They cite the Commentary under Ambrose Name on Ephesians. Cap. 4.
and that passage ( Non per omnia convenient Apostoli Scripta Ordinationi quae
nunc est in Ecclesia) That the Apostles Writings did not every way agree with
the Order then in the Church. Here is Novel Doctrine of Presbyterians, so Close
and Throng, as will probably put our Antique Dr. to the outmost Limits of his
Patience. Presbyterian Scriptures, Presbyterian Sense, Presbyterian Arguments,
Canted over by Dull Novelists, one after another, and which is yet more, by
Novelist Universities of the Scots Presbyterian Persuasion. But this that
follows, will possibly please worse.

Maccovius Redivivus in his (...) Pontificorum, Socin. etc. Cap. 6. De Cler.
thus represents the Pontificii, or the Popish Cause and Doctrine, which I fear
will Embrace in its Bosom, the Dr's. Reverence. It is even thus, [ Episcopi
jure Divino superiores sunt verbi Ministris, tum ordinis potestate, tum
jurisdictione] That the Bishop by Divine Right, is Superior to the Ministers of
the Word, both in the Power of Order and Jurisdiction. Maccovius not having the
Honor to know our Dr. presents for his voucher, Bellarmin, lib. 1. De Cler.
Cap. 14. The ^. ^. he thus represents [ consuetudo Romanorum quae Distinguit
inter versantem verbum Dei and Episcopum] The Romish Custom, which
distinguishes betwixt the Preacher of the Word, and the Bishop; As our Romish
Dr. does: This is Rude, but how is this Refelled by Maccovius? Why? Its even
thus [ Refellitur; primo Philip. 1.1. Ubi idem Presbyteri predicantes and
Episcopi dicuntur; Secundo. Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 3.1.2. U^i idem docentur esse
Presbyteri Praedicantes and Episcopi] His two Proofs are, that in these
premised Scriptures, the Preaching Presbyter, or Pastor, and the Bishop, are
held out as one and the same.

Another Novelist, asserting this New Coined Doctrine, and falling into the same
error with the Scots Presbyterians, is Antonius Walleus, de funct. Ecc^es. P.
(mihi) 470. having stated the Question Viz. utrum talis sit eminen^^^ inter
Pastores, ut unus gradu altero sit superior jure Divino, adeo ut uni Potestas
in alterum concedatur, potestas scilicet mittendi aut deponendi ministros,
potestas excommunicandi, aut admittendi, leges praescribendi, regendi etc.
qualem sibi bodierni Episcopi ascribunt] whether there be such an Eminency
among Pastors, so, as one is in Degree Superior to another by Divine Right, and
has Authority over another, the Authority of the Mission or deposition of
Ministers, the Authority and Power of Excommunication, or relaxation, of
prescribing Laws, and of Governing, etc. such as the present Bishops, arrogat
and appropriat to themselves. Then he shows, that he speaks of Spiritual
Authority: And thus Answers [ hoc est quod nostri negant adversus episcopales]
This is that we deny against the Episcopalians: Here is a bold Novelist. He
after shows that the Divines of that Church, were of his mind; and thus
exhibits a Muster Roll of New Coined Novelists. But he presents his [ praecipua
Argumenta] Chief Arguments: What are these? (1) [ in tota scriptura ejusmodi
eminentiae and potestatis nulla fit mentio] That in all the Scripture, there is
no mention of such Eminency and Power of a Bishop above Pastors. (2) [ quia in
illis Locis ubi ex professo de ministrorum novi Testamenti gradibus fit mentio,
unius generis Pastorum Scriptura tantum meminit, ut 1 Cor. 12.28. constituit in
Ecclesia primum Apostolos, secundo Prophetas, Tertio Doctores. Et Ephesians. 4.11.
ipse dedit alios quidem Apostolos, alios vero Pastores and Doctores, etc. sic
Romans 12.6. Act. 20.17.28. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2.] That in those places, where there is
express mention of purpose made of the Degrees of Ministers of the New
Testament, the Scripture owns only one kind of Pastors, as 1 Cor. 12.28. He set
in the Church, first Apostles, secondarly Prophets, Thirdly Doctors or
Teachers; and Ephesians. 4.11. He gave some Apostles, some Pastors and Teachers, etc.
Thus Romans 12.6. Acts, 2^.17.28. 1 Pet. 5.1.2. The (3 d) Reason or Argument is
thus [ quia Sacra Scriptura docet express Episcopos and Presbyteros fuisse
plane eosd^m, ita Act. 20.17. convocavit Presbyteros, and v. 28. Dicit Spiritum
Sanctum eos constituisse Episcopos, Ita Phil. 1.1. Paulus and Timotheus servi
Jesus Christi, omnibus Sanctis qui sunt Phillippicum Episcopis and Diaconis: Et
ad Titum 1.5. ideo reliqui te in Creta, ut oppidatim constituas Presbyteros: Et
v. 7. opportet enim E-Eiscopum unius esse uxoris virum, etc.] That the sacred
Scriptures shows the Bishop and Presbyter, to have been one and the same; Thus
Act. 20.7. the Apostle called together the Elders, and v. 28. he says, that
the Spirit of God had made them Bishops: Also Philip. 1.1. Paul and Timotheus,
Servants of Jesus Christ, to all the Saints which are at Philippi, with the
Bishops and Deacons; and Tit. 1.5. For this Cause left I thee in Crete, that
thou should Ordain Elders in every City; and v. 6. For a Bishop must be the
Husband of one Wife* etc. He adds, that Ierom ( Comment. in Tit. and Ephesians. ad
Evag.) does from these places collect (as an old doting Novelist too) that the
Bishop and Presbyter is all one, the one Name signifying the Age, the other the
Office: he Cites also Ambrose (in Ephesians. 4.) as holding the same. He adds ( sic
Augustinus and plurimi alii in hanc sententiam) that Augustine and many others,
were of this Judgment, to whom he also adds Bucer ( de gub. P. 258. C.
deinceps) Thus Walleus holds, that this forementioned Scots Presbyterian Sense
of the Scriptures premised, has for a considerable time been a working Notion;
for want, no doubt of our Dr's clearer Instructions. But this bigot Novelist,
goes on to add, Denique ex nullo Scripturae loco prohibetur uni Presbytero aut
Pastori ordinario ullam dari potestatem, sive in verbi predicatione, omnes enim
sunt Doctores and Pastores; sive in Sacramentorum Administratione ut Mat.
28.19. 1 Cor. 11.23. sive in exercitio Disciplinae. 1 Cor. 5.4. etc. 2 Cor.
2.7. sive in Ecclesiae rectione, Act. 20.17. 1 Pet. 5.1.2. Heb. 13.17. obedite
praepositis vestris qui non datur alteri) That from no place of Scripture, it
can be made good, that there is any Power given to an ordinary Pastor, or
singular Prerogative above another, either in the Preaching the Word, for all
are Pastors and Teachers; or in the administration of the Sacraments, Matthew.
28.19. 1. Cor. 11.23. or, in the exercise of Discipline. 1. Cor. 5.4, etc. 2
Cor. 2.7. Or in the Governing the Church, Act. 20.17. 1 Pet. 5.1. 2. Heb.
13.17. Obey those that are set over you. He adds, quare Apostoli in Epistolarum
suarum inscriptionibus seribunt Sanctis, item Ministris, Nunquam soli alicui
Episcopo, and Regulas Prescribunt. 1. Tim. 3.2. Tit. 1.5.7. 1 Pet. 5.2. Omnibus
Pastoribus communes, nullas singulares Episcoporum) That upon this Ground, the
Apostles in the Inscriptions of their Epistles, do write unto the Saints, and
also to Ministers, but never to any one Bishop; and 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit. 1.6. 1
Pet. 5.2. Do prescrbe such Rules as are common to all Pastors, but none that
are peculiar to Bishops. Here is a bold new Novelist, with a whole Congeries of
New Notions upon Texts pleaded by the Scots Presbyterians, suting, no doubt,
the Consideration of our Profound Antiquary. I am verily of Opinion, that this
grave Inquirer into the new dangerous Notions of the Scots Presbyterians,
should either have perused the premised grounds of their New Opinion, or
Written to his Friend at Edinburgh, to make inquiry in his behalf, for some
more of these dangerous Books, that they might be sent up to him, in order to
his Doctorships perusal and confutation: For, it seems, he has never seen them.
I need not mention Chamier, and other conceited Novelists, who has fallen into
the same dottage ( De aecumenico Pont. lib. 10. Cap. 3.)

Arnoldus in his Lux in tenebris, on Act. 20.17. ( he called the Elders)
presents the Orthodox opinion thus, That Bishops and Presbyters are not Names
of diverse Gifts in the Church, but of one and the same Office, because those
who are called Presbyters v. 17. are called Bishops. v. 28. This Man it seems,
had got the new Notion in his Head too. He adds, The Papists Object (had he
enjoyed the time and opportunity of seeing our Antique Drs Enquiry into the New
dangerous Notions of Scots Presbyterians, he had not been so ill manner'd, as
to term the Reasons of our Venerable Dr. an Objection of Papists) Well, what do
they Object? 'That in these times, the Names were Common, but yet the Offices
of Bishops and Presbyters diverse. Now, let us hear Arnoldus answers to our
profound Enquirers great argument, wherewith he has filled up so great a part
of his Pamphlet. 1. This is, says he, to affirm, not to prove. 2. When Offices
are distinct, there also the Names are diverse. 3. There was one Office, both
of Bishops and Presbyters, viz. the Office of Teaching. 4. Says he, upon the
Papists supposition (beware of the Venerable Dr. again; what! could this Blind
Novelist see none who maintained this Ancient Doctrine but Papists?) there can
and ought to be only one Bishop in one City; but so it is, that there were here
many: Therefore Bishops signify Presbyters.

After the premised account of these doting Presbyterians, who notwithstanding
are judged by many, to be men of very Venerable Name, may I presume to trouble
our profound enquiring Dr, in giving him a view of some bigot Confessions of
the Reformed Protestant Churches, who, its like, have asserted this New Notion
and Opinion of Scots Presbyterians. The Confession of the French Church, upon
this head, runs thus ( credimus veram Ecclesiam, etc.) We believe, that the
true Church ought to be Governed, by that Policy, which Christ has ordained.
Mr. Dr. will no doubt acknowledge this is sound. Well, what next? They add,
That there be Pastors, Presbyters, or Elders, and Deacons. This is fair. But is
there no distinction of Bishops and Pastors in their Sense? The enquiring Dr.
will tell them; that the two Classes of Elders and Deacons, admits of a
subdivision. But the unmannerly froward Confession, is bold to contradict his
Reverence, proceeding thus: And again, we believe, that all true Pastors,
wherever they be, are endued with equal and the same Power, under one Head and
Bishop, Christ Jesus. Here is the Scots Presbyterians New Notion in grain.
Shall we try the Dr's. Patience with another such Instance.

The Belgic Confession, is no better natured to our Dr. but are as bold to
contradict him in this point, and it seems do hold the same New Scots Notion:
For, thus they assert, Art. 30. All Christ's Ministers of the Word of God, have
the same and equal Power and Authority, as being all Ministers of that only
Universal Head and Bishop, Christ.

In the Point of Ordination, which the Dr. appropriats to the Bishop, the
latter Confession of Helvetia* ( Harm. Confess. Chap. 11. P. 232.) do assert,
'That the Holy Function of the Ministry, is given by the laying on of the hands
of Presbyters. No word of Prelates Hands. So ( Chap 18. P. 236.) they are to be
Ordained by public Prayer and laying on of Hands: Which Power, they say, is
the same and alike in all: Citing that Passage, Luke. 22. He that will be great
among you, let him be your Servant. Thus crossing the Dr's Sense of this, and
other parallel Passages. They also Cite Act. 15. And Ierom on Tit. 1. Concluding
thus, Therefore, let no Man forbid, that we return to the old Appointment of
God (so they call the Presbyterian way of Ordination,) and rather receive it,
than the custom devised by Men (so they call the Episcopal Method.)

Thus the Confession of Boheme, Cha. 9. ( Harm. Confess. Sect. 11. P. 246.247.)
after setting down the qualifications of Ministers, as to Ordination, they say,
that after Prayer and Fasting, they are to be Confirmed and approved of the
Elders, by the laying one of their Hands. So The Confession of Saxony, Chap.
12. ( Harm. Confess. Part. 2.) affirms, That it belongs to the Ministers of the
Word to Ordain Ministers, Lawfully Elected and Called. Where, we have asserted
at once, both the Presbyters Power in Ordination, and the Peoples Interest, in
the Call of Pastors, in opposition to Prelacy. But as to this Point of the
Equality of Pastors, and their joint Interest in Ordination, it is long since
Dr. Reynolds has told the Dr. and his Fellows that this is the Common Judgment
of the Reformed Churches; Viz. Helvetia, Savoy, France, Scotland, Germany,
Hungary, Polland, the Low Countries; Citing the Harmony of Confessions.

Well, Whoever own these Opinions of the Parity of Pastors, and their joint
Interest in Government, The Dr. tells his Friend, he Charges them with Error
and Novelty, tho a Current Opinion among his Countrymen, whom the enquiring
Dr. Labors to undeceive, and he assures his Friend (a sure Demonstration no
doubt, if it admit no other Measures, but his Assertion) That they are
altogether New, and were never propagat in any part of the Christian Church,
till these last days of Separation and Singularity. I could wish, he had
Condescended upon the measures of these last days, wherein this Separation
Reigns, as also, of these New Opinions. We know, the Scripture calls the whole
Gospel times, last times and latter days; And some will allege there has been
Separation and Singularity, Old enough in years: But, if we may draw
Conjectures from the Drs. Principles anent an Oecumenick New Testament High
Priest and Patriarch, and the standing of the Old Testament Economy, as
Exemplary to the New, and who has for several Ages, pretended to follow this
Copy, and who he is, who has been for some Ages separat from, tho once
Universally wondered after, and followed, viz. The Good Old Gentleman with the
Triple Crown; I think Protestant Schismatics, as well as these their
forementioned Opinions, may be supposed to have been in this Assertion, much in
the Dr's. View. But that I be not tedious, and may hasten to consider the Dr's
grave Enquiry and Answer to the premised Scriptures; and the New Protestant
Glosses upon them, which moves his Spleen to such declamatory anger against his
Poor pur-blind Countrymen; one thing I would suggest to him (if I may do it
without putting him into a Chaff) which is this; It Is known, that there is a
certain English Dr. of as great Figure and Reputation (almost) in England, as
he is in Scotland, and of a great Name to this day, who having got this New
Scots Notion of the Parity of Bishops and Presbyters, into his unwarry head,
was bold to exhibit a great many Testimonies of Greek and Latin Fathers, for
this New Opinion; his Name is Doctor Reynolds, in his Epistle to Sir Francis
Knolls; the Dr. would do well to enlarge his Enquiring Charity, and undeceive
his Countriemen and others, in the Point of this dangerous Error, in examining
his Citations. Its long since the Epistle was Exhibit to public view, and is
in many hands, and upon a little enquiry, the Dr. may easily have a view of
this dangerous Piece. For, if these Citations hold, the Opinion is not so New
and Singular, as the Dr. Suggests, but it seems is an Old notion revived again:
As the Dr. knows the Waldenses revived Old Points before them, and from them
the Protestant Schismatics, have taken up the same; and in special, so Learned
an Antiquary, as the Dr. cannot be ignorant, that this very Scots Dangerous New
Notion, against which his Pamphlet is levelled, was condemned by the Roman
Church in Wickliff, and the Waldenses, as testifies Michael Medina, lib. 1. De
sacrorum hominum origin and eminentia, Cap 5.

But now, that my hand is in, before I come to examine the Dr's. Answers to the
premised Scriptures, I must be bold to Exhibit to him some more of the
Heretical assertors of Presbyters Power and interest in Government, in
correspondence to the New Scots Notion.

Festus Hommius Disput. Theol. Adversus Pontificios Disput. 25. De Minist.
Eccles. Ordin. These. 1. He calls the Office of Apostles and Evangelists
Extraordinary, and holds it to be expired: These. 2. [ primus itaque ordo
Ministrorum Ecclesiae Novi Testamenti ordinariorum est ordo Pastorum, qui etiam
Episcopi, Presbyteri, praesides laborantes, Ministri Praedicantes, servi,
dispensatcres, praesides and duces in Sacra Scriptura appellantur] That the
First order of the Ordinary Ministers of the New Testament, is that of Pastors,
who in Scripture are called Bishops, Presbyters, Laboring Presidents,
Dispensing Servants, Leaders Rulers, etc. These. 3. [ inter Episcopum and
Pastorem seu^ Presbyterum in verbo laborantem, Respectu Muneris seu ministerii
nullum in sacra Scriptura; verum and essentiale discrimen reperitur; haec enim
vocibus hisce Promiscue utitur, cum unum eundemque Ministrorum Novi Testamenti
ordinem designat: Quia in una Ecclesia and Civitate plures tempore Apostolorum
Episcopus fuisse diserte Scriptura Sacra Testatur. That betwixt the Bis^op and
Pastor or Presbyter laboring in the Word and Doctrine, there is no essential or
Official difference found in Scripture, which uses these words promiscuously,
pointing out thereby the same Order of the New Testament Ministers: Since it
does clearly Testify, that in the times of the Apostles, there were many
Bishops in one City. From whence he draws this Conclusion [ quare Epsicopi jure
Divino Pastoribus, neque gradu, neque dignitate, neque ordinis potestate, neque
Jurisdiction majores sunt] That therefore Bishops by Divine Right are neither
in Degree, Dignity, Power of Order nor Jurisdiction greater than Pastors. Here
is extensive Scots Bigotry.

I cannot but also observe, how Crabbed and unlucky expressions he has These. 2.
As to the Drs. Denomination, of the Gospel Ministry by the term of Priesthood,
because Christ's Priesthood is Eternal, and admits of no Successors, he does
upon this ground Reason thus [ quare Ministri Novi Testamenti nusquam in sacra
Scriptura Sacerdotes proprie dicti appellantur] That the Ministers of the New
Testament, are no where in Scripture called Priests. Adding [ proinde
pontificii Pastores cum nomen and munus sacerdotis sibi arrogant, non tantum
palam judaizant, sed etiam blaspheme and sacrilege in Sanctissimum munus Domini
-- in v^lant] That therefore the Popish Ministers, in arrogating to themselves,
the Name and Office of Priests, do not only palpably Judaize, but also, make a
Blasphemous, and sacralegious Invasion upon the most Holy Office of Christ.

Musculus (loc. Commun. de Offic. Minist.) is Scots Presbyterian in grain, in
this Point (P. mihi. 360, 361, 362.) after he has asserted from Scripture
Grounds the extraordinary Nature of the Apostolic and Evangelistick Office,
and the identity of the Pastoral and Doctoral office with Ierom: Because the
Apostle Ephesians. 4. says not, that our Lord gave some Pastors and some Doctors, but
Conjunctly Pastors and Doctors, he adds [ eosdem esse Presbyteros and Pastores
ex eo patet, quod 1 Pet. 5. Legimus Seniores ab Apostolis admoneri, ut gregem
Dei pascant] That Elders and Ministers, are by the Apostles admonished to feed
the Lords Flock [3 tio. says he, eosdem esse Presbyteros quoque and Episcopas
and Pastores, ex eo patet, quod Act. 20. Legimus adhunc modum. A Mileto autem
missus Ephesum nuntius accersivit Presbyteros Ecclesiae, qui cum venissent,
dixit iis; vos scitis a primo die, etc. Et aliquanto post. Attendite igitur
vobis and toto gregi in quo vos Spiritus Sanctus posuit Episcopos ad pascendum
((...)) Ecclesiam Dei. Quos Lucas vocat Presbyteros Ecclesiae Ephesinae, hos
Paulus vocat Episcopos, and dixit eos ad hoc esse a Spiritu Sancto positos, ut
pascant Ecclesiam Dei, sic palam videmus eosdem esse Presbyteros, Episcopos and
Pastores] He adds for his Third Reason, that it appears from Act. 20. that
Presbyters, Bishops and Pastors are the same; because Paul sent from Miletum to
Ephesus for the Elders of the Church, who being come to him, he enjoins them to
take heed to themselves, and to all the flock, over which the Holy Ghost had
made them Bishops, to Feed ( i. e. to Rule and Govern, as the Original Word
imports) the Church of God. Those whom Luke calls the Elders of the Church of
Ephesus, those Paul calls the Bishops, for this end constitut by the Holy
Ghost, to Feed the Church of God, whence it evidently appears, that Bishops,
Presbyters, and Pastors, are the same. He adds [ de inde in una and eadem
ecclesiae simul and conjunctim plures fuisse episcopos, etc.] That it appears,
the Spirit of GOD, placed at once and jointly a Plurality of Bishops, in one
and the same Church. [ Quem admodum ex eo quoque videri est, quod Phil: 1.1.
Legimus Paulus ac Timotheus servi Jesus Christi, omnibus sanctis qui sunt
Philippi, una cum Episcopis and Diaconis. Ecce and Philippis plures simul erant
Episcopi, erant autem illi Seniores Ecclesiae] That in the Church of Philippi a
Plurality of Bishops are saluted by the Apostle, who are supposed to be the
same with Pastors. He thus proceeds [ Et ubi in Epistola ad Titum Cap. 1.
Legimus, Hujus rei gratia reliqui te in Creta, ut quae desunt pergas corrigere,
and constituas oppidatim Presbyteros, sicut ego tibi ordinaram, si quis est
incupatus, etc. Opportet enim episcopum inculpatum esse, etc. An non hic quoque
videmus eosdem esse Presbyterum and Episcopum. Et 1 Pet: 5. Loco supra citato,
tres hae voces (...), and (...) Ad eosdem ab Apostolis Scriptae leguntur, unde
videas Apostolorum tempore in ecclesia Christi eosdem fuisse Presbyteros,
Pastores and Episcopos] That the Apostle in the Epistle to Titus, Chap. 1.
showing that he left him to place Elders in Crete, who must be Blameless, etc.
Because a Bishop must be such, does show, That the Bishop and the Presbyter are
one and the same. And 1 Pet. 5. the three Original Words, which signify
Presbyters, Feeding, and Overseeing, or Acting the Bishops, are by the Apostle,
Written and Ascribed to the same Persons; Whence, it is evident, that in the
Times of the Apostles, Elders, Pastors, and Bishops, were one and the same in
Gods Church. He adds [ Est itaque prorsus indubitatum ( Alas! this Poor Man
wanted the Venerable Dr's Instructions, to have Corrected this Bigotrie) in
prima and Apostolica Ecclesia sic fuisse ab Apostolis Dispositum, ut Seniores
Ecclesiae (...) i. e. Gregis Dominicae Curam gerentes, Communi Opera Ministeria
Docendi ac R^gendi obirent, essentque, ut ita dicam, (...) i. e. Nulli Capiti
ac Praesidi subjecti, quales h^die quoque in nonnullis Ecclesiis Verbi Ministri
reperiuntur, inter quos nemo caeteris est superior Officio and Potestate, etc.]
That it is beyond all Debate, that the First and Apostolic Church, was by the
Apostles so Constitute, that the Elders of the Church, did Exercise a Common
Episcopal Care over the Lords Flock, and the same Function of Teaching and
Governing the same, and were therein subject to no Head or President: Like unto
whom, are found several Ministers now in some Churches, who own no Superior in
either Office or Authority, etc. Afterward speaking of the Exalting of a (...)
with the peculiar Name of Bishop, and of Ieroms Account of this Practice, viz.
for Eviting of Schism, which he calls Emphatically [ Tentatio illa] that
Tentation. He adds, [ Profuerit ne Consilium hoc Ecclesiae Christi -- melius
est posterioribus saeculis declaratum, quam cum baec Consuetudo primum
introduceretur, cui debemus omnem illam Principalium and Equestrium Episcoporum
Insolentiam, Opulentiam, and Tyrannidem, imo omnium Ecclesiarum Christi
Corruptionem, quam si Hieronimus cerneret, dubio procul Consilium agnosceret,
non Spiritus Sancti ad tollenda Schismata, sicut praetexebatur, sed ipsius
Satanae ad Vastanda ac Perdenda prisca Pascendi Dominici Gregis Ministeria, quo
fieret, ut haberet Ecclesia, non veros Pastores, Doctores, Presbyteros, and
Episcopos, sed sub Nominum istorum Larvis Otiosos Ventres, ac Magnificos
Princepes, qui non modo non pascant ipsi Populum Domini Doctrina Sana and
Apostolica, sed and Improbissima Violentia vetant, ne id per quenquam alium
fiat. Hoc, sciz. Consilio Satanae factum est, ut habeant Ecclesiae pro
Episcopis Potentes Dominos ac Princepes magna ex part, ex Ordine Nobilium ac
Satrapum Saeculi Delectos, etc.] Whether this Counsel or Method of Eviting
Schism, was profitable for the Church of Christ, was more apparent to the
After-Ages, than when this Custom, was first introduced. For, thereunto is
owing all that Grandeur, Insolency and Tyrranny of those Knight-like and
Princely Bishops, yea, the Corruption of all the Churches of Christ; which, if
Ierom had discerned, he would, no doubt, have acknowledged, that this was not
the Counsel of the Holy Ghost, for the Removal of Schisms, as was pretended,
but the very Project of the Devil, to Wast and Destroy the Primitive Ministry,
appointed for Feeding the Lords Flock, that thus the Church of God, might not
have true Pastors, Doctors, Presbyters and Bishops, but under the Disguise of
such Names, Idle Bellies, and Magnificent Princes, who, not only, Feed not the
People of God themselves, with the Sound and Apostolical Doctrine, but by most
Wicked Violence, hinders the same to be performed by any other: And that by
this Engyne of Satan, its come to pass, that the Churches, instead of true
Bishops, have Powerful Lords and Princes chosen for the most part, out of the
Order of the Nobility and Grandees of this World. Thereafter, he Inveighs
against their Gorgeous Stoles, Girdles, etc. which he says, is to them, instead
of the Spiritual Armor enjoined Ephesians. 6. calling them the (...) or Counterfeit
Bishops, and the Pastors, the true ones. Thus he P. 362.

I must here again present to our Dr, some further Account of the Sentiments of
the Learned Iunius upon this Point, in his Animadversions on Bellarmin ad
Controver. 4. de Council. in Cap. 15. Par. 9. Art. 7. [ Non sunt Pastores Laici,
nec Ecclesiastici quicunque, sed soli Episcopi] That the Bishops only are the
Pastors, and no Inferior Officers. He thus Animadverts and Answers [
Distinguenda Assumptio haec, nam si anguste Episcopos ex Pontificiorum usu
intelligas, falsa est; sin autem latius Communiterque Presbyteros Operam dantes
Administratione Verbi ex Dono and Vocatione Dei, vera est Assumptio: Recte enim
Magister Sententiarum, Lib. 4. Disput. 24. Excellenter inquit, Canones duos
tanquam Sacros Ordines appellari censent, Diaconatus, sciz. Et Presbyteratus;
quia hos solos Primitiva Ecclesia legitur habuisse, and de his solis Preceptum
Apostoli habemus; enim vero si soli Episcopi Pastores essent, profecto neque
Episcopi faciunt officium qui non pascunt gregem, etc.] That the premised
Assertion, that the Bishops only are Pastors, is rightly understood, if applied
to Presbyters, who Labors in the Administration of the Word, who are thereunto
Called of God, and have Correspondent Gifts. That the Master of Sentences, does
rightly assert, that the Canons do only own Two Orders as Sacred, Viz. The
Diaconate and Presbyterate: Because we read, that the Primitive Church had
these only, and of these alone, we have the Command of the Apostle. Moreover,
if Bishops only be Pastors, these Bishops do not their Duty, who Feed not the
Flock. He adds after, [ nam illa Episcoporum distinctio a Pastoribus and
Presbyterorum ordine, juris Divini non est, sed humani instituti -- Nos de Iure
solum communi Divinoque agimus: Presbyteris ergo qui dabant operam
administrationi verbi jus commune fuit, ut Conciliis interessent, etc.] That
the distinction of Bishops from Pastors, has no Divine Warand, but is of Human
Institution only; That Presbyters who Labor in Dispensing the Word, had an
Interest to Sit in Councils. Where its evident, that he calls the Dr's Notion
of the Bishop, as its distinct from the Pastor, and Superior to him, Popish and
an Human Invention, and Asserts the Identity of Pastor an^ Bishop by Divine
Right, they being Members of Councils: And that this was the Sentence of the
prime Schoolmen, as Lombard, etc. (10. ibid.) [ Spiritus Sanctus posuit
Episcopos regere Ecclesiam Dei] That the Holy Ghost set up Bishops to Rule the
Church of God. Thus Iunius animadverts [ aequivoce: nam Episcopos dicit
Apostolus communi significato, i. e. inspectores and Curatores Ecclesiae esse
Presbyteros illius. Agit autem cum Presbyteris unius Ecclesiae, puta Ephesinae,
quos accersi ad se curaverat, quod si unus tantum esse debet (ut volunt
Pontificii) in una Ecclesia Episcopus, and ejus est solius pascere, cur Paulus
per omnia plurali numero usus est in hoc suo protreptico ad Presbyteros Ephesi]
Adding [ falsa ex aequivocatione sententia] that the premised Assertion, anent
the Establishing Bishops in the Church by the Holy Ghost, when applied to the
Prelat Bishop, is not found, since the Apostle, according to the common use of
the Word, calls the Pastors or Presbyters of the Church, her Inspectors or
Bishops: Because, in that place, viz. Act. 20. the Apostles Speech is directed
to that one Church of Ephesus, for whose Pastors he had sent; but if (as the
Papists would have it) there ought to be but one Bishop in one Church, and it
is proper to him alone to Feed, how comes it, that Paul, all along, makes use
of the Plural Number, in this his Exhortatory Speech, or Sermon to the
Presbyters of Ephesus? After, in Art. 9. [ Passim asserunt Concilia Episcoporum
esse] That Councils were made up of Bishops. Thus Iunius animadverts in his
Third Answer [ quod Episcopi plurimum adessent, non ideo factum est quod
Episcopi essent, sed quod eruditione and Doctrina praestarent plerumque aliis
de Presbyterio, and qui propterea suffragiis Presbyterii praefecti essent toto
Presbyterorum collegio in Ecclesia singuli: Nam qui erant ejusmodi, eos ad
Consilia generalia communibus Ecclesiae suffragiis mitti, erat aequius, quam
rudiores, etc.] That the Bishops were for most part present at Councils; this
was not upon the account of their being Bishops or as in that Character, but
because they for most part, were beyond others of the Presbytrie in Gifts and
Learning, and that for this Reason every such Bishop, was by the suffrages of
the Presbytrie, made President of their Collegiat Meeting; for, such as were in
this capacity, it was more equitable they should be sent to General Councils,
by the Churches common suffrages, than those, that were less learned, etc. He
adds [ tanquam perpetui juris statuae Episcoporum pontificiorum sibi
Assumpserunt, sicut and omnem autoritatem Ecclesiae and Presbyterii] That the
Popish Bishops, as if founded upon a standing Right and Tittle, have Usurpt and
assumed to themselves, the whole Authority of the Church, and the Presbytrie.
In Art. 10. he Corrects Bellarmin's absurd Gloss, as if Theodosius and
Valentinianus had intended only the Bishops to be Received in the Council --
And 15. ibid. he shows, that the Chorepiscopi and Presbyteri Subscribed and
Voted in the Council of Nice: And in Art. 11. [inveni^ntur soli Episcopi
Subscripsisse) That Bishops only did Subscribe: He Answers, that this is false
( De Niceno modo Diximus Not. 15. Constantinopolitano p^^no Subscripserunt
aliquot Presbyteri, Alpius Presb. pro Philomuso Alexandrino Cappadociae, Paulus
Presb. Promontano Claudiopolitano Isauriae, etc.) That in the First Council of
Constantinople, Presbyters Subscribed. Thereafter, he shows, why the Bishops
were Chosen to General Councils -- (in singulis Presbyteriis cujuscunque
Provinciae, Communibus suffragiis Episcopi eligerentur ii, qui Pietate,
Doctrina, Iudicio -- praestare viderentur. Adfuerunt autem and Presbyteri
juarum Ecclesiarum singuli Communi Synodorum particularium calculo ad actionem
illam deputati, tum Ecclesiae suae, tum Provinciae totius nomine*) That in
every Presbytrie of the respective Provinces, these Bishops were Chosen by
common suffrage, who were judged more Eminent in Piety and Learning, but
Presbyters were also present, being deputed to that Work, both by the Vote of
their own Churches, and the common suffrage of Particular Synods, and thus, in
the Name, both of their own Church, and of the whole Province. He had said
before, that of the whole Province few were laid aside from Councils. Upon 19.
ibid. Where it is alleged, that the Interest of any other than Bishops in
Councils is [ contra morem omnis Antiquitatis] Against the Custom of all
Antiquity: In Opposition to this, Iunius produces the Pattern of that Council,
Act. 15. where it is said, Paul and those with him, were received by the
Apostles and Elders; that the Apostles and Elders met in Council -- Citing v.
22. It seemed good to the Apostles and Elders, to send Chosen Men -- and v. 23.
where the Apostles and Elders wrote to the Churches. Adding [ atque ^ita diu in
Ecclesia fuisse observatum, demonstrat Exemplum Romanae Synodi, quae contra
Novatum fuit habita a 60 Episcopis, Presbyterisque and Diaconis pluribus, qui
Sententiam definiverunt contra Novatum, Apostolici illius Concilii Exemplo, ut
refert Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. Lib. 6. Cap. 43. Et Ruffin. Cap. 33. Item
Alexandrinae Synodi contra Arrium apud Gelasium Cyzicenum] That it was thus of
a long time observed in the Church, is demonstrat by the example of the Roman
Synod, which was held against Novatus by 60 Bishops, and many Presbyters and
Deacons, who gave Sentence against Novatus, after the Example of that
Apostolical Synod, by the Testimony of Eusebius and Ruffinus in their
Histories: As also, by the Example of the Synod of Alexandria against Arius,
according to Gelasius, etc. By this time, its evident, what the Judgment of
this Great Divine was, as to the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter, both the
Name and Office, and their Interest and Authority in Church Government, yea,
and in Councils, both de Facto and de Iure.

Franc. Gomarus Explic. Epist. ad Gal. Cap. 2. P. ( mihi) 487. having asserted
the extraordinary Ecclesiastic Function of Timothy and Titus, and upon the
common Ground of their various Travels with the Apostle Paul, proved, their
Evangelistick Office to be inconsistent with the Function of a Bishop, who is
tied to a certain Post: He adds, deinde illa Episcopi significatio, quae post
Apostolorum tempora introducta, in Sacris literis omnino insolens est, in
quibus idem quod Presbyterum notat, ut Paulus Tit. 1.6. ostendit: quos enim, v.
5. Presbyteros Ecclesiae, eosdem, v. 7. Episcopos vocat, etc. That the
signification or designation of Bishop, introduced after the Apostles times, is
unknown to the Scriptures, wherein, it signifies the same thing with the
Presbyter, and Pastor, as the Apostle, Tit. 1.6. shows; for, whom, in the 5, v.
he Calls the Presbyters of the Church, the same he calls the Bishops in the 7.
v. as also the Presbyters of the Church of Ephesus, so termed by Luke, Act.
20.17. Paul calls, the Bishops. v. 28. and Philip. 1.1. he writes to the Saints
with the Bishops and Deacons; Where, by Bishops, he understands the Presbyters,
not the Prelates set over Presbyters, otherwise, which were absurd, in one and
the same Church, of Ephesus, and Philippi, there had been a plurality of such
ordinary Bishops, of which every one had been set over many Pastors. Finally,
where Paul recites the several kinds of the Gospel Ministers, he acknowledges
no such Bishops, distinct from Presbyters, and superior unto them, as Ephesians.
4.11. To which purpose Ierom's Judgment is memorable, which is extant, Comment.
in Ep. to Tit. 1.1. where comparing the 5. and 7. v. he infers, that the Bishop
and Presbyter is one and the same; which Point he does likewise (in the same
manner as we have done) demonstrat from Philip 1.1. and Act. 20.28.29. and
other Passages adjoined thereunto; concluding all with this weighty assertion,
that with the Ancients, the Bishops and Presbyters were one and the same,
until by Degrees, the care and inspection was put upon one -- and that the
Bishops were set over Presbyters, rather by Custom than by Truth of Divine
appointment; which Custom (says the Author] did at last bring upon the Church,
the mischievous dominion of Bishops, contrary to the Apostles Command, 1 Pet.
5. Thereafter he reasons the Ruling Elders Office from these Scriptures, 1 Cor.
12.28. 1 Timothy 5.17. Romans 12.8. 1 These. 5.12.

P. 526. explic. Epist. ad Philip. Cap. 1. Consect. 1. Cum Paulus, and hic, and
alibi, ut Act. 20. Uni Ecclesiae plures Episcopos tribuat; nec ullum inter
Episeopos ordinarios, and Pastores, statuat discrimen: sequitur, adversus
pontificios, Episcopum non significare Pastorem and praefectum Pastorum, sed
Ecclesiae Pastorem, ut docet Hieron. in Ep. ad Evag. and Comment. ad Titum
probat. v. 1. Since Paul both here, and elsewhere, as Act. 20. ascribes unto
one Church a Plurality of Bishops, neither places any difference betwixt the
ordinary Bishops, and the Pastors, it follows against the Papists (and thus
against this Dr. in Gomarus Sense,) that the Word Bishop, does not signify
both the Pastor and Prelatical Inspector over Pastors, or a Pastor of Pastors,
but a Pastor of the Church, as Ierom learnedly proves in Epist ad Evag.

P. 704. Explicat. in 1 Pet. 5. Consect. 8. Quandoquidem Presbyterorum officium
hic statuitur (...), quemadmodum Paulus Presbyteros Ephesinos dictos, Act.
20.17. vocat deinde Episcopos v. 28. and Philip. 1.1. Ecclesiae unius Urbis
Philippensis, tribuit Paulus Episcopos, and Diaconos: Neque ullibi in Sacris
Literis Episcopus Presbyteris praefertur: Inde sequitur, non ex Divina
Institutione, sed Humana Traditione; cui deinde accessit superbia, Episcopos a
Presbyteris fuisse distinctos, iisque Potestate and Authoritate praelatis. That
is, since the Office of Presbyters is here held out, to be an Episcopal
Inspection, as Paul does accordingly call the Pastors and Presbyters of Ephesus
Bishops, Act. 20.28. who are likewise termed Presbyters, v. 17. and Philip.
1.1. mentions the Bishops and Deacons of that one City Philippi, neither is
there a Bishop found set over Presbyters in any place of Holy Writ: It hence
follows, that the distinguishing of Bishops from Presbyters, and setting them
over Presbyters, in a Potestative and Authoritative Prelacy, had its Rise from
no Divine Institution, but from Humane Tradition, which was the Foundation of
Pride.

Well, shall I weary our Profound Dr, with another of the same Stamp with the
Scots Presbyterians? Antonius Sadael Operum Theol. Tom. 1. De Legitima
Vocatione Pastorem Ecclesiae. In the beginning of that Dispute, he professes to
deal with such as professed to own the Reformed Doctrine, but studied to evert
the chief part of Discipline -- [rejectis iis quibus ex officio incumbit ipsius
Disciplinae Administratio] rejecting such, who by their Office, have the
Administration of Government committed to them. P. (mihi) 65, 66, 67. He thus
proceeds, having Answered an Argument of one of the Sorbon Doctors, he proposes
his Second, which is this -- [ objicit primos nostros Doctores fuisse quidem
Presbyteros, sed non Episcopos, itaque non potuisse alios Ecclesiae Doctores
constituere, cum soli Episcopi Ius Ordinandi habeant] That our first Doctors
were Presbyters, and not Bishops, and thus could not Ordain other Ministers of
the Church, since only Bishops have a Right to Ordain. [ Quae Sententia, says
Sadael, quam falsa sit, jam videndum est] The Falsehood of which Opinion, he
undertakes to discover: And thus he confutes it, [ Patet ex Verbo Dei Episcopum
and Presbyterum (qui quidem Ecclesiam docent) reipsa atque munere eundem esse:
Atque ita variis nominibus rem eandem fuisse significatam; sic enim Paulus ad
Titum. Cap. 1.5. hujus rei causa, inquit, reliqui te in Creta ut constituas
oppidatim Presbyteros, sicut tibi mandavi, si quis est inculpatus -- opportet
enim Episcopum inculpatum esse] It is evident from the Word of God, that the
Bishop and Presbyter (such as Teach the Church of God) are upon the Matter, and
in Office one and the same; and that by these Names one and the same thing is
signified: For, thus the Apostle to Titus Cap. 1. v. 5. For this cause left I
thee in Crete, That thou should Ordain Elders in every City -- If any be
blameless -- For, a Bishop must be blameless, etc. He adds [ idem Apostolus ad
Presbyteros Ephesinos, Act. 20. attendite vos ipsos and totum gregem in quo
Spiritus Sanctus constituit Episcopos ad pascendam Ecclesiam Dei. Et in Epist.
ad Philip. Cap. 1, v. 1. Salutat Sanctos qui erant Philippis una cum Episcopis
and Diaconis. Ex quibus omnibus satis patere arbitror, Paulum, eundem fuisse
Episcopum qui Presbyter esset ad docendam Ecclesiam institutus. Deinde cum
Apostolus agit de muneribus Ecclesiasticis in Epist. ad Ephesians. Pastores quidem
recenset and Doctores, nullum autem superiorem gradum Episcoporum Assignat: Imo
ne meminit quidem illius nominis, adeo ut necessessit eos nomine Pastorum
comprehendi: Quod quidem Presbyteris convenire patet ex Cap. 20. Actorum and ex
1 Pet. 5. Ne alii loci mihi commemorandi sint] That the same Apostle Paul, Act.
20. Thus Enjoins the Presbyters of Ephesus; Take heed to your selves, and to
all the Flock, over which, the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops, to Feed the
Church of GOD. And Philip. 1.1. he Salutes the Saints which were at Philippi,
together with the Bishops and Deacons. From all which it is evident, that with
the Apostle Paul, the Bishop is the same with the Presbyter, who is appointed
to Teach the Church. Moreover, when the Apostle, is Treating of Ecclesiastic
Offices, in the Epist. to Ephesians. he reckons up Pastors and Doctors, but Assigns
no Superior Degree of Bishops; nay, he does not so much as mention such a Name;
so that of necessity, he must needs Comprehend them under the Name of Pastors:
And that the Name and thing is Competent to Presbyters, appears from Act. 20.
and 1 Pet. 5. that I need not mention other places.

But now let us hear what the Sorbon (and our Reverend Dr. his Associat in the
Cause) do Reply to what is premised. Thus our Author proceeds, [ Respondet
Sorbonicus nominum quidem esse, sed non munerum, confusionem. Verum enimvero
quando Presbyteri vocantur Episcopi, ibi agitur non de nominibus ac titulis,
sed de ipsa muneris functione; cum enim Paulus hortatur Presbyteros Epheseos ad
suum munus legittime obeundum, hanc addit rationem, quod illos Spiritus Sanctus
constituit Episcopos: Non igitur ait eos vocari tantum, sed esse constituos
Episcopos ex quo efficitur tot revera tunc fuisse Episcopos Ephesi quot erant
Presbyteri and Pastores Ecclesiae; adeo ut plane jaceat illa responsio de sola
nominum confusione] i. e. The Sorbon does Reply, that there is indeed in the
premised places, a confusion of Names, but not of the thing it self, or the
Office. But when Presbyters are called Bishops, the Apostle is in such places,
treating not of the Names or Titles only, but of the Office and Function it
self. For, when the Apostle exhorts the Presbyters of Ephesus, to the right
Exercise o^ their Office, he adds this Reason, that the Holy Ghost had
constitute them Bishops, and therefore, he says not, that they were only called
so, but that they were in very deed Constitut such Bishops, From whence it
evidently follows, that there were then at Ephesus, as many Bishops, as there
were Presbyters and Pastors of the Church; So, that this answer, touching the
Confusion of Names only in the premised places, is quite overthrown. Well, thus
he thinks, he has laid all along, and aboard the Topgallant of the Sorbon; and
consequently our Dr's great Answer. The Author proceeds to a New Objection [
sed objicit, quod ait Paulus ad Timotheum. 1 Timothy 5.22. Manus inquit, ne cui
cito imponito, additque mandatum illud Pauli ad Titum de constituendis in Creta
Presbyteris: Utrumque enim Episcopum fuisse atque eo ratione jus ordinandi
habuisse contendit] That Paul says to Timothy, 1. Tim. 5.22. Lay Hands
suddenly on no Man. And that he adds that Command of Paul to Titus, anent the
Ordaining Elders in Crete, and thereupon contends, that both the one and the
other were Bishops, and upon this account had the Right of Ordination. Here, no
doubt, the Sorbon presented much of the Strength of our Dr's Reasoning; so that
we see how much the Popish Agents, are in Love with our Prelatical Arguments,
and that there is no new thing under the Sun. But let us hear our Authors
Answer, [ respondeo, nomine (...) and impositionis manuum tota significatur
electio] That the whole Election of Pastors is signified by this Phrase of the
Imposition of Hands. And after some what, in Confirmation of this, he adds -- (
electionum vero curam ^ni Timotheo, incubuisse ne ipse Doctor Sorbonicus
dixisset, qui ex frequenti veterum Lectione Dedicerat olim antistites Ecclesiae
non aliter fuisse electos quam judicio totius Cleri, etc.) That the Sorbon Dr.
himself, will not be Bold to say, that the whole care of Elections, was
incumbent upon, and Committed to Timothy alone, who from the frequent reading
of the Ancients, had Learned, that Church Rulers, were not of old chosen
otherwise than by the Judgment of the whole Clergy, etc. He adds ( merito
dicere possumus in unius Timothei persona praefectos omnes Ecclesiasticos esse
sui officii common^ factos) That all Church Rulers, are in the person of
Timothy admonished of their duty. And hence, he further Argues, that this
Reasoning and Conclusion of the Sorbon, is most absurd (Paulus Timotheo
praecepit ne cito manus imponat: Nemo igitur praeter Timotheum illic habuit jus
ordinationis) Paul enjoins Timothy, not to lay on hands suddenly; therefore
none but Timothy, had the Right of Ordination: Which he confutes from this (
jubetur Timotheus, fabulas rejicere, attendere Lectioni exhortationi,
Doctrinae, etc. Number igitur illa omnia sibi uni Timotheus vendicavit -- nonne
pertinebant ad Presbyteros, quos Paulus ipse testatur laborasse in Sermon and
Doctrina] That Timothy is enjoined to reject Fables, give Attendance to
Reading, Exhortation and Doctrine, etc. Did therefore Timothy arrogat all these
things to himself alone? Did they not belong to Presbyters, who by Paul's
Testimony Labored in the Word and Doctrine? He adds, that Timothy's Episcopacy
at Ephesus [ Nullo Scripturae Testimonio confirmari potest] can be made good by
no Testimony of Scripture, which he proves from these Words [ Rogavi te ut
maneres Ephesi cum profisiscerem in Macedoniam, 1 Timothy 1.3.] I besought thee to
abide still at Ephesus when I went into Macedonia, 1 Timothy 1.3. Which shows,
says our Author, he was left there, for some time, for this end -- [
Quemadmodum ipsa Historiae series evincit] As the very Tract of the History
makes evident. And this he proves from Timothy's attending Paul, when to go to
Asia; As also from this Ground, that Paul was ordinarily attended by Timothy and
Titus, in this Exercise of his Apostolic Function. Adding further, that if we
suppose him Bishop of the Churches, to which he was sent, we will make him
Bishop of the Corinthians, Philippians, Thessalonians, etc. He after puts the
Querie to the Episcopalians: Who (upon their Hypothesis) Ordained at Ephesus,
when Timothy was gone thence? And whether the (...) [ apud Ephesios inter
mortua jacebat] the Ordaining Power at Ephesus, lay dead in his Absence? He
shows, that his Transient Unfixed Ministry, could not Consist with a Fixed
Episcopal Station; And that this Razeth [ C^mmentum illud de Timothei
Episcopatu] that Fable concerning Timothy's Episcopacy. He after, improves the
Argument from Paul's Farewell Sermon to the Elders and Church of Ephesus, in
Timothy's Presence, and Committing the Episcopal Charge over that Church to
them, and not to him, [ Ecquando potius elucere debuit, says he, Splendour
Episcopatus Ephesinae, quam cum Paulus tam pie de Ecclesiae salute disserebat,
and tam fancte Praefectos omnes, cohortabatur ad intercludendum Lupis viam,
alioquin totum Gregem dissipaturis] When was there a fitter Season, for
Illustrating the Splendour and Authority of the Episcopacy a Ephesus, than when
Paul was so Piously Discoursing of that Churches Safety, and so Holily
Exhorting all the Governors thereof, to Stop the Way against the Wolves, who
were otherwise ready to Scatter that Flock. He adds [ Huie Disputationi (he
means anent Timothy's Episcopacy) Paulus ipse modum imponit cum expressis
verbis Timotheum vocat Evangelistam, 2 Timothy 4. ( qui gradus tantum ad aliquod
tempus in Ecclesia locum habuit) alios autem fuisse Evangelistas ab ordinariis
Ecclesiae Pastoribus aper^e doc^t Ap. in Epist. ad Ephesians. Cap. 4.] That the
Apostle Paul himself, put an end to this Dispute, in Calling Timothy, expressly,
an Evangelist (which Degree and Office, was to continue for a time only in the
Church) The Apostle also, showing evidently ( Ephesians. 4.) that Evangelists were
distinct from the ordinary Pastors of the Church. He adds thereafter, that the
Sorbon Dr. commits a Twofold Error, in Arguing from Timothy's Imposing Hands,
to an Episcopal Prerogative in this Matter. First, In that this is
Sophistically made Exclusive of Presbyters Interest -- which can no more be
said, than this can be inferred from the Command of Exhorting, Reading,
delivered to him, which he Confirms by the Scripture Instances of a Plurality
of Church Officers Imposing Hands; As upon the Deacons, by all the Apostles;
upon Paul and Barnabas, by the Prophets and Teachers at Antioch; upon Timothy
by the Presbytrie. Secondly, In that, tho it were granted, that he Imposed
Hands solely, he did this, as an Evangelist, in Paul's Absence, not as a
Bishop. But, says he, ( Si absque contentionis studiorem ipsam intueamur,
facile videbimus in unius Timothei persona omnes Ecclesiae Praefectos sui
officii admoneri) That to such, as are not Contentious, but considers the thing
it self, all Church Rulers, in the Person of Timothy, are Admonished of their
Duty. He after Cites several of the Ancients, to Confirm this his Sense and
Exposition; such as Irenaeus, Lib. 4. Cap. 43. where he shows, that
Presbyters have the ( Successio Episcopatus) Succession of Episcopacy. So,
ibid. Cap. 44. ( Tales Presbyteros nutrit Ecclesia, de quibus and Propheta ait,
dabo Principes tuos in pace, and Episcopos tuos in justitia) That the Church
has such Presbyters, of whom the Prophet said, I will give you Rulers and
Bishops in Peace and Righteousness. ( Ecce (says our Author) eosdem vocat
Episcopos, quos antea Presbyteros appellavit, and Presbyteris tribuit
Episcopatum) That he calls the same Persons Bishops, whom before he Named
Presbyters, and Ascribes to Presbyters an Episcopacy. Afterward, he Cites
Ambrose on Ephesians. 4. showing, that the P^esbyters were called Bishops, and in
Egypt Ordained, if the Bishop were not present. So, Ierom on 1 Timothy 3. showing,
that the same Persons were called Bishops and Presbyters, that the one, is the
Name of Dignity, the other of Age. And Epist. ad Oceanum, where he asserts,
that ( Apostolus perspicue docet eosdem esse Presbyteros quos Episcopos) So
Epist. ad Evagrium. Likewise, his Famous Testimony upon Tit. 1. ( Presbyter
idem est qui Episcopus -- and antequam Diaboli Instinctu, etc.) So also,
Augustine. Ep. 19. [ Quanuqam secundum Honorum Vocabula quae Ecclesiae usus
obtinuit Episcopatus Presbyterio major sit, etc.] Where Augustine asserts, that
his Episcopal Distinction from Ierom, and of a Bishop from a Presbyter, was
only in some Titles of Respect, which the Churches use had obtained. Likewise
that Passage [ in Alexandria and per totum Egyptum, si desit Episcopus,
consecrat Presbyter] That in Alexandria, and through all Egypt, Presbyters did
Ordain in Absence of the Bishop. These, he tells his Popish Adversary, he Cites
[ quia pluris faciunt Autoritatem Veterum, quam ipsos plane Scripturae Locos]
Because they esteem more the Authority of the Ancients, than plain Places of
Scripture. I cannot but add what he has further* If, says he, we all allow to
Presbyters, the Authority of Preaching the Gospel, the Administration of
Baptism, the Celebration of the Lords Supper, and if, by their Judgment,
Ecclesiastical Elections are to be made [ Ecquid erit Causae, quam ob rem non
possunt Electum Sanctis Praecibus, and Manuum Impositione Deo Consecrare] Upon
what imaginable Ground can we suppose, they cannot Consecrat and set apart to
God the Person thus Elected, by Prayer and Imposition of Hands, when the other
parts of this Work are brought [ tanquam ad Fastigium] to the Accomplishment or
Copestone, as it were? Wherefore are they [ ut Indigni and Inutiles] as Useless
and Unworthy Forbidden [ Manum Operi Imponere] to set the last Hand to this
Work, in its Accomplishment? He adds, that we often hear Paul Magnify and Extol
the Preaching of the Gospel, which is the Pastor or Presbyters Function,
Magnifying his own Authority therein, [ Cur non ille potius summum hoc Ius
Ordinationis in medium proponit] Wherefore presents he not rather his chief
Interest in Ordination? He afterward Cites Ieroms Notable Saying [ Ad quorum
Preces, Corpus and Sanguis Christi conficitur, atque interim Ius Ordinandi
ipsis Presbyteris denegant] That Presbyters are absurdly denied the Right of
Ordination, by whose Prayers notwithstanding, the Sacramental Elements are
Consecrat, to Represent the Body and Blood of Christ. The Author adds [ Obsecro
utrum majus est, Manus Imponere, an Christi Corpus and Sanguinem Precibus
conficere? Itaque qui Presbyteros a (...) excludunt, ipsi profecto Vim ac
Naturam ipsius (...), and quod sit ipsum Presbyterii Munus, penitus ignorant]
Whether is greater, I pray, to Impose Hands in Ordination, or in Prayer to
Consecrate the Body and Blood of Christ? Therefore, such as exclude Presbyters
from this Imposition of Hands, do show themselves to be grossly ignorant, both
of the Nature of Ordination, and the Pastoral Office. And thus, we dismiss
Sadael, whom we have found sufficiently to Combat and Worst our Dr.

But to proceed, Dr. Reynolds, in the forementioned Epistle, after Citing
several Fathers, for this Identity of Bishop and Presbyter, such as Ierom,
Theodoret, Primasius, Sedulius, Theophylact, Occumenius 1 Timothy 3. Yea, Gregory,
Pellic. Lib. 2. Tit. 19, 39. and Great. Cap. Legimus Did. 39. and Cap. olim
Did. 95. He adds, that these, who have Labored in Reforming the Church, these
Five Hundred Years, have Taught, that all Pastors, be they Entitled Bishops or
Priests, have equal Authority and Power by Gods Word. Citing first, the
Waldenses in Aeneas Silvius Hist. of Bohem. Cap. 35. Next, Marsilius Patavinus
Defens. Pacis Part. 2. Cap. 15. Wickliff. etc.

If the Testimony of Bishops will please the Dr, we will find Bishop Jewel,
fully Combats him in this Point: Defens. Apol. cont. Hard. Edit. An. 1570. P.
243. What means Mr. Harding, says he, to make it an Heresy to say, that by
the Scriptures of God, a Bishop and Priest, are all one? Knows he, how far, and
to whom, he reaches the Name of an Heretic? Then he Cites Chrystos. on 1 Timothy
Hom. 11. showing, that [ inter Episcopum and Presbyterum interest ferme nihil]
Betwixt a Bishop and Presbyter, there is almost no Difference. Ierom ad
Evagrium, asserting that [ Apostolus perspi^ue docet eosdem esse Presbyteros
quos Episcopos] The Apostle clearly Teaches, the Bishop and Presbyter, to be
one and the same, calling the contrary Opinion, a Vecordia or Folly. Also
August. Quest. Vet. and N. Test. Quest. 101. [ Quid est Episcopus nisi primus
Presbyter] That the Bishop is only the first Presbyter. Amb. de Dignit. Sacerd.
[ Episcopi and Presbyteri una est Ordinatio] Asserting, that the Ordination,
and consequently the Function of the Bishop and Presbyter, is one and the same.
All these and many more Holy Fathers, says Bishop Jewel, together with St.
Paul the Apostle, for thus saying, by Mr. Hardings Advice, must be holden for
Heretics. I will add, and all these; and many more, together with the Apostle
Paul, by this Dr's Advice, must be holden for Novelists, and Scots
Schismatics. But there are other Bishops, will yet enter the Lists with our
Dr: Bishop Pilkinton, on Revelation, and in the Treatise of Burning of Paul's
Church. Bishop Bilson Perpet. Gover. Cap. 2. Yea, more of the Famous English
Drs. Fulk against the Rhemists on Tit. 1.5. Dr. Humphray in Campian. and
Duraeum Iesuitas Part. 2. Ration. 3. Whittaker above Cited. So also, ad
Rations Campiani Ration. 6. Confutat. Duraei. Lib. 6. Chemnitius and
Gentiletus, the great Examinators of the Council of Trent, the one a Divine,
the other a Lawyer, does both Condemn, as a Trent Error, our Dr's Assertion,
anent the Distinction of Bishop and Presbyter; the one by Scriptures and
Fathers, the other, by the Canon Law. We have heard, that Dr. Reynolds, for
this Parity of Bishop and Presbyter, tells us, Its needless to speak of the
particular Persons, since, its the common Judgment of the Churches of Helvetia,
Savoy, France, Scotland, Germany, Hungary, Poland, the Low Countries, and our
own; Witness the Harmony of Confessions, Sect. 11.

Now, from all that is said, whether the Body of Protestant Divines and
Churches, be not for the Official, as well as Nominal Identity of Bishop and
Presbyter: Whether this be not likewise the Judgment of the most Ancient and
Purer Church: Whether our Argument be only a Confusione Nominum, and
Sophistical and Childish; Is left to the Judgment of Judicious and Impartial
Readers, who shall Weigh what is said, in the Balances of Scripture and Sound
Reason.

Before I proceed, I cannot but take notice of this Dr's petulant impertinency
in proposing our Argument. He says, this is our great Argument, That there is
no distinction betwixt a Bishop and Presbyter in Scripture -- And therefore, we
conclude that our Argument, a Confusione nominum, is demonstrative and solid.
As if, when we maintain, that in Scripture, there is no distinction betwixt
these Offices, we meant a Nominal only, and not a real diversity. Had he ever
perused the Authors he Cites, or conferred with any Presbyterian, who
understands the Controversy, he would have found, that from the Scriptures
Cited, and many Paralels, its an Official oneness, not a Nominal only, we plead
for, and that our Arguments therefrom, has such Nerves, as he durst not meddle
with.

The Dr. tells us (P. 23.) That whether the Bishop be of an Higher Order than
the Priest, falls not under his enquiry, nor is it very Material -- considered
with Respect to the common Priesthood, and Subordinat Officers, they might be
of the same Order, tho at other times, when Authority and Jurisdiction is
Named, the Bishop (with regard to his Dignity and Power) is alwise reckoned
above a Presbyter. Here, I must say, is a strange Confusion, and that not
Nominum but Rerum. 1. The Dr. is so much for the Official Scriptural
Superiority of the Bishop to the Presbyter, that he affirms the Contrar
Assertion to be a New opinion, got into the Heads of his Countrymen, and some
others, but never heard of this 1400 years; For curing of which, he has sent
down this Learned Pamphlet; yet he will not enquire, whether a Bishop be of a
higher Order, or not, to a Presbyter, i. e. He will not enquire whether his
Countrymen or he, have the Right in this Debate. If the Bishop be not of an
Higher Order, his Country Presbyterians are Right, their Arguments, which ly
level to this scope, are good and Conclusive, and do batter his Principle of a
Superior Order of Ministers above the Pastor, and in especial under this
Designation and Character of Bishop: The Antithesis whereof ( viz. that there
is an Officer called a Bishop, of a Superior Order eo no nine) the Dr. Contends
for tanquam pro aris and focis; yet he says, the enquiry into this Point (which
to all men of Sense, is the Cardo Questionis) is not in it self Material. Let
any ponder, whether this stout pretended Signifer, does not here let fall his
Standart, and even flees at the First alarm. 2. He tells us, when Authority and
Jurisdiction is named, the Bishop with regard to his Dignity, is alwise
reckoned above a Presbyter. Now, I do appeal to all Men of Common sense,
whether the Dr dos not here Assert. (1.) A Divine Authority and Jurisdiction of
a Bishop above a Presbyter. (2) By clear Consequence, that he is of an higher
Order than the Presbyter; or else, how can he be in Jurisdiction and Authority
above him? (3.) That the Bishop, under that Character, and eo nomine, is thus
Represented in the Scripture Accounts of him. Now, all this being his
Assertion, in opposition to his Country-mens supposed Errors, how can he
decline the enquiry, whether the Bishop be of an higher Order? Let any Judge,
if he says not this, upon the Matter, the thing is Clear in it self, in the
Scripture Accounts; and this I maintain in opposition to the Scots
Presbyterians, whom I do hereby Charge with a new Opinion on this Ground, but
am not Concerned to Examine their Arguments, or make good my own. 3. He tells us
they are sometime considered, as of the same order, with respect to the common
Priesthood. I Answer we have proved that Presbyters or Pastors, have both name
and thing of all ordinary Ministerial Authority appropriat to them, and that
with Relation thereto, the Bishop and the Presbyter, are in Scripture made one
and the same. (2.) When he says, they are made of the same Order, with respect
to the Priesthood, common to either: He speaks Confusedly and Ignorantly; For
will he say, that the attributing to Two Church Officers, who are different,
the same Geneal or (to speak to the Dr's Scope) the same Generical Priesthood,
or Ministry, will infer, that they are of the same order therein, or
specifical Office? If so, then Apostles, who are called Presbyters or Elders,
he must say, are of the same Order with them; yea with Deacons also, since
sometimes their Office and Ministry is represented by such a term, as
Represents a Deaconate or common service. Further, I must here warn the Doctor.
to take up his Shield, and beware of the Rebound of his own Blow: Was our Lord
of the same Order, with the Prophets or Servants of God, because in the
capacity of Mediator, and with Respect to a general Ministry or Service of the
Father, he gets the Designation, name and thing of Prophet, Messenger, and
Servant of God? Will the Dr. thus Blasphemously degrade him into the same Order
with mere Creatures, who are Prophets and Servants? In a word, let us hold the
Dr to his affirmative, and challenge his proof of this Point, viz. That in
Scripture, there is an ordinary standing Church Officer, exhibit under the
Character and designation of a Bishop, who is alwise Reckoned above a Presbyter
or Pastor, when Authority and Jurisdiction is Named. And according to the
scope, measures, and extent of this Assertion, let his ensuing Discourse,
Answers, and proofs be examined, wherein, I am sure, he has fair dealing,
according to all acknowledged Laws of Disputation.

Well, proceed we then to his Proofs of this Assertion, and the ground of his
ensuing Answer to this Argument, taken from the Identity of Bishop and
Presbyter. He tells us, that the inspired Writers, as the Jews Dichotomotized,
or made a bipartit Division ( Reader, be not so ignorant, as to start at this
term as a Goblin, the Dr. as an English Orator, may cast his Greek into an
English Mould: And you must know, he is against new stan^^t Opinions not
Phrases) Well, what did they Dichotomtoize? The Clergy, says the Dr. into Two
Orders, (here he has soundly exponed his term) like that of Priests and Levits,
tho as among the Jews -- So, among Christians, this admitted of a Sub-division
and subordination of Church Officers among themselves, as were the Priests of
the Old Testament -- This, he says, was suitable to the Language of the
Helenistical ( or Grecian) Tribes (high Oratory!) of the Apostolic Age -- the
Name of Priest and High Priest being Confounded, Levit. 1.7. The Sons of Aaron
the Priest shall put Fire, etc. v. 8. the Priests, Aarons Sons shall lay the
parts, etc. Now, says the Dr. if Priests and Highpriests got the same Name,
without any distinction of Order, notwithstanding the Highpriests
extraordinary privileges, the Name of High Priest likewise being never affixt
to Aaron or Eleazar, and the term but Twice or Thrice mentioned in the Books of
Moses while yet the Homonymie of Names pleaded not against the Subordination of
Priests; Could it be thought strange, that Apostles or Apostolical Men in
mentioning Presbyters of the New Testament, might not make use of the current
Phraseology of their Countrymen, in speaking of Priests and Levites, Dividing
them into two Orders, as if there were no more? -- Tho the meanest Jew knew the
high Priest was very Honorable, and by all marks of eminency and Authority,
Disstinguished from ordinary Priests. Thus he Page 23.24.25.

I Answer, Quod haec ad rhombum? What says this to the Point? Or how lies this
Discourse level to his scope, either to prove the Bishops Jurisdictional
Authority above a Presbyter or Pastor, as Bishop in the Scripture Sense, or to
prove, that we Argue sophistically, when alleging that the Scripture makes the
Bishop and Presbyter one in Name and thing, and that therefore, the
discriminating of both, by Episcopalians, is antiscriptural. How, I say, this
lies level to the Dr's Conclusion, or can in solid Reason reach the same, I
must Confess, passes my Comprehension. For, 1. Tho all the Dr. says be granted,
it is palpably evident, that this pleading, if it prove any thing, levels
merely against such as would draw the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter only
from this, that there is an homonymie of these two Names, whereas, it is the
Identity of the Qualifications, Gifts, Duties, and every essential of the
Office, which is the Topic and Principle Presbyterians plead from, not merely
the confusion of Names, 2. The Dr. himsef acknowledges, that notwithstanding of
this supposed confusion of Names, o^ Dichotomotizing the Old Testament Church
Officers, yet the High Priest, was distinguished from the other Priests, by
marks of Eminency and Authority; for instance, [ that he is called High-Priest]
And therefore, before his Discourse can have any shadow of Answer, he is bound
to Exhibit, in a just Parallel, the same Scripture marks of Eminency and
Authority of the Diocesan Bishop, above the Pastor or Presbyter-Bishop, as the
Scripture Exhibits in reference to the Highpriests, above the ordinary
Priests, or the Priests in reference to the Levites, else, this Answer, by his
own Confession, and in the Sense of all men of Sense, is but a pitiful Begging
of the Question: For, upon this Ground, he might allege a Distinction betwixt
the Pastor and Preaching Presbyter. He alleges P. 25. That in the
Hagiographical and Prophetical Writings, the High Priest is frequently
distinguished by his proper and special Character. Well then, he is obliged to
let us see in Scripture, such a frequent distinction of the Prelatical or
Diocesan Bishop from the Pastor or Presbyter, by such a Character as the Dr.
makes special and Peculiar to him, and exhibit his special Official difference
therein, and super eminent Authority over Pastors, else he never touches the
Point. We hold that the Bishop and Presbyter are in Scripture alwise one, Name,
and thing: The Dr. grants, that the High Priest, and other Priests are not so,
but distinguished; and therefore, he brings an impertinent Parallel and
exception anent the sometimes Community of Names of Priests and Highpriests,
unless he can otherwise than thus disprove and answer our Assertion. Besides,
the Critical Disputant will here put him to prove, that the inspired Writers of
the New Testament, followed the Phraseologie of the Jews, in speaking of the
New Testament-Church Officers, especially since we find frequent recitations of
them, in a far other strain and Phrase, and that in their several Classes and
Degrees, both ordinary and extraordinary, as 1 Cor. 12.28. Romans 12.6, 7, 8.
Ephesians. 4.11. Moreover, when in that place, Levit. 1. Aaron, is called not merely
the Priest, but emphatice, Aaron the Priest (whose eminent immediate Call to the
Priesthood, is so clear) and distinguished from his Sons the Priests, mentioned
in the plural, in that very Passage, his Super-eminency above them, is
insinuat, yea Asserted. The Dr. is bold to assert, that when Authority and
Jurisdiction is Named, the Bishop, with regard to his Dignity, is alwise
reckoned above a Presbyter. Of this alwise, we demand one instance, the Dr's
extensive Phraseologie, boasts of a Plenty of Instances, but in not offering so
much as one he shows great penury, especially, when, as the affirmer he stands
so clearly obliged thereto: But here, as often elsewhere, he plys us with
generals, alien from the purpose.

He tells us, (P. 26.) Tho neither Aaron nor Eleazar, in the beginning of the
Jewish Economy, were called High Priests, it had been Madness from this
Confusion of Names, to have inferred an Equality, since their Offices were
distinguished by their special Ministries and Jurisdiction. Here again, a Poor
Repeated General, Alien from the Point; If this Dr. had intended to Dispute,
not to Rove with Unprofitable Talk, he should, instead of Begging Poorly the
Question, in Supposing it, have made that good, in the Case of the Bishop and
Presbyter in the New Testament Church Government, which he here asserts of the
Priests in the Jewish Economy, viz. That as the special Ministries and
Jurisdiction of High Priests and other Priests, were distinguished, and what
was appropriat to the one, denied to the other under that Dispensation, so
there is exhibit in the New Testament, the same Discriminating Distinction,
betwixt the Bishop and Pastor or Presbyter, in point of Ministry and
Jurisdiction. It is pity to see a Man Represented in the Frontispiece of his
Book, in the Character of a D. D. proceeding with such Big Words, in a Dispute
and supposed Confutation of the Presbyterians, yet as an Officiperda, so far
mistaking his Mark and Measures, that he never comes near the Point, which they
deny, and he undertakes, or stands obliged to prove.

He adds (ibid.) Bishops were called Presbyters, who had Presbyters under them,
in the Days of the Apostles. If he mean this of ordinary Officers,
distinguished as Bishops from Presbyters, I deny it, and that there were any
such ordinary Officers, with such Authority over Pastors, under the
Denomination of either Bishop or Presbyter. He tells us, that the Presbyters
signify the Priests, who assist the Bishop in his Ecclesiastic
Administrations. A New Begging of the Question. I deny either that Priests is
the New Testament Designation of Ministers, and do consequently hold, that this
his Designation is Popish and Anti-Scriptural, or that the Term Presbyter or
Pastor, does ever signify in the Scripture such an Officer, as has a Relation
to a Bishop of his Mould. The Dr. is bold to tell us, That tho all Bishops are
Presbyters, yet not all Presbyters Bishops; and therefore, to infer an Equality
from the Promiscuous Use of Names, is neither good Logic nor Good History. But
since the Dr. exhibits no Scripture Warrant nor History, for this his Forged
Distinction betwixt the Bishop and Pastor (wherein I dare appeal to all who
ponders these his Answers) he shows himself no good Historian, in Obtruding
such Doctrine: And since, instead of proving, he still beggs the Question, and
that doubly: First, In supposing that we ground our Assertion of the Identity
of Bishop and Presbyter, upon the mere promiscuous Use of the Names, without
respect to the Official Identity, exhibit in the places which we plead: Next,
In supposing the Scriptural Official Distinction of Bishop and Presbyter, and
grounding all his Answers thereupon, without the least Offer of a Proof, it is
evident that his Logic is as bad as his History and Divinity.

He runs on in the same Carreer of a Petitio Principii, (P. 27.) He will not be
thought to conclude the Bishops Superiority to Presbyters, from the High Priest
among the Jews. But since this is all the Scripture Proof he has yet offered,
what then would he prove? Tho we meet with the same Dichotomies in the New
Testament, we ought not to conclude an Equality among them of the higher Order.
I have often told him, that we conclude the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter,
not from his Fancied Dich^tomies, but from the Scriptures full and constant
Assertion of the Equality and Identity of the Official Power. And where there
is such a Dichotomie, as he alleges, (as Philip. 1.1.) our Argument proceeds
not merely upon this, but also upon this Ground and Topic, that the Office and
Officer do there stand so described in the Context, as necessarly infers this
our Conclusion. The Dr. tells us next, That the Jewish Economy was never
abrogated in the New Testament, and that their Taxis was Divided into Supreme
and Subordinat Priests. Thus we have a clear Vidimus what he would prove from
this, at least, what the Series of his Reasoning concludes, even a standing
Primat over the Catholic Church: And therefore, needs Stumble no Protestants,
nor Amuse them, tho he set the Cross upon the Frontispiece of his next
Pamphlet, or upon his Breast, as a Devout Catholic Dr. of his Holy Mother
Church. He adds, That still the Jews subdivided the Priests into highest and
Subordinat, as is clear from Philo the Jew. He told us the Scripture
distinguishes them, pray good Mr. Dr. what need is there of Proofs or Instances
from Philo, since the Presbyterians, are satisfied in the first, and think
themselves not concerned in the Proof it self?

But to proceed (P. 28.) He is still upon this Idle Repeated Begging the
Question, telling us, of the Apostles speaking in the Jewish Phrase, Classing
the Clergy into a Bipartit or Tripartit Division, as reckoned either among
themselves, or with relation to the People, as the Priests were by a Tripartit,
while reckoned by their Distinctions: That Community of Names, was as
observable when the Offices were as truly distinguished as could be. But still
we are Wearyed, Calling upon our Triffling Dr, to come Home from his Prodigal
Wanderings, to the Point, which is to show us in the Scriptures of the New
Testament, such a true Distinction of the Bishop and Presbyters Office, as is
exhibit in the Offices of the Jewish Economy, in the Old. The Dr. affirms,
That the Proestos in the Apostolic Age, was as much above the Subordinat
Presbyters, as the High Priest among the Jews, above other Priests, who yet was
Ranked among them, without a Nominal Distinction. But, as in the rest, so here,
the Dr. presents us his Magisterial Dictats for Proof and Argument: He should
have given us a Scripture Instance of such a Pr^estos, or first Presbyter,
Vested with a Prostasie of this Nature in the Apostolic Age, and then drawn
his Inference from the Nominal Identity. 2. What if we should grant the Matter
of Fact, or such a Proestos in that Age? Will that merely prove the Ius? If the
Dr. say so, (and he does say it, in his Way of Arguing) then he Claps the
Lawful Mitre, or a Divine Warrant at least, upon the Head of a Diotrephes, and
Stamps this Ius Divinum, upon the begun Mystery of Iniquity, and other Tares,
which the evil one was then Sowing among the Wheat. 3. That such a Proestos was
as much above the Presbyters, as the High Priest above other Priests, is as
Ignorant an Assertion, and Arrant Untruth, as the Dr. could readily have let
fall: Whereof I will (1.) Convince him out of his own Mouth, unless in the
Point of this (...), he still beg the Question. (2.) From the Scripture
Accounts of the High Priests Office. First, He does acknowledge, that the High
Priest was thus Termed, upon the Ground of Special Ministries, which were
Essential and Peculiar to him: Now, I pray, what were the Special Ministries of
this Proestos, and even in the Point of Order, in the Apostles Days, above his
Fellows? Next, the High Priest entered every Year into the Holy of Holies, with
Blood and Incense, and had this Prerogative above other Priests, the Priesthood
was Hereditary to his First Born, Tied to his Family, etc. And would not the
Dr. Blush, to Assert such like Prerogatives, as Applicable to the Proestos, or
Supposed Fixed President in the Apostles Days? But he adds, Salmasius grants,
That when the pretended Equality prevailed, a Preces had the Loce Primarius in
Consessu during Life -- And that there are such palpable Evidences of the
peculiar Honor and Jurisdiction of one of the Ecclesiastic Senate, in the
Apostolic Age, that the Learned Sticklers for Parity cannot deny it. But if
Salmasius assert, that while this pretended Proestos had the Chair, an Official
Equality of Pastors was existent and prevailed, it is undeniable, that he
denies to this President or Chairman, such an Episcopal Pre-eminence and
Dominion as the Dr. pleads for, and allows him only the Chair of Presidency,
not Principality: A Moderator's Chair, and no more. Again, I Challenge our Dr.
to prove this Consequence. Salmasius asserts, that even an Official Equality
prevailed among Pastors, when there was a Proestos set up, during Life: Ergo,
he asserts, that this Proestos was ab initio, in the Apostolic Age, or
approved by the Apostles. For what he adds, P. 29. That the Learned Pleaders
for Parity, do acknowledge a peculiar Jurisdiction appropriat to one of the
Ecclesiastic Senate, in the Apostolic Age: He should have Named them, and
where they assert this: For, as for what he adduces of Salmasius, I have shown
how far it is from reaching his Conclusion. And Beza, I am sure (whom no doubt,
the Dr. will own, as an Eminent Pleader for Parity) condemns this Humane
Prostasie, as the Episcopus Humanus, distinct from the Divine, much more a
Peculiarity of Jurisdiction in one Pastor over another. For the Dr's Inviduous
Character of Sticklers for Parity, which he bestows upon Presbyterian Writers,
the premised Account of them, discovers what a Black Theta he marks himself
with, who dare thus asperse the Body of Reformed Churches and Divines. No
doubt, if they were such Sticklers for Parity of Pastors, or Preaching
Presbyters, (for this is the Parity, which he thus ignorantly represents in
such a Confused General) as he is for Imparity, and the Prelatical Hierarchy,
their Stickling were not to be Valued.

But what are these palpable Evidences, which convinces our greatest Sticklers?
-- Something, says the Dr, that makes it evident beyond all Contradiction.
Some mighty Evidences then we must expect. The first, which he adduces, is,
That of the Apocalyptick Angels, among whom, he tells us, we justly reckon St.
Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna. But, 1. How has he proved, that these Angels were
single Presidents, and that the Term is not taken Collectively? 2. How does he
prove, that such as acknowledge them single Persons, do hold them to be any
more than Presidents pro tempore? Beza, I am sure, acknowledges them only such.
Whom the Dr, or any other, do reckon for the Angel of Smyrna, when John wrote
the Epistle to that Church, is not the Question, but whom he can prove from
Scripture, to have been such, and what the Bishops Character is in Scripture.

The Dr's. next supposed evidence, is drawn from the Epistles to Timothy and
Titus, and the Catalogues of Bishops, succeeding to the Apostles in their
several Sees. To which I Answer in short, First, That the Dr. can neither
prove. 1. That the Apostles, or Timothy and Titus the Evangelists, exercised an
ordinary Episcopal Authority, to be continued in the Church. Nor, 2. Can he
prove or conclude from these Catalogues, such an Authority: Since (1) They are
found to consist of Officers of diverse Cutts and unequal Authority. (2)
Inconsistent and contradictory to one another. (3) They are found resolving in
Apostles or Evangelists, whose Office admitted of no Succession, and upon this
very account, can found no shadow of an Argument for what he intends, far less,
make the thing evident beyond contradiction. What the Dr. adds further in this
Page, Of our concluding the Equality of Presbyters of the New Testament, from
the Dichotomies used in Christian VVriters, and of the Ancients, dividing
sometimes the Clergy into two Orders, etc. And that nothing of moment was
Canonically Determined in Ecclesiastic Meetings without their Bishops -- That
Cyprian compares the Evangelical Priesthood and Ministrations with the
Aaronical: Is the same nauseating repeated begging of the Question, with the
former, wherewith, instead of solid Scripture Proof of the Official imparity of
Bishop and Presbyter, he fills up idle Pages. How often shall we tell him, that
the point in question, is not what Dichotomies were used in Christian Writings,
or who determined Canonically in Ecclesiastic Meetings, after the Apostolic
Age? What Comparisons Cyprian, Clemens, or Origin used in setting out the New
Testament Ministry? But what Answers the Dr. has to offer to the premised
Scripture Arguments of Presbyterians, for the Paritie of Bishop and Presbyter,
Iure Divino? And what proof from Scripture, from the Apostles Doctrine and
Practice, he can produce for such a Jurisdictional Power and Authority of a
Bishop, under this Character, above the Pastor or preaching Presbyter, as he is
bold to assert? We often tell him, that we plead other Grounds than his fancied
Dichotomies. And tho that were made one Ground, and say further, he had
disproved it, in these his pityful Tautologies and Repetitions, what says this
to the many other Nervous Pleadings above rehearsed?

But proceed we. P. 29.30. He presses thus his often Repeated Notion anent
Dichotomies; Especially, says he, since the Ancients sometimes divide the
Clergy into two Orders* yet upon other occasions subdivide the highest Order,
and distinguish the Bishop from subordinat Presbyters. Ans. He should have
Exhibit these Ancients, and their words, thus distinguishing the Bishop under
that Character, from all subordinate Presbyters. 2. The Dr. is obliged (this
being the substratum and supposition of all his Answers, and insinuat Argument)
to exhibit the Scriptures subdivision of the Pastoral Office, into higher and
inferior Orders, and the Scripture distinction of such an ordinary Officer, as
comes under the Character of Bishop, from Subordinat Preaching Presbyters or
Pastors. As for determination in Councils, he did well to add to his bold
Assertion, his two Limitations, of Matters of moment, and Canonically, which
must be referred to his Explication. But we have made appear from the Learned
Iunius and others, what was Presbyters interest in Councils; and he must be
posed who concurred and Acted Authoritatively in that Council, Act. 15? As for
the Comparison of the Old and New Testament Ministry, used by some of the
Ancients, we have seen what a pitiful Argument it is, in reference to his
Conclusion, and that the Comparison, is only with reference to a similitude, in
point of of a Distinction and Subordination of Courts and Officers, not a
Parity or Identity of both OEconomies: For, this were to make an illustrating
similitude or allusion to infer an Identity; with absurdity, if the Dr. should
draw upon himself, who will not hiss him? I desiderat still, and call for the
Dr, s. Scripture Proof of the Diocesan Bishops Superiority to the Pastor or
Presbyter, according to the true State of the Question, and his undertaking,
and supposition in his Answers, but there is no scent of it, tho I am still in
Quest of the same.

Page 30. He is still repeating again his Notion and Fantastical Conceit of
Dichotomies. Well, what more to this scope? Clemens Romanus says the Dr.
divides the Clergy into two Orders, and so he does the Jewish Ministry into
Priests and Levites, tho in either there is no equality. But to this nauseous
repeating Dr. I must Repeat again. 1. Tho he should exhibit Clemens's Assertion
of his Hierarchical Bishop; it touches not the Point in Question, which is
anent a Scripture Assertion, of such an Officer, not what any Human Writers
have Asserted. 2. He has not made appear, Clemens's subdivision of the Pastoral
Office into his fancied Orders, nor the Assertions of any Writers else to this
purpose. For Tertullians Testimony, if it prove any thing, it proves too much,
and beyond his Assertion, Viz. The Deacons Power to Baptize, which the Dr.
cannot own, without disowning the Scripture-accounts of this Office, and the
whole Body of Protestant Churches and Divines.

But to proceed with the Dr. P. 31. In stead of a solid Answer to our Scripture
Arguments, for the Parity of Bishop and Presbyter, or our demanded
Scripture Proof of his supposed Imparity, I find the Dr. is still casting up
his pityful recocted Crambe of Dichotomies, and telling us trifflling quibles
of Tertullian's sense of the Seniores mentioned in his VVritings; he tells us,
he is not at a Point in it, whether by Seniores, Tertullian understood all
Presbyters, or those only advanced to the Episcopal Dignity: And what this
signifies to the point in question often mentioned, the Appeal is made to all
considering persons to Judge; And whether in such pretended Answers to our
Scripture Arguments for Presbyterian Government (long since offered to the view
of the Learned World) and to our demand of a Scripture proof of his supposed
Impariity, this Man be not a poor Beggarly Trifler, and a Skirmisher with his
own Shadow. Besides, Tertullian asserts, that [ praesident probati quique
Seniores] if the Dr. is not sure, but that such in Tertullian's sense, might be
Pastors, he must acknowledge, that according to Tertullian, such presided, or
had the Authority of a Proestos, in Church Judicatories, as were not of his
Hierarchical Order: So, that he did not well to raise this frighting Ghost.
What more to our Question? We are told next, That Clem. Alexan. Stromat. Lib.
6. reckons up Three Orders of the Clergy. What then? We reckon up Pastors,
Ruling Elders, Deacons. The question is, what Degrees he assigns of the
Pastoral Office? And further, upon what Scripture VVarrand? How long will
scorners delight in scorning, and fools hate Knowledge? What more? Are we yet
arrived at the Dr's. Answer to Presbyterian Scripture Arguments, or his own
Scripture Proofs of what he here beggs? No. We hear next, that Cyprian asserts
the Episcopal Jurisdiction. But all who have read Cyprian, can tell him, that
he also ownes the Presbyters as his Colleagues, without whom he could do
nothing; And therefore, that he owned no sole Episcopal Jurisdiction. What
more? Polycarp troubles the Dr. who divids the Clergy into two Orders, in his
Epistle to the Philippians. What will remedy this? Why? He recommends
Ignatius his Epistles, where the Apostolic Hierarchy is often mentioned. But
what assurance gives the Dr. that these were his genuine Epistles, which now go
under his Name, there being Passages in these Epistles, which the Dr. himself
cannot but be ashamed of. But Polycarp, in the Dr's. Opinion, was a very modest
humble Man, whose useual Style was, Polycarp, and the Presbyters that are with
him. Which the Dr. will needs have to express his Episcopal Distinction from
them. A proof, which, if you be a Friend, you may take off his Hand, when the
poor empty Man has no better. I see it is now dangerous for any Minister to say
or write, I and the Pastors that are with me, least the Dr. fasten an Episcopal
Gloss upon it. The Dr. profoundly supposes, that nothing but an Episcopal
Jurisdiction and Priority, could warrant this Phrase, and order of his Words:
The contrary whereof, can be cleared, by so many Instances, as renders this
Reason obviously ridiculous. What more? we are told P. 32. That there can be
nothing more extravagant, than to conclude a Parity among Priests, because the
Ancients used the Jewish Phraseology, since they frequentlie assert the
Jurisdiction of Bishops above Presbyters. But what can be more extravagant,
than this Dr's. Trifling in this Debate, and telling over and over, ad nauseam
usque, this pityful quible, not to the purpose and the point in question, and
in stead of an Answer to our Nervous Scripture-Arguments for the Official
Parity of Bishop and Presbyter, Iure Divino, presenting idle repeated Stories
of the Ancients Phraseologie, anent the New Testament Church Officers, which
all Men of Sense, cannot but see, to be as far from the purpose, as East is
from West; While pretending to run the Carrier of a fierce Assault upon
Presbyterians, he does nothing but chase empty insignificant quibles, with his
back to his Adversaries, and to the point, and in such a faint declining of a
closs and true Scripture-Dispute, upon this Question, according to its genuine
Nature and Terms, as all Judicious Persons, who read his Pamphlet, may see that
the Presbyterians have this pityful cowardly Braggard in Chase, who dare not
encounter them, and fairly deal Strokes upon the point. The Scripture Assertion
of the Authority and Jurisdiction of the Bishop, under that Character, over the
Pastor or Presbyter, as an ordinary New Testament Officer, is that which we are
still seeking from this Dr. not the Assertion of Humane Writers, Ancient or
Modern, which last notwithstanding, so weak is his Cause, he has not produced.

What more Answers? P. 32.33. Hermes contemporary with Clemens Romanus reproved
their ambition, who in his time, strove for Dignity and Preferment. Reader,
here is a mighty proof of Bishops their Precedencie and Official Dignity above
Presbyters, and Answer to our Arguments to the contrary. Mar not your Modesty,
in laughing at a Venerable Dr's. Arguments and Answers, while you read them.
The Dr. tells you, he was contemporary with Clemens Romanus, who was of the
Apostolic Age. And he will probably be got persuaded, that Clemens in this
walked up to the Sense of that Eminent and very Ancient Father, the Apostle
John, who reproved Diotrephes, for his aspiring after this manner. But least
you abuse this Citation, to infer the dangerous consequence and Heresy of the
official parity of Bishop and Presbyter, the warry prudent Dr. precludes your
mistake, by adding this Salvo, If there was no such Precedencie then in the
Church, there was no Ground for his Reprehension. Mighty Reason! And well
correspondent to his Reverend Father Bellarmin's Sense and Pleading against our
Divines, for the Papacy. It should seem, Men were never tempted to strive for
a Dignity and Preferment, in the Dr's. Sense, but what was Lawful; And that
this very seeking and enquiry, proves the Lawfulness, and supposes it. It seems
also, that a (...) Diotrephes was seeking a Lawful Pre-eminence, when he
resisted the Apostle John, and the only fault was, that the Man did not
modestly stay till the place was for him, and he for it. And in correspondence
to the Dr's. Sense of this Reprehension, when Petter exhorted, not to be Lords
over GOD's Heritage, he rebuked only an ambitious seeking of a Lawful Lordship.
Our Savior also, in His great Command and Prohibition above mentioned,
relative to the Apostles seeking a Primacie and First Dignity (as the Dr.
calls it) supposed and established a Primacie in the Church; otherwise, ye will
wrong and expose the Dr's. Consequence, if you admit not this Reasoning: For,
he will tell you, That else there was no ground for such a Reprehension.

But now, (P. 33.) The Dr. tells you, he is come (after this long Travel and
Pains, these Way-ward and Stubborn Presbyterians has put him to) and arrived at
the Sum of all that these Reasonings amounts unto. We expect then, the
Distilled Spirits, the Nerves of what goes before, Epitomized, if this be the
Epilogue and Sum Total of what we have heard. Well, what is that Sum of all?
Why? The Helenist Jews ( the Grecian Jews) distinguished the High Priest from
the Levites, by the Name of Priest (for which again Philo the Jew stands
Vo^cher) yet none will conclude, he had no Subordinat Priests; as now adays,
Presbyterians argue upon the same Topic Sophistically, -- for when the Priests
were compared among themselves -- then their Dignities and Subordinations were
mentioned -- when we compare the New Testament Priests and Deacons, we say
Priests and Deacons, but when we compare them among themselves, we acknowledge
their Subordinations. Really, if this be the Comprehensive Account of all, it
is pity, the Dr. has spent so much Discourse upon it, and run himself out of
Breath, to catch a Nothing. For, I am of the mind, that every Reader, will
judge that this his Sum, might have very well served for all, and saved him
the Labor of the Tedious Discourse, we have heard. But to the point, we often
tell him, (I know not how often we must) that our Argument from Philip. 1.1.
which all this his Quible mainly aims at, is not merely drawn from the Division
and Dichotomie: The Sense of the place, already exhibit by our Divines, evinces
the contrary. Nay further, (which discovers this Man's Vanity, and Quibling
Folly in this Matter) we acknowledge, that sometimes general Divisions of
Church Officers in the New Testament, admits of a Subdivision, as particularly
Romans 12.6, 7, 8. is generally acknowledged; As also in that of Philip. 1.1. But
this we assert, that these general Divisions and Subdivisions, and the several
Recitations of the New Testament Church Officers, still supposes the
Pastor-Bishop, or Preaching Presbyter, to be the highest ordinary Church
Officer appointed of God, and that the Pastor or Preaching Presbyters Office,
admits no Subdivision of Superior and Inferior Degrees, no more than the Office
of Apostles and Evangelists: And we are still seeking from this Dr, the proof
of his supposed Affirmative, that it does. I confess, the Dr. Words it in so
far well, When we compare, says he, Priests among themselves, -- we must
acknowledge their Subordinations -- We cannot help what the Dr. must, but he
must have better Prespectives to give us, ere we can see his Subordination of
Pastors in the New Testament: And as for his New Testament Priests, we own
them not. We know there is an Holy Priesthood and Brotherhood, whereby the
Scripture points out Believers joint Privileges, who are a Kingdom of Priests;
and that there is a Glorious High Priest of our Profession, whose Priesthood is
Unchangeable, and passes not to others: But for New Testament Priests, thus
Characterized as Church Officers, we are yet to Learn their Warrant from our
Dr, among others his Mysterious Points. I know the Prophecy of the Old
Testament, as to Ministers of the New, runs thus, I will take of them, for
Priests and Levites; But, if the Dr. Strain this Allusion, to bear the
Conclusion of a suitable Name of New Testament Officers, he will also upon
Malachie's Prophecy anent purifying the Sons of Levi, in order to offering a
pure offering in in every place, draw the pretty Popish Conclusion, with his
Friend Bellarmin, of a New Testament Sacrifice, for his New Testament Priests.
And really, when I consider his continued constant Designations of Ministers of
the Gospel, after this manner, I do judge the Cardinal and he, are much one in
this Sense and Conclusion: And that which follows confirms me; For, P. 33, 34.
the Dr. tells us, That the Old Testament Priests, were by their offering
Sacrifices, distinguished from the Levites; and the New Testament Priests of
the highest and subordinat Order, are distinguished from the Deacons, by their
offering the Eucharistical Sacrifice. Now, we all know, that Priests and
Sacrifices, are Correlates -- But the Dr. knows, that his Novell Divines, the
Protestants (tho they did pass with a Charitable Construction, some of the
Ancients Allusive Expressions this way, yet) do disowne the Name and Thing of a
Sacrifice, as appropriat to the Celebration of that Sacrament.

P. 34. The Dr. has not yet done with his Dichotomies: And the Sum of this Page
is, The Jews used their Dichotomies of their Clergy, in the Apostolic Age --
and the Bipartite or Tripartite Division upon this Ground, was used by Jewish
and Christian Writers -- yet these, who Reckon the two Orders, in other places,
reckon up the Hierarchy of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons. I have heard of a
Beggar, who pleased himself, as possessing a great Sum, by telling a piece of
Money often over. How often shall we have this more than recocted Crambe, these
often boiled Colworts, repeated? I am of the mind, that Battologie, was never
better exemplified, than in our Dr's Arguings. We are still seeking from our
nauseous Dreaming Dr. a Bipartite or Tripartite Division of Pastors or
Preaching Presbyters, in the Scriptures and inspired Writings of the Apostles;
And we do again, as often before, Challenge one Instance of this. We have
already told him, and that not once, That we hold, that there is a
Subordination of Officers, and Courts of Judicature, Represented in the New
Testament; yea, and a tripartite Division of Officers, viz. Pastors, Ruling
Elders, and Deacons: But that Officers, Ordinary and Extraordinary, Apostles,
Evangelists, Pastors, etc. are of one Official Authority, and equal in their
own kind, we maintain, and are still challenging his contrary proof. And to
this Point, it is palpably impertinent to tell us of Ecclesiastical Writers,
distinguishing Bishops, Elders and Deacons. Besides, that the early Prostasie
that obtained, and the Bishops Nominal distinction thence ensuing, might easily
be productive of such a Division, or Phraseology, in some of the Ancients, as
he mentions, who never had the Idea of his Hierarchy in their Head; and the
Authority, which Presbyters are clearly found to exercise in Judicatories,
after the Proestos came in; together with the First Bishops acknowledgment of
Presbyters collegiat Power with them (as Cyprian particularly) Besides, the
acknowledgment of the Identity of the Office of Bishop and Presbyter, as having
one and the same Ordination, especially by Chrisostom and Ambrose, does evince
this beyond contradiction. I might add, that the Office of the Presbyter or
Senior, who Rules only, acknowledged by the Ancients, as Presbyterians have
made appear, might easily in some Writers, have produced this Tripartite
Division of Bishop, Presbyter and Deacon, wouthout the least Shadow of
advantage to his Cause.

The Dr. in the close of this Page, soars aloft in a Triumphing Vein; telling
us, That we may easily perceive that our Argument against Episcopacy, founded
upon Dichotomies, is not only weak, but foolish and extravagant. But truly,
the Dr. in confining all the Presbyterian Arguments against Episcopacy, upon
this head, to this one anent his fancied Dichotomies, and offering in Answer
thereto, such trivial babbling Repetitions, has discovered to all judicious
Readers, that weakness, folly and extravagancie, which he imputes to us. To
Convince any Ingenuous Knowing person hereof, let it be considered, that he
Cites Smectymnus, Ius Divin. Minist. Ang. The unbishop. of Tim. and Tit. Alt.
Damasc. Mr. Dur. on Rev. He would be thought to answer these Authors; and their
great Argument, he represents thus, That it is taken from the Identity of
Bishop and Presbyter. There is no doubt, but that this is one great Topic and
Argument, and Mr. Durham makes use of that Term of Identity, in the Title of
his Digression upon this head. But dare this Man say, or tho he should have the
Brow to say it, will any who ever Read so much as one, much less, all of these
Authors, believe it, that it is a mere Nominal Identity, that they plead from,
and not an Official, in all the parts and ingredients of the Office? Or, that
the Strength of their Argument is drawn merely a confusione Nominum, as he
expresses it; and not rather from many nervous Scripture grounds, which in the
Texts mentioned by him, and other Paralels, do evince an Official Identity? Why
then, bottoms he all his Answers and impertinent quiblings upon this palpably
false Supposition? To make what I assert, evident to conviction, one of the
Authors he names, viz: Ius Div. Minist. Ang. proposes the Question thus, We
undertake to prove, that according to the Scripture Pattern, which is a perfect
Rule, both for Doctrine and Government, a Bishop and Presbyter, are all one, not
only in Name, but in Office; and that there is no such Officer in the Church,
Ordained by Christ, as a Bishop over Presbyters. Then they propose, no fewer
than Nine nervous Scripture Arguments* all running to this issue, to prove an
Official Identity: The Topic of the Fourth whereof, is thus proposed, They who
have the same Name, the same qualifications for their Office, and the same
Ordination, and the same work and duty required of them, are one and the same
Officer. Then subsuming, that thus it is in the Scripture account of the Bishop
and Presbyter. They subjoin Scripture-proofs, to every one of these Clauses and
Assertions, and thereupon conclud, that they are one and the same Officer. Now,
upon this small view of but one of these Authors, let the World Judge of this
Man's Impudence, in asserting, that not only, that Authors Arguments, but all
the Arguments of the Authors he mentions, concluds only a confusione nominum
(as he expresses it, in a distinct Character) and whether his founding of all
his supposed confutation of Presbyterian Arguments, upon this supposition and
quiblings about a Dichotomie, be not extravagancy with a Witness. Moreover, let
the Serious and Impartial, Judge, since these Authors he mentions, presents so
considerable a Number of Scripture-Arguments, For that which this Man calls a
New Foolish Opinion, in order to his design of making men believe he has fully
Confuted them, and convinced them of folly, whether he was not in Conscience
and Reason, obliged fairly to present their Arguments to his Readers view, and
offer formal Replys to them. I may further pose the Impartial Reader upon it,
whether this Man, who has never encountered their Arguments, nor tried their
Strength in a fair and formal Dispute, and yet would fain Triumph in this
boasting Pamphlet, charging all their Arguments, with weakness, folly and
evtravagancy, has not Written himself a Fool of the first Magnitude, and a
personat Thra^o in Disput? I must not forget, that while I view that Fourth
Argument of the Ius Div. Minist. Ang. I find they have upon the Margin,
Ambrose's Testimony upon 1 Timothy 3. [ post Episcopum Diaconi ordinationem
subjicit, quare? nisi quia Episcopi and Presbyteri una Ordinatio est] After the
Bishop, the Apostle subjoins the Ordination of the Deacon, and upon what other
ground but this? that the Bishop and the Presbyter have one and the same
Ordination. One would think that this is a little more than the assertion of a
mere Confusio Nominum, and that both from Scripture and Antiquity.

But to proceed, our Dr. P. 35. Censures Blondel, Salmasius, Dally, as
^mploying their Learning to support their own Hypothesis with this Argument of
the Confusion of Names: And the Dr. regrats, that Sir Tho. Craig, a Man
otherwise learned in Law, was deceived with this fallacy. We see, that in the
Dr's Sense, learned Men have been imposed upon, by this Scots Notion, but when
he has exhibit and answered their Pleadings, whom he here mentions, then, and
not till then, his Censure is to be admitted. But he tells us, That this
Opinion was never heard of before the days of Aerius. Good Mr. Dr. ye know the
Answer of Protestant Divines to the Papists Objection, where was your Religion,
your Church and Doctrine before Luther? viz. That it was from the beginning, and
is to be found in Scripture. The same I affirm of the Official Identity of
Bishop and Presbyter: And many Learned Protestant Divines think they have made
it good, whom the Dr. may please to advise, if his leisure from Pamphleting
work, together with some piece of petty interest, and prejudicat preoccupation
of Principles, will admit of the perusal. If it be found in Scripture, it was a
pretty while, it seems, before Aerius. But there is an English Divine of some
considerable account (good Old Whittaker if it were not, that he had got the
Scots new Notion in his Head) who has a Saying somewhat Rude to the Dr. Sane
cum Aerio s^^sit Hieronymus quo minus curandum est toties nobis objici Aerium
ab insulsis hominibus. Si fuit in hac re Haereticus Aerius socium haereseos
habuit Hie^onymum nec illum modo sed alios etiam veteres patres Graecos pariter
and Latinos quemadmodum Medina confitetur. Thus he, Controv. ^ 4ta quest. 1.
Cap. 3. Sect. 30. Here we find, he spares not to call these of the Dr's.
Judgment Bl^ckish Men, in objecting this anent Aerius, affirming that not only
Ierom, but likewise both Greek and Latin Fathers, were of Aerius Judgment in
this point. The Dr. might likewise have found, that Michael Medina Lib. 1. de
Sacr. Hominum Orig. and continen. Cap. 5. holds, that not only Ierom, but also
Ambros. August. Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom. Theodoret, OEcumen. and
Theophylact. were of the same mind with Aerius; As also the Waldenses and
Wickliff. What more? P. 35. Apostle, Bishop and Presbyter, are sometime
remarked without a Distinction, yet the Government of one among many, is
particularly demonstrated. This is somewhat obscure. No doubt, Apostles,
Bishops, and Presbyters, have general and common Names. For the Government of
one among many, in his Sense, I do still call for the Dr's Proof, but have no
Return.

We are told next, (P. 35, 36.) That our Savior is called an Apostle, Heb. 3.
That the Names seems restrained to the Twelve, and yet Matthias is called an
Apostle, that the Name was bestowed on several others, besides the Twelve, as
Paul, Barnabas, Adronicus, Junius, Epaphroditus: That our Savior is called a
Bishop, 1 Pet. 2.25. And the Government of the Apostles, Episcopacy, Act. 1.20.
That Priests of the Apostolic Power and Jurisdiction, are called Bishops; That
thus all the Fathers understand 1 Timothy 3. 1. Tit. 1.7. That the Bishops,
Philip. 1.1. are by Chrysostom. OEcum. Theoph. Theodo. understood of Priests
(still Priests) of the second Order: For, they conclude Epaphrod. Bishop of
Philippi from Philip. 2.25. The Dr. is never wearied of this Nominal Argument,
which seems one of Achillean Strength to him. I am sorry he is put to so much
Pains in Print, to raise such Formidable Batteries against this New Notion, and
am afraid, some Facetious Wits will allege, he is but getting himself a Heat,
in Cudgelling and Beating a Man of Straw of his own Upsetting. But in short, it
passes much my Comprehension, what he would make of all this, if not to prove
that palpably distinct Officers, do sometimes come under general Names: And who
knows not, that this Argument and Answer is still ex ignoratione Elenchi? None
of us doubts of this, which he offers in Thesi; But the Dr. will easily
acknowledge, that these Officers mentioned, have, in the Scripture Accounts,
their Marks of Distinction clearly set down, which makes it evident, that their
Communicating in the same general Name, will not conclude an Identity in the
Office: And thus the Dr. and we are easily agreed in the Application of the
Answer, when he has exhibit to us, such Scripture Discriminations of the Office
of the Bishop and Pastor, or Preaching Presbyter, such a clear Official
Imparity and Difference, as is betwixt the Office of an Apostle and Presbyter,
and betwixt our Saviors Apostolate, and that of his Disciples; and betwixt his
Episcopacy or Overseeing Care, and that of Apostles. For the Denomination of
Apostle, I need not tell one, who sets a D. D. to his Name, in the Frontispiece
of his Book, how Protestant Divines understand the Name, properly taken, and do
define the Office as distinct from all others: That first, Matthias, and
thereafter Paul were added to the Number of Apostles, none doubts: That the
Name is sometimes taken improperly, when attribute to certain Persons, is as
little doubted. As for Adronicus, Iunius, who are said to be of Note among the
Apostles, the Phrase imports in the Sense of some, that they were well known to
the Apostles; Some take them to be of the Number of the Seventy, Luke 10.
Others to be of the Number of the One Hundred and Twenty, mentioned Act. 1.15.
Or of these Converted by Peter, Act. 2.14. See Pool Annot. That 1 Timothy 3.1. and
Tit. 1.7. are understood of Priests of the first Order, with Apostolic Power
by all the Fathers, must pass current only, with those, who will take the Dr's
ipse dixit for Proof: But let them at their Leisure, Pose him, whether St.
Chrysostom. and Ierom, upon these Passages, were of that Judgment, and whether
he reckons them among the Fathers. That the Fathers after mentioned upon
Philip. 1.1. Understood it of the Priests of the second Order, he should have
proved from their Words, and that they understood Epaphroditus to be Bishop of
Philippi from Chap. 2.25. Our Translators renders it with the current of
Protestant Divines (as I have made good) your Messenger, which the Context
convincingly discovers, viz. The Messenger that ministered to Paul's wants. But
the Dr. has no shift, but to censure them as following Beza: A pityful shift
indeed. The Episcopal Translators, who in their Translation, so Zealously
patronize that Cause, that the Term (...) is with the utmost endeavor
translated to that Scope, yet are so befooled (in the Dr's. Sense) as to
translate this passage, so advantageous to Episcopacy, contrary to the Sense of
the Ancient Fathers, yea, and the Greek Fathers, so well seen in that Language,
and all this to follow a Presbyterian Novelist. But the Dr. preferrs Salmasius
to his Episcopal Masters, who thinks the word Apostle, signifies Legatum Dei ad
homines: He is now become of sudden Fond of Salmasius: But should have given us
a better Account, than a bare naming of Walo Messalinus, putting us to search
all the Book, in order to an enquiry of what he here asserts. I might tell him
further, that the Complex Phrase [ your Messenger] and the Explication of [
ministering to Paul's wants] sufficiently restricts the Term Apostle, in this
place, tho it were granted, that ordinarily it is thus taken.

But one Word more, before I part with the Dr. on this Passage: If, in the
Sense of these Fathers, the Bishops mentioned in the Inscription of the
Epistle, were Priests of the second Order only, and Epaphroditus, the Chief
Priest or Bishop; Then 1. It seems the Apostle Paul was somewhat rude in his
Salutation, to mention only these inferior underling Priests, with the lowest
petty Deacons, passing quite over the High Priest, without any Hint or Note of
Distinction. 2. It seems that either Ambrose, or some of his late Episcopal
Pleaders, are pityfully bemisted, who do cite Ambrose, as holding that the
Bishops saluted by Paul, were not Bishops of that Church, but extraneous
Bishops accidentally present; Thus the Author of the three Dialogues, P. 9. But
Theodoret, says the Dr. did judge, that when in the Apostolic Age, Bishops
were named as contradistinct from Priests, they were called Apostles. Behold
our critical Dr. censuring again the Apostle Paul, in his Salutation; It seems
also there were none of the Apostles of the Dr's. Mould, when this Apostle gave
his last Farewell to the Elders of Ephesus. nor in the Church, which Peter wrote
to; For, Ministers there, are called to act the Bishops, and nothing is heard
of an Apostle-bishop: And really I think this inadvertant Man, Paul, is further
to be blamed, in that describing of set purpose, 1 Timothy and in the Epistle to
Titus, which are in the Dr's. Judgment, the great Charter of the Episcopal
Authority, the Qualifications and Duties of Church Officers, he was so leavened
with his Notion of Dichotomies, that he passes quite over in silence, the High
Priest and Apostle-Bishops, whose Office was chiefly under this Name and
Character to have been discribed, that the Churches then, and in after ages,
together with all inferior Priests, might understand their Duty toward them:
But since, in all their Descriptions, Recitals, and Accounts of Church
Officers, he and other Apostles, were so foregetful, as to pass over in
silence, the absolute High Priest of the Christian Church, the Pope's Holiness,
notwithstanding that the Jewish Economy of Church Government was never
repealed, but still standing as a Pattern to the New Testament Church, it is no
wonder that they fell into this Mistake also.

P. 37. He tells us, That he only mentions this transiently, not insisting upon
it. What this extends to, is somewhat dubious; many, it is like, will be of
Opinion (of whom I am one) that what ever he has offered hitherto, is a
Digression, and but obiter to the point. But his business, he tells us, at
present, is to prove that community of Names will not prove community of
Offices. Truly, if this be all his business, he is a mere Officiperda, and has
foregot his Episcopal Errand in this eloborat Pamphlet: For, no Presbyterian
ever concluded this, from the mere community of Names simplely, and abstracted
from other Grounds, drawn from the Scope and Circumstances of such places, as
we do plead from Scripture upon this Point, and from many other clear Scripture
Arguments, long since exhibit to him, in the Books, which he mentions, and
there needs no more, than the reading, to convince any person, that he is
acting the Thraso, in this his pretended Confutation of the same, which does
rather confirm, than weaken the persuasion of any Man of Sense, who have
perused these Authors. The Dr. tells us (ibid.) That Peter calls himself a
Presbyter. Well, if this Apostle writing to Presbyters, and dehorting them from
acting the Bishops, and Lording over the Flock, put himself, as to an ordinary
Office and Ministry Pastoral, among the number, making this one of his
Arguments; It is evident that he thus asserts their proper Succession to him,
tho not to his Apostolat, yet to his Pastoral Office of feeding by the Word and
Discipline: For, his Command imports both. But why did he not address the Chief
Bishop, or High Priest, under the Apostolic Designation, after this manner? [
The Apostle and inferior Presbyters among you, I exhort, who am also an
Apostle] or thus [ The Super-eminent Bishop and Presbyters I exhort, who also
am a Bishop] But the Dr's. correcting information, is come far too late to him.
I might further tell him, that when he shall exhibit as clear a distinction
betwixt the Bishop and Presbyter, as there is betwixt the Office of Apostles
and Presbyter, then, and not till then, his parallel Argument will appear of
some force, which he draws from Peter and John's designing themselves Elders,
and shall be acknowledged conclusive to his Scope.

The Dr. will next preoccuppy our Argument from 1 Timothy 4.14. And tells us, That
the Presbytrie mentioned in that place, was a Senate, composed of Apostles and
other Priests, but whether of the first or second Rank, he is not certain. And
really, the Dr, in my poor Judgment, might have added, whether there were any
other Apostles in that Senate, than the Apostle Paul, is equally uncertain: And
let me humbly entreat his Reverence, by his next, to give us an Account of the
Scripture Grounds of his Certainty of the one, rather than of the other. That
the Apostle Paul was present, and concurred in this Presbytrie, I know is
pleaded by his Episcopal Brethren; tho Collating the two places, 1 Timothy 4.14.
and 2 Timothy 1.6. the different Phra^eology in both being pondered, they will
find the Work pretty hard, to make it good against a Critical Disputant, and
the admitting of this, rather Confirms, than Weakens our Pleadings from that
place, as Presbyterian Writers have made appear. Some have alleged, that by
the Presbytrie, we are to understand the Office: Which Pleaders, have been long
since told, that the Office has no Hands to lay on. But that other Apostles
were there than Paul, is a Notion, I am sure, much, if not only, beholden to
the Dr's Fertile (that I say not Fond) Invention. It were needless, and but to
burden Paper unnecessarly, to recite Interpreters, in Opposition to this his
Gloss: This is known to all that are acquaint with them. But let us hear the
Dr's Argument upon these Passages; He tells us, It is evident from 2 Timothy 1.6
that Paul was of the Number; and that in the other place, 1 Timothy 4.14. he is
exh^rted not to neglect the Gift given him, with the Laying on of the Hands of
the Presbytrie: In the last, he is put in mind, to stir up the Gift, which he
received by the Laying on of St. Paul's Hands. There is none doubts, that these
Passages, thus stands in the New Testament, but had he, instead of this Dark
Insinuating Hint, drawn out a Formal Argument, lying level to his Scope and
Conclusion, it would have deserved our Consideration. However, to prevent his
Mistake, Presbyterians have long since told him, 1. That the different Phrase
in both places, viz. (...) in the first, (...) in the second, makes Paul's
presence, at least, Debateable, but clearly proves, that the Laying on of the
Presbytries Hands is evidently Diversified in a distinct Comma, as a distinct
Privilege, in its self considered, from the Gifts given by Prophecy, and
ascribed to the Laying on of Paul's Hands. And 2. That tho Paul's presence in
this Action were admitted, it clearly proves, that even an Apostles Laying on
of Hands upon an Evangelist, did not exclude the Presbytries Authoritative
Imposition: And that therefore, (by a clear Consequence, from the Greater to
the Less) that Privilege, much more belongs to them now, with relation to
ordinary Pastors or Ministers, when the Office of Apostles and Evangelists is
ceased. But, if I might be bold with a Person of the Dr's Reverence, I would
ask him this Question: He holds Timothy was Consecrat a Bishop; here we find a
Presbytrie, Laying Hands upon him with Paul, whom the Dr. holds to be here
Acting the Bishop; How comes he then to say, It is uncertain whether they were
Presbyters or Priests of the first or second Rank? Really, if he be uncertain
in this, he holds by clear Consequence, that mere Presbyters, might have laid
on Hands upon a Bishop at his Consecration, yea, and this by Apostolical
Warrant, tho Bishops superior to them, were present at this great Work: And
what Consequence in Doctrine and Practice, this will further amount to, I leave
to the Dr's Melancholic Reflection. But further, in mentioning this last Text,
the Dr. says, He is put in mind to stir up the Gift, which he received by the
Laying on of St. Paul's Hands: He has also told us, and positively asserted,
that this Senate was composed of Apostles in the plural: How many there were, I
think, the Dr. found it hard to determine; but in this, he is clear and
positive, that there were other Apostles with Paul, and consequently of equal
official Authority with him in this Action. Now, upon this, I would desire his
grave Judgment, how comes this Apostle to mention the laying on of his own
hands solely, and of no Apostles else? We find him so humble an Apostle and
Biishop, that in the inscription of several Epistles, he takes in the Inferior
Clergy and Presbyters with himself; whence then comes this singularity of
expression, herein attributing to himself solely, what was equally applicable
to other Apostles concurring with him? What he adds further of the Work and
Ministry of Apostles and Pastors, sometimes expressed by the General term (...);
I have already made appear, how insignificant it is to his scope, so that it is
here Idly repeated.

We are next told (P. 38.) That if any infer the Community of Offices from the
Community of Names, he confounds the highest and lowest Rank of Officers. The
Presbyeerians are of his mind, when the inference is from a mere Community of
Names, while the Offices are otherwise distinguished in Scripture, but when
both Name and Office in all essentials thereof, are identified, they think the
Argument from hence for an Official Parity, concludes well; and they pity this
Dr's continued Repetition of his mistake, in stead of an Answer to their
Argument. He tells us next, That it is certain, the Offices were carefully
distinguished and separated in those days. This is true when understood of
Church Officers in general; and hence we conclude that the Spirit of God has
left us clear distinguishing marks of the Superiority and distinction of such
Officers, as do communicate in General Names with (the inferior; and this to
prevent the mistake which he instances: And therefore, unless the Dr. will
fasten a blasphemous Reflection upon the Spirit, who dictat the Scriptures, he
is obliged to let us see therein the distinguishing marks and Characters fixed
to the Bishop and Pastors Office, to show the Official difference of the one
from the other: And this he cannot but acknowledge necessary to prevent the bad
consequence of an Official Identity, drawn from the Community of Names. And no
doubt, had he as sincerely designed to give and receive light in this Point, as
to present a vain prattling Pamphlet, he would have examined the Presbyterians
Arguments for the Official Identity of Bishop and Presbyter, and endeavored to
produce the Scripture distinguishing differences, discriminating the one from
the other.

What more? We are told (ibid.) That the Humility of Superior Officers,
hindered them not to distinguish themselves from their subordinat Brethren.
Right; Paul, no doubt owns, and strenuously pleads for the Authority of his
Apostolic Office, notwithstanding of his often instanced Humble Respect to
Officers of inferior Rank. What then? Why? Bishops in the second Century
transcribed this, tho they preserved the distinction betwixt Priests (still
Priests) of the first and second Order. But we are wearied, seeking from this
Dr. the Scripture Distinction of Pastors and Presbyters into a first and second
Order: Besides, it is odd, that no Bishops were so modest and humble in this
point, and prudent withal, but those of the second Century. We must know, the
Dr. prefaced thus, that he might tell us, That they studied humble modest
Expressions, and of Condiscension, which he instances in the Inscription of
Polycarp's Epistle to the Philippians. But since this modest Condescension, the
Dr. will acknowledge, did not prejudge his care to distinguish the Offices of
Bishops and Priests, of Priests of the first and second Rank, he must either
exhibit this in the place cited, or he puts this Reflection upon Polycarp: He
may also remember, how that afterward (p. 84.) he makes Augustine to pass from
his Episcopal Authority, in a Complement to Ierom, in his foolish gloss on that
passage of Ep. 19. [ Episcopus Presbytero major secundum honoris vocabula, quae
Ecclesiae usus obtinuit] That he was distinguished from Ierom, by a customary
Title only of a Bishop. As for the Elegy of Apostolic Martyr, which he bestows
upon Polycarp, we let it pass, as capable of a sound Sense; But for that of
Prince of the Asiatick Church, I remit him to 1 Cor. 3.5. 1 Pet. 5.2.3. 2 Cor.
1.24. to be censured for his vain precipitancy.

The Dr. (P. 38.) drawing to an end of these impregnable reasonings, must needs
give us a touch of his pulse and humor, in concluding with high Rantings; This
Argument, he tells us, he has considered the more carefully, in that he Finds
it over and over again in all the Writings of the Ecclesiastic Levellers, as
their first and last refuge. Truly, if these Disputers he calls so, had as
inspidily proposed it, far less repeated it so often, as he has Parat-like,
c^nted over and over, in so many Pages, his babbling repetitions of an
impertinent quible, instead of an Answer, they had as much exposed their
Judgment and ingenuity in this Controversy, as I am sure, his, now is, in the
Sense of all men that understand it, and have Read the Authors mentioned by
him, whereof this petulent Scorner discovers he knows no more but the Names. As
for the Character of Ecclesiastic Levellers, which he bestows upon the
Presbyterians; I think indeed his experience; together with that of his Fellow,
has taught him, that in this respect, they deserve it, Viz. That their nervous
Scripture Reasonings, which he dare not encounter, has so levelled and laid
along, and aboard the high Top-gallant of the Hierarchical Prelat, he so
zealously fences for, as all his Wit and Learning, will never erect it again:
which in this place, is convincingly apparent, since among the many Argumnts
used by them, he has upon this head insisted so long upon (if not solely
singled out) this one, anent the Community of Names of Bishop and Presbyter,
which is none of the most considerable; and after he has disguised it, and
spent Eight or Nine Pages, in exhibiting the outmost of his wit to answer the
same, the expense of all his endeavors, has only amounted to such pityful
impertinent Repetitions, Battologies, and beggings of the Question, that it is
evident, this one Argument has Mastered him, and with its Weight, born down his
poor strength to the ground.

The Dr. adds ( P. 38.39.) That nothing is more frivolous and triffling than
this Argument -- that the Names of the lowest Officers of the Christian Church
were frequently assumed by the highest; and distinction of Offices is rather to
be inferred from peculiar Ministries and Acts of Jurisdiction, than any Names
we can fix on. But what can be more triffling and frivolous, than this Dr's
endless canting over and over this Quible and begged Supposition, without
giving us any shadow of the peculiar Ministries and Jurisdiction,
distinguishing in Scripture, the Bishop from the Pastor or Presbyter?

The Dr. having (P. 39.) discussed all our Scripture Arguments for Parity, as
he invidiously calls it, from the Command of Christ, and the Consequences of
Scriptures, drawn a confusione nominum -- tells his Reader, That if we cannot
establish our new Doctrine thus, we endeavor to support it, by some
Testimonies of the Primitive Fathers. I am satisfied that his Reputation stand
or fall upon this Trial, Whether he has so much as proposed, far less answered
the Scripture-pleadings of the Authors, whom he cites for the Parity of Bishop
and Presbyter. As for his alleging that we endeavor to support the Government
we plead for, by Testimonies of the Primitive Fathers: He has in this, as in
many other things, exposed himself, and is blotted as a gross Calumniator: For,
it is the Scriptures of Truth only, and no Humane Testimonies, upon which we
found the Ius, the Divine Right of the Government, we own and contend for. As
for Humane Testimonies of the Ancients, we look upon them as confirming
Appendices of Matters of Fact only, as Testes facti in some Respect, but not as
Iudices very, it being the Divine Scripture's Bar and Tribunal only, to which
we bring our Cause to be decided. And to discover to all Men, this Dr's.
impudence in this point, one of the Authors he cites, viz. Ius Divin. Minist.
Ang. in their learned Appendix, in the point of Antiquity, consisting of eight
Propositions, and nine, in the Matter of Ordination in special, not one of
which this Man has dared to meddle with. The very first is, That whatever may be
said for Prelacy out of Antiquity, yet (as they have proved) it has no
foundation in the Scriptures -- That, as in the Matter of Divorce, Christ
brought the Jews to the first institution of Marriage, so we must in point of
Episcopacy, say as Christ [ from the Beginning it was not so] Thereafter, they
cite several of the Ancients, in proof of this, that it is not the Custom or
Practice of the Church, but the Divine Scriptures; which must herein determine
us, and that all Human Writings must be examined by the Canonical, and Customs
never so ancient, the Scriptures being perfect as to all Credenda, Petenda,
Facienda. In the second Proposition, so far are they from making the most
ancient Testimonies, or Practice of the Church, the Foundation of our
Government, that they affirm and prove by clear Testimonies and Instances, that
many Corruptions crept into the Church, in the Infancy of it, and were
generally received as Apostolical Traditions, which yet Episcopal Men
themselves confess to be Errors; instancing the Millenary Error, with diverse
others: Whence, they conclude -- That there are Doctrines and Practices,
pretended to be grounded upon Apostolical Institution, which are rather to be
accounted as Apocryphal.

But to proceed, upon this false Foundation ( ibid.) the Dr being about to blot
some useless Sheet, with his Trifling Quiblings, upon several passages of
Blondel and Salmasius, must needs, e're he fall to work, disgorge some more of
his Venom and Gall against the Presbyterians, his Contrymen, as well as
Blondel. For Blondel, he would needs make us believe, That in Compliance with
Cromvel his Enthusiasticks, he employed his Skill to make the Ancients
contradict themselves, and all Contemporary Records. A bad design no doubt, and
so bad as well as irrational, that its hard to believe the Dr: For, Blondel his
Writings, as well as those of Salmasius, has obtained the Testimony of Men of
the best note in Protestant Churches; as the Learned Professors of Saumer, and
many others: So that his barkings will never touch or stain the same. But for
his Contrymen, Presbyterians, he is bold to tell his Reader, That they
Concluded Blondels Book, to be pure and undeniable demonstration, before ever
they Read it. If I should return him the Words of the Psalmist [ What shall be
given thee thou false Tongue?] I think I should merit no severe Censure. What a
fore head, must this Man have, who durst suffer his Mouth to utter, much less
dare to Print and exhibit to the World, such an impudent Calumny, yea, so
Vilely to asperse his Native Country? Two things, do sufficiently discover
what sentiments upon this Assertion, the World may have of this Person. 1. His
Conscience can tell him, yea, its known to all Men, who know Scotland, that
since our Reformation, there has been, and are Hundreds therein, not only of
Ministers, but others of the most Considerable Note and Character, Men of
Conscience and Learning, who adhere to the Presbyterian Government, as having a
Divine Warrant, and who have concerned themselves in a Search of this
Controversy, in the Writings upon both Sides; And if the Dr. know not this, he
is a pitiful Peregrinus Domi. 2. That to conclude any Man's Writings and Book,
to be pure and undeniable Demonstration, before a Person has Read the same, is
such a Sottish, Brutish Practice, such an Irrational Conclusion, as cannot
befall any Per^o^, that has the most Common Exercise of Reason: So, that he
might with the same Veracity, have told the World in his Pamphlet, that his
Country Men, Presbyterians, are Idiots, Dunces, or Brutes, and in Point of
Judgment and Integrity, much of a Size with the Popish Vulgar, who Hang upon an
Implicit Belief, and have but a Plagiary Faith, depending upon Men's Dictats and
Hearsay; yea, and that they are all such, none excepted. But that the Dr. may
not (since he is in his Ranting, Calumniating Vein and Humor) be satisfied with
one single Lie, but make a Lusty Complicated One, and let flee a whole Vollee
of this Hell-Shot, at his Country Men, he adds, That his Country Men think,
they need no other Answer, to any thing written against them, than to say, that
Episcopacy, and all its Defenses, is quite Ruined by Blondel and Salmasius.
Poor pitiable Soul* Had he gone to Iamaica, or to some places; where neither
the Persons, nor Matter he speaks of, was ever heard or known, he might hope to
get this believed. Some of the Books he mentions, P. 22. his Conscience could
tell him, are Written by Scotsmen, viz. Didoclav. and Mr. Durh. And we know of
no Answer returned to this Day, unto either of them: It should then seem, that
his Countrymen should rather allege these. Does he think indeed we esteem,
that we need no other Answer, than to tell of Blondel and Salmasius? But yet
more of this Hellish Blusterings, Tho there are, says the Dr, ( ibid.) few of
them that ever read them, and that every Line of their Writings, that has
Color of Argument, has been frequently exposed, yet such is the Power of
Prejudice and Partiality, that they shut their eyes against the clearest
Evidences produced by their Adversaries. Here Is a Deep Charge: 1. His
Countrymen, Presbyterians, becomes such Peevish Ignoramus's, that few of them
read these Books. 2. So Hardened in their Prejudices against Truth, that they
shut their Eyes against all Convictions thereof, so, that a Judicial Stroke and
Judgment has fallen upon them, if this Man may be believed. But I will be bold
to ask him, what are these Evidences, I mean Scripture-Evidences, produced by
him, or any of his Party, which we have not considered? Dare he say, that all
in Scotland, Embracing the Presbyterian Persuasion, do thus shut their Eyes?
And may we not easily Retort his Charge, and Enquire what Evidences has been
produced by Didoclav. Mr. Durh. and others, whom he mentions? And besides
these, many not Named by him, to whom, neither he, nor any of his Gang, have
offered an Answer to this Day. Why do they shut their Eyes against the Light
produced by them? Presbyterians, no doubt, need no other Evidence, than this
Pamphlet, to convince the World, that the Power of Prejudice, has Shut and
Blinded this Man's Eyes against Light. He pretends therein, by his mighty
Arguments, to Beat his Presbyterian Countrymen from their Principles; He
presents in the beginning of his Famous Work, some considerable Authors, whose
Writings and Arguments, he tells the World, they ground their Persuasion upon,
yet never offers to Scann so much as one of them, when fairly presented in
their genuin strength: And let all men Judge what prejudice and partiality, this
savours of. And if he be not wholly a Stranger thereunto, he cannot but know,
that our Judgment in this Point, is the Sense of the whole Body of Protestant
Churches and Divines. And are they also thus Hardened? But more yet, ( ibid.)
the Dr. tells us further, That it is enough for us, that Blondel has written a
Book of 549 Pages, and this, in our Judgment, may bar all Dispute. Indeed, Mr.
Dr. if there were no more Strength or Nerves in them, than in your 339 Pages,
Stuffed with Blustering Talk, and Empty Quiblings, the Defense were no Defense.
We are again told, That when we are bidden Name the Place, which proves the New
Doctrine, we refuse any such closs Engagement. Really, the good Narcissus here
sees his Picture in the Well -- Decline a closs Engagement! Let all Men that
ever read the Authors he Names, judge what closs Engagement, this Man has made
with them, and if he has not as evidently Snaked away from their Arguments, as
ever did any Coward in Disput. For Ierom, that he was of this Judgment of the
Parity of Bishop and Presbyter, the Learned have sufficiently discovered. But,
says he, Salmasius and Blondel, have been exposed by the Incomparable Bishop
of Chester. Had Presbyterians put this Elegy upon any of their Writers, they
had been posted up for Admirers of Men's Persons. But now, our Dr. will Examine
some of his most Remarkable Testimonies from Antiquity: Some, no doubt, not
all, and in the same manner as he does the Presbyterian Scripture Arguments, i.
e. so as to convince all Readers, that he Traces but Fantastic Quiblings,
instead of Answer. But being closs in my Examining his Scripture Pleadings,
that I interrupt not the Series thereof, I must here pass over to his Second
Chapter.

CHAP. III. Wherein the Dr's Absurd Description of the Apostolic Function, in
Opposition to Protestant Divines, is exposed; Together with his Assertion about
the Succession of Hierarchical Bishops to Apostles, in a proper Formal Sense:
His Opinion loaded with Gross and Palpable Absurdities.
IN this Chapter, the Dr. having told us, That he has Examined our most
plausible Pretenses for Parity (And what Scripture Arguments, he has Examined,
let any judge) gives us Encouragement, by undertaking Truly to State the
Controversy, (I am sorry, he has not done it sooner) No doubt, all will
acknowledge this to be, what he stands obliged to. But to Trace his Steps, and
Examine him clossly. 1. I am agreed with him in this, That the Government of
the Christian Church, has been established and fixed by Christ and his
Apostles, to continue to the end, and who oppose this Institution are
Schismatics. 2. For what he adds, (P. 95.) That it is agreed there was an
Hierarchy under the Old Testament, the High Priests having a Superiority and
Jurisdiction over inferior Priests. I must tell him, that we do hold, with all
our Divines, that this Superiority was such a fixed Presidency, as had adjoined
thereunto some special Ministrations peculiar to it: And moreover, we hold,
that both the one and the other was Typical, and also such, as did not encroach
upon the ordinary Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction of the Sanhedrin, or invade their
Decisive Suffrage; as Iunius particularly observes. Our Dr's Inference, That
Subordination of one Priest to another, is not simplely unlawful; if meant of a
Subordination of Officers in general, is admitted; If, of one Pastor to
another, in Point of Official Authority, it is a bad Inference, and a Begging
of the Question, which is not about, what may be simplely lawful or unlawful in
this Case, but upon the Hypothesis of Gods Institution, in the New Testament
Economy and Government. The Dr's Distinction (ibid.) of the Apostles Ordinary,
Permanent, Essential Power, and their Extrinsick Extraordinary Privileges --
suitable to the first Plantation of Churches, is in general accorded: But his
Application and Explication subjoyned, viz. That by the first, they were
distinguished from all subordinat Ecclesiastic Officers, in the Christian
Church; is that which I deny: And that upon this ground: That Power, which was
Ordinary, Permanent and Essential, behoved to be so eminenter, in the Apostles,
as it was to be transmitted to standing Officers, who were to be Invested with
the same Ordinary, Essential, Permanent Power, else the Dr's assertion cannot
subsist, that this Power was ordinary and permanent in its nature, or a Power
necessary for the Churches Preservation, when the Apostles, at first Clothed
with it, were gone off: And therefore, to be Transmitted to successive
Officers, consequently, these ordinary succeeding Officers were, in this equal
to them, when clothed with this Power, and invested therein; And by further
necessary Consequence, the Apostles were not by this essential necessary Power,
distinguished from all Subordinat Ecclesiastic Officers, it being such, as the
Churches subsistence required the same in all times: And besides, these
succeeding Officers, when invested with this ordinary Power, were still
subordinat to them, as Apostles, and clothed with that formal Office and
Authority. I know, that in this Phrase of Subordinat Ecclesiastic Officers,
the Dr. excluds the Bishops, in the Series of his Reasoning, that he may take
them within the compass of a supposed Apostolical ordinary Power over Pastors:
But how absurdly and inconsequentially, as well as cross to the Sense of sound
Divines, in this Point, is already evident, and shall yet further appear.

To proceed, the Dr. tells us, That by the second (i. e. their extrinsick,
extraordinary privileges, suited to the First Plantation of Churches) they were
in capacity to exercise their Authority with greater Success, in the Conversion
of Infidels, in the Government of Churches. Wherein I differ from him in t^is,
that he makes their Extraordinary Apostolical privileges, necessary only for
the been esse, which were necessary Simpliciter, for the Planting and
Government of the Churches, in that infant State thereof: The very exercise of
their Apostolical Authority, as such, did consist in exerting these
extraordinary privileges: For, thus, their Mission, their Gifts, their
extensive Power, essential to the Apostolic Office, taken in a formal sense,
Respected the founding and watering of the Churches, in that Infant-state of
Christianity, the Establishing the Gospel Ordinances therein, and all its
ordinary standing Officers. I must then mind the Dr. that when he speaks of the
Apostles ordinary, permanent, essential Power, by Essential, he must not, nay,
cannnot understand that Power, which is Essential to them, as Apostles
strictly, or under that reduplication, qua Apostles; For, then, their Office
were not extraordinary, but a standing Office to be succeeded to, in its entire
Nature formally, as they were invested with it, and did exercise it, which is
cross to that Sense of the Apostolic Office, exhibit by Protestant Divines, as
I shall further make appear. The Dr. will needs distinguish, their Essential
Apostolic Office from their extraordinary Prerogatives, their transient
temporary Privileges, who were the first Apostles, and were Limited in the
exigences of the First Christian Mission. Wherein he speaks confusedly: For, 1.
These Prerogatives suited to the Churches First exigence, were in such manner
suited, as was the very Office it self, and consequently were Essential
ingredients thereof, for this end. Hence. 2. The Essential Office of the
Apostolat, as such, or taken in a proper formal Sense, could admit of no such
spliting and distinction, unless the Dr. will split and distinguish the
Essence, which he should know consists in indivisibili. The Essential
Apostolic Office, the Dr. tells us ( P. 96.) is necessary peramanent,
perpetual, citing Matthew. 28. [ Lo, I am with you, always even unto the end of
the World] Hence, in his Sense, the Command and Promise in that place, imports
the standing Essential Office of Apostolat to the end* -- What Harmony this
keeps with the Sense of Protestant Interpreters, let all judge. Pool tells us,
The Promise imports his presence to the end, with his Ministers, Preaching,
Baptizing, Teaching to observe what he has Commanded. That it relates to Gospel
Ministers, in their Ministrations, as the Apostles successors; thus the English
Notes, and Belgic Divines. But that it imports a standing Apostolic Office to
the end, no sound Protestant ever dreamed.

To proceed, to make this appear the more, says the Dr. ( ibid.) The Apostles
as such, were formally and essentially distinguished from all other
Ecclesiastic subordinat Officers. This indeed makes it appear more, if one
contradictory Proposition will prove another: For, if the Apostles were
Formally and Essentially, i. e. in respect of their essential formal Office,
distinguished from all inferior Officers, all Officers, who were not in a
proper formal Sense Apostles, How could any succeed them in this proper formal
Office? And consequently, How could that Office be permanent? It being certain,
that such Functions, wherein they were to be succeeded, could not be their
Characteristick as Apostles, and their mark of distinction from succeeding
Officers. For instance, the Function of Preaching and Baptizing, with the
appendant proportioned ordinary power of Government, was a Work and Office,
wherein they were to be succeeded. The Apostles were at first enjoined [go
Teach, Baptize, and Disciple the Nations] Paul enjoined to the Elders of
Ephesus, to Feed and Rule by the Word and Discipline, within their Percinct;
Hence these Duties simplely considered, could not be that wherein they were
distinguished from inferior Officers. For 1. In respect of this Pastoral Work,
both the Apostle Peter and John owned themselves, as Co-presbyters, which could
have no good Sense, if in this they were distinguished from all others. 2.
Hence this distinguishing Criterion had then evanished, when inferior Officers
had it; So, that the Dr. in his Series of Reasoning, is driven upon this Scylla
or Charybdis, either to say, that their Essential Office perished with
themselves, and consequently, was not permanent, in opposition to what he
asserts ( P. 95.) or else, in respect thereof, they were not formally and
essentially distinguished from inferior Officers, in contradiction to what he
asserts ( P. 96.) I know the Dr's tacit Evasion is, that he supposes the
Bishops, not to be Subordinat Officers, which, how cross it is to the Series
and Contexture of his Reasoning, as well as the Sense of sound Divines, we
shall further m^ke appear. The difference of their Office, from that which is
properly and formally Apostolic, being so palpable, that himself is forced to
place a Distinction betwixt the Function of the one and the other, yea, and
calls them a sort of secondary Apostles; Thus distinguishing them from those he
would have to be Primary.

But the Dr. will now enquire (ibid.) What distinguished the Apostles from the
Seventy two, from Presbyters in the Modern Notion (as he speaks) (I could wish
he had exhibit and refined his antique Notion) from Deacons and other Offieers
of the New Testament. He undertakes, 1. To exhibit the Presbyterian's Account
of the Apostolic Office, and tells us, That the Presbyteriand and Socinians,
contrary to the uniform Testimony of Antiquity, affirm, that the Apostolic
Office is ceased as extraordinary, that the Apostles were distinguished from
Subordinat Ecclesiastics, by infallibility in Preaching, their power of
Miracles, their being immediately called by our Savior to the Apostolat, by
their unlimited and unconfined Commission, to propagat the Gospel among all
Nations. This is such Stuff, as I dare challenge and appeal all Protestant
Churches and Divines, to give Judgment and Character upon the person who
presents it, which I am sure, will be such, as will fasten upon him an infamous
Stigma: Nor shall I here much meddle with, or stand upon the shameless Man his
comparing us to, and ranking us with the blasphemous Socinians, in this point,
citing their Racovian Catechism, Sect. 9. Chap. 2. But to convince all, that
are but acquaint in the least, with the Protestant Doctrine in this point, I
shall exhibit in some few Instances, their Sense of the Apostolic and Pastoral
Office: And of a vast Number, shall instance but a few.

First, The Professors of Leyden, Synops. Pur. Theol. Disput. 42. These. 17.
They reckon among extraordinary Officers, that of the Apostolat, adding
Prophets and Evangelists [ quorum vocatio, say they, fuit temporaria -- sub
novo faedere ad Ecclesiae Dilatandae propagationem ordinata] whose Vocation was
temporary or transient, as being ordained and appointed for the Propagation of
the Church of the New Testament. These. 18. They show the ordinary Vocation to
be that, whereby Officers with ordinary Gifts performs the ordinary and Common
Service of the Church -- such as that of Pastors and Doctors -- who promot the
Edification of the Church, through all Nations, according to Christ's Promise --
[ a temporibus Apostolorum per totum terrarum orbem dispersi, edificationem
quibus libet in locis promovendam usque ad finem mundi locum habebit juxta
Christi promissionem, Matthew. 28.20. Ite and Docete, etc.] As being sent from
the times of the Apostles, for the Edification of the Church, in every place,
to the end of the World, according to Christ's Promise, Go teach all Nations.
Where it is evident, that the Apostolic Office, as such, in universum, is by
them held to be Extraordinary, and that the Pastors and Doctors are their
Successors, as ordinary Ministers appointed for propagating the Church, and
promotting its Edification to the end of the World, and that upon the Ground
of, and according to that same very Promise, which this Pamphleter pleads, to
prove the standing Office of Apostolat to the End. Thereafter, having noticed (
These. 19.) That the Apostle having Ephesians. 4.11, 12. placed the three
Extraordinary Officers in the first Rank, they add ( These. 20.) [ hos duos
tantum extraordinariorum ac perpetuorum verbi Divini administratorum ordines
ibidem conjunctim subjicit, cum addit eundem Christum alios praeterea dedisse
Pastores and Doctores] That the Apostle does thereafter subjoyn; in a
Conjunction, the Pastors and Doctors, as the only perpetual Ministers, given
for the Edification of the Church. These. 21. They thus describ the Apostolic
Office ( Apostoli erant praecones Evangelii universales ad Ecclesiae Catholicae
fundamentum, quod est Christus, ubique terrarum ponendum, ab ipso Christ^
immediate atque extra ordinem missii, dono absque errore -- alios docendi,
Doctrineque suae veritatem miraculis confirmandi a Deo instructi) Citing Matthew.
28.20. 1 Cor. 3.10.11. Matthew. 10.1. Ioh. 16.13. Act. 2.2. etc. That the
Apostles were universal Preachers of the Gospel, s^nt by Christ for laying
every where the Foundation of the Gospel Church, instructed and furnished with
the Gift of Teaching infallibly, and confirming their Doctrine by Miracles,
having also an immediate and extraordinary Mission from him. Which Sense is
confirmed by the Passages above cited. And here I appeal to all Men, whether
the learned Professors, offer not the same Description and Characteristicks of
the Apostolic Office, which this Man makes the Opinion of the Scots
Presbyterians, and Socinians. Further, after the Description of the
Extraordinary Office of Evangelists ( These. 23.) The ordinary Pastoral Office,
is thus described ( These. 25.) (Pastores erant verbi divini dispensatores,
certis Ecclesiis docendis ac regendis ab Apostolis and Evangelistis praefecti)
That the Pastors were Dispensers of the Word, appointed for Governing and
Teaching particular Churches by the Apostles and Evangelists. Adding that their
Office is described Act. 20. Viz: to feed and Rule, as Bishops set up by the
Holy Ghost; as also 1 Timothy 3. and Tit. 1. where their Office is clearly
Identified with that of the Bishop; Likewise, 1 Pet. 5. where the same is
evident. The parts of the Pastoral Office, common with the extraordinary
Officers, they hold to be. 1. ( Populum Dei ex verbo Dei docere) To Teach Gods
People from his Word. 2. ( eidem juxta Christi institutionem Sacramenta
administrare) To Administer Sacraments* to them, according to Christ's
Institution. 3. ( pro eodem preces ad Deum fundere.) To Pour out Prayers for
the People. 4. ( ^um fraeno disciplinae Ecclesiasticae intra limits
obedientiae Deo secundum verbum ipsius debitae contineri) To keep them within
the limits of Gospel obedience, by the restraints of Ecclesiastic Discipline,
Citing Matthew. 28. anent the grand Commission of Teaching and making Disciples,
etc. and Mat. 18.17. where our Lord enjoins the ultimat appeal to be to the
Collegiat Body of Church Officers; So Act. 20.28. anent the Teaching and
Governing Power, entrusted to Pastors and Elders of Ephesus, etc. Now, whether
our Sense of the Apostolic Office, of its extraordinary Nature, and proper
marks and essentials; As also, our Sense of the Pastoral Office be not the
same, with that of the Leyden Professors, let any Judge: And whether these
Professors* or we, do in this strike hands with the Blasphemous Socinians, as
this Man has the Forehead to affirm, the Appeal is also made to all Men to
judge; Nay, if he has not in this point blotted himself with the Stain of an
infamous Calumniator, especially, it being evident, that the Socinians, in the
place* Cited by him, do absolutely deny a Ministerial Mission and Authority,
whom the Learned Professors, in that same Passage, Cite for this, together with
some other places of Socinus, and refute the same ( These. 6.7, 8, 9, 10, etc.)

Let us hear next the Professors of Saum^r, whom we will find Fully to accord
with us in this Point, in contradiction to our Calumnious Dr. ( de diverse.
Minist. grad. These. 7.) ( extraordinariorum Ministrorum tres fuerunt gradus seu
ordines -- Apostoli, Prophetae, and Evangelistae -- De Apostolis planum, eos
supremum inter Evangelii Ministros constituere gradum quorum hae supra reliquos
preregativae, etc.) That the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists were the three
degrees of extraordinary Ministers, of whom the Apostles had the first place;
Having these Prerogatives beyond others, which they thus recite. 1. ( Quod a
Domino nostro Jesus Christo immediate vocati, etc.) That they were called
immediately by Jesus Christ, to the Office of Preaching the Gospel to all
Nations, citing Matthew. 28.18.19, 2. ( Quod ita a Spiritu sancto instructi,
etc.) That they were so furnished by the Spirit of GOD, and lead into all
Truth, that they were infallible in Teaching, since otherwise* their Function
and Mission had been in vain, had it been Lawful to disbelieve them in their
Teaching. 3. ( Quod nulli loco vel Ecclesiae singulari addicti.) That they were
fixed to no place, or particular Church, but were to preach the Gospel, and
govern the Churches, through all places of the World, according to the Spirits
Conduct. 4. ( Quod pluribus and majoribus, etc.) That they were beyond all
other Ministers, endued with more excellent and various Gifts of the Spirit,
according to 1 Cor. 14.18. where Paul magnifies his gift of Tongues above all
others: And mentioning the conferring the miraculous Gifts of the Spirit, by
the laying on of their Hands, they add ( quae omnia fuerant, etc.) All which
were necessary in the Apostolic Office, for laying the first Foundation of the
Christian Church, through the World. Here again, the Apostles Extraordinary
Office, is asserted by the Saumer University, and that with the same
Ingredients, and upon the like grounds, as we do hold. So, here are more of the
Socinian Principles, if we may believe this Dr. and this University, as well as
that of Leyden, found ignorant of, and going cross to all Antiquity, in this
Matter. The ordinary succeeding Officers, and of the highest Function in that
capacity, they hold to be the Pastors and Doctors, whom they assert to derive
down what was ordinary in the Apostolic Office, to whom the Authority
Consequently, and Power of Teaching and Governing the Church is committed,
citing Act. 13. where mention is made of this Authority, in the Pastors and
Teachers of Antioch, and their joint collegiat Power in Imposition of Hands;
also 1 Cor. 14.29, 30, 31, 32. where the Prophets Authoritative judging of
every Member of the College and Society, and the due Subjection of every
Prophet to their decision, is asserted* joining therewith Chap. 12.29. ( Are
all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? etc.)

Well, shall we offer to the Dr, yet more Scots Presbyterian Novelists, and of
the Socinian Stamp, in this Matter? Piscat. de Minist. Eccles. Aphorism. 9* [
Apostoli immediate a Christo vocati fuerunt, etc.] The Apostles were immediately
called by Christ, and sent through the whole World, to es^ablish every where,
the Kingdom of God, by the Preaching of the Gospel. In his Explication he
shows, that in this Aphorism, the Ministry of the Apostles is explained in four
Heads, 1. [ Ex causa sine qua non, etc.] From the Cause and Ground, without
which they could not discharge their Apostolical Office, and this was their
immediate Vocation and Calling. 2. [ e subjectis Locis, etc.] From the Places,
where they Exercised their Apostolic Function, viz. the various Kingdoms of
the World. 3. [ Ex Fine ad quem, etc.] From the Scope and End, to which they
were to Direct their Ministry and Labors, viz. the Planting and Founding
Churches, etc. 4. [ Ex Causa Instrumentali, etc.] From the Instrumental Cause
they were to make use of, viz. their Unfixt Preaching of the Gospel. Here, I
Appeal to all Men of Judgment, whether this Account of the Apostolic Office,
is not the same, with that which this Man rejects as Socinian. Aphorism. 12. [
Sequuntur Pastores, etc.] He proceeds to Describe Pastors and Doctors, whom the
Church can never want; in the Explication, he tells us, that [ a praecedentibus
differunt Duratione] They differ from Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, in
Continuance, as being of constant Necessity to the Church. Thus, Denying in
Contradiction to our Dr, the Permanency of the Apostolic Office. Afterward he
adds, [ Officia Pastorum indicantur, etc.] That there are four Branches of the
Pastors, work and Office; The Interpretation of Scripture, the Ordering of
Government and Discipline, the Administration of the Sacraments, together with
Authoritative Admonitions and Exhortations: Showing thereafter, that the
Pastors do Succeed to what is Ordinary in the Apostolic and Evangelistick
Office: And their Episcopal Pastoral Authority, he proves from these notable
known Passages, improven by the Presbyterians, Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2.
Philip. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.1. 2. Tit. 1.5, 7. Now, I dare refer it to all Men of
Sense, whether this Man, is not in this Point of the New Opinion of Scots
Presbyterians, and stands Antipode to our Dr's Uniform Testimony of all
Antiquity.

Shall we Consult yet another? Turret. (Part. 3. Loc. 18. Quest. 17. These. 3.)
Reasoning against Bellarmin, in Point of Peter's pretended Primacy, he draws his
Argument, [ a Natura Apostolici Muneris] and tells the Iesuited Cardinal, and
our Dr. with him, that the Apostles had an immediate Power and Jurisdiction,
which they received from Christ immediately. And ( These. 4.) in Answer to
Bellarmin, holding, (much to our Reverend Dr's Sense and Pleading) that Peter
had the Pontificat, as an ordinary Pastor, to be therein succeeded. He Answers,
that [ gratis supponitur, etc.] it is without Ground presumed, that Peter was
an ordinary Pastor, to whom any could succeed; Adding in the end, ( denique cum
Apostolatus, etc.) since the Apostolat as such, was an Extraordinary, Temporal,
Transient Function, which was to expire and cease in the Church, it could have
no Successors: Herein flatly giving the Lie to our Dr's Grand Topic and
Principle, anent the permanent Function of Apostolat, as necessary in the
Church till the End of Time. As for his Judgment of the Pastoral Office, as the
Highest Ordinary Function of the Church, and the same with that of the
Scripture Bishop and Presbyter, and by Consequence, the Succession thereof to
what was Ordinary in the Apostolic Office, we have already made it appear.

Musculus (if I may Name him again, without Angring our Dr.) is full and clear
to this Purpose, ( de Offic. Minist. P. 358, 359.) ( Apostolus est, qui, etc.)
That the Apostles were not set over any one particular Church, but the Lords
Command to them, was, that they should Preach the Gospel through the World, and
the Command ( Go, Teach all Nations) was peculiar to them. And (P. 360.) he
shows, that Pastors were the same with Bishops, and were in this distinguished
from Apostles, that they were sent to Teach and Feed particular Churches, and
fixed to them.

Amand. Polan. ( Syntag. Theol. Lib. 7. Cap. 11. de Minist. Ecclesiae)
describes thus the Apostolic Office, ( Apostoli Christi fuerunt Christi
Discipuli immediate ab ipso edocti, etc.) That the Apostles were the Disciples
of Christ, immediately Instructed by him, sent to Preach the Exhibiting of the
Messiah before his Ascension, and thereafter to Preach to the whole World, and
thus to Found the Gospel Church, having this Testimony from God, that they
could not err in Doctrine, etc. Afterward, he tells us, what were the
Privilegia Apostolorum, and the Prerogative Praeordinari^s Novi-Testamenti
Ministris, their Prerogatives above the ordinary Ministers of the New
Testament; Instancing, 1. Their immediate Institution by Christ. 2. Their
immediate Mission by him to Teach. 3. Their General Legation to the whole World,
with Authority of Founding Churches every where, not in one place only, Citing
2 Cor. 11.28. where Paul shows, that the Care of all the Churches was upon him.
4. The Visible Symbol and Badge of this Legation, viz. the conferring of the
Visible Gifts of the Spirit by Imposition of Hands. 5. Their Immunity from all
Error, after their Receiving the Holy Spirit, in the Day of Pentecost. 6. Their
Extraordinary Authority against the Rebellious, Citing 2 Cor. 10.6, 8. where
Paul mentions his Readiness to Revenge all Disobedience, and the Authority
hereanent, for the Edification of the Church, whereof he might Boast. 7. Their
Prophetical Gift, in showing things to come. The 8 th. Prerogative, he
represents thus [ Authoritas qua nullus ex Discipulis ipsorum comparari cum
ipsis unquam potuit aut potest, qua enim Apostoli Christi supra Ecclesiam
reliquam extit^runt] Their singular Authority, which was of such a Nature, that
none of their Disciples or Successors, in an ordinary Ministry, could be
compared with them, nor can be; For as Apostles, they had a Supereminent
Authority over the whole Church. (P. 538.) He describes the Pastors to be such,
as are set over some particular Flock, Citing Act. 20.28. Here I need not tell
the Dr, that this Man also, is of the Novel Scots Opinion, and if we may
believe the Dr's Reverence, a Socinian, as to the Sense of the Extraordinary
Apostolic Office, giving the same. Sense of its Ingredients as we do, and
holding that the Apostles neither were, nor could be succeeded in their Office,
and consequently, that their Formal Office, as such, ceased with themselves. He
asserts, ( ibid.) the Official Identity of the Bishop and Presbyter; And
thereafter tells us, that ( Episcopi omnes Apostolorum Successores sunt) All
Pastors are the proper Successors of the Apostles in the Gift of Feeding and
Teaching the Church, Citing Anaclet. Did. 21. Cap. in Novo, and Hierom. ut
citatur Did. 35. Cap* Ecclesiae ( si in Apostolorum Loco sumus, etc.)
Asserting that Pastors are properly in the Place of Apostles, in the Exercise
of an Ordinary Ministry: And* also* -- Urbanus Secundus ex August. Did. 68.

Another yet of the New Scots Opinion, in this point of the Apostles
extraordinary expired Office, we may propose, yea oppose to the Dr. viz: the
Famous and Learned Rivet. Cathol. Orthodox. Tract. 28. Quest. 23. Ballaeus the
Jesuit, against whom he disputes, proposing the Question in his Catholic
Catechism ( Habent ne Episcopi in Sacerdotes reliquos que ordines
praeeminentiam) Whether Bishops has a Pre-eminence above Priests, and all other
Orders of the Ministry. I need not tell the Dr. the Answer of his Catholicus
papista, the same it is with that of our Catholic Dr. and upon a pretense of (
universalis* patrum consensus) universal consent of the Fathers. The great
Answer is ( Apostolis Episcopos successisse) That the Hierarchical Bishops have
succeeded the Apostles, in their proper formal Office. And to show the sweet
Harmony betwixt these Dear Catholics and Patrons of that Cause, our Dr. makes
this the goodly Title of his second Chapter, viz: Of the succession of Bishops
to the Apostles. And remarkable it is, that the Catholic Jesuit and he, pleads
upon the same very Grounds, viz: The Apostolat called Episcopacy Act. 1. --
Then comes in James's Episcopacy at Jerusalem* -- Afterward the warry Jesuit
strikes Hands with our Dr. in obviating the Objection taken from the Nominal
Identity of Bishop and Presbyter, showing that this will not infer the
Protestants dangerous heresy of the Identity of the Office -- Then comes in
the Episcopacy of Timothy and Titus -- yea, and our Dr's. Testimony of
Tertullian is not forgot ( lib. de Baptismo) ( Episcopus Baptizandi autoritate
pollet, etc.) That the Bishop has the power of Baptizing, then Presbyters and
Deacons by his Authority, that the Subordination of the Ecclesiastic
Hierarchy, may be kept entire. -- Thereafter the Jesuit, as our Dr. exclaims
upon the Reformers as pleading for a confused Parity Well, some will allege,
the Dr. in this point, is pretty near the Sacred Order. I cannot here
transcribe all that this French, or Scots Novelist Presbyterian, Rivet, returns
in Answer to this point, which I really judge, had our Dr. impartially read and
perused, it would have saved him the Trouble and Labor of this Pamphlet. He is
first severe to the Jesuit, and to our Dr. as to the Name Sacerdos, or Priest,
whereby they represent Pastors ( De Episcoporum in Sacerdotes praeeminentia,
says he, frustra disputatur, cum sacerdotum ordo nullus sit in Christianismo,
ut antea docuimus, etc.) That there is no access for a Debate concerning the
Pre-eminence of Bishops above Priests, since in the Christian Church there is
no order of Priests as he has before taught; (so upon the preceding Question,
Par. 4.) He tells his Adversary, the Protestant Churches acknowledges no
Priests properly so called, for offering Sacrifice in the Christian Church, and
that CHRIST the Eternal Priest, has no Successor: Beware then Mr. Dr. of naming
any more Priests for Ministers, if you will accord with Rivet, but there is no
access for this Admonition to a Dr. fixed in his Persuasion, again all Scots or
Extraneous Novelists* Thereafter, he is positive in asserting our Principle of
Parity against his Dr. Iesuita, and our Dr. ( Negamus, says he, Episcopos
supra Presbyteros jure Divino praeeminentiam habere.) He denis the Bishop's
Preeminence by Divine Right above Pastors. Thereafter, reciting the Jesuits
Medium and our Dr's ( quod Episcopi Apostolis, Presbyteri Discipulis
suec^sserant^) That Bishops Succeeded the Apostles, and Pastors the Seventy
Disciples: He answers thus [ hoc falsum est, ac utrorumque Officio contrarium,
quod extraordinarium fuit -- nemoque ipsis in eodem ordine ac autoritate
successit: Quamvis omnes vere Pastores Apostolor^m in Doctrinae publicatione,
and Iurisdionis Ecclesiasticae exercitio, successores dici possunt] That this
Asserton is false and contrary to the office of both Apostles and Evangelists,
which was extraordinary, and none did succeed them in the same Order, Office
and Authority, although all true Pastors, in respect of the publication of the
Doctrine, and the exercise of Ecclesiastic Discipline, may be called Successors
of the Apostles. Here, the Scots Presbyterian Opinion, pretty clear: Mr. Dr. it
seems Rivet was in this Point a Socinian; and a gross ignoramus in all
Antiquity. I cannot stand to transcribe his Answers, to our Dr's. and the
Jesuits* Arguments Subjoined. His Answer to that of confusion of Names, as not
inferring the sameness of things, is thus ( faetor vocum confusionem non semper
verum identitatem innuere, sed cum res eadem iis attribuuntur quibus eadem
nomina dantur, vera est synonomia, si quidem nomen cum definitione sit commune)
That granting that confusion of Names does not alwise infer the identity of the
things themselves, yet when the same things are attribute to those, to whom the
same Names are given, there is a true Syn^nomie or sameness of both Name and
thing, the Name being common with the definition. Here* in this one J^dicious
Answer, he cuts the Sinews of all our Dr's Reasoning upon this head. Then for
Confirmation of this Identity, he Cites 1 Timothy 3.1, 2. Tit. 1.5.7. And from
these known pregnant Passages pleads as we do, that the Name, Qualities, and
Ordination of Bishop and Presbyter are the same. For Tertullians Testimony,
which the Dr. Iesuita (and our Dr) cites, he tells him, That Tertullian speaks
( de humano ordine su^ tempore recepto) of the human Order or custom, received
in his time, which was, that the ( probatus quisque Senior) or every approven
Presbyter (as he expresses it Apol. Cap. 39.) presided over the Collegiat
Meeting of Pastors, and was called Bishop. The same, he tells the Jesuit, may
be applied to Ignatius's Epistles, and what is Cited from them to this Scope (
si sicuti jam se habent fidem mererentur) upon condition, that they deserved to
be credited, as, they are now presented: But then subjoins ( sed omnibus notum
est eas additionibus ac dimunitionibus fuisse corruptas) But it is known to
all, that they have been corrupted with additions and Dimunitions: Referring
upon the Margin to his Crit. Sacr. Lib. 2. Cap. 1. Cooks Censure, and Vedel.
Not.

Wallaeus de past. P. ( mihi) 473, ascribs also to Apostles the extraordinary
call and Function, upon Grounds of their immediate vocation, citing Gal. 1* 1.
Paul's calling himself an Apostle, not of Men, nor by Man; their infallibility
in Doctrine, etc. The ordinary Officers and Successors of Apostles, he holds to
be the Pastors, as being first planted by them in the Churches; for which he
Cites and improves these places Act. 14.23. where we find the Apostles
Ordaining Ministers or Elders, Church by Church, as their proper immediate
Successors, in an ordinary Ministry: Tit. 1.5.7. where the Office of Bishop and
Presbyter, is identified in Name and thing; 2 Timothy 2.2. where he is enjoined to
commit what he had heard of Paul to faithful Men, able to Teach others: So Act.
20.28. where the Episcopal Office is enjoined to Elders by Paul in his last
farewell to the Church of Ephesus: So also Ephesians. 4.11. with Rev. 2.3. In which
places, the Pastors power and Jurisdiction, is to this Scope asserted.

Iunius Cont. 5th Lib. 1. Chap. 14. Not. 15. has these notable words ( nunquam
instituit Christus ut Apostolis. Secundum gradum succederetur quae res si
fuisset* jam Apostolatus functio ordinaria dicenda esset, hoc autem veritati
and rationi adversatur: omnes Dei servi in Doctrinam Apostolorum suecesserunt,
in gradum eorum neminem adoptavit Deus. God never appointed or allowed any
succession to the Office and degree of Apostolat, which had it been, the Office
of the Apostles, might be called ordinary, but this is contrary to the Truth
and sound Reason. All the servants of God, have succeeded into the Doctrine of
the Apostles, but God has adopted none of them into the Apostles degree and
Office.

None succeeded to Apostles and Evangelists, as to the degree and Office (says
Baynes) since it was extraordinary and temporary. The Pastors and Presbyters,
because ordinary Officers, succeed them from another Line, but not as one
Brother succeeding to another, in the Right of inheritance -- As the Laws of
Moses, during that Economy, were to be kept, tho Moses, who delivered them,
had none Succeeding him, in his Office and degree; So, neither were the Rules
in Government, presented in the Epistles of Timothy and Titus, delivered to any
succeeding them in their Office.

Ecclesiastical Authority (says Gerson de potest. Eccles. considerat. 6 ta)
may be considered either formally, absolutely, or respectively, as applied to
this or that person, and executively. Although the Authority absolutely
considered* continues the same, yet in the application, it is various; and that
which was in Apostles and Evangelists, remained not alwise with such Apostles
and Evangelists: As in Point of Right, none could succeed to the degree of
Apostles and Evangelists, so in Matter of Fact, none did succeed.

Causabon ( exercit. 14. P. 314.) makes this the quarta Nota of the Apostolat,
Potestas long major and Augustior quam ulli unquam alii functioni Spirituali
fuerit attributa. The fourth discriminating mark of an Apostle, is with
Causabon, their greater and more Venerable Authority and Power, than was
competent or allowed to any other Spiritual Function or Office. Which he
illustrats from Chrysostom, 1 Cor. 12.29. asserting the Apostles to be above
all other Spiritual Functions.

Quis nescit (says August. lib. 2 de Baptismo cap. 1.) illum Apostolatus
Episcpatum cuilibet Episcopatui praeferendum. Who knows not that the Episcopacy
of Apostles, is set above all other Episcopacy whatsomever?

Now, I supose from what is said, it is evident, that this Man, in stead of
exposing the Presbyterians, in this account of their Judgment, anent the
Apostolic Office, has opposed himself to Protestant Divines, and has blotted
himself, as a Calumniator of the true Protestant Doctrine in this point,
espousing therein the Popish Cause and Interest.

But let us hear what is our Dr's. Account of the Apostolic Office: It is
thus: In opposition to which, says the Dr. P. 96. ( i. e. the premised
Presbyterian, or rather Protestant Account of the Apostolic Office) We affirm
(had he added, we Catholics and Jesuits, some would allege the Epithet had
been suitable to his Doctrine) Well, What affirms he? That the true
Characteristick, formal, and distinguishing Mark of an Apostle, was his
Constant, Supreme, Spiritual, Perpetual Power, Authority; and Jurisdiction,
over all subordinat Officers, and all others believing in Christ, and his Power
to transmit this Authority to his Successors, according to the Command of our
Savior. Here, we have it in his own Words: Upon which, 1. Let it be
considered, that he presents this Description and Account of the Apostolic
Office, in opposition to that which he premiseth as ours. We hold, as well as
he, that the Apostles had a Supreme (though collateral and equal) and Spiritual
Power and Authority over Officers and Members of the Church: Only we add these
further Characteristicks of their Office, viz: Their extraordinary Gifts, their
immediate Call, including and having connected therewith, an unconfined
Commission to propagat the Gospel among all Nations, as himself words our
Tenet, and which is also proved from that Passage he cites, Matthew. 28. Now,
since in opposition to our Description, he holds, that his, not ours, are the
proper discriminating Marks, whereby Apostles were distinguished from other
Officers, he must of necessity, hold that these Characters are proper to other
Officers, as well as them, For, there is no Mids: Either these Prerogatives
were peculiar to Apostles, or proper to others also, and thus common to both,
and it being so, not to mention other properties, since their unconfined
Commission to Preach to all Nations; And he cannot but acknowledge as immediate
Officers of all the Churches, in actu exerciso, and in order to the founding
them, and planting Gospel Ordinances, and Officers therein, according to our
Saviors Commission, Matthew. 28. is our great Mark and Characteristick of an
Apostle, I challenge him to show me, what succeeding ordinary Officer, had this
applicable to him, whether of his supposed Epis^opal Mould or any other. The D^
will not deny, that upon this Ground, the Churches are said to be built upon
the Apostles Foundation, and this in an exclusive Sense, not the Foundation of
any succeeding Officers, whether the Dr. call them Subordinat or otherwise; And
he knows the Churches Foundation is not to be twice laid; So, that he is
obliged either to produce succeeding Officers with this Prerogative and Power,
or acknowledge this his Description naught, which he so vainly offers, in
opposition to the Account of this Office, offered by Protestant Divines. 2. He
says, That this power was constant, perpetual, and to be transmitted to
Successors. Here, I ask him, whether the Apostles were to transmit their Power
to one Successor and Supreme President, or to devolve their Collateral,
Universal Power over all Believers, and all subordinat Officers, to respective
Successors, coming after every one of them? If the Dr. adhere to the first, he
clearly homologats the Papal Pleadings for a Primacy over the Church Universal:
And indeed, his owning as a Pattern to the New Testament Church, the Continuance
of the Jewish Economy, does much oblige him thereunto. If he assert, that
every one of the Apostles had a respective Successor, then his Descrip^^on
obliges him to mantain that every such Successor, has transmited unto him, A
Perpetual, Spiritual, Constant, Universal Inspection over all Churches, both
Ministers and Believers: For, this essential Authority of Apostles, he affirms,
they were to transmitt to Successors, and that according to the Command of our
Savior.

But to proceed; Let us Listen to our Dr's Explication, (P. 97.) The Apostles
Permanent Successive Power, was to Preach the Gospel, Govern the Churches they
Planted, give Rules and Directions to Successors in the same Office, and all
Subordinat Ecclesiastics, Inflict Censures, Communicate this Authority to
others, Hear Complaints, Decide Controversies, Settle Church Discipline,
Conferr the Holy Ghost, as the Necessity of the Faithful requires -- (He tells
us, He understands the Gifts, that must needs attend the Authoritative Ministry
of Holy Things) This being Essentially the Apostolic Office, it remains for
ever in the Church, the ordinary Necessities thereof, requiring it should
continue till Christ's coming. Here, First, I would enquire again, since the
Power thus described, is in the Dr's Sense, Permanent and Successive, and
necessary to the Church, whether is it so, as devolved upon every Person
Succeeding, and in the same Extent, and for the same E^ds, as the Apostles
Exercised it? If it be not, then every Body of Common Sense, knows, that this
Apostolic Power and Office, cannot be called Permanent and Successive, and of
a continued standing Necessity in the Church, no more than a Pastors ordinary
Power to Preach and Baptize, will prove this, and that they hold this entire
Apostolic Office, which he describes. If this Apostolic Power and Office, be
devolved in its entire extent, and to every Person Succeeding, then every
Person thus Succeeding, has an Entire, Unconfined, Universal Authority and
Inspection over all the Churches, all Ecclesiastics and Believers, to use his
own Terms, and are obliged by their Office, to Preach unto, and Govern them
all, as the Apostles did, to give Rules, Inflict Censures upon all Subordinat
Officers. If he say, that every Apostle did not so Extensively Preach and
Govern: I Answer, even admitting some Gradual Difference in the Extent of the
Actual Exercise, yet this did no whit Lessen their Universal Commission,
expressed Matthew. 28. and the Obligation of a Proportioned Endeavor, could not
Impeach their standing Authority over all the Churches, and their Relation, in
Actu Exercito, as immediate Catholic Officers thereof: And the Dr, in saying,
That this Authority and Jurisdiction reached over all Subordinat Officers and
Believers; without Exception, (which very Power, he affirms, they were to
Transmit to Successors) confirms what I said, and cuts him off from this
Evasion. To clear this further, in the second place, it may be asked, whether
these supposed Successors, are Authorized to Plant Churches, give Rules to
them, Decide Controversies, Conferr the Holy Ghost, as the Apostles did, with
Respect to the End, Manner, and Extent foresaid? If not, then sure this Power
is Transient, not Permanent and Successive, as the Dr. calls it. If they have
this Power of Apostles, as above expressed; Then first, there lies upon every
such Successor, an Obligation to Plant Churches, where they were not; For, he
will not deny that the Apostles were to Plant and to Govern the Churches
Planted, and to give Rules and Directions thereanent. The Absurdity of which
Assertion, is sufficiently apparent, and its necessary Dependence upon what he
asserts, no less evident. But while we speak of Successors giving Rules, the
Dr. would do well to inform us, what Rules he means, whether the Apostles
Rules, or others? If the same, then they could not Succeed the Apostles in
Authoritative, Infallible Delivery of the first Gospel Rules, this Work being
already done: If others; then the Dr. will ascribe to them such a Nomothetick
Authority as to Rules, as no Church can now acclaim, in the Sense of all
Protestant Divines. If he say, he means an Application or Declarator of
Apostolic Rules, in particular Cases: Then I Answer, This is not the
Apostolical Delivery of Rules, as all Men know, but is toto coelo different
from it, both in its Nature and Extent; So, that this Shift will not help the
Dr. out of the Briars. But in the next place, the Dr. has told us, of an
Apostolical derived Power in Deciding Controversies, which he appropriats to
the Bishops their Successors, and in the Sequel of his Reasoning, must atribute
it to every one of them. And here, I would enquire of him, how did the Apostles
Decide Controversies? The Dr. will not deny, that any one of the Apostles, by
virtue of their Authority and Infallibility, could decide Controversies
infallibly, as being our Saviors Living Oracles and having the Mind of Christ:
And what Bishop, or Succeeding Church Officer, I pray, has this Power and
Authority? We know, General Councils have erred in their Decisions: But the Dr.
gives a greater Power to every Bishop, by this his New Notion. Or, if the Dr
allay and lessen this Decision, either as to Extent or Authority, then he is
still in the Briars, and baffles his own definition and explication. Further,
the Dr. has told us, the Bishops succeeds the Apostles in giving the Holy
Ghost. The Scriptures tells us the Apostles gave the Holy Ghost, and even
Miraculous visible Gifts thereof, by imposition of Hands; and we have heard,
that Protestant Divines ascribe this to them, as one of their incommunicable
Prerogatives: The Dr. will needs have them succeeded in this. But being someway
sensible of the absurdity of this lax Assertion, he restricts it to such Gifts,
as must needs attend the Authoritative Ministry of Holy things. Be it so; but
will he say, that the Apostles did no otherways give the Holy Ghost? This he
cannot assert. Then I say. 1. He must acknowledge, that here is a defective,
maimed, not an entire Succession in this work and part of their Office. 2. The
Dr would be puzzled to show a Reason, why he restricts and limits this Point of
the Succession, rather than the rest. Finally, the Dr. calls this Power of the
Apostles, Supreme, and no doubt, since it is with him, one Criterion of the
Apostolic Office, and competent to all their Successors the Bishops, in this
Apostolic extent; For, he affirms, that this Power of the Apostles, is
perpetual and necessary in the Church, and that the Bishops are their proper
Successors therein: And here, the Dr. would do well to inform us of what
Character and Mould, in Point of Power, these Bishops are, whom he owns to
succeed to this Apostolic Office: For, that de facto, there is a great variety
in the extent of their Power, he will not deny. Whether does he hold, that
every ordinary Bishop is such a Successor? or the Arch Bishop? or only Primats?
If every Bishop does thus succeed (which the Series of his Arguing seems to
import) then I would know, how a Bishop with a derived, subaltern, subordinat
Power, limit to a certain, and may be, not a very great Precinct or district,
can be said to succeed the Apostles, in a Supreme Jurisdiction over all
Believers and Ecclesiastics? Let him make Sense of this, if he can: If he say
that the Bishops Succession relates to their Power within their own district:
Then, 1. They no more succeed the Apostles, in the Power by him described, than
Successors to a Sheriff in a Kingdom, can be said to succeed to the Regal
Throne. 2. If he once break square thus, and infringe his own Rule, his
measures and description, he must consequently acknowledge, that a Government
in the smallest precinct, yea, even of a Pastor over his Flock, is eaten us, a
Succesion to the Apostles. If he say, the Pastor has no Rule over
Ecclesiastics, and consequently, no Apostolic Succession, in his Sense: I
Answer, neither has the Bishops over all Ecclesiastics, which is also his
Sense and description of the Apostolic Succession. If he own, that only Arch
Bishops* are such Successors; Then, 1. How comes he to own the Bishops, in
universum, as succeeding the Apostles, in a Rectoral Power. 2. Since the
Bishops can give Rules to subordinat Ecclesiastics, Preach if their Lordships
please, give Rules of Discipline, hear complaints, decide Controversies, etc.
wherein he makes this Apostolic Succession to consist, how can he deny, even
to Diocesan Bishops, this Succession? 3. Suppose, but one Diocesan Church in a
Country gathered, the Dr. will not deny an Apostolic Succession and
Government, there, according to his Pattern and Principles.

But to proceed, if the Dr. hold, that only the great Arch Bishops or
Metrapolitans, have this Supremacy and Apostolic Succession; I would know upon
what ground, he can defend this in his Principles? I know none, except that of
the extent of their Power, be alleged. But here the Dr. is still at odds with
himself: For the Apostolic Power, which he holds to be Succeeded unto and
Permanent, extended to all Churches, to all Ecclesiastics and Believers. And
besides, suppose an Oecumenick Council Assembled, the Dr. will not assert, that
he has an Authority paramount to it, by his Office, and that there may not be a
greater Metropolitan than he, existent, whose Power may be paramount to his, in
the Council, or otherwise. Thus, we see how our Dr. in his Fantastic
Description of the Apostolat, and Pleadings for the Bishops Succession
thereunto, has involved himself, and is Rolling Sisiphus Stone, which still
returns upon him, and renews his Labor.

But in the next place, the Dr. ( P. 97.98.) tells us, That extraordinary Gifts
of the Holy Ghost, Power of Miracles, Languages, other Spiritual Furniture,
were temporary, extrinsick advantages, necessary for first forming the
Christian Church, and when this Fabric is erected, Scaffoldings are removed.
But I should think, if the Apostolic work and necessary duties required these
extraordinary Gifts, as necessary advantages and furniture for the same, then
they were intrinsic, not extrinsick to the Office it self; Which I will prove
to the Dr, by a parallel Argument, the Topic whereof, he must needs own: To be
apt to Teach, to have Spiritual knowledge, and the Gift of utterance, in a
competent Measure, prudence, a competent knowledge of the Scriptures, and
Languages thereof, he will acknowledge, are needful for the Pastoral work of
Feeding by the word and Doctrine: Therefore, say I, they are essential and
intrinsic to the Pastoral Office; For, 1. Else there were no need of a
previous trial of these Gifts, in order to admission to that Office. And 2. God
conjoins the call to the Office, with the Gifts for it, and the one in an
ordinary way, must be made Appear by the other: I hope, the Dr* and I are
agreed as to the Soundness of this Reasoning. Now, let me subsum upon this
Conclusion; In like manner, the Apostolic Office required these works or
duties, whereunto were necessarly annexed the forementioned Gifts and Eurniture
for the fame. 1. They were to teach all Nations; this they could not do without
the Gift of Tongues, wherefore on the day of Penticost, they were thus sealled;
Yea were, Commanded to stay and wait at Jerusalem for this Seal. 2. Another
piece of their work, was, to Confirm their Doctrine by Miracles, then new and
unknown, thus to seal their Commission to an Infidel world, as also, to the
Jews, as Moses and Aaron were to Pharaoh and Israel, before whom the Signs were
shown of the Rod and Leprous hand: This Work required the Gift of Miracles. 3.
They were to form the Christian Church, and lay the ground plott of its
Government, and deliver the Rules and platform of its Doctrine and Worship;
This required an infallible directive Power and Authority, in reference to all
the Ordinances and Officers thereof. 4. Their Work and Office required an
immediate Relation, in actu secundo, to all Churches, so that they were, while
alive, solely such Officers thereof: Hence, their very Office being of this
Nature, and supposing the Christian Church a forming and erecting, it is
certain, that taken in a proper formal Sense, with these its Ingredients, i^ is
the Scaffolding which is removed* when this Fabric is erected, since, now no
Mortal can pretend to such a Mission, Commission, and Authority. Further, The
Command, [ Go teach all Nations] he must hold still vigent, as essentially
included in the Apostolic Office, for he distinguishes this part of their
Permanent Power, from their extraordinary expired Privileges (P. 96.) so that
he must needs acknowledge, that this requiring the Gift of Tongues, it was
essential thereunto. Again, he holds, there is a Supreme Power of Government,
constant and transmitted to the Church: And this Supreme Power necessarly
requires, (1.) Infallibility in all the Methods and Measures of Government;
For, that upon the ground of such a Supremacy, the Apostles had an
Infallibility, in all their Measures and Ordinances of Government, delivered to
the Churches, the Dr. will not deny. (2.) He cannot deny this necessary
Consequence, That therefore, they were privileged with unaccountableness and
uncontrolable Power; And this in his Principles, he must needs hold to be
transmitted: For, if Supremacy and Infallibility will not infer these two,
surely nothing will. And the Dr. will not say, that Supremacy over all Church
Officers and Members, are temporary expired Privileges; For this he clearly
distinguishes from them: And it being thus; the Question still recurrs to what
Bishops he ascribs this? Whether to some of them who are of Special Character,
or to all? If to all, then none of them are subordinat and accountable to
another, as being all Infallible and Supreme, in the Exercise of their
Government. If to some only, under what Character are they? Primats,
Archbishops, or Patriarchs? And whether are they subject to one Head? If to
one Head, then they loss the Privilege of Supremacy, wherein the Dr. makes an
Apostolic Succession to consist: Yet it will be hard to say, that they were
not subject to a General Council, as to their Doctrine and Administration: And
sure I am, the Dr. will assert, that the Apostles had such a Supreme Power, as
put them beyond the reach of Subjection to any Church Judicatory, and this
their Supreme Authority, he asserts to be Constant and Permanent, still
necessary for the Church, and died not with their Persons: So, that here is
another confused Maze and Farrago of Inconsistencies.

But further, to show how this Man's precipitant folly has involved him, two
things are again considerable: First, He holds the Jewish Economy never to
have been abrogat, but to be still vigent, as it exemplifies a Pattern to the
New Testament Church; This he acknowledges had a Supreme High Priest, who was
an OEcumenick President over that Church, over all inferior Priests* and all
their Courts: For, he will be far from admitting any inferior Priests to share
in this Privilege. Hence, i^ inevitably follows, that this Supremacy is in his
Sense, applicable only to the Supreme OEcumenick President, that the Christian
Church may come up to its Pattern. And it being thus, let us in the next place
see, how he notwithdanding crosses this in two Points; 1. In making this
Constant, Supreme, Spiritual Power, over all Members and Officers in the
Christian Church, to have been first exercised by every one of the Twelve
Apostles, and by them derived to their respective Successors. 2. In holding in
discriminatim, and without any note of distinction of one from another, that
the Bishops (yea, all Bishops) are Successors of the Apostles; he means in a
proper formal Sense: For, this is the very Title of this goodly Chapter, of the
Succession of Bishops from the Apostles, as is said. Further, I would gladly
know, whether our Dr. ownes any Church Power to have been transmitted to
Presbyters or Pastors, and to be asserted, Act. 20 28. 1 Pet, 5.2. Heb.
13.7.17. and many such places, pleaded by the Presbyterians: It is probable, he
will acknowledge this, so that it be within their Precincts, and
insubordination to the Bishops. Now, I pray, why will he deny them the
Privilege of Succession to Apostles, in point of Church Power? He has no
Shadow of Ground, unless upon the Account of a Precarious Dependence upon the
Bishop; So, that it is not a Supreme Spiritual Power, as he defines that of the
Bishops, as succeeding Apostles therein. And I beseech him, why are not the
Bishops, upon this Ground of their Precarious Dependence upon Superior Bishops,
equally cut off from this Privilege? If he say, the Bishops Power reaches to
Church Officers under them, not that of Presbyters; I have already told him,
what an Insignificant Evasion this is, and that he cuts himself off from this
Answer, in that he makes this Apostolic Power, which is Transmitted to
Successors, to be a Jurisdiction and Authority over all Subordinat Officers,
all Ecclesiastics, and all others Believing in Christ. And he tells us, That
the Apostles were to give Directions to their Suceessors in the same Office.
So, that if it be not thus understood, who can reconcile his Words to Sense?
For, he distinguishes the Successors to their Office, from such as he calls
Subordinat Ecclesiastics, who have no such Authority. And to say the Office is
perpetual and permanent, that the Office imports Essentially a Supreme Power
over all Church Officers and Members, and is thus distinguished from all
Inferior Offices, that this very Office is derived to Successors, as being
Essential and necessary to the Church Government in all Ages, and yet that
these Successors, one or more, have a Power Encircled within a certain Plott of
Ground or District, is such a palpable Contradiction and Nonsense, as none can
be more evident.

We are told, (P. 98.) That the Essence of the Apostolic Office, consisted not
in the forementioned extraordinary Privileges -- but in the Rectoral Power,
Transmitted to their Successors in all Ages. I have told him, and made it
appear, that their Rectoral-Power, necessarly included these Privileges, and
since he acknowledges, that the Essence of their Office consisted in their
Rectoral Power, it does necessarly follow, that these being of the Essence of
that Power, they were Essential to the Office. We acknowledge with him, that
they were by their Office distinguished from Subordinat Officers; The Dr.
infers, That therefore, this Distinction must consist in something so peculiar
to them, as its incommunicable to any Orders of Officers not Honored with this
Character. Before I come to a direct Answer, I will here cleave all his
Reasoning asunder, with a Wedge of his own Setting. The Apostles Universal,
Unconfined Inspection over all Churches, Planted and to be Planted, and as
Catholic Universal Ministers thereof, in Actu Exercito, is that whereby they
are distinguished from other Officers, who are not of that Character: And being
thus distinguished, this must of necessity be the Essence of their Office; for
it is the Essence, from which Essential Distinctions flows: Yet, we will find
the Dr. Disowning and Denying this (P. 96.) Next, from hence, its easy to
infer, that to give Successors the true Apostolic Character and Power, it must
be of this Nature and Extent, else its Hetrogeneous unto, and comes short of
its Pattern* Will any Rational Man deny, that the Rectoral Power derived to
Apostles by our Savior, wherein he says, the Essence of their Office did
consist, was of this Nature and Extent? Now, let him produce, if he can, any
one Officer or Successor, with this Character. Again, that whereby they were
distinguished, or what was peculiar to them, may be understood two ways, 1.
Materially, or Simplely. 2. Formally, or as making up their Complex Office,
with its other Ingredients, and as properly subservient to the proper, formal,
immediate Ends thereof. In the first Sense, there were several things, whereby
they were not properly distinguished from other Officers at that time,
considering them materially and remotely; such as Gifts of Tongues, Miracles,
etc. which others had in their own Sphere and Degree: But formally, they were
proper to Apostles, considering their Degree, Circumstances, and proper
immediate End. Others had Gifts of Tongues, and of Miracles, but these Gifts
were distinguished from those of Apostles, upon the Ground above expressed. I
would make it evident by a Scripture Instance: Our Savior shows what
Miraculous Signs shall follow them that believe; And in these first times,
gives Instance, viz. their Casting out Devils, Speaking with Tongues, Taking up
Serpents without Hurt, (this we read of Paul, Act. 28.) their Drinking Deadly
Things without Prejudice; yet Paul says, speaking of these extraordinary Gifts,
[ truly the Signs, Wonders and Mighty Deeds of an Apostle are wrought among
you] But notwithstanding this, we know that Stephen, tho no Apostle, did
Wonders among the People. But who knows not, that in the Apostles, these
Actings of the Divine Power, were of another Nature, and for another immediate
End, viz. To Confirm and Ratify an Apostolic Authority, as the Churches
Infallible, Universal, First Messengers, upon whose Doctrine, the Foundation of
the Church was to be laid? Thus, according to the Sense of the Judicious and
Learned Professors of Leyden, their Office consisted in this, That they were
Christ's Universal Ambassadors to lay every where the Foundation of the Gospel
Church, and were sent immediately* and extraordinarly by him, instructed with
Infallibility in Doctrine, and Power to Confirm it with Miracles. So, that in
their Sense, and in the Sense of Sound Divines, already exhibit, when we speak
of the Apostolic Office, somethings were more remotely, and less principally,
Ingredients therein; somethings, more immediately and properly, to which the
other was subservient. Their Office lay in that Universal Legation mentioned,
and as Levelled at that great End of Founding the Gospel Church, which
necessarly included their immediate Mission, as is said; other things, as
Correspondent to this End, were Ingredients in their Office, in the remote
Sense above cleared, such as the Gifts of Tongues, Miracles, etc. This serves
to Unravel our Dr's Foolish Notion, which he has (P. 98, 99.) to disprove our
Sense of the Apostolic Office: Such as, First, That the Laity, many of them,
had Extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost. I Answer, (not to stand upon his
Expression, the Laity, or upon an Enquiry, who of them, had these
Extraordinary, Ministerial Gifts) by denying they were either of that Nature,
Measure, or for such an immediate End, as those of the Apostles. None certainly,
had such a clear comprehensive, immediate, infallible Light in Divine things as
they; And many things may convince the Dr. of this his Error: For, First, What
meant else their Solemn Extraordinary Seal of the Spirit, Act. 2. striking the
World with such Admiration? What need the Promise of the Spirit, to lead them
unto all Truth, and endue them with Power from on High? Again, the Dr. will
acknowledge, that the Apostolic Office was to Plant the Christian Church, and
Gospel Ordinances through the World; And therefore, he must, by necessary
Consequence, acknowledge, that their Gifts behoved to be, of such a Nature and
Measure, as were suited to this End, and in special to the immediate infallible
Government of the Churches, and the Direction of both Members and Officers
thereof, in their respective Duties: Hence, our Lord spent forty Days, after
his Resurrection, in instructing them in the things, pertaining to his Kingdom,
that they might be thus immediately fitted for this Work. The Dr. will not deny,
that the Pastoral Gifts before Instanced, of Scriptural Knowledge, Skill in the
Languages, Prudence, etc. are proper Ingredients in that Office, and
Characteristicks thereof, as suited to the Ends of the same, and the Evidences
of the Divine Call, all other things concurring, notwithstanding that some of
the Laity may have these Gifts. Next, for their Infallibility, the Dr. tells
us, That the Evangelists and Seventy Disciples were such. I Answer, supposing
the Seventy to be Evangelists, I deny this Infallibility competent to them,
understanding it of such a Nature and Extent as competent unto Apostles, and an
Ingredient of their Office, else I beseech him, why was Timothy, after his
Inauguration instructed by the Apostle, in reference to so many Points of his
Office and Duty, and so many things pointed out to him to beware of? As for
Lukes Writing from the Testimony of Eyewitnesses and Ministers of the Word;
Any with half an Eye, may see, that this falls utterly short of proving an
Apostolic Infallibility, in its Nature and Extent, and with respect to its
Ends; Although the Spirit of GODs infallible Guidance in what he wrote, is
necessarly supposed. What he means by Under-Ministers, I understand not: If the
Spirit of GOD, made use of his Information by Apostles or others, in order to
His End of this infallible Writing, can any imagine that this will prove an
Apostolic Infalibility, properly and formally such? As for Stephens doing
Miracles, and being endued with such Wisdom, as Adversaries could not resist
him: I deny the Consequence, that therefore he had Infallibility, or Gifts of
Miracles of that Nature and Extent, or to such a proper immediate End, as was
competent to the Apostles, upon the Ground already exhibit. Next, He tells us,
That Matthias was not immediately called, but by the Apostles, yet had power to
continue that Succession to the End. I deny his Assertion, which is among the
rest of his gratis dicta: It is evident to any, that but reads the History,
that Matthias was by GODs immediate choice and Declaration by a Lot (the
Disposal whereof, is of the LORD) set a part for his Work and Office, and GOD
was sought unto by Prayer to show His Mind, as touching this Choice: Which
therefore, was immediately his own. It is true, the Apostles, who had the Mind
of CHRIST, did with the consent of the Church, present the two to the LORD, but
the Choice and Call was GODs. And the presenting of these Eminent Persons to
GOD by the Church, will no more prove that Matthias was called and authorized
by them, than the Peoples presenting the seven Deacons to the Apostles, to be
ordained, will prove that they, not the Apostles, ordained them. The Dr. tells
us, That the first Apostles were Witnesses of Christ's Resurrection -- yet this
did not make them Apostles. What does he drive at? None says, that merely to
witness this, made any of them Apostles, or that to be an immediate Witness of
it, was indispensably needful in order to the Apostolic Office: For, so was
not the Apostle Paul: Although there is no doubt but that the Testimony of Christ's
Resurrection, was a great Point of the Apostolic Doctrine and Testimony. But
the Dr. will needs add his Proof, Or else, says he, Matthias had been an
Apostle before he was Invested. Who would not pity such impertinent triff^^gs?
I know none who asserts, that to be a Witness of Christ's Resurrection made an
Apostle; Who knows not that several Women (incapable of a Ministry) were among
the early and first Witnesses of our LORDs Resurrection: Besides, that the Dr.
has not proved that Matthia^ was such an immediate Witness. The Dr's. Conclusion
(ibid.) is That the Essence of the Apostolic Office, consisted not in
extraordinary Privileges, so plentifully poured out on the first Ministers and
Converts. We have told him, in what Sense, the Apostolic Office included these
Ingredients thereof: And even granting that some of these extraordinary
Privileges or Gifts, might have been in some Sense communicated to other
Officers; The Dr. is never a white nearer his Conclusion, since the Apostles
proper Work and Function consisted in this, to lay the Foundation of the Gospel
Church, to plant and water it, and as being infallibly inspired, to order the
Ordinances and Officers thereof, as being Immediate and Catholic Officers of
the same: Herein, we have often told him, lay their Office, as to its main
Essentials, and unto this their other Prerogatives, were Subservient. Now, in
all his Instances, he has exhibit none, who ever did or could share with them
in this Privilege. 2. He alleges (P. 96.) That we include among the
Essentials of their Office, their unconfined Commission to propagat the Gospel
among all Nations -- which necessarly includes an Immediate Relation, in actu
secundo, to the whole Church, and inferrs their Duty to be of the Nature and
Extent, as above expressed -- Yet he neither can, nor offers to give the least
shadow of any such Officer, that did or could share with the Apostles, or come
up to them in this Prerogative. The Dr. Concludes, That the Nature and Essence
of the Apostolic Office is perpetual. His Conclusion is like some Mushroms,
that Naturalists speaks of as a Miracle of Nature, because they grow without a
Root: His Reason [ that our Savior promised to be with them to the end] is as
far remote from the Conclusion, as East is from West, taking the essence of the
Office, in a proper formal Sense, as Apostolic. For, himself will not say,
that this promise will includ the continuance of all the Apostolic Privileges
or Gifts, several of which, he holds to be expired. And therefore, it must
still come under trial, wherein their Office was succeeded, even when this is
admitted. How he has proven this, to be the Nature and Essence of their Office,
we have seen above. Paraeus, with the current of Protestant Divines, takes the
place he cites, to import a general promise to the whole Church, in specal the
Faithful Ministers, the Apostles true Succcessors; thus he Paraphrases it [ Nec
paucis tantum diebus, sed omnibus vobiscum ero, nec vobiscum tantum, sed and
vobis mortuis and cum vestris successoribus Fidelibus Evangelii Doctoribus
Ecclesiarum Pastoribus usque ad consummationem saeculi] That the Lord promised
to be with his Apostles, and when they were gone, with all their true
Successors, the faithful Pastors and Doctors of the Church till the end of the
World.

This derived Power, says the Dr. (P. 100) is strictly Jure Divino: No doubt,
that Power which the Apostles derived, is such* He adds, that nothing can more
formally distinguish an Apostle from all other Ministers of the Gospel
Economy, than a supreme Spiritual Power to Govern Ecclesiastic affairs by
their Authority, of which they are to give account to our Savior. But we have
often told him, that this Supreme Power, most formally includes an immediate
Relation unto, and Universal inspection over the whole Church, and the nature
of the Work, and consequently the Office, as is above expressed. And the Dr. when
put to let us see the persons, who are the Subjects of this conveyed Power,
what ordinary Church Officers, are the proper Recipients thereof, must go to
Utopia to seek them; and in his arguing traverses in an inextricable Labyrinth;
which, besides what is said, h^s in this late Passage, a new proof: For, he
says, that the Apostles were to give an account to our Savior of this Power,
described by him. He will not say, they were to give this account merely, as
all Ministers are, in a mediat Sense; For thus, he would contradict his Scope,
of delineating their Supreme Power; so, that his meaning must be, that they
were to give an account only to our Savior, and were accountable or Subject to
no Church Judicatory upon Earth, for their Administration. Now, Mr. Dr. except
the Pope of Rome, your dear Patron, I know no Church Officer, whose head this
infallible Mitre will suit; unless these Supreme Infallibles be multiplied,
according to the Number of Bishops or Archbishops, it must necessarly resolve
thus in the Supreme incontrolable Patriarch: And what absurdity there is either
in the one, or the other, I need not show. We are told next, that the Name,
with the Office, was derived to others, besides the Twelve -- and Epaphroditus
must needs be the Philippians Apostle and Bishop, because called their Apostle,
Philip. 2.25. How impertinent this inference is, we have heard above. The Dr.
alleges, the word signifies always a Messenger from God to Men. But Mr. Dr.
your always, is here notably baffled, since, he is expressly called [ their
M^ssenger, sent to Paul, to Minister to his wants] This looks like a Messenger
from Men to Men, unless the Dr. will deifie the Philippians, and deny them to
be Men.

(P. 101.) Our English Translators miss their Mark, not only here, but in 2
Cor. 8.23. in Translating it thus [the Messengers of the Churches, and the
Glory of Christ.] What Glory of Christ was it, says he, that these Apostles
were employed from one Church to another --? but their Authoritative Delegation
was his Glory. Therefore, the Dr. will have them understood to be their
Apostles or Bishops. I Answer, the Translators could not but know, that the
Sense and context necessarly led them to this Interpretation; the Apostle,
being to commend unto this Church, while in treating of this Point of the
Col^ection, the integrity of Titus, and the other Brethren, who, upon his
exhortation, were come unto them, for this end, it follows necessarly, that
their Mission and Message here intimated by this epithet, must be the same with
that of Titus; So, that both appear to be sent in the same manner, and to the
same scope. As for the Dr's Reason, its palpably naught; the Apostles scope is,
to stir up this Church to their Duty of Charity, by these high Elogies put upon
the Messenger sent to them, beginning with Titus, whom he calls his Partner and
Fellow Laborer; and the Argument is strong, and lies Level to the Apostles
Scope and Conclusion, v. 24. [ therefore, show ye to them, and before the
Churches, the proof your Love] why to them? The Reason is, I have employed in
this Message to you, such eminent and Faithful Ministers, who are, as in that
capacity, the Glory of Christ. I must tell him further, that as CHRIST Gloried
to do the meanest Service to his Saints, and Humbled himself to Death for them,
so such Ministers are likest their Master, who esteem the meanest Service to
his Elect, their Glory, and above all worldly Dignity. Angels are Ministering
Spirits to Gods Elect* David esteemed it more Honorable to be a Doorkeeper in
his House than all worldly Glory. His sense of Rom* 16.7. Will not help him,
against the current of the Context and Interpreters. The Belgic Divines
Translate it [Renouned among Apostles] i. e. say they them that Preach the
Gospel here and there -- or well known with the Apostles. Diodat, and the
English Annot. take it to import [ Excellent Evangelists or Preachers] or [
such as were well known to the Apostles]

But now our Dr. (P. 101.102.) (...) obviat one main Objection taken from the
narrow Limits of the secondarie Apostles, as he calls them; This, says he,
alters not the Nature of their Apostolical Power, within their Bounds, no more
than Kings of Judah, can be denied the Honor of sitting upon the Throne of
David, in full Power and Royality, after the Apostasy -- they were as tru^ly
Kings* as any of their Predicessors, as Solomon, tho the number of Subjects was
not equal. Ans. I pray, was not in his Sense, the Rectoral Spiritual Power,
which our LORD conferred upon his Disciples and Apostles, of the Nature and
Extent above expressed, and such, as he calls Suprem^ over all Church Officers,
and all other Believers --? And says he not expressly, that this very Power,
thus described by him, is Essential to the Apostolic Office, and Permanent,
and that the Apostolic Office being no other than this, remains for ever in
the Church? How then is it possible, that such Officers, as derive down this
extensive Apostolic Power, should crumble into a petty Diocese? How are such
petty confined Successors, Supreme, and over all Church Officers? 2. The Dr.
Similitudinary and parallel Reason, cutts the Sinews of his Pleading and
Argument. It is true, Kings ^^ Judah sat upon David's* Throne, in full Power
over Judah; But I pray, did they succeed to David or Solomon's Throne or
Dignity, as they left it? I trow not. Now, he has told us, that the Bishops
succeed the Apostles, in that same Supreme Authority over Church Officers, and
all Believers, which Christ committed unto them. Should England be divided into
two Kingdoms, or into an Heptarchy, will any say, that the Man who succeeds to
one of these petty Dominions, succeeds to the Crown of England, or unto the
Kings thereof, because they possess a part of his Throne and Dominion? Surely
not: And so the Case is here. In a word, since in the Dr's. Sense, the
narrowing the Limits of the Authority, impeaches not the Episcopal Power, and
since, he will, no doubt, own the Maxim, Maj^s and minus non variant speciem,
Nazianzen, and such Bishops, as a^e said to have had but little Dorps for their
Diocesses, had this Apostolic Power. What consequence this will bear, in
reference to Pastors, some whereof, have a larger District, I have already told
him.

P. 102. The Apostles Bounds and Provinces of their Inspection -- was not as
equal as their Power it self, wherewith they were vested -- Who doubts of this?
Whatever was their Condescension this way, and adjusted Measures of Travels,
for the more commodious spreading of the Gospel, yet by virtue of their
Commission, their Authority reached the whole World, and all Churches planted
and to be planted, and this conjunctly and severally. As when the twelve Spies
were sent to Canaan, whatever ways they might have separatly gone, in a
voluntary Condescension, yet their Authority and Commission, jointly and a
part, immediately and formally, reached to a search of the whole Land. But I
need not labor in proving this; For the Dr. is ^o ingenuous, as to confess it,
telling us, That the different extent of places, to which they went, did not
alter or change that Rectoral Power and Jurisdiction wherewith they were
endued: But thus he inferrs (ibid.) no more did the Apostolic Authority
transmitted to Successors, differ from that which was lodged in the first
Apostles, tho confined in its exercise to narrower Limits. But, good Mr. Dr.
the Parallel is pitifully Lame, the Original Authority lodged in the Apostles,
by our LORDs Commission, is, by your Confession and Description, immediately
relative to all Churches, and all Believers in them; So, that this immediate
Relation, and a Right to Officiat upon Occasion accordingly, was still Vigent
and Existent, with any one of the Apostles, tho ordinarily exercising their
Ministry in never so narrow a Circle, every one of them, being Universal
Doctors, Bishops, and Inspectors of the whole Catholic Church, planted and to
be planted, and that ex natura officii, as Apostles: But I hope, ye will not
say this of the Bishop, he being properly and immediately related only to his
Diocese. It had been a gross absurdity to say, Paul, or James, are only
Apostles of such or such a Province, and have a Relation Apostolical to no
other Church, as it is proper to say this Man as Bishop of such a Diocese, has
an immediate Relation to it, and to no Diocese else. How often shall we tell the
Dr. (whose nauseous Repetitions forces us to repeat) that the Apostles were
capable of no particular fixed Ralation to any one Flock or Diocese, being as
Apostles, vi and natura officii, Catholic Doctors of the Church Catholic, and
constant infallible Inspectors and Directors of its Government, and all the
Ordinances and Officers thereof; And consequently, that this their proper
formal Office of Apostolat, went off, and expired with that infant State and
Exigence of the Church, and could never be succeeded unto by any Church Officer?

P. 103. We are told, That the Apostles by lot divided the places of their
Travels -- and went about what fell to their share. None doubts of this in
general, tho the particular Account of their dividing the World by lots, and
who were to go to Asia, who to Scythia, etc. is a piece of Discovery on the
back of the Bible, which we let pass among the rest of the Dr's profound
Notions. He adds, Its plain, that when Matthias was chosen, it was to take the
lot of his Ministry and Apostleship. Who doubts of this either? And that every
Apostle had a share of this Ministry of Apostolat, because all of the same
Office. But this will noways infer (except by the Dr's Logic, which can prove
quidlibet ex quolibet) that they were capable of a fixed Relation to any one
Post, or Watch Tower of the Church. That they Governed the Churches where they
resided, (as the Dr. next tells us) we doubt not. Tho I add, if the Churches
were constitute in their Organick Being, according to Gospel Rules, their
Apostolic Inspection was Cumulative unto, not Privative of the Government of
the Ordinary Officers Constitute therein. He adds, (ibid.) They committed their
Apostolical Episcopal Inspection to particular Persons, who succeeded them,
even in their Apostolic Authority. This is the (...) the Question, which the
Dr. still Cants over without Proof. We have often told him, that their
Apostolic Rectoral Power (as he calls it) related immediately to the Catholic
Church: And to say, that this they committed to particular Persons, related to
one fixed Post, and by Consequence solely Pastors or Bishops thereof, in an
immediate proper Sense, and subject to Superior Collegiat Churches and
Judicatories, (which he must needs hold, unless he embrace the Independent
Principles, and he cannot deny, that de Facto, the Bishops he pleads for, were
and are thus subject) is as great Nonsense, as to say, a Man succeeding to a
Private Cure, succeeds a Metropolitans Place, or that the Person who succeeds to
an Episcopal Chair, does succeed to the Papacy, in its supposed Rectoral Power.
The Dr. does here again Cant over, That their Rectoral Power distinguished them
from all Subordinat Officers. And from hence we rationally infer, that all
Ordinary Officers, being Inferior and Subordinat to them, this Rectoral Power
reached all Officers and Believers, as to the Ius it self, and consequently the
Exercise upon Occasion: And that therefore, the Dr. absurdly calls this their
Power Permanent, and as absurdly holds, that Officers related to particular
Posts, did therein succeed them.

P. 103, 104. The Dr. thus proceeds, When the Evangelical Priesthood (still
Priesthood) got its Qualified Officers, Bishops and Priests were not to
encroach upon one another, but every one was to Feed the Flock within the
Limits alloted to him. Now, here is a Confession, which contradicts and baffles
all his Pleadings; For, even these pretended succeeding Bishops and Apostles,
in his Sense, could not, without Impeaching Christ's Order, and Encroaching on
their Fellows, go beyond their Limits, in the Exercise of their Ministry: And
he will not deny, that this Limited Ministry flowed from the very Nature of
their Fixed and Limited Office: But will he dare to say, that any one of the
Apostles, were thus Limited, or had an Office of this Nature, or that they
would have Encroached upon the Authority of any of these his supposed fixed
Bishops, if Officiating within their Bounds, and Exercising their Apostolic,
Rectoral Power, in an immediate manner, without their previous Consent, as one
Bishop or Pastor cannot, yea may not, upon this Ground, thus Officia^. But,
says the Dr, (ibid.) They were not so Confined to their Sees, but that their
Episcopal Care reached the whole Church, as far as was possible, and Christian
Charity did require. I Answer, 1. So is no Pastor fixed to his Post, but as a
Watchman upon Ierusalems Walls, and thus having an immediate Relation to the
Catholic Church, his Pastoral Care, in its Exercise, in an Orderly Way, is
capable of a further Extension. The Church of God is a City, that has Watchmen
set upon her Walls, and in their several Posts, whose Care must, in a mediat
Sense, reach the whole City, but cannot in its Exercise be extended, but
according to the Garrison-Laws and Discipline; So, that thus, the Dr. will make
any Pastor succeed the Apostles: For, he will not deny, that the Pastoral Care
is of this Nature; Nor can he assign any Reason why, since the Bishop is tied
to his Limits, as well as the Pastor, the Pastoral Care is not capable of such
an Extension of its Exercise, as is suitable to the Churches Edification. But,
2. The Dr. speaks improperly and confusedly, when he assigns no other Rules and
Measures of this extended Care, but Christian Charity, and a Possibility
thereof merely: For, unless he turn Independent, and deny all Subordination of
Church Officers and Courts, he must needs acknowledge, that this Extension of
Exercise, must come under the Regulation, and Authorit^tive Inspection of
Superior Judicatories; the Spirits of the Prophets being subject to the
Prophets: And the Church Representative must be still supposed the proper
Ministerial Judges of her greater Good and Edification, which is the great
Ground of this Extension. So, that its pitifully impertinent to say, that its
only Christian Charity, and the simple Possibility of the Thing in it self
considered, whereof the Person himself is supposed Judge, that regulats this
Matter of so high Importance. Who will say, that a Sentinel's Exercise of
Military Inspection, can be extended beyond his Post and Station assigned him,
by the Governor and Officers of the Garrison, upon mere Charity, and a
Possibility of this further Extension, without Respect to what the Military
Discipline, and the Authority of the Governor and Officers, will allow? Now,
to subsume, I beseech this Dr. to tell me plainly, and speak it out, were the
Apostles, by virtue of their Office, to extend their Apostolic Inspection from
one Church or Country to another, only after this Manner, and by such Rules
and Measures? And dare he deny, that they were to follow the Spirits Conduct
every where, and by virtue of their Office, had an immediate Access to Exercise
their Authority over all Churches, wherever they came, and were subject to no
Churches Inspection, or Direction in this Matter? Can he not here see a
palpable Distinction of the Office of Apostolat, from all ordinary Officers, as
that of the Commanders of a Garrison, who are called to go the Round over all
the Posts and Sentinels, to take Inspection over, and Direct them, differs
necessarly and essentially from the Office and Charge of those, who are in
these fixed Posts, whether their Inspection be of a Larger or Lesser Extension?
And hence it appears, that unless the Dr. can let us see such Officers in
Scripture, whose proper Work was of this Nature, succeeding the Apostles in the
Inspection mentioned, and having such a Power devolved upon them, he will never
prove it from the Occasional Transient Officiating of Fixed Officers, beyond
their Limits, Directed and Authorized therein, by, and under the Inspection of
Superior Church Officers and Iudicatories. As for his Citation of Causabon,
Exercit. 14. ad Annal. Baron. N. 4. touching the Bishops peculiar Care of their
own Flock, yet so, as suo quodam modo, they Cared for the whole Church: I
nothing doubt, but that it may have a Safe and Sound Sense, when applied to
every Pastor, whose mediat Care, actu primo, suo modo, reaches the whole
Church. And the Citation quite baffles the Dr. For, if their care reached to a
peculiar Charge committed to them in solidum, it was toto coelo different from
the Apostolic care and Charge, as is above made good. And the Dr. in saying,
that this exactly resembled the Features and Lineaments of the Apostolic
Office, shows himself to be as bad and unskilful in the Art of Limning, as
unsincere and unskilful in Disput. For, such a Confined, Limited Ministry,
under such Regulations, as is above expressed, can no more Represent the
Features and Lineaments of the Apostolic Office, in a proper formal Sense, and
in its entire Nature, as delineat in Scripture, than a hand or Foot can
Represent the Lineaments of an entire Body. For what he adds, ibid. That
Confinment to a particular See, proceeds not from the Nature of the Priesthood,
but Rules of Prudence and Ecclesiastical Economy and Canonical Constitutions.
He speaks confusedly, and without Sense. For, this being the Nature of the
Priesthood or Ministry, viz: That it is Gods Ordinance, designed for
Edification, it must be consequently Adapted and measured to this end: And
therefore, whatever Person, has an ordinary Ministry committed to him, must
have it in such a proportion, as his Case and personal ability can reach* God
committing to no Man, an immediate inspection of the Catholic Church, as his
peculiar Charge: So, that whatever be the particular individual Limits of the
Charge, which is left to the Churches Prudence to assign, yet the persons
having such a Limited Charge, as is above discribed, flows from the Nature of
the ordinary Ministry, and the State and Case of the Church, when the
extraordinary Office of Apostolat is expired. And to Convince the Dr. of this,
and of the Folly of this Lax Assertion, that Confinement to a particular See
proceeds not from the Nature of the Priesthood, I would put to him this Querie:
Whether the Assigning unto one Bishop an U^niversal Inspection and Primacy over
the Catholic Church, would be any impeachment of the Nature of his Priesthood
or Ministry Assigned to him by G^d, yea or not? If not; then who sees not that
he owns the Lawfulness and Divine Warrands of a Papal Primacy, especialy, if
the Church should Corroborat this by an Universal Constitution? If he say, that
this extension were contrary to the Nature of the Priesthood; Then he
Contradicts himself, in Asserting, that the Priesthood of its own Nature,
requires no Confinment, as he calls it; and in Calling it so, he Insinuats some
sort of Violence offered to the Nature of this Ministry. Besides, these
Constitutions he mentions, Confining Bishops to a certain Charge, are either
cross or Correspondent to the Nature and ends of a Gospel Ministry, expressed
in Scripture: If cross thereunto; then sure they are not Lawful, unless he will
say, God gives the Church Authority to enact Constitutions cross to his
Revealed Will, and consequently paramount to his own Rules and Authority:
Which, whether it be greater nonsense or Blasphemy, is hard to determine. If
they be Correspondent to the Nature and ends of a Gospel Ministry, how can he
deny, that such a Confinment or Constitutions proceed from the Nature thereof?
His Reason added, viz. That the Apostles ordained Bishops for the Spiritual
Service of such as should believe, is as void of Sense or connection, as any
can be: For, so are all Pastors (the true Scripture Bishops) ordained by
Apostles. But will he be bold to say, or if he say, will not all Men of Sense
hiss him, That the Apostles ordained all and every Bishop or Minister, for the
actual immediate Service of all Believers of the Catholic Church, as their
proper peculiar Work and Charge? This he must either say, or his Reason is
naught. Nay, will he not thus contradict himself, in affirming his Secondary
Apostles, (as he calls them) to differ in Extension of Power from the first
Apostles?

P. 105. We are told, That the Apostles committed their Rectoral Power over
subordinat Ecclesiastics to particular persons, succeeding in their Room, in
particular Churches. Another piece of Repeated nonsense. The Apostles by their
Office, had an Universal immediate Inspection over all Ecclesiastics, or Church
Officers of the Catholic Church, as himself describs their Office: Yet this
their proper formal Office, thus described by him, he will needs have them to
devolve upon particular persons, fixed to particular Churches; as good Sense as
to say, the King Commits his Regal Primacy and Rectoral Power over his Kingdom,
when dying, or leaving it, unto the Man, whom he has enstalled in the Office
of a Sheriff.

But the Dr. tells us, that he will now propose the true State of the
Controversy. I am sorry a Doctor has disputed so long upon a Question, and has
yet the State of the Controversy to propose. Common Ingenuity and Rules of
Dispute, would have prompted him in the first place, to propose the true State
of the Question, and explain the Terms thereof: But these Rules are too
Pedantick for our Dr. who is more inclined to Pamphleting Harrangues, than
Systematick Divinity. Well, what State of the Question offers he? Thus it is,
[ Whether the Apostles committed their Apostolic Authority, they exercised in
particular Churches, to such single persons, duly and regularlie chosen; Or
to a College of Presbyters, acting in administration of Ecclesiastic Affairs
in a perfect Paritie and Equality?] I shall be glad to admit this State of the
Question, when one Exception is offered by way of Caution, Viz: That as we
grant an Ordinary Authority, which the Apostles exercised in particular
Churches, contained in their Office Eminenter, which they transmitted to
Successors; So, we deny, that the Authority, which they transmitted to these
ordinary succeeding Officers, was an Authority properly and formally
Apostolical, or such, in a formal Sense, as themselves exercised. And this I
have made appear to be the Harmonious Sense and Judgment of sound Divines, who
distinguish the expired Apostolic Office and Authority, from that ordinary
Power and Authority, which they transmitted to Successors. What next? We are
told, ( ibid.) That the Scripture-confusion of Names (might I presume to
prescribe a better* Term to such a Master of Language, as our Dr. I should
rather, to evite an apparent Reflection on the Holy Ghosts Language, call it
Community or Homonymie) will not prove Community of Offices, when persons are
undenyablie distinguished, with regard to their Authority. If we forget this
mighty Caution of our warry Dr. we must not blame him, if an unwearied
Repetition will help us. The Dr. will have this fixed, that we fight not in the
dark. The Presbyterians do hold this as fixed as he. What next?

P. 105.106. The LORD promised a perpetual Duration of the Apostolic Office,
not in their personal but Spiritual Capacity, he loving his Church as much
after as before his withdrawing -- If then they conveyed their Episcopal Power
to single persons in all particular Churches, and not to a College of
Presbyters, acting in a Paritie and Equality, then the Divine Right of
Episcopal Government is clearlie Estabilished. But 1. How often will this Man
cant over his Petitio Principii, and take that for the Ground and Topic of his
Argument, which is in the Question; Yea, and in the Question by his own
Confession, viz: That the Apostolic Office is perpetual, permanent, and
succeeded unto, in a proper formal Sense? What strange (may I call it
Impertinency, or) Inadvertancy is this? Since himself asserts that we deny such
a perpetual Office of Apostolat, and he opposes above, his definition anent
their permanent, perpetual Office unto Presbyterians assertion of the contrary,
and their Definition asserting the Apostles Transitory Function. 2. His Proof
from Christ's promise and constant care of the Church, is, in the Sense of all
Protestants, unsound and foolish, and he is therein inconsistent with himself:
For, in their Sense (yea, and by his own Confession) there are many expired
Prerogatives of Apostles, yea and Gifts of Officers in the first Apostolic
Church, which notwithstanding impeaches not, either that promise of Christ's
constant Care of his Church, or his constant Love thereunto: And therefore, it
reflects neither upon the one, nor the other, that this formal Office of
Apostolat, consisting of such expired Prerogatives, is ceased. Nay, himself
confesses, that without Impeachment of either of these, the Apostles Extensive,
universal Power is changed unto a Limited and Confined Inspection of Bishops.
Tho the Contexture of his Reasoning, renders him in this inconsistent with
himself, Christ's Care and Promise are abundantly verified in the Establishment
of such a Government and Officers in His Church, as are suited to her
Edification and Preservation in all times and places. I cannot but further
remark the Dr's. changing the Term of [ Apostolic Office] which he holds to be
transmitted to Successors, into that of [ Episcopal Power] as if these were all
one. But this is such a confusion of Names and Things, as cannot be admitted.
But proceed we.

The Question the Dr. will needs have to be a Matter of Fact, to be decided by
Testimony. Whom the Apostles appointed Successors is [ Matter of Fact] simplely
considered; But this [ Matter of Fact] must have a Divine Testimony to clear
it, it being [ a Divine Fact] (to call it so) of Christ's Infallible, Divinely
Inspired Apostles, in the management of the Trust committed to them, in
founding and modelling the Gospel Churches. And consequently, in enquiring into
this Point, we must take our Measures, both from their Doctrine and Practice,
if we acknowledge the Apostles had no Sovereign, independent, but Subordinat,
Subaltern Power, Authorized and prescribed by their great Master, whose
Doctrine and Measures prescribed in his Holy Testament, we must therefore look
unto. So that, when the Dr. asserts, There can be no decisive proof of this,
but by Testimony; He should have called it [ Divine Testimonie] for an Human
Testimony can here have no place* when the Question is anent the Apostles
Doctrine and Practice, in point of Church Government: And therefore, what the
Dr. adds, viz: That the Testimony alleged by him and the Episcopalians, is so
much the stronger, upon the Ground of the Reception thereof, Discovers his bad
Design of leaving out the Qualification of Divine, in the Testimony to which he
appeals; And likewayes, his absurd alleging, that a Divine Testimony is
strengthened by an Human, as influencing a stronger Pr^of in eodem genere
Causae. That the Church knew no other Government than Prelacy, for fourteen
hundred Years (as the Doctor is bold to assert) shall be admitted, when he
shall exhibit the full Accounts and Records of these 1400 Years asserting so
much. To proceed.

To prove that the Apostles Rectoral Power, was by them transmitted immediately
to single Successors, the Dr. tells us (ibid.) that he will first view the Holy
Scriptures, then Ecclesiastical Records. First view, I say only and properly
view, in order to this proof: For, 1. our Faith of this, is a Divine Faith,
which therefore cannot be founded upon an human Testimony, else it were but an
human Credulity. 2. Ecclesiastic Records cannot be an infallible Comment upon
the Sense of these Scriptures, wherein this Testimony is contained: And this
upon several weighty Grounds, which I have elsewhere exhibit; Since this were,
(1.) To set up an higher Tribunal than the Scriptures. (2.) Ye exclud an
examination of the Human Testimony by the Scriptures. (3.) To make the Churches
practice the infallible Rule to direct our persuasion and practice, in
reference to every Scripture Truth and Duty, therein held out. Besides, that
neither this Dr, nor any for him, will ever exhibit Authentic Records of the
Churches Universal Practice since the Apostles* many of the Ancients having
written nothing at all, many of their Writings also being lost, many going
under their Name, being Counterfeit and supposititious: And that none of these,
did in this Matter contradict the Writers, whom the Dr. alleges in this Point,
but did accord in judgment and practice with what he supposes them to hold in
Point of Episcopacy, is a proof which lies upon the Doctor as the affirmer,
before his Argument can be admitted as valid, and his Testimonies be supposed
harmonious; and this he will, no doubt, perform ad calendas Graecas* Who knows
not that the prime Historian, Eusebius, with many others, do acknowledge, that
the shattered and maimed Records of the First Ages after the Apostles (which
are in this Point most considerable) are most uncertain and dark, as to Matter
of Fact? And do therefore, exhibit but a Lame and imperfect Testimony in this
Matter: My work and scope then, is to examine the Dr's Pleadings from a Divine
Testimony; which I shall fully perform.

CHAP: IV: The Dr's Proof of the Divine Right of the Hierarchical Bishop, drawn
from the pretended Episcopacy of Timothy and Titus, and the Seven Asian Angels,
Examined.
HEre we find the Doctor Tracing the Steps of his Fellows, but giving their
Notions and Arguments pitifully Insipide, and nothing Recocted. In the first
place, says he, (P. 106, 107.) we find Timothy set over Ephesus by Paul, when
he went unto Macedonia. Which place he compares with Act. 20.3, 4. 1 Timothy 1.3.
[ I besought thee to abide at Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia, that thou
might charge some, that they Teach no other Doctrine] -- That Timothy
thereafter waited upon Paul, to yield Assistance in the Service of Religion, he
tells us, cannot infer, he was disingaged upon Occasional Iourneys from that
Episcopal Inspection, particularly committed to him, in the Church of Ephesus
by Paul. Here is such a Proof, as he might have seen long since Baffled and
Disproved: 1. All that hold Timothies Office, as Evangelist, to be
extraordinary, and to have expired with that of Apostles, (and this do the Body
of Protestant Divines hold, as is above evinced) will consequently deny his
Episcopal Instalment over Ephesus; And put the Dr. to prove, that his
Evangelistick Office, here expressly enjoined him, was First, an ordinary Office
to be continued: Secondly, Formally and properly Episcopal; or such as did
import a sole and singular Authority, Paramount to all the ordinary Officers
Authority in that Church, and Exclusive thereof: And what Answer to these
Demands, and Proof of these Suppositions is in the premised Argument, let all
Men judge. 2. Had the Dr. been serious in this Debate, he might have found,
that Presbyterians have exhibit from Scripture, Timothie^ continual transient
Employments through the Churches, both before and after this supposed
Instalment^. Ius Divinum Minist. Angli. Smect. with diverse others, have made
this evident. 3. The Dr. did well to exhibit the supposed Scripture Charter of
Timothies pretended Instalment, [ I besought thee to abide at Ephesus, when I
went into Macedonia, that thou might Charge some, that they Teach no other
Doctrine etc.] Which the Presbyterians have long since told him, is a clear
Proof of the contrary; since there was no need of such Importunity, if Paul had
Committed the Episcopal Charge over Ephesus to him: For, thus he might have
laid as Dreadful a Charge upon him, to abide at Ephesus, as he does afterward
to Preach the Gospel, 2 Timothy 4.1.2. They have told him, that the Words specify
an Occasional Employment, and are not Words of Instalment to any ^ixt Office or
Bishopric over that Church, and do clearly insinuat and point at an Intendment
to Call him away again; As accordingly, both he and Titus, are found actually
Recalled, in these same Epistles. For what the Dr. adds, That his Occasional
Travels disingaged him not from his Episcopal Inspection: It is long since
Presbyteria^s (and in special, the Authors mentioned by him) have Baffled this
Answer, telling him, and such as have pleaded thus, that they are challenged to
prove, that any one, appointed Overseer of a particular Church, had such a
Planetary Motion, and Transient Employment, as that of Timothy is proven to
have been. Or, 2. That either he or Titus, after this Employment, did
constantly or ordinarily return to Ephesus or Crete, and not to the Places of
the Apostles present Abode or Employment. 3. They also tell him, that this
Answer is a Begging of the Question, since all the Ground of Instalment exhibit
here by the Dr. and his Fellows, is in that Charge in Reference to Ephesus,
wherein this Transient Employment is clearly held out. The Dr. adds, (ibid.)
That Presbyterians would not take it kindly, if told, that the Relation to
their Flocks were lost, if upon Occasions they were Employed now and then to
Visit Foreign Churches. Certainly they would not, but they take it as
unkindly, that the Dr, instead of an Illustrating Argument and Proof, by this
Parallel, Beggs the Question still, and draws a Simile from an Instance,
wherein there is a palpable Disparity and Dissimilitude. For, in the Instance
adduced, the fixed Relation, Instalment and Title is supposed. 2. The ordinary
fixed Attendance upon the Pastors Charge, in Consequence thereof; whereas, in
the Case of Timothy his fixed Instalment is begged, not proved, but rather a
Transient Occasional Employment pointed at in the very Place, which he Cites.
Whence it clearly follows, That this Transient Unfixt Ministry, was Timothies
Ordinary Employment and Ministry.

The Dr. proceeds to tell us ( ibid.) That the Ancients took no notice of this
Objection against his Episcopacy at Ephesus, and that in the 11. Act of the
Council of Chalcedon, Twenty seven Bishops are Reckoned from Timothy. What
notice the Ancients took of this Objection, is not the Question. But for the
Catalogues, Presbyterians have long since told him, what a poor Argument this
is, and have largely baffled this Fantastical conceit; particularly Ius
Divinum Minist. Ang. in Prop. 7. of the Appendix, in several weighty
Considerations, to which I refer him. They have therein made appear, that in
these Catalogues, besides, that there is an Homonomy in the word Bishop, the
nearer they come to the Apostles days, they are the more uncertain and
contradictory one to another; that the Catalogue-drawers spoke in the Language
of their own times; and in these Catalogues, is a far other design than what is
pretended by the Episcopalians; that the Catalogues resolving in Apostles or
Evangelists, who were not Bishops, nor could be properly, as not having an
ordinary, but extraordinary Office, the proof of a successive Line of Bishops
from them, which is drawn from these Catalogues, appears palpably unsound and
impertinent.

Before I pass from this, since the Dr. mentions Act. 20.4, 5. to prove that
Timothy was left at Ephesus by Paul; He had done well to look downward to the
28 v. where he would have found the whole Episcopal Charge over that Church
committed after this to the Elders or Pastors of Ephesus, before Timothies
face, in Paul's last farewell unto them, and this without the least hint of any
Interest that Timothy had in or over them, or of their precarious dependence
upon him in this Matter. And here he might have seen a passage looking like the
Apostles committing their Episcopal Power, or what was ordinary in their
Function, to a College of Presbyters, and consequently a Scriptural Decision
of this Question and Controversy against him. But to proceed.

The Dr. ( P. 107, 108) undertakes to prove from the Epistles, that an
Episcopal Authority was Committed to Timothy; And to clear this by instances,
viz. That he is Charged not to rebuke an Elder, but entreat him, 1 Timothy 5.1.
Not to receive an accusation but before two or three Witnesses v, 19. To rebuke
such as sin before all, v. 20. Not to lay hands suddenly, v. 22. To ordain such
Deacons as were blameless, 1 Timothy 3.14, 15. Where his particular Rel^tion to
that Church, is insinuat, the Apostle Writing to him, to instruct how to behave
himself in the House of GOD, etc. To these the Dr. adds his Charge of the care
of Widows, and Objects of Charity, and ordering the public Worship and
Liturgies of the Church 1 Timothy: 5.9. 1 Timothy 2.1. 1 Timothy 5.21. He and he alone,
says the Dr, is Charged to observe these things, without preferring one before
another, doing nothing by partiality. Ans. 1. If all these prescriptions
suppose only in Timothy, an Evangelistick, and consequently an exraordinary
expired Inspection, not an Episcopal and ordinary, then this Parade of the Dr's
Argument, is cut off with one Blow: For, as for his proof of an Episcopal
Relation to that Church, drawn from the Apostles showing his scope to direct
him, how to carry in the House of GOD; it is so clearly adapted to an
Evangelistick Inspection over that and other Churches, that it can afford him
no shadow of a Reason or Evasion.

For Convincing the Dr. of this, I shall make use of his own Parallel Argument,
and turn his Weapons point upon him. He has told us [ that no Presbyterian
would think his Relation to his Particular Flock untyed, if employed to visit
now and then Foreign Churches] Now, suppose, that in this transient visitation
of such Churches, the Church Rulers do write several directions to such a
Pastor, in reference to Government, adding as a pressing Motive [ that he is
therein instructed how to behave in the Church of the living God, which is his
House, in case he continue any time in this imployment] as the Apostle here
adds the limiting Clause [ if I tarry long] Will the Dr's Argument hold good,
that this will infer such a Pastors relation to these Churches? If he says
this, he Contradicts himself: And on the other hand, he will not dare to
affirm, that a Minister in this Case, is not capable of such directions, which
would upon the Matter infer, that these Churches were not the House of God, and
that a Minister is not concerned how to behave in them. And if this will not
conclude such a Pastors particular Relation to these Churches, but supposes
only a transient Employment in this Case, then I say, his Reason and Argument
is naught, which Infers Timothies special Episcopal relation to Ephesus; I mean
to that Church, from this expression of the Apostles Scope, in the premised
directions. Moreover, the Dr. will not deny, that Timothy visited and watered
several other Churches, after this at Ephesus, and after the directions given,
while officiating therein. Now, I would fain know, if the Dr. will deny, that
these directions, together with this expressed scope thereof, viz that he might
know how to behave in the Church of GOD, were clearly applicable to him in his
other transient Employments therein? If the Dr. deny this, he will swallow
Monstrous absurdities, viz. He will assert that in other Churches, he had no
Authority to rebuke, to receive accusations, to rebuke such as sin before all,
to see to the Worship, to Charity, to the State and Carriage of Widows, to the
right Instalment of Deacons, and all this without partiality, etc. If Timothy
in all these other Churches had this Authority, and the premised prescriptions,
together with the express scope thereof, were applicable to him, as officiating
else where, then they can infer no particular Relation to this Church, more
than others. If the Dr. say that they are applicable as in this transient
Employment, Protunc, but not so as in Ephesus, where his Relation was fixed,
and the directions consequently in a special manner, applicable thereto: Who
sees not that this is a palpable and shameless begging of the Question,
supposing these prescriptions to infer a fixed Relation to this Church of
Ephesus, which is the very Quesitum and Point in question?

But Secondly, to strike out the Bottom of the Dr's Notion, and put this to a
short Issue, since, upon the one Hand, the Episcopal Charge, as to both Order
and Jurisdiction, was by Paul, in his last Farewell, committed to the Elders or
Ministers of this Church of Ephesus jointly; Which Charge the Apostles are
found to entrust likewise unto Pastors, in other parallel places: And since,
upon the other Hand, Timothies Inspection is found Transient, and Relative to
several other Churches, and therein Exercised, it follows necessarly, that what
Authority he had in this Church, and is supposed in these Directions, and the
Scope thereof, was Cumulative unto, not Privative of the ordinary standing
Authority of the fixed Pastors, established or to be established therein, and
that Timothy had no sole or Episcopal Authority, Paramount to that of Pastors,
entrusted to him: Which may be further confirmed upon these Grounds, in that,
1. The Apostles themselves Exercised no such Authority in Churches constitute,
as is evident in the Presbytries Concurrence with Paul in Timothies Ordination,
and Presbyters Authoritative Excommunication of the Incestuous Corinthian. 2.
This Supposition of such a Paramount Authority would make the Apostles, in
Clothing Single Persons therewith, to contradict their Previous Doctrine and
Practice in the Instalment of Pastors, with the Episcopal Authority. To make
which convincingly apparent, one thing further I would propose to the Dr;
Whether will he deny, that several Prescriptions delivered to Timothy, were
Relative to such Authority, such an Exercise of the Power of Order, as is
incontrovertibly Applicable to Pastors? I shall take the Dr's own Instance, of
Rebuking such as Sin before all, Seeing to Widows, and the Objects of Charity;
I add, To give himself to Reading, Exhortation, to take Heed to himself and the
Doctrine, to Preach the Word, to be Instant in Season and out of Season, etc.
All which, the Apostle does with the same Emphasis, of an Explicit Special
Address to Timothy, prescribe; And to the same Scope of Directing him how to
behave in the House of God -- Charging him as Solemnly to observe the same, as
these that relate to the Power of Jurisdiction. But will the Dr's Inference
^old good, [ That therefore Timothy had a sole Interest therein] and such as
was Exclusive of that of Pastors? If his Answer be Negative, why shall his
Argument hold good in the Point of Jurisdiction, and the Precepts relative
thereunto? I know nothing he can Answer, except that either Pastors had this
Authority in a Dependence upon Timothy, or that the Power of Order is attribute
to Pastors elsewhere, not that of Jurisdiction: Both which Evasions are a mere
Petitio Principii, and a Baffling of the great Topic and Ground of his
Argument, taken from the Address of these Precepts to Timothy, especially since
the same Precepts, and equally supposing Authority in Church Government are
attribute to Pastors. Who knows not, that the (...) and (...) Act. 20.24. the
Authoritative Rebuke of the Highest Degree, even to Excommunication, is
ascribed to the College of Pastors, 1 Cor. 5? As l^^ewise, the Authoritative
Admonition, is held out to be their joint Privilege, Gal. 6.1. 2 These. 3.14,
15. Likewise, the Laying on of Hands in Ordination is ascribed to the
Presbytrie, 1 Timothy 4.14. And they are thus found clearly Judges of Scandals, as
being Empowered to receive Delations, Mat. 18.16, 17. And none can deny, that
these Authoritative Precepts are directed to them upon the constant standing
Grounds exhibit in Scripture, and to the same Scope, viz. the Preciousness of
Souls, their Account to Christ the great Shepherd at his Appearing, Act. 20.24.
1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. Old Whittaker, in Answer to Bellarmin, long since told our
Dr, ( Controv. 4. Quest. 1. Chap. 2.) That Timothy here, is supposed to have no
such Dominion over Elderships, or Pastors, as Prelates afterward assumed; And
that Receiving the Accusation imports (according to the Apostles Mind) bringing
a Crime or Scandal to the Church -- That the Ecclesiastic Synod had the Chief
Interest in Censures, though even Appeals were made to the Metropolitan. See
Bucer de Vi. and Usu. Sacr. Ministerii. Willet. Sinops. Papismi Controv. 5.
Quest. 3. Part. 3. in the Appendix. Bucer de Gub. P. 398.

Before I pass this, I cannot but add a Remark or two further: 1. That the Dr.
will needs have Timothy Directed to Order the Public Worship and Liturgies of
the Church. That he is Directed, 1 Timothy 2.1. and elsewhere, anent Public
Worship, is certain: But for Liturgies, which the Dr. thrusts in, he must be
told, they were not yet sprung up, if we may believe Tertullian, and others: It
is palpably evident, that in all these Precepts, there is altum silentium of
Liturgies, whatever the Dr's Love to them, might Buzze in his Ears. 2. He tells
us, That Timothy, and (with Emphasis) he alone in the Church of Ephesus, is
Charged before the Lord, to observe these things, etc. Thus, in the Dr's Sense,
it seems that no Pastor, had any thing to do with Rebuking Sinners, either by
Doctrine or Censure, or the Oversight of Widows, and the Objects of Charity,
etc. These being peculiar to the Episcopal Function: An Assertion, no doubt,
peculiar to the Dr. But proceed we.

We are next told P. 109. That in those Apostolical Directions and Injunctions
addressed personally to Timothy, are contained the Nature, Extent, and
Authority of the Episcopal Power. But why calls he it not an Apostolical Power,
Since in his Sense, the Office derived is of this Nature and Character? Again,
if this be the Nature of the Episcopal Power, and if thus one and the same with
that of Timothy, then sure, it is not paramount to the Collegiat Power of
Pastors; For such, we have proved Timothies to be. Next, as for the Extent
thereof, we have made appear, that his Evangelistick Authority, is found
extended to several other Churches: And therefore, if the Dr. shape Prelat's
Diocesses by this Standart, he will extend his Measures far beyond Ephesus.

What more is contained in those addressed Injunctions? His relation to that
Church (says the Dr.) and the perpetuity of his Power. But we have above made
appear, that these Injunctions can no more evince a peculiar Relation to that
Church, than to others, where he exercised his Evangelistick Office, as well as
in that of Ephesus: And for the perpetuity of the Power, we have told him, that
the intimation of Timothie's transient Employment in that Church, presented in
the beginning of the Epistle, the express Command of doing the work of an
Evangelist therein (an Office, acknowledged by Protestant Divines, to be
expired) the Apostles express recalling him from this transient Employment to
the further prosecuting of his Office else where, as likewise, his ascribing
the whole Episcopal Power, after this, to the Pastors of this Church of
Ephesus, in Timothie's presence, without the least hint of his Interest
therein, convinces this assertion of Falsehood.

But to prove that his Power was not transient, but successive and perpetual,
the Dr. presents unto us the Apostolical Command put upon him, to commit his
Power to faithful Men, who shall be able to teach others. This proves indeed a
Succession of a teaching Ministry, and of the Scripture Bishops and Pastors,
who must be apt to teach, and hold fast the faithful Word; But that it imports
a committing his Evangelistick Authority to Successors, is the Dr's.
Anti-scriptural Dream; Wherein, he runs cross, 1. To the Judgment of sound
Interpreters, as all know, since they understand by that which was to be
entrusted to these Faithful Men, the Doctrine of the Gospel, not the Authority
of Timothy. 2. He does herein cross the Scope and Context: And that in three
Points (1.) In that there is here a Plurality of Successors supposed, to whom
this was to be committed: And if Timothie's Authority was to be devolved upon a
Plurality, Dr. farewell the Derivation of an Episcopal Power to a single
Successor. (2.) The great Characteristick of these Faithful Men, is (as is
said) that they be apt to teach, which is the very Character of the Pastor,
Chap. 3.2. (3.) The thing which is to be committed is, That which Timothy had
heard of Paul, Sciz. The true Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Pastoral Charge
thereanent, which is likewise entrusted to all Ministers of the Word, Act. 20.
Tit. 1.9.

But the Dr. will needs have that which is enjoined in this Precept -- (which
is Faithfulness and Ability to teach others) to be by Timothy committed to a
single Successor, as it was in solidum, his sole Prerogative. Really Dr. this
is at least slender Dealing of Charity. What! All Faithful Teaching monopolized
in the person of the Bishop, committed to him, in solidum, excluding Pastors?
Many will suppose, that if this Work be enhanced in the Bishop, the Diocese
will be meanly fed, especially since, besides his personal incapacity to feed
the whole Diocese, his Sermons drops very rarely* and many poor Sheep may
starve in the interval.

But to proceed, the Dr. ( ibid.) will have his Adversaries to grant* That
Timothy 's power exercised over Ephesus, was the very same, which he pleads
for, as due to Bishops, in their particular Sees. That he had an Evangelistick
Power, we grant, and that Bishops take or usurp an Authority and Inspection,
which, with some Presbyterians, is said to have an apparent Resemblance of that
of Timothy, is true; But that the Function exercised by Prelates, is one and the
same with that of Timothy, is denied: For 1. We have proved, that neither
Apostles nor Evangelists had a fixed or ordinary Authority over particular
Churches, or any such special Relation thereunto, as Prelates do pretend. 2. We
made appear, that the Authority which they exercised, was not exclusive of, or
paramount unto the ordinary* Authority and Decisive Power of Pastors in
Government, that in Churches constitute, they had neither a sole Power, nor
sole Exercise of Ordination and Jurisdiction, such as Prelates assume, who,
according to the Nature of that Government, are the proper sole Pastors of the
Diocese, and the whole power of Order and Jurisdiction is properly and
originally seated in them, no Pastor having any thing of this, or the Exercise
thereof, but according as it is let out, or derived to them, at the Bishops
pleasure; For, they deny universally, that the Pastoral Office has in its
Nature, included any Interest in Government. Now, this Dominion over Church
Judicatories, thus exclusive of all Authority of Pastors in Government, no
Evangelist, nay, nor Apostle ever exercised, it being such a Dominion in the
House of GOD, as is disowned and discharged by them; 2 Cor. 1. ult. 1 Pet. 5.2,
3. Besides, the Dr. knows, that he pleads for a power in Civils, and a Civil
Peerage, as due to Prelates, which he dare not say, that Apostles or Evangelists
ever exercised, nor can he, or any of his Party, make it appear, that the
Apostles gave the least shadow of a Warrant for it in their Doctrine.

But to proceed, the Dr. adds ( ibid.) That we pretend that Timothy exercised
his power in the Church of Ephesus, under the Notion of an Evangelist, not as
proper Bishop of Ephesus. That he was enjoined, and accordingly exercised this
Office, and had a Command put upon him, to perform the Work of an Evangelist
there, is that which (under this prodigiously profound D^'s Correction) a Man
tinctured with the New Scots Opinion, viz: The ^postle, Paul pretends; And this
Office, we hold to be distinct, toto coelo, ^^om that of the Bishop. The Dr.
says, he will examine this afterward, wherein, I shall afterward trace and
search him.

But at present, the Dr. will have some things to be granted, which cannot be
denied. If such indeed, its pity the Dr. were denied so just a Demand. What
are these? First, That the power which Timothy exercised was Lawful in it self.
GOD forbid, we should assert that Paul enjoined or authorized an unlawful
power; But Lawful and Law, being Correlats, the good Dr. will allow us to
Distinguish Lawful, into that which is so, upon ground of a Standing Law or
Ordinance; And that which is so, upon a temporal and transitory Precept, and
authorized by an Extraordinary Authority for the time; Which might be
exemplified in a multiplicity of clear Scripture Instances, if we were not
discoursing with a venerable Dr. who can distinguish General and Special,
Ordinary and Extraordinary Precepts, etc. Lawful in their own time and
Circumstances. We know the Apostolic Universal Authority was Lawful, writing
authentic binding Epistles, in the Execution of this Authority, constituting
Officers, Church by Church, modelling them in their Organick Being, delivering
to them the Ordinances, their Disciplining all Nations, laying on Hands in
order to the Spirits Miraculous Gifts, anointing the Sick with Oil, in order to
the healing of them, etc. What next?

The Doctor, in the Second Place, will have us grant, That this power was
practiced by Timothy in the Church of Epesus. And truly they are highly
Censurable, who will deny the Doctor so Just a Demand, so necessarly following
upon the preceding Concession, and the Scripture Records of the Exercise of
his Power in that place. And no doubt, had the Dr. knit all his Consequences as
well as this, he had past for a fair and Triumphant Disputant, and Acted as a
Man worthy of his Cape and Orders: Only, we must be permitted, together with
this Concession, to Whisper the Dr. in the Ear, That he Exercised the same
Evangelistick Office in other Churches, as well as in Ephesus, yea, and both
before and after he was there, and he knows the Consequence, which these that
have got the Scots Notion in their Head will draw upon him, viz. That
therefore, Timothy had no Special Relation to that Church, nor Ordinary
Inspection therein.

What is his Third Desire of a Concession? viz. That this Power was committed
to him alone, not to a College of Presbyters, Acting in Parity and Equality.
If he mean the Evangelistick Power, or an Evangelistick Inspection, supposing
(as is often told him) the Existence of the Apostolic and Evangelistick
Offices, which we hold, with all Sound Divines, to be expired; Supposing
likewise, the Foundation of the Churches to be a laying, and which we may call
the Scaffolding, which the Dr. has told us, was to be removed, when the
Building is perfected; And withal, understanding the Term Alone, as Exclusive
of Pastors, and other Inferior Ordinary Church Officers; And so as not to
Confine the Evangelistick Office to Timothies Person: This Demand is easily
granted. But here we deny two Points, 1. That this Inspection, or Extraordinary
Evangelistick Power, was so committed to Timothy, over this Church, at this
time, as to Exclude or Inhaunce the Pastors Ordinary Power, or to infer his
Sole, and consequently Episcopal Interest in Government. 2. That the Ordinary
Power of Government, was not committed by Paul to a College of Presbyters, as
the Dr. supposes, or that the Non-committing of Timothies Formal Office and
Power as an Evangelist, to such a College will infer such a Conclusion: Since,
thus we would fasten a Contradiction upon Paul, in Intrusting the whole
Episcopal Power over the Church of Ephesus, after this, to a College of
Presbyters, Acting in Parity.

The Fourth Undeniable Point, the Dr. will have us to grant, is, That there is
no mention of a Spiritual Power lodged in a College of Presbyters, to which
Timothy was Accountable for his Administrations. I Answer, 1. There was no
need, because in that Infant-State of the Church, when (to use the Dr's Phrase)
the Churches Fabric was but in an Imperfect Scaffolding Posture, and the
Ordinary Church Officers and Judicatories were a Framing, he was Accountable to
the Infallibly Inspired Great Apostle of the Gentiles, Paul, who Enjoined him
to order Things, in the Moulding of that Church, as he had Commanded and
Appointed him. Besides, that the Nature of Timothy's Work, being a Temporary
Transient Inspection, to pass off with that Exigent, and to give Way to his
other Employments elsewhere, there was no Access for such an Inspection in the
College of Presbyters. Here I cannot but take notice, that the Dr. still
adding the Clause of Spiritual, when speaking of Timothy's Power, must be
minded of the Bishops Temporal and Civil Authority, which they claim. 2. We
find mention made of a Presbytrie, that Ordained him, and whether, if ever
fixed in any particular Post or Charge after Paul's Death, the mention of a
Presbytrie that Ordained him, will infer an Accountableness, is left to the
Dr's Consideration. As also, whether the mention of that General Rule, 1 Cor.
14.32. That the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, will infer
an Accountableness of all who come under a Character of Prophets to their
Collegiat Meetings.

The Dr's Fifth Concession, he will have from us, is, That the great and most
eminent Branches of Episcopal Power, were lodged in his Person, Viz. the
Ordination of such as were admitted unto the sacred Function, the care of the
Widows, the censuring of Elders, the Authoritative prevention of Heresies;
about which (he tells us) the Episcopal Authority was most conversant in the
Primitive times. I am glad that the Bishops high Office is become of so
condescending and humble a nature and genius, that the mean business of the
care of poor Widows, or Church Eleemo^ynaries, is become one of the most
eminent Branches of their Power. I see these Branches runs far out, and their
Lordships must have long A^ms. But may I hope that the Dr. will take along in
his next famous Work (since he has in this place forgot it) the little mean
and humble exercise of Preaching the Gospel constantly and assiduously, since
we find that Timothy was here enjoined it, and that in Season and out of
Season, to which these Eminent Branches may stretch out, if at least, the Dr.
can obtain a License for it of their Lordships, with such restrictions and
proviso's, in respect of their State-Imployments, as this unwarry Man, Paul,
forgot to put in, who lays this in an unlimited general Precept upon the
Bishop, Timothy, and with the solemnity of an alarming Preface of Laying this
Charge upon him before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the
quick and the Dead, at his appearing and his Kingdom. 2. Timothy is found so
far from having the Dr's Eminent Branches of Episcopal Power, lodged in him,
that in the Scriptural Accounts, he is found, to have neither Root nor Branch
of the same: The Bishops Power is supposed Ordinary, his was not; the Bishops
Power is pleaded for as necessary to the Churches exedified State, in all
times, and when Molded in its Organick Being, his was suited to the Moulding
thereof, when in fieri as to such a Being; the Bishops Power is in Fixed
Diocesses, Timothies was not, but a transient Ministry, like that of the
Apostles; The Bishops has sole absolute Power in Ordination and Jurisdiction,
over all Pastors of the Diocese; Timothy had no such Authority, but only of an
Inspector and Moderator, for the time of his transient Mission; The Bishops
assume a negative voice in all Judicatories of the Diocese, which the Dr. here
owns, for he will have them subject to no collegiat Meetings of Pastors; had
Timothy assumed this, he had contradicted and baffled the Apostles Carriage
Act. 15. where ordinary Pastors or Elders, are found concurring Authoritatively
with the Apostles in the whole procedure of that solemn Council, both in the
Disquisition, the Sentence, and the Epistle, enjoining the Churches obedience
thereunto: And I must presum to add with the Dr's good leave, that this Council
is of more venerable Authority, and the Constitution thereof, of a more
Divinly-exemplifying influence, than any he can appeal to, as patronizing the
Hierarchical Prelat, for whom he pleads. Again, had Timothy ordained alone,
without Pastors, where they were to be had, he would have crossed the Rule of
his own Ordination, and Paul's Precept supposing the same: Had he Censured
alone, or assumed a sole Interest therein, he had crossed the Apostles Doctrine,
who makes Censures the joint Authoritative Acts of the Collegiat Meetings of
Pastors, 1 Cor. 5.1, 2, 4, 5, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. As for the exercise of such
Episcopal Power in the Primitive times, the Dr. will never prove the Bishops
sole Power herein, in the First and Purest times, yea, and even after the
Episcopus Praese^ was set up, and had obtained in Judicatories.

The Sixth Concession which the Dr will have from us, is, That this Authority
was not of it self of a temporary duration, transient, or extraordinary, but
such as the constant necessities of the Church does make necessary in all Ages
That it was temporary and transient, is that which we maintain, and is the
Sense of Sound Protestant Divines, as is already made appear; and we must have
better Arguments to take this from us, and beat us from this Post, than our
Dr's begging assertion, without proof, or a Shadow of it. If the necessity of
the Church calls for such an Office, as this of Timothy, according to the
Scripture Character and Accounts, then sure for that of Apostolat also, in a
proper formal Sense, with all its Prerogatives, viz: That there be persons
empowered to give infallible Commands to transient Evangelists, and by
infallible direction of the Spirit enjoining and Authorizing the exercise of
their Function, recalling thus the persons Authorized by an infallible
Authority, from one Church to the further prosecuting this Work in another, and
this in order to the Moulding and Watering of these Churches. Hence, 2. This
Power not being properly and formally Episcopal, but contrary to such a
Function, as well as in it self extraordinary, and passed off, with that first
State and exigence of the Church; neither can the Churches constant necessity
crave it, nor does it in the least patronize the Bishops acclaimed Power.

For what the Dr. adds of Timothy's committing his Power unto faithful Men,
such as were able to Teach others. We have above discovered the insufficiency
of this Argument, to bear the weight of his Conclusion: And he must prove, not
barely assert, that the Trust Committted to him was ordinary, before it will be
admitted, or his ruinous Consequence built upon this rotten Foundation, that
therefore there was no need of an extraordinary Officer to manage it.

But now that the Dr. has Done with Timothy, he pr^ceeds to Titus, telling us,
P. 110.111. That the same Power was committed to Titus in Crete, as one of
Paul's Fellow Laborers: And the exception [ that he was an Evangelist] which he
cannot but know to be the Sense of the generality of sound P^otestant Divines,
our Dr. is bold to call a ridiculous subterfuge. Truly, if as ridiculous as
his Arguments and Answers, it were so at all will. But, why ridiculous?
Because, it is no where said in Scripture, that he was one of them, who are
called Evangelists. I could wish the Dr. had been pleased to give us the
definition of Evangelist, properly so taken, that it might be seen, how good.
Harmony he keeps with Protestant Churches and Divines in this Point. I must
add, that our critical Dr. seems very way-ward and ill to please: He will not
have Titus an Evangelist, because, no where so called: Now he cannot but
Confess Timothy is expressly called Evangelist, yea, and emphatically enjoined
to do the work of an Evangelist, yet neither will he admit him to be such. We
told the Dr. that the Professors of Leyden have this notion of the Office, That
Evangelists were either scriptores Evangelici de vita and morte, dictis and
factis Salvatoris, -- etc. such as wrote the History of our Saviors Life and
Death; or ab Apostolis ad Evangelium una cum ipsis praedicandum vocati -- etc.
such as were called by the Apostles to Preach the Gospel together with them,
and attended them as their Fellow Laborers, unless, when they were by the
Apostles set to oversee some Churches for a time; such were Barnabas, Silas,
Timothy and Titus, to whom some add the Seventy Disciples. Here is the
Protestant Notion of the Office, which clearly appears Scriptural: And upon the
equality and sameness of Timothy and Titus Function and Work, concluds them
both Evangelists. I must further tell the Dr, that in Ambrose sense,
Evangelists were such, as did Evangeliz are sine Cathedra, Preached without a
fixed Charge. And Saravia himself ( de diversis gradibus Minist. Cap. 6.) upon
that Precept of Paul, Do the Work of an Evangelist, tells us. That he will not
deny Timothy the Name of Evangelist, since Paul enjoined him to perform this
Office. The Man knew Paul put not upon him an empty Name. But further, the Dr.
will have nothing in the Office of an Evangelist inconsistent with the Dignity
of Bishop, Presbyter or Deacon. That the Evangelistick Office, as in Scripture
delineat, stands opposite to that of the Hierarchical Bishop, I have above made
good. How he comes to say, its not inconsistent with the Dignity of these
Offices, is some what Mysterious, since the general acceptance of the
Evangelistick Office, is, that it was next in Dignity to that of Apostles, at
least, above all Ordinary Officers: And for the Dignity of Deacons, it seems
Odd, that the Lowest Office has a Dignity suitable to that of Evangelists. The
Dr. tells us further, That Eusebius Notion of Evangelist, is one who Preached
the Gospel to such as had not heard it, or at least, had Resisted its Light and
were not Converted. Eusebius takes the Title two ways, either for such as Wrote
the Gospel, or those that Taught it; and those again, were either such as had
ordinary Places and Gifts, or whose Places and Gifts were Extraordinary, not
Settled upon any Charge, but were Apostolorum Vice, or Vice-Apostles, having a
Vicarious Care of the Churches, as the Apostles had the principal. Which
Justles with the Dr's Account: And in the Passage of Eusebius Cited by him, he
makes the Evangelist Work to be a Watering the Apostles Plantations, as well as
a Preaching to such as had not heard the Gospel. But he adds, That its
agreeable to the Function of either of these Offices, to Preach the Gospel to
such as are not yet acquainted with it. This is hardly intelligible: 1. That
the Evangelists Office consisted in mere Preaching, and to such as were in the
Character of Infidels or Resisters of the Gospel; as it appears not to be
Eusebius Sense, so he cannot show it to be the Sense of any Sound Protestant.
2. The Dr. will not say, that Timothy's Preaching-Work in Ephesus, where he was
called to be instant therein, in Season and out of Season, respected not mainly
the Members of that Church, wherein he was also called to give Attendance to
Reading, Exhortation, and Doctrine: And moreover, by the Dr's Confession, to
many pieces of a Iurisdictional Work, which he must either grant to fall within
the Compass of his Evangelistick Office, and consequently, that his Restricted
Sense thereof above expressed, is foolish and impertinent, or prove the
Exception thereof out of that Precept, and the Service and Ministry therein
enjoined him by the Apostle, when he is thus exhorted to do the Work of an
Evangelist, and make fall Proof of his Ministry.

But now the Dr. will Answer the Objection taken from this Precept, enjoining
the Exercise of an Evangelistick Office. And, First, He tells us, There was
Good Reason for it: No doubt of that; Good Reason, a Church Officer be enjoined
Diligence in his Office. But why Good Reason, in the Dr's Sense? Because (says
he) Many among the Ephesians were Infidels. Here is a Reason of this Precept
rare to be found elsewhere: But even granting this to be one Partial Ground,
that this was the only or main Ground of the Precept, and that his Work as an
Evangelist, was only of this Nature, is among the rest of the Dr's Magisterial
Dictats, and gratis supposita. He adds, That it is no where insinuated, that he
was only invested with that Authority, that agrees to the Notion of an
Evangelist separated and distinguished from either Bishop or Presbyter. Here
the Dr. speaks of an Evangelists Office separated and distinguished from that
of Bishop or Presbyter; Whereof he has given us no distinct Account. As for
that Sense, in Reference to Preaching, which he hints as that of Eusebius, and
his own, we have made appear, how cross it is to the Sense exhibit by Sound
Divines, and that Timothy had an Office distinct from Bishop or Presbyter,
which consequently this Precept enjoins, so, that it is enough for us, that he
was invested (and in that Precept, is supposed invested) with such an
Evangelistick Office, as is inconsistent with the Office of the Bishop, whom he
pleads for. And to this purpose, it is observable, that the Term Evangelist,
being thrice only used in the New Testament, viz. Act. 21.8. Ephesians. 4.11. and in
this Precept: Since in the other two Places, it is taken for the Extraordinary
Function above described, why not also here? Besides, tho Extraordinary
Functions communicate in General Names with Ordinary, as when Apostles are
called Presbyters or Elders, yet he cannot show, that Extraordinary Names are
m^de use of (at least, so Emphatically as in this Precept) to point at Ordinary
Functions. If we Parallel this Complex Phrase or Phraseology, as the Dr.
speaks, with the like in Scripture Language, this may be convincingly made
good, as when we read of Signs of an Apostle, 2 Cor: 12.12. Commands of
Apostles, 2 Pet. 3.2. Foundation of Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20. Where the Term designs
a peculiar Office: And thus it must be, when the Work of an Evangelist is
enjoined to Timothy. So that if the Office and Work of an Evangelist, which is
in the Sense of sound Divines, extraordinary and expired, be ascribed to both
these persons, and found incompatible with the Work and Office of a Prelat, the
Dr's. Evasions are evidently found naught. Suppose a person enjoined to do the
Work of a Parent, a Magistrate, or a Husband, none will doubt that the peculiar
Relations and Duties of Parents, Magistrates and Husbands are here intimat: As
likewise, if a Pastor be enjoined to do that Work, the same is held out. The
Dr. will have it no where insinuat, That Timothy was invested with that
Authority that agrees to the Notion of an Evangelist, separated and
distinguished from either Bishop or Presbyter. If by Separated and
Distinguished, he understand an higher formal Office, than that of Bishop or
Presbyter, the Passage above mentioned clearly proves it, admitting the
Evangelists Office to be of that Nature, State and Rank above expressed. If by
Separate, he understand such as is formally distinct from the Office of Bishop
or Presbyter, and of another specific Nature, the Precept does likewise
clearly insinuat this. If by Only Invested, he mean such an Office as cannot
exert the Acts or Duties competent to Scripture- Bishop or Presbyter, this is
impertinent to the purpose, and there is no need of such Insinuation. The
Apostles and Evangelists were invested properly and formally with their
Apostolical, Evangelistick Offices, which Eminenter had included therein the
Pastors Work and Duties. This does abundantly discover the Dr's. empty
Quiblings ensuing, to be mere impertinent Shifts: Such as, that one may do the
Evangelists Work, who is higher; Sed quid hoc ad Rhombum, the Apostles
performed the Duties and Work of Pastors: But that therefore there is no
peculiar Office of a Pastor distinct from that of Apostle, is a palpably weak
Consequence: And will he say, that when a Pastor is commanded and enjoined his
Work, there is no peculiar Office and Duty supposed, because his Office is
Eminenter, contained in that of Apostles, and that they performed and were
enjoined the same Duties? The Dr's next Instance is as foolish: Daniel (says
he) did the Work of a King, yet was no King, Dan: 8.7. He is indeed said to do
the Kings Business, in a passive Sense, That is, performed Service to the King,
as the meanest Servant does his greatest Masters Business in serving him; But
he that will hold that upon this account, he may be said to do the Work of a
King, That is, performed the Royal Acts of his Regal Office, and such as are
peculiar thereunto, or that this phrase has the same import as Timothy's being
enjoined to the Work of an Evangelist, has a Crack in his Intellectuals.

We are told next, P. 111.112. That Philip was an Evangelist, Act. 21.8. yet
also one of the seven Deacons mentioned Act. 6. But had no power to confirm the
Baptized, nor to ordain to Ecclesiastic Offices by imposition of Hands, as
Timothy. Ans. First, That Philip continued in the Office of a Deacon, when
called an Evangelist, is more than he offers to prove, or will be ever able to
do. The Belgic Divines, with Diodiate and others, take the Office of
Evangelist here, for the extraordinary expired Function, above described: And
consequently, to be the same with the Office of Timothy. Thus also Pool. 2 d.
Part, paralelling this Passage, with 2 Timothy 4.5. and Ephesians. 4.11. And upon the
last Clause, wherein mention is made of his Diaconate, they assert, that having
discharged the Office of Deacon well, he did purchase to himself this Good
Degree, as 1 Timothy 3.13. Judicious Calvin upon the place, offers the same Sense
of the Evangelists Office, Inter Apostolos and Doctores medii erant, etc. That
they had a middle Function betwixt Apostles and Doctors, and an Office next to
that of the Apostolat, that they might every where preach the Gospel, and were
set to no fixed Station or Post. Whence, he concludes that his Diaconate at
Jerusalem, was only transient, or for some time exercised by him, and that
thereafter he was assumed to be an Evangelist, since otherwise, it had not been
warrantable to him to leave Jerusalem and reside at Cesarea. He further adds,
That he is not here proposed as a voluntar Deserter of his Office, but as one
who had a more excellent Office entrusted unto him, so that he held not both
Offices jointly.

Secondly, For the point of Ordination: I Answer, First, It is more than he
has proved, or can, that Timothy had a sole Interest therein in Churches
constitute; And what he might do in Churches not constitute, is not to the
purpose. For 1. Ordination is found in Scripture to be the Judicial Act of a
Presbytrie, which was exercised, even upon Timothy himself. 2. Paul would not
ordain alone, tho the great Apostle of the Gentiles, but took along the
Presbytries Authoritative Concurrence, where a Presbytrie was constitute, as is
evident in the Scripture Accounts of this Evangelists Ordination, wherein the
Presbytrie Authoritatively laid on Hands, together with the Apostle. Hence it
is evident, that far less could Timothy assume a sole Interest in Ordinarion,
exclusive of that of the Presbytrie, when constitute; since his Office was
inferior to that of Apostolat. Next, Supposing Philip an Evangelist, in the
proper Scripture Acceptance above described, he was no doubt capable of the
same Employment and Exercise thereof, when the Churches Case required it, as
Timothy, else the Dr. will say, that Evangelists had not all the same Office
and Authority. For, what he adds of Confirming the Baptized, we have above
spoken to it a large; And when he has described this Confirmation, and
exhibit the Divine Warrands thereof, and proved from Scripture, Timothie's
Interest therein, I doubt not to bring up Philip to the same Privilege. We are
told next, That to be an Evangelist, is very agreeable to all Subordinations of
the Christian Hierarchy. Thus it seems with him, That the Term imports no
peculiar Office: And thus, if he owns Eusebius Notion of Evangelist, which is
to Preach the Gospel to such as had not heard it, or resisted it, and were not
Converted; He appears inconsistent with himself, in making it applicable to all
Church Officers, and consequently appropriating to them the Function of
Converting Infidels, by Preaching the Gospel, as in these first times of
Christianity: And what Harmony this keeps with the Sense of Protestant Divines,
in Reference both to the Pastoral and Evangelistick Office, is obviously
evident. Not to scann the foulsom Popish Savor of his expression of Christian
Hierarchy, and the necessary consequence of his absurd ascribing the Office of
preaching the Gospel, consequently, the administration of the Seals of the
Covenant, to the meanest and lowest of Church Officers. He adds, That the
primitive Bishops were Evangelists, and that any Bishop or Presbyter that
Converts Infidels, are as properly Evangelists, as these so called in the
Primitive Church. He must say as this person of whom our debate is, who is by
the Apostle Paul called to do the work of an Evangelist. This is such a gross
absurd Assertion, that to recite it, is to refute it. Will any Man of common
Sense imagine, that when Timothy is thus enjoined, he is put upon no other
work, or to exercise no other Function, than what the meanest Deacon was
capable of? Or that the Sense of this Precept, do the Work of an Evangelist, is
only amounting to this, Convert Infidels? I think indeed the Man who believes
this, is an Infidel to this Scripture Light.

The Dr. is now advancing to a Scripture proof from James, and tells us, He
will not debate with us, whether James was one of the Twelve or not: Nor shall
I detain him upon this, it being spoken to above, and shall aknowledge he had
the Name and Authority of an Apostle ascribed unto him, Gal. 2.9. and 1.19.
That he was Bishop of Jerusalem, the Dr. tell us, is uniformly attested by the
most ancient Witnesses, especially Clemens Alexandrinus and Hegesippus. What
Strength is in this Argument from Human Testimony, and what Credit Hegesippus
deserves, is above touched: But we must tell him that he must be set to his
task; It is Divine Testimony and Scripture proof, and Witnesses we are seeking,
according to his undertaking, not that of Clemens or Hegesippus. But he tells
us, he needs not fill Text or Margin with Gitations, since all his Adversaries,
and particularly Salmasius, acknowledge that he was the first Bishop of
Jerusalem. But truly, he has instead of Scripture proof, filled his Pamphlet
with such stuff, that he had done well long since, thus to resolve. Here is a
bold and broad amplifying Assertion, which some will be bold to call one of the
Dr's broad and splendid Lies, What! All his Adversaries acknowledge James first
Bishop of Jerusalem? I know not one, nor can he Assign one of this All, that
acknowledge him Bishop in the Prelatical Sense. His Instance of Salmasius,
which is the only one to evince this All, the Dr. Produces, is such a pitiful
faint Witness, that his adducing of him, serves only to render the Dr. the
Object of their Laughter, who are less Serious; For, all that he can say is,
That James continued at Jerusalem, when other Apostles withdrew: But that he
was therefore in his Sense, Bishop of Jerusalem, is a Consequence which will
require other Rules of Logic to make it good, than have been heard of. Suppose
Salmasius acknowledge that the Ancients called him so; all do know, that he
asserts only their expressing the Offices of Apostles, and other extraordinary
Officers, after the Mode of their Times, and Denominations, which had then
obtained; as Iunius, Whittaker, and many other Learned Protestant Divines have
observed; And the Matter it self is evident to all Unprejudicat Minds: So, that
we need not insist upon this. Only, we must again enjoin him, his Task of
proving a Twofold Consequence, and help his Memory in order to his next
Undertaking against the Presbyterians: 1. James stayed at Jerusalem, when other
Apostles withdrew; Ergo, he was properly and formally Bishop thereof. 2.
Salmasius acknowledges, that de facto, the Ancients call him Bishop, and that
he abode at Jerusalem; Ergo, he acknowledges him Bishop of Jerusalem, and a
Bishop of the Dr's Mould, as succeeding the Apostolat therein, now it seems
laid aside. Again, the Ancients acknowledge, that de facto, he was Bishop of
Jerusalem, and Salmasius relates this; Ergo, he ownes the Ius of the
Hierarchical Bishop. When the Dr. has managed this Task, he shall be an Apollo
for his Skill.

But now (P. 113.) the Dr. tells us, That the Account the Scriptures gives us
of him, is very agreeable to the Testimony of the Ancients. I am verrily of the
Opinion, that the Dr's Veneration for Antiquity is too Venerable. I should
think that the Dr. should have spoken better Sense and Divinity, if expressing
it in this Order, that the Testimony of the Ancients is agreeable to the
Account of the Scripture, and to have made the Scripture Account the Leading
Testimony. Well, let us hear this Account of Scripture: Only before we hear it,
let us remember, what the Point is, which this Account and Testimony must have
Reference to, viz. That the Apostle James was properly and formally Bishop of
Jerusalem, having a fixed Relation thereto, as his proper peculiar Diocese, and
Exercising an ordinary Episcopal Jurisdiction over that Church. The first Proof
is, That Peter pays a Deference to him, in enjoining notice to be given him,
and the Brethren, of his Escape from Prison, Act. 12.17. Here is an Account
given of an Important Mercy to a Fellow-Apostle, and other Ministers at
Jerusalem, but a Deference to him asi Bishop of Jerusalem, in the Sense above
exhibit, even granting the ordnary Exercise of his Apostleship there, is such a
Consequence, as no Rational Man can admit: For, 1. Were not all, whether we may
suppose them Apostles or Brethren present, concerned in this, and capable of
the Deference of this Information? Yea, are they not thus Represented? 2.
Suppose Apostles present, without any such Residence, or supposed Episcopal
Relation, will the mere Deference of such an Information prove this? Yea, say
this supposed his special Residence there, and consequently, his and the other
Brethrens Concern in the Information, can any Rational Man imagine, that this
Deference thus expressed, will suppose any more, than such a Residence for the
time? Besides, that the more Severe Critic, would Interrogat him, how this
Information, simplely considered, comes under the Character of such a Special
Deference and Honor, as the Dr. makes it? Will the Report of an Important
Mercy prove this, since another End is evident, viz. The Instruction and
Comfort of the Person Informed, simplely considered? The Critic would also
Pose the Dr. upon this, What Deference was paid in Peter's first Personal Visit
to the House of Mary, and the other Praying Persons with her? I think if
mention had been of John Mark his Personal Presence, this Deference, by the
help of the Dr's Logic, and Quickened a little by his Zeal for Prelacy, would
have put fair to set him up as Bishop of Jerusalem at this time.

But the Dr. tells us, this Deference is taken notice of elsewhere, as Gal.
1.19. Gal. 2.1, 9. For the first Passage, the Apostle tells, v. 18. that he
went up to Jerusalem to see Peter. Here is some Deference. He adds, that he saw
none of the Apostles save James. What Deference is here insinuat, and in
special eo nomine, as Bishop of Jerusalem, will require a new Essay of the Dr.
to draw it from the Text. Pool takes the Naming of these here to import, That
the other Apostles being scattered, and gone off to prosecute their Work, these
two Apostles were only at this time resident there. Thus it seems the Dr's
great Topic from a Residence at Jerusalem, as peculiar to James, is much
Weakened by this Testimony; And his Reverence did not well to raise this Ghost.
As for Paul's second Journey to Jerusalem, Recorded in the other Passage, and
the mention of James with Peter and John, as Pillars, I know not what Shadow of
Argument can be drawn therefrom, for his pretended Episcopacy at Jerusalem,
more than of Cephas and John: Whatever Eminency in Moral Respects is here
insinuat, sure it is Shared among all the three, without any Shadow of a
Preference of James to the rest, and far less eo nomine, as Bishop of
Jerusalem, unless the Dr. draw the Strength of his Argument from his being
first Named, and thus Patronize the Popish Argument, from the first Nomination
of Peter, to prove his Primacy; Which is long since Baffled and Disowned by all
Protestant Divines. The Dr. alleges, that Presbyterians would needs Impose
upon Men's Senses and Belief, their own Dreams; as if some Fantastic Person
should pretend he sees Visions of Armies and Battallions in the Skies, and
Challenge and Threaten others to see what they see not: If his Consequences in
this and many other places of his Pamphlet, be not of this Nature, surely never
any were.

But the great Demonstration of the highest Class follows, which the Dr.
Prefaceth with a most of all. What is that? Why? Act. 15.19. He pronunces the
Sentence of the Council by his Episcopal Authority. Here is an Airy Vision
indeed, a Demonstration, the Rules whereof are existent only in the Dr's Brain.
The Sentence and Decision of this Apostolic Council, upon Conference and
Debate, was pronunced by James; Ergo as a Deference exhibit to him by all the
Apostles above themselves, yea, and eo nomine, as Bishop of Jerusalem. What a
Rope of Sand is this? I know, its ordinarily supposed he presided in the
Council, but that this does import any Official Deference or Supereminency over
his Fellow-Apostles, and far less as Bishop of Jerusalem, is a Consequence as
far remote from this Concession and Supposition, as East from West. The Dr.
says, he pronunced the Sentence by his Episcopal Authority: Thus it seems his
Episcopal Authority was a higher Sphere of Authority, than ever he had by his
Apostolat; And if so, the Dr. has Razed all his former Pleadings for a
Succession of Episcopacy to an Apostolat, and must devise a higher Function,
than even that of Apostolat, to found Episcopal Authority. But the Dr. will not
be thought (now that he is in a Calmer Humor) to plead that James alone Decided
by his sole Power, without Concurrence of other Apostles, but as Bishop of
Jerusalem he presided in the Council. But here it might be asked, what sort of
Presidency it is that the Dr. here ascribes to James, in this Council? Whether
the mere Presidency of a Moderator, or that which is properly Episcopal, having
the sole Rectoral Power included therein? The asserting of the first only seems
not Consonant to the Dr's Scope, which is to prove an Episcopal Authority in
Judicatories, as here Exemplified. If he assert the second, then in
Contradiction to himself, he robs the rest of the Apostles of this Rectoral
Power, Monopolizing it in the Person of James. Or, if he should ascribe this
Episcopal Power to him, with respect to the Inferior Clergy there present, he
cannot deny, that his Fellow-Apostles Shared with him herein; And so there is
nothing of sole Episcopal Power Exemplified in this Instance, or any thing
else, except a mere Presidency, which might be allowed upon the Account of his
ordinary Residence at Jerusalem, by his Fellow-Apostles, not unlike unto a
Moderators Office allowed by a Synod to the Minister of a City, wherein it is
assembled, which does nothing impeach the same Rectoral Power, competent to
every Pastor of the Judicatory. But as to the Episcopal Rectoral Power, the Dr.
cannot be ignorant, that his Fellow-Pleader Bishop Downam, in his Defense (with
whom the Dr. will not desire to Justle and Deal Strokes) is clear and positive
in this Assertion of the Bishops sole Authority in Government. That James
presided in the Council, I have told the Dr, is supposed, though I conceive it
a pretty hard task to offer a demonstrative Argument from the Text to make it
good: But that it was as Bishop of Jerusalem, is a fantastic Dream, which
has no shadow of Ground. That Passage [ My Sentence is] the Authors of the 2
d. Part of Pools Annot. with several others, take to be only the Signification
of his Judgment upon the Question, in Correspondence to what Peter had before
spoken. As for Simeons Succession to James in Jerusalem, and Hegesippus Account
of the Succession of Bishops there: It is spoken to above, and what Credit is
to be given to the supposed Catalogue of Bishops in Jerusalem and other
pretended Diocesses. For what he adds of Calvin's Judgment upon Gal. 2.9. As
favoring his Opinion. I Answer, Calvin takes him indeed to be among Eminent
Apostles, viz. In Moral Respects, prudentia and aliis dotibus, as he expones
the word Pillar, and attributs the same Eminency to Peter and John; And
speaking of his presiding in the Council, he does not positively assert the
Ground which the Dr. alleges, but problematically with a fortassis id factum,
etc. And even granting his Admission of a Presidency, the Consequence of an
Official Presidency, and as importing a Majority of Power, far less eo nomine
as formally Bishop there, is so very gross and obviously impertinent, as any
with half an Eye may discover it.

The Dr. tells us, That his Scripture Instances do plainly demonstrat that the
Apostolical or Episcopal Authority was conveyed to single persons in the first
Plantations of Christianity. What Demonstrations these are, I refer to the
Reader to Judge from what is above replied, such sure, as are not adapted to
any Rules that hitherto has been heard of, whereof this is a very clear
Demonstration, that the Dr. in this Peroration and refined Sum and Conclusion
of his supposed mighty preceding Demonstrations, has pronounced as great
None-sense as ever was spoken or written: Which I demonstrat thus from the
Series of his Reasoning: In his Sense, the Apostolic and Episcopal Office is
one and equal, and Apostles as such, were Superior to all Church Officers
except Bishops, their proper Successors in Official Authority. Now, here is a
Successor Bishop preferred to all Apostles eo nomine, as Successor-Bishop, yet
deriving in his Sense also an Apostolat only; And which is yet odder,
succeeding to an Apostolic Office, who was an Apostle before, and by his
Confession thus related unto, and having an Official Authority, respecting the
Church Universal; Yet when his Charge is Restricted to Jerusalem, as his proper
Post and Diocese, he does upon this Ground Transcend all the Apostles in
Official Authority. If any will sodder these Assertions together, and reconcile
them to sound Sense and Divinity, he must be better skilled than all Vulcan's
Gimmerers.

The Dr. will not insist upon the Presbyterians imaginary and superficial
Exceptions which they have invented. They must be such because he says it, and
save him from a Concern in Scanning them. No doubt, if as Superficial and
Imaginary as his Demonstrations, their Inventions were very shallow.

The Dr. brings next (P. 114.) the Trite Argument taken from the seven Asiatick
Angels: And first tells us of Salmasius taking the Angels as denoting the
Churches, the Denomination being taken from the purer Part of these Cities, to
which Christ wrote. To which he replies from the distinction of the Churches
from the Angels, Rev. 1.20. And that the Sense would thus be, to the Church of
the Churches. Not to detain him much here, we only tell him, that whatever
Salmasius Sense or Escape might be in this, he cannot deny, that in the Sense
and Judgment of the Body of all Presbyterians, the Angels are distinguished
from the Churches, as the Church Representative, is from the Church Collective.
Besides, himself acknowledges (P. 115.) That the Heavenly Admonitions are first
addressed to the Angels, and by them were Communicated to the Churches: As at
the close of every Epistle, all are called to hear what the Spirit says to the
Churches. And he will not doubt that Salmasius distinguishes Ministers from
Church Members in this Point, and the Church Members concern in all that is
written, he can less doubt. Besides that, Salmasius words will hardly bear his
critical and saucy Construction, who calls them a silly subterfuge, since he
may be supposed to compare only the Populi purior pars (as he Terms it) with
the rest of the Inhabitants of these Towns, so that the Address
distininguisheth them from others; And the Angel of the Church, in his Sense,
will import only the Church in such a City, not the Church of such a Church.

But the Dr. will not have the Angel a Multitude, but one single Angel,
presiding over Presbyters and People. We have already made appear, that the
Collective Sense of the Term Angel, is most su^eable to Scripture, and the
Scope of this Book. But the Dr. will needs loose the Objection taken from the
Plural Address of the Angel, which he thus propones, That some Instructions
there are in these Epistles, in which others beside the Angels, are
particularly admonished. This is a piece of our Dr's. petty Sophistry: He must
make the knot easy, that he may know how to loose it. The very proposing of
this Objection, is a yielding of the Cause; For, if in this Plural Address,
these others addressed, be not the Angel, then there is no Plural Address of
the Angel himself, or Representation of the Term Angel, in a Plural Mould: But
had the Dr. intended to Dispute, not to triffle, in proposing a simple Foppery,
in stead of a Presbyterian Objection, he should have told his Reader, that we
hold (and do exhibit Instances of it) that the Angel himself, is addressed
Plurally, and bespoken so in these Epistles, as a plurality of Officers, appear
evidently to be pointed at by the Term Angel. As particularly, when it is said,
To you and the rest in Thyatira, Rev. 2.24. Thus likewise v. 10. Fear none of
these things, which thou shall suffer: Behold the Devil shall cast some of you
into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation, etc. Be thou
faithful unto death. Well, what says he to this Objection? Why? The Epistle is
no less addressed to the single Angel, than that of the Philippians is to the
whole Church at Philippi, though Paul uses particular Compellations, Chap.
4.2.3. I entreat thee also true Yoke Fellow, help those Women, etc. But good
Dr. here is both a particular, special, distinct Precept, and under such a
Compellation, as is in t^rminis, separat and distinguished from the Body of the
Church, and those general Precepts addressed thereunto, So that there is no
shadow of a Parallel, when the Angel is plurally Addressed, for the Precept and
Injunction is the very same -- Fear none of these things which thou shall
suffer; There Is a relative pointing at the single Term Angel -- Then the Devil
shall cast you -- that ye may be tried -- Be thou faithful, etc. There the same
persons are addressed and spoken to, both singlely as one Angel, and plurally
as many, and that in reference to the same very individual Purpose and Duty,
the Speech running on both to the same Persons, and the same Scope. So that to
use the Dr's. Phrase in reference to Salmasius, his Answer to this Objection,
appears to be a silly subterfuge, fit for nothing but to move their Laughter,
who are seen in this Debat, and unworthy to have been uttered, much less
printed by a Man who sets a D. D. to his Name. The Dr. cannot but know that the
pinch of this Debate, and state of the Question betwixt him and us, is, Whether
all that is spoken of this Angel, can be competent to one individual (the
contrary whereof, Presbyterians have made good) and not anent the Concerns of
particular Persons, in some special Precepts of a general Epistle, which is in
terminis addressed to the whole Church.

The Dr. adds as another mighty Answer, That the second Epistle to Timothy is
addressed to him alone, tho the Conclusion be to all the Faithful at Ephesus.
Ans: That the second Epistle to Timothy is addressed to him immediately, no Body
doubts: As for that Conclusion, The Lord Jesus be with thy Spirit, Grace be
with you, there can nothing thence be inferred, but that the Apostle in the
Precepts addressed to Timothy, designed the Good of the whole Church: And although
what is contained in the Epistle, have this general Scope, yet it is to be
applied pro unius cujusque modulo, and Peoples Duties, and that of Ministers,
are to be distinguished: But in the plural Adress of the Angel, the same Duties
are (as is said) enjoined to the same Persons, and to the same Scope; And the
Mystical Term Angel, is represented in a plain plural Mould, as pointing at a
Plurality of Church Officers. Besides, that in this Conclusion, the People are
distinguished from the person of Timothy; So, that the Conclusion does not
solely and immediately reach them: But this holds not parallel with the Direction
of an Epistle to a Plurality, thus Mystically represented by one single Angel.
The Dr. adds further, That the Bishops of the Asiatick Churches, are said to be
Angels, in Imitation of the Jews, among whom the High Priest was dignified with
that Name, as Mal. 2.7. Where the Word Messenger may be translated Angel. I
like not the Doctor's Jewish Imitations: If the Pattern was drawn from Mal.
2.7. Even granting this to the Dr, that the Term Angel is with Allusion to that
Term of Messenger, the Term and Designation is Scriptural; And had his Eyes
been single, he might in looking upon that Text, have found that the Term of
Messenger and Priest, has a plural Signification; And consequently our
Exposition of the single Term Angel, in a Collective Sense, in these Epistles,
and Application of the Plural Address to the single Angel, to be Exemplified in
that Scripture. But the Dr. will needs suppose gratis, and Magisterially Dictat
unto us, his Petitio Principii, That the High Priest only was Dignified with
that Name: But he and his Fore-leader Dr. Hammond has pi^ifully mist the Mark
in this Notion, it being palpable, that the Scope is to direct the Lords
Priests and Ministers in their common Duties to which they were called; and to
say that the High Priest alone was here designed and intended, will infer that
the first Verse of that Chapter, O ye Priests this Commandment is for you, is
to be understood only of the High Priest, that he alone was concerned to give
Glory to the Lords Name, as is enjoined in the 2. Verse, and he alone threatened
in the same Verse, with a Curse to be inflicted upon his Blessings, that he
alone was to have the Law of Truth in his Mouth, and to keep knowledge, as
Verses 6, 7. and that at his Mouth only, the Law was to be sought; Whereas all
the Priests were Teachers, and Solemnly Addressed the People, in Teaching
together with Moses himself, Deuteronomy. 27.9, 10. and were sent to Teach the People,
2 Chronicles. 17.8. Besides that, had the Dr. been through in Searching this
Controversy, he might have found, that as the Term Levi, represents in this
Chapter the Multitude of Levites, so Pres^^terians do plead, that the Term
Angel, whereby the Officers of every Church of Asia is represented, has
nothing peculiar in it; beside what is applicable to every Minister of the
Gospel, whose Angelick Frame, as well as Office and Authority, is hereby
pointed out; And therefore, cannot in this place Indigitat an Officer Superior
to Pastors or Ministers. The Dr. asserts That the Angels Authority was extended
to Laity and Clergy. But he must be admonished, that his new Term of Clergy and
Laity, were not then begot; and he must prove, not assert without Proof, this
his alleged Extension of the single Angel, or Prelat his Power and Authority.
The Dr. pleads that the Faults of the Churches are imputed to the Angels,
because of their Spiritual Power to Reform and Chastise these Abuses. Ans. No
doubt Ministers have great influence upon the good or ill Frame of Churches,
and this will say as much, yea much more for us, than for the Dr; for upon our
Supposition of a Plurality of Pastors Addressed in the Angel, its much more
suitable to suppose a Peoples good or ill Frame and Spiritual Condition to be
influenced by the good or bad Carriage of their Pastors, who have an immediate
Inspection over them, than to suppose it flows merely from the good or bad
Carriage of one Prelat set over their Clergy and themselves, this Inspection
being the more remote: And the Dr. knows we may call in an old gray Hair'd
Witness, Experience, to testify that there has sometimes been some diligent
Pastors, and a thriving People in a Diocese, where the Bishop has been naught.
And besides, that the Dr. here pitifully beggs the Question, he should have
seen how to evite the Inconvenience of Timothy (so eminently commended for his
Faithfulness, Stedfastness and Piety) his falling, as Bishop of Ephesus, from
his first Love, and by his bad Carriage influencing this bad Frame in that
Church, and leading them wrong. As likewise, he should have seen, how to make
it appear, that the Important Duties of Faithfulness, holding fast what is
attained, not to Fear Sufferings, Warnings of a Prison Trial, etc. are
applicable to one Person solely. As likewise, how several of these evils
charged upon the Churches, could be the Objects of the Bishops supposed
Spiritual Chastising Power, such as their Dead Frame, Falling from their first
Love, etc.

The Dr. ( ibid.) will in the next place, loose the Objection taken from Rev.
2.24. But unto you I say, and to the rest in Thyatira: Whence he tells us we
plead that the Epistles were directed to a Community, because the Compellation
is in the Plural. To this he Answers, That the Word (...) is left out in the
most Ancient Manuscripts, particularly the Alexandrian, preserved in the Royal
Library. It Is pity the Dr, or a Man of his Sense was not called in to Instruct
or Inform our last Translators, wh^ were, no doubt, as favorable to the
Episcopal Cause as he (though I will not say they would have allowed all his
Methods in Pleading) and he will not doubt of their diligent Searching the
Original Text, and that they knew of these Manuscripts, as well as Dr. Hammond
and he, yet do render the Text with the Conjunction (...), according to the
Current of all the Greek Copies. Its strange that the Dr. has the Confidence,
upon the Supposition of one Copy, or of two at most reading the Text without
the Conjunction, to assert that the most Ancient Manuscripts do thus read it,
as if these two deserved that Character, and might stand good against the whole
Body of all the Greek Copies, wherein this Particle is found, yea the whole
Body of all Translators, as has been Instanced unto him by Presbyterian
Writers. We have above made appear, that the Text cannot be consonantly read
Read to the scope or contexture, without the Conjunction, since after that our
Lord in verse. 23. gives this general warning, I will give unto every one of you
according to your Works, etc. He adds, but unto you and unto the rest in
Thyatira, viz: you Ministers and the People in that Church, contradistinct from
others, etc. The Dr will needs have the words we insist on, applicable to those
mentioned in the latter end of the 23 verse, and not properly to the Angel of
the Church of Thyatira: And this is his Answer, even upon the supposition of
our Reading with the conjunction which he is forced to acknowledge is the
common Reading; and thus discovers his folly in opposing two supp^sed Copies to
it. His Reason is, that [ they] are the other Churches of Asia, which because
mentioned in the Speech directed to the Angel of the Church of Thyatira, the
immediate transition from him to them is natural and easy, and all the Churches
shall know, viz: the Churches of Asia shall know that I am He which searches
the Reins and hearts: v. 24. But unto you ( i. e. says the Dr.) the Churches
of Asia, etc. Thus he scor's out, and expungeth the adversative particle, [
But] in 24 verse, clearly limiting the you here, and distinguishing it from the
more extensive [ you] in verse 23. I hope the Dr saw no Copies reading the Text
without the adversative particle [ But] The Dr. says, because the Particle [
they] in v. 23, is understood of all the Churches of Asia, in the Speech
directed to Thyatira, the Transition from him to them is easy and natural, all
the Churches of Asia shall know, etc. -- But unto you i. e. the Churches of
Asia, etc. If this be not an offering violence to the Text, nothing ever was;
For after that our Lord has added a general appendant motive v. 23. that by
this stroke on Iezebel, all the Churches shall know ( viz: the Asian Churches)
that he is a searcher of the Reins and Hearts, etc. He returns to an express
Application and Address of the Speech to Thyatira (...) First in general by the
discriminating But, or (...); Secondly in an express mention of Thyatira. And
that we may not mistake it for a general partition of the Churches of Asia unto
those of Thyatira and others (as the Dr. dreams) he expressly, and in terminis,
thus restricts the phrase and address to that particular Church, to you and the
rest in Thyatira, not to you in all Asia. The Dr will not deny, that in this
clause the ( you) and the ( rest) are distinguished, and within distinct Limits
and Marches, but so cannot those of Thyatira, be distinguished from the
Churches of Asia, whereof they are a part. For what he adds of Beza's
Acknowledgment of the Angel to be a Praeses, we have already made appear, how
insignificant this is to bear the weight of his conclusion of a Prelatical
Presidency here supposed, since he owns him only as a Moderator or Praeses of
the Meeting, by the Dr's acknowledgement. But the Dr. tells us, he makes him in
a ridiculous manner a Weekly or Monthly Mod^rator. This Charge of the Dr's is
ridiculous, Beza only pleading against the fixed Moderator, which with him is
the Episcopus humanus, without mentioning any such Limits of time, as the Dr.
Imputes unto him. The Dr. will needs remove the Objection taken from the Angels
not being called Bishops; to which he returns, That neither Baptism nor the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper are called Sacraments, though we express the
Scripture Sense of these Institutions, when so terming them. But by his favor,
this Objection is not so inconsiderable, as he imagins, nor his Answer so
considerable; for, if the Apostles Scope was to point out the Nature and Office
of the Diocesan Bishop, whom the Dr. distinguishes from inferior Officers, and
owns him as distinguished by this term Bishop, which he knows to be (...) and
in terminis a Scripture term and epithet, such as is not the word Sacrament, it
should seem this discriminating term should here have been made use of rather
than a more general Term, aplicable to all Pastors. And in a word, when he
shall make the Divine institution of the Diocesan Bishop appear in Scripture,
then his Parallel answer with reference to Terms of Trinity and Sacraments,
expressing what is revealed in Scripture, though not in Scripture Terms, shall
be admitted as valid: But till then, must make up the Number of the rest of the
Dr's gratis supposita and beggings of the Question.

The Dr. will needs have the whole Question to be determined by the Ancients
affirmation of a Prelatical Succession to Apostles. And next by their insisting
on this Succession in their Disputes with Heretics. And in the Third place, by
the resolution of this doubt, whether we may safely Lean on their Authority and
Tradition in an affair of this Consequence. What Credit is to be given to the
Ancients in this Poin^, and what strength is in the Argument drawn from their
supposed Testimony, in reference to our persuasion of the Divine Right of
Prelacy, is above fully cleared. And our scope being to trace only the Dr. in
his pretended Scripiure-proofs, we leave him sufficiently exposed in this Point
of Antiquity, by those, who have fully examined him, and traced his human
Proofs on these heads: Wishing him a Sounder heart, and more sincere diligence
in this Controversy.

FINIS.
A REVIEW and EXAMINATION OF THE Scripture-Grounds, UPON WHICH The AUTHOR of
the Survey of Naphtali (Supposed to be Mr. Andrew Honyman, Bishop of Orkney)
Pleads for the LAWFULNESS of the Episcopal Office: Where the Arguments of the
IV. Chap. of his II. PART, are Discussed.
CHAP: I: A Consideration of the Scripture Grounds, upon which the Surveyer
pleads for the Lawfulness of the Episcopal Office.
TO Examine with as Succinct Perspicuity as we can, the Surveyers Scripture
Pleadings for Episcopacy, in this 4 th. Chap. It is in the first place to be
noticed, how that he was afraid to set his Foot upon such Slippery Ground, as
to plead directly for the Necessity of Prelacy, upon a Divine or Apostolic
Warrant; as knowing that the contrary Practice and Principles of almost the
whole Body of Reformed Churches and Divines, do in this Point contradict him.
He therefore, pretends to Abstract from this supposed Necessity, and the
Grounds thereof, and to plead only for the Lawfulness of the Order: Yet least
he should seem too Cool a Pleader, he presents some things, which he calls
Positive Grounds of Episcopacy; Whereof the First in Sum is.

That Christ has appointed in his Church an Official Power, which we call
Episcopal, paramount unto, and above any Power that can be Exercised by a
single Presbyter alone; Which Power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, is
acknowledged utrinque, Lawful in it self, the only Difference is, that
Presbyterians hold it to be Seated in a College of Presbyters, and the
Episcopalians hold it to be Concentred in one Person, yet to be Exercised by
Presbyters Concurrence and Consent: So, that the Difference of this Diffused
Episcopacy in the Presbytrie, and Contracted in a single Bishop, to be managed
with Consent of Presbyters, is like that between m^nus aperta and manus clausa.
Ans. The Surveyer does but here Shufflle and Obscure the true State of this
Question, betwixt Episcopalians and Presbyterians; Which is this, viz. Upon our
Supposal of that Authority and Government, ascribed in Scripture to Pastors or
Presbyters, and their Essential Interest therein, how an Officer, who is
pretended to be Distinct from them, and Superior unto them, and Enhancing and
Concentring all their Power in himself, can be consistent with the Scripture
Prescriptions in point of Government? The Surveyer should have known, that the
Scripture does not only appoint the Official Power, but its proper Subject; So
that the Removing it from its proper Basis and Subject, is a palpable
Impeachment of these Institutions in point of Government: And therefore, if by
our Lords Warrant, this Official Power is Diffused in a College of Pastors or
Presbyters, the Concentring it in the person of one Prelat, must needs be an
arrant Usurpation in Men, yea (and if possible) in Angels. Next, the Surveyer
Narroweth and Disguiseth the Bishops Power he pleads for: And that several
ways, 1. He overleaps his Arrogated Power of Order, whereof he is the proper
and primary Subject in the Diocese, wherein Pastors Act but as his Deputs. 2.
His Civil Acclaimed Power. 3. He seems to Tie the Exercise of it to the Consent
and Concurrence of Presbyters, wherein he dissembles the Nature of their
Arrogated Jurisdictional Power: For, if he did mean a Concurrence and Consent,
which is Decisive; Besides, that he in this contradicts himself, in Concentring
this Power in the Prelat, since frustra est potentia quae non potest reduci in
actum, he durst not affirm that the Official Power of the Prelat, then existent
by Law, and whom he pleaded for, was of this Nature: For, according to the Law
establishing Prelacy, they were to Exercise their Power with Advice only, and
of such of the Clergy only, as they should find (they themselves being Judges)
of known Loyalty and Prudence. Again, should the Surveyer say this Advice was
only Consultive not Decisive, he did but Mock and Prevaricat, in adding this
Limitation of Presbyters Consent and Concurrence, and in pretending thus to put
some Limitations on the Prelates sole Exercise of his Power, as if it did not
swallow up and exclude the Official Authority of Presbyters and Pastors in
Government. In a Word, as it is certain that the Diversifying of the Subject,
diversifieth the Species and Kinds of Government, which is evident in that of
Monarchy, Democracy, Aristocracy etc. So in the point of Church Government,
depending upon Divine and positive Institution, It is easy to discover such a
vast Variation upon this Ground, as might have covered this Surveyer with
Blushes, and which baffles his Notion with his own Similitude of the manus
aperta and clausa. For he will not deny the Lawfulness of an OEcomenick or
General Council, in a Just Representative of all Christian Churches, having an
Authority diffused in all the Members, which respects the whole Churches. Now,
here is the manus aperta, and in his Sense the manus clausa, or the
Monopolizing and Concentring this Authority in one person, does no whit impeach
the Lawfulness of the Power it self. Then advance the manus clausa, an
OEcumenick Bishop, or Supreme Head over all the Church, having all this
Authority Monopolized in him, which was before diffused in the General Council.
And here it may be demanded, whether this Pleader, or such as he, did own such
an Officer as Lawful or not? If such an Officer be owned as Lawful, then
farewell the Protestant Profession, and the Doctrine of all Reformed Churches
against a Papal Supremacy and Universal OEcumenick Bishop: If such an Officer
be held unlawful, then this Notion and Argument is quit baffled and excluded,
which asserted the Lawfulness both of the Diffused and Contracted Official
Power: For, here the one Power is owned as warranded of GOD, and instituted in
its Nature and Exercise; The other is disowned, as contrary to His Institution.
What the Surveyer adds upon this Head, touching a Lawful Demanour toward
Powers that are usurped, and entertaining fellowship with a Ministerial Church,
though called by an usurping Bishop, has been sufficiently answered by the
Apologist and Others, and the Difference so clearly stated betwixt the
Condition of a Church, wherein Prelates are obtruded upon the standing Church
Judicatories (in which Case Ministers are to keep their places, and contend
against them) and such a State and Condition of a Church, wherein the
Government is razed, and the Foundation of it laid upon a Princes arrogated
Supremacy over the same, and Prelates Authority as his Administrators in the
Government thereof, and withal in the Concurrence a formal and direct
acknowledgment of both the one and the other being required, as the Condition
of Ministerial Communion, that nothing needs here be further added.

The Next Ground the Surveyer adduceth is, That Ministers Union and Association
of themselves, and setting over them one single Person to Moderat and Govern
the Actions of the Meeting, is Juris Divini, and that by our own Confession.
Ans. The Surveyer durst not make his Application here; or had he done so, the
absurdity of the Consequence from this Moderator or President to the Prelat he
pleaded for, would have palpably appeared, and his Inconsistency with himself:
For 1. He says that Associat Ministers set over themselves this Moderator, and
this he holds to be Iuris Divini, and GODs Will; And if so, then sure it is
neither Iuris Divini, nor GODs Will, that this Moderator should be obtruded
upon them by an Extraneous Power; without the least shadow of their Consent, as
he could not but know the Prelates he pleaded for, were obtruded upon this
Church. 2. If it be GODs Will that this President be set over Meetings of
Ministers, to govern the Actions of the Meeting; and preserve Due Order, then
it is not His Will that this Moderator or President should have their whole
Authority Concentred in him, as this Survey^r pleads, and so as to smallow up
their whole decisive Suffrage, and render them mere Ciphers: This he cannot but
acknowledge to exceed far the mere governing the Actions of the Meeting, and
preserving of Order; Which is the proper Work of a Moderator. I might add that
the admitting it is GODs Will, that Ministers set over their Associat Meetings
one single person to Moderat, will not so much as infer, that he should moderat
ad vitam: Since. 1. This will bring under the burden of whatever abuse of his
Power he may be guilty of, and exclude all Help and Redress. 2. This will deny
the Judicatory or Meeting, the Advantage and Use of these governing Gifts and
Graces, that may be supposed in other Members: And sure the Surveyer could not
but acknowledge this contrary to the Divine Law, since the Gifts and Graces of
every Minister are given by GOD for the Advantage of His Church, and to be
improven accordingly. The Ministration of the Spirit (says the Apostle) is
given to every one to profit withal (...) A Metaphor taken (as some do judge)
from Bees bringing all to the common Hive. Thus we see, that unless the
Surveyer degrade the Bishops to mere Moderators, this Reason is utterly remote
from, and absolutely short of reaching any other Conclusion.

The Third Ground is, That it is Juris Divini, by way of Approbation, that the
Churches in their Ministerial Combinations for Government, should have one over
them, who has a singular Power for prevention of Schism and Disorder, and such
a Power as what is Right or Wrong in the Church; may be imputed to him, as is
manifest from the Epistles directed to the Angels of the Churches, Rev. 2.3.
whom Beza, Cartwright, Reynolds, etc. hold to be single persons: Ans. It is not
clearly discernible what strength is in this Reason beyond the former, since it
still runs upon the Ius Divinum, and necessity of a President in Church
Meetings, in order to this* as its native and great End, viz: the Prevention of
Schism and Disorder: And if this be the Rule and Measure of such a Presidency,
the Surveyer had been hard put to it, to prove that this does necessarly infer
and require that it be such as swallows up the whole decisive Power and
Authority of Pastors in Government; And that Disorder and Schism cannot be
otherwise prevented by a President, than thus Authorized, and that reserving to
Pastors their decisive Authority and Power cannot as well reach this End. 2.
For what the Surveyer adds, That the Power of the President must be such, as
what is Right or amiss, may be imputed to him, as using his Power Well or
Badly: As it may have a terrible Sound in the Ears of the Hierarchical Prelat,
who has an Authority and Power extended not only to all the Pastors of the
Diocese, but the whole Body of the People therein, as this Surveyer owns, P.
194. Since he has thus a Work and Office of such a Nature, as is impossible to
be managed: Besides, that the Charge of all the evils within the Diocese, lies
necessarly upon him; So likewise, it is more than this Surveyer could prove
that what was well or amiss in the Asian Churches, is chiefly imputed to one
Person. For, 1. It is not enough to say, that some Authors, though acknowledged
Godly and Learned, do hold them to be single persons, but the Grounds hinc inde
of those who hold them to be such, and of those who understand the Word [
Angel] in a Collective Sense, must be weighed in the Balances of the
Sanctuary. 2. Beza's Judgment is, that the Proestos or President is first
advertised, that by him all the rest of the College, and also the whole Church
might have notice made to them of that which concerned them all; And further,
that not so much as the Office of a Perpetual President can be hence inferred,
as that which he holds to be the Foundation of the Tyranical Oligarchy, whose
Head is the Antichristian Beast. 3. Granting a Presidency for prevention of
Schism and disorder, over these Churches, the Question still is to be
discussed, what Presidency it was? And that it could not be of the Surveyers
Supposed Episcopal mould is evident, and by the Presbyterian Writers made good
from several Grounds; As that (1.) It cannot be made good, that any directions
in these Epistles, respecting Government, diversifie one Pastor from another,
or suppose his Jurisdiction over the rest. (2.) That without fastening a
contradiction upon the Scripture Account of the Presbyter or Pastors Office,
this cannot be admitted, Pastors having the Name and thing of Rulers,
Governors and Bishops attributed unto them, yea, and the Episcopal Power being
found committed to the Pastors of Ephesus (the first of the Churches here
addressed) in Paul's last farewell to them, Act. 20. And none will deny that the
whole Churches were settled in an Uniform Mould of Government. That the
Collective Sense of the word Angel is most suitable to the Scope of these
Epistles, and parallel Scriptures, is above made good, and needs not be here
repeated. The Surveyer alleges P. 193. That if single persons had not been
intended, they would have been compared by the Spirit of God, not to single
Stars but Constellations. Thus this critical Master of Language will needs
Teach the Spirit of God how to express himself. But since he acknowledges that
these Churches, tho made up of several Congregations, do upon the Ground of an
Unity in Government, come under the denomination of one Candlestick, why may
not also the Pastors and Ministers, because of a combination in Government,
come under the Denomination of single Stars? Besides, that these Stars or
Angels are (as is above made good) sometimes addressed plurally, and thus, upon
the matter held out as Constellations. He adds, That we may as well extend the
seven Candlesticks beyond the Seven Churches, as the Angel beyond a single
Person. But the Spirit of GOD calling these Candlesticks the Seven Churches,
and the Stars generally the Angels of the Churches, not the Seven Angels,
sufficiently discovers the impertinent folly of this Objection: But says the
Surveyer, ibid. by this Collective Sense of the Word Angel, we will take in the
Ruling Elders, as Messengers of the Lord of Hosts, or else assert that these
Churches had none. Ans. The Divine warrant of the Ruling Elder, is made good
upon clear Scripture grounds, and if he have a share and Interest in Church
Government, the Surveyer could give no reason, why he might not in so far, come
under this Denomination, as a Church Officer, supposing that our Lord
addresseth in these Epistles, both Church Officers and Members. For what he
adds of Blondels Sense of the Authority of these Angels, P. 6. of his Preface*
It is evident to any that reads it, That he ascribs the Power of Presidents
only unto them, and holds that the Proestotes or Presidents acknowledged alwise
the Power of the College of Presbyters to be above their own, and were subject
to the Injunctions of the Meetings, as well as any other Member.

The Fourth Ground, which the Surveyer lays down, P. 194. is this, That as
there are ordinances merely Divine, so also mixed Ordinances, which have a
Divine ground, and with all adjoined thereunto a positive human Institution,
such as Calvin holds geniculation in prayer to be: The Episcopal Power being in
it self Lawful, the Subjecting of it in one person, in a certain Circuit, is
most suitable for preserving Unity, supposing the Person to be of greater
worth, and consequently recommended by the light of Nature, and in so far by
the word of GOD, and further warranded by a Lawful Church Constitution. Ans.
This ground easily appears foolish and unsound, when we consider that not only
the Power it self, is of Gods appointment and institution, but likewise the
Subject thereof, and and Officers Clothed with the Power, so that whatever
Authority the Church may be supposed to have for regulating the Exercise,
according to the general Rules of the word, and of Christian prudence; yet no
Church under Heaven has Authority to lift up the March-stones, which God has
set, and impeach his Institutions in Point of Government: Which Guilt, is
certainly Contracted either, 1. In setting up a New Officer, Clothed with such
Authority as he has not allowed; such as we have made appear the Prelat to be,
both in Respect of his acclaimed Civil and Ecclesiastic Authority. 2. In
Robbing the Pastor of that Authority, allowed by the great Masters Appointment
and Institution, which, as we have made appear, does in its Essence respect an
Interest, both in the Power of Order and Jurisdiction. As for Calvin, he is
found in that place, to speak nothing of the Nature of this Geniculation. or
what may give light touching the Nature of those mixed Ordinances. Besides,
that the Surveyers Reason here adduced, from the Light of Nature, appears to
Confound the (...) and (...) and without Respect to the Gospel Rules of
Government, to found a Claim thereunto, merely upon the greater Worth and
Ability: A Principle which will also brangle the Civil Government. And in a
word, this Principle of Monopolizing the Power in one Person, in a certain
Circuit, for this end of Preserving Unity, will tower up this singularity of
Government in one person over the Bishops, the Archbishops, till the Hierarchy
resolve in a Papacy at last.

Proceed we to the Surveyers Fifth Ground, ibid. resolving in a Partition of
Three or Four Particulars, to infer a direct positive Institution, for the
Superiority of one Church Officer, of a certain Circuit, over others. Whereof
the First is, That Jesus Christ from his Received plenitude of Church Power
from his Father, to be made use of, till the Elect be gathered in, sent his
Apostles, with plenitude of Power for all Church Offices, necessary for
Edifying and Preserving the same, as Power to Preach, administer Sacraments,
preserve the Church in order by Godly Discipline; for which he Cites Joh. 20.21.
As my Father has sent me, even so send I you, etc. Ans. As it is acknowledged,
that the Apostles were sent forth for the Great end of laying the Foundation of
the Gospel Churches, and Establishing the Ordinances and Offices thereof; so
that whatever Officers they are found to have Instituted and Authorized for the
Churches preservation, and Purity of Order, ought to be received with all due
Reverence; so it is evident, that their Office was in this Respect,
Extraordinary, and that they were Distinguished from all other Officers by
their immediate Call, their immediate Instructions from Christ, in^allibility in
Doctrine, a greater Amplitude of Power, etc. Hence we have made appear, there
was no Shadow of a Prelatical Power in their Office, and the exercise thereof,
since none of the Apostles were set over any fixed Diocese, but had an immediate
Relation to the whole Church, they exercised their Ministry sometimes jointly
and promiscuously in the same place, they Ordained no Inferior Officers alone,
without the Concurrence of other Officers, where they might be had, nor
Challenged, as Prelates, a sole Power of Jurisdiction over the Churches, etc.

The Second Subservient ground, which the Surveyer, P. 195, adduces, is, That
the Apostles had Successors to themselves in that plenitude of Ordinary Church
Power, for that Power was not to Cease till the end of the World, according to
the Promise, Matthew. 28.20. I am with you always, to the end of the World,
meaning with them and their Successors. Ans. That the Apostles had Successors,
that derived down an Ordinary Church Power, in reference to the Preaching of
the Word, the Administration of the Sacraments, and such a Governing Power, and
the exercise thereof, as is necessary for the Churches Edification and
Preservation in all times, is easily admitted: And this ordinary Church Power,
we maintain with the Body of all Protestant Divines, to be derived down by the
Pastor, the proper Successor of the Apostles in this Work, as has been above
cleared. And this is most Properly that plenitude of Power, which was to
continue to the end. For this Surveyer, in this Discriminating term of Ordinary
Church Power, seems, to exclude any Succession of Church Officers to the
Apostles, in eundem gradum, and properly.

The Surveyer tells us in the Third place, That there are three probable
Pretenders to this Succession of Apostles, Viz: Single Presbyters in the Modern
Notion; Colleges of Presbyters in a full Equality of Power; Or some single
Persons having Superiority of Power over ordinary Presbyters. The Pretensions
of the People, or of any other to the Church Government, He tells us, he does
pass as Irrational: And so do we. Only I must here say, That as what a single
Presbyter may do in extraordinary Cases, in Point of Jurisdiction, is not here
the Question; And that therefore his three Pretenders may be Justly reduced to
two: So in his confident Rejection of all other Pretenders as Irrational, he
should have been aware of touching the Kings Crown, and more consistently
defended his Erastian Supremacy in Church Government; Since in the last Edition
of our Scots Hierarchy, he was Owned and Established, as the chief Officer and
Head of this Church.

The Surveyer will have this Question of the Matter of Fact, upon which the Jus
depends, to be determined by Historical Narrations of the Acts of the Apostles,
and the first and surest Light, Church History can afford in the Churches
purest Times. I have made appear that this Question of a Divine Fact, must be
decided by the Scripture Light allenarly, and by Consequence, not from the Acts
of the Apostles Solely, excluding what further Light in this Matter is to be
had from their Instructions, in Point of Church Government, contained in their
Epistles, and likewayes from other places of the New Testament. So, that
whatever Practice of the Church, the History, even of Purest Times, presents
unto us, must be brought to this Touchstone and Standard of the Scripture
Institution, as being thereby Regulable: And therefore, can make up no part of
this Rule. In determining this Question, the Surveyer in the first place, Will
not have the Fullness of Ordinary Church Power, committed by the Apostles to any
single Presbyter, as if he had Actual Power of Ordination, or Jurisdiction:
That the Power of Order, the Administration of the Word and Sacraments is
committed to the Pastor, is of it self Evident; That the Power of Jurisdiction
is committed to him, as he is by Office a Member of the Judicatory, which is
the proper adequat Subject of this Authority of Ordination and Jurisdiction, is
equally evident. The Surveyer challenges us to show such Colleges of single
Presbyters, as had that Plentitude of Church Power committed to them by the
Apostles, and exercised the same, especially taking in Ruling Elders. Ans. If
by Plentitude of Church Power, be understood the ordinary Power of Ordination
and Jurisdiction, necessary for the Churches Edification and Preservation in
all times, and as abstracted and distinguished from the extensive Power of
Apostles and Evangelists; We say it is found seated in the College of Pastors
and Presbyters, both in the Acts of the Apostles, and else where in the New
Testament* The Apostles instituted Pastors or Presbyters (...) Church by
Church, and sure not to preach only and administrat Sacraments, but to Rule,
seeing they have the Name and Thing of Governors, Rulers, Overseers, Bishops,
ascribed to them; And if they were to Rule, sure in Collegiat Meetings. We find
the Exercise of this Power commanded and commended to Pastors or Presbyters;
Thus by the Apostle to the Elders or Pastors of Ephesus, Act. 20. By the
Apostle Peter 1 Pet. 5. to the Pastors of the Churches, to which he wrote. We
find this Jurisdictional Power accordingly exercised by them, both as to
Ordination and the highest Censures, 1 Timothy 4.14. 1 Cor. 5. And the
Circumstances of these and such like Texts do cleary evince, that this
Jurisdictional Power was to continue, thus exercised by these Societies or
Colleges of Presbyters, when the Apostles were gone off the Stage, and that
consequently they are the Proper Subject of the Power, immediately derived from
them. As for the Ruling Elder, his Institution and Office being found in
Scripture, he is upon Divine Warrant, supposed a Member of these Judicatories,
when the Churches are fully constituted in their Organick being. But the
Surveyer tells us, We cannot make appear, that in these Meetings of Presbyters,
there was an Equality of Power, since Superior Officers were with them Ruling
and Ordering their Church Actings. Ans. Though de facto it were found, that in
these Meetings, Superior Officers were present, yet if they be found Officers
of an Extraordinary Authority, and whose Power was Cumulative unto, not
Privative of the ordinary Power and Authority of these Meetings; This is
utterly remote from speaking any thing to his Purpose and Conclusion. 2.
Whereas the Surveyer peremptorly poseth us, Where such a Meeting of Presbyters
is found in the Acts of the Apostles (he should have added, or else where in
the New Testament) without Superior Officers ordering their Meeting? We
peremptorly Pose him, what Superior Officer is found set over the College of
the Elders of Ephesus, when Paul gave them his last Charge, touching the
Exercise of a Joint Episcopal Power over that Church? What Superior Officer is
found set over the Bishops and Pastors of the Church of Philippi? Or over these
Pastors and Bishops mentioned 1 Pet. 5.? or these Ruling Teachers mentioned 1
These. 5.12. Heb. 13.7.17? Sure, these Governing Teachers met for Government,
and these Meetings if found thus Constituted, and Exercising an Episcopal
Power, we have therein Convincing Instances of an Episcopal Power in a College
of Presbyters, without the Inspection of any Superior Ordinary Officers: For,
as for Apostolical Directions hereanent, they could no more impeach this
Authority, than Directions with Reference to the Power of Order could impeach
the same.

The Surveyer P. 196. brings for his third Ground, The Apostles committing the
Plentitude of Ordinary Church Power to single Persons, in a Superiority over
other Ministers; Instancing the Asiatick Angels, Rev. 2.3. And Paul's Directions
to Timothy and Titus, whom he sent and instructed with a Judiciary Power, into
Ephesus and Crete, and to ordain Ministers, which had been to no purpose, had
this Power been competent to Pastors. Ans. This Trite Argument has been above
at large spoken to; Therefore, we shall but briefly touch it in this place.

First, For the Asiatick Angels; We have made appear, First, That the
Collective Sense of the word Angel, stands upon the most probable Foundation,
and is owned by the greatest part of sound Interpreters, as being most suitable
to the Style of Prophetic Writings, representing many Persons by a singular
Typical Term, whereof frequent Instances are exhibit; to the Style of this very
Book, in representing many Persons, or a Series of Men, by one Symbolical Term,
such as Whore, Woman, Beast, etc. Besides, that the Angel is found plurally
addressed, Chap. 2.24. Next, That admitting the Angel to be a single Person,
will only plead that he is the Angelus praeses, or Moderator, yea, and so pro
tempore, and addressed as the Parliament is in the Person of the Speaker; That
no Address is made to him with respect to any Jurisdiction over Pastors, nor
can any Reason be given wherefore the Commendations and Reprehensions
respecting Ministerial Dutys, must be fixed in an Exclusive Sense upon one
Person, etc.

Next, For the Directions to Timothy and Titus; It is above made appear, that
their Office was Extraordinary, and passed off, like that of the Apostles, with
that First Infant State and Exigence of the Church, since it is made Good they
were Evangelists, in a proper formal Sense. 2. That upon this Ground, they
could have no Successors in their Formal Office and Inspection, which imported
a Relation to no particular Church, nor can consequently represent the
Authority of any ordinary Officer, with such a fixed Relation of this Nature
and Extent. It is likewayes made appear, that the Episcopal Pleaders from these
Directions, must either upon this Ground, extend their Power equally with that
of Apostles, or make it appear, that these Directions of this Nature, and
importing this Authority, were applicable to them no where else, and in
reference to no other Churches, where they are found to exercise their Office;
Either of which are inevitable Absurdities. Finally, It is made appear, that
this Inspection was of a Transient Nature, did suppose the Existence and
Exercise of the Apostolic Office, was Cumulative unto, not Privative of the
Official Authority of Pastors, and therefore cannot prove a sole and single
Authority of a Prelat over Church Judicatories.

But says the Surveyer, What need was there to send them for this End to these
Churches, if a Iurisdictional Power was competent to Pastors? This Objection is
above fully removed. And here again we repone, 1. The Infant State of the
Church requiring a Temporary Super-intendency of an Evangelist, and Directions
from an infallible Apostle. 2. Episcopalians must confess, that in many Points,
wherein Timothy and Titus are immediately addressed, ordinary Pastors and
Presbyters have a necessary and essential Interest, and that therefore they
must acknowledge this to be one end of these addressed Instructions, that
Pastors or Presbyters may have a clear Vidimus of their Ministerial Office and
Duties; And that by consequence the addressing of these Directions to Timothy
and Titus will not exclude Pastors from the Jurisdictional Power; And no more
make this peculiar to these persons, than the Injunctions respecting the
Reading, Preaching of the Word, Convincing the Gain sayers, and Rebuking the
Scandalous, solely applicable to a Prelat, as his incommunicable Prerogatives.

The Surveyer here Cants over again the Old Song, That its the greatest
possible evidence, that can be in such a Matter of Fact, that immediately after
all the Apostles Death, until the Council of Nice, the Church had no other
Government, but that of Bishops. Ans. This Assertion, especially as respecting
the Patriarchal Bishop of the late Edition, viz: with sole Power of Ordination
and Jurisdiction, tied to Preach to no flock, and deriving all his Power from
the Civil Magistrate, is so grossly absurd, so palpably false, that the very
Repetition is a Confutation; the contrary having been demonstrated by several
Learned Pens. The best Antiquaries confess these first times dark, as to
Matters of Fact. But the Surveyer quite mistakes this Question, which is not
anent a mere Matter of Fact, or the Churches Practice simplely Considered, but
anent the Apostolic Instructions and Institutions, in point of Church
Government, viz: what Officers the Apostles set up and Instituted, in what
order, and Clothed with what Authority, how qualified for their Office, and
instructed therein, how they are found to have exercised this Power, when thus
Instituted and set up. If this be clear in the Scripture Records, then no
defects or aberrations therefrom, either in, or after the Apostles times, can
direct or warrant our Imitation, nor can be an Infallible proof of the Rule,
unless we will extend this to Regulat us as to every Scripture Truth and Duty
therein held out. Both Scripture and Church History, do give us an account of
the early aberrations from the Divine Rule, both in Point of Doctrine, Worship
and Government, such as those anent the Resurrection, Justification by good
Works, Worshipping of Angels, the Error of the Nicolaitans; and in Point of
Government, the Mystery of Iniquity, the Embryon of a Papal Primacy, was
working in Paul's time, and early appeared in Diotrephes aspiring after a
Primacy* Not to stand upon the Millenary Error, the Error anent the Vision of
GOD, and others, early appearing thereafter. The Surveyer will needs strengthen
his Notion by the Maxim, Lex currit cum praxi, and consuetudo est optimus
interpres Legis: What interpretation and Sense this is capable of, in reference
to Human Laws, or of what use, is left to the Consideration of the Gentlemen of
the Long Robe; But sure with respect to the Divine Law, it is dangerous and
sadly lax. Divinity, and Isreal's Consuetudo and early practice of Idolatry,
and the Worshipping of Images, as that of the Golden Calf, with a pretended
design to Worship the Lord Jehovah, was a shrewd and gross interpretation of
the Second Command. The People who told Jeeremiah, that they would pour out
Drink Offerings to the Queen of Heaven, because their Progenitors in a long
tract of time had done so, were much in this Surveyers Mind. But the great
Lawgiver, who enjoined his People not to walk after their Fathers Commandments*
nor Judgments, though of never so Large an extent and long Continuance, but
after his Laws and Judgments, is of another Mind. Tertullians Rule and Prayer
is good, speaking of Custom in it self considered and simplely, Surge veritas
ipsa. Scripturas tuas interpretare quas consuetudo non novit nam si nosset non
esset: Did Custom know Scripture, it would be ashamed of it self, and cease to
be any more: Upon which ground he pleads, that the Eternal Light himself might
arise and expone his own Scriptures.

The Surveyer tells us, That in these preceding grounds, he has pleaded only
for the Lawfulness of Prelacy, though the necessity is not denied. But sure, if
these grounds evince any thing, they prove a Necessity, as well as Lawfulness:
If the Apostles Directions and Practice in the Institution of Church Officers,
pursuant to their great Masters Commission, together with his supposition of
the Apostolical and Christian Churches Universal Reception and Practice, will
not evince and prove this, I know nothing will: Besides, that we heard him
plead upon the Ground of a Divine Institution, which will bear this Conclusion
of Necessity, not of Lawfulness only. But in this proof of the Lawfulness of
Prelacy, the Surveyer tells us, he intended to quiet the Minds of People, anent
the Covenant obligation against it. A good Pillow of security, no doubt this
had been, had he proved, that Universally and absolutely no Oath can oblige
against a thing in it self Lawful or retrench our Liberty thereanent, and
answered the Arguments urged by Casuists on the contrary. But it is not our
purpose to digress on this head. He adds, That if Lawful, it is Juris Divini,
that we submit to a Lawful Human Ordinance and Command, for the Lords sake:
Which Reason were valid, had he made good that the Human Ordinance, in this
Circumstantiate Case, had for its object a thing Lawful; And that the Human
ordinance is the First Rule and adequat ground of our Judging the expediency of
a Practice hic and nunc, though in it self Lawful: And further, that the Human
Ordinance can of its own Nature loose solemn Oaths and Vows upon the Lawgivers
themselves, and the Subjects, against such a practice as is commanded.

CHAP. II. The Surveyers Exceptions and Answers, which he offers to the
Scriptures, Pleaded by Presbyterians, Examined; Particularly, To these Passages
viz: Matt. 20:25, 26: with the Paralels Mark 10:42: Luke 22, 25: To that
passage Mat. 18:17: and Act: 20:17, 28: Tit: 1:5: 7: 1 Pet: 5:1.2. The
Vnsoundness and Inconsistency of his Exceptions and Glosses made appear.
THE Surveyer having thus presented his Episcopal Strength, and his great
Grounds for proving Prelacy Lawful, does in the next place, undertake to Answer
the Scripture Arguments, that are pleaded for Presbyterian Government; which we
shall now Consider and Examin^.

The First Scriptures (he tells us, P. 197.) that are made use of, for proving
the Parity of Ministers in the Government of the Church, and disproving
Imparity or Superiority of any over others, are Mark. 10.42. Matthew. 20, 25, 26.
Luke. 22.25. Where, because our Lord is speaking of the Kings and Great Ones of
the Earth, their Exercising Dominion and Authority over their Subjects, forbids
his Disciples to do so, it shall not be so among you; therefore, it is
concluded, that there should be no Superiority or Governing Power of Ministers
of the Church above Ministers, but all should be equal. Ans. These Texts have
been above considered and improven: It is evident, that our Lord Commanded
Parity of Official power among his Apostles, his First Ministers, and by clear
Consequence, the same equality among Pastors, who are equal, and of the same
Order as Apostles were, and their proper Successors in the ordinary power of
Government. That the Prelates acclaimed Power in Civils, and Dominion over
Church Judicatories, brings him within the Compass of the prohibition in these
Texts, is above made good. The Surveyer, in his way of expressing our Argument,
seems to oppose to this Official equality of Pastors, the Superior power and
Authority of greater to the lesser Judicatories, which is the necessary
Ligament of all Government, and of Presbyterian consequently. But to proceed.

The Surveyer in his First Answer, will needs question, That there is at all a
Prohibion in these Texts given to Christ's Apostles, but only a mere prediction
of what was to be their Lot in the World, Viz. That they were not to have a
Stately, Glorious, Pompeous, worldly Superiority over others; Christ assuring
them they were to be despised of the World; It was as Incongruous to prohibit
them to Reign as Grandees, as to Charge a Man not to act the King, who is
assured that all his days he is to be a Beggar* Ans. This pitiful Shift and
Gloss, out of the Road of Interpreters, discovers what a desperate falling
Cause the Surveyer was maintaining, which needed the support of such a Conceit
as this: To which we oppose. 1. The Circumstances and Scope of the place,
clearly refuting this irrational Subterfuge. It is evident, our Lord was here
curing the Disciples Emulation and sinful Debate about Superiority and
Chiefness in his Church and Kingdom, and directing them, both negatively and
positively, in the exercise of their Spiritual power, as his Ministers, and
this in order to the preventing of mistakes in Judgment, and contravention of
their Practice, in Reference to the Nature and Exercise of Church Government:
In order to which Scope, the pointing at the events of Providence, merely in
their external Condition, had been utterly extraneous and impertinent. And as
in this Gloss, the Surveyer does Violence to the prohibiting part of the Text,
so most palpably to the positive Injunction, He that will be great or Chief, as
Luke has it, let him be as the Youngest, recommending to them a Humble
Ministry, in Opposition to Pompous greatness. 2. The Surveyers Reason is
palpably absurd and impertinent, for notwithstanding of our Lords warning them
of their despised State in the World, yet he also Instructed them in the Nature
and Exercise of his Kingdom, did show he was to have a Church, which is his
Kingdom, against which the Gates of Hell should not prevail; In which Kingdom,
they being Officers and Governors, it was necessary they should understand its
nature, in order to a due exercise thereof, and as necessary it was, their
Successors should have the same knowledge. The Offices in the House of GOD are
truly Honorable, to be counted worthy of Honor and Highly Esteemed by the
Members of the Church, was it not then necessary, that the Nature of this
Spiritual greatness and Honor, in opposition to worldly Pomp, should be thus
pointed out? The Surveyer holds there was a Prophetic Intimation, that
Apostles and their Successors, should not have a Glorious, Pompous, Worldly
Superiority, and thus excludes from an Apostolic Succession, Prelates, who are
Princes of the Empire, and Peers of the Land, and must set them in Terms of
Contradiction to this his supposed Prophecy.

Secondly, Granting there is here a Prohibition, the Surveyer will consider
what is prohibited, and to whom. For the First, He tells us, It is that Sort of
Dominion exercised among Kings of the Gentiles, according to the Notion the
Apostles had of Christ's Kingdom, Act. 1.6. Luke 24.21. Mat. 18.1. Mark 9.34. So
that our Lord discharged Earthly Pomp, Coactive Power of Worldly Kingdoms, not
all Superiority of one of his Ministers above others, non Rem sed Modum Rei.
Ans. This is above Examined and Confuted. We have made appear, that all
Masterly Power and Dominion is here forbidden, as inconsistent with that Humble
Ministry, and Ministerial Service, enjoined in the positive part of this
Precept, which does not Discriminat one Dominion from another, as if one sort
were allowed, and another forbidden, or, as if Government, which is in the
Nature of Lordship and Dominion, were Diversified and Distinguished in respect
of its manner of Exercise, good or bad, but all Masterly Power, though in its
self lawful, is here, both as to matter and manner forbidden to Christ's
Ministers, in the Exercise of their Authority. This Man acknowledges Earthly
Pomp to be forbidden and Worldly Grandeur, and what could his thoughts be of
Prelates being a third Estate of Parliament, bearing State Offices of the
Highest Sort? He says our Lord discharged not Rem but Modum Rei: If by this
Modus Rei he understand a Civil Dominion, he has cut off the Prelates Civil
Rule, and in so far acknowledges their Transgressing this Precept: If he
restrict the Sense to a Dominion, which he may call Spiritual, he leaves still
a Latitude for the highest Extension thereof, even to a Papal Primacy. He tells
us, that a Chiefness is rather supposed than forbidden, as he labors to prove
( P. 201.) from Luke 22.26. And thus neither the Disciples Distemper, nor
Emulation about a Primacy, nor the Papal Pretensions thereof, are ever touched
by this Prohibition, according to his Gloss: And in this, as he crosses our
Lords Scope, so he contradicts himself, since ( P. 199.) he asserts with
Cyprian, that the Apostles were Pari honoris and potestatis consortio praediti,
had equal Power and Authority. This Answer of the Surveyer, wherein he embraces
the Popish Distinction and Evasion upon this Text, viz. That our Lord
discharged that Sort of Dominion only, exercised among the Kings of the
Gentiles, and as he expresses it non Rem sed Modum Rei, brings to Mind a
remarkable Passage of the Learned Turretin, Institut. Theol. Elenct. Part. 3.
Loc. 18. Quest. 16. de Regimine Ecclesiae, P. mihi 164, 165. Having Cited this
Passage, Luke 22.25, 26. against the Papal Monarchy, together with the
parallel, 1 Pet. 5.2. And from both, having inferred that Dominion in the
Church is forbidden, and a Ministerial Service enjoined: He brings this Popish
Argument and Exception, Nec dici potest apud Lucam Monarchiam and Dominationem
absolute non interdici, sed tantum ejus modum, qui non sit simulis Dominationi
Politicae seu Tyrannidi Regum Gentium; That is, It cannot be said in the place
of Luke, that Monarchy and Dominion is not absolutely forbidden, but only the
manner thereof, or such as is like to that Tyrannical Dominion of Earthly
Kings. The Reasons of his rejecting this Gloss, he subjoyns, Quia Apostoli non
contendebant inter se de modo Primatus sed de Primatu ipso, etc. That the
Apostles were not contending about the manner of a Primacy, but the Primacy it
self, and therefore, that our Lords Answer may be apposit to their Question, it
must needs absolutely forbid all Dominion. 2. If our Lord had intended to
forbid only some special kind of Dominion certum Dominationis modum, he had not
removed their Ambition, which he is here endeavoring signally to remove, since
other Primacies also do Feed Ambition. 3. Says he, this Phrase [ Not so, viz.
shall it be among you] according to the Use of the Scripture, does import a
simple and absolute Negation, as Psalm. 1.4.147.20. Adding that in the
paralells, Mat. 20. and Mark 10. it is expressed (...) non it a sit inter vos,
It shall not be so among you. He adds that if Christ had allowed a Dominion to
Peter, the Apostles had been admonished thereanent, and that the Term (...)
signifying a Service or Ministry ascribed unto them, is inconsistent therewith.
He afterward in the next Paragraph Answers the Objection taken from the
Signification of the Compound Words, (...) and (...) as importing a violent
Domination, showing that the Words of themselves will not necessarly import
such a thing, which he proves from some parallel Texts, and that they signify a
simple Dominion only, which he further proves from Lukes making use of the
Simple Verbs (...) and (...). Adding in the third place, that there was no
need, that our Lord should speak of a Dominion of this Nature, because the
Apostles Debate was not about a violent Domination. He adds further, Nec valet
quod subjicitur, etc. It is of no weight which the Popish Adversary pleads
against the Discharge of all Primacy, because our Lord subjoyns, He that is
greatest among you, since our Lord speaks not of a true Greatness, in respect
of the thing it self, but of an Imaginary, in respect of Affectation and
Desire: Which Matthew and Mark do expone and clear by these Words, Whosoever
will be great amongst you. In the rest of his Reasons, he has several things
to this purpose, as if he had been expressly Disputing against this Surveyer, as
indeed upon the Matter he does, and Lists him among the Popish Adversaries in
this Point.

For that Point of the Persons spoken to, the Surveyer tells us, The Apostles
were sometimes spoken to, as representing all Christians, Mark. 13.37. In which
Sense, this Prohibition was not given to them, which would strike at the
Authority allowed among Christians: Sometimes what is spoken to them concerns
themselves alone in their Apostolic Capacity, as Matthew. 19.28. In which Sense,
we cannot understand this Prohibition, since it would exclude all Ministers
afterward: Some things likewise were spoken to them, as representing only
Ministers, as when Power of remitting and retaining Sins is given them, Joh.
20. In which Sense, we cannot apply this unto them, since this will impeach the
Superior Authority of any of them above others, and their Authority over
Inferior Ministers, evidenced in Paul's Excommunicating Hymeneus and Alexander,
making Decrees for the Church of Corinth, etc. Ans. Whatever may be said to
this Partition in it self, it is certain, the Enumeration is not so adequat as
not to admit of a Super-numerary: Some things might be spoken to Apostles,
which did most nearly concern them as Apostles, as being immediately directed to
them, and yet may have an useful reference, in a Subaltern and Subordinat
Sense, to all the Ministers of Christ. As when our LORD said to His Apostles,
Ye are the Light of the World, the Salt of the Earth: This in some respect had
a peculiar Application to them as Apostles, and our LORDs Infallibly Inspired
Ambassadors, authorized to lay the Foundation of the Gospel Church, prescribe
her Ordinances and institute her Officers, and several of them appointed to be
the Holy Ghosts Penmen in writing the Scriptures, in which respect the Church
is said to be Built upon their Foundation. But though no Ministers else could
acclaim to be in this respect the Light of the World, and Salt of the Earth, or
challenge a Right to the peculiar Privileges of Apostles included therein, it
is notwithstanding certain, that there is a Subordinat Application hereof unto
ordinary Ministers, that they are in their Capacity and Sphere the Light of the
World, and the Salt of the Earth, and have the Honor and Duties of their
Ministerial Office therein enjoined and included, as well as the Apostles had
theirs. 2. Since he grants the Apostles were pari honoris and potestatis
consortio praediti, and cannot deny that our LORD bespoke them upon that Ground
of an equal Official Power, and as in that Capacity, it follows that he bespoke
Pastors, whom he appointed to be in the same order of an equal Official Power,
and to succeed to the Apostles in their ordinary Authority. The Surveyer can
give no Reason wherefore our LORD discharged the impeaching this instituted
Equal Power of Apostles, by an Unlawful Dominion, and not to have given the
same Prohibition to Pastors: Why a (...) or Chief or Primat is discharged among
Apostles, and not also among Pastors. The Surveyers Contrary Instances (as he
calls them) of the Apostolic Authority over Ministers in the Church, are
palpably Impertinent, and do miss the Mark. For 1. Their Authority in the first
plantation of Churches, can no ways conclude what is the ordinary Authority of
Pastors, in the Churches ordinary and settled Government. 2. Our Argument runs
thus, That the Apostles being placed in an equal Sphere of a Ministry, were
equal among themselves as Apostles, formally, and equal among themselves as
Gospel Ministers upon this Ground: But that therefore, they could have no
Authority Apostolical, as Apostles, over Inferior Officers, does nowayes follow
this Supposition, nor will it follow, that because the Apostles were Ministers,
and had Authority over other Ministers, that therefore there is a Lawful
Official Authority of one Pastor over another, because the Apostles were more
than Ministers, viz. Apostles, and in that Capacity had that Superiority, but
not as Ministers simplely: So that such an Argument would run cross to the
common Rules. It is certain, whatever Authority they put forth in the Churches
in fieri, and in directing them in the Exercise of their ordinary Power, yet in
settled Judicatories they are found acting as Elders and Ministers, and not as
Apostles; This has been made Good in Paul's assuming the Presbytrie in the
Ordination of Timothy; The ordinary Elders or Ministers concurring with the
Apostles in that Council, Act. 15. Both in the Disquisition, in the Sentence,
and enjoining the Decree. But says the Surveyer, We must not distinguish where
the Law distinguishes not; If notwithstanding this Prohibition, the Apostles
exercised Authority over Ministers, it does not Discharge such an Authority of
Pastors over Pastors. Ans. The Laws of our LORD delivered in the New Testament,
and the Correspondent Recorded Practice thereof, does State a clear distinction
betwixt the Extraordinary and Ordinary Officers and Pastors, and that both with
respect to the Nature and Extent of their power. The Surveyer tells us, the
Ambition beginning among the Apostles, the cure should have been applied to
them. Ans. So we affirm it was in our Lords prohibiting either a Prelatical
Dominion among themselves, or over Inferior Officers: But this could not
impeach their extraordinary Inspection over the Churches,-which was together
with their Office to pass off, and die with themselves, when that Case and
exigency of the Church was over.

The Surveyers Second Counter-evidence (P. 199.) is drawn from 1 Cor. 12.28.
God has set in his Church, First Apostles, Secondarily Prophets, Thirdly
Teachers; which is an ordinal Numbering, with reference to the Object they were
employed about; as Presbyterians hold upon this ground, the Pastors Office
Superior to the Elder. Ans. Not to stand upon this his ordinal numbering; nor
upon an enquiry wherefore the Evangelist is excluded by the Surveyer in this
Account of ordinal numbering, whom we find Numbered, Ephesians. 4.11. It is Evident,
that. 1. This Instance is extravagant from the Point: For, from our Assertion,
that the Prohibition of Unlawful Dominion over their Fellows, was given to
Apostles as representing Pastors or Ministers, he draws a Conclusion, that
thereupon will follow a Discharge of the Superior Authority of one Pastor over
another, he means an Official Superiority, the Contrary whereof, he undertakes
to prove by Instances; and here his great Instance is drawn from the
Apostolical Authority, which the Apostles exercised over inferior Officers; or
the supposed ordinal Numbering of Extraordinary Officers: But I pray, what is
this to prove the Official ordinary Superiority of Pastors over Pastors, or to
evince their Superior Degrees among themselves? Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, etc. were placed in their several Degrees, or had their special
Pieces of work in the Churches Infant State, therefore there ought to be the
same Degrees of the Pastoral Office: What Consequence is this? 2. He is
inconsistent with himself in this Reasoning: For (1.) He has already
distinguished the Apostles Official ordinary Power, in the plenitude whereof,
he alleges Prelates do succeed them, from another, which he must call
extraordinary, else his Distinction is chimerical, and must fly with one Wing.
And (2) He alleges some things are spoken to them alone in their Apostolic
Capacity, which concerned none else; and thus distinguishes that capacity from
the capacity of Pastors: Now when he is about to prove, that the Apostles, qua
Pastors, or in that Capacity, and under thus reduplication strictly and
properly, were above other Pastors, and consequently that there are different
Degrees of the Pastoral Office; As if he had forgot his Distinction, he draws
his Argument from the Apostolical Acts of Superiority over inferior Officers,
and the supposed Degrees of Apostles, Prophets and others, in that
extraordinary Function, wherein he palpably baffles his former suposition and
Distinction. That in the Text Cited, together with the Parallel, Ephesians. 4.11.
there is a Numbering (whether we call it ordinal or not) of Extraordinary
Officers, now past off with these first times of Christianity, is the
consentient Judgment of sound Divines, and by Consequence, that no Argument can
be drawn from hence, for distinction of Degrees in the Pastoral Office. The
Surveyer (P. 200.) cannot understand how the Pastor having a Doctrinal
Superiority over other Officers of the Congregation, should in Point of
Discipline, which is but a Personal application of the Word sink below his
Assistants in the Session and have his Voice swallowed up by theirs. But he
might much more wonder at his own Principle, who alleges the Pastor to have,
in dispensing the Word and Sacraments, an Authority and Power of the same
Nature, with that of the Hierarchical Bishop, and yet when he comes from the
Pulpit, and sits in a Judicatory with the Prelat, losses all Authoriry in
Government, and according to the last Edition of our Hierarchical Prelacy,
become a mere Cipher without a Figure, having no Power but to advise the
Prelat, and scarce that. As for the Pastors Authority in the Session, we say
that although the higher Honor allowed to the Labourer in Word and Doctrine,
above the Officer who Rules only, and who does not thus Labor, will allow the
respect and deference of a constant Presidency in the Parochial Church
Judidicatory, yet Ruling Elders having an Essential interest in Church
Government, he cannot have the sole decisive Vote, though there is still access
to appeal to a higher Judicatory, in case of mal-Administration.

The Surveyers Third ground is, That if Governing Superiority be inhibit to
Pastors over others, it is either of one over others, and thus we unjustly
distinguish this Monarchical Government of one, while we allow the like
Government of many, which in an Aristocratical form, may have as much of State
and Command, as of one: If we say, that he Discharged all Superiority of many,
or of some Number over others this will, in favor of Independents, destroy
Presbyterian Government, and the Subordination of Iudicatories. Ans. This is in
part already removed, by what we have offered anent the Essential difference,
in Point of Government, betwixt the Judiciary Power, as Subjected in a College
or Society, and the Monopolizing and concentring it in one Person. 1. We have
told him, that our Lord has Established and Instituted both the Nature and
Subject of Church Power. 2. Having Instituted Pastors of an equal Official
Authority, all Pastors as Members of the Judicatory, have an Essential interest
in the decisive Votes, and an equal decisive suffrage therein upon this Ground;
so that there is a Clear exclusion of the Monopolized Government in one Person,
who appears excluded and Discharged by our Lords Instituted Principles and
Grounds of Government, since this Concentring of Government in one, robs
Pastors of this their Decisive suffrage, excludes a free and full Conference
and Debate, in order to a suitable Determination, by a free suffrage, as is
exemplified in that Council* Act. 15. And therefore this Dominion of a Prelat
over Pastors (besides his Pompous Civil Dominion) brings him palpably within
the Compass of this Prohibition. 3. That the Presbyterians Subordination of
Judicatories, cannot fall within the Compass hereof, nor come under the
Surveyers imputation of State and Dominion, is many ways evident. (1.) This is
founded upon the Light and Law of Nature, and the Nature of all Governments.
(2.) This is notably consistent with the Jurisdictional exercise of the
Pastoral Office, and the ends thereof, both which the Prelatical Dominion
destroys: This Subordination is founded upon our Lords Institution, as is
evident, Matthew. 18. where the gradation in Point of Censure and Appeals, is
from the Lesser to the greater Number, which the Prelatical form inverts and
destroys. As for Commisions of Assemblies, which the Surveyer next quibles
about: We say, that it is no extrinsick Judicatory, exercising any extrinsick
power, but a more Compendious meeting of the whole Assembly, with their
Conjunct power for the purposes delegated and limited, both as to the Time and
Object of their power, and are accountable to the ensuing Assembly for their
Administration. What the Surveyer adds, touching their power to punish all
Ministers who will not obey their Acts, etc. It is palpably impertinent, for no
Censures or Punishments were to go beyond the Limits of their Instructions and
Commission, nor ever did, or could Assemblies engage to own them any otherwise;
so that in whatever point they did Malverse, the Assembly, was still as an
equal Judge to be Appealed unto.

The Surveyers Fourth Ground and Instance (P. 201.) is, That in the Texts under
Debate, our Lord supposes some of his Disciples, in Comparison of others, were
to be great and chief, in respect of Power and Authority, else the Speech were
not to the purpose; And that our Lord directs such as attained to this Chiefty
and Greatness, to Demean themselves Humbly and Usefully, let him be as the
Younger, which is no Direction to Undervalue such, but only prohibits an
Affectation of Honor, separat from the worthy Work mentioned, 1 Timothy 3.1. Ans.
This Popish Gloss of Bellarmin and others, we have already at large Confuted,
which, as we have above made appear, establishes and fixes the Popes Mitre,
instead of Levelling against it, as this Text certainly does. Protestant
Divines, more appositely to the Scope and Contexture, have told the Papists,
that our Lord said not, he who by my Appointment should be Chief, or enjoy a
Principality or Supremacy, but he that from the bad Disposition of James and
John, would seek this, must in place thereof endeavor and emulat Spiritual
Faithful Diligence in the Ministerial Duties, and thus to be Chief in Virtue
and Reward. That this Popish Gloss of a supposed Lawful Chiefness or
Principality in the Church, so overthrows the Scope, that it makes our Lord
rather to have Inflamed than Quenched by his Answer, the Ambitious Suit of the
two Brethren, and the Disciples Emulation thereupon. That this Gloss will prove
the Disciples Concernment in the Enquiry, anent the Person who was to be Chief.
The Survey^r though apparently excluding a Civil Chiefness or Kingly Power, yet
allows a Spiritual Principality. His Caution, that the Clause, let him be as
the Younger, will not import a Direction to Undervalue such, is fruitless and
impertinent, since the Lord recommends therein a humble Ministerial Diligence,
as is said. The Bishops Work, 1 Timothy 3. is the Work and Office of the Laborious
Pastor and Scripture Bishop, but the Aspiring Seeker of a Chiefness, which the
Surveyer would bring within the Compass of that Text, is condemned with the
(...) Diotrephes, who aspired after the same. For what he adds of the Motive
drawn from our Lords Humility: We have above made appear, that in the Series of
their Arguing, he and his Fellows does underprop by such a Notion and Gloss of
this Passage, a Primacy or Papacy. It is enough that we add here, that our
Lords Exemplary Humility, who is the Master of the House, is in this place
presented, the more strongly to enforce his Servants abhorring all Ambitious
Usurpation one over another, since they are all Fellow-Disciples and Servants.

The Surveyers Fifth Ground and Counter-Instance (P. 202.) is this in Sum,
That our Lord mentioning in this Prohibition, the Authority, not of Kings over
Chief Grandees, but over their Subjects, were our Gloss of his discharging all
Governing Superiority admitted, it would reach a Prohibition of Government over
the People, and therefore our Lord discharges not the Rule of one or some
Ministers over Ministers, but only the Lordly and Earthly Way of it. Ans. As
the Dominion and Arbitrary Power, which our Lord here discharged, is certainly
such, as respects both Ministers and People, Church Members and Church
Officers, and a fortiori, as reaching Church Officers, because respecting
Church Members: Whence the Apostle Peter, Copying out this Direction of his
Master, exhorted Ministers not to Lord over Gods Heritage; So we have made
appear, that the Power and Dominion of the Hierarchical Bishop, is such as
encroaches upon the just Liberties both of Ministers and People, robbing the
one of their Decisive Suffrage and Jurisdictional Power, the other of their
just Liberty in the Call of Ministers, and in other things. Here again, we may
notice, how this Surveyer overshoots still his Mark, and wanders from the
Point, while endeavoring to prove that an Official Inequality of Pastors is
not here prohibited; And drawing his Proof from the supposed Superiority of
Apostles over ordinary Pastors. Again, the Surveyer acknowledged, that there is
here discharged a Dominative, Worldly and Lordly Government, and thus the Text
forces him to give a Deadly Blow to his Darling Prelates, who own the Title,
Name and Thing of Lordship, and both Civil and Spiritual Dominion, they being
owned as Spiritual Lords, and Lords of the High Court of Parliament.

The next Scripture made use of for Presbyterian Government, and against
Episcopacy, which the Surveyer (P. 203.) undertakes to Answer, is that Passage,
Matthew. 18.17. If thy Brother trespass against thee, etc. go tell the Church,
etc. Whence he says we argue, That Christ our Lord giving out the great
Charter of censuring Jurisdiction to be exercised among his Subjects, does not
give that Power to one Man, a Bishop, but to the Church, and one Man cannot be
a Church. In Answer to this, the Surveyer in the first place professes to
disclaim Erastus way, which denis an inherent Discipline and Government in the
Church for correcting Offenses, and keeping Ordinances in Purity. Which
contradicts his Zealous Pleading for the Kings Ecclesiastic Supremacy in this
Pamphlet, as it was then established by Law, and screwed up to the highest
pinnacle of an Arbitrary Dominion, so that the Prelates were declared to Act as
his Commissioners, accountable to him in their pretended Ecclesiastic
Administrations, and the Government it self, is in our Laws called and owned,
as his Majesty's Ecclesiastic Government. But though the Surveyer pretends to
disowne Erastus way, yet he spends a considerable Discourse in fighting with
their Weapons. In order to this Scope he tells us, That a Course is here
prescribed for charitable removing private Quarrels arising among Brethren, both
to gain their Friendship and their Souls too, from the guiltiness of the Breach
of Charity, which he tells us, is clear from v. 21.22. And from the parallel,
Luke 17.2, 3, 4. Hence he inferrs, that our Lords Direction is in Limitation to
private Injuries, and not be extended to the whole Latitude of all Offenses, to
which this Direction cannot be extended. Ans. First, It is evident that our
Lord here prescribs this Method of removing Offenses, viz. That when more
private Means reach not the end, and the person privately admonished is not
gained and convinced of his Miscarriage, the Matter is to be brought to the
public hearing of the Church, and such a Church and Collegiat Meeting, as is
supposed to be clothed with power to censure Ecclesiastically. So that
admiting there is a Remedy here prescribed for the removal of the private
Offenses, it is still under the Notion of Scandals that might arise among them
in point of Charity and Equity. And hence it is evident, that the Gaining, here
made the Scope of Dealing with the offending Brother, respects mainly the
gaining of his Soul to GOD: So the word is taken Iam. 5.20. and the gaining of
his Friendship, only in a Subordinat Sense. As for the Passages cited, neither
v. 21.22. of this Chap. nor Luke 17.1.2, 3, 4. (which the Surveyer himself dare
not call exactly parallel to the place under debate) can evince that the
Offenses mentioned were nothing but mere private Injuries, and not Scandals; as
Mr. Gillespie in the Aarons Rod, Lib. 3. Chapter 2. has abundantly proved: And
admitting there is a Medium betwixt private Injuries and all Offenses, this
place is meant only of Offenses and Scandals; Nor can it be hence inferred,
that the more grosser and the lesser Scandals may not fall under a diverse
Consideration, with reference to some pieces of a Method of Procedure, as is
evident from what the Apostle prescribes, 1 Cor. 5. in reference to the removal
of that attrocious Scandal of the incestuous Corinthian.

The Surveyer (P. 203, 204 205.) spends a long Discourse in endeavoring to
load with Absurdities, the Distinction betwixt Civil and Ecclesiastic Powers,
upon the account of the Varieties of Offenses arising upon sins of Omission and
Commission, sins of Quotidian Incursion, Scandals from Actions Criminal, or in
point of Civil Injuries, of Oppression, etc. And Injuries in order to the
joynting of the supposed Discipline, as he calls it, with the Civil Government,
when the Civil Injuries and Scandal are joined, whether he shall complain to
the Church to Judge of the Scandal, since thus the Church will Judge the Civil
injury, and invade the Magistrates part, or else pronounce the Actions
Scandalous, and Censure blindly, following the antecedent Judgment of the
Magistrate, or otherwise be necessitat to review the whole Process de novo, etc.
Ans. As Matters coming before these Respective Judicatories, must be considered
Matterially and Formally, so the proper difference betwixt the two
Jurisdictions, with respect to the Object, is to be drawn from the Formalities
of the Actions, or the ratio suo qua, they come under their Respective
cognizances. It cannot be the Materiality of the Action simplely, for this
would make the Two Powers inevitably to Justle, and the Church might not meddle
with any Action, which the Civil Magistrates Power does in any Case touch, such
as habituated Adultery, Perjury, Incest, etc. So that the Scandal being the
proper formal Object of the Churches Power, the same Action, as under the other
formalis Ratio of the Civil injury, is the proper object of the Magistrates
Cognizance; and in the Case wherein the Civil injury is dubious, the Magistrates
Right stands good, as to a Priority in the Cognizance. Likewise, there are
Civil wrongs, wherein the Case is so dubious, that before the Legal Decision,
the Person wronging, cannot be presumed to have Acted from a bad Principle or
purpose, but from the ground of a mistaken Right, and therefore after the Legal
Decision, no Scandal can be concluded. And in cases wherein there is manifest
Scandal, the Churches Power takes place and herein there is no necessity, as
the Surveyer pretends, either for a blind following the Magistrates Decision in
this Point, or an immediate meddling with Civil Processes. For the Scandals
Mentioned by him, we say, that as in the Circumstantials of procedure, there is
such variety allowed to the prudentials of Church Governors, according to the
General Rules of the Word, as cannot Justle with the Method prescribed in this
Text, so these Sins, whether of ommission, ordinary incursion, of opinion, in
Matters Civil or Criminal, in so far as habituat and scandalous, do come under
the Churches Cognizance, understanding this still with the due Caution
premised, touching the Scandal of Civil injuries: For Scandals in Matters
Criminal, if the Magistrates Sword of Justice do strike, in removing the Person
from the Land of the Living, there is a prevention of any further dealing; If
he neglect his Duty, the Church is to follow the ordinary Methods for gaining
the Persons Soul, and removing the Scandal. In a word, the Civil and
Ecclesiastic Jurisdictions being both Gods appointments, as this Surveyer
should not deny, it necessarly follows, that they have their distinct Limits
and Measures drawn, their proper Ends and Objects appointed by the God of
Order, and therefore cannot be said of themselves, to interfere, and clash
together, without a Blasphemous reflection upon him, who is the Author of both;
so that whatever practical interfeirings and abuse of Power, men in either
Capacity may be guilty of, can no more reflect upon these Ordinances
themselves, than Man's Sinful abuse can be said to impeach the Divine Authority
of the Office he sustains. I add this remark further, that the Surveyer does in
the Premised discourse palpably contradict himself, while endeavoring to
asperse a true Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction, for he professes to disclaim Erastus
his way, and asserts there ought to be a Godly Discipline in the Church, for
correcting Offenders, and keeping the House of GOD and his Ordinances in
Purity, and consequently he professes to own an intrinsic Church Government
distinct from the Civil, and by further consequence, a coordination of the two
Powers and Jurisdictions, and likewise a necessary mutual Subjection of persons
Clothed therewith, to the Respective Authority of the one and the other
Jurisdiction; yet in his muster of supposed absurdities, he impugns this
Principle, and endeavors to prove that without palpable Confusions and
clashing of Societies, there can be no exercise of this Government. Besides, he
pretends to impugn only the received sense of this Passage, and to keep within
these Limits, yet while attempting to prove, that this is not the sense of the
place, he rambles out into such a Discourse, as if it prove any thing, does
evince that neither this, nor any other place of Scripture, does hold out an
Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction and Discipline, as properly and formally distinct
from the Civil.

The Surveyers next Answer ( P. 205.) is in Sum this, That supposing the
Church Collective cannot be here understood, but the Representative only, in
the Matter of Representation, it is indifferent, whether they be one or many;
one Commissioner may represent a Presbytrie in an Assembly: So that tell the
Church, is tell the Presidents and Rulers of the Respective Churches, or tell
him that is Chief, with his Assistant. Ans. The State of the Question is whether
the word (...) or Church, does here import such an imbodied Society or Court,
as is the proper Subject of a Jurisdictional Censuring Power, and to whom the
Appeal is to be made after more private Dealings, which if evinced, the
Hierachical Prelates arrogated Power monopolizing this Jurisdiction, and (to use
the Surveyers term) concentring this Authority in himself solely, is
sufficiently overthrown, as contrary to the Scripture Pattern, and cross to
this great Rule and Standart: For the word (...) it is the Consentient
Judgment of Critics and Interprete^s, that it naturally signifies a Caetus,
and Caetas evocatus, a concio convocatorum, an indicta concio, thus Suidas;
thus Demosthenes; and in Scripture it points out generally a Convocation, as
Act. 19 32. and a Convocation in curia, or a Caetus civilis, v. 39. And
sometimes its put for the Assembly of Believers, sometimes for the Church
Militant, sometimes for a Province, Kingdom or City: Compare Ephesians. 5.23. with
Act. 8.13. Rev. 12.5. Romans 16.5. And here good Interpreters do consequently
take it to Represent the Ecclesiastic Senate or Presbytrie, making it one and
the some with that (...) 1 Timothy 4.14. Hence the Verb (...) properly signifies
in Concione delibero, Verba facio, to Consult, Deliberat and Discourse in
Public Assembly. The Text convinces of this; For, 1. The Gradation is from the
Lesser to the Greater Number. 2. Our Lord, v. 19, 20. speaks of an agreeing on
Earth, and gathering together in his Name. Besides, that the Surveyer himself
expones the Church, of the Rulers and Governors, who, if they have a joint
Essential Interest in their Jurisdiction, he overthrows his Opinion of
Concentring this in the Prelat; if he ascribe the Jurisdictional Decisive
Authority to one, who is Chief, making the rest but his Assistants, he again
contradicts himself, in seeming to ascribe this Ruling Power to the whole
Meeting, for thus the Sense could not be as he says, tell the Rulers and
Governors. For what he adds of Commissioners, it is palpably absurd: For, 1.
The Church Representative, or the Officers thereof, have a Divine immediate
Institution, are set by God therein, and have not a derived Authority from the
Church. 2. It is the Court it self, not the Deputed Commissioner, one or more,
which is the proper Subject of the Jurisdictional Power. 3. To make the Parallel
hold, he behoved to say the Prelates have a derived Power, as Commissioner, from
the Church, the Falsehood whereof is apparent.

The Surveyer adds, (P. 206.) That the attributing a Iurisdictional Power to
the Church, is nothing against him, who allows not to one single Bishop this
Power, without the Council of Presbyters, according to the 4th. Council of
Carthage, Can. 23. though nothing is to be done without the Bishop. Ans. In
Stating the Question with the Presbyterians, (P. 192.) he tells us, It is
whether this Power be equally Diffused in the whole College of Presbyters, or
Concentred in one Person: Now if the Person of the Bishop be the Center, he
cannot allow this Official Power to step beyond that Center; So, that no
Members of the Meeting have any Interest therein. He adds here, as likeways in
the place before Cited, That the Bishop must exercise this Power with the
Concurr^nce and the Assistance of Presbyters; But this can import no Exercise
of Jurisdiction, since private Persons may Counsel and Advise, who have no
Decisive Suffrage: And he knew, that in the late Edition of our Hierarchical
Prelacy, the Clergy were to Advise the Bishop only, and scarce that. So that
our Prelates, in such Exercise of their Power, baffled that Act of the Council
of Carthage, which he mentions. The Surveyer adds, That there is a Plurality of
Officers, even where this Inequality of Power is supposed, whether Judging or
Advising. But if one only Judge, and the rest are but mere Advisers, the
Judging Power being thus Concentred in one, there is no such Court, as is the
Subject of a Jurisdictional Power; So that the Surveyer bewrays great
Impudence, in saying that the Determination properly flows from them all, since
the Authority is thus Concentred in one. But says the Surveyer, since the
Organick Church is made up of Rulers and Ruled, the Notion of a Church will not
import an Equality of Power in all. Ans. This Parallel is palpably unjust and
impertinent, since the Church Organick, considered thus complexly, does
necessarly and essentially include Members and Officers, Rulers and Ruled, and
consequently a necessary Inequality; But the Surveyer could not deny, that in
this place, the (...) or Church, imports a Society or College of Rulers only,
which can come under no such Consideration of a necessary Inequality.

The Surveyers Fourth Answer is in Sum, That we find the highest Censures of
the Church inflicted by the Authority of single Persons, who ever otherwise
concurred; So Paul excommunicat Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.20. And to say
he acted as a Member of a Quorum, is to make him a vain Boaster, and to make
the Scripture speak what we will. Ans. The Surveyer must acknowledge, yea and
has acknowledged the difference betwixt the Apostolic Authority, in the
Framing and Constitution of Churches, and the Exercise of their Power, in
Churches already constitute in their Organick Being: In the first Case, there
was an indispensible necessity of exerting a singular Apostolic Authority,
when no Officers were to concur, and Churches were not fully Molded in their
Organick Being: And we heard himself distinguish the Apostles ordinary and
extraordinary Power: In the other Case, when Churches were constitute, it is
evident, and has been made good, that they did assume the Official Concurrence
of ordinary Church Rulers. The Surveyer challenges us to produce a Warrant for
our Assertion of Paul's acting here upon an extraordinary Apostolic Authority.
Thus he challenges the Apostle Paul to produce his Warrant for this his
Apostolic Acting, which he has long since produced and recorded, if this Man
had been pleased to read and consider it. Whereas he tells us, It was none of
the extraordinary Characters of the Apostles to act in these Matters, by his
own only Authority; We say it was, where Churches were not constitute, and no
ordinary Officers to concur: And this Surveyer might be challenged, as the
Affirmer, to prove that this Act was put forth in an Organick Church, where
ordinary Officers were to concur, or else in denying this to be one of the
Characteristicks of the Apostolic Office, he asperses his Apostolic Power and
Authority. He adds, That what was beyond their immediate Calling, infallible
Direction, illimited Jurisdiction, etc. was transmittable to his Successors,
and actually transmitted to Timothy and Titus. It is Answered, we have made
appear, that their immediate Calling, considered with reference to its Nature
and End of Planting Churches, Constituting the Officers and Ordinances thereof,
did necessarly include this Authority in this first Framing of Churches, which
neither was nor could be transmitted, unless it be pleaded that the Churches
Foundation could be twice laid. For Timothy and Titus, we have above spoken to
their Authority and Office, and made appear that it was transient and
extraordinary, as that of Apostles, and to be Exercised with the Authoritative
Official Concurrence of ordinary Officers or Presbyters, where they were
Planted.

The Surveyers Fifth Answer and Exception (P. 207.) is, That there is in this
Text an Allusion to the Jewish Church Courts, wherein there were Chief and
Subordinat Rulers, both in the Sanhedrin and Synagogues. Ans. Unless the
Surveyer can make appear, that the whole Iurisdictional Power and Authority
therein, was so Concentred in one Person, as there was nothing of it left to
any of the Members; and that their Work was only to give Assent unto the sole
Decisive Determination and Sentence of that one Person, this Answer will never
help the Hierarchical Bishop, whose Power was of this Nature, according to our
Laws. If it be supposed that the Jurisdictional Power, was competent to the
whole College in these Meetings, the Passage stands still in its Condemning
Force against the Hierarchical Bishop. That the whole Jurisdictional Power in
the Sanhedrin, was Concentred in the Person of the High Priest, none can,
without extreme Impudence, assert. We heard that the Learned Iunius (and
several others) do assert that the ordinary Jurisdiction was penes concessum
Sacerdotum, competent to the whole Meeting of the Priests. The Levits, as well
as the Priests, were to show the Sentence of Judgment in Matters and Questions
brought before them, Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9, 10. So Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19.8, 9.
restoring this Sanhedrin, set the Levites, as well as the Priests, to Judge the
Controversies that came before them, by way of Appeal. And though we find that
the High Priest did pronounce the Sentence of Judgment, 2 Chronicles. 19.11. with
Deuteronomy. 17.12. this will not infer the Surveyers Conclusion of his sole Decisive
Suffrage, since the Moderator of an Assembly may pronounce the Sentence flowing
from their joint Decisive Votes. For the Rulers of Synagogues, since we read of
them, and of Chief Rulers in the plural, Mark 5.22. Act. 13.15. compared with
Act. 18.8, 17. it is evident there could be no peculiar Jurisdiction lodged in
one exclusive of the rest.

His Last Exception to this Passage is, That the Remedy here prescribed was
presently to be made use of, upon the rising of Scandals, and therefore, was
not for Scandals to arise a long time thereafter. Ans. This first Seminary of
the Christian Church, being at present under our Lords immediate Inspection,
there was no such Access for a present Use of this Remedy, and therefore this
Rule and Remedy was mainly prescribed for aftertimes, as the Charter of the
Churches Jurisdiction. The Author of the second part of Pool's Annot. well
observes upon this Passage, That we are not to understand our Savior as
speaking with relation unto the present time, but the time to come, and giving
Laws, which should take place, and abide from the gathering of the Christian
Church: And if the Church be understood of those that have the Authority of
Binding and Loosing, they show that the present Church of Apostles, was to
constitute particular Churches, to whom, when constituted, in force of this
precept, such Offenses were to be told, etc. The Surveyer asks, Suppose
Scandals then arising, V. G. Judas giving Scandal to Peter, would our Lord have
sent them to the Sanhed^in of the Jews? Upon the Ground I now offered, the
Negative Answer is clear; The Complaint was to be made to this glorious Head of
the Church, in whom all Church Authority is truly concentred, and in telling
him, the Church was told. But the Surveyer tells us of Bucers Assertion, That
Christ and his Apostles were a sufficient Representative Christian Church; And
this Primitive Presbytrie and Representative, he professes to accept well of,
where was no Equality of Power in the Members. Ans. The Surveyer knew there was
here an absolute Dominion of the Churches Glorious Head over a Society of
Officers; And if he will still have such a standing Pattern of a Representative
Church, viz. a Supreme Vicar having the Radical Authority thereof, the Pope
will join issue with him in his gladful Acceptance thereof.. That there was no
Equality of Power in the Members, contradicts his former Assertion, anent an
Equality of an Official Power among the Apostles, unless he will put Christ the
Glorious Head among these Members, and degrade Him from his Head-ship. He tells
us further, That in this Primitive Pattern, there was no Inter-mixture of
Lay Elders. A witty Knack and Notion indeed. He has told us P. 199. of several
Classes and Degrees of Church Officers, which he thinks exemplifies the
continual standing Measures for the Christian Church, from that Passage, 1 Cor.
12.28. First Apostles, Secondarily Prophets, Thirdly Teachers, after that
Miracles, and he will not doubt Evangelists likewayes are of the Number, who
are reckoned Ephesians. 4. Our Surveyer saw no mixture of these in this Presbytrie,
nor of the Pastor, whom he distinguishes from the Apostolic Office, the
Bishops being with him, their Successors: So that the poor Man was upon the
Charybdis or Scylla, either to acknowledge that this Presbytrie was not so
complete as it ought to have been, and thus forced to contradict what he here
asserts, That according to this Form all others afterward should be framed
(for this will make the Pattern and after Copies manck and defective) Or else,
if he acknowledge that in this Primitive Seminary and Embryon of Church
Judicatories, all ordinary Officers were not present, he behoved to confess
that his Charge against Lay Elders (as he calls them) because not here, was
impertinent and groundless. The Surveyer calls for such a Presbytrie to end all
our Controversy. That is a Presbytrie with a Head, having a Sovereign Absolute
Dominion over all the Members: And since he would not with the Millenaries,
have our Lord to reign personally on Earth, he here wished for a Supreme
infallible Vicar to end the Controversy. In his Dislike of hetrogenous
Mixtures in Church Judicatories, he might have reflected upon the High
Commission Court, with its threefold Inte^mixture. 1. Of Members, viz. His
Reverend Fathers the Bishops, and Lay-Lords, Nobles, and other Statesmen. 2.
Of Matters cognoscible and Objects of their Power, viz. Scandals, and Civil
Crimes. 3. Of the Actings of the C^urt, like the Popes Ecce duo gladii, Fyning,
Confyning, Imprisonment; As also, Ecclesiastic Censures of Excommunication,
Deprivation, etc. One Remark further I add upon this Passage of Scripture. The
Surveyer founds his Argument upon the Allusion made to the Jewish Courts: But
1. It is evident in general, there are Scripture Allusions, that will not so
much as plead for the Lawfulness of the thing alluded to, witness, the Psalmist
allusion to Charming, and our Lords warning that he comes as a Thief. 2. Should
he plead for a complete equality betwixt the Jewish, and Christian Church
Judicatories, he would plead for an Oecumenick Bishop and fixed President over
the whole Christian Church, as there was a Supreme High Priest set over the
Jewish; so-that this Argument proving too much, and beyond his Assertion,
proves nothing. 3. It is enough to found the allusion, that there be some
likeness of the things compared; and thus in this Case, there being in the
Jewish Church, Courts, a suitable Subordination of the Lesser to the greater,
and a Correspondent Official Power seated therein, the allusion stands good,
entire, and evident upon this ground* that Christian Church Courts are of such
a Nature.

The Surveyer (P. 207.208.) makes his next Assault upon our Argument for the
Official identity of Bishop and Presbyter, drawn from Act. 20.17. 28. where the
Elders of the Church sent for by Puul to Miletus, are called Bishops: And from
Tit. 1.5, 7. where he that's called an Elder, is called also a Bishop, and the
Names are used as Synonim^us, so 1 Pet. 5.1.2. the Elders are (...) such as
have oversight over the Flock. The Argument with the Surveyer runs thus, If
there were no Bishops in the Apostles days, differing from Presbyters in
Office, there ought to be none now: But there were none such in the Apostles
days. Ergo: We do for Brevity rest upon this hint of Argument, having spoken to
it above, as deducible from these Texts. His first Answer is, That the first
proposition is not so indubitable as it seems; And his proof is, that Beza,
though holding the Scripture Bishop and Presbyter to be ^ne and the same, yet
acknowledges the Lawfulness of that Episcopacy, which he calls human; And
therefore, though no such Bishops had been in the Apostles time, the Churches
appointment of such a Constitution, guided by the Spirit, might be a fit means
for Conservation of Peace. Ans. First, The Surveyers founding the unsoundness
of the proposition upon the supposed sentiments of Beza, as it appears palpably
unsound, unless Beza were supposed infallible, so it is evident (and if we
could here stay upon it, might be made good at large, from many Passages of
Beza, which we have elsewhere produced) that he disowns the human Prostasie, as
a recess from the Divine appointment, and the first step of the Churches
defection in point of Government. On Philip. 1.1. he tells us, of the community
of the Name of Bishop and Presbyter, which Continued till he who was in the
Assembly set over the rest -- began to be peculiarly called the Bishop; from
hence, says he, the Devil began to lay the first Foundation of Tyranny in the
Church of GOD. And discoursing further of the Ascension that was made from
Bishops to the higher Officers of the Hierarchy till it came to Patriarchs,
etc. He has this remarkable Passage at the close of his Discourse, Behold of
how great moment and consequence it is to decline, even in a hairbreadth from
the Word of GOD.. Now, this Surveyer might have pondered what Sense or Divinity
it could be in him, or Beza; to assert that the Church is guided by the Spirit
in her declinings from the word of GOD. To this Scope we might Cite many
Passages of Beza: See (for brevity) Beza ad Cap. 9. apud Sarav. number. 20. Beza
Resp. C. 11. N. 3. Likewise in Quest. 2. Referent. Sarav. P. 92. In which
Passages (and many such like) we find him clearly condemning this Human
Prostasie, in so far as transcending the Limits of a Moderators Office.

The Surveyer next coming to the Second proposition of the Argument, tells us,
That its sooner affirmed than proven, that there were no Bishops in the
Apostles days, differing from Presbyters in the modern notion: And he compares
the Presbyterians to the Melancholic Man in Athens, who concerned himself in
every Ship arriving in the Harbor, as his own property A Charge easily
retorted; since in such like Hypochondriack distempers, the Surveyer (as his
Fellows) would needs have the Hierarchical Bishop of their New Notion, to be
lodged under the Denomination of the Scripture- Bishop: Yea (and in a Distemper
beyond that of the Man at Athens) will often lap him under the Denomination of
a Presbyter, where there is not so much as an appearance of this auspicious
arriving Vessel. The Surveyer tells us, That the Name of Presbyter is not in
Holy Scripture, a distinguishing Name of one sort of Officers from all others,
although sometimes the Scripture requires that it must be looked on as
Distinguishing those that are under that Name from other Officers* Ans. The
proposition he impugns, is, That in the Apostles days, there were no Bishops
Superior to Presbyters, no Ordinary Officers of the Hierarchical Mould, or
Bishops of his Modern Notion. That from these places Cited, it is aparent, that
the Ordinary Church Officers Instituted by Apostles, were Bishops and
Presbyters, of the same Official Mould and Authority, to whom the Feeding and
Governing of the Church is enjoined promiscuously: And all his Answer to the
Proposition amounts to this, that the Name of Presbyter is sometimes a more
general Name, than to point at an ordinary Officer: An Answer utterly remote
from the Point, as is obvious to any that considers, That it touches not. 1.
The Official Identity of the Bishop and Presbyter, in the Passages Cited, and
their equal Official Authority, as ordinary Church Officers, given to Feed and
Rule the Church jointly, which is a necessary Consequence of the former. 2. The
unwarrantableness of such an Officer, as the Hierarchical Prelat, whose Office
encroaches upon, and robs them of that Power allowed them of GOD, which is
another Necessary Consequence drawn from this Ground. This Charge is the more
evident in that he has acknowledged, that sometimes these Names of Bishop and
Presbyter, distinguishes those that are under the same, from other Officers.
And in the Passages Cited, he cannot but acknowledge them thus distinguished:
Sure they are so, at least for any thing he has said. He tells us, he will in
this and other Considerations, remove our Mistake: But sure he has here
presented his own.

He adds, ( P. 209.) That in the Rehearsal of Church Officers, 1 Cor. 12.28.
with Ephesians. 4.11. Presbyters are not in the Number, though Bishops, and they are
comprehend under the Name of Pastors and Teachers, which shows that the Name is
not appointed to design any certain Order of Ministers. Ans. The Surveyer could
not but grant, that the Hierarchical Bishop, according to his modern Notion, as
distinguished by this Name from the Pastor or Presbyter, is in none of these
Rolls, and therefore, upon his own Principle, this Name is not appointed to
design any certain Order of Ministers: And where is then his warrant for the
Hierarchical Bishop, as thus distinguished? Likewise the Surveyer very
unhappily made the Name of Teacher, the Characteristick of his Hierarchical
Bishop, who looks upon Teaching as none of his work, nor is Chargeable, qua
Prelat, with any deficiency in his Office, though his Sermons drop but once or
twice, pro forma, and on Solemnities from one years and to another. In a word,
as the Surveyer in this Reason quite ruined his Cause and assertion, so it is
evident, that in the Scripture Accounts of the institution and work of
Presbyters, the work and Office is found the same with that of these ordinary
Officers, Cited 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. since both Teaching and Government, are
evidently committed unto them Act. 20.28. with Tit. 1.5: 7. 1 Timothy 5.17. But
for the Divine Institution of his Hierarchical Prelat, or any proper
designation for his Office in that Capacity, our Surveyer, after all the
Travels of his Surveying Notions, brings us home nothing but a non inventus
est. He adds as a proof of his former Assertion, That he knows no place of
Scripture, where the word Elder must needs point out an Officer fixed to a
particular Charge in Teaching and Ruling, having no other above him in Power,
or having Power over any other Officers. But he should have pointed us to the
place, where the Diocesan Bishop of his new Mould, is represented in Scripture,
under the Name of either Bishop or Presbyter: And if he give over this
discovery, and the Answer of our demand hereanent, he must take home and Lodge
this Argument with himself, and when he falls upon a good answer, bestow it for
us upon himself. But for such Presbyters or Elders, as he does desiderat, he
might have found them in the same Text of Act. 20.17, 28. empowered with the
ordinary Office and Authority of Teaching and Ruling the Church, as succeeding
the Apostles in this ordinary Office, yea and fixed as the ordinary Officers of
this Church of Ephesus for this end; as likewise Elders thus set up with an
Episcopal Power, and fixed to their Charges, Tit. 1.5. with 1 Pet. 5. Likewise
1 Timothy 5.17. We have Elders or Presbyters supposed to have a fixed Relation to
that Church, having also a Teaching and Governing Power: Yea Act. 14.23. We
find such Pastors or Presbyters, ordained Church by Church, or in every Church.
But the Surveyer adds, That Presbyterians hold Elders to be of two Ranks, and
therefore, if the Ruling Elders are not to be here supposed, they make the
first Constitution of Churches manck and defective, without Ruling Elders or
Deacons; Or if they include both under the Name of Elders, he can with bete^^
Ground, include the Majores Presbyteri, or Bishops, distinct from the Minores,
or Pastors. Ans. Whether we assert there are Ruling Elders here or not, his
Hierarchical Bishop is not in the least helped, or his Pleading for him
strengthened. For, if we shall say, that in this first plantation of the
Churches, there were only Teaching Elders or Pastors appointed, who were in
tuto to appoint and ordain Ruling Elders and Deacons, his absurdity is easily
evaded, if we shall but suppose that which is easily supposable* that in the
first Constitution of Churches, there was a gradual procedure, and the chief
Officers, the Pastors, first ordained and empowered* as above said: If we
embrace the other Answer, and affirm that Elders of both sorts, were here
ordained, his Inference has no shadow of a Connection hereupon, since we do
make good from Scripture, the Distinction of the Teaching and Ruling Elder, who
both come under this general Designation. But for his Hierarchical Bishop, his
Institution, Name, or Office, the Surveyer can give us no shadow of a P^^of,
and but beggs the Question in supposing such an Officers Existence. Besides,
though it were granted, that such a Distinction could be admitted, where finds
this Surveyer the Deacons in these Catalogues? And how will he thus evite the
Rebound of his own Blow, and his own absurdity of a manck Constitution of the
Primitive Churches? For what he adds, That Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, is called
a Presbyter of his Church of Lions. It is certain, Bishops were sometimes so
called, and therefore they were the more guilty who did appropriat the Name
Bishop to a pretended Office, Superior to a Presbyter, especially since this
Retention of the Name Presbyter, was from some Impression of the New Testament
Times and Writings, wherein the two Names are promis^uously used to point at
one and the same Officer. And it would seem this Name, which, with Beda
signifies Sapientiae Maturitatem, should have been rather assumed by these
pretended Fathers, than that of Bishop, which with him imports industriam curae
pastoralis, the Industry of the Pastoral Care, a Work that Prelates are found
little to concern themselves about.

There is another Passage, wherein he might have seen such Presbyters as he
desiderats, viz. Act. 15.22, 23. where mention is made of Apostles and Elders,
meeting in that Council at Jerusalem, who must needs be understood of fixed
Pastors of that Chuch. The Surveyer (P. 210.) offers to our thoughts, Whether
James, the LORDS Brother, called by the Ancients Bishop of Jerusalem, and is a
Distinct person from the two of that Name, comes under any of these
Denominations? We have above made appear, in collating this Passage with Gal.
2.1.9. Gal. 1.19. That this James who is called the Lords Brother, is called an
Apostle, and such an Apostle as Peter and others, v. 17.18. Which is also clear
from this, that we read of a James the less, Mark. 15.14. Which (as Ierom
contra Helvidium reasons) had been no fit Distinction, had there been three
James's. The Harmony of Interpreters taking James to be an Apostle in Gal.
1.19. is above made appear; such as Estius, Paraeus, Gomarus, Menochius,
Piscator, Tirinus, Simplicius, etc. The Surveyer was not to be troubled in a
Counter-enquiry, To what purpose he proposed the Question? Or next, under which
of these Names he comprehended the Deacons? But for us, a rational Account may
be given, If it be said they are comprehended under none of these Names, there
being in this Meeting put forth a Diatactick, Critic, and Dogmatick Power and
Authority, in none of which, Deacons as such, have an Interest, their Work and
Interest being to serve Tables.

To that Passage 1 Pet. 5. where the fixed Elders or Presbyters of the Churches
have ascribed unto them an Authority in Feeding and Ruling the same; The
Surveyer Answers, That the Name of Presbyter is common to all Church Officers,
Higher and Lower, even to Apostles, as Beza acknowledges. Ans. He has already
acknowledged, That it must sometimes in Scripture be looked on, as
distinguishing those pointed out thereby from other Officers; So that it may
here denote a Preaching Pastor in special, notwithstanding that in a general
Sense, Superior Officers had that Name, such as Apostles. He could not deny the
peculiar Office of a Deacon, though the word (...) or (...) is sometimes
appropriat to Superior Officers. And besides, that the proper Name and
Designation of the Superior Officer, he cannot show to be given to the
Inferior, though the Superior in a General Sense, have sometimes the Name of
the Inferior attributted to them. He might have here seen, that these Officers
or Presbyters have an Episcopal Inspection and Oversight over the Flock
ascribed unto them, and that of such a Nature, as imports a complete Official
Equality, and Excludes Lordship over GODS Heritage: Which does clearly Justle
out his Hierarchical Prelat, as having no Interest in Church Government. The
Surveyer further tells us, There is no ground to assert that the Presbyters
Act. 20.17.28. were such only in the Modern Notion, and none of them Bishops in
the Modern Notion: And to obviat an Objection from their Relation to Ephesus,
he adds, That they were not only Elders of that Church, but of the Churches of
Asia about, so far as in a transient Visit they might get Intelligence. This
often baffled Subterfuge, Episcopalians have been told, is contrary to the
Sense of Ancient Fathers, Ierom, Theodoret, Chrysostom; contrary to several
Councils; contrary to the Syriack Translation, which reads the Text thus, be
sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church of Ephesus. Dr. Lightfoot
holds, they were the Twelve, upon whom the Apostle Paul imposed Hands, and gave
them the Spirit, Act. 19.6. and such others (if any such were) whom Timothy had
ordained. See Lightfoot Harm. Chron. N. Test. The Text says, He sent to
Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church: Sure of that Church to which he
sent, and there is no shadow of a hint of any other Elders there present.
Again, he sent for the Elders of the Church, in the Singular Number, viz. that
particular Church: But the Surveyers Gloss will read the Elders of the
Churches, in the Plural, viz. of Asia, then met at Ephesus. The Scripture
expresses Provincial Churches in the plural, as the Churches of Asia, Rev.
1.11. Churches of Judea, but otherwise of the Church of Jerusalem, Corinth, in
the singular, which were in Cities. Neither will the old rotten Evasion help
the Surveyer, viz. that v. 18. its said he Preached throughout all Asia, and v.
25. speaking to these that were conveened, he says, you all among whom I have
gone Preaching the Kingdom of God; from which he pleads, there were others
present, as well as the Elders of Ephesus, who might be proper Bishops in their
places: Since it is evident, that the Term [ All ye] does properly relate to
the Elders of Ephesus then present, and was immediately spoken to them: Such
Universal Terms, used in such a Sense, and to such a Scope, are very ordinary
and caseable, as if one should say to a certain Number of an Assembly, ye are
all now dissolved, it would not imply the presence of all the Members. Again,
the Apostle might speak many things, which did import the Concern and Duty of
all, though the Speech were directed immediately and personally to those only
that were present. When he said, You all among whom I have gone, Preaching the
Kingdom of God, the Surveyer will not be bold to say this will infer that these
all were present* or that the Speech did import so much. As for the Passages
Cited, viz. v. 18, 25. It is Answered, that the Apostle spent most of these
Years in Ephesus only, viz. two Years and three Months, and the Superplus in
the places adjacent; So that these Elders could not be ignorant, how the whole
was spent. Some have observed further, that there is nothing of a peculiar
Address here to a supposed Bishop of Ephesus, and that all these Elders are
Charged with the Oversight of that Flock. But the Surveyer will not have the
Presbyters here to be meaned in the restrained Signification, or that this Term
should restrain the Term of Bishop. But we restrain none of them from their due
and Native Signification, as importing the Preaching Presbyter or Pastor. As
for his enlarged Signification, stretching to an Hierarchical Prelat, it is the
Chimera of his own Fancy, whereof he has offered no Shadow of a Proof.

To that Text of Tit. 1.5. wherein the Bishop and Elder are found clearly
Identified, and a Plurality of them fixed in that one Church; The Surveyer (P.
211.) repones again his Old Recocted* Crambe of the Majores and Minores
Presbyteri, as comprehended in these Terms, and tells us of an Analogical
Reasoning which the Apostle uses, from the Qualifications and Duties of the
Bishop, properly so called, to show the necessity of the like in all
Presbyters, who are comprehended under their Order. Ans. As his Supposition of
the properly and improperly called Bishops, is still begged by him without any
ground, and as easily denied by us, as affirmed by him; So his Gloss and Reason
adduced, is clearly cross to the Text; Since the Apostle showing Titus, how the
Elders to be ordained in every City, were to be qualified, adds this Reason of
Advice, for a Bishop must be blameless; this (...), or for, is causal, showing
the Identity of the Office, as well as the Name, else the Reasoning were false:
Should a Chancellor in one of the Universities (says Smectymnus, who uses
this illustrating Similitude) give Order to his Vice Chancellor, to admit none
to the Degree of Batchelour of Arts, but such as were able to Preach, or keep a
Divinity Act, for Batchelours of Divinity must be so: What Reason or Equity
were in this? And we may enquire here what Reason is this, The improperly
called Bishop must be so and so qualified, because the Bishop of the higher
Order and distinct Function must be so qualified? Gerard. (...) Minist* Eccles.
uses the same Reason to show the Absurdity of such a Gloss. The Apostle in the
Series of his Reasoning, Identifies both the Work and Office of Bishop and
Presbyter: But this Surveyer will needs correct him, and cast in his Limiting
Cautions, and instead of that identity, that the Apostle asserts of the
Offices, make them only in some Sense the same, not entirely. He tells us, That
in Sacerdotal Acts they are the same: But he cannot say, that the Apostles
Identity here asserted, reaches and includes only the Acts of Order, and is not
to be extended to the Exercise of Jurisdiction. As for the Acts of Order, the
Hierarchical Bishop, is in their Principles, the proper Primary Subject of the
Sacerdotal Acts and Authority in the whole Diocese, whereas that of the Pastor
is Precarious, and Subaltern to his, and fixed to one Flock. He calls (P. 200.)
the Acts of Jurisdiction a Personal Application only of the Word, or of the
Power of Order; yet he does here Diversifie them; so that though he assert the
Pastor is the very same with the Prelat in the Sacerdotal Acts, he is not so in
those of Jurisdiction. But we cannot stand to Trace all the Inconsistencies of
the Surveyers Notions.

This distinction of Presbyters of the First and Second Order, in a New Petitio
principii, serves his turn as an Answer to our Argument from 1 Pet. 5. And here
we are again told, That the Presbyterians allow two Ranks and Orders of
Presbyters: Where it would seem, he Screws up his Hierarchical Prelat, in this
and the preceding Answers to a Divine Right, and thus quites and Justles with
what he often pretends anent a Right he calls partly Ecclesiastic* Again, the
Text ascribs an Episcopal Authority and oversight to these Elders and Bishops,
which as is said in former Cases and Instances, overthrows the Hierarchical
Prelates sole arrogated Power in Ordination and Jurisdiction. It has further
this unlucky aspect upon my Lord Bishop; that the Bishops or Elders here, are
enjoined an immediate Ministerial Inspection over the Flocks, and diligently to
Feed the same by sound Doctrine, are forbidden to be Lords over GODs Heretage,
much more to be Peers in Parliament, which pitifully plucks the Plums of their
Lordships Grandeur, and marrs their Figure in Herauldry. They are bidden beware
of the Filthy Lucre, which will much straiten their Revenues, which does so far
overstretch the allowed Maintenance of a Laborious Pastor. But of this, enough.

CHAP. III. Some more Exceptions and Answers of the Surveyer, examined, Viz: To
that Passage, 1 Cor. 5: To that of Ephesians. 4:11. (To which the Paralels, 1 Cor:
12.28. Rom: 12: 6, 7, 8: are to be joined) To that Passage Philip: 1:1. And to
1 Timothy: 4:14: His unsoundness and inconsistency therein, further made appear.
PRoceed we to that considerable Text 1 Cor. 5. the energy and force whereof,
in order to the evincing a Presbyterial Authoririty of Pastors in that Church,
is above spoken to. He tells us, It is alleged that the Church of Corinth, not
having a Bishop, ^is acknowledged by the Apostle to have the Power of
Ecclesiasti^k censures, even of Excommunication, and is reproved for not
executing these Censures, and exhorted speedily to execute the same; that hence
it is concluded, seeing this Apostolic Church was so Constitut with such a
Power of Excommunication, by its own Officers and Presbyters without a Bishop,
that therefore all other Churches, should have the same Power, according to the
Word of GOD. In Answer to this, the Surveyer (not unlike a Fugitive Criminal,
who will flee to a place of the greatest hazard otherways, so he may escape the
Pursuer) Flees to the exploded Notion of the Independents, a Party standing in
most opposite Terms to the Episcopalians, telling us, that this Power of
Jurisdiction and Censure, is not found here in the Eldership, or in them alone,
since the whole Church is spoken to in this Matter; There is Fornication among
you, ye are puffed up, etc. and all the Saints, Are concerned, of whom he
says, they Judge them that are within: That it were strange, that Elders, who
are not named, should be concerned, and not the People, who are expressly named;
that there is no more mention of the Governing Presbytrie there, than of the
Governing Bishop. Ans. The Surveyer here, is so unhappy, as to Raze the
Foundation of all his pleading, which, if it have any foundation at all, must
needs be grounded upon, and suppose a Distinction of the Church Representative
and Collective, Church Officers and Church Members: Nay, he Cuts the Throat of
his Assertion, P. 203. That there is an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and
Censure, and Discipline Established in the Church, for keeping Gods Ordinances
in Purity; which no person of common Sense or Reason can but ascribe to a
distinct Select Society from the whole Community: For, if all were Correctors
and Rulers, there is no Correlate of this Relative Power, or persons to be
Ruled. If he understand the Passage, Do not ye Judge them that are within? of a
Jurisdictional Power and Authority, it must needs have some Object, and
consequently must have for its Subject, some Select Order of Men, distinct from
the Collective Body. Next, who knows not, that the Directions Generally
addressed in the Epistles, to the whole Incorporation or Body of the Church,
are to be understood and applied pro unius cujusque Modulo, according to
Persons several places and capacities, though the General Address supposes
still the General Concern of all? When the Apostle thus enjoins Warn them that
are unruly, and again, if any obey not our Word in this Epistle, mark that Man
(which all do understand of a Censuring mark, as the word imports) who will
allege that these Authoritative Acts were competent to every individual?

The Surveyer foreseeing this, tells us, P. 212. That though this in some
things will hold, yet in the usual Style of the Apostolic Epistles, there are
distinctive Notes and Periods, that each person may know the Precepts wherein
they are concerned, and Apostrophees made to several Ranks, as Ministers,
Masters, Servants, to evite a dangerous Confusion: And upon the same ground an
acknowledged Jurisdiction in any of the Presbyters, would have here procured a
distinguishing of them from the People. Ans. The Surveyers Concession [ That
sometimes Precepts are not to be applied and appropriat to all, distributively,
but respectively, according as several persons or sorts of Persons are
concerned in these Commands contained in Epistles directed to the collective
Body] has razed the Foundation of this Answer, which, from the Non-nomination
of Elders, concludes the collective Body of the People to be addressed only,
and stiffled it in the Birth: Since he must acknowledge, that sometimes
peculiar Duties, and such, wherein some persons only have a special Interest,
are thus promiscuously and generally propounded, and even in this same Epistle:
And then it would have suited his Thoughts to ponder, how in this Case, he could
evite his own Consequence and Charge of a dangerous Confusion following
thereupon, unless he quite the Topic of this his Argument and Reason; It would
have likewayes suited his thoughts to assign his distinctive Notes and
Apostrophees in the Passages cited, and the Apostles Precepts touching the
Lords Supper in the 11. Chap. As likewayes to assign such in the Passages,
which do entrust a Jurisdictional Power to Elders: I mean such distinctive
Notes and Apostrophees, as would have distinguished the Bishop properly so
called, from his Minor and improperly so called Bishops, in order to the
eviting the Confusion of their Offices, and to cut off the dangerous
Presbyterian Consequence and Error of understanding the Bishop and Presbyter to
be Indentified in Name and Thing. He acknowledged that in some things this our
Answer will hold: And sure, if in any Case, it must in this, where Rulers are
supposed Existent, and a competent knowledge of their Official Authority, both
in themselves and the People.

The Surveyer adds, That there is a deep silence concerning Presbyters
Jurisdiction, or a fixed Presbytrie at Corinth, at this time, though there were
Teachers and Eminent Teachers, Extraordinary Prophets, 1 Cor. 14. Ans. The
Surveyer will not disowne, that in that 1 Cor. 14. There is a Trial and an
Examination of the Doctrine, ascribed to these Teachers, therefore he cannot
deny them the Authority of Judging those that are within, mentioned 12. v. of
5. Chapter But for the Surveyers deep silence, which he alleges, of a Presbyterial
Jurisdiction here, he might have found it removed by a full Scripture Sound,
had he pondered, First, in General, the Jurisdictional Power ascribed to
Pastors and Teachers, such as is imported in these Names mentioned, viz.
Rulers, Governors, Overseers, Bishops, Ministers, Stewards, Ambassadors. And
next in Special, that this Church of Corinth is clearly found to have been a
Presbyterial Church, and under the Inspection of a Presbyterial associat
Ministry. 1. There was a great multitude of Believers there, mention being made
of many Believers, of many Baptized and added to the Church; All whom Paul
Baptized not himself, consequently, are supposed to be Baptized by other
Ministers: God likewayes having a great Harvest of Souls there, and much People
in that City, upon which Paul was encouraged to stay among them for so
considerable a time, as the Year and six Months, compare Act. 18.1.7, 8, 9,
10, 11. This multitude behoved to be divided in particular Congregations. 2.
There is correspondent Plenty of Ministers and Preachers found there, pointing
it out as a Presbyterial Church, and not one single Congregation; first Paul
stayed all this time at Corinth, as a Master Builder, having other under
Builders, Act. 18.11. 1 Cor. 3.10. an occasion of their Doting, some upon one,
some upon a second, some upon a third Teacher; So that there appears a plenty
of Preachers there, who had their several Flocks and Followers; And Paul speaks
of their not having many Fathers, though they had ten thousand Instructers,
compare 1. Cor. 3. with 1 Cor. 5.14. Mention is likewayes made of a
Subordination of Prophets to Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.29. Considering likewayes the
Division of Tongues and Languages, this Church could not be one Congregation,
but united in a Presbyterial Classical Unity. Which in a word, is further
confirmed from this Principle, that we read of a Plurality of Churches there,
while the Apostle says, Let your Women keep silence in the Churches, (...) he
says not the Women, in general, but your Women in that Church. Yet this
Plurality of single Congregations in Corinth, are called and owned as one
Church, in the Inscription of the Epistle, which could not be merely upon the
Ground of Heart-unity, for thus they were jure-charitatis, nor in regard of an
Explicit Church Covenant, whereof the Scripture is silent, nor in respect of
the Ministration of the Word and Sacraments; for these were dispensed in single
Congregations* severally, since they could not all meet in one Congregation: So
that of necessity they are owned and designed as one Church, in regard of one
joint Administration of Government among them, by one common Presbytery or
College of Elders, associated for that End. See Ius Divin. Minist. Eccles. P.
( mihi) 206.207, 208. That the Prophets mentioned 14. Chapter were ordinary Pastors
and Ministers of that Church, not extraordinary Officers, as the Surveyer
insinuats, since Rules and Directions aptly agreeing to ordinary Pastors are
imposed upon them, for the well ordering their Ministerial Exercises, is upon
this and many other Grounds made good by Mr. Rutherfurd, in his Due Right of
Presbyt. P. 466.467.

The Surveyer in his next Answer, is, in with standing the Evidence of this
Scripture, driven upon the contrary extreme of ascribing the Authority and
Jurisdiction here mentioned to the Apostle Paul solely. He tells us, That the
Apostle speaks of the Sentence, as proceeding from himself, though the
declaring and executing thereof was committed unto the Corinthians, that they
are charged for not mourning that the Incestuous might be taken away by such as
had Power: And it were improper to say, a Man were to take a thing away from
himself. Ans. The plain reading of the Text, is a sufficient Confutation of
this Distortion and Gloss. The Apostle certainly reprehends this Church, and
imputs a Guilt to them, as to Non-procedure, in this Matter. Now the Question
is, wherein their Negligence appeared? And this is best seen and understood, in
pondering the Duty enjoined, viz. their Judging such as were within, Purging
out the Infectious bad Leaven, the Delivery unto Satan, etc. comp. v. 5, 7, 12.
with 2 Cor. 2.6. If they had no Authority hereanent, why is such a Defect and
Negligence reprehended? This Surveyer, in making them only the Promulgaters and
Executers of the Apostles previous Sentence, takes the Guilt of this
Negligence from the Corinthians, and puts it upon the Apostle Paul. The
Surveyers Gloss upon the Apostles Rebuke, as to their not mourning over this
Wickedness, viz. That they sought not with Tears to such as had Power to
inflict the Censure: If meant of a Power lodged in the Apostle, is contrary to
the Scope, since they are enjoined to deliver the Person to Satan, and to put
him away from among themselves. But says the Surveyer, the word (...) I have
judged, imports the Apostles sole Determination, that none are taken in as
Sharers with him in this Censure, and imports he required only the Execution of
their Sentence. We have already removed this Objection, the Apostles giving his
Apostolic Judgment, as touching the Necessity and Expediency of the Thing, can
no more exclude and prejudge the Authority and Interest of the Ordinary Church
Officers herein, than his giving his Apostolic Judgment in any other
Uncontroverted Duty, wherein the Persons enjoined the same, have an infallible
Interest, will bear such a Conclusion. Suppose the Apostle giving his Judgment
touching Archippus greater Diligence in his Ministry; And giving his Judgment
in the Point of Marriage, and the Duties thereof, as one that had found mercy
to be faithful, can this prejudge the Interest of the Persons concerned in the
Duties enjoined? Or would the Surveyer have said, that Paul's requiring the
Obedience of Church Officers, in any Point of their Ministerial Duties, and
showing them that he had judged such and such things to be their Duty, will
conclude they had no Authority and Interest therein, antecedaneously to such
Judging and Enjoining? Surely not at all. Nay suppose his Hierarchical Bishop,
set up in this Church, with his arrogated Power of Ordination and Censures, and
that upon his Neglect of putting forth his Power, Paul had thus declared, that
he had already judged the Necessity and Expediency of such Duties, will this
prove that the Bishop was destitute of all this Authority antecedaneously to
such Judging, or had none previous thereunto? The Surveyer could not say it,
and no more could he assert it in this case. The Apostle says, to whom you
forgive any thing, I do also, which looks like the Apostles corresponding with
the inherent Authority in these Officers, so that the Apostles Judging in this
Case, was to prevent and obviat their Pretenses of Delay, and quicken them to
their Duty.

But the Surveyer, ( P. 213.) from that Passage, when you are met together
with my Spirit, and the Power of the Lord Jesus, inferrs, That something was to
be done, beyond the Authority of the Church of Corinth, viz. Delivering of the
Man to Satan to be tormented outwardly, which Paul only by his Miraculous
Power, could effectuat. Ans. Suppose such an extraordinary Appendix, distinct
from the Censure it self (which may be upon weighty grounds called in doubt) it
does no whit impeach the intrinsic, ordinary Authority of the Church Officers,
in the inflicting of that Censure, though this Miraculous Effect, attending the
same, were ascribeable to Apostolic Authority. Again, the Surveyer, in the
Series of his Reasoning, shutting up both the Sentence in its self, and this
Miraculous Appendant (which two, he must needs distinguish, unless he totally
deny the Right of Excommunication in the Churches) within the Sphere of an
Apostolic Prerogative, renders useless, and casts a blot upon several Clauses
of the Sacred Text; such as their Solemn Meeting together, here enjoined, and
that expressly, in order to the delivering of the Man to Satan, which does
include the entire Sentence and Punishment, and that this Punishment is
expressly said to be inflicted by many, viz. the Church Officers as distinct
from the Church Members, for thus they are called in Opposition to the
Collective Body. Besides, that the Apostle in this Passage joining first in
their gathering together, and then mentioning his Spiritual Confirming
Presence, holds out that the first was an Authoritative gathering together, the
other a Confirming Approbation, for their Encouragement in this Exercise of
their intrinsic Power and Authority, as all Sound Interpreters take it. Again,
the Separating here enjoined, must be an Active, Judicial Separating this
Person from them (as the Leper and Unclean Person under the Law, was thus
separat from the Congregation) which does import an Authoritative Interest of
Church Rulers, in putting forth this Censuring Act, whereas the Surveyer makes
it a consequential withdrawing only from a Person already Censured.

The Surveyer in his third Answer, tells us, That though a Censuring Power were
in these Church Officers, it can make nothing for us, unless we could prove
they were single Presbyters, in the Modern Notion; There were Prophets here
above ordinary Officers, who might have this Power, and it is uncertain whether
ordinary Presbyters were here settled. Ans. The Surveyer has forgot that he
has acknowledged upon that Passage 1 Cor. 12. That there were here such
Pastors and Teachers, as will include the Bishops, and likewise Presbyters:
Besides, that the Apostle diversifies the Ordinary and Extraordinary Gifts, v.
8.9.10. Likewise, he knew there were in Corinth many Instructers, and such as
were settled in every Church, Act 13.1, 2, 3. Compared with Chapter 14.23. Viz.
Preaching Elders and Presbyters, so that he could not with any Shadow of
Reason, suppose they were all extraordinary Officers. And in a word, if he
asserted, there were here mixed Officers, he not only made the Power and
Authority of the extraordinary Officers, to swallow up that of the Pastors, but
likewise he crossed his monopolizing this extraordinary Power in the Apostle.
Again, since he could not say the Apostle in these Injunctions, does by
distinctive notes or Apostrophees, diversify the Ordinary from the
Extraordinary Officers, in the point of this high Jurisdictional Act, he
baffled and excluded his First Answer. And in a word, giving by this Answer, a
Jurisdictional Power and Authority in this Act, to a Collegiat Meeting of
Church Officers, and asserting that it was jointly thus put forth by them, he
did thus bid farewell to my Lord Bishops singular prerogative in this Matter,
and generally in Point of Government.

His last Answer is, That if this Power were supposed in the ordinary Church
Officers of Corinth, they might have had this by delegation and Commission of
the Apostle. But where did the Surveyer read this Commission? What account can
he give of such a delegated Power beyond the Essential Authority of Pastors, to
deliver to Satan, purge out the old Leaven, to meet together for this great
Jurisdictional Act? And why was the Apostle Paul so fatally Cross to the
Diocesan Prelat, as not to deliver this Commission to him? But we must know
this Chimerical fancy stands upon the strong Pillar of this infallible
Surveyers may be, or might be, and this is all the proof we must expect. But
what is the last shift and dead lift? We are told next, That this Instance of
the Church of Corinth is but one, which cannot make a Rule, without the sure
knowledge of the Divine Direction, which the Apost^les had to keep an uniform
course in such ext^rnal Matt^rs. Ans. As none will say, that the Apostles did
constitute the Christian Church as a speckled Bird, with a Hetrogenous or
various Mixtures of forms of Government, so in this P^int they had their
Masters great Rules and Measures prescribed to them, and such Rules as
overthrows the Hierarchical Bishop. First, We may remind the great Rule in Mat.
18. recommending a subordination of lesser to greater Judicatories, pointing
likewise at the Collegiat Meeting of Church Officers, as the proper subject of
the Jurisdictional Power, in opposition to what he pleads for, viz: the
concentring this in one Prelat. Next, what surer direction can we have in this
Point, than that the Apostles are found Establishing; wherever a Church was
gathered, such Officers as have Names and Titles of Intrinsic* Official Power
and Authority engraven upon them, and are found exercising an equal, Official
Power in Government? Thus in the Passage now debated, and 1 Cor. 12.28. Comp.
with Ephesians. 4.11. and with Act. 14.23. Tit: 1.5, 7. Heb. 13.7, 17, 1 These. 5.12.

Presbyterian Writers do exhibit a large account and induction of these Names
and Titles, importing Authority: Such as that of Presbyter or Elder, Act. 15.2,
4, with 20, 17, 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Pet. 5.1. A Title of Political Rulers, Judge.
8.14. Thus expressed by the LXXII* Interpreters. The Title of Bishop importing
a Power and Charge over the Flock Act. 20.28. Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit.
1.5.7. A word made use of also by these Interpreters to point at the Civil
Magistrates Power, Number. 31.14. The Title and Name of (...)* which signifies
Conductor, Captain, Governor, Leader: A word setting forth the Power of Civil
Rulers, Deuteronomy. 1.13. 2* Chron. 5.1. And thus they are distinguished from the
Church and Saints, Heb. 13.7, 17, 24. The Title of Stewards over the Lords
House and Family: Of Pastors and Shepherds, who are to feed Pedo and Pabulo; a
Title likewise attributed to the Civil Magistrate, Isa. 24.28. comp. 1 Cor. 4.
1. Luke 12.42. Gal. 4.2. Romans 13.2.3. Now, our Lord Commanding his Apostles to
Disciple all Nations, or form them into Churches, and the Apostles pursuant to
this Commission, being found to have placed such Officers in the Churches, and
these being found exercising a joint Official Authority in greater and lesser
Judicatories, either the Apostles Divine Direction herein must be acknowledged,
and their walking up to it in this Point of an uniform Mould of Government, or
their Faithfulness in the execution of their great Trust is impeached and
called in Question. Thu- we have seen, that after this pregnant Text, has
tossed this Pitiful Sursveyer from one extreme to another, in seeking some
shift of Answer, and driven him upon the Pinacles and Precipies of
contradictory Answers, all his fantastic quiblings issues in this miserable
shift of calling into Question the Uniformity of the Apostolic Church
Government.

The Surveyer next assaults our Argument from the not mentioning of the Bishop
in the Catalogue of Church Officers, but palpably disguises it, as if we argued
merely from the non-nomination of the Bishop in Ephesians, 4.11. among the Officers
there mentioned, as Gifted to the Church. The Argument is this, That there
being several Recitations of Church Officers of Divine appointment and
Institution, as in that Passage Ephesians. 4. and likewise 1 Cor. 12.28. Romans 12.6.7.
The Diocesan Hierarchical Bishop is found in none of them, and we may add, and
likewise in none of the Accounts of ordinary Church Officers, exhibit in
Scripture; and therefore is no Officer app^inted of GOD. He tells us, That
though not mentioned under that Name, they are mentioned under the Name of
Pastors and Teachers. But* as he unjustly supposes that our Argument Concludes
from that one place, so he deals as unjustly, or unskilfully in lapping them up
under the Name of Teachers, who so little concern themselves in that work, and
marrs his design in making them Succeed to the Apostles, in the plenitude of
their ordinary Power, as he does, P. 194, 195. for thus they are to be included
rather in the Name of Apostles, or else he must bring up Pastors and Teachers
to the same Succession. The Surveyer could not exhibit different Degrees of the
Apostolic or Evangelistick Office, why then did he assign different Degrees of
the Pastoral Office? This Consequence, the Surveyer calls weak, because a
Governing Superiority among Apostles and Evangelists, was partly impracticable,
partly unnecessary, they seldom living in ordinary Societies, because of their
Dispersion, for speedy spreading of the Gospel, and having infallible direction
in their Ministry: Whereas Pastors living in Society, and fixed-upon their
Charges, their Associations have need of some Governing Superiority among them,
to be a Nerve and Sinnew of their Union, and that the Prudence of some may
repress the Levity of others. Ans. This Reason is but the ignis fatuus of our
Surveyers fancy: First as touching Apostles, we find them notwithstanding of
the infallible conduct of the Spirit, joining Counsel together, yea, and with
concurrence of ordinary Officers, as Act. 15. and a Moderator of the Meeting
presiding, whom his Party will needs make us believe did preside as Bishop of
Jerusalem; so that this very College of Apostles had the Superintendency of
this Episcopal Nerve, in their Sense. And none can deny that persons managing
one work, if far dispersed, have the greater need of a Corresponding head^.
Next, as for Pastors, we find their social Government by common Counsel exhibit
in Scripture, and that their Union was a Presbyterial, Classical Union, and did
not Coalesce into the Headship of a Hierarchical Prelat. Besides, the Surveyer
is a niggardly Dispenser of Governing Prudence, when Monopolizing it in one
Prelat, and denying it to the rest of the Members of the Society of Pastors:
Or, if he allow it to more than one Person, he plucks the Hierarchical Bishop
from his Seat, and disownes the Concentring of this Authority in his Person.
For what he adds of the Early Reception of this supposed Headship of the
Hierarchical Prelat by the whole Church: His Confident Assertion is easily
Answered by a well grounded Denial. He is bold to say, there is nothing in
Scripture against this Officer: But his palpable Perversion of the Scriptures
pleaded against him, discovers there is more said against him, than he was able
to Answer, and these Texts pleaded, appears the more forcible after all his
faint Essays this way.

He offers in the next place (P. 214.) a Reply to our Argument from Philip.
1.1. From which we argue, That there being here a Plurality in one and the same
Church, who must need be Pastors and Officers therein: Therefore, the Scripture
Bishop is not the Hierarchical Bishop, since the Apostle salutes these Pastors
jointly, as Officers of the Highest Rank, under this Notion of being Bishops
thereof, and without the least hint of a respect to any Superior Officer set
over them: Besides, that no Inferior Officers are denominat by the Name proper
to the Superior. In Answer to this, the Surveyer first takes notice, that in
this Epistle only, the Direction is by Paul to the Officers, as contradistinct
from the Church, whereas in the rest of the Epistles, he includes them in the
Organick Church, without express mentioning of them. Ans. Not to stand upon
this Variety in the Inscription of Epistles, wherein sometimes the Apostle
Style himself by his Authority, sometimes not, sometimes associats with
himself, Officers of an Inferior Order, sometimes not. It is noticeable here,
how this Man, in a palpable Contradiction to himself, does quite baffle and run
down his first large Answer to our Argument from 1 Cor. 5. which concludes the
People only to be bespoken, because Officers are not Named: Whereas here he
acknowledges, that except in this one Epistle, in the rest the Church Officers
are included in the Organick Church, without the express mentioning of them.
But to proceed, the Surveyer will needs, with Ambrose, have the Reason of the
Difference to be, that they were not Bishops and Deacons of that Church, but
present with Paul and Timothy at Writing of the Epistle, and assumed as
Consenters with him; and this he makes parallel with Gal. 1. All the Brethren
that are with me. He tells us, the Apostle calls them not Bishops and Deacons
of Philippi, but absolutely Bishops and Deacons, and the Copulative [(...)] may
refer to Paul and Timothy, the Writers, as well as to the Saints at Philippi.
Ans. The Surveyer, in approving this palpably absurd Gloss, discovers how
miserably he is put to it, to find out a Lurking Hole and Subterfuge from this
Argument: For ^not to speak of Ambrose Sentiments, wherein the Surveyer cannot
make it appear, he is followed by any Interpreters) it is evident beyond all
Contradiction, that the Apostles usual Method in the Inscription of all the
Epistles is, First, To describe himself, either by his Office of Apostle, or
otherwise, as the Penman of the Epistle, together with Others (if any such
be) whom he is pleased to Associat with him in the Inscription: And then in a
Distinct Clause and Branch to Describe these, whether persons or Churches, to
whom the Epistle is Addresed. And we dare confidently Challenge such as embrace
this Sense to exhibit a contrary Instance in any of the Epistles, or to show
where the persons supposed present with the Apostle, are in their Description
cast behind his Character of himself, and the Description of the Persons to
whom he writes. Nay, this so evident, that the Surveyers own Instance Gal. 1.
baffles his Answer: For, after Paul's Description of himself, as the Spirit of
GODS Penman, calling himself an Apostle, not of Men, neither by Man, etc. He
does in the 2 v. add, and all that are with me; And next describes those to
whom the Epistle is directed, viz. Unto the Churches of Galatia. The Surveyer
inverts the Order, and would make the Words run thus, Paul an Apostle, etc.
unto the Churches of Galatia, and all the Brethren, etc. And that of 1 Cor. 1.
should thus run and be Sensed, Paul an Apostle unto the Churches of GOD at
Corinth, and Sosthenes our Brother, point blank cross to the Scope and Order of
the Text. Thus also 2 Cor. 1.1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, etc. unto the
Churches of GOD at Corinth, and Timothy our Brother. Thus the Sense of this
place Philip. 1.1. is (with the Surveyer) Paul and Timotheus, the Servants of
Jesus Christ, to the Saints in Christ Jesus at Philippi, with the Bishops and
Deacons with Paul. What Sense, or rather Nonsense is this? He could assign no
Instance of such a Trajection of the copulative (...), as he here admitts, nor
any Reason why Timothy is not ranked with these Bishops.

The Surveyer P. 215. to strengthen one absurd Notion with another, does in the
second place allege, That there was here a casual Muster of other Bishops of
Macedonia gathered at Philippi the Metropolis thereof, to consult the good of
the Churches; And tells us, That the Apostle speaks generally, as to the Saints
at Philippi, Chapter 4.21. And not only of that Church, so of these Bishops and
Deacons taken universally as met there, though not of that particular Church.
But this fantastical Muster-master of these Extraneous Officers, as he can give
no shadow of Ground for this Matter of Fact, which is the Substratum of his
Reason and Answer; So he does in asserting Philippi to be the Metropolis of
Macedonia, either in a Civil or Ecclesiastic Sense, contradict the Judgment
of several of the Learned. And as he still beggs the Question, in supposing the
Existence of his Diocesan Prelat, so there is nothing in this Epistle, that
might be supposed to have the least respect to the Ends of such a Meeting, or
can give Ground to extend the Bishops, Deacons, or Saints, beyond the Limits of
that Church, unless such an Extension be applied to other Churches, in the like
case of Epistles addressed to them, as Ephesus, Rome, etc. Nay, where there is
in the Inscription of Epistles, such an express Extension in reference to the
persons addressed, we find it in a distinct Clause; Thus 1 Cor. 1.2. after this
general Inscription and Designation, viz. Unto the Church of GOD, which is at
Corinth, there follows this Extension, with all that in every place call upon
the Name of Jesus Christ. Thus 2 Cor. 1.1. After the Direction to that
particular Church which is at Corinth, follows this express Extension, with all
the Saints that are in all Achaia.

The Surveyer in his third Answer, will admit the Bishops and Deacons to be
related to that particular Church: But tells us, This will not prove they were
all Bishops of an equal Degree. It is good, that the Surveyer will at last
admit these Bishops to be the settled Bishops here, and will take them off, and
likewise the Deacons, whose work is only to serve Tables, from his alleged
great and general Consults, anent the Case of the Churches of Macedonia. But
for what is here forged and pretended, we have told him, that the Scripture
Bishops or Pastors are of equal Official Authority, and that he would here mind
and take home his own Reason, viz. that there is no such Notes of Distinction,
or Discriminating Characters, as he stands so much upon, in the Apostles
Salutation. The Surveyer tells us, The general Name might be common to the
Bishops, strictly so called, and the Inferior Bishops: As in a Letter directed
to the Magistrates of a City, and terming them Magistrates in general, though one
only is supposed a Provost, and others Bailiffs: Thus Saluting the Bishops in
cumulo, he denies not their different Degrees. Ans. Besides, that the Surveyer
is still renewing his Petitio Principii, and supposing the Existence of his
Hierarchical Prelat, he should have pondered the Rule Similitudo ad Pompam,
etc. A Similitude may illustrat a thing proposed or supposed, but cannot prove
a thing in Question. Next, this Similitude overthrows his Scope: For, 1. There
is not here a Naming of all in cumulo, but under distinct Epithets of Bishops
and Deacons, diversifying as he acknowledged, Church Officers of a distinct
Character and Office. 2. He makes the Term Bishop, to be the Name
distinguishing the Diocesan, as under that Character, from Presbyters, and who
is supposed to be but one in one Church; Thus looking to his Similitude, he
makes the Apostle speak as improperly, as if a Plurality of Provosts, or
Provosts in the p^ural, were saluted in a Letter to one City. But the Surveyer
P. 216. urges, That since we own two sorts of Elders, the Preaching and Ruling
Elder, and comprehend them under the Name Bishop, we must own it that there
are diverse Ranks of Officers, saluted under that Name; Or if disowning this,
it follows that the Apostle did not intend to write to such, tho supposed
Church Officers. Ans. This Dilemma is crocked, and pushes us not: If we say
such Officers were not as yet existent in this Church, it only follows, that it
was not yet fully constitute in all its Officers: Or, if in the next place, we
admit them existent, the Surveyer has no Advantage: For, 1. We admit this
Divinely instituted Officer, as eminenter included in the Office of the Bishop
or Pastor, both having the general Notion of Inspection applicable unto them;
But the Hierarchical Bishop is but a half Divinely appointed Officer, by his
Confession. 2. The admitting of the Ruling Elder, impeaches not the equal Power
of Pastors, here saluted in the Plural, but the admitting of the Hierarchical
Prelat overthrows this, and consequently the Apostles Scope. But the Surveyer
tells us, he may, upon our ground, bring in the Superior and Inferior Degrees
of Bishops and Presbyters, under this general Name of Bishops. Ans. We can
comprehend none under this Designation, who have not our Lords Institution, as
all Inspectors and Governors of his House must, else they run unsent, and
cannot be called his Stewards, not having a Commission from him. We include the
Elder, as a Divinely instituted Officer, whose Divine Institution we make good,
but do reject the Hierarchical Prelat, as an Officer of Man's devising: And the
Surveyer might, under Pretense of this general Name, and upon such a Topic,
advance Cardinals, Primats, or whom he pleased.

The Surveyer, in the fourth place, will needs loose the Objection, that the
Name of the Superior Officer is not given to the Inferior: To which he gives
this Return, That the Name of the Superior Officer is given to the Inferior, in
respect of some common Dignity, Qualifications, or Accidents, competent to
both; as the Name of Presbyter, both via ascensus and descensus is given to
Superior and Inferior Officers, as Beza confesses on 1 Pet. 5. Ans. The
Surveyer here has disguised the Strength and Nerves of this Objection. We know
that Superior and Inferior Officers do come under general Names and
Designations: But our Assertion is this, That no Name of the Superior Officer,
which is the proper Characteristick of his Office, and whereby he is
distinguished from the Inferior, is attributed to such Inferior Officers, since
this would Brangle the Scriptures Distinction thereof, and remove the
March-Stones, which God has set; So that his Instance of the common Name to
Superior and Inferior Officers, upon the ground of common Qualifications, is
impertinent to the Point: For no Names of this Nature and Import, can be the
proper distinguishing Names of the Superior from the Inferior, since this would
infallibly infer a Confusion in the Holy Ghosts Language, such as cannot
without Blasphemy be imputed to him. Thus the Name Apostle, in its proper
Sense, or Evange^ist, is ascribed to no Inferior Officer. To apply this, the
Name of Bishop, is in the Surveyers Princip^es, a distinguishing Character of
an Officer superior to a Pastor or Presbyter; and therefore the Absurdity of
his Inference or parallel Reason, is palpably evident; this Name being by his
own Confession, ascribed to ordinary Pastors.

The Surveyer in the Fifth place, repeats again to us for Answer, this poor,
hungry shift, which we have before refuted, viz: That granting there were none
but mere Presbyters at that time, in that Church of Philippi, who are called
Bishops, yet upon what grounds shall the Constitution thereof be the Measure of
all Churches, unless a Divine Rule for Managing the Government in that uniform
manner could be produced? Ans. The Surveyer in Repeating this Subterfuge, which
he made use of, to eschew our Argument drawn from the State of the Church of
Corinth, told us, that that Church, which is but one, ought not to be a Rule to
others, and that one instance cannot make a Rule. Here it seems he he has
found another Instance, to make the Number two, yet this will not please him,
unless a Divine Rule be produced, for managing the Government in that manner.
It is certain, that the Apostles practice, in the constitution of Churches, in
their Officers and Ordinances, pursuant to their great Masters Commission
hereanent, and upon the necessary supposition of their Infallibility and
Faithfulness, in managing this Trust, is a sufficient Rule and Divine Warrant
to found our Persuasion and Faith in this Matter. This is so clear, that the
Episcopalians must either acknowledge it, or baffle and overthrow their own
Principles and Arguings for Prelacy: For I pray, how will they make their
supposed Constitution of the Churches of Ephesus and Crete, under the pretended
Episcopal Inspection of Timothy and Titus, a Standart and Measure for all
Christian Churches, if this Apostolic Constitution therereof, be not admitted,
as an infallible ground of this Argument? And if Presbyterians shall repone to
their Episcopal Pleadings, that the Constitution of these Churches, cannot be a
Standart for ever, unless a Divine Rule be produced, for managing the
Government in that uniform manner, they are destitute of an Answer: So, that it
appears the Surveyer behoved either in granting the Churches of Corinth and of
Philippi, to be thus governed, to yield the Cause to the Presbyterians, in
acknowledging a Divine Presbyterial Constitution of these Churches, or sto^d
obliged to retract and disown all his Episcopal Pleadings, in the Instances
exhibit. The Episcopalians might have found that these Instances are exhibited
by us as proofs and Demonstrations of the common Universal Rule. The
Constitution of the other Apostolic Churches, after this manner, has been
exhibit and evinced, as by several others, so in special, by the Judicious
Authors of the Ius Divin, Minist. Eccles. who have at large made appear and
proven a Presbyterial, Classical Unity, and equal Official Authority of Pastors
in Government. 1. In the Church of Jerusalem. 2. In the Church of Antioch. 3.
In the Church of Ephesus. 4. In the Church of Corinth. And that in all these
Instances, there is in the Word, a Pattern (...) Presbyterian Government, in
common, over diverse single Congregations in one Church. See Ius Divin. Minis.
Eccles. from P. 292. etc. And in special, the Surveyer and his Fellows might
have found this made good, which he here pretended to seek a Proof of, Viz:
That the Pattern of the said Presbytrie and Presbyterian Government, is for a
Rule to the Churches of Christ in all after Ages. Which is made good,

First, From this, that the First Churches were immediately Planted and Governed
by Christ's own Apostles and Disciples. The strength of this Reason is
illustrated from several Grounds; As that 1. The Apostles immediately received
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven from Christ himself, Matthew. 16.19. Ioh.
20.21.23. 2. Had immediately the promise of his perpetual presence in their
Ministry, Matthew. 28.18.19.20. The plentiful donation of the Spirit to lead into
all Truth, Ioh. 14.16. Act. 15. Ioh. 16.14, 15. 3. They received immediately
Commands from Christ, after his Resurrection, and were instructed Forty days,
in the Nature of his Kingdom. That they were first and immediately Baptized of
the Holy Ghost extraordinarly Act. 2.1. to 5. So that whether we consider the
Spirits infallible influence upon the Apostles in this great work of ordering
and Governing the Primitive Churches, or their performing Christ's Commandments
in this work, which he did impose upon them, touching his Kingdom, and
consequently their infallibly Right use of the Keys of his Kingdom, which he
Committed to them, it is evident beyond all contradiction, that the Pattern of
their Practices herein, must be a Rule for all the succeeding Churches.

Secondly, This is made good from the end proposed by the Holy Ghost in the
careful Records of the Apostolical Churches State and Government; which must
needs be in order to succeeding Churches imitation, since this Record, as the
other Scriptures, must needs be (...) for our Learning or Instruction; which
Instruction must Relate, not merely to the Factum, but mainly to the Ius, viz:
the Reasons and grounds of this Apostolical Government, this being the most
proper and profitable Instruction.

Thirdly, That, if in the Point of Government, such Apostolic Patterns will
not amount to an obligatory Rule, we will impeach the Authority of other Acts
of Religion, received from them, and bottomed only and Chiefly upon the
Foundation of the Practice of Christ's Apostles, and Apostolical Churches, such
as the Reciving of the Lords Supper on the Lords days, etc. See Ius Divin.
Minis. Eccles. P. 213, 214. Nay, this is so evident, that the Surveyer without
contradicting himself, cannot but admit this Rule; For P. 195, he will needs
have the determination of this Question to depend upon the Historical
Narrations of the Acts of the Apostles contained in Scripture, and the surest
Light History can afford in the Churches most Virgin times. Now, here is
exhibit Historical Accounts and Narrations of the Churches pure and Primitive
pure Constitution in its first and most Virgin times, why then did he (in
Contradiction to himself) call for another Rule?

But the Surveyer, P. 216.217. presents yet another evasion, That this Church
might have had a Bishop, Eminenter, so called, though not present at Philippi;
That we cannot otherwise account of Epaphroditus, who is called their Apostle,
Philip. 2.25. or Messenger, as the Angels Rev. 2. and 3. are called the Angels
of the Churches; and not for any Temporal Employment of being sent with their
Alms, it being too high a Style to give Men upon so low an Account: Thus 2 Cor.
8.23. We read of the Messengers of the Churches, and the Glory of Christ. Ans.
We have above removed the Foundation of this exception, both in Reference to
Epaphroditus, and the Asian Angels. That Epaphroditus gets the Name of their
Apostle and Messenger Catachrestice and improperly, and consequently that he
was no such Bishop, as the Surveyer pretends, is most evident in the Sacred
Text, since he is thus termed, with respect to that special Employment of
carrying the Churches Benevolence to Paul. For the Apostle, after he has
called him their Messenger, does expressly adjoyn this ground of the Epithet and
Denomination, viz. He that Ministered to my Wants, which does clearly restrict
and explain the Term [ Messenger] in this Context. Besides, that v. 30. he is
said to come to supply their Lack of Service toward the Apostle; and the
Apostle mentioning him again, Chapter 4.18. tells this Church, That he received
from Epaphroditus the things that were sent by them: As for the Surveyers
Exception, That this was too high a Style to be given upon so low an Account,
comparing this with 2 Cor. 8.23. I have above told such Pleaders, that the
Service of the Churches, and the Interest of Christ in them, is such a
Honorable Employment, as the most eminent need not be ashamed of, since he who
is Lord of all, came not to be Ministered unto, but to Minister; and the Holy
Angels, literally so called, think it no Disparagement to their High Estate and
Dignity, to be sent forth as Messengers, to Minister and do Service to the
meanest, who are Heirs of Salvation. For that Passage, 2 Cor. 8. we have made
appear, that it rather Confirms, than Impugns our Answer and Exposition of this
Scripture anent Epaphroditus: The Apostles Scope in that place, being evidently
to stir up the Church to a large Expression of their Charity and Bounty, upon
the Account of the Fidelity and Worth of the Messengers sent to them for that
end. Next, I might tell this Surveyer, that Epaphroditus and these other
Messengers, being restrictedly called Messengers of the Churches, and with a
special respect to the Employment specified in the Text, are thus distinguished
from the Apostles, who properly are Christ's Messengers to the Churches; And
therefore, Persons under this Character of Messengers from Churches to
Churches, have not that special proper Signature, which the Surveyer pleads
for, upon the account of the general Name, Messenger, applied to them. In a
word, in this Conjecture, as the Surveyer presents but a new Petitio Principii
and groundless Fancy, without the least shadow of Proof, so, its baffled by his
own Principle, who thinks it below his supposed great Men to be sent upon a
Temporary Employment. Now, it is certain that Epaphroditus was sent with this
Churches Benevolence to Paul, and it would have puzzled this Surveyer to Ans^er
the Querie: Why none else, but the sole and eminent Bishop was sent with this
Benevolence? As likeways, to Answer further these Queries, First, Why the
Apostle Paul put the proper Name and Characteristick of this sole and eminent
Bishop, upon all the Pastors of the Church of Philippi? Which, upon his
Principles, did draw with it great Inconveniences; as tending 1. To cast a
Cloud of Ignorance upon these Pastors, in reference to a Person, to whom they
did owe important Duties. 2. This might tend to involve them in the Temptation
of a Sinful Emulous Disposition and Breach among themselves: And no body will
judge, that the Apostle was not careful to prevent this. Besides, this could
not consist with that high Esteem of Epaphroditus, which the Apostle here
expresses, thus to deal with him, and in special, to make him the Messenger of
such Derogatory Expressions, in this Epistle, wherein he is so much commended.
Thus we have seen, that the Evidence of this Scripture, as likewise of the
preceding, does quite dispel the Mist of the Surveyers fond Exceptions.

The Surveyer tells us, He finds one Scripture more, wherein, because
Presbytrie is Named, we account we have great Advantage for our Way; The
Passage is 1 Timothy 4.14. Whereas, he may more justly triumph in the word Bishop,
so often mentioned in Scripture. He professes his Resolution pressely to
consider this place: And his Replies shall be pressely considered. His first
Reply is, That we cannot prove that by Presbytrie here is meant a College of
single Presbyters, in the Modern Notion, and not rather the Dignity and Office
of a Presbyter, as Calvin (Institut. Lib. 4. Cap. 3.) Jerome, and others also do
judge. Ans. 1. Not to stand upon the Surveyers cutting off by this Gloss,
Presbyters from so much as a consent to Timothies Ordination, which in
contradiction to himself here, he does in his other Replies to this Text, allow
them. It is in this place very considerable that this Word (...) or Presbytrie,
being used only thrice in the New Testament, viz. Luke 22.66. and Act. 22.5.
and in this Passage under Debate; Since in the two first places, it must
necessarly be taken, for a Concessus Presbyter orum, a College of Elders or
Presbyters, this Surveyer could offer no shadow of Reason or Evidence for the
altering the Signification in this Passage; Since 1. The Scope and
Circumstances do clearly lead to this its ordinary Acceptance. And 2. There
can no such Exposition be offered here, without a very gross Imputation upon
the Language and Sense of the Holy Ghost; It differing little from Nonsense,
if at all reconcilable to Sense, thus to read the Text, Neglect not the Gift
given thee etc. by the laying on of the Hands of the Office: For what Hands
has an Office to lay on? Not only Reason, but the very Ear disrelishes such a
Sense: Especally, if the Matter of Fact be admitted (in opposition to which,
the Surveyer could give no Evidence) that as there was Ruling Officers or
Presbyters then existent, so they did de facto, lay Hands upon Timothy. For
Calvin's Judgment, we find that in his Commentary upon the place, he asserts
that such as understand the Word Presbytrie here, in a collective Sense, and to
import the College and Meeting of Presbyters, do, in his Judgment, put a
right Sense upon the Words; So that he cannot be reckoned as holding the
Surveyers Gloss* And however, we do not judge that most worthy Person (as
neither Ierom in this point, Inferior to Greek Fathers) infallible, or our
selves obliged jurare in ejus verba. As for the Authors after cited, as
understanding the Term in his Sense; It is one thing to say that the Term (...)
and (...) have been indifferently used by Greek Authors, for the Office and
Order of a Presbyter; it is a far other thing to say, that the Scripture Term
in these three Passages, is so to be understood; Since here the signification
of the Word is to be drawn from the Scope and Contexture of the place of
Scripture where it is, which must needs Overruled and Determine the
Signification in this Passage, though it were granted that sometimes Greek
Authors did use it in another Signification. The Language of the Holy Ghost in
these three Passages, as it does certainly Overruled all other Greek Authors,
so the Term in the three Passages exhibited, does palpably appear to be of one
and the same Signification, viz. pointing at a College of Presbyters or
Elders. Besides, that there want not Ecclesiastic and Greek Authors thus
understanding it; Such as Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact. For what the
Surveyer adds out of Bilson, P. 77. That ordinarily in Ancient Greek Councils
(...) and (...) have been used indifferently for the Office and Order of a
Presbyter: Citing Council of Nice, Can. 2. Antioch, Can. 18. Afric. Can. 136.
Eusebius. Lib. 6. Cap. 8. It is Answered, First, It is acknowledged by Bilson,
that the Councils mentioned, use the Word (...) which is distinct from (...).
Next, as Camero is clear and positive for our Sense of the Word (...) on Matthew.
18.5. And asserts that the contrary Acceptance for the Office and Dignity of
Presbyter, contradicts both the Signification of the Word, and the Apostles
Scope; So he shows further, that rarely does the Word (...) import the Office,
but where the Word (...) may be understood. Hen. Stephanus takes the Word here
to import Caetum omnium illorum qui in verbo laborabant, the College of such
as labor in the Word and Doctrine. And the other Paralels Luke 22.66. and Act.
22.5. he expones of the Meeting of Elders. Scapula expones the Word in this
Passage, Caetus Presbyterorum, Presbyterium, a Presbytrie or College and
Meeting of Presbyters. The Passage of Eusebius. Lib. 6. C. 8. may be taken without
any Violence offered to the Words, to import the College of Presbyters, and in
Camero's Judgment (...) may be taken for (...). In a word, it is enough to
baffle this Exception, that as this Term in Greek and Ecclesiastic Authors, is
ordinarily thus taken, for which frequent Instances might be given, so it is
certain, and enough for us, that it is always taken in a Collegiat Sense, in
the Scriptures of the New Testament. And in the Paralels mentioned, it were
gross Nonsense to take the Word in the Surveyers Sense, and to say that the
Office of Elders did meet together, and the Office of Elders did bear Witness
to Paul, so it carries the same Incongruity and absurd Sense with it, to
assert that the Office laid Hands upon Timothy. The Surveyer next excepts
against our Argument drawn from the Paralels, That therein the word imports not
a Meeting of Christian Presbyters, but only of Jewish Elders, persecuting
Christ and His Apostles: That though the Term were taken in this Sense only in
this place, there wants not Parallel Instances of such an acceptance of words;
As the word [Church] is taken but once Matthew. 18.17. for a Representative
Church, so the 1 Cor. 11.10. the word [Power] in that place of Scripture only
signifies the Covering and Vail upon the Woman's head, as a token of Subjection
to her Husband: And that it is enough in such Cases, that the Strain of the
Context requires a Varrying from the Acceptance of the word in other places.
Ans. The Strength of our Argument is drawn, both from the ordinary Acceptance
of the Word, which has its own secondary weight, and likewise, and mainly from
this, that the Scope and Contexture of this Passage, do clearly plead for the
Acceptance of the Word in the ordinary Sense, and not to varry from it. And
therefore his Assertion, That the Strain of the Context requires a varrying
from this ordinary acceptance in this place, is but his bold begging of the
Question; For of this, he neither offers, nor can offer any solid proof: Nay,
the contrary, is the consentient Judgment of Interpreters. The Imposition of
Hands here signifies Consent and Election, whereof it was a Sign, says
Vatabulus. The whole is signified by a part, viz. of the Ordination, says
Estius, To wit, of the whole Ceremony of the Presbytries Ordination. Prayer was
added with Imposition of Hands, says Grotius. I hope he will not say the
Office prayed. Camero censures the contrary Exposition, upon several Grounds.
1. Because the Imposing of the hands of the Office, is a harsh saying, and
sounds improperly. 2. Because the word (...) never signifies the Office,
wherever it occurs in the new Testament, citing the Paralels Luke. 22.66. Act.
22 5. As likewise, because the Office is signified by the word (...) but here
the word signifies a College or embodied Court. 3. Because Timothy's Authority
was greater, than that it could be called a Presbyterate. Bullinger upon the
place tells us, that this is one motive whereby the Apostle stirrs up Timothy
to diligence in his Office, that besides the Prophesies that went before of
him, and his inward impulse accedit praeterea and manuum Seniorum impositio,
quae ista comprobavit, and publico muneri public praefeeit, That he had the
Imposition of the Hands of the Elders or Presbyters, sealing and confirming his
inward impulse, in the Prophesies that went before, and which did install him
in this public Office* Paraeus upon the place, shows that Timothy was thus
taken into the Order and Society of Pastors: And upon Chapter 1. v. 6. of 2 d
Epistle, collating together the imposing of Paul's Hands, and the Hands of the
Presbytrie, he shows the Reason thus, quia Paulus* unus fuit ex Presbyterio,
vel Presbyterii nomine imposuit; Because Paul was one of that Presbytrie, or
imposed hands in their Name; Where it is evident he understands the Prebytrie
in a collegiat sense, for a Meeting of Pastors. Piscator upon the place, shows,
That Timothy is stirred up to diligence, first upon the account of his singular
vocation to this Function, by the Revelation of the Holy Ghost: And next, by
the vocation of the Church* obeying this Command of the Holy Ghost, in imposing
the Hands of the Presbytrie upon him, because the Presbyters or Pastors by this
Rite ordained the Ministers of the Church. Diodat. upon the place tells us, that
by the Presbytrie, we are to understand the laying on of the Hands of the
Elders; showing that thus the Italian reads the Text, and these Elders, he
expones to be the Pastors and other Guides of the Church, paralelling this
Sense of the Elders, with that of Act. 11.30. where we read of the Churches
benevolence sent to the Elders and Church Rulers, for the Relief of the Poor
Saints in Judea. The Belgic Divines upon the place, Translate this Clause of
the Eldership, That is (say they) of the Assembly of the Elders, or Overseers
of the Church, etc. The Eng. Annot. upon the place having added to the word
Presbytrie, the Phrase of [ Eldership] thus proceed* Some by Presbytrie
understand the Office of a Presbyter, which Timothy received by imposition of
Hands; but the word (...) is never taken in Scripture for the Office of a
Presbyter, but for the Company of Elders, who here laid hands upon Timothy,
when he was Ordained: And they add the agreeableness hereunto of the Canon of
the 4 th Council of Carthage, and the Practice of the Reformed Churches to this
day, Pool. 2 d Part, Paraphraseth this Passage thus, That Timothy's Office was
given by the Revelation of the Divine Will, by the extraordinary Influence of
the Spirit of GOD, and the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytrie, was a
declaration of it. The last clause of 6. v. 1 Chapter of 2 d Epistle, they thus
Paraphrase, That he is called to the improvement of those Spiritual abilities
given him upon the Prayers of Paul and the Presbytrie, when he was by them set
a part to the work of an Evangelist, for the end, for which GOD had given them
to him. To these Expositors, many others might be added, exponing this word and
term, of a Collegiat Meeting; such as M^nochius, Tirinus, Zegerius, Sligelius,
Beza, Simplicius, Vorstius, etc.

But now to proceed (after this little digression with Interpreters) to our
Surveyers Instances and Exceptions taken from the Terms in Matthew. 18. 1 Cor.
11. We Answer, that the exception is palpably absurd; For he could not deny
that these terms [ Church] and [ Power] are Ordinarily taken in Scripture in
another Sense, than in these Passages, though the circumstances of these
Scriptures plead for varrying from that Acceptance: But he neither did, nor
could make it appear, that this Term Presbytrie under debate, is ever in
Scripture taken in this Acceptance, nor could he deny, that it is taken in our
Sense elsewhere; So that his Exception touches not the Point: And as much
ridiculous, if not more, is that other Exception which he offers to the parallel
Passages, viz. That Rulers therein signifies Civil Rulers, and Rulers who were
Enemies to Christ: For, whatever were the Moral Qualities of the Rulers, if the
Word signifies a Collegiat Meeting of Rulers, it is enough to our purpose, and
evinceth our Argument from the paralels, to be good and valid, unless he could
evince a contrary Acceptance, which he does not so much as essay. He could not
deny, that the Legal Constitution of one Assembly or Parliament, is a far and
distinct thing from the Qualities of the Members, who consequently come truly
under these Denominations upon the ground of a Legal Constitution. And
supposing our Sense of the Word Presbytrie, and the Matter of Fact to be such
as we assert, he could not, without making himself most ridiculous, infer from
these Paralels, that the Members Constituent of this Presbytrie, were either
Civil Rulers, or bad.

The Surveyer, (P. 217, 218.) is bold to call this our Exception against his
Sense, viz. That the Office has no Hands to impose, a ridiculous Objection
flowing from a Mistake of the Meaning of the Text, which attributes not the
imposed Hands to the Presbytrie, as to an Agent or Efficient, but only limits
and determines that Imposition of Hands which Timothy had from the Apostle, or
other high Officers of the Church, to the particular use and end for which
Hands were imposed on him, viz. the giving him a Power of a Presbyter or Elder.
Ans. Here is a strange Exposition, obscuring rather than clearing the Text. Had
the Apostle no other way of expressing the end of the Ordination, and its
Nature, than by telling him of Hands of the Office laid upon him, which in all
common Sense, does relate to an Agent or Instrument, and not to the Limitation
and Use of his Office? A Man may thus fasten the most Fantastic Senses upon
Scripture. Besides, he holds that there were eminent high Officers with Paul,
and concurring with this Imposition of Hands upon Timothy: Why then will he
strike off their Hands from being here meaned, when Imposition of Hands is so
expressly mentioned? The Surveyer thus further Senseth the Words, Neglect not
the Gift given thee by the Laying on of Hands, not Confirmatory, not
Reconciliatory, but Imposition of Hands Ordinatory, whereby thou was ordained,
or made a Presbyter. Ans. Besides, that this Division of Imposition of Hands,
is as odd, as his Sense of the Text, it is strange, that he admits of
Imposition of Hands upon Timothy, in order to this end of making him a
Minister, and yet denies the Presbytrie here to import a Collegiat Meeting,
thus imposing. He holds that the Sense is, Neglect not the Gift given by the
Laying on of the Hands, whereby thou was ordained. Now, pray, what hinders
these Hands to be the Hands of the Collegiat Meeting imposing the same? Whereby
the Sense is ours, or otherwise, in Contradiction to himself, he makes the
Office the Ordaining Agent. If he acknowledge this place parallel with 2 Timothy
1.6. he cannot but see a like Construction in both, of the Term of Hands, with
the Genitive. Nor can he deny that the Imposition of Hands is ever constructed
with the Office in other Paralels, Act. 6.6. and 13.3. He calls our Reason
against his Gloss ridiculous, but whether his Return be not more ridiculous, is
left to the Reader to judge.

We are told for his next Answer, That were a Presbytrie here admitted, there
is nothing in the Context to evince that it was a Classical Presbytrie, to
which only we ascribe Ordination, and not a Congregational or Paroch
Presbytrie. Ans. Here again, the Surveyer is driven to seek shelter among the
Independents, but is ruined in this Shift; For, upon his Supposition, that a
Congregation, or one Pastor with Unpreaching Elders, is the Subject of an
Ordaining Power, the Prelatical as well as the Presbyterian Ordination, is
overthrown. The places above referred to, and hinted at, do abundantly clear
and evince the Divine Institution of Classical Presbytries, and Collegiat
Meetings of Pastors of several Congregations, in order to a Ministerial Rule
and Jurisdictional Authority over the same, and consequently, that they are the
proper Subject of the Ordaining Power. The Treatise above mentioned, Chapter 10.
besides several others, have abundantly evinced this Point, that the Fraternity
or Community of the Faithful, and consequently of the particular single
Congregation, cannot be the proper Subject of the Jurisdictional Power, nor the
Power of Order; and ^oth are cleared by a large Account of the one and the
other; See P. 95, 96, 97, 98. This Surveyer did but ridicule the Scriptures, or
rather expose himself, while pretending to impugn the Presbyterians, and answer
their Scripture Reasonings, for he comes on with his may be this, and may be
the other Sense; the one sense [ may be] striking out and Contradicting the
other, whereas, in the Judgment of all who own the Truth and the Authority of
the Scriptures, the true sense is but one, since otherwise there can be no
Truth, where there are different and various Senses. In his first Answer, he
will needs have High Officers of the Church (as he calls them) to concur with
the Apostle Paul in Imposing Hands upon Timothy; these High Officers, he no
doubt advances far above the Sphere of Presbyters and Pastors, and puts them in
the Character of his Magnates or Hierarchical Bishops; yet in this second
Answer, he will needs (in a palpable Contradiction to the First) crowd in all
these High Officers into one Congregation; yea, and positively asserts, that
there is no evidence in the Text to prove that this Presbytrie was any other
than a Paroch-Presbytrie; and that it will trouble the Presbyterians to prove
the contrary: But would it not much more have troubled this Fantastical
Dictator, with his Linsey-Woolsey, party colored Senses and Comments, to prove
that these High Officers, near to the Apostolic Character, were all related to
one Congregation, and but a Meeting of a Paroch Presbytrie, as he speaks.

His Third answer is taken from collating this Passage with 2 Timothy 1.6. where
Paul enjoins Timothy to stir up the Gift that is in him, (...), by the putting
on of my Hands, as here 1 Timothy 4.14. He says, Grace was given thee (...), with
the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytrie. The former place importing his
Authority in the Action, and the latter the concern and consent of the Meeting
of Presbyters with him: So that granting a Presbytrie present, there is no
ordaining power can be hence inferred. Ans. We have already made appear, that
these places Collated, do clearly evince a Presbyterial Authority in the Point
of Ordination, and that since the imposing of Paul's hands in order to the
Gifts, is clearly distinguished from the imposing of the Hands of the
Presbytrie, which must needs respect his Ordination, and consequently their
Authoritative influence thereupon, these Texts collated, do confirm this Point;
and further do thus give light unto it, that supposing that the Imposition of
Paul's hands, and the Hands of the Presbytrie, were contemporary, the
Presbyterian Cause is the more strengthened, in that the imposing of an
Apostles Hands, did not swallow up, nor exclude the Presbytries Authoritative
imposition: So that this Authority may be much more now supposed competent to
them, when the Office of Apostle is gone. I must here again Reflect upon it,
that this our vertumnous Expositor, who will needs have in his First Answer,
several High Officers to concur with Paul, in this Imposition of Hands, makes
Timothy thereby to receive a Presbyterate only: And I pray what needs such High
Officers to concur with Paul, in order to this end? But in this Answer, we find
ordinary Pastors concurring in the Ordination of this his supposed Presbyter;
for the Surveyer in collating these Texts, insinuats no Officers of a higher
Order, to have been present, except the Apostle Paul: And indeed the Passages
themselves do only point at the Presbytrie and the Apostle Paul. Here also,
Presbyters are found laying hands upon our Surveyer and his Fellows supposed
Hierarchical Prelat, set over the Church of Ephesus.

Next, he acknowledges that the mention of imposing of Paul's hands 2 Timothy 1.6.
with the emphatick (...), or by, respects the Gift of GOD in him, wherein he
seems to distinguish the (...) and (...) the Authority and the Gift, yet
expones this precisely of Paul's Authority in his Ordination, exclusive of that
of the Presbytrie: But so it is, that the imposing of Hands, in order to Gifts
of the Spirit, he must needs acknowledge to be of it self distinct from such an
Imposition of Hands, as is in order to Ordination: Yea, even some of his own
party acknowledge, that Hands were twice laid upon Timothy, and once by the
Presbytrie alone. Besides, that Passage 1 Timothy 4.14. we find him very
confusedly and inconsideratly exponing thus, Viz. The Grace given him with
((...)) the laying on of the hands of the Presbytrie: Whereas the Text runs
thus, neglect not the Gift that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy,
with the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytrie; where it is evident, the
Gift given, and the Prophecy, are in two distinct Clauses, and the laying on
of Hands of the Presbytrie, is in the third and last, and diversified by a
distinct Particle (...) both from the Gift, and from the Prophecy: So that it
is apparent, that this Grace or Gift, has a special Respect to the Prophecy,
but the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytrie, is here set down in a
distinct Clause, as a distinct Privilege from the other two, and therefore,
must either import their Authoritative action, or does here signify nothing;
especially, since (as is said) the variation of the phrase (...), or with, does
here import so much, and diversifie the one from the other. Which baffles his
Sense and Exposition, that makes the imposing of the Presbytries hands to
import no more but a Consent or Concurrence; The folly of which Exposition is
further evidenced in that. 1. This solemn Action of Imposing Hands, being in
the Scripture Accounts and Sense* a badge of Authoritative Blessing, must
neeeds import much more, than a bare Consent or Concurrence, for he will not
dare to say, that all those whose Hearts do concur in praying for the Blessing,
had right to impose hands upon the Ordained. 2. He tells us in the beginning of
his Answer, that the Presbytrie imposed not hands alone without a Higher
Officer joined with them in the Act. Now, I pray, what was this Act, if not of
Ordination? Now, if the Presbytrie had an Authoritative Concurrence in the Act,
or rather an influence thereupon, as their Act, how can he say they did only
consent to the thing? For, upon this ground of a naked consent, he could not
say that Paul was joined with him in the Act, which imports their joint
Authoritative Concurrence (if this phrase have any Sense) and yet
notwithstanding of this, according to his exposition, in the latter part of his
Answer, the Action was Paul's alone, and not theirs; and he Confines the
Authority of the Action, within the compass of the Apostles Imposition solely.
I only add, if the Actions were supposed diverse, as severals do hold, the
Surveyer has no Shield nor Buckler against such a Weapon, which
notwithstanding quite baffles this his Answer, if admitted.

His fourth Answer is, That since the Name of Presbyter or Elder, even in
Beza's Sense on 1 Pet. 5. comprehends in general, all who have any
Ecclesiastic Function, the Officers here might be of a higher sort than single
Presbyters, even admitting the Term Presbytrie, to import a Collegiat Meeting.
Ans. The Surveyer is still here repeating his groundless Conjectures, and
beggings of the Question, for an Answer, yea, and confuting and baffling
himself in these his fantastic Quiblings; For, besides that the existence of
ordinary Officers, Superior to Presbyters, and clothed with Episcopal
Authority, is still begged by him, in several other Respects, this his
Conjecture is most unaccountable and repugnant to the Text: For neither, first,
can he make appear that such a Meeting of such Officers of a higher Order than
single Presbyters, comes under the Scripture Denomination of a Presbytrie, in
any Passages of Holy Write, or that when Officers of a higher Order, met with
Presbyters, they had no distinct Specification by their Titles or Names; As
when the Apostles met with the Elders Act. 15. and Prophets and Teachers met
together Act. 13. we find distinguishing Epithets and Names given to these
Officers.

Next, As this conjecturing Surveyer, could give no account, whether this
Meeting was solely of extraordinary Officers, or a Meeting mixed of Ordinary
and Extraordinary, whether of his supposed Bishops, with these Extraordinary
Officers, or not; So, whatever Answer he might embrace, he is still in the
Briars, and overthrows his own Scope; For, besides that he cannot give account,
why a College of Prelates is called a Presbytrie, or to what end such a mixed
Meeting can be here supposed: If his Conjecture be admitted, they could be no
Paroch Presbytrie; And thus his second Answer is baffled, which supposes this.
Again, if there were in this Meeting higher Officers than Presbyters, he would
needs grant that the ordaining Authority was not monopolized in one: And thus
1. He affronts and excludes all his former Pleadings for the sole Authority of
the Prelatical Bishop in Ordination. 2. He asserts that all here imposing
Hands, did Authoritatively Concur, and therefore none of them were mere
Consenters (as he alleges this Presbytrie was) and this universally, without
Exception of any one of the Number; And the Authority of the Action was not
solely Paul's: And thus again, he has given a deadly wound to his third Answer,
asserting so much. In a word, if all were Extraordinary Officers, the sole
Authority of the Prelat in Ordination (a supposed ordinary Officer) is no way
concluded, nor that of a Presbytrie impeached: If they were all ordinary
Officers, this Joint Authoritative Concurrence, cutts the throat of the Prelates
arrogated sole Interest in Ordination: If mixed Officers of a Superior and
Inferior Order, this Surveyer could give no shadow of a Reason wherefore the
Pastors did not Authoritatively concur. I need not mention the common Maxim,
pleaded by some of his Party, in a like Case, Actiones sunt suppositorum, the
Authoritative Act is ascribed to the whole Collegiat Meeting or Presbytrie,
without the least shadow of a Distinction of the Interest and Authority of one
Member from another, and he has before told us, that non est distinguendum ubi
lex non distinguit.

The Surveyer adds, If he was ordained a Bishop, as some of the most Learned
Commentators of the Ancients do think, as Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact
and Oecumenius, That Presbytrie might be a Meeting of Bishops, concurring
according to their Mind in that work with the Apostle Paul. Ans. The Surveyer
striving against the Light of this Scripture, is still more and more involved
in the Briars. Before, he would needs have Timothy to receive but the Office of
a Presbyter in this Ordination, and thus he expressly paraphraseth the Text,
Neglect not the Gift which is given thee by the laying on of Hands, whereby
thou was ordained or made a Presbyter: This he seteth down in distinct
Characters, as the Genuin Sense of the Text: Now, here he quits this post, and
will admit that he was ordained a Bishop; For he Ownes and Defends the Sense of
the Authors cited to this Scope, so that we know not where to find this
Proteus, in these his inconsistent Answers. Again, if Bishops here concurred in
this Ordination of a Bishop, he will grant that they all Authoritatively
concurred, and were not mere Consenters in the Action: And thus again farewell
his third Answer, which monopolized this Authority in the person of Paul, or
else he must say that all these Bishops were Apostles. Again, if not Apostles,
but ordinary Officers, then sure, Paul put forth no Extraordinary Authority in
this Case, but acted as an ordinary Bishop; and then it would puzzle this
Surveyer to show wherefore the Apostle imputs this Ordination to the Laying on
of his Hands solelie, or why upon our true Supposition (which he cannot
disprove) viz. That the persons concurring were Pastors or Presbyters, the
presence of Paul, or the laying on of his Hands, did swallow up or exclude
their Authority, rather than that of a supposed Bishops, in this Matter. As for
the Authors mentioned, it is above made appear, that they spoke of Scripture
Church Officers, according to the Practice and Style of their own Times. The
Surveyer calls this a foul Imputation, as if they did wrest the Scriptures, to
color the Practice of their own times. Ans. Here again the Surveyer is put
upon this pitiful Dilemma, viz. either he must disowne the Comment of these
Ancients, and yield to the Strength of this Objection (which truly makes the
best Apology for this Exposition) or else he must acknowledge that his
preceding Answers puts him under this foul Imputation of palpable wresting the
Holy Scriptures, to patronize the Antiscriptural Hierarchical Prelat, and
imputs the same to these Fathers; For it is evident to any that reads his
Answers, that these Fathers Sense of this Text, and his foregoing Answers, are
Antipods, yea and cross and destroy one another. The Sense and Comments of
these Fathers, which he is so Zealous in defending, makes Timothy to have
received an Episcopacy, in his Ordination: His first Answer makes him to be
ordained only a Presbyter: His third Answer makes the Authority of Ordaining to
be only the Apostle Paul's, and the rest of the Meeting to be but Consenters:
The Comment of these Fathers, makes them all to concur with Official
Authority; For such, certainly that of Diocesan Bishops, is held to be: The
Comment of these Fathers makes the Members of the Meeting such Bishops, as had
every one of them Authority over a Diocese, and consequently over many
Congregations: His first Answer makes them all Congregational Elders, and
crowds them within the small Circuits of one Paroch. Now, this Surveyer might,
or any of his way, may still call in Vulcans Gymmerers to sodder these
Assertions with themselves, and with the Fathers Comments, if they can. That
the Expressions of the Fathers touching Scripture Church Officers, were of that
Mould, as is said, has been made good by several of the Learned, and is in
this convincingly apparent, in that they put the Names of Bishops and
Archbishops, or Metropolitans, upon Timothy and Titus. We need not here again
remind what is above made good touching Ambrose Assertion upon Ephesians. 4. Non per
omnia convenient, etc. That the Practice of the Church then (he is speaking in
point of Church Government) did not suit in every thing the Writings of the
Apostles. And that of Chrysostom on 1 Timothy 3. Hom. 11. That betwixt the Office
of Bishop and Presbyter, there is almost no difference. As for his Charge of
our wresting the Scriptures to patronize Human Devices; We let it pass among
the rest of this Man's lying Imputations, it being evident to the candid
Searchers of the Word, and into this Controversy, whether this person and his
Associats, in their Pleadings, or the Presbyterians, be the Perverters and
Wresters of the Scriptures.

The Surveyer P. 219. further adds, That if the Ordination of Timothy to be an
Evangelist, be spoken of here, under the Name of Presbytrie, may well be
comprehended a Mee^ing of Apostles or Evangelists, or Apostolical Men, seeing
the conjugated word Presbytrie, may be of as great a Latitude and Signification
as to a Meeting, as Presbyter is to a Person. Ans. Here is a new flight of our
Surveyers fancy, Timothy now stepping up to be an Evangelist, and the Ordainers
Apostles or Evangelists, or Apostolical-Men: But sure, if they be either of the
first two, as he supposes, Paul is put out of his Office of a Sole Ordainer
here; Yea, and in his Sense, if any of the three be admitted, the Scripture
Particle (...), which he pleaded as importing Paul's single Authority in this
Action, is expunged, that room may be made for other Apostles and Evangelists.
This Surveyer would be hard put to it to prove that the Ordination of an
Evangelist, necessarly required such a compacted Meeting: But as in the rest of
his Comments and Replies, so in this, we must take his word for proof, as if
his new Prelatical Office (if such it was indeed, as some have supposed) had
derived an Infallibility into his Magisterial Dictats. As for his
Latitudinarian Extensions of the word Presbytrie, besides, that he has exhibit
no Scripture Instance to prove such an Extension, or evince that the word is
ever taken in such a Sense, he still beggs the Question in its Application to
this Passage.

Next, We are still in the dark, what he means by Apostolic Men: If he intend
his Hierarchical Prelat, here is a new begging of the Question, and though the
word Presbytrie might reach the comprehending of the higher Officers to the
Presbyter, who have the Scripture Stamp and Signature, it is a stretching of
the Term upon Tenter Pins till it crack, to make it reach to an Officer of a
Human Invention, or a half Human Mould, as he makes the Bishops. It would have
also puzzled this Surveyer, or these of his mind, upon the supposition that
Timothy was here ordained an Evangelist, to reconcile this with what he and
they do plead from Paul's Directions in the first Epistle to him, for his
Instalment in his Episcopal Function over the Church of Ephesus, wherein he is
commanded to do the Work of an Evangelist; For they must either here degrade
him from this Function, upon their Supposition of his Episcopal Instalment, or
if they make his Instalment here Evangelistick, they make him to have been
twice instaled in that Function.

CHAP. IV. Wherein is considered the Surveyers Answer to the Presbyterian
Charge against the Diocesan Prelat, as a new Officer, different from those
instituted by our Lord, and standing in opposition to the Scripture Accounts of
the New Testament Church Government: And this upon the Ground of the Perfection
of the Scripture Records hereanent, and our Lords Faithfulness in the full
Institution of the Officers and Government of his Church
THE Surveyer, now P. 219. tells his Reader, He has presented the Sum of the
Presbyterian Strength in these Passages, and given fair and just
Interpretations of these Scriptures, which they plead. Whereas he has
presented rather a Farrago of his own fantastic Quiblings, and contradictory
Notions and Conceits, instead of true Interpretations of these places: And it
is apparent that after all this Man's faint Essays, the Presbyterian Bow abids
in its Strength. Yet after all is done, the Surveyer will needs attempt the
removal of some more Impediments in his way.

The one is, That the Presbyterians disown Episcopacy as a Human invention, as
a new Office, never appointed by Christ, and consequently to be expelled his
House: In Answer to this, the Surveyer having acknowledged, that there are
Human inventions which proceed from Men's pleasures, as Matthew. 15.9. adds, that
there are results of sanctified Reason, subservient to the orderly performance
of the Worship of God, and to the Ruling of his House, with respect to the
general Rules of the Word; Wherein as before, he still beggs the Question* in
supposing Prelacy to be one of these variable Circumstances determinable by
Human Prudence, and subservient to the Churches good, according to the General
Rules of the Word, which is proved to be Diametrally opposite to Christ's
Institutions, in point of Government, and stands in opposition to the great
ends of the Churches Edific^tion, and the true Government thereof. Thereafter,
he runs out into an impertinent discourse anent Ministers use of invention in
Preaching, the singing of Psalms with Poetical invention, of the Composer in
Meter, who had no infallible inspiration; And asks if we account the Confession
of Faith, Catechism, and the Holy Covenant, Human Inventions, as to their
outward frame? And enquires further, what we will answer to one that should
plead thus, was not Christ and his Apostles wise enough, and could have set
down such forms, if they had ju^ged them necessary, etc. and not left them to
Man's inventions? Ans. The impertinency of all this evidently appears, when we
consider, that our Question with them, is anent an Office and Officer not
appointed by the Lord, and cross to his Institutions, in Point of Government,
whether Men may set him up in the House of God, yea or not. His Instances speak
only of the Lawfulness of our Reason and Christian Prudence, in a clear
subserviency to the obedience of Commanded Ordinances; for such is Preaching,
and Ministerial instruction, Catechizing, and Singing of Psalms; So that these
being Commanded Ordinances and Institutions, the proper subservient means
thereof, do in a Remote Sense, fall within the compass of the Divine Commands,
enjoining the same; such are these he mentions, viz. a methodical form of Sound
words, digested into Catechisms, for the Peoples instruction and growth of
Knowledge, the framing of Psalms, commended for the use of Singing (a Commanded
Duty) into such a Metrical Composure, as is suitable hereunto, I mean keeping
still close to the Sacred Text, and not varying from the true and genuine Sense
of the words; the Minister making use of Sanctified Reason, in a suitable
Methodical invention, to digest the Matter he delivers, in the best Mould,
for the Case and Edification of the People, to whom he is the Mouth of God, and
must divide the Word of Truth aright unto them, applying it for Doctrine,
Reproof, Exhortation, etc. according to their various Conditions. For the
Covenant, which the Surveyer in derision calls Holy, it falls under the same
Consideration with the preceding Instances, besides the clear Scripture
Precedents, recommending and warranding the Practice. These I say, are so far
from reaching any Patrociny to the setting up of a Prelat, whose Office
encroaches upon the Due Rights of a true Gospel Ministry, and consequently
stands in opposition both to Divine Institutions and ends of Government, that
this defense appears no defense at all. For what he adds of the ^reed and
Doxologie, it is removed by what is said, and we need only to add, that the end
of such Observances is better reached in the present Practice of our Church, in
point of Worship, than with such Observances.

But the Surveyer appears very angry at the calling the Diocesan Bishop a New
Officer, not Instituted by GOD in his House, and spe^ds to this Scope many
words, P. 222.223. which is this in Sum. First That the Prelatical Function,
is only a new Dignity and Authority granted for Peace sake, to one Minister
above others, within the bounds of the same Order. Ans. First, the Surveyer
should have considered that his Spliting of a supposed Divinely Instituted
Office, and dividing the Work and Duties thereof unto different Subjects and
Recipients, is upon the Matter a devising of New Orders, and all one therewith.
Do not Papists tell us, that the Priest is the Highest Order of Ministry, and
comprises, with the Diaconate, their whole Hierarchy, which is nothing else but
an extension of these? Suppose the Pastoral Power of Order were thus Split,
that one Rank or degree of Men were allowed only to Baptize, not to Preach,
others to Preach, not at all to Baptize, who will disown it, that these were
Antiscriptural Human Inventions, dividing what GOD has conjoined? And once
admitting this, what limits can be set to Men's inventions in this Point? Or how
can the Multiplied Orders in Popery be condemned, and all the Swarm of their
new invented Officers? Sure, the solid ground of Condemning them, is, that they
are a Spurious Brood, inverting and destroying the End, Union and Order of the
Divinely appointed Officers of the House of GOD. The Spliting of the Actings of
the Power of Order is surely condemned upon this Ground of the Oneness and
Identity of this Office of the Pastor: And if the Case stands thus with
Reference to the Power and Exercise of Order, why is not the case the same in
the Point of Jurisdiction, which is for the same end as the other? Moreover, if
upon pretense of Order and Unity, this extension of the exercise were admitted,
in the Method he pleads, this Jurisdictional Power may be extended to the
highest degree, even of a Patriarchat or Popedom, for the Pope does pretend he
is but of the order of Priestood, and the lowest Rank of that Hierarchy have,
by this Principle, a fundamental aptitude for the highest Office and extent of
their Order. The Surveyer will have a Power left to the Church, to Rank
Ministers, with a Respect to Union; and here is an Union of the Universal
Church, resolving in such an Officer, and clearly going upon his Principle of
the way of uniting particular Churches: And who will doubt that the Union of
the Church Universal has the same Ground with that of Particular Churches?

In a word, the Folly of this Discourse appears in this, that Ministers who
have an unquestionable interest in Ordination and Jurisdiction, are charged by
the Great Master, duly to exercise both, as they shall Answer to him, and
therefore must not, but upon their perril denude themselves of any piece of
that Work and Authority committed to them; this being the Talent, whereof they
are to give an account to him, who has given to every one of his Servants
their Work. The distinction of the Diocesan, Hierarchical Prelat from the
Presbyter, as a New Officer, is evident, whether we consider his New Name, of
Bishop or Archbishop; his New work of Governing the Diocese, besides his Trust
in the Civil Government; his New Ordination or Consecration to his New work;
his distinct Qualifications, in consequence of the whole, from the Pastor or
Minister: So that he appears in all these Respects, a Compacted New Officer,
and supposing the Pastors Divine Authority, a New Usurper. The Surveyer tells
us, He is no New Officer, since the inferior Officer doing the same Acts, it is
not a nullity. But, as this Reason would tend to the former Antiscriptural
spliting of Offices, so that the Episcopalians will not allow this Concession,
is by this time evident. We all know who have in a late practice, condemned the
Presbyterial Ordination of the Protestant Church of France. For what he adds of
the Power of the Commission of Assemblies, to Fortify his Notion, the
Disparity is palpable and apparent, whether we consider the Powers Deputing and
giving Commission, viz: The King, in the Case of the Prelates; the Churches
Representative or Assembly, in the Case of the Commission: The Prelat receiving
a New Ordination; The Commissioners not: The Commissioners being limited as to
their work and continuance by the Assembly, and as being Answerable unto them,
not the Prelates etc. But of this above. As for his discourse of
Superintendents, P. 223. The Author of the Vindiciae Epistolae Philadelphi
against Spotswoods Calumnies, has at large made good the vast and essential
difference betwixt the transient Office of the Superintendents and that of
Prelates, P. 31.32. in no less than Twelve Instances to which, for brevitie, we
refer the Reader.

The Surveyer P. 223.224. attempts in the next place, to answer the Objection
against the Hierarchical Prelat taken from Christ's Faithfulness, and the
Scriptures perfection: From the Comparison institut in Scripture betwixt Christ
and Moses, in point of Faithfulness, in the Ordering and Institution of the
Government and Ordinances of the House of God. The Argument is no doubt very
considerable upon both grounds, if we shall but suppose the Absolute Perfection
of all our M^diators Offices, and the Correspondent Exercises thereof, for the
Edification and Salvation of his Church, and especially under the Gospel
Dispensation: As a Prophet, he has fully revealed the Counsel and Mind of GOD,
so as nothing is to be added to his Divine Revelations thereof, no new Rules,
Truths or Duties to be superadded beyond the limits he has revealed: As a
Priest, his Satisfaction, his Intercession* is so full, that no pretended
subservient Intercessors or Saviors, are to be devised by Men: Thus full and
perfect is the Exercise of his Kingly Office, in appointing the Officers,
Censures, Laws and Government of his House. The Argument appears further
invincibly strong when we Ponder two things. First, What the faithfulness of
Moses under the Legal dispensation, did reach unto, which our Blessed Lords
Sovereign Faithfulnesss does exceed. 1. Moses appointed the Officers of the
House of God their several Orders and Degrees, their Work and Duties, in so far
that his Institutions did amount to determine a species of Government. 2. All
his Appointments hereanent were fixed and unalterable, so as none might add to
or detract therefrom. 3. They were hence not Committed to the disposal of the
Civil Magistrate, to mould them after the Rules of worldly Policy. 4. These
Officers were not to denude themselves of any part of the Authority and
Function committed to them, or of the exercise thereof. Hence, it inevitably
follows, that the Government and Officers of the Church of the New Testament,
is in all these Points of the like Nature; the Species is determined, the
Offices and Officers are unalterable, are not to be Fashioned by Men's Laws at
their arbitriment, are to continue in this Fixed Mould of his Institution, and
Method of its Official Exercise, till his Returning again.

Secondly, The Scriptures Perfection clears this abundantly, all things to be
believed and practiced, in order to Salvation, are perfectly contained therein,
and there being so much delivered in Scriptures, touching the Government, Laws
and Offices of the House of GOD, and in order to the Instruction, both of
Church Rulers and Church Members, in their Respective Duties; if these
Directions, Laws and Institutions be not completely correspondent to these
ends, the Scriptures perfection is palpably impeached, and the infinite Wisdom
of the Lawgiver blasphemed.

To this Argument the Surveyer Answers, That in order to the great end of our
Lords Prophetical and Kingly Offices, He has given particular Commands
concerning the Essentials of the Government of His House, and general Commands
to direct the Prudence of His Church* to order what is Left to Christian
Liberty* for the best Ends; And that it is preposterous to fancy a thing
necessary; and then allege Christ has instituted the same, because Faithful,
but rather upon this ground, we must reason the necessity of the thing from his
Appointment. Ans. This is removed in a word, by this one Position, That if we
acknowledge these Essentials do include all necessary Offices and Officers of
the Church, and do draw the Limits and Measures of their Actings,
Qualifications, and the Nature of their Power, with such Exactness, as none may
justle with, or encroach upon their Privileges therein; We can offer such
Scripture Discoveries in this Point, as do sufficiently lay aside the Diocesan
Prelat, and prove him such an Heteroclite, as his Office cannot be brought up
to the Scripture Rules. Thus, we are so far from such Reasoning, as this
fancycal Surveyer imputs to us, that on the contrary, we do suppose and prove
the Scripture Institutions in this Point, and upon the Scripture Discoveries
thereof, we reason the Necessity from our Lords Faithfulness. But if the
Surveyer did hold that the Offices and Officers of the House of GOD, their
Duties and Qualification, are such things as falls within the compass of the
Churches Liberty, to dispose as she thinks fit: 1. It might be enquired, what
he or those of his Mind will own as Essentials? Next, To what end are all the
Scripu^e Directions and Institutions in this Point delivered unto the Church of
GOD? And why upon this Ground, the most extended Hierarchy may not be pleaded
for? 3. How this can consist with that express Design of the Scriptures
Perfection, viz. To make, not only the ordinary Christian, but also the Man of
God, the Minister of God, perfect and thoroughly furnished to every good Work, or
every piece of his Office and Duty; and with this further Expression of this
Design of Ministerial Instructions proposed by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.15. viz.
To instruct the Man of God how to behave in the House of God, which is His
Church? In Answer to this, the Surveyer acknowledges the Scriptures Perfection,
to make the Man of GOD wise to Salvation, and furnish him for every good Work,
either by the general or particular Precepts thereof, but that it belongs not
to the Perfection of the Scripture, to contain the particular Rules for all the
Circumstantials of Church Government, more than it does for all the particular
Practices of our common Life. Ans. Behold the Hierarchy, in this our Surveyers
great Essay, turned into the Dwarf of a mere Circumstance. Behold also his Zeal
for right ordering of the House of GOD, what Officers must Rule therein, what
the Nature of their Work and Power is, what Duties are committed to them, what
the Nature and Species of the Government must be, whether it must run to the
Extrems of Monarchy, or the An^baptistical Morellian way, of Anarchy, or the
middle Forms; All, or either of these is but a mere Circumstance, with our
Surveyer. Let any Judge, if he gave not here manus victas to the Presbyterians,
and yielded up his Cause to them: For no Man of Sense, will call the Matters,
instanced mere Circumstances; And if they be not, the Scriptures Perfection,
for the ends mentioned, must clearly reach the Determination thereof. The
Surveyer told us, That the work of the Bishop 1 Timothy 3. Does import the Work
and Office of the Hierarchical Prelat; And he has acknowledged here the
Scriptures Perfection to furnish the Minister of Christ for every good Work,
yea, he has asserted P. 194.195. That the plentitude of the Apostolic Power,
committed by our Lord to the Apostles, for the great End of the Churches
Edification and Union, was by them committed to the Bishops, as their proper
Successors. Now, how these Assertions can consist with his Describing and
Owning here the Work and Office of the Bishop as a mere Circumstance, wherein
the Scriptures gives no certain distinct Sound, must be put among the rest of
his mysterious Inventions.

Two or three things further, I add, and I have done with this Surveyer. First,
It is generally acknowledged by all Sound Divines, That there is no Lawful
Church Office or Officer of the House of GOD, but what must have our LORD'S
positive Grant or Institution: And this is fortified by several Grounds. 1.
Whatever is not of Faith is sin, in general, and whoever pretends to Officiat
in Christ's House and Kingdom, as an Officer therein, acts sine titulo, and his
Actings are void; And therefore he cannot act in Faith, if there be not a
Divine Warrant for the Office he sustains, and the Official Exercise and
Actings thereof. 2. If we acknowledge Christ's Kingly Power and Headship over
the Church, as a political Body, whereof he is the political Head, giving her
her Laws and Officers, Isa. 9.6. Matthew. 28.18. Ioh. 5.22. As in all Kingdoms,
no person can claim an Office of State, or Magistracy, without the Warrant of
the Laws, and the Kings Authority thereto Interposed, so all Church Power and
Authority, must be conveyed to Church Officers by this Glorious KING's
Authentic Commission or Grant. Now, none can pretend to any Grant or
Commission from Him, but what is in the Scriptures; Which is especially
evident, and further convincingly clear, both from the Perfection of His Word
and Testament hereanent; And likewise, from this, that the Church Government in
the whole of it, must needs be acknowledged to be founded upon a Divine and
positive Institution.

Secondly, Our LORD did thus actually exercise His Kingly Power, and derived
the same to Church Officers, thus he gave the Power to Bind and Loose, and the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven to his Apostles, promised His Presence with them
and their Successors to the End; And this for the Edification and Building up
of His Church, till her Warfare is accomplished, Matthew. 16.18.19, with Matthew.
18.19.20. Ioh. 21.23. Matthew. 28.18.19, 20. 2 Cor. 8.13. Ephesians. 4.11.12.

Finally, When this Fundamental Truth of our LORD'S political Headship and
Influences accordingly, in the Government of the Church, and the Perfection of
His Holy Testament, in reference to the Laws, Ordinances, and Officers thereof,
is denied, the Foundations of a Christian Church are removed, the Rules,
Limits, and Boundaries, in reference to the Duties, both of Church Officers and
Members, so annihilate, as the Church becomes a Chaos of all Confusion and
arbitrary Disorder whatsomever, or at least the Leaden and Versatile Rule of
Worldly Wisdom, being made her Measures of Ordinances and Government, a Door is
opened for Inundations of all Errors and Superstitions, and for the most wicked
Usurpations and Disorders, in point of Government, that the wicked Mind of Man,
by the influence of Satan, can invent.

FINIS.
The CONTENTS
PART I.
CHAP I. Dr. Scot's stating of the Question, and his Argument taken from the
Institution of of our Savior, Examined. Page 1. CHAP. II. His Argument, from
the Practice of the Apostles, Examined. P. 11. CHAP. III. His Argument taken
from an alleged punctual Conf^rmity of the Primitive Church, to Christ's
Institution, and the Apostolic Practice, in Point of Episcopacy, Considered.
Page 35. CHAP. IV. His Argument Examined, taken from our Saviors alleged
Allowance and Approbation of Episcopal Government, in his Epistles to the Seven
Asian Churches. Page 69. CHAP. V. The Dr's Scripture proofs of a Four ^old
Ministry or Prerogative of a Bp. as Superior to a Pastor in Point of
Government, Considered. Page 85.
PART. II.
CHAP. I. Dr. Monro's unsound and Impertinent Reflections upon our first
Reformers, as to Church Government, exposed: Together with his unsound and
Popish Method in his Answer to the Argument against Episcopacy, from Matthew.
20.25. And with the Parallel Texts. Page 1. CHAP. II. A Confutation of what he
Offers in Answer to our Argument for Parity of Pastors, taken from the Official
Identity of Bishop and Presbyter, in Scripture. Page 31. CHAP. III. The Dr's
absurd description of the Apostolic Function, in opposition to Protestant
Divines, exposed: His Assertion about the Succession of Hierarchical Bishops to
Apostles, in a proper formal Sense: His Opinion Loaded with gross and palpable
Absurdities. Page 85 CHAP. IV. His proof of the Divine Right of the
Hierarchical Bp. from the pretended Episcopacy of Tim. ct Tit. and the 7 Asian
Angels, examined. P. 119.
PART III.
CHAP. I. A Consideration of the Scripture Grounds, upon which the Surveyer
pleads for the Lawfulness of the Episcopal Office. Page 1. CHAP. II. His
Answers offered to the Scriptures, pleaded by Presbyterians, Examined; viz.
Mat. 20.25, 26. with the Paralels, Mark. 10 42. Luke 22.25. Mat. 18.17. Act.
20.17, 28. Tit. 1.5, 7. 1 Pet. 5.1* 2. The unsoundness and inconsistency of his
Glosses made appear. Page 13. CHAP. III. Some more of his Exceptions and
Answers examined, viz. to 1 Cor. 5. Ephesians. 4.11. (To which the Paralels, 1 Cor.
12.28. Romans 12.6. 7, 8. are to be joined) to Philip. 1.1. And to 1. Tim. 4.14.
His unsoundness, and inconsistency therein, further made appear. Page 38. CHAP.
IV. Wherein is considered his Answer to our Charge against the Diocesan Prelat,
as a New Officer, different from those Instituted by our Lord, and standing in
opposition to the New Testament Church Government, and this upon the Ground of
the Perfection of the Scripture* Records hereanent, and our Lords Faithfulness
in the full Institution of the Officers and Government of his Church. Page 65.

