EXPERIMENTED PROPOSALS HOW The KING may have Money to Pay and Maintain His
FLEETS with Ease to His People. LONDON may be Rebuilt, and all PROPRIETORS
Satisfied. MONEY be Lent at Six per Cent, on PAWNS. AND, The FISHING-TRADE Set
up, which alone is able and sure to Enrich us all.

And all this without Altering, Straining, or Thwarting any of our Laws or
Customs now in Use.

By Sir EDWARD FORDE.

London, Printed by William Godbid. 1666.

EXPERIMENTED PROPOSALS How the King may have Money to Pay and Maintain his
Fleets with ease to his People, etc.
1. THe end of our Money is to adjust Contracts and Accounts between out
selves, for it is not Coined to be Melted or Transported.

2. These and all Tokens of Account are valued according to their portableness,
which prefers Gold before Silver, Jewels before Gold, Bills and Bonds before
all.

3. These Bills, Bonds, Book Accounts, and even verbal promises, we transfer
from one to the other, which our Law approves of and corroborates.

4. Satisfying security therefore clearly supplies and contents us as well as
Money, for who would not rather have a Straw, or a piece of Paper, then an
hundred pounds, if he were sure it would at all times yield him as much as he
took it for. Our practice evinceth this, for we purchase Bills of Exchange at
two or more per cent. The Money-Master parts with his Coin for a sheet of Paper
or Parchment. Nay it gets our Money into our Enemies, esteemed, but in truth,
failable Money Banks, though they give but Three per cent. use, and we Six, nay
Ireland ten and more per cent. For it is satisfying security, not great Use,
that attracts Money.

5. Land security is evidently, of all, the surest, and most satisfying, where
the Title is clear, and no danger of Counterfeits or Foreign Conquest.

6. No Money can be surer than Taxes by Act of Parliament, though ten, or more
years day of Payment were allowed the people, which this way may be done, and
yet the King by making current Bills thereon, may have it all presently without
any deductions. And by the peoples yearly and easy payments these Bills may be
certainly paid and taken in.

7. By such like distinct Bills, London may be rebuilt, and all Proprietors
satisfied for enlarging the Streets, the Fines and Rents of all so built, being
engaged to satisfy and take in all these Bills.

8. The like may be done for Banks of Loan upon Pawns, truly called Mounts of
Piety, where the Stock thus coming gratis, the Poor (who now pay above 40, 50,
nay 60 per cent. Use, to their ruin, and casting them and theirs on their
Parishes charge) may have money at Six per cent. The Clothiers on their Cloth
the like, till the Merchant or Draper can take it off, and the Clothier, mean
time, have Money to go on with his Trade, and keep his Workmen still employed.
The Landed man at Four per cent. Use, whereby he may improve his Land, or lend
his Money to such as can well pay him Six per cent. and gain enough. Half this
Use will soon pay and take in these Bills, the other half will defray all
charges and augment this Mount to a vast advantage of all.

9. By the like way, the Herring Trade may be established, to the breeding up
and maintaining plenty of Mariners enough for the King, Merchant, and Fishery;
and employ our Poor from their Childhood, and the profit hereof will soon pay
and take in these Bills also: for John Keymor's Books clearly shows how the
Dutch and Foreigners, by our Fish, make more Money in one year, than the King
of Spain does in four years of his Indies; and how these Dutch hereby will
certainly eat us out of all Trade, and be clear Masters of the Sea, to the
terror of all Kings and States.

10. Credit thus raised, is honest, because all Bills are sure to be paid. It
prejudiceth no man, because he has as much use of this Bill Money, as if he
had the Silver; and it compasses all these particulars, to the good of us all.
Nor is the way hazardous or untroden, but such as has been long, and is still
used by our Neighbors, to the advancing their little Country (not so big, nor
fruitful as one English County) from Poor Distressed States, to be Hogans
Mogans, and all by a real cheat; for no considerate man can believe that they
have so much Money in their Banks, as they give out Bills for. What then do
they get? but lose the Use they pay, and their charge in guarding and keeping
Accounts.

11. These lessen not, but increases both Bullion and Coin, where they are
used; for what Monarch can spare such Sums as little Genoa lends to the King of
Spain, that great Master and Merchant of Gold and Silver? and what people
generally fuller of Money, and freer from Beggars than the Dutch, by these
proposed courses.

If all, or any, of these be thought worthy debateing, the Proposer is
confident he can answer all objections, and show the way how there shall not be
any danger of cheat or abuse in any part thereof.

FINIS.
Licensed, Nov. 2. 1666.

ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

Sir EDWARD FORDE'S ADDITIONAL DEFENSE OF Bill-Credit.
THat Credit satisfies as well as Coin, and drives the greatest Trade in the
World, is certain and visible to the most Judicious; But our Natural jealousy,
blown by malicious whispers, would not have Credit and Monarchy compatable. To
convince therefore the deceived, and silence those who fear and malign our King
and Kingdoms prosperity, I here show (part of what I hinted in the Conclusion
of my first paper) how the there proposed Bill-Money may be justly and
infallibly paid in by Silver Coin, which some so dote on.

1. That the Tax of every County be assigned to be paid their next City, or
responsible Corporation, and the Bills thereon sent to them to deliver and pay
(as His Majesty shall appoint) the said Bill-Money, and so be obliged to pay
and take in all the said Bills, as fast as they Receive their County Tax.

2. The like for Rebuilding London, to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Chamber
thereof, to whom the King sends as many Bills as is found needful; and so they
to be accomptable, and take in their Bills as the Fines and Rents of what they
Build herewith, bring in to them.

3. The like for Mounts of Piety and advancing our Fishery, some convenient
Corporations or responsible Commissioners, bound for the just expending their
Bills, and repaying with the profits as they come in.

4. By this way, all the Countrey-mans Wool and Grain, the Clothiers Cloth, the
Miners Tin, Lead, Coal, and all durable sure sailable Commodities, may be taken
off; and so all Workmen still employed, and all heads and hands set to work.

5. What the King will, and justly may challenge to himself for the use of this
His Bill-Money (to us as serviceable as Silver) I know not; but am sure we can
no where else have it under Six per cent, nor enough so. Nor can our King be
too rich, but we shall fare the better by it, and pay the less Taxes.

Nor do I think we get by screwing any of His Rights from Him, whom we must
preserve potent and able to defend us, or all come to speedy and certain ruin.

How this Bill-Money may be kept from Counterfeiting, or unjust augmenting, I
can most clearly demonstrate and secure, if I find what I have said approved
and acceptable; Hopeing that my Mite may be received into the grand Treasury of
better judgments; as the simple Countrey-man's project, to take the height of a
Tree (by comparing the shadow of his Staff, with that of the Tree) was to the
ingenious Mathematicians.

FINIS.

