A Brief Defense, Of the Old and Succesful METHOD Of CURING Continual Fevers;
In Opposition to Doctor BROWN And his Vindicatory Schedule.

Quae ducere oportet, quo maxim vergant, eo ducenda, per loca convenientia.
Hip. S1. A. 21.

Concocta purgare and movere oportet, non cruda, neque in principiis, nisi
turgeant. Plurima vero non turgent. Idem S1. A. 22.

Quo magis adstrictam illi alvum prastitero, tanto magis eum extra periculi
aleam colloco. Sydenham de Febr. Cont. P. 29.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by George Mosman, and are to be Sold at his Shop in the
Parliament Closs. M. DC. XCIV.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE, Sir Robert Sinclair OF STEVENSTOUN, SHIRREFF of the
Shire of Haddingtoun: And One of the Members of Their Majesty's most Honorable
PRIVY COUNCIL.
Right Honorable,
MY Design in presenting to you this Small and Mean Essay, is neither to keep
it or my self from Censure; nor yet to take occasion to divulge your Praises.
As for the former it is ordinarily spoke in a Complement, without all Cause, and
passes as such without any Effect: For it neither preserves the Author from
Reproach, nor the Book from an Answer, when any of them are deserved. And if I
intended to do the latter, I could hardly say that which would be thought too
little, to such as know you; but I must of necessity run the risk of being
esteemed a Flaterer, by them, who are neither acquaint with you, nor your
excellent Enduements and great Desert.

My purpose is only to show both to your self and others, how sensible I am of
the manifold Favors, I have received at your Hands, in a Country where I was
a Stranger, and you are, amongst the Gentlemen, the most eminent.

Yea further, you may challenge some Right to it as a Domestic, it being both
Conceived and brought Forth within your Walls, while I had the Honor to attend
your incomparable Lady, and some of your excellent Children.

Take it then, Sir, as an Evidence of my Gratitude and Thankfulness, and yet be
pleased to Honor him with your Favor and Friendship, whose great Ambition it
is, to Subscribe himself,

Right Honorable, Your most Humble, and much Obliged Servant James Forest.

The Preface.
IT may be thought no small Presumption in me, a Stripling, to enter the Lists
with this Man of Gath; he being a seven Years older Physician as I am a Man.
For in the 36 page of Philander's Second Letter, published two Years ago, he
boasts himself to have been a Physician, for near thirty Years; whereas I as
yet have never seen Twenty six Summers. However, I shall say no more for my
Vindication in this: But, that if I chance to Overcome, my Victory will be the
more Glorious, and if it be my ill Luck to be Foiled, the Cause for which I
Fight, will suffer the less prejudice; he being one of the Youngest, as well as
Meanest, of its Patriots, who has undertaken the Defense. I am more solicitous
to satisfy my Reader, why I, whose young Years, small Experience, and weak
Ability, might have been a sufficient Disswasive from such an Attempt: Do yet
nevertheless undertake That, which seems to have been declined by far abler
Pens. And my Reasons are the following Two,

First, I thought it not unfit that so weak a Brother, as I am, should enter
the Combat, that so the World seeing what can be done against him, by so mean
and obscure an Author; might thereby judge, what would have been the Event, if
any of the more Learned had engaged in the Quarrel: Yea, I looked on the Book
which I was to consider, as altogether unworthy the spare Hours of an
experienced Man: And I was afraid lest it might give the Doctor too just cause
of Boasting, if any other as a young Physician had given him an Answer.

Secondly, My Resentments for Learning in general, and for Physic in
particular, are so great; that I could hardly think to see any of them suffer
so much, as they both do, by the Vindicatory Schedule, without endeavoring my
outmost, to procure its Relief from his rapacious Hands, who, providing his own
Interest may be advanced, cares not suppose it be upon the Ruins of all
others, yea of Learning it self.

I am abundantly sensible, with how much greater Advantage it could have been
managed by any other Man whatsomever: But I think when a House is on Fire, it
becomes the weakest therein, to do what he can to extinguish the Flames.

It was no vain Conceit of my own Knowledge, my Pretensions to Learning being
as few as my Right can be small, that prompt me to undertake this youthly
Essay. I had far rather had the satisfaction, to have seen it well done by
others, as to have run the least hazard, of either wronging it, or exposing my
self. However, albeit I have not the Happiness to be Learned my self, yet I
have the Equity, both to value it, and such as profess it.

Nor yet was it any contradicting Humor, or prejudice at It, or its Author,
that caused me prosecute the undertaken Design. For I know no honest nor
ingenuous Man, who will not embrace a Truth, especially in Physic, Vbi luditur
de corio humano, albeit presented by a mean Hand. Seeing the ordinary Proverb
tells us, and Reason with daily Experience confirms it: That a Fool may give a
Wiseman Counsel at a time. So that if either Reason or Experience could
persuade us of the Advantage the New Method has to the Old, nothing should
deterr us, at least me, from its thankful Acceptance and constant Practice. I
ever having (and I hope with God's Assistance still shall) preferred the Safety
of my Patient and the quiet of my Conscience, not only to my Gain and
Advantage; but even to my Credit and Reputation.

I am so far from promising either Advantage or Esteem to my self, by this
small and abortive Essay: That had it not been my design to leave the Country
in a short time, it had never seen Light: And were it not to take all occasion
of Glorying from my Antagonist, as if I durst not discover his Adversary, I had
concealed my Name. I know there is so little either of Learning or Experience
therein, that perhaps I may only hereby discover my Weakness to some, who had
conceived a better Opinion of my Studies, as ever they deserved. Nay, it cannot
otherways be, it being begun and ended in some Five or Six Days, when I was
obliged to attend in an Honorable Family, and so was denied that help, I might
otherways have expected from my Books. Neither could I afterward have the
time, or be at the pains, to lick my own Bleeding and untimous Birth, but
suffered it to creep into the World in the same dress, in which it had slipped
from my negligent Pen.

If it be not good, I have given as little of it as possibly I could, noways
imitating Doctor Brown, who has transcribed a large Book consisting of 14
Sheets, besides Dedication and Prefaces, from Authors, (sometimes expressing,
but oftener concealing their Names) whereas all that any way relates to Fevers,
which is the subject of his Book, may be easily contained in Four.

I hope nothing herein is repugnant to Anatomy or Physiology in particular, nor
yet to any of the known Rules of Physic in general: For smaller Matters,
wherein Men may have different Opinions, without being in any great Error, I
am not much concerned. All who know me, know also how far my Humor is from
Boasting, and I know my self how very good Reason I have so to be, my Parts
either Natural or Acquired, being but very sober: Yet I Will boldly affirm, that
the Arguments here brought for Sudorificks, are such, as the Doctor shall never
solve, till Nature shall change her Course. and as often Cure Fevers by Stool,
when left to her self, as now she does by Sweating.

No doubt my Language will be Censured, and I confess deservedly, as Course and
Barbarous: I shall not labor to excuse it, but shall only add some Three
Things, which may serve somewhat to Apologize for its Roughness. First, The
Subject is such, as altogether refuses a handsome Dress: For here I am not
only obliged to adhere to, and frequently use again the same Terms of Art,
which nevertheless found pretty harshly in our Mother Tongue, but also I am
necessitat to keep closs to the Author, whom I endeavor to Refute, so that I
may say with the Poet:

Ornari res ipsa negat, contenta doceri.
Secondly, I resolved to Instruct, not to Complement the Doctor, therefore I
was not scrupulous in choosing my Words, providing they were proper and did
express my meaning.

And Thirdly, As I said before, it was only the hasty product of some five or
six idle Days, while I was removed from that Assistance I might otherways have
had, both as to its Matter and Form.

Some perhaps may think it very unexcusable, to obtrude upon the World a Book,
which I acknowledge to be so unpolished. I readily confess, that without any
great Loss to Learning both the Vindicatory Schedule and this Defense might
have been a wanting: And had it not been for the one it should never have been
troubled with the other. But seeing the Offense was given, it was necessary to
do somewhat to remove the Scandal. And for as little as this Answer may contain,
yet I hope, by the Judicious and Learned, it will be found a sufficient
Refutation of the New Method: As for the Vulgar, I never esteemed their
Applause, however, seeing the very writing of a Book is enough to prevail with
them (otherways certainly the Vindicatory Schedule had never taken much) who
knows but this, being the last, may be thought the best?

Others may probably say, Why do I now, after the elapsing of near Three Years,
first give that Book an Answer? To which I Reply, That all along the V. S.
displeased me, and so much the more, when I considered the Design upon which it
was write, which could be no other, as to purchase a Name amongst the ignorant
Vulgar, and thereby to be the easilier twisted into the larger Employment. I
was not a little confirmed in this my Opinion, when some short time after my
Arival to the Kingdom, in a Coffee-House the Vindicatory Schedule was shufled
into my Hands. I knew not the Author then, neither do I yet, but I instantly
concluded him some empty Emperick, who, it not being the custom here as in
London and elsewhere, to affix their Libels and Advertisements to Posts and
Corners, did choose the next ordinary, as well as effectual way, of
distributing it through Taverns and Coffee-houses. I was heartily sorry, that
one who carried the Honorable Name of a Doctor in Physic, should abase
himself so far, as to join Hands with the Scum of Mankind, naughty Quacks; who
to cheat simple people of some Money, do not care to rob them of their Lives.
This made me ever desirous that some person or other should Chastise the
Author's Impudence as well as Ignorance. And accordingly I am informed it was
done (I never having seen it my self) in a very fit, and the only deserved way,
in a Dialogue betwixt D. Brown and D. Black: For a Book that contains neither
Learning nor Reason, should only be Answered with Mockry and Scorn.
Nevertheless the Doctor glorying in that which should have been his Shame,
insulted the more, as if his Book were altogether unanswerable. Therefore I
thought it not amiss to give some Reasons why we employ this Old and Reasonable
Method: Although the Authority and Experience of Physicians in all Ages, might
be proof enough against him, who really, for the Defense of his New Method,
brings no other Arguments, as, That he says it.

But farther, that which engaged me at this time, was this, A Fortnight ago
being in the Company of a Grave and Judicious Minister, who as he is a near
Relation of the Doctor's; so he is a great Admirer of his New Method: Where
among other things, happening to speak of the Doctor and his Book, and he
observing me not much to value it, did freely offer to lend me (for it seems
the Author is careful to disperse them) the V. S. with the Two Letters (I
having told him, that I had never seen only heared thereof) thereby designing
perhaps to proselite me. And some few Days after, I being obliged, as I said
before, to attend a Week in an Honorable Family, did for my Divertisement,
write this Answer, and return the Books to their worthy Owner. But now I think
I may be at the Expense to Buy the Book, which I have been at the pains to
Confute. for to this moment I do not possess it.

I have altogether shunned personal Reflections, for I love to speak of things
freely, but of persons honorably. And if any person, either of the one party
or other, shall be herewith offended, I shall be extremely grieved: For all
that I say, is only for love of the Truth, I noways inclining to engage in any
Man's private Quarrel. Only that Attestation annexed to the Tail of his Book, I
cannot away with: For surely any knowing Man will think these Persons, though
otherways sensible and intelligent, very unfit Judges in such a Case; yea I
say, that both Doctor Brown and I, ought to give Ear, when such Eminent Men as
Doctor Burnet and Doctor Bruce speak. I have the Honor to be Acquaint with Sir
Thomas Burnet, and I remember he was pleased to inform me, that it was not a
Fever, but an other Distemper which then afflicted the honorable Person: And
as his great Candor and Ingenuity will never suffer him to be capable of making
a Lie; so his great Learning and Knowledge in Physic, do abundantly free him
from the necessity of flying to any such base and mean Refuge.

And now to draw to a Close, if the D. shall think this Defense worthy of any
Reply, I hope he will also grant me the following Requests, otherways I Will
hardly think my self obliged to return him any Answer. First, To oppose Reason
to Reason, still consulting Anatomy and Physiology: And neither insisting on
Experience, which is nothing to the purpose, while I can oppose a Thousand to
One; nor yet using Railery and Cavills, which are by me all along declined,
they being most averse to my Humor, and I often have observed, that in stead of
uniting Men's Opinions, they rather separat and disjoin their Minds and
Affections. Secondly, I wish it may be in the Latin Tongue in which the
Controversy cannot only be better managed, it being very hard to express Terms
of Art in the English Language; but also our Debates will be thereby concealed
from the Vulgar, who seeing us blame one another, may be apt to conclude us both
in the wrong. And Thirdly, I hope he will do it shortly, left when he is
pleased to appear, I may perhaps be removed.

Finally, Let not the frequent use of the Word Nature, offend the Learned
Reader. I have read Boil on that Subject, and means nothing thereby, save the
different Figure, Structure, Texture, etc. of the Parts, by which they are
enabled to act as Second Causes.

A brief Defense of the Old and Succesful Method of Curing Continual Fevers,
etc.
ALthough it be a Work of no small pains, and require the knowledge of no few
things, rightly to act the part of a Physician: Yet not a few there be, aiming
more at their own profit than their Neighbors safety, who, as they find it
most Easy, so they think it most Safe, to acquire in some few Years, I had
almost said Months, some general Compend and universal Method of Curing, which
they ignorantly and dangerously apply to all Distempers. Not unlike to that
Medicaster spoken of by the Learned Wedelius in the Preface to his Pharmacy,
who shufling all the Physical Receipts he had heired from his Father in a Bag,
desired the Patient to try his own Fortune: And if the Cure chance at any time
to be as successful as his was, when called to a Countess lying sick of a
Squinancy, who trying her Luck, did obtain a Clyster, which causing her laugh,
did break the Imposthum; immediately they set up for Masters, and are not
satisfied to use the same Remedy in all other Distempers, though never so
different, themselves; unless it be also employed and approven by others.

It Is far from my Design to apply this to the person, against whom I am now
engaged, at whom I have neither any Prejudice, nor of whom I know any Evil,
save the Writing of the Vindicatory Schedule. My Intention being only to
endeavor the Vindication, not only of these excellent Physicians who have gone
before us; but also of such who at this Day, do either at Home or Abroad
practice their Method, and that, Blessed be God, with both Credit to themselves
and Advantage to their Patients, from the^ calumnious Imputation, of either
Ignorance as if they knew not the right, or wicked Maliciousness and horrid
Murder, that knowing the Right would yet do the wrong. From one of which,
providing it be true, what the Author of the V. S. most falsely alleges, they
cannot be absolved.

Among all these Miseries and Diseases, unto which Man by his Fall was made
liable, a Fever perhaps, is the most frequent. A Fever it is which in all
Countries, and in all Seasons, without respect to either Sex or Age, does daily
Invade, Afflict, yea and Kill many Persons. Neither can it other ways be, seeing
our Life seems no depend upon the circular and intestine Motion of our Blood:
Which Motion can hardly be troubled, without the production of one sort of
Fever or other. So of necessity a Fever must be of all Distempers, the most
frequent as well as most dangerous.

I am not ignorant my self, far less I Am sure any of these in whose Defense I
write, how many and great Debates there be among Authors concerning the
Definition as well as Division of Fevers: However I shall concern my self in
none of them here, where I only resolve to give a short, and for what appears
to me, the most probable Account of the Disease, in so far as it may serve for
clearing its Method of Curing. For as I am very far from presumiug (being
abundantly conscious of my own Weakness) to usurp the part of a Teacher. So I
^ould never much value that vain and ostentive way of some, who force all they
can find Rare and Learned in Authors, though never so remote from, and alien
unto the subject they treat of, into their own Books, and thereby make them as
Ridiculous as the Picture described by Horace, in the first Book of his Art.
Poet. which is a thing not unfrequent in the V. S. where all that concerns
Fevers and their Cure might remain; suppose the largest half of the Book, had
got the desert of the whole, which is either the Fire or the S -- And how
happily this Plagiary has succeeded with the Doctor, we shall perhaps
afterward have occasion to show, in an instance of Anatomy, Physiology and
Chemistry.

To me then it seems not improbable, that the Formalitie, Essence, or if you
please a Term of Art, the continent Cause of a Fever, consists in a Commotion
or Exagitation of the Intestine as well as Circular Motion of the Blood:
Whereby the Oeconomie of the Body is disturbed, with diverse and sometimes right
grievous Symptoms. Which Commotion, for the most part, may arise from some
Heterogeneous Body conveyed into it.

That the Blood is the Subject of Fevers, I suppose will be called in question
by none, seeing not only the Changes, and sometimes Advantages, which do accrue
to the Patient by its Evacuations, are very observable; but also the Crudity
and Coction of the morbisick Matter in the Urine is discernable: In a word, the
Jaundice which sometimes solves the Disease. the Alterations of the Pulse, etc.
are sufficient to persuade the morosest of Antagonists.

I look upon it as needless, either to trouble the Reader or my self here, with
that more curious as useful Question: Which of the Blood's two parts is most
frequently affected: It being, in my Opinion, not unreasonable to acknowledge
in the same, a more liquorous and crass Substance which is moved, besides
another more Spiritual or Aetherecal which moves. All the Arguments alleged in
favors of the Aetherecal Portion, such as the power of Opiats in Curing
Fevers, and these continual as well as intermittent, the Effects of the Fancy
and Apprehension in the same Case, the unchangableness of the Urin and Pulse in
malign Fevers, and the like: By any judicious and skilled Physician will be as
soon Answered as they can be Proposed. Yea, it seems to me highly probable,
that sometimes the one, sometimes the other, but most frequently both, may be
the Theater of this unlucky Tragedy.

It was not unadvisedly that I preferred the word Exagitation or Commotion to
that of Fermentation: For by this means I not only evite all these Debates and
Altercations, which I have observed betwixt Willis, Bontekoe, and others. But
also I am fully convinced, that Fermentation properly taken, is very
improperly, either in a Natural or Praeternatural State. adscribed to the
Blood. For to let alone many other Reasons, reiterate Experience has taught
me, that no ardent or sulphurous Spirit, can be distilled from the Blood of
feverish persons: Which nevertheless the same Authors tell us, should always be
obtained from fermented Liquors. However if these Learned Men who delight in
the word Fermentation, understand only an extraordinary Commotion, Ebulition,
etc. I assent to what they say, and think as they write, never loving to
contest about Words (my Humor being most averse to Disputes and Debates) when
we can agree in Things.

Some there be, and these none of the Unlearnedst, as particularly that
excellent Anatomist and Physician, Barbette, who maintain the Essence of a
Fever to consist solely in the circular Motion augmented, But besides some
Arguments to be had from Barbette himself: Not only the slowness of the Pulse
in the beginning of all Fevers, and through the whole Course of malign ones:
But also the very nature of a Fluid Body, consisting in the perpetual intestine
Motion of its Minute or small Particles (which clearly appears by the
dissolution of Sugar, Salt, etc. in any Menstruum, the gathering together of
the dissolved Particles of Silver to the injected Copper, besides several other
Experiments, to be met with in the immortal Boil his History of Fluid: and
Firm, (does sufficiently, in my Opinion, overturn this ingenious Hypothesis.
Howbeit, I shall adventure to say, that the intestine Motion of the Blood being
troubled) with its Circulation sometimes diminished, but oftener augmented, does
constitute that Disease which is known to the Vulgar, by the Name of a Fever.

From this Exagitation or Commotion, it will be no hard matter, to derive all
the other Symptoms which in different Subjects do differently invade: Yea,
which is no small Argument to confirm the Truth of what I have said, with this
Exagitation they ordinarily increase and remit. I do not incline to treat of
them all, therefore shall only take notice, as the most frequent and principal
of the following Four.

And to begin with Heat, in which the Ancients either sought the Pathognomonick
Sign, or placed the Essence of a Fever (for betwixt these two there is no small
difference, which were easy to show, if my intended Brevity did not forbid me)
it especially deserves our Consideration. The Opinion of the Schools placing
the Formality of Fevers in Heat, albeit it prevailed long with Physicians, yet
at length it was exploded by Helmont, Sylvius, and other: And that (1) Because
in the beginning of Fevers, which by all is acklowledged as one of their parts,
Cold creats greater trouble as Heat, Yea (2) some malign Fevers there be, in
which the Patients are never heard to complain of Heat, but rather at sometimes
do tremble with extreme Cold. Nevertheless by admitting a distinction betwixt
the Beginning and Status of Fevers, and betwixt Internal and Suppressed, and
External and Manifest Heat, I had far rather grant to the Ancients that the
Formality of a Fever consists in Heat, as say with D. Brown, that Heat is the
genuine Effect of slow Motion in the Blood. Whether it be the sublimity of his
Discourse, or my shallow Capacity, I shall not rashly determine But forced I am
to confess. that I can hardly understand what he there intends, only by the
Title of the 8.. p. 111. I find he resolves to prove Heat to be the genuine
Effect of slow Motion in the Blood: The contrary of which I have ever been
taught, and shall here endeavor to evince.

And First, I would have it observed, that the intestine Motion of any Fluid,
or Body whatsomever, deserves as well the denomination of Motion, as the
progressive does; yea the Doctor himself, in the end of the Section, by his
Instance of the Breath and Hand, seems also to acknowledge it: And if I thought
he doubted thereof, I could send him to Cooks, to behold their boiling Liquors,
not now to mention the Experiments afforded us by the Incomparable Boil in his
Mechanical production of Heat. Now consequently Heat cannot be the Effect of
slow Motion absolutely spoken, since the Intestine, which is most properly so
called, is with it and in it exceedingly intended. The Doctor ought at least to
have distinguished betwixt the Two, and not to have attributed indefinitly to
both, that which Experience denies properly to any of them, and he himself, as
I noted before, to one.

Secondly, The Cause why by swift progressive Motion the Heat is abated, as I
think, is not because that Motion is intended, but rather that the determinate
Intestine Motion, Sursum deorsum and ad utraque latera, is thereby diminished,
or at least not proportionably therewith augmented: So that if the Intestine,
can be conform to the Local, as you shall intend the progressive Motion,
proportionably you shall increase the Heat.

Thirdly, I cannot enough admire, how the Doctor comes to assert, that Heat is
the genuine Effect of gross Blood, since, with all others, he himself will
acknowledge Heat to be produced with intestine Motion: For sure I am the more
gross and thick any Body is, the more unfit it is for Motion whatsomever, and
consequently rendered the more innept to procure Heat. This is a thing so
clearly demonstrat by Philosophers, that it were but a consuming of time, to
insist in its probation, and had it come from some old Peripatetick I could
easily have pardoned it, but in the Doctor who pretends so much Skill to the
New and Experimental Philosophy, I can hardly forgive it. Nay I have a greater
esteem of our Author's Knowledge, than to think him ignorant of this common and
perpetual Truth: But the matter is, his false and precarious Hypothesis does
necessarly extort it: For grant one Absurdity a hundred will follow.

More excusable had he been to have said. That crassness of Blood was the
native product of Heat, although that be but also accidental. For whatsomever
causes Heat in the Body v. g. volatile Salts, the Sun, Commotions of the Body
and Mind, do all of them immediately and necessarly bring along with them
Thinness of the Blood, and only accidentally Crassness, viz. By accelerating
its Motion they do augment Transpiration, by which the thinner Particles are
exhaled, and the remainder consequently turns thicker, and so much the thicker,
so much the unfiter to produce Heat. Hereby it is clearly evinced how falsely
the Doctor philosophizeth; when he would persuade us that Crassness of the
Blood is the Cause of Heat: When on the contrary it is rather the Effect, and
that but accidentally too: For whoever can stop or impede the Consumption of
the thinner Particles in Transpiration, shall also prevent the Thickness of the
Blood, notwithstanding its Heat.

Fourthly, So far is it from being true what the Doctor averrs, P. 111. that
Heat is caused by the Attrition the Muscles make on themselves and the adjacent
Parts; that the Doctor, nor none for him, shall ever by rubbing or Attrition,
procure Heat to a sphacelat Member: Where nevertheless there be Muscles and
Bones both, but wants Blood and Spirits.

Yea Fifthly, I humbly think that not only Motion, but the Motion of
Determinat, Sulphurous, Oily, etc. Particles, is requisite to excite Heat.
Which in my Judgment may hence be proven: That not only Sulphurous Bodies are
most ready to contract Heat, Flame, etc. and according as there is more or less
Sulphur in the Body, so the Heat will be the greater, lesser or none at all;
but also the intestine and confused Motion of the Minute Particles, may
sometimes be intended without the increase of Heat, yea with the production of
a sensible degree of Cold to the very same Hand, as may be learned from Boil
in his Mech. Orig. of Heat and Cold: I being at the time removed from my Books,
can neither Instance the Experiment nor Page, but sure I am severals are there
to be found, And here by the by, I would seriously advise to the uniting of
these Two, (viz. The New Philosophy and Chemistry) which to the great prejudice
of solid Learning, have too long been unluckily separat: For the former being
mainly taken up about Motion, has almost entirely neglected the Matter: While
the latter on the other hand, being as much concerned with the Matter, have
wholly over-looked the Motion.

What is said I think may suffice to evert our Author's Position: When in his
8.. he engages to prove Heat in Fevers to be the genuine Effect of slow Motion
in the Blood. It being rather produced, while the Motion thereof, especially
Intestine, is intended, and the sulphurous Particles do move, as it were, from
the Center to the Circumference.

I proceed to the Second and ordinary Symptom of Fevers, vix. A frequent and
hard beating Pulse, which the experienced Slyvius, to whom the Hypothesis of
the Ancients was unsatisfying, made enter the Definition of Fevers, as the
Genus. Nevertheless this his Opinion is liable to the same Censures with the
former. For neither the beginning of Fevers have still the Pulse augmented, nor
yet can we always call it a Fever where it is accelerate: As in congrumate
Blood, Commotions of the Mind, Worms contained in the Heart, etc. is easily
demonstrable Moreover, by the by, I cannot but observe, that these further
Discoveries made in Anatomy about the Bile, Succus Paner, etc. do noways
destroy this Hypothesis, which are nevertheless given by the Doctor as the only
Reasons why he rejects it: For it can very well stand without that prope, and
has been, and still is maintained by these, who never adopted his Triumverat.
The Cause of this frequency of the Pulse, I take to be nothing else, as the
frequent and violent Contraiction of the Heart, by which the contained Blood is
squeezed out, and so distendeth the Arteries.

Thirdly, It is also to be noticed, that Cold is not only a Symptom of all
Intermittent Fevers: But frequently also it is observable in the beginning of
Continual Ones. Which Cold, any person acquaint with the experimental
Philosophy, the Doctor pretends to be so much versed in will think to be a more
native product of the slowness of the Blood's Motion, as Heat. In a word, the
Coldness of the Members in persons troubled with Sounding, where the Motion of
the Blood, as well Circular as Intestine, together with the Pulse, is sensibly
diminished, does abundantly prove it.

The Fourth and last of these Symptoms I purpose to speak of is a change in the
Urine, (and it admits of the same Exceptions with the former, as to malign
Fevers) which in respect of their Consistence, generally turn thicker, seldom
thinner: As to their Color the Natural or Citrin is often turned red and
fiery, and sometimes pale and watery, but especially in the beginning these are
remarkable, while in the Progress and Status they appear still red and thick.
In rendering Causes for these Phenomenon, I noways incline to follow them, who
run instantly to Acids and Alkalies. Albeit I readily grant this Hypothesis to
be of pretty large extent, and conveniently applicable to several Cases; yet I
cannot in all acquiesce in their Sentence, for Reasons, perhaps to be
afterward rendered.

I shall suppose now with the Excellent Bohn and Experience: That the elemental
parts of Urine are Water, Salt, Sulphur, and Earth. So that the Urine whose
watery and limpid portion is most saturate with these Saline and Sulphurous
Particles, is always observed the thickest and crassest: Hence I conclude the
cause of thick and turbid Urine, to consist in the confused Admistion, and
unequal Dissolution of the solid Particles in the aqueous Vehicle. So sometimes
we observe the Urine to be clear when voided, and afterward to turn thick,
crass and turbide: Which is commonly called, Vrina turbata. And, in my Opinion,
arises hence: That these saline and earthy Particles being more closly and
naturally insinuate, in the Pores of the watery part when first voided, do
permit the Rays of the Sun to penetrat, and so it appears Diaphanous: But if
afterward either by their own gravity and looser Cohesion, or by the
constriction and straitning of the Pores of the Serum, by the ambient frigid
Air, they chance to be turned out, the passage to the Rays is thereby
intercepted, and the Urine turns turbide and opack, as I formerly said. Again
it is sometimes evacuate turbide, and persisteth in that confused condition,
whence it is named, Vrina confusa, and this is ordinary in the Increment and
Status of Fevers: Perhaps, there being many Heterogeneous and Terreous
Particles, unequally mixed with the watery portion, which nevertheless are so
firmly adjoined to the Serum, all being yet in a state of Crudity, that neither
by their proper weight, nor by the help of the external Ambient, can they be
thence separate. And Thirdly, the same Urine is sometimes, especially in the
end of the Status and beginning of the Declination emitted Thick and Turbide,
but does shortly after become Clear and Limpide: Probably the Concoction being
then approaching, these Heterogeneous Minima, which being kept in motion in the
Body, did still run up and down the containing Liquor, whereby if seemed
confused, do now being voided and acquiring rest, yea some two or three, or
more of them joining together, become heavier inspecie as the Serum, and
consequently, of necessity must seek to the bottom, where they constitute the
Sediment: But if they Hang in the middle, they are called Suspensio, and if they
swime above, go under the name of Nubecula:

Upon the other hand, that Urine, which should ordinarily represent and a Ly
midway boiled, does sometimes turn thinner, and this especially in the
beginning of acute Fevers is observable. For the explaining of which, it will
not be impertinent, to distinguish betwixt Vrinam potus, and Vrinam Sanguinis,
for the Urine of the Drink, being never digested in the Ventricle, nor
assimilate to the Blood in the Veslels, passes the Reins without all
alteration. But the cause of this thin consistence in the Urine, as we speak of
the Blood, may be a twofold Crudity: First, That in the Stomach, where the
Aliments being frustrate of their due, Digestion, cannot supply the Serum with
its ordinary Salts. And the second is that in the Reins, whose Tubult being
thereby obstructed, admit only the thin and Watery, excluding the gross and
terreous particles.

The Citrine or natural Color of the Urine, as it depends in a natural state
(which I think none will deny) from the saline and sulphurous Particle of the
Chyle, in the different Digestions extracted, and more intimatly therewith
commixed: So from the greater or lesser quantity of these Minima admixed in a
praeternatural state, their Color is sometimes highned, sometimes darkened:
However I never intend to exclude other Causes, such as congrumate Blood, the
use of Rhubarb etc. And this shall suffice for the Changes of the Urine, upon
which I have insisted the longer, because they are wholly neglected in the
Vindicatory Schedule, suppose of all others they give us the greatest Light,
both as to the Prognostics and Cures of Fevers. Neither was this Omission of
the Doctors altogether without reason, for not only the Signs of Crudity and
Coction, which ever have, and still will be observed by Learned Physicians in
Fevers, and by which the New Method is entirely destroyed, from them, and them
only are to be had; but also few or none of the Moderns, from whom the Doctor
might expect help, have write any thing tollerably of them.

Having briefly handled some few of these Symptoms, with which a Fever is
ordinarily attended, I come next to enquire after the antecedent Causes, which
may, and ordinarily do produce this Exagitation or Commotion, in which I have
been laboring to prove the continent Cause of Fevers to consist. And these I
think, for the most part (never intending to exclude all others) will be found
the following Four. viz. Obstruction, too violent Motion, Natural Evacuation
suppressed, and especially Crua^ties transferred into the Mass of Blood.

By Obstructions I would have nothing else understood, as the Coagulation of
that limpid and serous Humor, which being secerned in the Subcutaneous or
Miliar Glands, is excerned through the Pores of the the whole Habit, and that
in no small plenty, under the Name of Insensible Transpiration. Which Excrement
being condensed and coagulate by the cold ambient Air, or any other Cause, does
interrupt, not only the further Transpiration: But also disturbs the whole
Circulation in the capillary Vessels, or rather muscular Fibers. By which means
the Motion of the subsequent Blood being intercepted, the Fibers of the
Muscles, as well as these of the Vessels are irritate, and thereby urged into
frequent and irregular (not unlike to Convulsions) Contractions, by which both
the circular and intestine Motions of the Blood are notably intended, and that
which we call a Fever produced. It being enough here, for brevities sake, to
suppose from Pathologie, that the Motion of Fluids is augmented, either by the
Movent, Mobile, or Canals. And this account seems to me, and I hope will also
to others, far more reasonable, than with the Learned Author of the V. S. P.
106. and seq. to attribute Sense and Reason to gross and stupid Matter.
Concerning Obstructions more may perhaps be found hereafter, when I come to
consider our Author's New and Mechanical Hypothesis: For of all other Causes I
look upon them as the most seldom,

It is easy to gather, from what is immediately said, that these Anastomoses or
Inosculations of the Arteries and Veins. which with the Ancients, some of the
Learned Moderns do admire as very convenient, if not absolutely necessary, for
the Explication of the animal Functions, are not by me admitted, I desire to
move a Debate to no Man, therefore shall suffer them to abound in their own
Sense who embrace them, providing they will only allow me to give some Reasons
why I reject them: Without which I never have (neither I think ever shall)
adopted or repudiat any Opinion, because it was defended by this, or impugned
by the other Man. And to let alone Secretion and Nutrition, which to me, these
Inosculations being granted, seem altogether unexplicable: There be two
Experiments to be found in some place of the Learned Bohn his Cire Anat. (I not
having the Book by me cannot design the Page, but sure I am of them. having
oftener as once seen them tried) which do clearly evince the Bloods
Extravasation. As First, Inject with a Siphon tepid water into an Artery, v.
g. of the Arm, of any subject whatsomever, a knot being cast upon its fellow
Vein: The Water will never run out at the wounded Vein (it being lanced betwixt
the Ligature and the Artery) till the whole Arm and Hand be exceedingly
distended: i. e. The Pores of the Muscles be all replenished. Secondly,
Injection being made of melted Wax into an Artery, as also of the same, but of
another color, into its neighbor Vein: They will be found to have penetrate
to the extremities of both the capillary Vessels (but especially in the
Arteries, the Valves hindering much in the Veins) but we shall never discern any
intermediate Canal, communicating with both.

The grand, yea only Objection, formed against this Opinion, is, That this
Extravasation being admitted, a continual Hemorhagie must of necessity follow,
and that the Blood would rather diffuse it self through the Flesh, as enter the
small capillary Veins. This Objection indeed appears to be plausible, and to
create some difficulty: But yet there is nothing in it what serious and after
reflection will not easily remove, which were no hard matter to show, if my
design and leisure did not hinder me now. I shall at this time only desire the
Objectors to consider and say, whether or not there be any difficulty in the
Extravasation of the Blood, which is not in each of the following Three
Observations I offer to their consideration. The First of which is, That
ordinary way of separating Waters from Oils, commonly called, Filtratio per
Elychnium, where the Water or Oil, any of them in which the Cotton is dipped,
will by means of the Wool be carried from one Glass to another, without the
loss of so much as a drop: And why pray may not the Blood be carried the very
same way by the fleshy Fibers from one. Vessel to another, especially since the
Tonick Motion of the Parts, and influx of the Artereal Blood do help much:
Whereas the Experiment with the Oil, has no other Assistant, than the gravity
of the Air. Secondly, That Experiment first tried by Burnerus de Paner. and
afterward succeeding to others, as also to my self, does, in my weak
Judgment, not a little confirm what I am saying: And it is this, Blow with a
Tub into the Weazand of a Goose, whose Intestine being tied nothing can
descend, the Flatus will enter the open Extremities of the Mesaraick Veins, and
tend to the vena porta. From which Experiment, without any constraint, the
following Conclusion I think may be drawn: That the capillary Veins may be
open, and yet no Hemorhagie or Effusion of Blood will follow. Thirdly, This is
further made probable per purgationem menctruam, where no doubt the capillary
Vessels, by which that Excretion does happen, are always patent. There being
none, I think, who will affirm, that they, being otherways closed, should at
the due and set time get open. If that were objected, I know no other cause
that could, with the least appearance of Reason, be assigned for their so
doing, save the Blood it self, which being yielded, it could hardly be refused,
that whatever gave the Cause the first being, would beyond all question still
endeavor its perpetuation, from whence there must of necessiry arise a
continual Hemorhagie, the contrary whereof is nevertheless daily experienced,
What needs more, these Anastomoses are repuggnant to Reason, and they yet never
appeared to the Senses,

The Second of the antecedent Causes, I alleged to be too violent Motions of
the Body, I may perhaps also add these of the Mind. It were needless to produce
Observations, for proving this my Assertion, there being abundance to be had
from the general Collectors, I mean Forest, Schenkins, Hildanus, and others. I
shall rather explain the ways by which they seem to produce their Effects:
Which may be the following Two. First, By attenuating the Blood, and
accelerating its Motion, as well Circular as Intestine: Which is done either by
rarefying it self, or by opening the Pores, and admitting calorifick Atoms.
Though this last chances very rarely, for it rather happens that the Pores
being dilated, cold Particles get entry, by which these Obstructions formerly
mentioned are procured: And this, I think, may be the other way too violent
Motions work in exciting a Fever,

In the Third place, ordinary Evacuations suppressed come under our
Consideration, whose concurrence, I expect, by none will be denied: Seeing that
not only Blood-letting prevents, yea sometimes Cures Continual Fevers; but also
Nature it self does frequently endeavor, and sometimes obtain its own Relief,
by bleeding at the Nose and elsewhere. But this, as a thing conceded by all, I
shall leave, and rather consider the Description afforded us by our Author, of
insensible Transpiration, (it being of all most frequently suppressed) in which
he shows nothing of that knowledge and exactness, that might reasonably be
expected from an Author of a New Method.

It Is needless to mention how impertinently and prolixly he insists not only
upon the Invention, Utility, and Greatness of this Secretion: But he must needs
discourse also of Chylification, Respiration, and fixed Salts, (how skilfully
shall be afterward shown) all which are transcribed from Sanctorius, Majou,
Etmuller, etc. and for any thing I can see, upon no other Design, save to
enlarge the bulk of his Book: For all that can any ways concern Fevers in that
large 9.. consisting of 14 Pages, may be easily contained in seven Lines. Yea
surely it must argue no small Folly in a Man, to bring in such stuff as neither
the subject requires, nor he himself understands.

First, How he makes the Air the principal efficient of Transpiration, I cannot
understand, for to any considering Man it is evident, that the Ambient, by its
Gravity and Elasticity, will rather impede as promove it. But that I may show
him all the Favor I can, I suppose it is rather that, which according to him,
is mixed with the Blood in Inspiration, he here intends: Yet in the mean time
it is no small Debate, whether the Air be mixed with the Blood in Respiration
or not? as he may see in Harvey de Circ. San. Higemore Disq. Anat. Needham de
Form. Fort. etc. And really it must be confessed, there want not Reasons on
both sides. However grant it were so, none who has the least knowledge in
Physiology, will call it the efficient Cause of Transpiration: That being
acknowledged by all, to be nothing else, as the circular Motion of the Blood,
which nevertheless noways depends upon Respiration, as Maurocordatus would have
it. The Doctor may make the Experiment in himself, it being in his power, to
stop his Breathing, though not the Bloods Circulation. Ay there is no School
Boy in the Kingdom but knows, that by Running the Circulation is accelerate, the
Pulse augmented, and insensible Transpiration intended to Sweat.

Secondly, By what Figure our Author comes to call that no natural Excretion in
the 128 Page, which in the 119, he says, and that truly, does twice exceed all
other Evacuations whatsomever, perhaps he himself hardly does know: Unless it
be for the Reason immediately after Page 128 subjoined, viz. That Sweat is only
profitable in so far as it shuns a greater Evil, was ever such Reasoning heard?
For what pray are all other Evacuations natural! or are any whatsomever
natural. Nay, really by this New Method of Reasoning they are not.

Thirdly, Who will ever believe, that insensible Transpiration suppressed,
condenseth and thickneth the Blood, while in the mean time, except what goes to
the Spirits, its thinnest and subtilest Portion is thereby retained, and so by
its abode does rather render it thin and aqueous, than crass and viscid. Yea
all Practitioners whatsomever advise Sweating as a fit and proper Expedient to
render the Blood thick, and consequently its suppression (insensible
Transpiration and Sweating differing only secundum majus and minus) must have
the contrary effect in making it thin, Will the Doctor answer. These condensed
Particles being absorbed and carried back, do of necessity render the other
more viscid. But to this I reply, These by their being suppressed, do not only
impede the Excretion of Twenty times as many thinner and watery ones, and
thereby abundantly compense their own thickness; but also it will appear no
great Paradox to say, that these crass and absorbed ones, are by the far
greater quantity of the Blood and its continual Motion, reduced to their former
and limpid condition. By all which it is clear, that insensible Transpiration
suppressed, rather attenuates as thickens the Blood, contrary to the mind of
the Author of the V. S. P. 126. And hence I conclude, that all or most part,
the stoping of insensible Transpiration does in procuring Fevers, is only, by
creating Obstructions, and so disturbing the Blood in its Motion.

The Last, and by far the most frequent, of the Four named antecedent Causes of
Fevers, viz. Crudities conveyed into the Mass of the Blood, do as yet remain.
To insist in proving of this, which is universally acknowledged, were a mere
consumption of Time and Paper. Yea, from hence it is, that the generality of
the Moderns have persuaded themselves, that the Formality of a Fever consisted
in a Fermentation: Conceiving this Heterogeneous Body under the Notion of a
Ferment, which, when it could not be assimilate to the Mass of Blood, did
therein raise an Effervessence. I gave my Reasons before, why I could not fight
under their Banner, who delight in the Terms of Ferment and Fermentation,
therefore shall not repeat them here.

I think then, in few words, a Fever may not be ineptly conceived, as a
Wrestling or Struggling betwixt Nature and what is Heterogeneous thereto, under
which it does either succumb or expel whatever is offensive and injurious to it.

There are Two Things here to be noticed ere I further proceed: First, When I
speak of Crudities transferred to the Blood, I understand not only Crudities
proceeding from the first ways (though I easily grant these to be the most
ordinary, which may be inferred not only from the great efficacy we find in
Emeticks in the Cure of Continual as well as Intermittent Fevers; but also from
the great Hurt daily observed in them both, by Errors committed in the first
Digestion) but admits also morbisick Atoms or Effluvia, which may enter either
by the Pores or Respiration, from the ambient Air: As likeways Raments from
Ulcerous, Scirrous and Gypseous (pardon these uncouth Terms, for I can give
none more plain) Viscera.

Secondly, I must own my dissent from these, otherways Learned Men, who are
pleased to call this Ferment, as they speak, always Acide. For as I could never
forgive them, who endeavor to build all upon no surer Fundation, as an Acid
and Alcali; so I can hardly either pardon these, who trouble us so much with
them in Physic. And that for many Reasons, (without which I Will deny no Man's
Hypothesis) but especially the following Three. 1. Their Expeperiments and
Arguments prove noways what they are brought for. 2. In their Explication of
both Acid and Alcali, they are still very obscure, and could never satisfy me,
yea I believe hardly themselves. And 3. A great many Phenomenon, ex. gr.
Gravity, Levity, Colors, etc. Are by them unaccountable.

But besides these Reasons against the Hypothesis in general, I shall endeavor
to obviate the Arguments produced for it here in particular. The chief of which
I take to be the following Two: First, According to the different degree and
increase of the Fever, the Urine is also observed to intend and heighten its
Color, and that not unlike to those who are impregnat with Acids, v. g.
Vinegar, Spirit of Salt, etc. To which I answer, by granting the whole, though
not always, yet frequently to be so; as also that it may perhaps be, that this
Ferment may sometimes prove Acide: Yet that this change of Color is always,
and only the Effects of Acids, I positively deny, seeing by Saline and
Sulphurous Agents the same may be wrought, and daily is in statu sano, in
which, nevertheless no Acid has ever yet been obse^ved. In a word, they commit
that general Error in Physic, as well as in Philosophy, of forming from
particular Experiments general Hypotheses. So observing Acids and Alcalies to
Ferment, they have laid it down as an universal Axiom, that wherever
Fermentation is found, there must of necessity an Acid and Alcalie exist; while
yet succeeding Experiments inform us, that very high Acids. v. g. Oil of
Vitriol, Butter of Antimony, besides many others, which can be instanced by
such as are aquaint with Chemistry, will effervesce together.

Their other Argument, which is of the same force, is taken from the great and
good Effect of Salts, (Salia salsa I mean, which are composed of Acids and
Alcalies, and constitute a Third very different from both) Testaceous and
Alcalick Powders in Curing of Fevers: Which being contrary to Acids, makes them
conclude (dum contraria contrarus curantur) the morbifick Cause to be always
sour: To this it may be replied, That they fall into the same Fault, which was
reprehended in the former: viz. Of drawing universal Conclusions from
particular Premises. For I can safely say, that Acids themselves, v. g. Spir.
salis, Elyxir Vitrioli Mynsichti, etc. are frequently, and that not without
desirable success employed in Fevers.

It were very easy yet further to move a great many Arguments against this
Hypothesis: Such as an artificial Fever excited by the Inunction of the Oil of
Beetls, Fevers not unfrequently owing their arise to Fear, Anger, etc. but I
suppose it needless. Having already insisted longer on this as I designed, I
proceed to the Division, after I have told, what every person, at least
Physician, knows, that the Procatartick Causes, which give occasion to the
Antecedent, and set them a working, be the sex res non naturales.

I shall neither trouble my self nor my Reader, with that infinite Division of
Fevers, to be had in Sylvius and others, thinking it enough to consider the
following Four, under which all others may be easily comprehended.

And First, They are divisible into Continual and Intermittent: Which Continual
may again be divided into these called Continentes, which from the beginning to
the end, without all exacerbation, observe the same Schem: And into these
called Continuas, which never leave the Body without a Fever, but yet have
Exacerbations, sometimes once a day, and then they are called, Continuae
Quotidianae, sometimes once in two days, when they go under the Name of
Continuae Tertianae, etc. And to me they appear nothing else, as a Continent
and Intermittent Fever joined together. Secondly, Fevers are divided into
Benign and Malign. Thirdly, Into Acute and Lent. And Fourthly, Into Primary and
Secundary or Symptomatick.

All that has already been said is concerning Continual Fevers, and applicable
to them: So I proceed to consider these called Intermittent, which have created
as great Trouble to Physicians in this Age, in assigning them a true and
congrous Cause, as they did to these in the former, in finding a proper and
successful Cure. I cannot now stay to cribrate the various Sentiments of
different Authors, but shall propose what to me seems most probable, which in
few words is this: Every Paroxism of an Intermittent Fever, is Analogous to an
entire Continual one, and has its arise from Crudities carried through the
first Ways and Vasa lactea into the Mass of Blood, in which, they being thereto
hardly assimilable, raise and excite these Tumults before described. And do now
constitute a Quotidian, now a Tertian, now a Quartan, etc. at one time an
Erratick, at another time a Periodical Fever. First, Because of the Matter,
which is now more copious, now more scant, now crasser, and thicker, now
thinner and fluider, in one person at certain, in another person at uncertain
times, thither transferred. Secondly, Because of the diversity of the subject,
the Blood of one being easilier set a working as that of another. In a word,
when ever there comes so much Matter to the Blood, as can raise a struggling
therein, a Paroxism is produced. But after all, I think no shame to confess,
that there occurrs to me somewhat here which seems unaccountable, and therefore
I shall never obtrude upon others, what I do not enough understand my self.

Benign Fevers are these called Continual, but not accompanied with these
horrid Symptoms, which being present, do give them the Name of Malign. And such
are great Anxieties, Inquietude, sudden Prostration of the Strength, Spots,
cold Sweats, Tumors about the Glands, called Parotides, etc. In enquiring after
the Cause of these Malign Fevers, I can find nothing save obscurity in the
different Opinions of Authors: While some, with Willis, fancy to themselves a
great Coagulation of the Blood: Again others who follow Sylvius, strive as much
for a lixivious and urinous Acrimony of the same. De la Font pleads hard for an
Arsenical and Corrosive Poison inspired with the Air. For me, in such
ambiguity, I willingly profess my Ignorance: But still enclines to look upon
their Cause as always Epidemick, coming either from the Air, Meat or Drink: And
whenever it effects, seazeth especially upon the Head; we ordinarily observing
Symptoms of the Brain to insult, whilst Pulse and Urine suffer small or no
change. And hence I suppose is the Proverb, Good Pulse, good Urine, and the
Patient Dies.

Acute Fevers are such, as terminate against the 9, 14, 20, or 21. day: But
continuing no longer as the 7, they are called Peracute: Yea, sometimes they
Kill in the Third and Fourth Day, and so get the Name, (and that deservedly) of
Peracutissimae: While these, who extend themselves to the 40 day, are termed
Acutae ex Decidentia. And all that exceed this Term whether Fevers or other
Distempers, have obtained the general Denomination of Lent or Chronick
Diseases. It is certainly beyond all question, that this Diversity arises from
the weakness or strongness of the morbifick Matter, which in Lent Diseases, at
the beginning, brings little or no alteration to the Humane Body, but through
process of time, partly by defatigating the Body, partly by rendering more of
the Blood like unto it self, proves exitial to the Patient: Which is too
frequently seen in a Hectic, it being of all Lent Fevers the most formidable.

Lastly, Fevers were divided into Primary and Secundary or Symptomatick. The
first are such as have their Cause within themselves, and own their Being to no
other Disease, as do the others called Secundary or Symptomatick. Which be
sometimes excited by pain, as in the Gout, Gravel, etc. sometimes they
accompany Wounds, Inflammations, Ulcers, and many other Maladies: By all which
the Motion of the Blood, as well Circular as Intestine may be augmented, and
that which we call a Fever produced.

In the Page 185 of the V. S. the Doctor's Exactness, and great Skill in
Physic is very conspicous: For there he asserts Fevers and Tumors (I suppose
he means Inflammations, Tumors being of a large extent) to be perpetual
Companions: So that according to his Pathology, the one cannot exist without
the other. Whereas all the World knows, yea daily finds it, that Fevers can
exist without his Tumors, yea not one of ten Thousand, without all Hyperbole,
has them. True it is indeed, that Inflammations are ordinarily (yet not always)
followed by Fevers, and they are among the number of these I called Secondary
or Symptomatick.

Many Things appertaining to Fevers and their Theory: as Symptoms,
Prognostics, etc. do as yet remain. But I being far from presuming to give a
particular Account or Description of that Disease, knowing it to be a Load too
heavy for my young and tender Shoulders, finds my self nowayes obliged to
mention them here: My purpose being only to give a general, and for what
appears to me, the easiest and best Description of the Malady, into whose
Method of Curing I resolve to inquire. Neither will I labor (it being more my
desire to do well my self, than to discover that others have done ill) in
refuting the Opinions of others, as the Doctor does, though with Arguments I
confess. sometimes against, but as often for them.

Yet I must pass some Reflections upon the Doctor's New and Mechanical
Hypothesis, left my passing it by should offend its Author. And to speak
ingenuously, his description of the Disease is as obscure, as his Method of
Curing is dangerous. Have then the Scheme of the New and Mechanical Hypothesis
in the Author's own words, P. 104. Seeing then (for the five Pages which go
before, contain only the Fundation, though very unproportionable to the Noble
Building afterward erected in little more as one) the returns of Repararation
to the parts and functions ought to be made, both in time and quantity in
proportion to the waste, by the efflux of the arterial Blood from the Heart as
the Vehicle, and through the Arteries, as the Conduites of these Recruites: When
this is done Vegetly, Integrally, without any stop or delay, then redounds
Felicity Ease, and Integrity, of the Functions and Life: But when that Efflux
is retarded or stopped, either by reason of the Blood it self, or some stopage in
the Extremities and small Channels of the Vessels; or by reason of immoderate
and unusual waste, beyond the proportion of the ordinary supply, (as falls out
in immoderate Exercise and Motion) And, so I say, when by reason of any of
these Causes, the Heart cannot convey and lay in the desired Supplement in due
proportion and timously, by Strokes repeated at the usual Intervals, then it
does, by precipitating the Strokes, and straitning the Intervals of the
Pulsations, endeavor, what in it lies, to overcome the slowness of the Motion
of the Blood, and to come so near as it can to the due and proportionable
distribution of Nutriment, in respect of the waste: But if, notwithstanding of
these sedulous Endeavors of the Heart by redoubling of the Pulsations, that
slowness of the Blood, shall by a gradual increase of the thickness, and of
Obstructions in the Capillary Vessels, prove yet so obstinate as still to be
augmented, then this leads straight to the Porch and Gate of Death; Death being
nothing else but a total and permanent Cessation, and defect of this
distribution.

Behold the Description of a Disease, and it never once named! Is this Doctor
because it is so clear, that who runs may read it? surely then my Capacity is
very shallow: For had not the Title of that 7. Sect. promised a New and
Mechanical Hypothesis, I should from this Description never have inferred it,
and had not the very next Paragraph proposed an Objection, I should further
have looked back for it. Yea I believe it would puzle your self, were it not
for these Marks, to find it. For my part, I see nothing here described save
Death, and that perhaps not undeservedly, for by means of the New Method Death
and Fevers are become Synonima, and so the one with you, may safely go for the
other. But Thanks be to God, it is otherways with us, who walk in the Good, Old
and Experienced Path, where it becomes but sometimes a passage unto it.

But why, pray, a New Hypothefis? it being as old as since Bontekoe write de
Febribus. It is indeed very hard to know that Author's proper Opinion, he being
more taken up in refuting others, as in explaining himself: And what he has
said is so harsh and obscure, that he can scarcely be understood, yet, if I be
not deceived, he endeavors to evince a thickness of Blood in Continual Fevers.

Leaving this I go to things more serious, where it seems to me not improbable,
that one of the fundamental Errors into which the Doctor himself has slipped,
is that which I have noticed before, viz. The drawing of universal Conclusions
from particular Propositions: For by what I can learn from this Description, it
being indeed very hard, at least for me to draw any thing therefrom, he would
gladly persuade us that Obstructions and only they, are the Antecedent (and for
what I can see the Conjunct to) Cause of Fevers. The contrary of which, not
only innumerable Authors with infinite Examples have evinced: But I my self
have shown above, that there can be, and frequently are other Three, besides
many more by me over looked. This is indeed a Rock upon which many excellent Men
have split, therefore to be pardoned in our Author, and to dissuade him
therefrom, to the Observation I gave before, I shall now join other Two.

And First, There was nothing more ordinary, as upon the seeing Acids
coagulate, to assert, that wherever Coagulation happened, there must of necessity
exist an Acid: While yet after Experience did teach us, that Alcalies can
crudle Milk, and Spirit of Wine coagulate Humane Blood. In the like manner,
Practitioners having found the good success of Acids at some occasions (for
they do it not always, as Poterius observes) in quickening the Digestion,
precariously they conclude an Acid Humor the principal Agent in Chylification:
Yea, as Moebius observes, it was received with so general Applause and Consent,
that it became almost Heresy to call it in question: Albeit later Anatomists
have not only demonstrate, that Alcalies and Urinous Bodies may have the same,
yea greater Effect, but have entirely banished the famed Acid its fictitious
Office. To shut up all, it is this, that has given occasion to a great many
Errors in Physic as well as Philosophy, viz. That Phoenomena peculiar to this
or the other subject, have been generally applied to all kinds, and so from
particular Experiments and Observations, we have formed universal Hypotheses.

Secondly, I cannot conceive how Obstructions can be either so efficacious or
so frequent as the Doctor insinuates. I shall not make use of the ordinary
Objection, which nevertheless of no small force: That there can be no
Obstruction without a subsequent Tumor. However I wish the Doctor had told us,
in which of the Vessels, I mean Arteries or Veins, these Obstructions fall out.
For first it is to me unconceivable how they can be in the Arteries; seeing
nothing enters them, that has not first run through the small milky Vessels,
from thence to the Ductus Thoracicus, which empties it self in the subclavial
Vein, and that again by the Vena Cava, into the right Ventricle of the Heart,
out of which it is conveyed to the Lungs by the Pulmonal Artery, and from
thence to the Hearts left Ventricle by the Vein of the same Name, from which,
as from a Fountain, it is dispensed to the whole Body, by the great Artery and
its Branches.

All which being considered, may not I reasonably argue: That surely,
whatsomever has passed these small Lymphaticks, commonly called the milky
Vessels, and the capillary Branches of the Pulmonal Vein; will never stick in
any part of the great Artery, especially when its strong and frequent
Vibrations, do afford great assistance to this its Motion. Yea without stopping
the Course of the Blood in the whole Branch, it is altogether impossible, that
any Obstruction can happen in the minutest Artery.

The same Difficulties, if not greater, will meet us in the Veins, which are
the other kind of Vessels: For if we consider their Figure, we find it a Cone
inverted; now no Man of Sense will allege, that what has entered the small
end of a Cone, as the Blood does in the Veins, will stop in the great: Ergo,
the Doctor's Obstructions must be denied.

Several other Observations might safely be made on this Paradoxical, as he
himself, P. 109, justly calls it, Hypothesis: But I shall detain the Reader no
longer. Only I cannot omit, that in the beginning of the 8 Sect. he persuades
himself, that the rapid Circula^ion of the Blood, is wholly overturned, and yet
P. 105* where he is giving that which he would have us digest for a New Scheme
of Fevers, he boldly, and as I think, contradictorly, affirms the Heart to
redouble its Pulsations. Which how it can happen, ingenuously I, nor I suppose
none else, can conceive: Yea it is clearly repugnant to Reason and the
Circulation. Nevertheless I see by the 27 P, of Philanders second Letter, that
the Doctor will needs defend it.

What D. Black, or any who carries that Name, may have said against it, I am
wholly ignorant, these Books having never come to my Hands. But what I shall
do, shall be only this, to give a brief Account of the Hearts Motion and its
Cause, and so leave the Doctor and others to judge, how reconcilable these Two
are: For the Heart to double its Pulsations, and yet not to accelerate the
Bloods Circulation.

The Blood that enters the right and left Ventricles of the Heart from the Vena
Cava, but especially Pulmoners, does stimulate its Fibers: By which stipulation
the Animal Spirits are brought from the Brain by the Eight, or wandering pair of
Nerves, and being deposed in its lax Fibers, do contract the samen, and
straiten its Ventricles with so great a force, that whatever is contained
therein, is expelled, and thrust into the Arteries in this its Systole, by
which they are distended and acquire a Diastole: After which the same Fibers
are laxed, and these of the Auricles contracted, whereby the Blood, these
Auricles had immediately received from the Veins, is dismissed to the Heart,
which now, by the Relaxation of its Fibers, is in the Diastole: Which Blood
does a new stimulate as formerly, and so procures to the Heart a new Systole,
under which the Blood is again thrust forth into the Arteries, and occasioneth
in them a Diastole or Beating. So that the Arteries will never be distended,
except the Blood be admitted, for they can be the cause of their own Systole,
but never of their Diastole.

Now how can a Man averr, that the Heart can double its Pulsations, and yet not
render the Circulation more rapid: Seeing except it emit what Blood it had
received in its last Diastole, it can never obtain a new Systole. The Systole
being nothing, save the contraction of the Fibers, and expulsion of that Blood,
it had received in the former Diastole. In a word, it is as impossible for the
Heart to be contracted in the Systole, without expelling the contained Blood,
which must of necessity go into the Arteries and cause their Dilatation; as it
would be for the Doctor to press together the two sides of a Bladder filled
with Water, without expelling the contained Liquor.

By which brief and true Account of the Hearts Motion, it may excellently
appear, how fitly it is compared by our Learned Doctor, in the 27 P. of
Philand: second Letter, to the ascension of Water in Pumps. The true Cause of
which Phoenomenon, adscribed to the Ancients to a Fug^ vacus, being only this:
That by the retraction of the Embolus or Sucket, the place which it deserts is
left void, or at least the Air therein contained, is noways proportionable to
the external, and so not able to resist its pressure. In the mean time the Air
having no access to the Cavity of the Pump, does necessarly gravitat upon the
Water in which it stands, whereby it is forced to ascend in the Pump, in which,
by the retraction of the Sucker, it meets with no opposition, till such a
height, as is able (and beyond which it will by no means go) to keep an
Equilibrium with an equal Column of the external Air, which has the same
superfice, wherein the Pump stands for its Basis, and the Atmosphaere for its
height. In a word, there needs no more to make Water ascend in Pumps, save to
free it from the Impediment if found by the Suckers leaning upon it. How
bravely this grees with the Hearts (...)ation, Doctor Brown himself may be
Judge: However it quadrates as well as the most of his Simile's.

And now while I Am yet upon his Theory, it may be a fit time to give a Specimen
of his exactness in Anatomy, Physiologie, and Chemistry. To begin then with
Anatomy, his great Skill herein is excellently shown P. 178, where he pretends
to give a Reason, why hurtful to lie with the Head low: Which is, that then,
the grosser Blood does ascend, whereas it being higher, the more spiritous only
gets up, while the more crass seceeds at the (N. B.) Axillary branches
Excellent indeed! From whom I wonder did D. Brown learn, but that whatever
enters the Branches of Arteries, is carried foreward to their end, yea how can
it otherways be, seeing continually, by the help of their second Coat, which is
tendinous, they are constringed, and so at every place and in every moment,
give a new Impetus to the contained Blood. But yet better Anatomy, for ay till
D. Brown did write, we have been in a general Error, when we used to say, That
the subclavial Arteries, after they had demitted from themselves, three
superior Intercostals, the Mammariae Vertibrales, Cervicales and Musculae, did
go out of the Thorax or Trunck, and tend to the Artus or Arms, where they got
the new Name of Axillares But now D. Brown has discovered our Ignorance, by
showing, that they have their arise from the Carotides (otherways it were Folly
and Nonsense to say, that the grosser Blood seceeds by them, for except they
arise from the Carotides, how shall it enter them?) Had the Doctor said instead
of the Axiliars, that it seceeds to the Larynx and Pharynx, they indeed
receiving a share of that Blood, which tends to the Head; he might have
concealed his Ignorance, though not given any great proof of his Knowledge.

For so far is it from being true, what the Doctor says: That the great Artery
is not at all, according to the Ancients, divided into the Trunck ascending and
descending; but rather according to the Learned and Excellent Anatomist D.
Highmore, it is immediately upon its egrefs from the left Ventricle of the
Heart, divided into the two subclavial Branches. Nevertheless it is not all
true, what he alleges, when he affirms that from the right Subclavial both
the Carotides do arise: For frequent Experience has taught me, and no doubt
will also do any, who will be at the pains to try it, that from the right
Subclavial does only arise the right Carotis, and the left (which, to my
knowledge, was never noticed by any) comes neither from the right Subclavial,
nor yet from the left; but is a third Branch arising from the Heart it self,
and has no communication with any of the Subclavials, but far less with the
Axillary Branches. I know the Doctor has this from Des Carts, but really it
is too well known, that this great Wit and subtle Man, was none of the best
Anatomists, and perhaps it was his greatest Fault, to assert things he thought
consonant to Reason, never much careing or considering how they might be
favored by Experience, nevertheless the Doctor when citing him, should have
known to discover his Error.

Good Physiology is still the Companion of accurate Anatomy, as is also to be
seen in the Doctors New and Ingenious Hypothessis of Chylification, which P.
131. is most dexterously explained, by a Grinding and attenuating the Aliments,
their parts one against another by the contraction of the Ventricle whereby it
seems the Doctor would grate them to Chyle. But I would willingly know, if ever
he, or any Man else observed a solid Body turned into a Fluid, except it were
Ice, Butter and and such like, which have been Fluid before, by meet attrition:
When ever the Doctor affoords me one instance (for that of a Plume looks likeer
expression as Attrition) then, and never till then, I Will grant his whole
Hypothesis. Moreover for what end is all that Apparatus of Glands in the
Stomach, and why do Physicians advise the swallowing of the Spitle with large
drinking at Meat, as great helps to the digestion, if it happen by mere
Attrition: For certainly the harder any thing is, it is so much the sitter for
Grinding; or else the Authors Idea thereof, must be quite different from the
Vulgar* And really what is brought from the Ingenious Papins Digester does
rather refute as confirm, what it is brought for: The Gelly being produced, not
by the Bones mutual Attrition, but by the Waters dissolving and extracting. Yea
if I remembor right (it being now a good time since I read that Book, and not
being at Home I cannot consult it) the Ingenious Author himself calls it
Extraction, which all the World knows is quite different from Attrition.

Of the same kind is that account of Sanguification, which in the 18^ Page of
his V. S. he is pleased to communicate with us. We are indeed extremely obliged
to him, at least for his good Intentions, for laboring in a few Lines to
accomodate that Difference, which has caused almost bloody Contests for so
many Ages. I cannot enough admire the Policy of the Doctor, who prudently
(knowing most Debates to be about Words) conceals these invidious Terms of
Organical and Similar Functions, they having given occasion to no small strife:
Whilst some with the Ancients, plead hard for the former, others, after
Glisson, cry as loud for the latter. However, albeit our Author has not been
so ingenuous as to confess it, the Aetiology he gives, makes it purely
Organical, only what some adscribed to the Heart, others to the Liver, the
Doctor attributes allennerly to the Lungs. But pray, what does the Duty in the
Foetus, where during Nine Months, the Lungs lie entirely idle: For I doubt
nothing, but the Doctor knows the Foramenovale (which does not go from the Vena
Cava to the Vena Pulmonalis, as is generally affirmed, but rather terminates in
the left Auricle it self) and Canalem Arteriosum. Now I hope the Doctor will
never say, that Sanguification is the work of the Lungs, when the Blood is made
for Nine Months in the Foetus, and they never once concur. After the Doctor
has considered and soundly answered this Objection, if I can raise no other
against it, I shall adopt his New Hypothesis. But till such time, I expect
he will not be offended, if I shall assert Sanguification to be a Function partly
Organical, and partly Similar. i. e. in the Liver, Reins, Pancreas, etc. Such
Particles as could not turn into Blood, are deposed, and so its Organical: Also
by the continual Motion thereof, the sulphurous and nobler Particles of the
Chyle, are assimilate to the Blood, for which it is called Similar.

Yet I am so ingenuous as to grant to the Doctor, that Sanguification has more
help from the Lungs (the Blood descending always more florid and brisk by the
Vena Pulmonalis, as it did ascend by the Artery) as from any other part
whatsomever: Nevertheless they concur only as an Instrument with many others,
albeit they may perhaps be the principal.

As for that Argument so much insisted on, by the Learned Glisson, it creates
me no great difficulty: For albeit I cannot but grant, ocular Inspection having
demonstrat it to me, that the Blood appears in the Embryo, before any Organ,
and so consequently cannot be made by that, which is posterior to it self. Yet
I still think, there is great difference betwixt Sanguification in the Foctus
and in an Adult Person: For in the former, it is not simple Chyle that is
converted into Blood, but that which already circulating in the Mothers Body,
has demitted its Bile in her Liver, its Urine in her Reins, etc. by which it
is disposed to turn into Blood. So that if it had not experienced already the
organical part from the Mother, the similar action in the Foetus should hardly
have produced the effect. For, which I hope none will deny, as the same Subject
may be differently affected by diverse Agents, so the same Agent will produce
diverse effects upon various Subjects.

As expert seems the Doctor to be in Chemistry, as either Anatomy or
Physiology. In all his Book there occurs nothing, that savours of that Noble
Art, save one passage from Helmont and Tackenius, which without any prejudice
to either Author or Book might have been omitted, it being beyond all debate
now, that alcalizate or fixed salts, are not formerly preexistent in any Body,
being only produced by the acting of the Fire, so cannot as the Doctor would
have it, be dissolved and extracted by the Air, before they exist. He ought
rather to have said, That the Saline (there being a great difference amongst
Salts) and Sulphurous Atoms, which by joining together, do constitute fixed
(they not being Natural but Factitious) or alcalizat Salts, while the Herbs are
a drying, exhale and fly away.

After having dwelt so long upon the Theory of Fevers, it is time to proceed to
their Method of Curing. Which indeed is the principal Thing, it being no great
Matter how wild a Man's Opinions be in Speculations, providing he do not apply
them to practice. No Man must expect here a Description of all the various
Indications, which may, and ordinarily do require Attention in a dogmatick and
methodical Cure. My design being only (as I often said) to propose the Good,
Old, Rational and Successful Method, and to vindicate it from D. Brown's
Objections: who has not himself, albeit the Author of a New One, noticed the
half, of what deserves consideration in a Rational Cure.

Which nevertheless I Will readily grant in some Epidemick Constitutions or
Seasons, and in certain Subjects, especially where the Critical Motions of
Nature happen per secissum, which is not once in a hundred times, to prove
unsuccessful. This only I would say, that it is the most frequent, and
therefore deserves the Name of the best Method: And where nothing happens about
the Patient that is singular; it ought always to be practiced.

Before I go further it will not be impertinent to lay down some general
Axioms, which being founded upon sound Reason, and frequent Experience, have
extorted Assent from, and Credit with Physicians of all Ages: Nevertheless they
are not understood, or rather not much regarded by our Learned Author.

I. Cures are threefold 1. Cura Curatoria, which respect the Continent Cause,
as in Fevers and all acute Diseases. 2. Praeservatoria, which especially
regards the Antecedent Cause; ex. gr. in a person troubled with Gout, Gravel,
etc. after the removal of the Paroxism, we Purge, Bleed, etc. to prevent the
Accession of another. And 3. Cura Paltativa, v. g. in a Patient troubled with
incontinency of Urine, which cannot be Cured, the Sphincter of the Bladder
being lacerate, we apply such an Apparatus, as Van Here in his Observations
provides for such a Strait.

II. Indications ordinarily (sometimes they be more, but they are only
particular) are Three. 1. Indicatio Curatoria, which levels at the Disease and
its Continent Cause. 2. Conservatoria, preserving the Strength, that being by
all means to be cherished. And 3. Mitigatoria, for it is principally occupied
against the urgent Symptoms: Such as Thirst, Pains, Watching, etc. which being
sometimes more troublesome as the Distemper it self, do require Attention, even
with the neglect of the primary Disease.

Some indeed there be, who have denied this any room among Indications,
alleging that the one being removed, the other will necessarly cease, Symptoms
following only the Disease, as a shadow does the Body. But to this moment, I
never heard of any, who refused an Indication to the Continent Cause and
Disease it self, as Dr. Brown in the 71 Page of the V. S. has precariously
done. Where leaving the Essence of the Disease, he prosecutes the Antecedent
cause. Can any Person that knows or has a respect for Physic and Physicians,
read or hear this, without offense? And this really is the Fountain, from which
many of his Errors do flow.

But consider Doctor, and I entreat you, as you love your Neighbors Safety and
your own Quiet do: Continual Fevers are not Intermittent, in which the
Antecedent Cause continues in the first ways, and from thence is gradually and
successively carried in to the Blood; so that whoever can take away the Fomes,
may expect in all reason, to prevent the accession of a new Paroxism, though
never hinder the present. Whereas in Continual Fevers, the whole Antecedent
Cause is Semel and Simul carried into the Blood, and excites the Fever: Which
we must especially regard, and not the Antecedent Cause, which now is not, it
being turned into the Continent. Further when the Doctor is called to a
Patient, is it to Cure the present Fever, or to prevent a future? If it be to
prevent a future, then he does well, to look to the Antecedent Cause, which
still respects the future; and so he institutes that Cure, in the first Axiom,
called Praeservatoria: But if it be to Cure the present, then Sense and Reason
require that he should level at its Continent Cause and Essence. Whereas
according to the New Method, the present Distemper is committed to Nature,
while the Doctor only labors to prevent a future Evil, which really, as I am
informed, he does sometimes very successfully, by putting them beyond all fear
of Misery, as well as Happiness, except what is Eternal.

III. The Third of our Axioms is: That Contraries are Cured by Contraries, and
the like preserved by the like. By some a Controversy is here again moved, as
if Diseases were sometimes Cured by the like. v. g. an Hemorhagie by Bleeding,
a Flux by Purging, etc. But it ought to be considered, the question is not
about the Disease and its Remedy, which may indeed sometimes prove alike: but
betwixt the Indicans and the Indicanus, or that which indicates, and that which
is in dicated, they still being oppositite: Looseness ever indicating binding,
it matters not much, by what mean it be done.

IV. Whatever is natural ought to be preserved, and that which is preternatural
must be removed.

V. Of two Evils the least is to be chosen.

VI. Critical Evacuations are wisely to be discerned from Symptomatical. The
not distinguishing of which, is a matter of great Moment, and of bad
consequence, while it brings the Physician into the greatest of difficulties
and errors, as well as the Patient into the greatest of Hazards. Out of which
nevertheless both the Physician and Patient may be easily extricate, by rightly
ponderating the following four 1. The times of the Disease are prudently to be
noticed, the Coction and Crudity of the Humors, discernable especially in the
Urin, must exactly be observed: the Evacuation which happens in the beginning
of a Distemper, with the signs of Crudity being still Symptomatick. 2. The
place where the Evacuation happens signifies much, for if it chance in a place,
whither Nature in that Malady uses to tend, other things concurring, it is
still convenient. So a loose Belly is always more suspected in a Fever as,
sweat, this being natures ordinary path in that Distemper, whereas a Flux is
still looked on as dangerous: And if there were no more as this: Natures own
Course, it is sufficient to evert the whole new Method. 3. The quality of the
Humor voided, if such as it ought, is to be noticed: And 4, Neither should the
quantity be neglected, for larger Evacuations make us still afraid.

VII. Whatever is to be evacuat, drive it to the way it most tends, according
to the 21. of the first Section of Hippocrat's Aphorisms.

VIII. Concocted, not crude Humors are to be expelled by the 22. Aphorism of
the same first Section.

IX. The Times of Diseases are precisely to be noticed, it being safe to do at
one time that, which is perfect Death at another. Which times are four the
Beginning, the Increment, the Status and Declination.

X. The vast difference betwixt Purges, is also worth the considering. Some
being so Gentle that they only evacuat the Ventricle and first ways, never
reaching the Mass of the Blood, and are ordinarily designed by Laxantia. Others
tend farther in the Body, precipitat the Serum, and properly are called Purges
or Catharticks. Which division of Purges, acknowledged and admitted by all,
Will, I hope, stand us in no small stead.

At length I come to the Method of Curing, wherein, to keep close to the
matter, according to the second Axiom, a skilful Physician proposes to
himself these three Indications. 1. To remove and expel the Disease and its
continent cause, as preternatural. 2, To preserve as much as he can, the
Strength, it being natural: And 3. To mitigat the urgent Symptoms if any such
appear. I am abundantly sensible, that there occure many other things in a
Feverish person, which require attention: But, as I said before, these are the
ordinary and general Indications, and under them most others may come,
therefore can only be treated of in a general Method*

For the Removal of the Disease and its cause, it will be convenient to
remember, what was formerly said concerning the Nature of Fevers in general:
When I asserted their Formality to consist in a preternatural Exagitation of
the Blood, being most frequently thereto excited, by Heterogeneous Atoms
transferred into it. Therefore to end vour the Removal of the Disease, is to
lay this commotion, and to expel the cause, is to banish the Body, whatever it
is that sets the Blood thus a working.

And this we labor to accomplish by several means and Medicaments, as well
Alterants as Evacuants, but concerning the last, I am now especially engaged.
As to the second Indicant, of preserving the strength, and the third of
mitigating the Symptoms, the Doctor and I do agree, at least his Book contains
nothing of them. Therefore I, whose only purpose it is, to defend as much of
the Old Method, as D. Brown does molest, and to refute his, wherein it goes
opposite thereto, am no ways engaged to treat of all, that in an accurate and
exact Method, ought to be practiced.

Especially I said by Evacuants we remove the Disease and expels it is cause.
Among which the first that offers its self to our consideration, is that Noble
and excellent Remedy, if duly and skilfully applied, of Bleeding. Which as the
Doctor observes P. 143. is granted by all as very beneficial. And if this be
true, as certainly it is, the Doctor has given us no new Method as to this
part, and so might have spared his Labor in Writting a Book, to convince the
World of that, of which never Nan doubted. When and how often the Doctor uses
this Remedy, which was absolutely necessary in an accurate Method (there being
four very different times as the 9th. Axiom observes) he does not inform us,
and therefore I can say nothing against him.

However I must not omit, to reprehend that Vulgar as well as pernicious Error,
of Bleeding all persons and in all Fevers. For so long as a Plethory is the
only Indicant of Bleeding (of Revulsion, Derivation and Exploration, which do
frequently call for and allow of the same, I am not now speaking) it can never
safely, and with advantage to the Patient be Administrat, but where that
Plethory is. So that if a Fever fall out in a Young and robust person, where
any natural Evacuation is suppressed in one using a good and laudable Diet, in
a word, where the way of Living, or any other circumstance may persuade us of
abundance of Blood, no doubt the Physician does wisely, who advises it is
Eventilation, if he cannot set a working the natural Evacuation it self:
Providing it be in the beginning and Increment of the Malady, otherways when
Nature is endeavoring her own Liberation, he may be apt to disturb her Motions.

But that rash and inconsiderat Course of Bleeding, without any difference,
subjects of all Ages, Constitutions and Sexes; is a practice which neither
Reason persuades to, nor Experience allows of. We all acknowledge, and not
without Cause, that our Life and Strength consists in our Blood. It Is also
confessed, that Nature and Strength do Cure Diseases: The Physician only
assisting where Nature is weak, and directing when she is wrong. Why then do we
evacuate that Blood, which we expect should Cure the Disease and relieve the
Patient? Ay but say some, with the Doctor: The ill Blood comes away and leaves
the good behind. I answer, this is a Reason so ridiculous in its self, and so
repuguant to the Laws of the Circulation, that hardly any save Gardners,
Old-wives, etc. to whom that Noble Invention is a Mystery, will ever pretend
it: For whatever comes to the Vein, good or evil, is also evacuate. Yea the
Evil is so intermixed with the Good, that till it self have made a separation,
no Art can disjoin them, For Example, suppose a sick Man having in his Body
Twelve Pounds of Blood, Eight of which are Good, and Four Evil: Now being all
circulate through the Heart, at least twice every quarter of an Hour, is there
any Man so absurd as to affirm, that only the Evil, and only at that time, will
come to the Vein which is wounded, while the Good, being strangely sagacious,
and desirous to stay in the sick persons Body to restore him his Health, will
go to the other and remoter places? Is there, I say, any Man so absurd as to
maintain this prodigious Fancy? Nay I think it is far more credible, that of
the whole Twelve, one Pound being evacuate, two parts will be Good, and one
Evil, just as it was in the Body. And all the Advantage, which the Patient by
Bleeding does reap, is only this: That before he had Twelve Pounds of Blood,
Eight whereof were Good and Four Evil, but now he has only Eleven in all,
whereof Seven Pound with Four Ounces are Good, and Three Pound with Eight
Ounces are Evil.

However, the Doctor for his timous assistance to this decaying Opinion,
deserves to be listed with, if not to get the precedence among the forenamed
Medicasters. For, says he, P. 151, As in a River we observe the heterogeneous
Body still to tend toward the Brink, so in the Veins, the feculent and ill
Blood runs to their sides, and runs first out, while the finer returns to the
Heart. A notable Invention indeed, to preserve this feculent and exploded
Figment! What way, pray, can the fine Blood return? not by the Arteries, that
being absolutely impossible, for grant their Motion should invert, which yet no
Man of common Sense will imagine, the three Semilunar Valves do still hinder.
Neither by the Vein, for your Band put betwixt the Orifice and the Heart stops
the passage: So that of necessity, whatever enters the Vein, good as well as
bad, runs out at the Wound: For do we not see, that the Ligature being removed,
and passage being granted, neither good nor bad appears, a sure Evidence, that
it being present, both of them evacuates. When Doctor Brown finds the third
way, he has gained the point. If the Doctor had only given this, as an Answer
to some of the impertinent Questions of a Patient, I could have forgiven him
and applauded his Wit; but seriously to propose it in a printed Book, is
absolutely inexcusable.

The Chirurgical Fountain, does further supply us with Vesicator Platsters,
from which, in Fevers whatsomever, we obtain no small Advantage: But especially
in Malign, and where the Head is affected, yea in all Cephalic Distempers,
their use, by reiterated Experience is approven. But there being no debate
about them and their use, I proceed to Pharmacie, which assists us with more
Weapons, to strugle against this destructive Enemy.

The First whereof shall be Vomiters, which, providing they be timously and
warily administrate, do oftentimesnip the Evil in the very Bud, and by
stricking at the Root, do with one blow dislodge this unkind Guest.

From what has been said, I suppose, that for the most part, the Antecedent
Cause of a Fever, comes from the Ventricle. If then in the beginning of the
Malady, before the Antecedent Cause, be all transferred to the Mass of the
Blood, and there become the Continent, we use this Remedy; we do thereby purge
the Stomach, withdraw the Matter, and either extinguish, or at least so notably
assuage the Fury of the Fever, that after it is hardly ever able to make great
disturbance. Nevertheless they are not to be given indiscriminatly, but with
great wariness, as all other Remedies whatsomever: Albeit the D. in his whole
Book, hardly ever mentions one Caution.

And First, We are to consider where the Matter does lodge: For if the
Antecedent Cause should be any Evacuation suppressed, great Motion and the like:
There could be nothing more ridiculous than to advise Vomiting. but if it be in
the Stomach, which is easily known, by the Hypocondria Swelling, frequent
Rifting, Nauseating, etc. they can hardly be neglected, but with the Patients
eminent danger. Providing his Constitution, Age, shape of Body, and other
Distempers, v. g. Hemorhagy adjoined, do not dissuade it. All which being
carefully observed, they are most innocent, as well as powerful Remedies, in
the beginning of Fevers. It is likeways to be noticed, that if the
Circumstances require Bleeding, it ought to preceed Vomiting. lest by the
shaking of the Body, some small Vessel burst.

Next I come to Diaphoreticks, which I may truly call the universal Cure of
Fevers. Nature pointing with its Finger to their use, while in the universal
Declination of Continual, and in the parricular Declination of Intermittent
Fevers, Sweat breaks forth in a very great plenty.

This nevertheless is the Method which our Author rejects, wherefore I shall
take the more pains to confirm it: Which I Will endeavor to do by the following
Three. First, By declaring how they work. Secondly, By giving some Reasons why
we use them. And Thirdly, By answering the seeming Objections instanced by D.
Brown against them.

About the First, I need not be very prolix, for if we consider what Conditions
are requisite to insensible Transpiration and Sweating in a state natural:
Betwixt which there is no greater difference, as that in the former, the Matter
is excerned in a lesser quantity, and so absorbed by the Clothes or ambient
Air, under the name of Vapor; whereas in the latter, or Sweat, it chances in a
greater abundance, and so cannot be sweept up, but rather constitutes Drops
called Sweat. I say, whoever will be at the pains to consider the Conditions
requisite for this insensible Transpiration and Sweating, while they are
natural: Which are Fluxibility in the Liquor, a due Amplitude in the Pores, and
a Briskness in the circular Motion; will easily understand how Diaphoreticks
work, when given according to Art. Whatever can either attenuat the Blood in
its Consistence, quicken it in its Motion, or dilate and amplify the Miliar
Glands and Pores, will certainly procure Sweat.

And such are either Heterogeneous Bodies mixed with the Blood, which by
stimulating the Ventricles of the Heart, the interior Coats of the Vessels,
and muscular Fibers of the Parts, cause frequent Contraction, and consequently
swiftness of Motion: or inciding and volatile Medicaments, which partly
attenuating and inciding the Mass of Blood, partly amplifying and enlarging the
Pores and Passages, produce the same effect with the former

When I speak here of intending the circular Motion, I mean only that of the
Arteries, for both Reason and Experience teach us that the acceleration of the
returning Motion by the Veins, would rather prove a hinderance as a help to
this, as well as to all other Secretions. First, It is clear from Reason, for
if the Blood were as readily taken up by the Capillary Veins, as its is brought
in by the Arteries, it must necessarly return again to the Heart from whence it
came: Whereas admittance being denied by the Veins, it seeks another way or
passage, which is that of Secretion. Neither does Experience deny its assent to
this perpetual Truth: For if you will tie the social Vein of any Artery, by
which Blood is carried to the secerning Organ, v. g. the Vena emulgens, you
shall quickly observe the Secretion to be far more copious, than when the
regressive Motion was allowed. So that I may reasonably affirm, The slowness of
the refluent Motion of the Blood by the Veins, to be none of the least among
the efficient Causes of Secretion. And this much for the First.

Secondly, I come to give some Reasons, why in the Cure of Continual Fevers,
Physicians of all Ages, have adopted and practiced this Method of Sweating: As
also why we at this day, especially while D. Brown offers a Surer and Better,
do imitate them in that, which, to speak in his Language, is pernicious and
destructive to Mankind. Indeed if without Reasons, and these weighty ones too,
we should do that, which according to the V. S, can be nothing but horrid
Murder, and devilish Malice. In stead of being Cherished, Honored and
Entertained, as in all Ages, and among all civilized People, Physicians have
been; we ought to be taken and Hanged, for Villains and public Murderers. But
if I can prove our Method to be right, which I Will endeavor now, and his to be
wrong, which is to be done hereafter, when discoursing of Purging: Then let him
judge, upon whom the Punishment ought to be inflicted.

It were easy to accumulate Arguments in Favors of Diaphoreticks, but I shall
satisfy my self, and I hope my Reader to, with the following three,

Let us then First, According to the seventh Axiom, consider the motion of
Nature, I mean the course it takes when left to its self, as in many mean and
Indigent People it ordinarily is: And this is continually to seek its own Relief
by Sweating, so that not one Fever of a hundred and that of all sorts, is Cured
another way. Is there any Country Clown so foolish, but in a Fever, he will cry
for a Sweat, and if either by Art or Nature he can procure it, he will promise
himself speedy Relief and certain safety. Now this being granted the Dr.
himself not darring deny it, should not the Physicitians, who have taken to
themselves that modest, Denomination of Natur's Servants, and whose duty it is
to assist her when doing right, and to Correct her when doing wrong (as by all
she is looked upon to do when endeavoring to ease her self by Seige in a
Fever, except perhaps once in a hundred times, when it comes critically) should
not they I say, imitate her, in Curing Fevers by Diaphoreticks, the ordinary,
yea I I may say, the only way by which she removes that Distemper, yea
certainly they should, and that according to good Old Hippocrats excellent
Aphorism: Whethersoever Nature enclineth to go, thither lead her and it
conduces.

Besides this, it becomes us Secondly, to consider the Seat of the Morbifick
matter in Fevers, which none will deny to be in the Arteries and veins*
Likeways the conformation of these Vessels deserves our attention: Their Roots
being in the Heart, while their Branches tend to all parts of the Body (that I
may shun all occasions of Objections, I know that properly speaking, the
Origin of the Veins is in the parts, and they terminate with one Root in the
Heart) Now let us consider by what way, that which is contained in these
Vessels may be best and easiliest expelled: Surely any Man of sense and Reason,
will freely confess, by their Extremities or ends (of Anastomoses or
Inosculations I have said what I thought necessary before) which acknowledged,
we can not but also grant, that whatsomever part of the Body, manyest of these
Extremitie^ run to, or where most of the Arteries end in, there will be the
readies^ and most natural way, providing i^ be as patent as others, to
discharge whatsomever is contained therein: But most of these Extremities do
terminate by far in the habit, and that this way is as patent, as any other
insensible Transpiration, which by the Doctors own concession, exceeds all
other Evacuations of the Body, no less as three times, does clearly evince:
Therefore from these premises, I may lawfully conclude, the habit to be the
readiest and best way, to expel whatsomever is contained Heterogeneous in the
Blood,

It was not unadvisedly that I said, where most Arteries end, there will be the
readiest way to expel, the Morbifick matter. For whosoever is not altogether
ignorant of Anatomy, will easily allow, that whatever once enters the Veins,
can never be eliminate, till such time as it again run through the Arteries. At
their small end it cannot be, seeing what once enters there, can by no means
return, First, because of their valves Secondly, Because of the tonick motion
of the parts. And Thirdly, because of the continual Influx of the Arterial
Blood. And as it cannot happen at their small ends arising from the parts, so
far less can it be at the great end, which terminats in the Heart: Nothing
entering its Ventricles in the Diastole, but what is again thrust out into the
Pulmonal and great Artery, in the Systole: from all which it is clear, that
neither Secretion nor Excretion can be of the Venal Blood

Yet here, I Will present the Doctor, with a stronger argument for Purging in
Fevers, as his whole Book has done to his Readers. And it is this, being I
assert, what no Physician, if he be not destitute of Anatomy and Physiology
(the want of which bring inexpressible Damage to Physic) will deny, that,
wherever Arteries end, and depositate what is in them contained, there must
needs happen the Expulsion of the Morbisick matter: But the Arteries, some of
them at least end in the intestines, Ergo, there in these intestinal Glands
must happen the secretion of the Morbifick matter. All which I grant and
acknowledge, yea farther confirms, by avowing the faces Any to be not only
Excrements of the first, but also of the third and second Digestion, which may
be proven by several Observations, one of which at this time shall suffice.
viz. in the Foetus the Meconium is still observed to have its beginning, and
greatest quantity in the crass intestines. Nevertheless all this concludes
nothing against what either has already, or shall hereafter be said: Because
First the Arteries are but very few (in respect of that infinite number which
direct their course to the habit) from the Coeliack and two Mesenterick
Branches, which tend to the Intestines. Secondly, Neither do we altogether, for
as little as it is, neglect it, but partly by applying Clysters, partly by
giving these Medicaments, in the 10 and last Axiom, called Laxantia, drive away
what may be lurking in the first ways. But we never give Purges, properly so
called, which by entering the Mass of the Blood, do play therein their unlucky
Tragedy, except we intend (which God forbid so wicked a Thought should ever
enter a Physicians Heart) to send the Patient to the House of all Living. Yea
farther, it is with respect to this, that after the Recovery we ordinarily
advise Purging.

My Third and last Argument shall be, the general Practice and constant
Observation of Physicians in all Ages, in all Countries, and of all
Persuasions; yea of the Excellent Sydenham himself, as shall afterward be
shown. Who as one Man, acknowledge not only the great Advantage of
Diaphoreticks, but exclaim against the constant use of Catarticks, in the
Curing of Fevers. What, would the Doctor have all these so ignorant, as that
they should not know how to Cure the most ordinary of Distempers? or so
malicious and wicked, as when they knew it, yet neither to practice it
themselves, nor communicate it to others? or were they so stupid, as not to have
known what they used, neither from whence the Cure did proceed? Were there
never Physicians so conscientious in the World, before D. Brown came to it, as
to confess the damage of Diaphoreticks? or were they so blind that they could
not see it? Was Hippocrat, was Galen, Fernelous, Sennert, Harvey, and all the
rest of these brave Souls, who have enriched the noble and useful Art, with
their curious Observations, excellent Inventions, and judicious Reasonings,
were all these, I say, besides many others, who practiced this Method
themselves, and recommended it to their Successors, Fools or Ignorants? Nay,
nay, it is far better to say that D. Brown is both. But of Experience more
hereafter: Therefore I go on to the Examination of the Arguments urged by the
Doctor against this Old and long Practiced Method: Which we find in the 71 Page
of the V. S. where the Common and Diaphoretick Method is considered and
rejected forsooth; and they be neither more nor stronger as the following Two.

First. We have no Specisick in Continuat Fevers, therefore must not level at
the Continent Cause, which is truly the Disease. According to which way of
Reasoning I will go on and conclude: We have no Specific in any Disease, save
Intermutent Fevers; therefore except them. none must be Cured. The consequent
of the one is as native as that of the other, and truly in both it is none at
all. Physic and Physician are obliged to the Doctor, for bringing the
Employment to this weak pass. Is not this a strong Argument, to destroy a
Theory of some Thousand Years standing? Yet it is as strong as the other to be
found in the same 71 Page, where he farther inveighs against this our approved
Method, in these words: This indeed were no unfit Design, etc.

I look upon it as needless to resume, what is formerly said anent: Fevers and
their Causes, which I hope do sufficiently prove the Doctor's Hypothesis to be
none of the best. I shall rather here observe, that the force of this sham
Argument drives at these Two. First, That Sudorificks translate the morbisick
Matter or antetecedent Cause, from the Ventricle, Mesentery and Intestines,
into the Muss of Blood, and by that means turns the Antecedent Cause into the
Continent. And Secondly, That by the same we drive it to the Head, whereby we
produce these terrible Symptoms, under which, Nature not being able to
overcome, must of necessity succumb.

To which I answer these Three: 1. All, save D. Brown, do know and confess,
that in Continual Fevers, the morbisick Matter is in the beginning translated
to the Blood, and so does procure the Disease, which otherways we should never
have, but only an Apparatus to it. Yea in this seems to me, to consist the
difference betwixt Continual and Intermittent Fevers: That in the former the
morbisick Matter is translated all at once and so produces one great and
Continual Fever; whereas in the latter or Intermittent Fevers, it is conveyed
at several times and so constitutes several Paroxisms, which may be said to be
as many Continual, but shorter Fevers. By which we may clearly discern, how
falsely the Doctor alleges, that by Diaphoreticks we carry the Matter from the
first Ways to the Blood, that being a thing already done, else there could be
no Fever. And really all along it appears, that it is not a Fever, but an
Apparatus thereto, the Doctor would Cure. So that instead of intituling his
Book, A new Method of Curing Fevers, he should rather have named it, A new
Method for preventing them.

Secondly, How any thing can be more urged on the Head by the use of
Sudorificks, I suppose if the Doctor were asked, he could not well tell, it
being a mere precarious Assertion, grounded upon no Foundation, and he might
with as good Reason, have said the same, of the Hands, Feet, or any other part
of the Body. For, as they were only the Artertae Carotides and Vertebrales,
which furnished the Brain with Blood before; So, for ought I know, by the use
of Sudorificks no other are added: Neither is there any other way, by which any
thing whatsomever can be carried to the Head, save by the forenamed Arteries. I
hope the Doctor is not come to that Pitch of lgnorance to averr, that
Diaphoreticks by some occult quality are offensive to the Brain. True it is
indeed, that Sudorificks, by intending the Motion, as well Circular as
Intestine, put all the Humors, and perhaps the Spirits too, in a little
confusion: But this carries nothing to the Head, rather as to other places,
which went not before.

But Thirdly, Where learned the Doctor, that Sudorifick Medicines, had their
operation in the Ventricle, Mesentery and Intestines: Can any Man read this
without Laughing. Surely this is another Error, in which Physians till this
time have been in, for they still taught, that Diaphoreticks did work in the
Blood, and not in the first Ways. So then to grant, what the Doctor desires,
which nevertheless so long as Physicians are Masters of Reason will never be:
That the Continent Cause (for the Antecedent is no more, it being converted
into the Continent) lodges about the forenamed places; it will profit him
nothing, since Diaphoreticks will never awake it, they working only in the
Blood, not in the first Ways.

In the 165 Page, the Doctor inculcates a new the damage of mere Diaphoreticks
(for I shall do him the Justice to conceal none of his Arguments) and the
Reason is this: Because thereby the Vascous matter is impelled to the Pores in
great abundance, and so begets new Obstructions. And, which is wonderful, to
prevent this Inconveniency, he advises the use of Paregoricks, which, as all
the World knows, do incrassate extremely, and so instead of weakening the Malady
he strengthens its Hands.

However I would have the Doctor to know, this Fear of his to be vain and
groundless, we never forcing the Matter till once incided, and till we observe
the Signs of Coction in the Urine, as shall afterward (God willing) be said.
Neither is the Philosophic Comparison which he brings to illustrate this his
Argument, beyond all exception: For the greatest Fool in the Kingdom does know,
that the Church Doors can be no way dilated or widned; whereas we know
certainly, that occasion requiring, the Pores of the Body may be double
enlarged and distended.

It is in the 167 Page, where the Doctor runs to that pitch of Boldness, as to
exclaim against a Method direct to a Crisis, Boldness I must call it, and the
Reader will perhaps judge worse of it, when he considers with me, that there be
only Four Ways by which Diseases are terminate^ whereof a Crisis is ever
desired as the best. Which happens, when after ^wrestling betwixt the Disease
and Nature, the last at length obtains the Victory, and with one blow ejects
this its hostile Enemy. Which is done sometimes by Bleeding at the Nose,
sometimes by Purging, sometimes by Vomiting, but an hundred times for one, by
Sweating. The second Solution of Diseases, is that by Physicians called Lysis:
When there comes no critical Motion (which is still desired by all, it being
beyond all question the best) but rather the Malady decays slowly and
gradually, and this is most frequent in their our Cold Countries. Thirdly the
morbifick Matter, is sometimes discussed or translated from one place to
another per Metastasin, which if it happen to be from a nobler to a meanner, it
is good (although it were better to have it altogether expelled the Body by a
Crisis) but if it chance contrary, is most dangerous. The Fourth and last way
of Diseases terminating, is by Death, when the morbisick Matter subduing
Nature, renders the organical Body incapable of obeying the Inclinations of the
reasonable Soul, so that it must needs forsake its Mansion, and leave it a dead
Cadaver. If there be any other way of Diseases terminating, they do not to me
now occurr, yea after sometimes thinking, I cannot conceive them. Now let my
Reader, yea D. Brown himself judge, how good reason he has to cry out against
that Method which aims at a Crisis.

Before I leave Diaphoreticks, it will be necessary to inform the Reader, that
neither in the Beginning nor Increment of the Fever, we employ them; yea never,
till we have once incided and attenuate the Matter with proper and convenient
Medicaments, do we use them. And then, when we behold the Signs of Coction in
the Urine, we hasten away the Malady, sometimes with weaker, sometimes with
stronger Medicines, just as the Circumstances allow and advise.

It is also worth noticing, that there is no material Difference, betwixt
Inciders and Diaphoreticks: For every Incider, providing its Dose be augmented,
will prove Diaphoretick: And whatsomever provokes* Sweat, given more sparingly
does, only incide. Wherefore, whatever has been said* in defense of
Sudorisicks, may also be applied to Inciders: Especially since they are
repudiate by the Doctor, for one and the same Cause, which to speak the Truth,
is none at all.

Purging comes next to be discoursed of, for neither can the Cure of Fevers,
always want their Assistance, which nevertheless are not to be advised, as D.
Brown does, at all times, and of all kinds. Wherefore* I shall here show First,
When and how they are and have been employed* by Physicians, in all Ages.
Secondly, Bring some Arguments against the perpetual use of such of them, as
properly go under the Name of Purges. And Thirdly, endeavor to obviate any
Arguments afforded by the Doctor in their behalf.

Before I go farther, I am necessitate to observe and complain: that the Author
should have Printed a new Method, and yet never so much as once inform us,
when, and to what Patients it is, and safely may be applied: Nor yet does he
mention the Medicaments he then imployeth, none of which, besides many other
things ought to have been neglected by him, who presumed to Write an entire
Method, but far less by the Author of a New One. For whoever has the least
knowledge in Physic, cannot but be sufficiently acquaint with the difficulty
of purging, where a few hours, some few grains, or some conttrary Indicants,
may readily bring Death to the Patient. And really for my part, suppose I were
sufficiently convinced both of the Reasonableness and Success of D. Brown's New
Method (which nevertheless without other Arguments as I have yet seen, I never
will be) yet I durst not upon that trivial and superficial account he gives of
it, adventure to use it.

But to return to the things proposed, in prescribing of Purges to persons in
Fevers, we are to consider 1. The Division of Purges, as it in the 10 and last
Axiom, in Laxantia and proprie purgantia. 2. The different times of the
Disease, also above in the 9 Axiom specified, are carefully to be observed.
And 3. The Malignity sometimes adjoined, is by no means to be neglected; for at
certain times to give a Purge when it is present, it is not without great and
imminent danger. So that by Physicians of all ages not only the Begninnig but
also in the Increment and status of the Disease, where there is no Malignity
present (in which condition the very giving of a Clyster was still suspected)
these Purges called Laxantia, which go no farther, as the first ways have over
been advised* Which Laxantia are sometimes given at the Mouth, and so respect
the Ventricle with the rest of the Intestines: but oftener they are applied in
the form of a Clyster, which reaches no farther as the valves of the Intestine
Colon, nevertheless by there stimulating, augment the peristaltick motion of
the whole, and help the Excretion of the Faeces, contained therein.

Yet sometimes in the beginning and before the antecedent cause be turned into
the continent, by its going from the Ventricle and first ways to the Mass of
the Blood, it may not be improper to advise a Purge: However were I the
Physician, I had rather (if all circumstances allowed thereof) and for the most
part, make use of Emeticks, which do ordinarily cause also three or four Stools.
But the use of Purges properly so called, is frequently delayed till the
solution of the whole Distemper, if critical Motions advise not the contrary,
when (concluding some of the Morbifick matter to be desposed in the Itestines,
and adhering to, or in their Glands) strength being somewhat recovered, we use
first the help of that Medicine which we could not safely employ before: For
which our Reasons are the following five.

First, In obedience to the eight Axiom, Concocted not Crude Humors are to be
Evacuat: where again, Nature her Course is worth the noticing, which being left
to its self, never expels Humors till once digested, unless with great Hazard
to the Patient. and then it becomes the skilful Physician, to stop and hinder
her wrong and Symptomatick proceedings* It is not merely Hypocrates his
Authority that makes us decline them in this Condition, but because we see it
confirmed with strong Reason and sad Experience: For while the Humors are
Crude and indigested, the Heterogenities are so wrought in with the good and
laudable matter, that the one cannot be extruded, without the Expulsion of the
other: wherefore we rather expect, yea helps their Digestion, that so we may
have the Evil separat from the Good.

Neither is this all the evil, that redounds to the Sick, by advising Purging
in a state of Crudity, But Secondly, When given, they either operate none, or
by their working extremly, do intend the Fever. This is not said Gratis, for
daily experience confirms it, and that not only in persons troubled with
Intermittent Fevers, where Purges being given shortly after the ceasing of the
Disease, do infallibly make the Paroxism return: But even in sound persons, in
whom Catarticks never do their Duty, without raising a great commotion and
Exagitation in the Blood. Yea by injecting Gummi, or rather Succus Go^^^ a must
ordinary and common Purge, into the Veins of a Living Animal, we can procure an
artificial Fever.

Thirdly, By these strong and frequent Purges, the Serum which is the vehicle
of the Blood, and by which the Morbifick matter should be diluted, that so it
may be the better and easilier excluded, is altogether spent and consumed.

Fourthly, by these same reiterat Purges, Nature is extremly weakened and the
strength mightily dejected, which nevertheless as a thing Natural, the fourth
Axiom tells us ought to be preserved.

And Fifthly, Hereby again are the Motions of Nature disturbed, she seldom or
never tending this way, except when perversely and Symptomatically, in which
case, Art, as it is in the Sixth Axiom, advises rather to stop as encourage
her.

May other Arguments, such as the Hazard of Superpurgation, the inconveniencie
of Purging when affixed to Bed etc. Could easily be urged against this
preposterous Method: But they being of less moment, I leave them, till I see
the Doctors Answers to the five insisted on. Which being rightly considered and
pondered, I think it will be no hard matter to guess, with what advantage to
the Patient, Purges properly so called, in Fevers are used If the Doctor meant
only such as I have called Laxantia, then he has given us no New Method: Their
use under the Cautions, I gave, being as old as since Hippocrats days.

Lastly, I come to the Arguments, by which he endeavors to confirm this his
Method: Which I find P. 76. to be the Diaphoreticks are not successful, ergo we
must Purge: But the consequent of this, Doctor, especially its Antecedent being
truer, is as good: Purges are offensive, ergo sudorificks are necessar. None of
them follow, there being no Reason, why, supposing them both unsuccessful, a
third may not be chosen. But, proceeds the Doctor, without the help of
specificks we cannot level at the continent cause: Therefore we must endeavor
the extirpating the Antecedent, that thereby we may starve that enemy we are
not able to attack. All which is most false, Ridiculous and Dishonorable to
Physic and Physicians, as is formerly proved, therefore needs not be here
again repeated.

His other Motives (to be found in the first Sect.) advising to the embracing
of this his precarious Hypothesis, are as destitute of good and real
Conclusions, as any of the two Arguments just now considered.

Doctor Sydenhame was no doubt, a Man of great Ingenuity, Candor and Experience
and if I thought an Encomium from so mean and despised an Author as I am, could
contribute any way to his Praise, I would as willingly confer it, as the Doctor
himself. For I think that both this and future ages, are, and will be extremely
obliged to his Candor and great Sagacity, which he has all along manifested in
his excellent Writtings, but especially for his Historia Morbi and Regimen
Aegri. And I would to God that D. Brown had been more of his temper, who,
without all Reflections on other Physicians, wrote what he had observed in the
Latin Tongue. Not that I envy the knowledge of any, for as Moses wished all the
people of the Lord to be Prophets, so I am much indifferent, suppose all
Patients (which in a short time I think may be) were Physicians. Yet sure I am,
the publishing of Physic Books in our Mother Tongue, does much hurt but no
good: For thereby Gardners, Old wifes etc. acquire as much knowledge as to
Kill, but seldom as much as to Heal. In a word, as our Proverb speaks, it is
the putting a Weapon in a Mad-mans hand. However I being no more concerned as
others, wishes them success in their laudable attempts.

But how D. Brown comes to make D. Sydenhame his Defender, or rather how he
comes to writ a Book, to vindicat D. Sydenham in that, which he seems never to
have practiced, is that which I cannot conceive. The Schedula Monitoria is not
in my hands, neither am I in a place where I can procure it: Yet his Method of
Curing Continual Fevers, Printed at Amsterdam An. 1666. is; Wherein all along
he practices the good Old and approven Method: For in the page 27. he advises
the use of a Clyster only every other day, P. 29. he expressly affirms, that the
more bound he can make the Patients Belly, the more he puts him beyond Hazard:
His words are so express they deserve to be here inserted, and they are, quanto
magis obstructam illi alvum praestitero, tanto magis eum extra periculi aleam
colloco: P. 36. at length upon the 15 and sometimes 17. day, for the first time
he prescribes a Purge, and that none of the Strongest.

Now was not D. Sydenhame as Candid, as ingenuous and skilled, when he wrote
this as when he wrote the Sched. Monitoria: If he was, then what reason can
there be for prefering this New Method to the old, seeing both are commended. If
he was not, then no man can blame me, for denying assent and Credit to him, who
did once so egregiously Cheat me. Nay I doubt nothing, but he was ingenuous in
both: the matter being only this, in this Schedula Monitoria (to my best
remembrance it being some years since I read it) he gives only a description of
an Epidemick constitution, which beyond all question, sometime may extremely
alter the Scene, and may require a Method contrary to what is ordinary, and
which he in his Treatise de Curand. Febr: Con. had both practiced himself and
commended to others. And by this time I think it is clear, how little reason D.
Brown has to boast of Sydenhams Authority: No it is a mere Fiction of D.
Browns to apply to all occasions, what D. Sydenham meaned only of particular
Constitutions.

How can D. Brown think to impose upon us at this rate, he must think us all
very negligent, and so we do not read, or else very ignorant, and so cannot
understand what we do Read: Truly it seems we must be both according to his
Calculation.

But grant D. Sydenham were of this mind, as it is clear he is not, what then
does follow: For we all know and believe, that no honest nor ingegenuous Man,
will wittingly and wilingly cheat or deceive, yet we count it no Heresy to
think and say both, that out of ignorance and uncircumspectness he may.

What concerns the unparalelled danger he was saved from: I fear least in using
that as a cogent Argument, the Doctor prove himself as ill a Divine, as all
along in his Book he he appears to be a Physician. There being no doubt, but
that Gods good Providence is still Exercised about all things, good as well as
bad (permiting and suffering them to his own wise and good ends) and small as
well as great. Yet that special acts of preservation, will either prove the
person himself, or the end for which he is preserved, to be good in its self
(for I know and believe that God does nothing, but what some way or other,
tends to his own Glory, as also to His Peoples Good eventually, as the
permitting of an Impostor, etc.) and intentionally; is a thing which I very
much doubt: For we know they are the Wicked who prosper in their way, while the
Righteous are chastened every Morning: And suppose he, and all the Episcopal
Clergy in the Kingdom should Swear, that the French King's Deliverance from his
Fistula, was for some good end and great benefit to Mankind; yet I shall ever
look on him as the Scourge of the True Reformed Religion, which God at length
will, I hope, cast into the Fire. And by this way of Reasoning the Doctor will
answer Epicmus his Objection against Providence: Cur males been and bonis male,
by granting the whole.

It is no small Evidence of the Doctor's desperate Cause, when he flies to such
Arguments for the maintenance thereof, as the Commendations bestowed by Learned
Men upon the person, whom he would persuade us, though falsely, to be the
Author thereof: But especially considering that these Encomiums were given
before the Hypothesis was known. For Etmuller died at Lypsick, Anno 1683.
Sponius write his Epistle An: 1681. Dalaeus his Encyclopaedia. An: 1685.
Whereas the Schedula Monitoria, never saw Light till the Year 1687. If then
there be any strength in that Argument, as I think there is none, it militates
entirely against the New Method: Their Commendations being given upon account
of the old, professed and practiced in his Book de Meth: Curand: Febr: the
Schedula Monitoria not being at that time published.

Doctor Morton is indeed a Great Man, and deservedly esteemed by our Author,
for his excellent Treatise written formerly de Pihisi: as also for his late
Book de Febribus, wherein, as I am informed (I not having indeed perused it as
yet, which I am almost ashamed to profess) he does noways follow our Doctor's
New Method, which is no great proof of his overvaluing it: Nevertheless upon
other Scores he might, and that deservedly too, applaude D. Sydenhame.

Concerning these Excellent Men, Goodall, Harris, etc. I have nothing to say,
but perhaps it might be, that in some Epidemick and Anomalous Fever, they did
find that Method successful, and so did employ it: But surely therefore it must
not be applied to all.

And now I think, I have sufficiently Answered our Doctor's Arguments, as also
confirmed the contrary Hypothesis. Yet there remains one, which both in his
Books, but especially among his Admirers and Patients, he principally insists
on: viz. His great and successful Experience. This is a thing the greatest
Empericks boast most of; yea they will hardly grant a Patient ever to have died
in their Hands. I have nothing to say against Experience it self, it being,
with Reason, the Foundation of Physic. Neither will I here in an English Book,
discover the Fraud of some Men's Experience, but I will offer to the Reader's
and the Doctor's Consideration, the Five following Things. 1. I wish the Doctor
were as ingenuous to tell us how many Died, as he is careful to publish how
many Recovered, by this his New Method. 2. To one, I can oppose a hundred, not
only of such as were Cured by Old and Antiquated Physicians; but of such as
live and practice in this very Age. 3. As, blessed be God, all our Patients do
not Die, so neither, I suppose, do all the Doctor's Recover: And surely if any
of these two were, it would be a far more effectual mean to gain the Doctor
Employment, as his writing of the Vindicatory Schedule. No, Thanks be to the
Physician of Souls, we have no reason to complain. 4, How many persons Recover,
not only when no Mean is used, but even when that which is certainly Evil is
applied: So that a little success in a few Patients, deserves not the Name of
sound Experience in Physic. Especially when 5. we are sometimes right
uncertain, whether the Apothecary has rightly dispensed, or the Patient
rightly used, that which the Physician prescribed: None of which Doubts are
without all ground, as too frequent Experience tells us, and I could easily
evince: But I have no Inclination to discover my Father's Nakedness.

As for what he brings in the 14 Sect. for corroborating his Theory of Fevers
from the Helpers and Hurters, etc. as things of small Moment, and savouring
nothing, save Ignorance in Anatomy and Physiology, I pass them. As also the
Solutions he gives of Difficulties moved against it, are of the same Metal, as
has clearly been shown, in his Account of Sanguification, Chylification, etc.

Only, it deserves the Reader's Attentation, that Page 77. where he proposes
that true and most probable Method, as he is pleased to call it: I find
mention, and only mention, of Paregoricks, without any Advertisement, how and
when they ought to be used, albeit of all Medicaments whatsomever, they should
be advised with the greatest Cautions. I shall neither insist on them nor their
use: They be these unto which both he and we are forced to fly, when other
Refuges fail. And they be of two sorts: First, Such as either by obtunding the
Acrimony of the Humors, or laxing the Tone of the Fibers, do really mitigate
the Pain, by removing somewhat the Cause, and they are commonly called Auodyns.
And the others are these, who do not remove the Cause, but lay it a sleep, and
renders it quiet by stupefying the Senses, and they go under the Name of
Narcoticks. Concerning the first, or Anodyns, there is here no question, they
being frequently applied outwardly: But for Narcoticks, I cannot conceive, upon
what account he advises them in Fevers, (except when Symptoms grievously urge)
unless it be to stop critical Evacuations, there being hardly any thing, which
does it more happily. And if this be a good Design, whatever the Doctor may
pretend, let the World judge.

Now to shut up all, I shall lay down a brief Scheme of that Method, which we
daily, and, Blessed be God, with good Success practice, and I have been here
laboring to defend. I say a brief one, for I noways pretend to play the
Dictator, but only to show in few words, what it is I have been wrestling for.
Yea there are so many Circumstances and Accidents, which both may and
frequently do occurr and fall out about feverish Persons, that they make it
absolutely impossible, to commit all to Paper, what a skilled and judicious.
Physician will find expedient.

When then called to a Patient, in the First, Second or Third Day, after he
has found a Coldness and Grewing through his whole*Body, which is ordinarily
accompanied with, or at least is shortly after followed, with a Pain, in the
Head and Lassitude of the whole, together with a frequent Pulse, red and thick
Urine, great Thirst, dejection of Appetite, Watching, Heat, etc. By which we
easily conjecture a Fever to infest. I say when called to such a Patient,
immediately, if his Age, Sex, Evacuations suppressed, kind of Life, etc. do
allow, we advise Bleeding, more or less as the several Circumstances permit,
however, if need so require, we think it still safer to evacuate at different
times as all at once: But the Prohibents exceeding the Permittents, it ought to
be totally neglected. After that, if the Patient has been, or is yet troubled,
with Nauseating, Rifting, etc. a Vomiter, providing nothing dissuading the same
be present, is next advised. And then through the whole Course of the Cure, our
principal aim is levelled at the Continent or Conjunct, Cause of the Disease,
which, by giving Inciders and Aperients, ever till we observe the Signs of
Coction in the Urine, we labor to Incide and Digest; Which Signs appearing,
with stronger Sudorificks we assist Nature endeavoring its own Liberation, and
so we bring the Malady to a Crisis, or rather Lysis. In the mean time we
neither neglect the consideration of the Strength according to the second
Axiom: Nor yet do we forget the Antecedent Cause, as is in the first; but
partly by Clysters, partly by Laxants given at the Mouth, we absorbe and
cleanse the first Ways, and so prevent the further accumulating of Crudities,
which by running into the Mass of the Blood, might increase the Fever. And
while these are a doing, with proper and fit Medicaments, we provide (yet even
sometimes, as it is in the fifth Axiom, with the neglect of the primary
Disease) against the urgent Symptoms, such as Thirst, Watching, etc. After this
Method, God assisting, we Cure Tuto, Cito, and Jucunde.

FINIS.

