THE RESTORING OF Fallen Brethren: Containing, the Substance of Two SERMONS, On
Gal. VI. 1, 2. Preached at the Performance of PUBLIC PENANCE, By certain
CRIMINALS, On the Lord's Day, usually called Mid-Lent Sunday; 1696.

In the Parish Church of Old-Swinford in Worcestershire.

By Simon Ford, D. D. and Rector there.

With a Preface by the Right Reverend Father in God, Edward Lord Bishop of
Worcester.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's-Church-Yard.
1697.

PREFACE.
THE following Sermons is of an extraordinary Nature; being Preached by the
Reverend Author, at the Performance of a public Penance, enjoined to several
Criminals of his Parish. If others of the Clergy would follow so good an
Example, and do what in them lies to uphold the small Remainders of ancient
Discipline among us; it would bring more Honor to our Church, and the Religion
Established among us, than the warmest Disputes for our Constitution, without
regard to the Practice of it.

I am not insensible, what scandalous Imputations our Ecclesiastical Courts lie
under; but I desire those who are Concerned, to consider, in how much better
Reputation they might be, if the Management of them were more carefully looked
into, and brought to that Order which the Law of the Land Allows; and the
ancient Canons, and common Rules of Justice and Equity require. And since those
Prosecutions are now taken off by Law, which made the loudest Noise and Clamor
against them; I hope we may let the World see, that what Power is left in our
Hands, is Employed for the best Ends, viz. the Punishment of evil Doers; and
the Encouragement of those that do well.

But I fear there are some who had rather have Faults continued, that they
might still have occasion to complain, than use any Endeavors to Reform the
Abuses Committed in them.

I know no Courts, but are liable to Abuses; but there is a difference to be
made, between such as arise from the Rules and Orders of the Court, and such
which come only from the personal Faults of those who are employed in them. As
to the former, the Methods of Proceeding in these Courts, are of as great
Antiquity, at least; as of any other Courts of greatest Esteem among us: The
Ecclesiastical Laws have the same Advantage of Custom and long Observation,
which any other Laws of the Land have; but as to the particular Proceedings os
several Courts, the Rules are generally known, and certain, and agreeable to
the Laws, and not left to any arbitrary Methods. But where the Faults lie only
in the Persons; I hope that upon any just Complaints, effectual Care will be
taken to Punish the Transgressors, and to prevent the like for the future.

But the General, and most sensible Complaint has been, that Money, which
Governs the World too much, has so great an Influence on these Courts, that
any Criminal Offenders may be excused from doing Penance, by a pecuniary
Commutation.

Whether there has been any just Occasion formerly given for any Complaint of
that Nature, is out of my reach to enquire; but I hope there has not of late
been any Cause for it. Especially, since by His Majesty's Injunctions N. 17. No
Commutation of Penance is to be made, but by express Order and Directions of
the Bishop himself; which shall be declared in open Court. And I hope these
Injunctions will not be like new Laws made for Repairs of Highways; which
often leave them as bad as they find them. If there have been scandalous
Offenders, which through the Neglect of the Clergy, or the proper Officers have
not been Presented, let the blame lie, where it ought to do; the Ecclesiastical
Courts have no Reason to be charged with other Men's Faults.

But I must say it for the Honor of the worthy Author of these Sermons, that
he took care to have the Court duly Informed of the Miscarriages and Crimes
Committed in his Parish: whereupon, the Offenders, who performed the Penance,
submitted to the Sentence of the Court for it. Which was accordingly done in
the most public manner; and he Preached a very seasonable and useful Discourse
now Printed, relating to the Occasion. And that it may answer the good Ends for
which it was designed, is my hearty Desire and Prayer.

Ed. Wigorn.
Worcester, Apr. 8. 97.
GALAT. VI. 1. 2. Brethren, if any man be overtaken in a fault; ye which are
spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of meekness: considering thy self,
lest thou also be tempted.

Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.


ALthough (dearly beloved,) I have of late been deeply affected with Sorrow,
and secretly Mourned, (as the Apostle upon occasion of the Incestuous
Corinthians scandalous Sin, advises that Church to do, 1 Cor. 5. 2.) for the
late Fornications, and filthy Uncleanness, that have been committed in this
Neighborhood, by so many Persons as are now justly under Censure of the
Ecclesiastical Judicatory: yet am I, at last, (on the other side) not a little
comforted, that my good Advise to diverse of the Criminals, who now appear
before you, has had so good effect, as to render them willing, notwithstanding
all the Discouragements, which have. I doubt, been given them by either their
obstinate Fellow-sinners, or factious Dissenters from this Church, and it is
Discipline,) to present themselves here, as Penitents, to perform the Penance
enjoined them; and thereby, to give me occasion, to instruct you all in those
Points relating to this Exercise of Church Discipline, concerning which, except
upon such an occasion, you might not have heard from this Pulpit; and so,
either through Ignorance, or prejudicated Opinion, have been led into unworthy
Apprehensions concerning it.

And the Text I have chosen, I think, will afford me Grounds sufficient for the
handling all the Heads, to which, on this Occasion I intend to speak.

You may therefore herein observe these three Particulars.

I. A Supposition, (that Christian Brethren may be overtaken in such Faults as
render them like Members out of joint, in the Body of Christ, to which they
belong: and so need (to prevent their farther Corruption, and danger of
becoming Gangrened, and in the Issue, cut off) the charitable Endeavors of
their Fellows to set them in Joint again.) For so the Word ((...)) which we
render (restore,) does import.

II. A positive Duty incumbent on the rest of the Christian Brethren, (upon
such a Supposal, actually coming to pass, in any Christian Society:) to wit,
(to use all Christian Means they can, thus to restore such dislocated or
disabled Members to their former Soundness.)

In order to the better performance of which Duty, there are two Particulars
observable, under this Head in the Text.

I. The Description of the Persons who are to act in this charitable Work,
(they that are Spiritual;) which Phrase what it means, you shall be informed
anon, when I come to that Head.

Secondly, The Assignation of the manner how this charitable Duty is to be
performed (in the Spirit of Meekness.) and that heightened to such a degree of
Compassion, as gives them a kind of fellow-feeling in the pains those
dislocated Members undergo, called (v. 2.) (bearing one another brudens.)

Thirdly, (and lastly) two proper Motives to induce them to the Performance of
this Duty, in the manner directed.

(I.) One, taken from a confiderate Sensibleness of common humane Frailty:
Hazarding the sound Members to fall, and bruise themselves at one time or
other, upon like Tentations as occasioned the Harms the fallen Brethren had
reeeived. And herein it is specially remarkable, that the Apostle (by a kind of
Apostrophe,) applies himself to each Particular of the Spiritualty, whom
heexhorts to this Charity; wishing every of them to consider his own Frailty,
and Danger thereby, in the Words, (lest thou also be tempted.)

(II.) The other, from the Obedience they owe to Christ, and his Law, in a
special manner, requiring this at their Hands: So that by thus Meckly and
Compassionately taking part of their Brethrens Burdens, they (fulfill the law of
Christ.)

Of all, which I intend to discourse in order.

I. Of the Supposition, which is here laid down as the Ground of the Duty;
which contains in it this Doctrinal Truth.

That true members of the body of Christ, are liable to be overtaken in such
faults, as may sorely bruise and crush them, and render them, for the time they
lie under the guilt and pain of them, like dislocated Members in the natural
Body, and (do need to prevent their farther Corruption and danger of beingg
angrened, and in the Issue cut off to need the charitable Endeavors of their
Fellows, to set them in joint again.

For to be a Saint, whilst here below in this Estate of Imperfection, does not
divest any one totally of the Frailties of Humanity; nor does the Seed of God
in us that renews our Nature, secure us from a Possibility of sinning
altogether; but only from Sinning to Death, i. e. Sinning at that rate that
hardened habitual Sinners do, which the same Apostle calls (...), which denotes
a professed practice of sin, which, by indisposition, bars the Door as to
Recovery by Repentance, and so makes a Man incapable of Pardon, as appears by
comparing 1 John 3. 8, 9. with 5. 16, 17, 18. But as to Acts of Sin committed
through Surreption and Surprise, by the over-prevalency of a violent Tentation,
not foreseen and provided against, he himself tells us, that whoever denies
such Sins to be in him, or affirms that he is so Privileged, as not to be
capable of having so Sinned; he is a liar, deceiving himself with vain Notions
of an unattainable perfection, and the Truth is not in him, Chap. 1. 8, 10. And
indeed, if this kind of Sinlessness were attainable by any one here, the
Apostles Motive in the Text (to induce the most Spiritual Men to Meekness, in
restoring fallen Brethren, upon the consideration of their own Frailty,) would
be to no purpose; as to such a Person, as pretends to it; who might hence
justify his greatest Insolences against Offenders, as proceeding from one
that by his Privilege is exempt from that Consideration, on which the contrary
Duty is pressed. He supposes therefore here, that the holiest Man may be
obnoxious to such Falls, as unforeseen Stumbling Blocks, laid in his way, may
occasion: as the Word, ((...) and (...)) in the Original, properly import.

And the use the Apostle here makes of this Doctrine, (besides that which he
urges from it, by way of Motive to the Duty of the Text, which in it is proper
place will come to be considered;) is to exercise every one to consider
himself, as thus liable to Temptation; and accordingly to be watchful, and look
about him, (as Persons in a Garrison, beleaguered by an Enemy, are wont to do,
about all their Line, to see where the Fortifications are weak, and in such
places to set the stronger Guard; which is the true notion of the Word ((...))
in the Text;) where he lies open to a Temptation, and fortify the weak part
against Satan's Stratagems, and devices, that he get no advantage over him, 2
Cor. 2. 11.

And upon this supposition, (the first thing observable in the Text) is built
the second, which we are now to enter upon.

II. The Duty incumbent upon the Brethren, (the rest of the Church,) in the
supposed Case, when any of them is overtaken in a Fault; to wit, that they are
to (restore such an one;) that is, (as I before told you,) to use, (on their
parts,) all Christian means that the wounded Member may be reduced to soundness
again: and so capable of performing the Duty incumbent on him, and enjoying the
Benefits, and comfortable Privileges belonging to him, upon the account of his
Membership in that holy Society; and for which, his present wounded Condition
disables him. For indeed, foul falls do both ways disable a Churchmember,
more, or less, according to the different Circumstances he is under, i. e. as
his Crime is either secret, or public; known only to some one, or some few; or
notorious to the generality of those he converseth with; and, as, (if it be
notorious,) it is either before the Ecclesiastical Judicatory, or not: And
lastly, as, (if it be under their Cognizance,) it either is, or is not,
advanced so far as to Judgment, and Sentence. And according to these, and other
Circumstances of the Criminal; so are the Endeavors to be made use of for his
Restitution to be varied. And that both as to the Persons, who are employed in
that charitable Work, in their several Capacities and Stations; and the manner
how they are to act in order to the Accomplishing it. And both these, are to be
found in the Text also, as I before told you.

1. The Persons who are thus to endeavor the Offenders Restitution, are here
called ((...)) which we render, (ye that are spiritual.) But it is still a
Question; whom the Apostle means by this Compellation?

In Answer whereunto, I shall not confine my self to any of the particular
Notions of differing Interpreters; but make use of them all, so far as they
will admit of a Sense, as I apprehend most agreeable to the design of the
Apostle.

1. First, then, I suppose, the Word ((...),) here used, may in a general
Notion, include all the sound Members of the Church, who are, in their several
Stations to bear a part in this charitable Office. For the Church, being (in
St. Peter's Phrase, 1 Pet. 2. 5.) a spiritual House, or Temple. I know not, why
every stone, or rafter of it, may not partake of the Notion of Spirituality;
especially seeing the same Apostle does there call all Christians not only
lively stones, but (in a sense) an holy Priesthood, to offer up to God
spiritual Sacrifices.

And indeed, there is no Member of the Church, but when the Fault of any
Fellow-member comes to his notice, he is obliged to contribute, as he lawfully
may in his Station, his Endeavors to restore him: for no Man is to suffer Sin
upon his Brother, it it lie in his way to remove it, Lev. 19. 17. For to do
otherwise, is, (in Gods own Interpretation) to hate him in his Heart, whom he
sees dangerously wounded, and yet, (as the Priest and Levite, in our Saviors
Parable, Luke 10. 31, 32.) goes on the other side of the way, and lets him lie,
and perish for want of help.

2.) There is yet a more restrained notion of the Word ((...)) which will also
very well suit the design of the Text, and the State of the Galatian Church;
and that is that which distinguishes the Members of the Church, who are, in
some respect, more Spiritual from others, who are (in comparison to them,)
elsewhere called Carnal, and Babes in Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 15. and 3. 1. And so,
(seeing all the Members of the Church are not alike in Knowledge, Gifts, or
Graces;) they that excel in any of these, (or think they do, in the Phrase of
Chapter 14. 37.) are more especially obliged to this charitable Office, as being,
or supposed to be furnished with greater store of spiritual Medicaments, than
their inferior Brethren. For the Apostle tells us, that all these Gifts
wherein one Christian excells another, are bestowed, (not to capacitate them to
vaunt and magnify themselves, and contemn others, who in those respects are
inferior to them;) but they are all given to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7. And
that the employing of them in a way of Charity, is the most excellent way,
wherein they may be made use of, v. 31. of the same Chapter. But alas! it is a
thing to be much lamented, that ordinarily, (from the Gnostics downwards to
these days,) Persons, who most pretend to be extraordinarily gifted, (though
indeed, they excel only in a few new Phrases, volubility of Language, and
impudent Boldness, etc.) instead of charitable restoring their disjoynted
Brethren, most uncharitably reduce them into erroneous Opinions, and rend the
Body of Christ into divided Factions, and separated Societies; gathered (too
many of them) out of the most Ignorant, and Vicious of the Church, they
separate from; whose spiritual Wounds they heal slightly, by persuading them,
that to become their Proselites, will sufficiently atone for all former Crimes.

3. But then, (thirdly,) because whatever Applications private Persons make in
kindness to their wounded Neighbors, may possibly be insufficient to effect a
Cure, without the Assistance of a skilful Chyrurgeon; therefore, I must tell
you, that the word Spiritual, here, does yet admit also of a most restrained
Sense; to wit, as it denotes those, whose Calling and Employment, is conversant
in spiritual things; that are the Teachers, Guides, Pastors, and Rulers of the
Church. Including all, from the Apostles downwards, who are invested with those
Offices, in order to the good of their Souls and Spirits of Men committed to
their Charge. And to these only, do some very Learned and Reverend Commentators
(though I think they are therein too narrow, as I intimated before) restrain
the Sense of this Word in the Text.

And yet I concur so far with them; as to think these principally meant;
partly, because, in the apostolical Times, the Charismata, or special Gifts of
the Spirit, were most plentifully poured out upon them, and so many of them, as
are necessary for the Conduct of the Church, in all Ages since, have
accompanied that holy Calling, to that degree, as has been thought sufficient
to denominate them the Spiritualty, in distinction from the Temporalty, in the
esteem of all Christians: till the Papacy abusing the Name, rendered it less
grateful to the ears of those, who shook off that Yoke in the Reformation: And
partly, because this very (...) in the Text, or Spirit of Meekness, so
requisite to the restoring dislocated Members, is but once more used in the
whole New Test. and there joined with the (...), or Rod of Correcttion, as
attributed to the Apostle, in his managery of the Corinthian Church, 1 Cor. 4.
21. and lastly, because we find the word Spiritual, applied to those
extraordinary Persons in the Church, which were called Prophets, and made use
of, as equivalent, in common use, thereto; as in the Old Testament, in Hos. 9.
7. and 1 Cor. 14. 37. in the New.

And this Duty, all that are in any Ecclesiastical Station, are (according to
the Trust Reposed in them,) to mind, in reference to all committed to your
Inspection: and, are solemnly engaged thereunto, in this Church of England at
their Ordination: they are to preach the Word; to be instant in season, and out
of season; to reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering, and doctrine. 1 Timothy 6. 2. and by the Rubric before the Communion, are allowed to exercise
some Power of Discipline, with due deference to the Bishop, in case of
scandalous Offenders. And indeed, hereof we are sure, that the chief Power of
Church Discipline, as it was at first committed to the Apostles, and
Apostolical Men; and by them derived by Ordination to the successive Pastors,
and Rulers of the Churches Planted by them: so it has always, till of late
Years, been exercised by Bishops: (the whole Current of Antiquity giving us
abundant Proofs hereof, as to Matter of Fact,) who in many Cases, acted therein
alone: but in the most weighty Matters, were assisted by, and acted with a
Presbytery. But of a Presbytery acting without, (and much less against) the
Bishop, especially in inflicting Church censures: I think, (except in
Schismatical Churches) the greatest Assertors of Presbytery can hardly give us
one Instance. And to those, who are thus entrusted with Ecclesiastical
Authority, it belongs, in the Name of Christ, and with his Power, (in the
Apostles Phrase, 1 Cor. 5. 5.) to determine finally, the Cases of scandalous
Offenders, and by Church Censures to proceed against them, (either in order to
their Recovery, in case they be incurable; or in order to the Preservation of
the Church, both in its Health and Reputation, in case they be apparently
irrecoverable;) with more or less Severity.

And there is a stronger Obligation lies upon them, than upon all the rest of
the Church, to lay themselves forth to the utmost extent of their Ability and
Power, in the pursuance of so good a Work. To wit, the Trust Reposed in them,
by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; who (on the account thereof) are
concerned to watch for their Peoples Souls, as they that must give an account.
And they are Pastors, (even such as are of the highest denomination) only under
him, the chief Shepherd, and Bishop of Souls, 1 Pet. 2. 25. And therefore, to
them it belongs, to use all means they can, to seek out, and reduce to the Fold
all straying Sheep, and to heal the wounded of that Flock, over which the Holy
Ghost has made them Overseers, or Bishops; that having discharged their Duty
herein, when (...) Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 2. 4.
the chief Shepherd shall appear, they may receive a Crown of Glory. And if
they be negligent therein, and the Sheep perish through their Default; there is
a sad Doom pronounced in the Prophet Ezekiel. 34. 4, 5, 6. etc. very applicable to
them.

To which Obligation of Trust, there is also, (in reference to their particular
Charges) another of Relation. For the Pastors, in such a Case, are Fathers to
their People, and they reciprocally, to them their Children, 2 Cor. 12. 14.
Gal. 4. 19. 1 John 2. 2. 4. 4. etc. and therefore are they obliged to such
Tenderness toward them, as obliges them to take care of them, when sick, or
wounded, as Fathers are wont to do toward their natural Children.

And thus have I shown you, who those spiritual Ones are, to whom it belongs to
restore fallen, and wounded Brethren: and withal told you, that they are not
all to perform it in the same Methods: but each sort of them, as their station
in the Mystical Body of Christ capacitates them thereunto.

And indeed, it is so in the natural Body also, according to which the Apostle
modules the Regulation of the spirial Body, in the chapter before quoted, 1
Cor. 12. 27. wherein he tells us, that in both, there are (...), Members (as we
read it) in particular, i. e. each assigned to its particular Office: and yet,
in those distingu^shed Stations, and Offices, they have, or ought to have the
same Care one for another, (v. 25.) i. e. alike, and jointly, to assist for the
good each of other. And as (to apply it to the present Case) if the least Toe,
in (the lowest part) the Foot, be wounded, or pained in any kind, every other
Member is concerned to assist the Cure: the sound Leg offers it self to support
the wounded one, lifted up by its concurrent Motions, and laid on it, that it
may in the easiest posture be presented to the Eye, and Hand, to view in what
State it is, and apply proper Remedies thereunto; and the very Head, Shoulders,
Neck, Back, and Bulk of the Body, contract themselves into a narrower Compass
to facilitate the Cure: so should it be in the mystical Body of Christ: every
other Member, in its proper place, ought to do what belongs thereto; to assist
the Restitution of the Disabled one to its proper Soundness, and thereby
restore the whole Body to its due State of Integrity.

And accordingly, (1) those of the Spiritualty, in the lowest Notion (according
to our former Partition,) even the meanest Members of this spiritual Body, are,
as (by relation, mutual Dealing, Acquaintance, and freedom of Conversation,
they have Opportunities offered them,) to observe what is amiss in each other,
and by seasonable Admonitions, and Reproofs, to endeavor the Reformation
thereof, in a private Way; and when that will not do, to acquaint others, whom
the Offenders are more likely to be influenced by, of their Misdemeanors; and,
as they see these Endeavors disappointed by obstinate Incorrigibleness, and
Crimes grow more Scandalous and Infectious; to show their dislike of them, by
lessening their Intimacies, and Familiarities of Conversation with them: and
(last of all,) to apply themselves to the Officers of the particular Society of
Christians to whom they belong, that they may, in their particular Places, and
Subordinations, use their Power to Reclaim, and Reform them.

(2.) And those spiritual Ones (in the second Notion beforementioned,) who are
or are esteemed to be, beyond the Community of Christians, in Parts, and Gifts,
or by Educaion, Quality, or Degree, capable of doing more Good by their
Influence than others; are to take all occasional Advantages, which Providence
offers them, (especially among their Equals, and those who have any more then
ordinary Deference for them, or Dependence upon them,) to shame, and put out of
Countenance, bold and daring Impiety, or Immorality: and especially, if, (to
all other Advantages beforementioned,) they have any part of legal Authority
Annexed, to employ that, as far as it will extend to those holy Ends; and
withal, rendering their Endeavors in that Kind, more Efficacious, by their own
exemplary Piety and Virtue, and lastly, by Countenancing, and Encouraging those
in Ecclesiastical Authority, to the utmost of their Power, to the doing of
their Duty, that by their joint Concurrence, the greatest Offenders may, (as
well as the meanest) be brought under those due Methods of Cure, in reference
to their spiritual Distempers.

(3) And lastly, those who by Office in the Church, are (as I before told you)
most peculiarly Entitled to the Denomination of spiritual Persons in the Text,
are, (when all other Means have been used, and prove ineffectual,) to put the
last Hand, to this Holy and Charitable Work, in their Church-judicatories: to
call Criminals before them, when they come to their Notice by regular
Information, and Presentment; or otherwise, to examine their Facts with their
particular aggravating, or lessening Circumstances: and upon full Examination,
Authoritatively to Admonish and Exhort, and Reprove them, and finally to pass
Judgment, and by the Censures of the Church, to Prosecute them, either to their
Amendment, by enjoining them such penitential Acknowledgments of their Crimes,
as may testify their Repentance for them, satisfy the Church for the Scandal
given by them, and (by the Sorrow and Shame which they have occasioned them to
undergo,) both preserve themselves from relapsing into the same, or like Sins,
and others by their Examples, from such Courses: and if they shall obstinately
refuse such a Salutiferus Penance, to proceed to the greater, or lesser
Excommunication, as the Degrees of their Obstinacy deserve. And lastly, upon
their returning to a better Mind, (in case those Methods, through God's Grace,
reduce them,) to grant them Absolution in the Name of Christ, and his Church,
and thereby, to loosen those they have bound, to forgive them, restore them to
the Communion of the Church, and confirm their Love to them, in the Sense of
those Scripture Expressions, used to that purpose, Matthew. 16, 19. 18, 18. John
20. 23. 2 Cor. 2. 7, 8. etc.

And thus having showed you all, how far you are concerned, in, and by what
Means, and Methods, you, and all others are to perform your and their Parts, in
reference to so Christian a Duty; I think, the most proper use of all this
Discourse that we can make, is,

1. To reflect with holy Grief, upon the great Defects in point of
Ecclesiastical Discipline; ordained by our Savior, for so Great and Holy an
End, which at this Day, all Christian Churches lie under, and the great Danger
of so many Souls in them, for want of sufficient Remedies against the
Distempers and Diseases they are exposed to, and too often overrun withal.
There being hardly any Church in the World, that since the Cessation of
Miracles, (which kept the World in Awe by the Attestation they gave of the
divine Authority, backing the Censures of the Church, with! dreadful Executions
of obstinate Offenders) ever attained to that intrinsic Power, as to be able
to stand on its own Legs; but has been fain to call in the Civil Magistracy to
its Assistance: (and in most places) has too unhappily purchased its
Assistance, with the considerable lessening of its Orthodoxy, Unity, or
Revenues; and Diminution of its original Authority, to accommodate the
Interests of particular States and Kingdoms.

2. Earnestly to desire (as our Church Professes to do) that the godly
Discipline of the Primitive Church, of putting all who are Convicted of
notorious Sin, to open Penance, were in its original Perfection restored again,
in order to the great Ends there mentioned: that the Criminals being Punished
in this World, their Souls may be saved in the Day of the Lord; and that others
Admonished by their Example, may be the more afraid to offend. And such
Desires, expressed in our earnest Prayers to God, it may be hoped, may induce
him, in time, to make all the Kingdoms of the Earth (in this respect) the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and his Christ, according to that prophetical Promise,
Apoc. 11. 15. the means of fulfilling whereof, and the Times and Seasons
wherein it is to be Accomplished, have filled the Christian World with so many
Disputes, from the Times of the first Chiliasts, down to our Days; and so many
irregular Attempts of Indiscreet, and sometimes furious Zeal to Accomplish it.
and we have another comfortable Promise, applicable to that purpose; that, when
the Lords Time shall come to build up his Zion, he will appear in his Glory,
and not despise, but regard the Prayer of his destitute Church, etc. Ps. 102.
16, 17.

3. And to the utmost of our Power, to preserve, and keep in exercise so much
of it, in the mean time, as yet remains to us, in this general Decay; which
though (through the Indulgenoe of our Laws, it reach not all Offenders; yet) is
sufficiently assisted by them, to redress, if well followed, most notorious
Immoral^ties; or at least, to render them so uneasy to those that are guilty
of them; that it is much our Fault, that they dare appear so Open-faced in the
sight of the Sun, as they daily do. So that, (in this Case, at least,) it must
needs be highly unreasonable, for the quarelsome Dissenters from our Church, to
impute the abounding of such Crimes to the Church-constitution; and from thence
to frame colorable Excuses for their Separations from it; when they
themselves, would they join with us effectually, for the Prosecution of them,
might soon remove that Scandal out of the way; which I am afraid, (whatever
they pretend) too many of them are secretly willing should continue there, for
the carrying on of those By-ends of their own, to which they find the
Prejudices thence raised so Serviceable.

But (to shut up this Head) if we cannot herein get their hearty Assistances,
who stand divided from us; let those of us, at least, who profess to own
parochial Communion, (and especially the Officers of these Churches legally
Psalm. 106. 23.
Constituted,) rather choose (with Moses) to stand alone in the Gap, then
endanger the breaking in of God's Wrath upon us, for suffering our Laws, so sar
as they will extend, to sleep, in so general an Inundation of licentious
Debauchery: Let us, (after private Admonitions and Reproofs, tried in vain, 1 Thessalonians. 5 14.
by warning the Unruly,) make saithful Presentiments of Incorrigible Offenders
to the Ecclesiastical Judicatories; that they may either be Restored to a
sounder Constitution, and better Conversation, by public Penance, or the
Church rid of them, (both as to Infection, and Scandal) by Excommunication.

2. And thus much shall suffice, to be spoken of the Duty here enjoined; and
the Persons who are to perform it; and what their several Parts are, wherein
they must contribute to so good a Work: So that there now rests only (on this
Head) the Manner how they are each of them to discharge it, to be considered:
and that is (in the Spirit of Meekness.) as follows in the Text, (he that is
overtaken in a fault, must be restored, (...)) in a meek manner, by those that
undertake the Cure. For the Explication of which Phrase, you must know, 1 That.
(...) the Virtue here recommended, and rendered, Meekness; is, (as Moralists
define it,) a Virtue, which Checks, and keeps within due Bounds of Modcration,
the otherwise unruly Passions of Anger and Revenge; and renders those
Wild-beast like Emotions of Man's Soul, (...) or tame; which is the proper
Notion of the Greek Word.

2ly. That this moral Virtue, as it is improved by divine Grace, becomes a
Fruit of the Holy Spirit, and is mentioned as such, by our Apostle in the Chap.
next preceding this, Gal. 5. 23. v. 23. And hence, Interpreters ordinarily are
apt to derive the reason of this annexing (Spirit) to (Meekness) in the Text;
so, that the Spirit of Meekness, in this Notion, means only such a Meekness, as
is the Fruit of the Spirit.

But I think rather, the reason of joining (Spirit) to (Meekness) here, is
rather to be setched from parallel Phrases, in the Old Testament, and so is an
Hebraism, as many other Forms of Speaking are, in the New Testament. Now the
Hebrews frequently use, to express any vehement Impulse, or strong and frequent
Propension of the Mind, to such or such a thing, by the Name of the spirit
thereof. Thus (in evil things) is the Spirit of Jealousy, used for a strong
and vehement Jealousy, Number. 5. 14. A Spirit of Whoredoms, for a vehement
Inclination to whoredoms. Hos. 4. 12. A Spirit of deep sleep, for a continual
lethargical Propension. Is. 29. 10. and (in good things also) a Spirit of
Understanding, Job 20. 3. and Judgment, Is. 4. 4. and Counsel, and the Fear of
the Lord, Is. 11. 3. (not excluding the Original of them, as deriving
themselves from the Spirit of God,) cannote, the Powerful, and plentiful
Operations of them.

A Spirit of Meekness, then in the Text, (according to this Notion,) denotes a
strong Inclination to, and a large Proportion of Meekness, upon such Occasions,
exercised toward fallen Brethren, for your Restitution, possessing, and
strongly influencing the Spirits of those who go about so Charitable a Work;
which by passionate Applications, would be retarded, as a Wound in the Body, by
too rigid Handling, is oftentimes the longer ever it be Cured.

3. That the Meekness, the Spirit whereof is here recommended, is not to be
understood in a s^rict philosophical Sense, as it is confined to the Regulation
of the Passions of Anger and Revenge only; but in a larger Notion, as it lays
Restraints also on those of Pride and Contempt of others: And so it includes in
its Compass, those excellent Qualities that follow, that is, (first) of
Patience, in undergoing the greatest Evils from God, as owning that we deserve
worse; and thankfulness for the least Mercies, as judging our selves unworthy
of them; (2) modest Submission to our Superiors, among Men; obeying their
Lawful, and heartily interpreting their dubious Commands. 3 all obliging
Kindness, and respectful Civilities to our Equals; rather preferring them in
Honor, then contending with them for Punctilio's of that Nature, Romans 12. 10.
Especially, if they be good Men: it much becoming the meek Soul, (with St.
Paul) to look on himself, as less then the least of Saints. Ephesians. 3. 8. and if
they be bad, to lessen their Crimes, in balance with our own, and (by his
Example) reflecting on our selves as chief of Sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. (4)
Kindly, and Mildly and Prudently taking notice of their Faults; and taking it
kindly from them, when they in like manner take notice of ours, and reprove us
for them; (5) not rejoicing, though they be our Enemies; in any Ill they do, or
suffer, 1 Cor. 13. 6, (6) not hastily quarelling them for little Injuries, and
being ready to receive, and give moderate Satisfaction for such, on either side.

7. And lastly, toward Inferiors, showing our selves Accessible, and
Treatable to the Meanest of them: and being ready, on just Occasions, to do
them all Offices of Humanity, or Christianity; never oppressing them by our
Power or Purse; nor in any Case, Tyrannically using the Advantages we have over
them, or with a contemptuous Imperiousness, provoking them to Wrath, Ephesians. 6. 4.
and moderating Threatenings, (and Corrections) by What is Just and Equal, v. 9.
and Col. 4. 1. yea if Children, or even Slaves to us, (as most Servants were,
when the Apostle gave these Directions, but now mentioned.)

And by these, and the like Measures, (in the Case of an offending Brothers
Restitution) are all to show this Virtue.

1. Even Ecclesiastical Officers, that have the (...), or rod, are not to use
it always, nor indeed, ever when Lenity will prevail; but rather, (as the
Apostle intimates he desired, 1 Cor. 4. 21.) to reclaim Offenders with the
spirit of Meekness: and when their Obstinacy calls for it, to lay on that Rod
most Jer. 31. 30.
severaly, and withal, to show with how much unwillingness they are forced to
it, and that their fatherly Bowels (as Gods toward Ephraim) are troubled for
them; and pronounce Sentence, (as the Apostle does against the irregular
Walkers among the Philippians, chapter 3. 18, 19.) when he daclareth them Enemies
to the Cross of Christ, and denounces the Destruction from God impendent over
them,) with compassionate Tears, or equivalent Indications of Condolency.

2. And with a Spirit much of the same Temper, should all other Christians
carry themselves, in the several Circumstances, wherein their Brethren's falls
come under their notice. If their Crimes be only Private, their Admonitions and
Reproofs are to be so too; and those managed with all Modest, Kind, and
discreet Deportment, and Language proportionable; and patiently reiterated
again, and again, with such a Long-suffering as God uses toward us, to bring
us to Repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9.

And if, at last, we are enforced by our Duty to make the Crimes more known, by
calling in the Assistance of others; not to do it Rashly, and in a Passion, but
Deliberately, and with that Gradation which our Savior commands us to observe,
Mat. 18. 17. and when it comes in the Issue, to the Censure of the Church, and
the Offenders are by just Penance exposed to public Shame, we are not to
entertain them (in so doing before us, and the Congregation) with Countenances,
and Carriages, importing Lightness, and Frothiness of Spirit much less, with
Jeers, Flouts, or Reproaches, in Word or Gesture: but with a Serious and
composed Gravity of Spirit; and Demeanor through the whole Action; such as may
speak u^pitiful and compassionate Spectator of so sad a Scene, an^ withal
devout Assistants of them, and the Congregation in ou^ conjoined Prayers for
them: and lastly, when the Action ^^ over, and they Authoritatively Restored to
the Peace of the Church, and Readmitted to the Communion of that holy Soc^ety;
we ought to be ready to Re-admit them also into ou^ particular Affections, and
with all brotherly Kindness to Embrace them, to give them the right Hand of
Fellowship, to we^come them again into Christ's Fold, from whence they strayed:
and thence forward no more to remember their former Failings; and much less, to
Reproach them with, and cast in their Teeth those Crimes, which they have by
their Penitence, washed away. For such a Carriage, in such Cases, is both
Unmanly, and Unchristian. Unmanly, as that which is inconsistent with good
Breeding, in the Judgment of all civil Societies; and much more Unchristian, as
that which directly breaks one of Christ's great Commands of mutual
Forgiveness, Ephesians. 4. 32. Col. 3. 12, 13. and upon the Nonperformance whereof,
our very Pardon from God himself, is Suspended. Matt. 6. 14. Mark 11. 25, 26.
Nay more, our very Prayers are denied Access to him for Pardon to our selves;
we not being warranted to ask it, but on that Condition. Matt. 6. 12. And
lastly, such a Command, as does, not only enjoin the Duty of Forgiveness, but
also sets us the just Measure of Performance, even the Example of our Heavenly
Father. and our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 4. 32. before quoted. Wherein we are
enjoined to forgive, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us: And how that
is, the Scripture in many emphatical Forms of Speech tells us: To wit, by
blotting out our Transgressions, and not remembering our Sins. Is. 43. 25.
Forgiving our Iniquity, and remembering our sin no more. Jer. 31. 34. And
casting all our sins into the depths of the sea. Mic. 7. 19. And behind his
back, (so, as never to look on them any more.) Is. 38. 17. Yea so, as
(supposing they should be sought for) thenceforward, never to be found. Jer.
50. 20. etc.

So that, in effect, he that Reproacheth his Brother in this Case, does indeed
curse himself, when he prays God to forgive him, as he forgives.

III. And thus I have dispatched the main Thing, I intended on this Occasion to
Prosecute; to wit, (the Duty of Restoring our fallen Brethren with the Spirit
of Meekness.) I have only remaining, to touch in a few Words, the two Motives
which the Apostle here urges, to induce us to perform it in the manner
Prescribed: after which, (with a few Words relating to the Occasion) I shall
conclude. Which Motives, (as I told you before,) are two.

1. The consideration of our selves, as liable to the same Tenptations, by
which others are overtaken. And this, as we are Men, ought to prevail with us,
to consider our fallen Brethren, as those betwixt whom and us, only the Grace
of God, (not any Prerogative, or peculiar Power, or Virtue of our own) has put
a Difference.

1. Which Motive it concerns (...) even the most Spiritual, such as are most
eminently so, by Office in the Church; and though (as I before intimated) it
ought not to induce them to lay aside the (...), or Rod of Correction
altogether, where the Case requires it; yet ought to prevail even with them,
not to use it, where it may without hazard of Souls, and Scandal to the Church,
be forborne: and when Necessity inforceth them to use it, to show, as I told you
before, by their Managery thereof, that their Duty, not their Inclination puts
them upon it. For even they are obliged, (by the sad Examples, both in
Scripture, and too common Experience set before them) to consider themselves,
as liable to be Tempted, either with the same, or other, as foul Crimes as
those are, which they are to Censure.

2. And the like use ought every Christian in the Church to make of this
Motive, who either is, or thinks himself more Spiritual, then others, whose
Actions speak them (in the Apostles (...). 3. 1. 3.
Phrase) more Carnal. For to every such Person, in a particular Apostrophe, my
Text speaks, (consider thy self, least thou also be tempted.) Noah, and Lot,
and David, and man other great Saints in Scripture, are for this end set before
the best of us, as Examples for our Admonition; lest, when we think our selves
to stand most secure, we be in like manner endangered to fall. 1 Cor. 10. 12.

3. And most of all are those concerned, to lay this Motive to Heart, who, when
any of their Brethren are exposed to Shame as Criminals, are most apt to vent
their Spleen towords them, in an unsavory insulting Way; and withal, to flatter
themselves in their own Eyes, and Vaunt themselves before others, (though they
be Carnal enough as to other Fruits of the Flesh) that they are not such
Sinners, as those whom (with the Publican, Luke 18. 13.) they see beating their
Breasts, and begging Mercy of God, and the Congregation to which yet, would
they consider themselves, as our Apostle advises, might easily find, that
though they are not open Adulterers, or Fornicators, yet possibly they are,
secretly such, or (if not so, neither yet) common Swearers, or Drunkards, or
profane Scoffers at Religion: or, if they make a show of something like Piety
before the World, yet) possibly cheating Traders, Exactors, Oppressors,
Grinders of the Faces of the Poor; Heretics, or schismatical Dividers of the
Church; and because of those Vices, deserve a place among those Penitents, whom
they Insult over; and may one Day wish they had taken part of their Penance
with them, rather than after, being highly esteemed in the Eyes of Men; to be
eternally an abomination to the Lord, Luke 16. 15.

2. The secend Motive here tendered to our Consideration, is, that by treating
offending Brethren, in order to their Recovery with the Spirit of Meekness,
(and so bearing their Burdens, by a compassionate Temper toward them,) we Act
as Christians; and (fulfill the Law of Christ;) who has herein placed a great
part of that Blessedness which his Religion Conducts us to. Matt. 5. 5. Has
commended it to us by his own Example; and made this a part of that easy Yoke,
which he lays on us, in order to our everlasting Rest, to learn of him to be
meek and lowly in heart, Matt. 11. 28, 29, 30. And indeed, there is nothing,
wherein his Life was more eminently Exemplary, than in his Meekness toward
penitent Offenders. And we may make a guess at his Temper toward such, by his
frequent Conversation, (in order to the Reclaiming them,) with Publicans and
Sinners, in opposition to the sour Humor of the austere Pharisees, Matt. 9.
11, 12, 13. 11. 19. By his Treatment of the Woman, that Penitently washed his
feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head, etc. Luke 7. 38,
39. etc. And the other Woman Accused of Adultery, John 8. 10, 11. etc. Who,
though there be no peculiar Acts of her Penitence expressed; yet, it must be
supposed, that our Savior saw that in her, which rendered her malleable to
receive the Impressions of that meek Dismission from him, with Assurance of his
Pardon, provided she Sinned no more; i. e. left her Lewd Course of Life every
way, and particularly preserved her Chastity Inviolate for the future.

If then, there be so much of the Spirit of Christianity in this Spirit of
Meekness, which the Apostle here recommends to us: the contrary Temper must
necessarily, be Unchristian, as well as Inhumane.

And thus have I at length, dispatched the words, as they relate to the Duty of
those who are not Criminal, toward such as are so: to wit, the Restoring them
with the Spirit of Meekness. But I must not, in the close of this Discourse,
omit to touch somewhat on the Duty of Criminals themselves toward those who
endeavor to restore them. For the Duty of the one sort, will rationally follow
from that of the other; both as to the thing it self to be done, and the manner
of doing it.

1. As to the thing to be done, if the spiritual Brethren be obliged to restore
the fallen Ones, it is most highly reasonable, that they themselves should not
be unwilling, but rather readily comply with their Endeavors, in order to
their own Restitution. For indeed, Self-love, is the measure by which all Love
to our Neighbors is to be regulated.

And proportionably, here, Love to himself in the wounded Pationt, (in reason,)
ought to Operate more strongly on him to desire to be Cured; than Kindness, or
Compassion, can Operate upon the Chyrurgeon, to be at the Pains, or Charge to
Cure him. And therefore, when any ones Conscience Smites him for the most
secret Sins, and he cannot by his own Endeavors betwixt God and his own Soul,
recover his inward Peace; it is certainly, his Duty, of himself, to open his
Wound to some skilful spiritual Surgeon, and commit himself Voluntarily to
his Conduct for his Cure; and especially, and before all other, to his own
Pastor, who is over him in the Lord, 1 These. 5. 12, 14.

And if Men's Sins be known to others; they are not to think themselves
Affronted, if they be reproved by any of them; much less, must they quarrel
them, for not being willing to suffer Sin upon them; but rather take it as a
Kindness, that the righteous smites them, Psalm. 141. 5.

And lastly, if the Sin be Publicly, and scandalously Notorious; they should
be ready to use all lawful Means, yea, rather, seek out after the most proper
Expedients, in order to the giving as public Satisfaction to the offended
Congregation; and much more, are they obliged to comply with the lawful
Discipline of the Church, and submit to the Methods, which in this Case are
appointed for their Restitution.

For otherwise, they will incur the desperate Hazard of hardening their Hearts,
and Necks in Sin and endanger themselves to be judicially hardened by God, till
they be Destroyed without Remedy; according to the dreadful Threatenings,
levelled against such Obstinacy in Scripture, especially, Psalm. 95. 8. Heb. 3.
15. and Psalm. 81. 12. Prove. 28. 14, 29. 1 John 12. 40. Romans 2. 5. etc.

2. And as to the manner of doing it; there is as much Reason, why the Spirit
of Meekness should show it self in the fallen Brethren as in those, who
undertake to Restore them. Yea, indeed, much more; because (as in the Body, so
in the Soul,) any disorderly Passion, is apt to Inflame a Wound, and render the
Cure more Tedious, and Hazardous.

Besides, in their Case, they have no appearance of Reason, to justify them in
the Passions of Anger, or Revenge. For who can think it Rational, to be angry
with another, for such Offices, as really, and in due Estimation, carry in them
the greatest, and most obliging Kindnesses; and such are indeed, all pious and
charitable Attempts, to Rescue a Man from Sin, and Hell the greatest Evils,
yea, though the Attempter, (through Haste, and inconsiderate Zeal, should be
undecently rough, and forget his wonted Meekness; yet his Love, in such a Case,
in all reason, should excuse his Rudeness. And afterward, to reflect on this,
as deserving a Revenge; is certainly, as unreasonable, as it is to return Evil
for Good, which David complains of, asa most unaccountable Malice, Psalm. 109.
4, 5, And as little color of Reason can such Persons have for Pride, which
another way is wont to dislodge Meekness. For there is nothing more
unreasonable, then for a deformed Person, to be lifted up with Opinion of his
own Beauty; and all Sin is a Deformity to the Soul. For him, then, that is
notoriously Criminal, to be Proud, and Impatient to be looked on, and treated
as he deserves; is so very unbecoming, that it ordinarily gives the greatest
Tentation to others, to break the Measures of Meekness toward him, and turns
their Pity and Compassion into Scorn and Contempt, in the highest Degree.

And this is the Duty, I am, (in the last place,) to press upon you, that now
appear as Penitents, in this Congregation. It is certainly, to be commended in
you, that you have been willing to accept of the Punishment, the Church in
Christ's Name, Lev. 26. 41.
has inflicted on you for your Iniquity. And I hope, it proceeds from an
hearty desire to be restored to your Integrity, by Repentance; and that the
Confessions you are to make before God and his Church, will be accompanied with
a deep sense of true Sorrow, and brokenness of Heart, which may render it as
acceptable a sacrifice to God, as David's was, Psalm. 51. 17. and that none of
you will play the Hypocrites with God, and his Church, in professing that
outwardly, which inwardly you do not feel. And indeed, according to your
Sincerity herein, you are to expect God's Pardon; and according to the Evidence
you give thereof, by your meek and humble Demeanor, (joined with the other
circumstantial Evidences of true Sorrow, which naturally attend it where it is
so) you will be entitled to the Churches also. And I must tell you, the Church
will have the more reason to be satisfied herein, by your meek Submission to
those Habits, and Rites of Penitence, which she, in Conformity to the ancient
Times, enjoins you, of all which, (and they were very many) our Church,
(because many of the rest were abused by the Popish Church, when they thought
fit to make Penance a Sacrament,) has thought fit generally to retain but two:
that of the white Sheet, and Wand, with which her Penitence are enjoined (if
the Crimes require it,) to appear, and where they do not, she has liberty,
even to dispense with them.

That of the Sheet, is only enjoined to you --; all the rest being admitted,
only in their Course working-day apparel, with the (...), or Wand, to
acknowledge they justly deserved the Zod of Discipline, should be used toward
them. And the reason of that Difference, is; (as I suppose) because your
Offense appearing to your Ecclesiastical Judges, accompanied with many gross
and foul Circumstances of wanton Dalliance, betwixt the Wife of another Man,
and you, also, a married Person, gave a scandalous Appearance, and notorious
cause of Suspicion of actual Adultery; from which Suspicion the Defenses you
made, did not, (in their Judgment) sufficiently clear you;) as you Confession
enjoins you to acknowledge: whereas, the Crime of the ^est, was of an inferior
Guilt, though very great too, according to the Apostles Aggravation of it, (1
Cor. 6. 13. etc.) and they humbly offered themselves to their Penance, before
the Court had passed Judgment upon them, in order thereunto.

But, if they had required you all, to have appeared in the like ^innen Garb; I
know no reason, why any of you should have waved ^t, on that Account. A course
square Sheet, without being Fashioned, or Trimmed, being much of Kin to the
Sackcloth, which ^ntiently Penitents, (whom God himself in a particular Case,
required to present themselves before him, without Ornaments, Exodus 33. 4, 5,
6.) appeared in, as many Scriptures witness: only, with this difference, that
the old Sackcloth was far rougher, and more pungent, as being made of Hair,
not Flax, or Hemp, ^s ours is. This Imitation however, the Church thought fit
to ^etain, rather than to leave Penitents, the choice of colored, and
fashionable Garments, least even Penance it self, should in time turn to an
Ostentation of Pride in Apparel, through the affected Emulation of Persons,
vainly inclined to Singularity in the Garb they Publicly appear in.

And for the whiteness in particular, of the Vest, I am apt to believe, it
might owe it self, to the Conformity, which the Design of public Penitence,
bears to that of Baptism. This being (as the Evangelists call it) the Baptism
of Repentance for the Forgiveness of Sins, Mark 1. 4. Luke 3. 3. and that, a
Profession of Repentance, in order to the same end, the restoring Penitents who
had notoriously broken their Baptismal Vow, to their Baptismal Estate, and
Capacity again: it is not to me improbable, that the Candidates for both were
enjoined to appear in the same Garb, wherein the one sort (by the Testimony of
all Antiquity) were admitted to that Ordinance: from which Practice, the
Dominica in Albis, which from the white Vestments worn by the Baptized, on that
solemn Day especially appointed Anciently for the public Administration
thereof, still retains with us, the Name of White sunday.

This Digression (if it be so to be accounted) on this Occasion, I thought fit
to make, in order, if not to the Satisfaction, yet to the stopping the mouth of
those, who, (that they may discourage the Practice of public Penance, so
useful for the Souls of Penitents themselves, and so conducible to the Cred^^
of Christianity,) have, in this last Age, endeavored to Ridicu^^ it; and I
hope, it may not prove altogether unsuccessful to the end intended.

And now, (to conclude my Application to you;) remember what I told you, that
the sincere Conformity in your Hearts, t^ your outward Garb, in the Confessions
you are now to make according to your several Cases, can only render you
capable o^ the benefit of that Absolution, or Ministerial Forgiveness which in
the close of this Action, I am empowered by the Church to give you, (as the
Apostle expresses it, 2 Cor. 2. 10. in the Person of Christ: for without it,
it will be bestowed only, clave errnate, (as the Schools speak) upon mistaken
Subjects and so prove not only Ineffectual, for you good, but also greatly
Prejudicial to you, before him that searches the Hea^^ and tries the Reins,
by the Addition of high Presumption, and foul Hypocrisy to your other Crimes;
which God of his Mercy give you Grace to prevent.

Amen.
FINIS.

