A SERMON OF CATECHIZING; THOUGHT FIT For affinity of subject to be annexed to
this Treatise of the [Practicall use of INFANT BAPTISM.]

By the same Author.

Lutherus se professus est Discipulum Catechismi. (...)

(...).

Clem. Alex. Paedag. (...) LONDON, Printed for John Rothwel. 1655.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THou art here presented with a Sermon tending to revive an Ordinance of God,
almost grown out of date, what through the neglect of parents in private, and
Ministers and Magistrates in public; and that in some places so far, that it
is the great hinderance of those that do practice it, to be prejudiced by the
example of those that do not; some children being apt to plead the liberty
that others have, and count it an injury if they enjoy not the same: though it
be the sad liberty of dying without instruction. And this neglect is so much
the more sad, because it is so visible a compliance with the erroneous and
heretical generation of this present Age, who first decryed it in these days
of sinful liberty; as knowing how far such an omission would be friend them.
Thence thousands of people, seasoned with no principles, become easily infected
with theirs. Multitudes of Apostates, concerning whom all the good we can say,
is, that they speak evil of the things they know not, and 2 Pet. 2. 2
turn away from the holy Commandment, without the sad aggravation of having
known the way of righteousness. However it is a grievous thing that multitudes
should daily (through ignorance and error) go blindfold to Hell, and few men
take any pains to lend them their helping hand to keep them from that sad doom
of perishing for want of knowledge. If it be said, This is done by constant
Preaching; I answer, surely a man may Preach long enough to hundreds in the
Congregation (if his Congregation be of any largeness extraordinary) who will
not be able to give any account of one sentence they hear, if they live an
hundred years under the Ordinance: which will not appear improbable, if we
consider, that many come to Church merely for fashion, and take no notice of
any thing there, but gaze upon this, and that object; that others are dull of
apprehension, and their understandings, in a continued discourse, are like a
troubled water, wherein one ring or circle drives out another; and lastly, that
all generally, except they be catechized, or extraordinarily furnished with
parts beyond their neighbors, find it an hard matter to understand the very
common terms, in which Preachers must express themselves, and many times lose
a whole Sermon for want of understanding, or misunderstanding of them; For
though a Minister thinks he expresses himself very plain, yet it is almost
incredible what strange conceits most ignorant people have of common notions.
We that are Ministers of the Gospel may easily guess at the profoundnesse of
their ignorance, by our own gross imaginations (worse then Nicodemus his of
Regeneration) when we were children, although we had the advantage of education
beyond them; what absurd apprehensions we had concerning the greatest and
weightiest points of Religion. And I am sure most of our hearers are not
arrived (nor ever do to their dying day arrive) unto the understanding of a
child of twelve or fourteen years old, bred under means of Literature. Many of
our words, and expressions in our Sermons (do what we can) are Metaphorical and
Equivocal; or, if proper, yet (according to the present improvement of the
English Tongue, which a Minister that has been bred a Scholar cannot possibly
but have some smatch of) we have many foreign words, made denizons of our
language, which being grown familiar to us, we are apt to use, and with a
general charity to all our peoples understandings, conceive they stumble them
no more then they do us, whiles yet we are to them Barbarians (do what we can
many times) even in our own Mother Tongue. In a word, consider that no Minister
in his Preaching, let him be never so full, and plain, and methodical, can
possibly, cast all the heads of Divinity, the form of sound words, into so
narrow a compass (considering the time that he must take up in (the principal
part of Preaching) Application; but that to go through them in that way, will
require a competent number of years, for a man that is but indifferently full
of matter, though he forbear all unnecessary enlargements. And (in this way)
before an hearer can be thoroughly acquainted with a systeme of Divinity, to
know what he should do, the greatest part of his doing time will be over.
Besides, to such a way of principling men, by the tedious method before spoken
of, we must suppose each hearer to be able to accompany a Preacher with an
understanding and memory, suitable to his daily progress from point to point,
and to be every Lords day present; otherwise what he loses, (either through
absence or weakness of apprehension and memory) at one time, will make such a
wide gap and breach in the rest of notions, that he is rendered incapable of
understanding, and improving many other points, to which the knowledge of that
or those wherein he so fails, necessarily leads. I might add here the usual
consinement of many practical Preachers, by the inclination of their own
spirits, or the secret determination of Gods Spirit, to such a series of
Truths, as tends most to some end which they are most fitted to pursue; the
main stream of one Ministers labors running in the channel of convincing
Truths. Another labors are most directed to work upon the hearts of sinners
for conversion; another to apply cordials to the hearts of Saints for
consolation; another studies, and Preaches for the most part in a Theological
determination of Cases of Conscience, and most of the strength of their
labors, is spent in those respective ways, to which their studies most bend.
Now, how shall an hearer from such a man's Preaching, if he wait only on his
Ministry, be rendered (as he should be) thoroughly furnished for every good
work? These things I have (in brief) presented to such of my reverend Fathers
and Brethren, as (among other Readers) shall think any thing of mine worthy
their condescension to look upon it; concerning hundreds of whom in this Land,
I ingenuously and from my heart acknowledge, that I am not worthy to carry
their Books after them; and therefore confess my self too weak to advise them.
Only, for the glory of God, and the salvation of poor souls, and (in the
present course which they are to run in this erroneous and seducing generation)
for their grounding, and settling upon necessary foundations of faith and
godliness; I think my self bound to be a remembrancer unto such of our
Ministry, as have too much (of late) neglected this Ordinance of God; and
especially to those who are of the judgment of Infant Baptism, who cannot but
know that the very admission of Infants as Church Members by Baptism, renders
the whole Church, and themselves principally (as Officers thereof) indebted to
them for their education. Men, Fathers, and Brethren, I beseech you bear with a
few affectionate expostulations with you, on the behalf of the most innocent,
most hopeful, most teachable part of your Congregations, those I mean, of the
younger sort. It may be they are yet, (for the most part) dis-engaged in their
affections: Did they understand grace, and Christ, and Religion, these might
prepossesse them, and gain their first love. You may preach out your lungs and
heart to them, when they are set upon their sinful way, and marching furiously
in it like so many Jehu's, or settled upon their lees. When their lusts have
gotten the protection of a rivetted ignorance, and it may be possessed them
with a desire of continuing in it.

Surely (me thinks) you should leave your young candidates of holiness, whom
you have washed in Baptismall water, pleading with you thus:

Sirs, by your Ministry, we are devoted to the service of one God, in a
glorious Trinity of persons. How shall we serve him whom we know not? Think
you, we can ever own it for a mercy, or a privilege, to be admitted into a
Covenant, which we understand not? And will it not be the greatest temptation
to us, to renounce that Ordinance, because we cannot tell what good it does to
us? Our present Age, renders us waxy and ductile, easily molded into any form.
Why do you not forestall the market of Satan and Seducers, by prepossessing us
for God? Why are we dedicated to God in our Infant-age, if not to engage us to
be his betime? And how can we be so, except we give our selves a sacrifice
voluntarily, as once we were offered by our parents: And how can we offer our
selves a sacrifice, but in a reasonable service, Romans 12. 1? Did you then only
admit us to the empty name of Christians, and Church Members, that we might
afterward (for want of knowledge, of our duty) live and dye the veryer
Heathens? You preach truth, and we hear it, but our bottles are too narrow
mouthed, to take in so much at once; nay, so great a stream striving for
admission at once, causes all to run beside. You preach to work upon our
Consciences, but work upon our understandings first, and deal with us according
to our capacities. Give us milk as babes, and that will strengthen our stomachs
to digest stronger meat in time. Our parents, (many of them, most of them) are
ignorant, or careless of the performance of so necessary a duty. We are
therefore devolved upon you, as our spiritual Fathers. Let it not seem much to
you to descend beneath your selves, and the heights of your learned Nations and
high speculations, to lisp principles a little with your babes in Christ; The
great Apostle did so, and was never the less for it. And it will be no whit to
your discomfort at the last day, that you have denied your greatest excellency,
which makes you taller by the head and shoulders then other men, for the glory
of Christ, and the salvation of souls, by becoming all things to all persons,
and ages, that you might win some.

Dear and honored Sirs, what shall any of us reply to so rational a plea? Yea,
how much shall we come short of our duty, if we do not grant it, and act
accordingly? If we be Shepherds, like Christ the great Shepherd, we must carry
the Lambs in our bosom, as well as drive the elder sheep before us. If we be
Fathers indeed, we must teach our children to go by the forms, and walls, and
goe-cart, who cannot go alone, till they gather skill and strength enough to
dee so. For my part, I had not made so bold with you, but upon a principle (I
hope) of self-denial, choosing rather to adventure the censure of my reverend
Fathers and elder brethren, then to suffer the sonls of so many of my younger
brethren and sisters in the Lord, as are daily born into the Church by
Baptism, to be starved at nurse for want of milk. As for the means of
redressing these sad mischiefs, I know none like the conscionable practice of
Catechizing, fortified with the Magistrates concurrence, to command both the
Ministry to do their duty therein, and all Parents and Masters to present their
children and servants under some severe penalty thereunto. For truly the
Ministers are not altogether to blame in this thing. Many of them would do more
in it, could they prevail with their people to put to their helping hands: but
this is many times the lot of industrious Ministers, they would Catechize
willingly, but that they can prevail with very few to be milling to be
Catechized. Is there no balm in Gilead? no power in the Magistrates hand to
heal this evil disease of spiritual sloth and carelessness of attending upon
public Ordinances? Honorable Patriots! we desire not you should for the
consciences of any to consent to what it sees not ground for from the
Scriptures; but we desire, you should bring them where they may be informed,
and then let God work. We would teach them their duty to you, together with
their duty to God, as well, and (I hope better then those private Teachers,
whom they have yet (by a public allowance) liberty to follow; we act in the
face of the Sun, we infuse no principles in corners, but what we preach
publicly; you know our doctrine and our conversation. Do the levelling
Anti-Magistratical doctrines that fly all abroad about the Land flow from our
Congregations or theirs? Is it not safer to have children principled by us in a
public way, by Catechismes appointed by Authority, then by others in private,
who (some of them) teach either the Raccovian, or the Munsterian principles, or
(which are worse then both) the horrid Gallimaufrey of Errors and Heresies,
raked up out of all the kennels and dunghils of the former and present Ages,
lately penned, and Printed by John Bidle. For my part, I think public
Catechizing, yields the greatest security to the Magistrate that can be, of his
subjects, especially the very prime, and cream of them, the youth; who if they
be poisoned by such principles as dare not abide the light, may create unknown
dangers to him, when he thinks himself most secure. And I think, that was the
Politic ground of that project (some years since) of taking the children of
Papists out of their hands, and giving them Protestant education.

The Lord in his time convince us all of our duty, and quicken us to it: that
we may by laying the sound grounds of Religion in the youth of these Nations,
provide for the maintenance of Truth and Holiness in succeeding generations.
Mean while I have done my endeavor to the furtherance of this work, and (I
hope) removed all rational impediments thereunto, in the following Sermon;
which I leave in thy hands, Christian Reader, wishing it may work upon thee
whoever thou art in thy capacity, to yield a ready assistance to the
furtherance of so eminently useful an Ordinance. Vale and fruere.

From my study at Reading, October. 25. 1654. Thy affectionate friend, and
servant in the Gospel. SIMON FORD.

A SERMON OF CATECHIZING.
PROVE. 22. v. 6. Train up [ or Catechize] a child in the way he should go; and
when he is old he will not depart from it.
The Ordinance of Catechizing or grounding children in the principles of
Christian Religion, has been so constant a custom in all Ages and Churches,
that none ever professedly set himself against it, but those that made it their
business to promote ignorance, and (by means thereof) to propagate Atheism, or
Heresy. And as for such persons, we need not wonder, that they engage
themselves so hotly against it, if we consider, how great a means it is, both
by way of Antidote, to prevent, and by way of medicine, to cure those Egyptian
botches, wherever it is used as it ought to be. As for Atheism; it is either
notional, or practical. It is doubted among learned men, whether ever there
were any of the former sort of Atheists in the world. But if ever there were
any, whose heart in earnest told him, there is no God, I dare confidently
assirm, his tender years were not seasoned with the contrary truths, the
knowledge of the nature, attributes, and service of him. And for practical
Atheism, it is next to impossible, that without grievous reluctancies of
conscience, and mighty struglings of a convinced judgment, any man should with
an high hand continue in such Atheistical courses as proclaim to the world that
the fear of God is not before his eyes, who has from his infancy been
instructed in the principles of faith and godliness. And lastly, the present
spreading of damnable beresies, (being a disease that runs mostly among
ignorant and unprincipled persons) plainly evinceth that the cure of that
gangrene must be by the contrary, that is, gro^^ding them in the knowledge of
the principles of Religion; that being the most proper Antidote against that
infection which spreads most in dark corners, to follow it with the discovering
light of foundation-truths. No wonder then if when Satan endeavors (upon such
designs) to beat down this Ordinance, the faithful Ministers of Christ in all
Ages, have perpetually made use of it as their strongest bulwark against his
batteries; and labored to secure the truths of God by an holy prepossession of
the hearts of young ones. With the sacred Magazine of Fundamental Principles,
from whence, upon all assaults, they may be able to fetch a scripium est, for
offense and defense, as becomes disciplined and trained soldiers of Jesus
Christ. Thence in the Primitive times (as all Histories of that time inform us)
there were two Regiments of these trained soldiers in the Church, who were all
called (...), the Catechized.

1. Some of age, who being converted from Iudaisme or Gentilisme, to
Christianity, were before Baptism thoroughly tried in their knowledge of that
Religion which they undertook to prosesse, lest they should easily afterward
be drawn to apostatize from that God whom they ignorantly worshipped. Thence it
is the judgment V^sinus Catech: Kuchsinus
of able Divines, that the account that was taken of these persons, was called
(...), Heb.6.2. the doctrine of Baptismes, which contained such heads of
Christ's Religion, as were necessary to be known by persons of Age in order to
Baptism, especially of the nature of Sacraments,etc.

2. Some little children, who being born of Christian parents, were first
admitted to Baptism, andas they grew in years, catechized in order to the
receiving of the Lords Supper; to which they were not admitted whiles they were
Catechumeni, i. e. till they were (upon giving an account of their knowledge)
as it were discharged from that service by the laying on of bands. And therefore
the same Divines (before noted) conceive that (...), the doctrine of laying on
of hands, Heb. 6. 1, 2. denotes the Catechism wherein they were examined, who
by that ceremony were admitted to that highest part of Church Fellowship, the
communion of the Lords Supper.

Now these two Regiments were so closely followed by their Catechists, that ^as
in diverse Churches it was a peculiar office to be a Catechist, and so Clement,
Origin, and Cyril, were successively Catechizers of the young ones in the
famous Church of Alex^ndri^; so their progress was exceeding remarkable,
insomuch as a learned Papist [ Gallenius in Catech:] confesses to the shame of
their Church, that no convert was admitted (...), to Baptism, (which the
Fathers called Enlightening, from the Syriack Interpreter, who Heb. 6.
interprets (...), [ enlightn^d baptizat^s (baptized) qui non pene m^j^ri rerum
Christianrum luce peritiaque praeditus esset, quam in nostris (non dicam (says
he) vulgaribus Christianis) sed and (quod pudendum est) sacerdotibus multis
deprebendimus, i. e. none but such an one as for knowledge in the principles of
Christian Religion, went beyond many a Romish Priest. Insomuch, that Ambrose
was thought fit in the present exigence of the Church of Millain, to be taken
out of the Catechists form and made a Bishop; And Augustine, whiles he was yet
Catechized, wrote diverse learned books, before his Baptism, as Vrsin reports.
Oh friends, that the pride of peoples hearts in these days, should make them as
soon they are gotten into the teens, (as we say) to think they are too old or
too great to be Catechized! Truly I fear such persons will prove too old or too
great to be good, seeing they turn their backs upon so excellent a means of
knowledge and grace as this is, whereunto both Solomon the wisest of men, and
the most glorious of Kings, (and that upon his own experience) and the Spirit
of God by him, give so honorable a testimony for its usefulness, as in the
words which I have read to you.

Train up a child, and^. In the words there is observable,

1. The duty enjoined, wherein 1. Something implied, the person who is to do.
2. Somewhat expressed, viz. 1. The nature of the act commanded, Train up. 2. The
object of it, and that is double; 1. Cui, the person to be instructed, a child.
2. Quod, the thing whereabout this act is exercised, the way in which be should
go.


2. The motive annexed, wherein 1. The benefit attained thereby, he will not
depart. 2. The duration of that benefit, when he is old.

1. The persons upon whom this duty lies, are implied in the persons to whom it
is to be performed, viz. all such as have the relation of a father to children,
and so it implies not only natural parents, but Civil and Ecclesiastical also,
as Schoolmastcrs, Tutors, Magistrates, and Ministers; the care of all such, is
in these words required, for the training up a child in his way; The Magistrate
must preserve, and consirm by his Authority, a form of sound words, in which
they may be instructed; the rest must in their places endeavor to drop into
them those words, according as their age is capable of reception.

2. Their duty is [ training up,] or as we render it in the Margin,
Catechizing. The word is hanocb, and comes from (...) which signifies to enter,
or instruct in the elements, or first principles of any employment or
profession, and so we render it training, which is the initiation of a soldier
to his employment, by which he is fitted for service. It signifies also
dedicavit, or consecravit, to consecrate, or set apart, for an holy employment:
lastly, imbuit, to season, a vessel, or dip a garment, in a color that we
would have it take; and so it is as if he said, let a child be seasoned in
tender age with the liquour of saving knowledge, or let his soul be first died
into the principles by which he should walk; that his after-conversation may
look of the color of his first grounds.

3. The objectum cui, or the person who is thus to be seasoned, or principled,
is [ nagnar] which word is sometimes taken for a person entered into that age
which we call [ youth] that age that follows childhood (so Joseph is called [
nagnar] in Egypt, Genesis 41. 12. and Gideons son, Judges 8. 20.) and sometimes
for children abl^ to go and speak, as 2 Kings 2. 23. the children that mocked
Elishae are called nagnarim; and lastly, sometimes and most frequently for
children in an Infant-age, even as soon as they are sbaken out of the mothers
womb, seeing it comes from (...) excussit, to sbake off, or evacnate, etc. And
so it implies the condition of all persons, who by their age are not confirmed
or settled in their way, but are yet ductile and perswasible to choose their
way; years of childhood and youth are our learning time, few old people, or
such as are at man's estatc, but have chosen their way, and are too well
conceited of it, to admit of advice about it. And yet it may be that nagnar,
non aetate solum, sed and judicio putrum significat, as says Lavater.

4. The objectum quod, or the mystery in which they are to be instructed, is [
the way in which they should goe] it is emphatical in the Original; it is (...)
secundum os viae suae. Concerning which a Critic observes, that it must be
such a teaching as the party is capable of, as Nurses cut small bits for little
children. This is true, but perhaps too nice here; the words fignifie elsewhere
juxta mandatum, as Numb. 3. 16 M^ses is said to number the children of Israel,
(...) according to the word of the Lord, or Leigh Crit. Sacr.
(as the margin) according to the mouth of the Lord; so that this way must be
via secundum os, the way of duty commanded by God, which is called a man's way,
Ps. 119. 1, etc. The good way, Jer. 6. 16. the way of understanding, Isa. 40.
14. the way of life, Jer. 21. 8. the way of God, Mark 12. 14. the way of
salvation, Acts 16. 27. etc. Michael Cope in his Comment. reads, In the
entrance of way.

5. The benefit of this religious care in all Governors of youth, is expressed
by way of a strong probability, and implies thus much, that though it be not
impossible, that a man who has been well instructed in his youth, should
apostatize, yet it is a most unlikely thing that such a man will: nay, it
imports a promise on Gods part, to bless the means used conscientiously to
youth with constancy, and perseverance in age, which ought to be a very great
encouragement to parents to bring up their children in the nurture of the Lord;
forasmuch as even in this life they have this encouragement, that their labor
shall not be in vsin in the Lord, (...)

6. When he is old, though he be senio confectus, a very infirm old man, when
he has a foot in the grave, for so the word often signifies: or, when his age
has made him honorable, when he is an elder or a Senator, (as such are
called often senes, and (...), and we translate the word Senators, Psalm. 105.
22.) if he come to Authority, he will govern others as he himself was
principled in youth; the way he was set in, in his younger years, (...) non
recedet, be will not recede from it; the word is alike, Psalm. 14. 3. [they are
gone back, i. e. turned total Apostates] he shall not totally turn his back
upon it, so as to take up a quite contrary course. He may possibly stop ont of
that way, but he will not set his back where his face was, and walk direct
Antipocles to his former way. He may lose much of his spirits possibly, but he
will seldom grow like dead drink, as the word is used, Hos. 4. 18. there will
be some relish and savor in him to the last, of his first seasoning.

The words without any squeezing, will afford us easy Observations.

Doct. I. There is a way, wherein (even) children ought to go.

No age, not the youngest, is excused from its duties.

Doct. II. Those who have the charge of their education, are bound to catechize
or train them up in that way.

Doct. III. Good principles which have seasoned our younger years, we ought to
be faithful and constant to in our age.

Doct. IV. A well catechized and thorougbly grounded childhood, gives very
likely hopes of faithfulness, and constancy in old age.

I shall handle only the second at large; and improve all the rest, according
to the drift and intent of the Text, either by way of reason or motive, to the
duty therein required.

Doct. It is a duty that indispensahly lies on all those who have charge of the
education of children, to catechize, or train them up in the knowledge of that
holy way of God, wherein they are to go

This I shall fit for Application by

1. Proper proofs. 2. Pregnant presidents. 3. Demonstrative arguments.
(1.) Proper proofs.

Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Is an evident and undeniable place, These words shall be in thy
heart, and thou shall teach them diligently, or (as in the Hebrew) whet or
sharpen them unto thy children. That is, shall srequently inculcate the same
things, by way of Catechism, and shall talk of them when thou sitsest in thy
house, etc. See Deuteronomy. 11. 19. Ps. 78 5, 6: These shall sussice for the Old
Testament. See one also in the New, Ephesians. 6. 4. Ye Fathers bring up your
children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. This (...), denotes feeding
and nourishing, and their spiritual food must be (...), not only (...), which
signifies civil eauction, in manners, common honestly, moral virtue, and civil
learning, but (...), Religion too. Not only feed them and keep them alive,
(says Zanchy) facium boc and animalia bruta, beasts do thus much: not instruct
them only in manners and morality, for that Heathens did, and it is strange,
even amazing what rules Plutarch and Aristotle, etc. give for this. But this
admonition of the Lord, is Christianorum proprium, says he, and implies a
training them up in ver a pietate, ver a religione, ver a Dei cognitione
doctrinam coelestem in liberorum animos semper instillando; In true Religion,
and the knowledge and worship of God.

(2.) Pregnant presidents.

1. Of Catechizert. Without doubt all the Patriarchs before Moses were such,
for there being till Moses no written Word of God, the mind of God was
undoubtedly conveyed from Fathers to children by tradition; and (as
undoubtedly) through the diligence of some parents, and the neglect of others
in this duty, the true knowledge of God, continued in Seths, and Noah's, and
Sems, and Abraham's families, whiles most of the rest turned Heathens and
Idolaters. Concerning Abraham the Scripture is express, Genesis 18. 19: I know
Abraham (says God) that bre will command his children, and his household after
him, etc. q. d. I know Abraham so well, that of all men he will not neglect it.
David was so; see how he catechizeth Solomon his son, 1 Kin. 2. 2, 3. 1 Chronicles.
28. 9. And thou, Solomon, my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve
him with a perfect heart and a willing mind, etc. So useful a way it was, that
he invites others also to learn of him, Ps. 34. 11. the Catechism is more
large, Prove. 4. 4. etc. Bathshebs also, the mother, who took no less pains
with Solomon, as appears from his own mouth, Prove. 31. 1. The Apostle Paul
thought it not more beneath him to give milk to babes, i. e. to instruct
ignorant and weak Christians in plain Catechism grounds of Religion, more then
to speak wisdom, i. e. higher truths among knowing and judicious Christians, 1
Cor. 3. 1, 2. whom he calls perfect. This also in 2 Timothy 1. 5. and 3. 15.
compared, is the special commendation of Lois and Eunice. Afterward it became
a special office in the Church to be a Catechist (ut supra.)

2. Of catechized. Thus it is most likely, Henoch, holy Henoch that walked with
God, and whom God so gloriously translated to himself, was thus instructed, and
this appears from his very name, which is taken from the word in my Text
Chanak, and signifies catechized, or instructed. Likely Abel was so before him.
Concerning Solomon it is clear before. Theophilus, whom the Spirit of God
honors so far as to admit him to be the first person to whom any portion of
Scripture was dedicated, was thus catechized in the History of the Gospel, Luke
1. 4. (...). So was Apollos, to whom this commendation is given, that he was a
man mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18. 25. he was (...). Paul himself was
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, Acts 22. 3. a great Jewish Doctor. Timothy
is commended, that (...), from a suckling he had known the Scriptures, 2 Timothy
3. 15. Nay, what shall we say? when our Savior himself condescends to be
catechized? for so diverse interpret, his hearing the Doctors, and asking them
questions, which was the way of their training youth; and it is likely, so Paul
was bred at the feet of Gamaliel. What famous Fathers were Catechumeni, I have
in part shown before. To whom let me add Arnobius; And Luther professes,
though he were a studied Divine, yet he was beholden to Catechism.

(3.) Demonstrative Arguments. The first is, in this Syllogism.

Reason 1. If there be a way wherein children must go, and they cannot,
without being catechized, know that way; then it is the duty of those that have
charge of them, so to catechize them.

But there is a way wherein they ought to go, and they cannot know this way
without catechizing, etc.

First, that children in their tenderest years, have a way in which they should
go, a duty belonging to their age is clear.

1. To God. In that God requires them to remember their Creator in the days
of their youth, Eccles. 12. 1 And the persons spoken to are th^se whose vain
courses the wise man tar^ly reprehends in the clause of the former chapter.
Where he minds children, and young men alike, of the sicklenesse of those buds
and blossoms, of their prime* childhood, says he, and youth are vanity, chapter
11. 10.

Hence God commends Timothy for having learned the Scriptures, (...), from a
sucking child, 2 Timothy 3. 15.

Solomon was instructed very young; for Josephus says, he was but fourteen
years old, others but twelve, when he began to reign, and his parents had
catechized him before that age. And it is not inconsiderable, that God takes
children themselves into Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29. 11.

2. This for their duty to God. They have also a duty which they owe to
parents, Ephesians. 6. 1.

And both these are clear, in that God appoints correction as a great means to
keep them in, even from their Infancy. Now God allows not correction but for
faults, and there can be no fault where there is no duty. But God appoints the
rod for little children, See Pro. 22. 15. Foolishness, i. e. wickedness, is
bound in the hear of a child, implying that there is a bundle of it, and that
it is fixed, settled, natural; what then is the way to remove it? the rod of
correction shall setch it out.

Sol. 23. 13. Withhold not correction from the child, for if thou be^test him
with the red be shall not dye; implying that there are damning corruptions in
Infants hearts, and the way to save them from damnation is correction. Sure God
does not promise salvation to children barely because they are whipped and
corrected; but as the end of that means when rightly used, seeing the rod is an
instrument to bring the child into a way of salvation. And it is observable that
the way is (...) in both places, as in my Text.

2. That they cannot know this way without instruction, is clear,

1. It we consider, that none is borne a Chistian, farther then in profession,
Job 11. 12. Man is born like a wild asses colt. Vain man, or empty man is
foolish, and he is born so; like an ass, the dullest and foolishest of all
creatures (foolish to a proverb) and like a wild ass, the dullest and most
unteachable of Asses, and such a colt is man borne.

2. That we have no knowledge by inspiration without the use of means. A child
would neither speak nor go, were he not taught; though God can give both
without means, yet he will not, so neither will he infuse knowledge
immediately, having appointed means for us to use to that end. If a child be
bred where the name of God, and Christ, and religion is not heard, needs must
he be an Atheist.

2. Reason teaches us, that when we attempt to alter the natural disposition
of any thing, we must begin betimes. A crooked tree will break rather then
bend, when old, that would have been set straight when it was young, though it
were never so crooked; and when we will tame any creatures that are by nature
wild, we take them young, and use them to the discipline which we mean to bring
them to. A young horse is sit to learn a pace, and a young Spani^ll to
hunt, and therefore we put them to it in that age. We deal so with children in
the things of the world; we instruct them in reading, writing, needle work,
music, in their tender years. Hereby we condemn our selves in the presence of
God and good men, if we neglect to take the same course for principling them in
the ways of God. A child's age is tender and pliable, a young twig that you may
bend any way, if you take him betimes, but if you let him get head, and grow
stout before you handle him, (besides that he must needs grow crooked, seeing
it is so natural to him) he will be incapable of being reduced to order. When
persons are children, fond parents think them too young, and when they are a
little grown toward men and women, they think themselves too old to be
instructed; and so many poor sottish souls (what between their parents
negligence, and their own pride and conceitednesse) perish without
understanding, and as they live dye like beasts. Ergo, it is said, he that loves
his child chastens betimes, Pro. 13. 24.

3. If God requires constancy and preseverance in a good way to the end of the
longest life, then (as a means thereunto) be requires, youth should be
catechized in that way. But God requires constancy and persevarance in age.
Ergo.

Here are two propositions to be proved.

1. That God expects a man should persevere in a good way, ad extremam usque
senectutem. And I hope I shall not need to say much, only see how Paul
charge Timothy concerning the truths of Jesus Christ. Hold fast the form of
scund words, and (...) keep charity that good thing which was committed to
thee, speaking of Doctrine, 2 Timothy 1. 13, 14. and so 3. 14, 15.

And so for the ways of God, we are in many places pressed to endure to the
end, Mat. 10. 22. To hold fast the beginning of our confidence to the end, Heb.
3. 6, 14. To hold fast our profession, 4. 13. 10. 23. See another charge to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. 13, 14. So 1 Timothy 1. 18, 19. he has a command concerning
both.

And certainly there is nothing more unworthy a Christian, nay a man, then that
prodigious sicklenesse of persons in this our wanton age, wherein the minds of
men undergo more frequent changes then their garments, and become fickle in
every thing but their own sicklenesse. Certainly, the Lord hates such
Chamaelions, and Weather-cocks in Religion, such children in discretion, as are
turned about with every wind of false doctrine, and fall away from their
steadfastness, Ephesians. 4. 14. 2 Pet. 3. 17.

2. Now that catechizing in youth is a great security against Apostasy in age.
My Text in the latter part abundantly testifies; and when the Apostle presses
perseverance on Timothy, whence does he draw his argument? is it not from his
initiation into that way in infancy? 2 Timothy 3. 14, 15. continue -- knowing that
(...), etc. See the end that God aims at in enjoining parents their duty,
Psalm. 78. 4. 56,

Indeed, when we come to years of discretion, we must not then stick to truths
and ways barely, because we learned them in youth; for upon this account, a
man might be excused for obstinacy in an erroneous or sinful way; but we are
bound to try those things after wards, which we learn in youth by rote; and as
far as we find them good and sound, to be thereby the more encouraged to
persevere in them. We reverence truths and duties for our parents sake who
teach us when we are young; but afterward when we find the worth of the^ by a
riper judgment of our own, we reverence our parents for their sakes.

1. We perceive that as a tree is bent to the hand when it is young, so it
grows commonly ever after.

2. Prepossession (we say) is 11 points of the Law, and if God get the first
possession of the heart in our infancy, he will not be easily cast out again.
'Twill cost such a man as had good education from infancy, many an hard tugge
and pull of conscience, if he turn a side from the way afterward.

3. Men ordinarily count it their honor to be constant, and indeed it is so, if
it be a good way, for it is a beam of the Divine Nature which is
unchangeablenesse. But though the way be never so bad, yet (ordinarily) when we
are entered in it in our infancy, we hardly leave it. That that is bred in the
bone will bardly out of the slesh. And he reditary sins and crrours, like
hereditary diseases, are hardly ever cured, Jer. 44. 16, 17. The Queen of
heaven could not be ungodded by all Jeremies words, for they had been bred in
Idol-worship, and therefore they will continue in it. If a thing be but
indisserent the parents commands render it even necessary in the eyes of
children, to observe it. See in the Rechabites, Jer. 35 6. 7, 8. And the
Apost'e Paul was (...). Gal. 1. 14. exceeding zealous herein

And no doubt but the same principles would have some influence upon the
constancy of children in good things, if they were as carefully instilled into
them as evil ones are

4. Add to these, fastly, That God is cspecially engaged to such as are so
principled, to keep them in the way; and so some read the words in the Text, in
a promissory sense, be shall not depart from it. And truly I much incline to
that reading, seeing God intends it for an encouragement to parents to train
up their children in a good way, and that not merely moral, but divine, and
such an encouragement as may give them the greatest security against their
apostasy; and he could give them none, like engaging himself to keep them in
the way. See how confidently David prays on this account, 71. 5, 6, 9. 14, 17,
18

Object. But you will say then, how come so many that are well-bred, to
apostatize?

Answ. I answer, (1.) ei her they are but slightly principled by parents; and
if they sow little, they cannot look to reap much; or (2.) they do not water
what they sow, with prayer, as they should; or (3.) they undo by their example
what they do by instruction; (4.) or lastly, their children were never truly
the better for their education, but lived in a godly family, as diverse do in a
prison, and watched earnestly for a manumission from it by increase of years;
and it is no wonder if such be carried away, when opportunity is offered, that
watch an opportunity to escape before it is offered: No wonder if the fruit
fall when it is grown great, which was rotten at the core from the first.

Use. 1. Severe reprebension to those parents of all sorts and sizes who
neglect this duty. Now of these there are several sorts, and the reproof must
be directed to them in proportion as it is deserved

I. Some herein offend out of ignorance, not so much of the quod (for that I
hope I have removed by what has been said) but the qumodo how they must do it.
They are (themselves) ignorant of the first principles of Religion, though by
the time which they have had in the Church of God, they might have been enabled
to teach others; a thing which the Apostle Paul cries shame on, Heb. 5. 12

(1.) How many gray beards, and boary heads, shall a Minister, upon a serious
search, sind in Congregation, that are yet to learn the A. B. C. of the
Religion which they have lived in and professed from their infancy? Truly,
that such persons are Christians, is more from the hand of providence, then the
grace of presoverance. If the State hold to the Faith, they may, but if the
Religion of the clime alter, they that have lived Protestants in profossion
sixty or seventy years, I will not be bound for one to a thousand of them that
they shall not dye Papists, or Mahumentans. I fear when we shall hereafter
enquire into the knowledge as well as conversations of our Communicants, it will
appear so.

(2.) How many young Striplings are there that get them Wives and are fathers
of children, before they have wit to teach them any thing but childish games,
and are fitter to be their playmates, when they have begotten them, then their
paren's? Such as the Primitive Church would have kept among the Catechumeni,
many years, beyond the age in which among us they are Fathers and Mothers; and
it is pity, among us, a married condition is grown to be a protection against
Catechizing. We ordinarily condemn the wisdom of such persons as marry, and
get children before they know how to maintain them; and is it not as much a
shame for men to get children ere they can tell how to catechize them? I
profess for my part, I think it a very unfitting thing that any persons in a
Christian Commonwealth should marry and become parents, ere they can give an
account of their faith. How shall they engage to the Congregation to educate
their children in the Faith that they know not? I must beseech, nay charge,
such parents and masters of families, to get them Catechismes, and let them not
be a shamed to learn at home with their children, lest their children but strip
in knowledge, and rise up in judgment against their parents. Otherwise, I make
no question that by that time I have followed this exercise one twelve-moneth
(if they will be so good to their childrens souls, as to send them hither) by
the blessing of God, I shall make the least child here, that can but go and
speak, shame a great part of the elder people of this Congregation.

II. Others offend out of scruple, to whom I shall speak more in the next Use;
only let me tell them, that conscience that makes men scruple sin is safely
tender, but an erroneous dangerous one, that occasions scrupling duties; that
(ordinarily) a slight and careless, and unprofitable living under duties
whilst we are satisfied in them, occasions our dislike of them; and that it is
just with God it should be so that God should suffer themselves to put their
consciences as a bar to the enjoyment of the benefit of such duties, who once
made no conscience to benefit by them at all, when they did enjoy them.

III. Others offend wilfully, and therefore the more fearfully, and desperately.
There be some fools in the world, as Solomon says, that hate knowledge, Pro.
1. 22. and no wonder if they that hate it themselves, will labor to keep their
children from it as much as they can. Now as this hatred of knowledge seldom
possesses any man so desperately as that he should become an enemy to it for
its own sake, but he therefore hates it because it does (and so far hates it as
it does) discover some evils in him, which he labors to conceal and
maintain, as our Savior renders the cause, Job. 3. 20. so is this principle
that engages diverse persons so violently to set themselves against this
Ordinance, commonly begotten in them by one of these three things.

1. Error in their judgments. Men that hold heterodox and unsound opinions,
and desire to nuzle up their families in them, are afraid, if the light of
Catechism-truths get into their families, they shall not enjoy their dear
opinions so quietly; and seducers that creep into houses, and make silly men
and women their prey, are bodily afraid (as we say) lest this course should
deliver the prey from their teeth, and therefore they make it their business
to keep all that they can from this holy exercise. They know it is best juggling
by a dim light, and fishing in mudded waters, and a cloudy day.

2. Or secondly viciousness in their lives. They know whilst the light is shut
out of a room, a little cleanliness will pass for a great deal: but if the
Sun get in, he will show a great deal of dust which before was over-looked.
They know that a little Religion will go far to get them a name in an
uncatechized Town or Family; but when the very children and servants shall be
able by the Word of God to examine all their actions, and they shall have as
many reprovers in a neighborhood or family as persons, they think this a
tedious trouble; nay, and (possibly) they expect some service from them, which
light will hinder.

3. Or thirdly, Envy. This moved the Jews to hinder Paul's preaching, Acts 17.
5. 13. 45, 46.

To those of all three sorts, I must say this in the Name of the Lord, as Paul
said to Elymas the Sorcerer, Acts 13. 10. O ye wretches, that are full of
subtlety and all mischief, you children of the devil, and enemies of all
righteousness, will ye not yet cease to pervert the righteous ways of the
Lord? Is it not enough that you are resolved to damn your own souls, but you
must draw others into hell with you? Know this, that the more you occasion
damnation to, the deeper will your own damnation be. Believe it, all the
curses of your children and servants that are damned for want of knowledge,
will fall on your heads. If the wilful murder of the bodies of men be so
heinous a sin, O what an horrible guilt is there in the wilful murder of
souls!

Use. 2. Exhortation to the conscientious discharge of this duty, by all whom
it does concern. To set home this, I shall

1. Show on whom it lies. 2. Direct what course should be taken to effect it.
3. Lay down some inducements to it. 4. Remove impediments and discouragements.
I. The persons on whom this duty is chargeable, are (in general) all that
have the name of parents. Now that name, and so duty is common to all
superiors, though not to all in the same way. Magistrates are to teach, and so
to catechize, favendo, protegendo, praecipiendo. So Je^^shaphat and his
Princes, 2 Chronicles. 17. 7, 8, 9. taught, by sending out, and accompanying with
their power and assistance, teaching Priests. So Hezekiah, chap. 30. 22. and
Josiah 35. 2. taught by speaking comfortably to, and encouraging them.

Natural Parents and Masters of families are to do it, partly in their own
persons in private. This was Abraham's care, Genesis 18, 19. and David's, etc. ^^
supra, and partly, by causing them to present themselves to the public
instruction of the Minister, whose work is to teach them publicly, and take an
account of their growth in knowledge. That this is the Ministers duty, and so
by consequence, the duty of such Governors to present their charges before
them will appear, in that (1) they are not only shepherds to the stronger
sheep, but to the lambs also, and Christ requires they should be fed as they
can bear, John 21. 15. feed my little lambs, (...). The Apostle Paul had to
deal with the rawest and youngest as well as the most experienced and
strongest; and so had milk for them as well as stronger meat, and wisdom for
the perfect. It appears also from Heb. 13. 17. where the Holy Ghost charge
the souls of the whole flock on them, as that of which they must give account;
and if so, it is supposed they must know the state of them, and must have
proper means allowed them whereby to be able to perform it: and for this, no
means so proper as Catechizing. Besides, hereby they are enabled to discover
the care or negligence of Governors of Families in their respective charges,
and deal with them in their Ministry accordingly. Add to all this, that many
of such Governors and Parents have need to be catechized themselves, and then
the family are more properly and immediately under the Pastors charge and
inspection then otherwise; and such of all others (though they usually throught
pride are, yet) have least reason to be backward in presenting their people to
this Ordinance.

II. But what if we cannot prevail with our Children and Servants, to submit
themselves thereunto, what course must we take with them? (may Parents and
Masters say.)

Answ. Even the same course, or a more severe, which you would, in case they
neglected their duty to your selves.

1. Instruct them your selves, in their duty that they are bound to obey you in
the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 1. Yea, in all things that are not sinful, and I hope none
is so vile as to charge this duty with sin, see Col. 3. 22.

2. Charge this their duty upon them in the presence of God, with all
Authority, as they will answer it at the Judgment Seat of Christ. If this
succeed not,

3. Appoint proper penalties for every neglect in Gods Service; abridge them of
those liberties for recreation, and other refreshments of your smiles and
countenance, (things which are in your power to bestow or deny) till they
conform.

4. Correct them, and that more severely for any neglect of this kind, then
for any offense toward your own persons, Pro. 10. 13. 13. 24. 26. 3. 29. 15.

5. If they be incorrigible, discharge them the family, Psalm. 101. 4, 6. the
presence of such persons is more hurtful (if the presence and blessing of God
be any thing worth) then their absence, Philemon 11. Onesimus, when
unconverted, was an unprofitable servant, but converted, became profitable both
to the Church and his Master, and whereas Philemon had before either turned him
off, or let him depart, and counted it a good riddance, (as we use to say) Paul
never pressed him to entertain him again, till he was assured that he was
become gracious, See Genesis 21. 9, 10, 11 yet their usage must be different, as
they be either scrupulous, or shamefaced, or obstinate; if there be invincible
scrupulousness, these hindrances must be more gently, and with more
conscientious care removed; so far, as that it may appear, that the
judgment is, (or ought upon sufficient means of conviction to be) satisfied,
and then to enjoin obedience; you may judge if conscience scruple this, by
conscientious scruples in other things.

Shamefacednesse must be wrought out by bringing them to such duties by
degrees. Obstinacy must be presently knocked down by the authority and power of
the Master or Parent, it being a contestation with him for the rule of the
family.

III. Motives to this duty concern,

1. Superiors, or Parents. 2. Inferiors, or Children.
1. To Superiors. Consider,

1. Religion make^ the best servants and children, yea, subjects; Those that
have sucked in a conscientious knowledge of their duty in their tender years,
will do more for a word then others for many blows. Abraham's family was a
catecbized family, and see how sweet an harmony there is in all the parts; his
wife, an humble dutiful and obedient wife: The Scripture takes especial notice
that Sarab called Abraham Lord, and obeyed him, 1 Pet. 3. 6. His Son Isaac,
what an example was he of subjection to his Father, he trudgeth after him with
his load of wood that was to sacrifice him, he resignes himself wholly to him
in the choice of his Wife, he shows his pious education in his private
devotions, Genesis 22. 6. 24. 4. 63. His Servant Eliezer, what apatern of
wisdom, piety, and faithfulness gives he, chap. 24. And it cannot be
otherwise, but that Religion making them to behold Gods holy Law seconding all
the commands of their Superiors, must be a principle of universal obedience
unto them. Now religious principles ( ut supra) are not ex traduce, borne with
us, but taught; all the regular obedience that you can expect, must be in the
Lord, and how so, if they know not what that duty means?

2. This is the way to make Families, Churches, and so (in an especial manner)
to engage the blessing of God unto them, and the curse to the contrary. Though
catechizing carry not grace with it inseparably, yet (ordinarily) the want of
it is evidence enough of little grace in a family; needs must such families be
among them that call not upon the name of God, and so lie under a fearful
imprecation, Jer. 10. 2. For how can they call upon him, of whom they have not
heard? Romans 10. 14. An uncatechized family is an Heathen family. Now where God
is owned in a family, what a blessing comes with it; see in Potiphars family,
Labans family, Genesis 39. 5. and 30. 27. If one godly man in a family blessed it,
how would many?

3. By this means a plantation of Churches may be erected. People talk of
gathering Churches, but their way (generally) is scattering them, as many
precious Ministers find by sad experience, their Congregations being parcelled
out into private meetings; but this is warrantable way of gathering Churches.
Catechize your own familyes where you have authority, and when they go abroad
in the world, wherever they light, they will drop some savorie knowledge, and
leave some relish behind them. Thus is a good man (...), and families are
nurseries to Church and State. Dan. 12. 4. Many come to and fro, and knowledge
is multiplied.

4. This is a notable way to preserve union in families, when they walk (all
of them) by the same known common principles. The reason of division in many
families is, that they are persons of several principles and ways. It may be
in a family of ten persons (if of age) they are all members of ten several
Congregations. The husband will not communicate with the wife, nor the child
with the father, nor servants with their masters; whence this? is it not from
want of early grounding them all upon common principles?

5. If they be saved, you will be rewarded as instruments, Dan. 12. 3. If they
be damned, you are, clear their destruction will be of themselves, and their
blood upon their own heads: Otherwise think what heavy curses will be belched
out against you to all eternity, by those whose destruction has been promoted,
by your neglect of teaching them better. Let none of yours have cause to say,
you suffered them to perish without instruction.

6 (As for children in special) Parents, you have great reason to endeavor to
make them knowing and gracious, for their natural blindness and corruption they
are beholden to you for, they are hereditary diseases. You would feign have
your children acknowledge themselves beholden to you for their being, for what
I pray you? for making them children of wrath, and heirs of damnation, a
condition a thousand times worse then not to be? A parent is a man's deadliest
enemy that begets him to hell, and never endeavors to recover him from that
condition.

7. God uses to punish the neglect of this duty, by making those persons the
greatest plagues to a parent whom he is most careless to educate with a strict
hand in the knowledge and practice of their duty. Lamentable examples are in
Absalom and Adonijab, about whom it seems David took least care for their
strict education, See 2 Kings 1. 6.

If you let them sow wild oats, you (as well as they) may reap repentance in
time.

2. To Inferiors, and those of the younger sort, (especially) I shall say a
few things also by way of encouragement.

1. God values a knowing and religious childhood and youth at an high p^ice.
See how he calls for our young days, Eccles 12. 1. the argument is remarkable.
[ before the days come wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them. q.
d. Will thou leave those days for God, which thou shall be weary of thy
self? Will God take pleasu^e in that part of thy time that thou can take
none in? Thy days of choice (so the word signifies) the choycest days should
be filled up with the choycest employments.] It is a pretty observation of some
Rabbis upon Levit. 1. 14 that the Lord will admit turtles for a sacrifice at
any age, but pigeons it is expressly required that they be young; and they
give this reason, because tu^tles are savoury meat at any age, but pigeons when
they grow old, grow tough and illrelished. Truly friends, we are not born
turtles, (for such are only Christ's sanctisied ones, Psalm. 74. 19) we are
pigeons. Let us remember that there is no acceptable relish in old pigeons, See
2 Timothy 3. 15. God promises such especial mercy, Prove. 8. 17.

2. There is none of you but is old enough to dye, and old enough to be damned.
Romans 5. 14. Therefore it concerns you to get the knowledge of the way of
salvation early. You early contrive how you shall live in this world, and are
contented upon that account to learn a Trade, because you know not how soon you
may be left to your selves, Oh be as wise for your souls!

3. This is the learning-age; if ever you will know the things of God, it must
be now; hereafter when you come into the world, you will plead multitudes of
employments to divert you, you will not be able to find time to learn: Now you
have no affairs of your own to put these more weighty ones out of your heads,
you have not the temptation of shame to acknowledge your ignorance; and this to
those of grown age is a great enemy to learning, especially in this way; they
are ashamed now to learn, lest they should confess they have been ignorant so
long.

4. You can never make any regular profit of the public hearing (nay very
little of private reading) of the Word without the help of Catechism. As for
preaching, Catechisme-points are the tools, by the help whereof a Minister
makes Sermons, and people understand them. Can you understand a discourse
concerning any trade, and yet be altogether ignorant of the names and nature of
the tools that are used in it? And as for reading, you will be able to make
little use of that also, except you can reduce what you read to some
Methodicall head, or other of Divinity, which you must be beholden to
Catechismes for.

5. Nay further, some of the Ancients, have censured the ignorance of
Catechism very highly. Clemens Alexandrinus, (the great Catechist in the
famous Church of Alexandria, whence he has his title) says roundly, (...).
That there is no believing without catechizing-principles: And a Aquis. Council.
Can. 14.
whole Council determined many years since, that those are not worthy the
name of Christians that are not acquainted with Catechism.

6. The condemnation that lights upon any of you at the last day for wilful
ignorance will be an heavy condemnation. Read and tremble (you of Reading) at
the fearful place, Matthew. 10. 15. If it be (even under temporal evils) so sad
an aggravation, to consider that a man has hated instruction, and not obeyed
the voice of his Teachers, nor inclined his ear to them that instructed him
(as it seems it is by Solomon, Prove. 5. 12.) how much more aggravating will it
be to thee hereafter in hell, to consider that thou did once live in a family
where Catechizing and other exercises of family-religion were in use, that thou
had thy abode in a Town where thou did, or might at least, hear a
public Catechism every Lords day; and yet thou did either sloathfully
neglect, or malieiously hate those precious means which (by Gods blessing)
might have kept thee from that place of torment?

7 This is found (^y experience) the most pr^fitable and compendious way of
teaching all Arts and Sciences, to draw the principles of it into short
Systemes and Tables, and the Tutor to read Lectures upon them, and take an
account of his Scholars how they understand them. If you put a child to learn
English, he must begin with his A. B. C. and the Teacher must not only take the
book and read the lesson to the child about the letters, but examine him which
is which, if he will have him expert in so trivial a thing as an Horn-book.
Catechismes are such A. B. C. without which you cannot sp^^^ any sound
Divinity, and if you do not take the same course in them, with young novices,
we may preach to them while we will, to little purpose; and they hear, but to
as little.

IV. The impediments to this duty I shall take notice of, and (by Gods help)
take away in their order.

1. On the Parents and Governors part, who should present their little ones to
this Ordinance, there are two scruples (slender ones, I must needs say, yet
such as are strong enough to stumble slender Christians, and especially take
hold of such as are tainted with some principles of Anabaptisme; but as small
as they are, we will stoop to take them off.)

Object. And first it is objected, That if the children so catechized be very
young, and not capable of understanding what they learn and repeat, this will
prove nothing but a mere profanation of the Name of God, an Ordinance of his
being hereby misused, whilst it is performed by rote in a perfunctory way.

Answ. To which I answer.

1. The intellectualls of some children are very early ripe, and some things in
Religion are so plain, that they may easily be understood. The speeches that
have dropped from some children at four, five, six, years old, do sufficiently
demonstrate how early some truths have been apprehended by the understandings,
yea, and wrought upon the consciences of little ones.

2. This Objection seems to cross legs with the express Word of God, which
commends Timothy for acquaintance with the Scriptures even from his long-coats
and cradle, 2 Timothy 3. 15.

3. This holds as strongly against instructing elder persons known to be wicked
and profane, because there is more likelihood that they will profane those
holy things. And yet no Minister is to take the profaneness of his hearers as
a sufficient discharge from his duty, in instructing even those that oppose
themselves, to see if God will at any time give them repentance to the
acknowledgement of the truth, 2 Timothy 2. 25.

4. It is very unlikely, that those children who cried Hosanna to our Savior
Christ, Mat. 21. 16, 17. understood what they cried, but (it is likely) cried
with the multitude* for they were such for whom our Savior makes an Apology
under the name of babes and sucklings, and yet he received and justified them
in so doing. Had our Savior been of the objectors mind, he would have blamed
them with the Pharisees, rather then justified them.

5. There is more danger of their profanation of the Name of God for want of
instruction. We should not (I believe) hear so many oaths, and curses, and idle
exclamations upon the Name of the Lord, as we daily do, even from those that
can scarce speak or go alone, were they taught betimes that these things are
wicked and sinful. They might be kept from these profane practices very ea^ly
by the fear of hell, as well as from crying, by bug bears, etc. did men
possess them as early with true fears, as they do with vain ones.

6. A little, a very little understanding will r^nder a duty p^ssable and
current from a little one, when a grea^er measure will not suffice to the
performances of elder persons. We our selves indulge a great many childish
faylings in the duty we expect from our little children, which we will not a
like bear withal from greater boys. And God accepting according to what we
have, and not according to what we have not, gives us sufficient ground to
believe he walks by the same rule.

7. What they learn then, though but by rote, may stick in their memories, and
work upon their consciences many years after. And how know thou, O man, but
the light thou did kindle in the mind of thy child, may be renewing (at
least) restraining light to him many years after thou art gone?

Object. It is farther objected, That our way of catechizing is a form, the
asking some set Questions, and receiving set Answers to them; and the Objectors
think all Forms unlawful.

Answ. 1. But what think these men of a Form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1. 13. is
that also unlawful? and if it be not, then either our forms of
Catechisme-Questions and Answers must be made up of unsound words, (which if
they say, they must prove too) or else that they are a form will no way (to the
judgment of Gods Spirit) prejudice them.

2. So were the ten Commandments, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. and yet God commands the
Jews, to teach them their children, and whet them diligently upon them. Surely
we need not fear teaching our children the ten Commandments, when God
himself appoints them their Lesson, we that are but his ushers, may safely
require their learning it.

3. That our Catechismes are thus a form, does most answer one main end of
Catechizing, which is to teach men and women from their Infancy to think and
speak the same things which is necessary in a well-ordered Church; those
persons being much endangered to lose orthodox notions, who are ignorant of
orthodox expressions

And thus much shall serve to answer ths elder children in their weak
objections, I mean those parents who throw away the Ordinance of God upon such
childish exceptions.

I now come to remove the hindrances on the behalf of the younger ones, by
which they are scared from giving their due attendance hereupon.

Object. And first Shamefacednesse is pleaded ^y some, who pretend they can,
and would willingly answer in private, but they have not confidence enough to
appear in public.

Answ. 1. Art thou indeed shame-faced? the mo^e need have thou resalutely to
undertake the work, by how much thou have beyond others a temptation in thy
very constitution against it. One part of our spiritual watchfulness, and
daily m^rtification, consists in finding out, and overcomming constitution-sins.

2. Many that pretend Shamefacednesse in doing good, quickly enough grow past
shame in doing evil; and it is natural to most men by means or original
corruption, to blush more in doing their duty, then in acting sin.

3. Shame belongs to sin; shame and sin were both born i^to the world in a day.
Adam knew no shame till sin had made him naked; shame of duty is a sinful
shame. If this be an Ordinance of Christ (as I have proved it is) then to be
ashamed of it will (I doubt) appear a denial of Christ (in a sort) at the
last day, for being ashamed of Christ, i. e. in any truth, duty, or way of his,
is so interpreted ( Matthew. 10. 33. Mark 8. 38. compared) and then take heed
lest Christ be ashamed of thee before God the Father, and his holy Angels.

4. Thou art offended thou art called upon for a public account. But consider,

1. That many elder persons may learn by this means who are not able to read
at home.

2. That those that can, and do not, may by their readiness be shamed into
some endeavors lest they be out-gone by children in so necessary and weighty a
knowledge.

3. That thou will one day have occasion to claim the privilege of Communion
with the Church in higher Ordinances, and can thou think it reasonable that
the Church should give thee the right hand of fellowship, who have by no
public satisfactory evidence declared thy self to be a christian? it may be
they know tho^ art baptized, (but for any thing farther that they know of thee)
thou may have renounced thy Baptism and Christianity, before thou come to
claim those privileges, and accountest them mere matters of form, as too
many now do.

Object. A second objection of some is this; They shall be singular in reviving
an unusual exercise, they be gazed upon and laughed at, by their follows, who
out of profane principles keep away

Answ. To which I answer.

1. But child consider; Thou should not be discouraged in the way to heaven,
though thou walk it alone; will it be any trouble to a man when he is gotten
thither, that he had no company upon the way.

2. It Is a great honor to be alone in a good way, nay, the greatest honor that
can be, to forsake all company for Christ and duties sake. One Lot in Sodom,
one Noah in the old world, kept up the fear and service of God, and see how
Scripture honors them for it; so Elijab (to his seeming) was the only man
left that owned the truth of God in Ababs days, and yet he was not discouraged
for want of company.

3. The men of this world are not discouraged but encouraged rather, if they
drive the only trade in their profession, in the places wherein they live: men
are willing to grow riob alone, and why not to grow rich in grace and saving
knowledge alone?

4. It may be thou need not go alone, if thou had once begun, others by
thy example may be induced to follow; they are loath to begin as well as thou;
they do not so much doubt they shall be alone, as draw back from being first.
Now if thou can in a good way be a leader to others, it is far more
honorable.

5. Thou art afraid thou shall be gazed upon and laughed at; but consider, that
it is the usual lot of the best to be so handled; so in Isaiabs time the
Saints were looked on as fignes and wonders, Isa. 8. 18.

6. 'Twill be a more geievous thing to them to be (one day) laughed at by God,
then it is now to you to be laughed at by them; and this will here after return
into their bosoms, Pro. 1. 26. 3. 34.

7. Use the means, and get the start of them in saving knowledge, and thou will
discern them to be far more ridiculous.

Object. It may be thou may object, that thou art competently grown in
years, thou look toward man or woman, and this is an exercise that is more
proper for little children.

Answ. 1. Alas! how many be there that think it too childish a thing to be
eatechized, who by the help of that Ordinance, are outstripped in knowledge by
those children whom they condemn

2. If thy knowledge be not proportionable to thy age and growth, thou art yet
a child in understanding, and have more cause to be ashamed thereof, then of
any means wherein thou may be improved therein

3. Look upon the examples, before argued, of the primitive Fathers, who
continued under this Ordinance for diverse years after they had attained to
man's estate, and thought it no discredit to stand among the catechized, till
they were called forth to be teachers of others

4. Take heed of pride and self-conceit, there being no greater enemy to the
attainment of spiritual knowledge, then a conceit that men have attained
enough already, Prove. 26. 12.

Thus have I answered the most common and ordinary objections, and excuses upon
which this useful Ordinance, in these days of liberty, is laid aside. The
Lord grant that these plain lines may so far prevail (through his blessing)
for the restitution thereof to this Church and Nation; that in stead of that
notionall brainknowledge so much in fashion, we may see a practical heart
knowledge advanced, and that with so much improvement in old and young, that it
may cover the Land as the waters cover the Sea, until we all arrive at that
perfection truly, which some groundlessely conceit they have attained already,
that we shall need no more to speak every one to his neighbor, and to his
brother, saying, know the Lord; but that all may know him from the greatest to
the least, being all tought of God. Amen.

FINIS.
Reader, before thou read, do the Author the right, and thy self the courtefie,
to correct these material faults, and pass by litterall ones.
ERRATA.
In the Dialogue, in the Epistle, in some copies, p. 4. dele, of all ages. p.
8. l. 22. r. faction. p. 9. l. 4. p. 15. l. 3. p. 20. l. 4. p. 28. l. 22. p.
32. l. 28. p. 34. l. 17. r. their, for your. p. 9. l. 18. r: consider. l. 24.
r. the converts, p. 13. l. 28. blot out more. p. 20. l. 3. r. wit. p. 21. l. 3.
r. mere. l. 4, 5. blot out the first at most, p. 27. l. 9. r. thence. p. 29.
l, 5. r. to, for by. p 39. l. 3. put a comma after new, p. 41. l. 6. r. root.
p. 24. l. 15. r. art, and p. 49. l. 9. r. he that. p. 52. l. 14. r.
Anabaptisme. p. 53. l. 24. r, ones. p. 54 l. 12, for him, r. an Infant. p. 62.
l. 10. r. covenant relation. p. 74. l. 6. r. root. In the Sermon of
Catechizing, In the Epistle, p. 7. l. 21. r. hear, p. 9. l. 10. r. notions. In
the Sermon it self, p. 3. l. 3. blot out the full point. p. 7. l. 7. r. (...)
p. 8. l. 20. read the Hebrew after old. p. 14. l. 6. r. prove. 23. l. 14. r.
word for way, p. 16. l. 10. r. chari^y. p. 18. read (...)

An Epistle to the Readers of this Treatise, those of my own Flock, in Reading
in Berk-shire.
Christian Reader:
I Address my self to thee in the threshold of their Treatise, with a twofold
request, before thou spend thy censure upon it. The one is, that thou read, and
the other is, that thou pray over this little Treatise. Whatever thy judgment
be, I hope it will not deny me berein, did it concern thee less, then (in my
apprebension) this does

The reason why I desire the first of thee, is because I know many good books
suffer under the unjust sentence of prejulice, and disaffection, before they
are read. It being motivee nough to most engaged persons, on all bands, to
condome a book; (that its Title page speaks not of their side:) And the
second, I have this farther reason to beg at thy bands; because I know an
Unpraying Spirit is very unsit to adventure upon the study of any Practical
Subject whatsoever. Practical Truths always carry some thing in them which
goes against the grain of an bear not taught of God, and managed by his holy
Spirit

If I can but obtain these two things of thee, I douht not my sucesse in this
weak attempt toward thy satisfaction and settlement, in the practice and
improvemen of the Ordinance berein treated of

And next, (supposing that I have obtained my twofold request) I shall only
add a two fold advertisement to thee concerning the following Treatise

First. That I compose it in a Dialogue-way for two reasons

(...)
