Forms of Prayer Used in the Reformed Churches in France before their
Persecution and Destruction. With an Account of their manner of Baptizing,
Celebrating the Holy Supper, Marrying and Burying; with some Addi^ional Remarks.

Translated into English, for the use of such of the French Nation as do desire
to learn English; and may be serviceable to those English who are willing to
improve themselves in the French Language; and for the Information of All of
the Reformed Religion, and others.

Unto which is also Annexed the Names of several Learned French Ministers, to
Evidence the truth of this Translation.

London, Printed for E. Tracy at the 3 Bibles on London Bridge, and are to be
sold by M. Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1699.

THE Translator TO THE READER.
HAving perused the Liturgy of the reformed Churches in France, framed in the
beginning of the Reformation by Mr. Calvin, about the same time that the
Prayers of the Church of England were made, by her Reverend Bishops and
Divines, to lead Men from Tautologies and Superstitions, to the true worship of
Almighty God, and in their known Tongues, to the end that all Men might
understand them, and they might be useful, and conduce to draw the minds and
affections of Men, from Temporal to Heavenly things, and that the Minister, and
whole Congregation might join together with their Heart and Voice, to crave
Gods Gracious Pardon for all their daily wants, and to render thanks and praise
to his most Holy Name for their receiving of the same; and also observing the
Doctrine and Ceremonies of the reformed Churches in France; and seeing the
unhappy Differences and Misunderstandings, that are between the Church of
England and some other Protestants, and that many of her Members, and others,
believed that the reformed French Church had a nearer Affinity to the English
Presbyterians, then to the Church of England, (as I my self did, till by my
frequenting and often hearing of the French Ministers, I found the contrary) I
thought it my Duty by this Translation, to undeceive all those who through
ignorance or prejudice labor under that Error.

It Is true, there are already many Books Written by very Pious and Learned Men,
to show the misery and unreasonableness of separation, and Divisions in
Religion, and the advantage of a general Conformity in the same. The Titles of
some of them, as of other Books that may be very useful on this occasion, are
hereafter inserted; that all such Persons as are Piously inclined, and desirous
of Union in the Church; may with more ease find out such necessary Subjects,
which I hope, may tend to their satisfaction, and Unity in Faith, Doctrine and
Prayers.

The excellency and usefulness of our Liturgy, is explained by the Learned
Doctor Cumber, and also by Doctor Beveridge in his Sermon upon that point.

I thought fit likewise, to direct you unto Mr. Hookers Ecclesiastical Polity,
and unto the Case of a doubting Conscience, written by the most Reverend Father
in God, John Sharp, the present Lord Arch-Bish^p of York.

And the London Divines of the Church of England, as established by Law, did
with great Learning, Ingenuity and Candor, in several Discourses defend that
Glori^us and Pious Church, of which they have the honor and happiness to be
members, against the several objections that are usually raised by Dissenters
against her.

But what need I Name more of the Ep^scopal Clergy.

Mr. Baxter himself has in several of his Treatises well set forth the great
mischief of Divisions and Separations; in his Christian Directory, p. 741. he
says, that Schism is a sin against so many clear and vehement words of the
Holy Ghost, that it is utterly without excuse; he proceeds and declares that
even Whoredom, Treason and Perjury, are not oftener forbidden in the Gospel
then this, and that it is contrary to the design of Christ in our redemption,
to the Spirit of Grace, and to the Nature of Christianity it self, etc. That
Church Dividers are the ^ost successful Servants of the Devil, and Enemies to
Christ in his Family and Livery, that they serve the Devil more effectually
then open Enemies, and much more on this head he has said, in the pages
above cited. And you will find him quoting above forty places of Scripture
against separations, in his Cure of Church Divisions, Direct. 7. and in his
defense of the said Book, page 3. and says, that the World, the Flesh and the
Devil, are the Causes whence Divisions arise, all which you may see more al^
large in the Books themselves.

If any reply, that Mr. Baxter was a Dissenter. I Answer, he is the more to be
regarded by Dissenters; But withal, it is very well known that he often heard
the Divine Service, and received the Communion from the hands of the Right
Reverend Doctor Sharp, then Minister of St. Giles in the Fields.

To conclude, he that desires further information of the inexpressible dangers
which accompany Divisions, let him peruse the Learned Mr. Edwards Book, called,
Gangrena, unto which Tract I refer you; some, if not most of these Books herein
Named may be had of Samuel Ke^ble, at the Turks Head in Fleet Street, or Walte^
Kettleby, at the Bishop Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, or of other Booksellers
in London.

But yet considering tha^ in other Treatises ther^ are so many points
discussed; as make most (...) those Books so dear, tha^ all Persons are not
inclined to buy them.

I have thought fit t^ present unto the world this small Specimen of the
Prayers of the reforme^ Churches in France, which show their Concurrence and
Harmony with the Church of England, in reading the Holy Scriptures in their
Public Assemblys, and in most substantial points, as Confessions of Faith
contained in the Apostles, Nicene and Athanasian Creeds, and likewise in their
Methods of Worship, and Rules of Practice; by which you may see how near
Divine Providence and the Holy Spirit, has brought these Churches together.

And I am persuaded, that if all Men would impartially observe the same, it
might prevail with considering Christians, and make them sincerely united
together. This Liturgy being Composed in a small Tract, I was the more induced
to Translate it into English, for the information of all such who can neither
spare so much. Money or time, as the obtaining and perusing those larger
Volumes do require. By which all may see the Prayers and Service, which were
and are used in the reformed French Churches; and that this, or some such form
is used i^ all the reformed Churches throughout Holland, Hungary, Brandenburg,
and in other Parts of Germany, Switzerland, and Piedmont, and in all those
Places; where the Persecution has not taken away the Exercise of the reformed
Religion, used by Calvin and his followers.

There are also peculiar Forms of Public Prayers in the Tigurian Churches,
which are the Protestant Churches of the City, and Government of Zurick in
Switzerland, as you may see in a Book lately Printed, and called Liturgia,
Tigurina, or the Book of Common Prayers and Administration of the Sacraments,
and other Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies, used in the Churches and
Chapels of Zurick.

And the aforesaid People as I have been well informed, do endeavor to liv^ up
to the strict Rules o^ Justice and Piety; which their Lord and Master hat^
enjoined and required from them.

And it is to be remarked that there were and sti^^ are other Forms of Public^
Prayers used in the Reformed Churches, where the Doctrine and Discipline Luther
has prevailed.

Which are sufficient prove, and to convinc^ People that set Forms (...)
Prayer, were, and are used in other Ancient Churches, besides those of England,
or Rome, and to demonstrate that such as reject Forms, are in that respect
Dissenters from Luther and Calvin, as well as from that of England, and also to
show the unannimous agreement of the Churches before recited, and of the French
Reformed with the Church of England; besides, these Prayers will infallibly
point out to us the frequent use of the Lords Prayer, the Apostles Creed and
the Ten Commandments, which were placed in their Churches, and still are the
main subjects of their Catechism, which wa^ taught every Lords Day and the two
former are repeated when ever they assemble for the Public Service.

At Baptizing an Infan^ the Minister does sprinkl^ water on its Forehead, when
the Name is given, an^ that Church makes use of Godfathers and Godmothers,
who do undertak^ most of the same charge o^ those in the Church of England.

The French Protestant^ have also a particular Form of Prayer for Baptizing
^uch Persons of riper years as desire and duly prepare themselves to receive
it.

The time and manner of their receiving the Holy Sacrament, is generally after
the Morning Sermon; which is performed with much decency and r^spect, but for
the most part they did receive it standing in France, partly because their
Flocks being large, and their opportunities of receiving not frequent, they
might the sooner give place one to another: And partly, because they would not
follow the manner of the Papists among whom they lived, and who kneeled at the
Communion, in order to adore their Host^ or a Wafer, yet they do never oppose
kneeling when it does not tend to Idolatry. But supposing the^ looked upon
kneeling as on^ extreme, they took to b^ sure sitting for the other^

But as to the sense of it they do agree with the Church of England, a^ you may
more plainly s^ toward the latter end o^ their Catechism, which (...) often
annexed to their Form of Prayers after the Singing Psalms, at the latter end of
the French New Testament.

In the time of Persecution, before the general destruction of their Churches,
the Protestants in France had but one hour allowed them in the Morning, and
another hour in the Evening for the meeting of the thirty People to bury the
Dead, (which was the greatest Number then permitted to attend the Corpse unto
the Grave) unto which they were obliged to commit them, without paying such
decent respects which are usually done to the Corpse of other Christians, to
make a difference between the Bodies of Deceased Christians, and of such Animals
as have nothing but mere sense, though they are sometimes put into the Earth, yet
never deserv^ a solemn interment.

This Ceremony which used's to Deceased Christians, it also, to put the living
in mind of Mortality and therefore after the return of the People from the
Grave to the Deceased's late House, or to the place where they at first met;
the Minister did make an Exhortation to admonish the living, and to comfort the
afflicted, for the loss of their Friend.

At first, when they were allowed to bury publicly, the Minister followed
after the Dead, and at the interment the Minister made such an Exhortation as
before mentioned.

In this Book are also comprehended the Forms of Prayer, used upon Fasting
Days, and at the Celebration of the Holy Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords
Supper, and also at Marriage.

Although their Prayers are short, they comprehend most things for most
conditions of men; so composed, that the whole Congregation may join with the
Minister, in praying for all necessaries and for Gods Love and Mercy in Jesus
Christ, toward them, and in giving thank for the same.

Their affinity to the Ancient Catholic, and no^ reformed Church of England,
is further demonstrated by several reformed French Churches, in and about
London, whos^ Ministers have not only received the Ordination o^ the Church of
England but do also make use of he Liturgy, and are conformable to her Orders
an^ Constitutions.

Moreover, the Protestants of Geneva, Swi^zerland, Germany, etc Esteem her
Doctrine an^ Discipline to be Apostolical and Orthodox.

And the Characters which our Episcopal Divines bore in the Synod of Dort, does
plainly show the great veneration they had for the reformed Church of our
Kingdom.

And especially Monsieur le Moines Letter, written at Leyden in September, in
the Year of our Lord 1680, confirms the same; He was at that time, and in that
University Professor of Divinity, and the Letters of Monsieur de Langle, one of
the Ministers of the reformed French Church at Charenton, and of Monsieur
Claude, another French Minister of the same Church, both written at Paris, do
the like, and the last was wrote by one of the most Illustrious Men of the
reformed French Church in his time.

In which he mentions, that he has often explained his Opinion, concerning the
Government of the reformed Episcopal Church which appears from a larger
Discourse upon it in the 336 Page, of his defense of the Reformation.

Which Letters do likewise ascertain the giving o^ their Pulpits, and
committing the charge of their Flocks to such Ministers as had received
Episcopal Ordination, and particularly to Monsieur du Plessis, and Monsieur
Wicart, who were ordained by the Right Reverend the Bishops of London and
Lincoln, the former was afterward received Minister of a reformed French Church
in the Province of Paris, and the latter also Preached afterward in the
Protestant Church of Charenton in the same Province, and is now Dean of
Winchester.

These Letters were all sent to the Right Reverend, Henry, present Lord Bishop
of London, in which you may not only see the particular sentiments of those
Reverend Ministers, but also the general Opinion of the reformed Churches then
in France; concerning the Government and Discipline of the English Church, and
of the Divisions that were then between her and the Presbyterians and others.
Which Letters were written in French, and from the Originals Translated into
English, and Printed in the life time of the Authors, they being Annexed unto
the Treatise of the unreasonableness of separation, or an Impartial account of
the History of the Nature and Pleas of the present separation from the
Communion of the Church of England, written by the Reverend Doctor
Stillingfleet, now Lord Bishop of Worcester; one of these Books was sent by the
Lord Bishop of London, unto Monsieur Claude in 1681, with the said Letters
Printed at the latter end thereof, which Treatise does also show the Government
of the African, Helvetian, etc. Churches, unto which I refer you for your
better Information and Satisfaction.

Moreover, I thought fit to show you the great aversion which the reformed
French Churches had to separation, as it appears by an Article made in 1644,
and is Printed in the seventh Chapter and the 205 and 366 Pages, of the
Discipline of the reformed Churches of France, and in the 72, 73, and 74 Pages
of this Treatise; it is declared that all such as do make different Sects, and
others, are Excommunicated from receiving the Holy Sacrament, until they do
repent and unite.

You cannot well suppose, that what the Persons before mentioned have written
was done out of fear or interest, for if you will truly consider the style of
their Letters, you will find them to be Men of Learning and Piety, and void of
all manner of Hypocrisy and Dissimulation.

I know there are other French Churches whose Ministers do use their own
constitution, more, because they were brought up therein, then out of any
motive of aversion to the English Liturgy, for they go very often to Prayers,
and to hear the Sermons, and do receive the Communion in the Church of England.

It Is an amazing wonder, that any sort of Men should so much value their own
mode of Praying, as to slight that comprehensive Prayer which our Lord both
made and commanded, and it grieves me, that most of our English Separatists
contrary to the practice of the Church, and to the instruction given by our
Blessed Savior to his Disciples (as it is written in the Gospel of St. Mat. in
the sixth Chapter and the ninth verse, and in that of St. Luke in the 11th. and
2d.) do too often refrain, not only the use of the Apostles. Creed and the Ten
Commandments: But also of the Lords Prayer, which I fear is not only a shame to
such as profess the Christian Religion, but is also a great offense unto our
Lord, who has expressly taught and enjoined us when we pray, to say, Our
Father which art in Heaven, etc.

But as Charity Commands us to forgive one another, I leave such to the mercy
of Almighty God, who is able to Pardon the greatest offenders.

This being premised, together with the exemplary lives, Sincere and Charitable
endeavors of our English Ministry, in showing the true ground; of the Ancient,
and now reformed Catholic and. Apostolic Religion professed and taught in the
Church of England; may by Gods assistance be the best means of bringing over
the remaining part of the English Dissenters; who do not yet use the English
Service, nor observe its Canons, and invite them by mutual love to conform and
join with the Church of England, for the obtaining of Gods Blessings of Grace,
Peace and Christian Charity among us, or at least prove them to be inexcusable
for their separating from the reformed National Church, which never excludes
Prayers in private.

Good Lord, be pleased to open our Eyes that we may see what Triumph it
occasions to our adversaries, to behold the many divisions and bitter
contentions among us upon the account of Religion, and that they take more
advantage from discords among our selves, then from all their own Strength and
Policy.

Wherefore because we are beset by Satan on one side, and by our Popish
adversaries on the other, which are enslaving the Souls and destroying the
Bodies of our Poor Brethren, and subverting the Fundamentals of our Religion;
let us all join with one heart, and render most humble thanks unto God, that he
has been pleased by many eminent deliverances which he has shown to the
Churches and Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in preserving us from the Power
of our Enemies.

And let us most humbly beseech God to be pleased of his Infinite Mercy and
Goodness, to prevent all their wicked designs against our distressed brethren
and our selves, by defeating al^ their Malicious attempts, and the works and
power of the Devil, and to convert all our Enemies, and to turn their and our
hearts unto him.

And the Lord grant that we may put away all hatred and malice, evil speaking,
lying and slandering, and pray with true and contrite hearts for the remission
of all our sins and heinous offenses, and for the delivery of all our
Persecuted Brethren, from the undermining designs of their Enemies, and for the
Preservation of the true Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, and more
especially for the Church of England, and for our most Gracious Sovereign Lord
King William, and the Royal Family, etc. That he will be pleased to lead us by
his Holy Spirit, and enrich us with his Heavenly Grace, that we may follow the
good Examples of the Primitive Christians, praying one for another in the same
Words and Churches, and helping each other in Love, Charity, Justice and Truth,
and that we may lay aside all worldly interests, and set our affections on
things above, and that by our leading Holy and Peaceable lives, we may promote
the Honor and Olory of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, by ou^ Words and
Actions, and induce the Papists and all other divided Christians to do the same.

Finally, let us beg of God that he will bring over the Turks^ Jews and
Infidels, to acknowledge our Lord, and to receive his Faith and Doctrine, and
to call upon and Praise his Holy Name, and by his assistance and merits, we may
be instrumental in obtaining the salvation (...) their and our own Immortal
Souls, which is the humble and chief aim of,

Your Faithful Servant J. T.

The FORM OF Church-Prayers, and.
On the Weekdays the Minister makes such an Exhortation as seems good to
him; accommodating it to the time, and to the subject which he treats of in his
Sermon.

On the Lord's Day before the Reader comes into the Church, the People usually
sing some part of the Psalms, until he see it a fit time to begin in this
manner:

OUR help is in the Name of God, wh^ has made Heaven and Earth. Amen.

And after says these following words:

Let us give attention with reverence and fear to the holy Word of God
contained in the -- Chapter: which he read^ and sometimes one or two more,
which are taken out of the Old or New Testament.

Then he says these Preparatory words;

Let us sing to the praise and glory of God, for the Edification, and to the
Consolation of our souls.

And upon that he gives out a Psalm, which is sung by him and the Congregation.
That being ended he reads one or two Chapters more.

Thus reading and singing alternately, till the Church be full, and the
Minister come into the Pulpit, then the Reader repeats these following words:

Hearken with reverence and faithful obedience unto the holy Commandments of
God, contained in the 20th Chapter Exodus, which he reads.

Then the Minister begi^ by this following Prayer:

Our help is in the nam^ of God, who has ma^^ Heaven and Earth. Ame^

An Exhortation.

Brethren, let every o^ of you present himself before the Lord, hearti^^
confessing his sins, an^ saying after me.

The Confession.

Lord God Almighty and everlasting Father, we sincerely confess and c^knowledge
before thy holy Majes^y, that we are miserable sinners, conceived and born in
iniquity and Corruption, inclined to do evil, and averse to do good; and that
by our sins we continually transgress thy holy Commandments: whereby we justly
incur thy Divine Vengeance: But, O Lord, we are truly sorrowful for our
offenses, we condemn our selves, and are sincerely penitent for our sins,
imploring the assistance of thy Grace in this our miserable condition.

Grant us therefore thy pity, O God, most gracious and merciful Father, in the
Name of thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Blo^ out our sins and iniquities bestow
and daily increase in us the gifts of thy holy Spirit, that we heartily
acknowledging our unrighteousness, may be deeply affected with sorrow, which
begets a true repentance in us, whereby being dead to sin, we may bring forth
such Fruits o^ Righteousness and Holiness, that may be accept able unto thee by
the same Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.

Vhis being done, the Minister says, Let us sing to the honor and glory of
God, and for the consolation of our souls; and gives out part of some Psalm
which is sung.

Afterward he begins again to pray, and to desire of God the grace of his holy
Spirit, that his word may be faithfully expounded to the honor of his Name,
and to the Edification of the Church; and that it may be received with such
humility and obedience as is meet.

The Form of this prayer is left to the discretion of the Minister.

At the end of which h^ repeats the Lords Prayer and after that these following
preparatory words

The word of God tha^ we are to explain, you shall find -- an^ names the Text.

At the end of the Sermon, the Minister having read the Bills for the sick and
made some Exhortations to prayer, he begins in this manner:

Almighty God, and Heavenly Father, tho^ have promised to gran^ our Requests
that we shall make unto thee in the name of thy beloved Son Jesus Christ our
Lord; and we are also taught by him, and his Apostles, to assemble our selves
together in his Name, promising he will be in the midst of us, and that he will
be our Intercessor toward thee, for the obtaining all those things that are
needful for us, which we shall agree to pray for upon Earth.

We are first commanded to pray for those whom thou have set over us, as
Superiors and Governors: likewise in the behalf of all thy people in necessity,
and for all mankind; therefore trusting in thy holy Doctrine and Promises, for
as much as we are here assembled in thy presence, and in the name of thy Son
Jesus Christ, we heartily beseech thee, good God and Father, in the name of thy
Son our only Savior, and Mediator, to grant us, through thy infinite mercy, the
free pardon of all our sins, and be pleased so to draw and raise our thoughts
and desires toward thee, that we may make our supplications with all our
hearts, according to thy will, and which is only most just and good.

Then the Minister prays for the King and the Royal Family by name.

We pray thee therefore, O heavenly Father, for all Kings, Princes and
Governors, thy Servants, unto whom thou have committed the dispensation of thy
Justice, and particularly for W. etc. that it may please thee to endue them all
with thy holy Spirit, which alone is the truly principal good. Increase those
gifts daily in them, that they acknowledging with a true Faith Jesus Christ thy
Son our Lord, to be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, as thou has^ given him
all power i^ Heaven, and on Earth they may seek to serve him, and to exat hi^
Kingdom in their Dominions, governing their Subjects, who are the works of thy
hands, and the Sheep of thy Pasture according to thy will, so that we here, and
all men through the whole Earth, being maintained in peace, and delivered from
the fear of our Enemies, may praise thee all the Days of our Lives.

A Prayer for the Ministry.

We also pray thee, O Father and Savior, for all those whom thou have
appointed Pastors over thy faithful Flock, and unto whom thou have committed
the Charge of Souls, and the dispensation of thy holy Gospel; that it may
please thee to guide them by thy holy Spirit, that they may be found true and
faithful Ministers of thy Gospel, always endeavoring that all thy poor
dispersed Flock may be gathered, and brought unto the Lord Jesus Christ, the
principal Pastor, and chief Bishop, that through him they may daily improve in
all Righteousness and Holiness. Moreover, we beseech thee to deliver all thy
Churches from the mouths of Ravening Wolves, and from all mercenary men, who do
only seek after their ow^ profit, and to gratifi^ their ambition, and have no
regard to the advancement of thy holy Name nor to the salvation o^ thy Flock.

We also pray thee; most gracious and merciful Father, for all mankind in
general, and as thou will be acknowledged Savior of the whole world by the
Redemption thereof, purchased by thy Son Jesus Christ, grant that such as are
still strangers to him, being in Darkness, Error and Ignorance, may by the
illumination of thy holy Spirit, and by the preaching of thy Gospel, be brought
to the true way of salvation, which is to know thee the only true God, and him
whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, that those whom thou have already visited
with thy grace, and enlightne^ by the knowledge of thy word, may daily increase
in goodness, and being enriched with thy spiritual blessing, we may adore thee
altogether with one heart, and one mouth and give honor and obedience unto thy
Christ, our Master, King and Legislator.

We likewise recommend unto thee, O God of all Comfort, all those whom thou
visits, and chastisest, by Crosses or Tribulations, and also those people whom
thou do afflict by War, Pestilence or Famine, and all such who do suffer by
Want, Imprisonment, Sickness, Banishment, or any other Calamity in Body or
Mind, and (especially all those for whom our prayers are desired) be pleased to
make them sensible of thy Fatherly Affection, which is to visit them in order
to their amendment, that they may be heartily converted unto thee, and being
converted, may receive perfect consolation, and be delivered from all evil.

We more especially recommend unto thee all our poor Brethren who are dispersed
under the Tyranny of Antichrist, being destitute of the Food of Life, and
deprived of the liberty of thy public Service; and all those who are detained
Prisoners, or persecuted by the Enemies of thy Gospel; that it may please thee,
O gracious Father, to strengthen them by the assistance of thy holy Spirit, so
that they may never fall from thy word, but may constantly persevere in thy
holy Religion; help and assist them according to their several necessities,
comfort them in their afflictions, preserve them from the rage of Wolves, and
increase in them all the gifts of thy Spirit, to the end that they may glorify
thee both in Life and Death.

Finally, O God and Father, grant also to us who are here assembled in the Name
of thy Son Jesus Christ, for the sake of his word, and of his holy Communion,
that we may sincerely, and without hypocrisy acknowledge how miserable we are
by Nature, and what Condemnations we deserve, and daily draw down upon our
selves by our wicked and disorderly Lives, that we seeing there is no good
thing in us, and that our Flesh and Blood are not capable of inheriting thy
Kingdom, we may with all affection and steadfast confidence, entirely surrender
up ou^ selves unto thy dear Son Jesus Christ, our only Savior and Redeemer;
that he dwelling in us, may mortify our old Adam, and renew in us? better
Life, whereby thy holy and glorious Name may be exalted and glorified by all,
and in all places.

Then he proceeds thus:

Hear us, O merciful Father, for Jesus Christ's sake, in whose Name and words we
further call upon thee, Our Father, etc.

The Minister having said the Lords Prayer and the Apostles Creed, he gives
some part of the Psalms, which is sung; and before the Congregations g^ forth
of the Church, he gives the following B^n^diction: (which is according to what
our Lord commanded in the sixth Chapter of Numbers:)

The Lord bless you, and keep you; the Lord make his Face to shine upon you,
and be gracious unto you; the Lord lift up his countenance upon yo^ and give
you peace. Ame^

A further Blessing the Minister says to the people

Go in Peace, and for the Love of God remember the Poor.

This following Pray^ is added to the former i^ time of great danger an^
distress.

And also as thou ha^ the Dominion and Government over us all grant that we may
daily learn more and more to submit and humble our selves before thy Majesty;
and as thou art King and Ruler every where, we beseech thee to guide thy People
by thy Word, and by the Efficacy of thy Spirit, confounding thy Enemies by the
power of thy Truth and Justice, that so all Power and Dominion contrary to thy
Glory, may be daily destroyed, and brought to naught, until thy Kingdom be
perfected, and fully established; when thou shall appear in Judgment in the
Person of thy Son. Grant that we and all Creatures may render thee true and
perfect Obedience, even as the Heavenly Angels wai^ only to execute thy
Commands, so that thy Will may be entirely fullfilled and that all may devot^
themselves to thy Service and Pleasure, and renounce their own Wills and all
the desires of their flesh. Grant that we may walk in the love and fea^ of thy
Name, and be nourished by thy bountifu^ goodness that thou giving us all things
which are needful and expedien^ for us, we may eat ou^ Bread in peace; and
seeing that thou carest for us, we may the better acknowledge thee to be our
Father, and expect all good things from thy hand; and by withdrawing our
confidence from all Creatures may place it wholly in thee, and in thy goodness,
because in as much as during this mortal Life, we are poor sinners, so full of
frailty that we continually fall, and go astray from the right way, be pleased
to pardon all our sins, whereby we are liable to thy Judgment, and to deliver
us by thy pardon from the Eternal Death, in which we are; that may please thee
not t^ impute to us our Iniqu^ties, as we according t^ thy Commandment pa^don
all the Injuries w^ have received from others, and instead of see^ing
Vengeance, do goo^ to our Enemies.

Finally, we pray, tha^ it may please thee to support us henceforth by the
power, that we may n^^ fall through the infirmit^ of our flesh; and for (...)
much as we are so wea^ of our selves that we can not continue steadfast on
moment, and on the other side so continually surrounded and assaulted by so
many Enemies, as the Devil, the World, Sin, and our Flesh not ceasing to war
against us, grant we may be strengthened with thy holy Spirit, and so armed with
thy grace, that we may constantly resist all Temptations and persevere in that
spiritual Warfare, until we shall obtain a full Victory and Triumph at length
in thy Kingdom, with our Captain and Protector, our Lord Jesus Christ.

Amen.

Upon such days as they celebrate the Lords Supper, they add to the former this
following Prayer:

As our Lord Jesus Christ has not only once offered his Body and Blood unto
thee upon the Cross for the remission of our sins but also communicate them
unto us for our nourishment to eternal life grant that we may with true
sincerity of heart and ardent Zeal, receiv^ such benefits by a tru^ Faith, that
we may part take of his Body an^ Blood, yea, and enjoy the^^ entirely: he being
tru^ God and true Man, (...) truly the holy Celesti^ Bread to quicken us, t^
the end that we may liv^ no more to our selves, according to our vicious and
corrupt nature; but that he may live in us, and bring us to an holy, blessed
and eternal life; grant therefore that we may be made true partakers of the new
and everlasting Covenant of Grace; being fully assured that thou will ever be
to us a gracious Father, in not imputing our sins unto us; and as to thy
beloved Children and Heirs, wilt provide for us all things necessary, as well
for our Bodies as Souls, that we may continually give thee thanks, and glorify
thy holy Name by Words and Works. Therefore, heavenly Father, give us grace
this day to celebrate the blessed memory o^ thy Dear Son, in this manner, and
to set forth the benefit of his Death; so that we receiving new increase and
strength in Faith, and in all goodness, may with the greater confidence call
thee Our Father, and glory in thee.

Amen.

After the holy Sacrament is ended, they use this following Thanksgiving, or
the like.

Heavenly Father, we give thee Eternal Praise and Thanks, in that thou have
bestowed upon us, poor sinners, so great a blessing, and brought us to the
Communion of thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord, having delivered him unto Death for
us, and given him for our spiritual nourishment unto life everlasting. Grant
that we may never forget thy mercies, but having them engrafted in our hearts,
we may continually grow and increase in good works; and in so doing we may
order all our lives to the advancement of thy glory, and to the Edification of
our Neighbors, by the same Jesus Christ thy Son, who in the Unity o^ the holy
Spirit, lives and reigns with thee God eternally blessed. Amen.

For as much as the Scripture teaches, That Wars, Pestilence, and other such
Adversities are Visitations sent from God, by which he punishes us for our
sins; when we see them coming, we must acknowledge that God is displeased with
us, and as true Christians we must confess our sins, and be grieved in our
selves, returning unto the Lord by Repentance and Amendment of life, and pray
unto him with true humility, that we may obtain pardon.

Wherefore if at any time we see that God threatens us, to the end that we may
not tempt his Patience, but rather prevent his Judgments, which otherwise we
may perceive to hang over our heads, it is meet that we should keep one day in
every week on which these things especially should be represented, and in which
we must make Prayers and Supplications according to the Exigency of the times.

For which here follows a proper Form.

Before the beginning of the Sermon they use the general Confession, as before
written, and used on the Lords Day.

At the end of the Sermon, having remonstrated to the people, that God afflicts
Men because of their Offenses which are committed upon the Earth, and that the
World is given up to al^^ Iniquity; having also exhorted the people to convert
and amend their Lives, and to pray unto God to obtain mercy, they use this
following Form of Prayer:

Almighty God, and Heavenly Father, we do acknowledge and confess as the Truth
is, that we are not worthy to lift up our Eyes to Heaven, to present our selves
before thee; and that we ought not to presume so far as to think that thou will
hear our prayers, if thou should mark what is amiss in us; for our
Consciences accuse us, and our sins bear Witness against us, and we know that
thou art a Just Judge, who do not justify sinners, but punishest the sins of
those who have transgressed thy holy Commandments; therefore, O Lord, when we
consider our whole Lives, we are ashamed at our hearts, and cannot but sink
down in despair, as if we were already in the gulf of Death. But, Lord, since
it has pleased thee in thy infinite mercy to command us, that we should call
upon thee; and the greater our Weakness and Misery is, we should with so much
the greater Confidence betake our selves to thy Sovereign Bounty, since thou
have promised us to receive our supplications and requests not in respect of
our own worthiness, but in the Name, and by the Merits of our Lord Jesus Christ
whom thou have made to be our Advocate and Intercessor; we do therefore
renounce all humane confidence, and do altogether rely on thy sole goodness,
and present our selves before thee to call upon thy holy Name for mercy.

First, Lord, besides the infinite benefits which thou have in general bestowed
upon all men in the world, thou have done us so many singular Favors, that it
is impossible for us to declare, or sufficiently to comprehend them; and in
particular it has pleased thee to call us to the knowledge of thy Gospel, and
to draw us from the miserable slavery of the Devil, in which we were detained,
delivering us from the Curse of Idolatry and Superstition, in which we were
plunged, to guide us into the light of thy truth; yet by our Ingratitude we
have forgotten the benefits which we have received from thy hand, and have gone
astray, and turned our selves from thee after our own Lusts; we have not given
that honor and obedience to thy holy Word which we ought, neither have we
praised and glorified thee as it behoved us to do; and although though thou
have always faithfully admonished us by thy Word, yet we have not hearkened to
thy Admonitions; therefore we have sinned, Lord, and offended against thee;
this covers us with shame and confusion, confessing that we are grievously
guilty before thy Judgment Seat; and if that thou should deal with us
according to what we deserve, we might expect nothing but Death and Damnation;
for when we would excuse our selves, our Consciences accuse us, and our
Iniquities are before thee to condemn us; and indeed Lord we see by the
Punishments which are already come upon us, that thou art Justly displeased
with us; for as thou art Just and upright, it is not without Cause that thou
do afflict thy People; having therefore been chastized with thy Rod, we
acknowledge that we have provoked thee against us, and now we behold thy hand
still lifted up to punish us; for the Sword with which thou were wont to
execute thy Vengeance is unsheathed, and the threatenings which thou have made
against the wicked and ungodly are ready to be executed. But tho thou should
punish us much more severely than thou have hitherto done, and that for one
Plague we should receive an hundred; and should even suffer such Calamities
to fall upon us as thou did afflict thy People of Israel with; yet we must
confess that it were just with thee, and no more than what we have fully
deserved.

However, Lord, thou art our Father, and we are but Dust and Ashes; thou art
our Creator, and we are the works of thy hands; thou art our Pastor, and we are
thy flock; thou art our Redeemer, and we are the people thou have redeemed;
thou art our God, and we are thine Heritage; therefore be not so angry with us
as to correct us in thy fury, neither remember our Iniquities to punish them,
but chastise us lovingly in thy mercy. By reason of our sins thine Anger is
inflamed, but remember that we are called by thy name, and that we bear thy
sign and Token. Maintain therefore the work thou have begun in us by thy grace,
that all the Earth may know that thou art our God and Savior; thou know
that the Dead in the Grave, and those whom thou have destroyed, cannot praise
thee, but sorrowful and afflicted souls, contrite hearts, and Consciences
oppressed with the sense of their sins, and longing after thy grace, shall give
thee glory and praise. Thy People of Israel often provoked thee to Anger by
their Iniquities; thou did Justly afflict them by thy Just Judgments: but
when they did return unto thee thou did always in pity receive them: were
their Offenses never so heinous, for the sake of thy Covenant which thou made
with thy Servants, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, thou did turn away those Evils,
and thy Rods which were prepared against them; so that their Prayers were never
rejected by thee. We have by thy Grace a much better Covenant to rely on than
they, which thou have made and established in Jesus Christ our Lord, which thou
wast pleased should be written with his Blood, and ratified by his Death and
Passion; therefore, Lord, renouncing our selves and all humane hopes, we have
recourse unto that blessed Covenant, by which our Lord Jesus, in offering his
Body as a Sacrifice, has reconciled us unto thee; look then, Lord, on the Face
of thy Christ, and not on us, that by his Intercession thy Anger may be
appeased, and thy Face may shine upon us with joy to our salvation, and grant
we may henceforth be received into thy holy conduct, and guided by thy holy
Spirit, which may regenerate us into a better life, by which thy Name may be
hallowed, thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done, etc.

And although we are not worthy to open our mouths unto thee for our selves, and
to call upon thee in our necessities, yet since it has pleased thee to command
us to pray one for another, we pray thee for all our poor Brethren and
Fellow Members, whom thou do visit with the Rod of thy correction, beseeching
thee to turn thine Anger from them, and more especially for N. N. that it may
please thee, Lord, to remember they are thy Children, as we are; and although they
have offended thee, yet cease not to extend thy wonted goodness and mercy
toward them; which thou have promised should continue for ever to all thy
faithful. Look down with pity, we beseech thee, upon thy whole Church and
People at this time afflicted by War, Pestilence or Famine, and also upon all
persons which do suffer by Sickness, Imprisonment, or Poverty; comfort them all
according to their several Necessities; make them to profit by thy Correction,
endue them with patience, and let not thy whole Displeasure arise against them,
but in the end deliver them, and cause them fully to rejoice in thy goodness,
and to bless thy Name.

Especially that it may please thee to look down upon all, and every one of
those who do labor in the defense of thy Truth, strengthen them with
invincible constancy, protect and assist them however dispersed or distressed;
defeat all the Plots and Practices of their and thy Enemies; restrain their
fury, and confound all their wicked attempts against thee and the Members of
thy Church; let not thy Inheritance be brought to desolation, nor suffer the
memory of thy Name to be abolished; permit not those to perish who call upon
thy Name, nor the Turks, Pagans, or any other Infidels to rejoice in
blaspheming of thee.

Then follows a part of the Sundays Prayer; wherein they pray for the King,
and the Royal Family, etc.

The FORM of Administration of Baptism.
It is to be observed that those Children which are to be Baptized, ought to be
brought on the Lord's Day at the time of Catechizing, or on some other days of
Preaching, to the end tha^ Baptism being a solemn Reception into the Church, i^
should be performed in the presence of the Congregation.

At the end of the Sermon they present the Children, and then the Minister
begins to say,

OUR help is in the Name of God, who has made Heaven and Earth. Amen.

Do you present thi^ Child to be baptized?

Ans. Yes.

The Minister.

Our Lord shows us what Poverty and Misery we are all born in, telling us we
must be born again; for if our Nature must be renewed, that we may have an
entrance into the Kingdom of God, it is a sign that it is wholly corrupt and
evil, in that he admonishes us to humble and dislike our selves, and so he
prepares us to desire and seek after his grace, by which all the Depravity and
Corruption of our Original state, may be abolished; for we are not able to
receive it before we are void of all confidence in our own goodness, Wisdom and
Righteousness, so as to disclaim all that is in us.

Now when he makes us sensible of our misery, he likewise comforts us by his
mercy, promising to regenerate us by his holy Spirit into a New Life which may
be to us a an entrance into his Kingdom. This Regeneration consists in Two
Points, (...) That we should deny ou^ selves, and not follow ou^ own Reason,
Will an^ Pleasure, but submit ou^ Understanding and Heart to the Justice and
Wisdom of God; and that we should mortify all that is in us, and our Carnal
Lusts. 2. That we should follow the Light of God to please him, and to obey his
Will and good pleasure, as he teaches us by his word, and leads us thereto by
his Spirit. The fullfilling of both these is in our Lord Jesus Christ, whose
Death and Passion has such Virtue, that in our partaking thereof we are dead
to sin, that our Carnal Lusts may be mortified; likewise by the Virtue of his
Resurrection, we do rise from sin unto a new and godly life, seeing his Spirit
governs and leads us to do such works as are acceptable unto him. Now the first
and chief Point of our Salvation is, that he by his mercy pardons all sins,
not imputing them unto us, but blotting out the memory of them, that they may
not stand in judgment against us; all these Graces he confers upon us when it
pleases him to incorporate us into his Church by Baptism; for in this
Sacrament he declares the Remission of our sins; and therefore he ordained the
sign of the Water to represent unto us, that as by this Element our bodily
filth and Pollutions are cleansed, so he will wash and purify our Souls, that
they may be without blemish. Moreover, he there represents to us our
Regeneration, which consists as before instanced, in the Mortification of our
flesh, and in the Spiritual Life, which he produces in us. Thus we receive a
double benefit from God in Baptism, if we do not make the virtue of this
Sacrament of none effect by our Ingratitude. First, We have thereby a real
assurance that God will be our gracious Father, in not imputing our sins and
offenses to us; And, Secondly, That he will assist us by his holy Spirit, that
we may be able to fight against the Devil, Sin, and the Lusts of our flesh,
until we obtain Victory over them, that we may get Freedom in his Kingdom,
which is the Kingdom of Righteousness and Justice; therefore seeing that these
two things are thus wrought in us by the grace of Jesus Christ, it follows,
that the virtue and substance of Baptism is comprehended in ou^ Savior; and we
indeed can no otherwise be cleansed than by his Blood, nor renewed but by his
Death and Resurrection; but as he communicates his Riches and Blessings to us
by his Word, so he distributes them unto us by his Sacraments.

Now our good God has not only been pleased to adopt us for his Children, and
receive us into the Communion of his Church, but also has more abundantly
extended his goodness toward us, in promising, that he will be our God, and
the God of our Posterity, unto a thousand Generations; therefore, tho the
Children of the Faithful be of the corrupted Seed of Adam, yet he receives them
by the virtue of that Covenant, into the Number of his own; therefore he would
heretofore that in his Church the Children should receive the sign of
Circumcision, figuring thereby the same, as is now represented unto us in
Baptism; and as he did command, that they should be Circumcised, so he did also
own them for his Children, calling himself their God, as he was the God of
their Fathers.

Now therefore as our Lord Jesus did not come down from Heaven to lessen the
Grace of God, his Father, but to enlarge his Covenant of Salvation through all
the world, which was before limited to the people of the Jews, there is no
doubt but our Children are heirs of that Life which he has promised unto us;
and therefore St. Paul says, the Children of the Faithful are holy, to
distinguish them from the Children of Pagans and Infidels; for this Reason our
Savior received the Children which they presented unto him, as it is written
in the 19th Chapter of St. Matthew, the 13th and 14th verses, Then were there
brought unto him little Children, that he should put his hands on them, and
pray; and the Disciples rebuked them; but Jesus said, Suffer little Children,
and forbid them not to come unto me; for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Now seeing he declares that the Kingdom of Heaven belongs to them, and that he
lays his hands on them, and recommendeth them to God his Father, he
fufficiently teaches us, that we ought not to exclude them from his Church;
therefore, according to this Rule, we will receive this Child into his Church;
that he may be made partaker of those benefits which God has promised to his
Faithful; and we will first humbly present him unto God by our Prayers, saying
with all our heart,

Lord God; Eternal and Everlasting Father, since it has pleased thee by thy
infinite goodness to promise us, that thou will be a God to us and to our
Children, we pray that it may please thee to confirm thy Grace in this Child
here present, begotten of parents whom thou have called into thy Church, and as
he is offered and consecrated unto thee by us, receive him into thy holy
protection, declaring thy self to be his God and Savior, by pardoning the
Original sins which the whole Race of Adam are guilty of. Sanctify him also by
thy Spirit, that when he shall come to the use of Knowledge, he may own and
adore thee as his only God, in glorifying thee all his Days, that he may obtain
of thee the remission of his sins, and to the end that he may obtain such
grace, be pleased to incorporate him into the Communion of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and make him partaker of all his Benefits, as one of the Members of his
Body. Hear us, merciful Father, that the Baptism we are to communicate unto
him, according to thy Ordinance, may produce such Fruits and Virtues in him, as
are declared to us in thy Gospel. ( Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Seeing we are about to receive this Child into the Congregation of the
Christian Church, do you promise when he shall come to years of discretion, to
instruct him in the Doctrine which is received by the People of God, as it is
briefly comprehended in the Confession of Faith which we all profess? ( I
believe in God, the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven, etc.)

Do you promise to take pains to instruct him in all this Doctrine, and
generally in all that is contained in the holy Scripture of the Old and New
Testaments, that he may receive it as the true Word of God come from Heaven?
You must also exhort him to live according to the Rule which our Lord has
given us in his Law, which does briefly consist in these Two Points, That we
should love God with all our minds, and with all our heart, and with all our
strength, and our Neighbor as our selves; likewise according to the
Exhortations that the has given by his Prophets and Apostles, that this Child,
renouncing himself and all his Carnal Desires, should dedicate himself unto the
glory of the Name of God, and of Jesus Christ, and to the Edification of his
Neighbor.

After the Promise is made (the Godfather speaking to the Minister), the Child
has his Name given him; and then the Minister, sprinkling water on the
For^head, baptizing him, saying, (with a loud voice,)

N. I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost.

The whole being audibly performed in the vulgar Tongue, that all they which
are present may understand, and be Witnesses to what is done, and be edified in
acknowledging, and calling to mind what is the Fruit and Use of their Baptism.

THE MANNER OF Celebrating the Holy Supper.
IT is to be observed, that they declare to the People on the Lords day, before
the holy Sacrament is given; First, that every one may prepare himself to
receive it worthily, and with such Reverence as it behooves him to do. Secondly
That they do not admit any children, but such as are well instructed, and have
made profession of their Faith in the Church. Thirdly, if there come any
Strangers that are yet ignoraut, to present themselves, they should come to be
instructed first in private. The day it is to be celebrated, the Minister
speaks of it at the end of his Sermon; or if it be necessary, makes his Sermon
wholly upon it, to explain to the people what our Lord did signify by this
Mystery, and in what manner we must receive it.

After the Prayers and Confession of Faith are made, to testify in the Name of
the People, that all would live and die in the Christian Doctrine and Religion,
he says with a loud voice;

Let us hear my brethren, how Jesus Christ has instituted for us his holy
Supper, as St. Paul says in the 11th chap. of the first Epist. to the
Corinthians; I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you,
that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread; and
when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat; this is my Body,
which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me. After the same manner he
also took the Cup when he had supped, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in
my Blood: This do ye as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. For as often
as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords death till he
come; Wherefore whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord
Unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. But let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup; for
he that eats and drinks Unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation to
himself, not discerning the Lords Body.

Brethte, we have heard how our Lord made his Supper amongst his Disciples;
which shows us, That Aliens, and such that are not of the Number of his
Faithful, should not be admitted thereto. Therefore according to that Rule, in
the Name, and by the Authority of the Lord Jesus Christ, I do Excommunicate all
Idolaters, Blasphemers, and contemners of God; Heretics, and all people that
make separate Sects to break the Union of the Church; all that are Perjured,
and all those who are Disobedient to Parents or to their Superiors; all
Seditious, Mutinous Strikers, Litigious. Adulterers, Whoremongers, Thieves,
Covetous, Usurers, Extortioners, Drunkards, Gluttons, and all such as lead a
wicked or scandalous Life; declaring unto them, that they must abstain from
this holy. Table, for fear of defiling and polluting of this holy Food, which
our Lord Jesus Christ does not give but to his faithful servants.

Therefore, according to St. Paul's Exhortation, let every one of you examine
his own Conscience, to know if he does truly and sincerely repent; resolving
hereafter to live holily, according to the Will of God, and above all if he
puts his Trust in the Mercy of God; wholly seeking his salvation in and through
Jesus Christ; and renouncing all Enmity and Hatred, have a true desire and
resolution to live in brotherly Love and Charity with his Neighbors.

If we have this Testimony in our hearts before God, let us not at all doubt
but that he will receive us for his Children; and that the Lord Jesus invites
us unto his Table, and to this holy Sacrament, which he has communicated unto
his Disciples.

And although we are conscious of our great Frailty and Misery, in not having a
True Faith, being inclined to Incredulity and Diffidence; and in not being so
entirely devoted to serve God with such zeal as we ought, being daily
struggling with the Lusts of our Flesh; yet seeing our Lord has by his Grace
engraven his Gospel in our Hearts, and has given us the desire and will of
Turning our selves from our Carnal Lusts, to follow his lust and holy
Commandments; Let us be assured, that our Sins and Imperfections will not
hinder us from being received by him, and made Worthy Partakers of that
Spiritual Table. For we do not come there, presuming that we are perfect or
just in otr selves. But on the contrary, by seeking our Life in Jesus Christ,
we do confess we are dead; therefore let us understand that this Sacrament is a
Remedy for the poor, spiritually sick: and all the worthiness which our Lord
requires of us, is, that we should examine our selves, and be grieved for our
Sins, and to place our Delight, Joy, and Contentment in him alone

Let us therefore first believe these promises which Jesus Christ, who is the
infallible truth, has declared with his own Mouth; Namely, that he will make
us true partakers of his Body and Blood, that we may so entirely enjoy him as
to live in him, and he in us; and although we do see nothing but Bread and Wine,
yet let us not doubt but that he will Spiritually accomplish in our Souls, all
that he has outwardly shown us by these visible signs, which is to say, that
he is the Heavenly Bread, to feed and nourish us to Eternal Life: So let us not
be ungrateful to the infinite bounty of our Savior, who displays all his
Riches and Benefits on this Table, in order to Communicate them unto us, for in
giving himself unto us, he signifies to us, that all he has is ours. Therefore
let us receive this Sacrament as a Pledge, that the virtue of his Death and
Passion is imputed to us for Righteousness, as if we had suffered in our own
Bodies. Let us not be so perverse as to refrain from this Table, when Jesus
Christ has so kindly invited us by his word; but weighing the dignity of this
precious gift, let us present our selves unto him with such fervent Zeal, as
may make us capable of receiving him.

Wherefore let us raise up our hearts and minds on high, where Jesus Christ is
in the Glory of his Father, from whence we do expect him for our Redemption;
and let us not amuse our selves with these Earthly and Corruptible Elements
which we see with the Eye, and touch with the Hand, nor seek him there as if he
were in the Bread and Wine, for then our Souls will be disposed to be nourished
and quickened with his substance, when they shall be raised above all Earthly
things into Heaven, the K^ngdom of God, where our Savior dwells, let us then
content our selves in our having the Bread and Wine for Signs and Tokens,
seeking Spiritually the truth, where the word of God promises that we shall
find it.

(After the Minister has admonished the People to come with reverence and in
good order: He distributes the Bread, and gives the Cup to the People, and in
the mean time they sing some Psalms, or read some part of the Holy Scripture
that is agreeable to that which is signified by the Sacrament.)

(And after, he makes use of the thanksgiving as has been before-said.)

THEIR FORM OF Solemnization OF Matrimony.
YOU must observe that before the Celebration of the Marriage, They do publish
it three Lords Days successively in the Church, that if any Person knows any
Lawful impediment, he or she may come to declare it in good time, or if any
other Person have any interest therein, he or she may there oppose it.

(That being done, both Parties come and present themselves at the beginning of
the Sermon, then the Minister says.)

Our help is in the Name of God who has made Heaven and Earth. Amen.

After that God our Father had Created Heaven and Earth, and all that in them
is, He created and made Man after his own Image, who should have Dominion and
Power over all the Beasts of the Earth, the Fish of the Sea, and Fowls of the
Air, Genesis 2. And the Lord God said, It is not good that the Man should be
alone: I will make him an help meet for him. And the Lord God caused a deep
sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept; and he took one of his Ribs, and the Rib
which the Lord God had taken from Man, made he a Woman; signifying, that the
Man and the Woman are but one Body, one Flesh, and one Blood, therefore shall a
Man leave his Father, and his Mother, and shall cleave unto his Wife; which he
ought to love as Christ loved his Church, which are the true Faithful
Christians for whom he Dyed. The Wife ought also to serve and obey her Husband
in all Holiness and Honesty, for she is subject, and is in the Power of her
Husband so long as she lives with him; this Holy Marriage which is instituted
by God is of that Nature, that by it* the Husband has no Power over his Body
but the Wife, nor has the Wife any Power over her Body but the Husband:
Therefore being joined by God they cannot be parted, unless it be for sometime
by consent of both, to apply themselves to Fasting and Prayer; bewaring they be
not tempted by Satan to incontinency, wherefore they are to come together
again, to avoid all uncleanness: Every Man ought to have his Wife, and every
Woman her Husband. So that all those who have not the gift of continency are to
Marry, that the Holy Temple of God which is our Bodies should not be defiled and
corrupted, for seeing that our Bodies are the Members of Jesus Christ, it would
be a great reproach to make them Members of an Harlot, therefore we must keep
them in all Holiness, for if any defile the Temple of God, him will God destroy.

You then Naming the Bridegroom and the Bride N. N. knowing, that God has
ordained it thus, will you live in the Holy State of Matrimony, which God has
so greatly honored? have you such an intention, as you do here declare before
this holy assembly, desiring that it should be confirmed?

They Answer. Yes.

(The Minister.)

I take you all, that are here present as Witnesses, desiring you to remember
it, yet if there be any who know any impediment in it, or that either of them
be Married to any other, let him declare the same.

(If no Person opposes it, the Minister says thus.)

Since there is no Person that opposes it, and that there is no impediment: Our
Lord God confirm that holy design which he has given you, let your beginning be
in the Name of God; who has made Heaven and Earth. Amen.

(The Minister speaking to the Bridegroom, says thus:)

N. Do you confess here before God, and this holy Assembly, that you have
taken, and do take M. here present, for your Wedded Wife, and do you promise to
keep her, in Loving, and faithfully maintaining her, as the duty of a Loving
Husband toward his Wife requires; Living Holily with Her, keeping Faith and
Loyalty in all things, according to the word of God, and of his Holy Gospel.

Answer. Yes.

(After speaking to the Bride the Minister says,)

M. Do you confess here before God, and this holy assembly, that you have taken
and do take N. here present for your Lawful Husband, do you promise to obey
him, serving and being subject unto him, living a holy life, Keeping says and
loyalty with him in all things, as a faithful and loyal wife ought to do
toward her husband, according to the Word of God, and of his holy Gospel?

Answer. Yes.

(Then the Minister does say,)

The Father of all mercy, who has called you by his Grace to this holy State,
for the love of his Son Jesus Christ, who did sanctify Marriage by his holy
presence, and where^t he wrought his first Miracle before his Apostles, give
you his holy Spirit to serve and honor him together with one accord. Amen.

Hear the Gospel, in which our Lord shows how he would have holy Matrimony to
be kept; and how it is firm, and indissolvable, as it is written in the 19th of
St. Matthew.

The Pharisees also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him, Is it
lawful for a man to put away his Wife for every cause? and he answer^^ and said
unto them, have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning, made
them Male and Female, and said, for this cause shall a man leave Father and
Mother, and cleave unto his Wife, and they twain shall be one Flesh; wherefore
they are no more twain, but one Flesh; what therefore God has Joined together,
let no man put asunder.

Believe these Holy Words which our Lord has spoken; as they are contained in
the holy Gospel, be assured that our Lord God has joined you in holy
Matrimony. Therefore live holily together in Love, Peace and Unity, keeping
true Charity, Faith and Loyalty, one toward another, according to the Word of
God.

(Let us all pray to our Father with one accord.)

God Almighty who art good and wise, and have foreseen from the beginning, that
it was not good for Man to be alone, and therefore did create an help meet
for him, like unto himself, and have ordained that two should be one. We most
humbly pray and beseech thee, since it has pleased thee to call these here
present unto the holy State of Matrimony, that thou would be pleased of thy
bountiful grace to give them thy holy Spirit, that they may live in true and
steadfast faith according to thy good will, that they may overcome all Evil
Affections, and edify others in all Honesty and Chastity; give them thy
Blessings as thou did to thy Faithful Servants, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob:
That they having an Holy Seed, may praise and serve thee; instructing and
nourishing them up to thy Praise and Glory, and to the Edification of our
Neighbors; and the advancement of thy Holy Gospel. Hear us most merciful
Father through our Lord Jesus Christ thy most Dear Son. Amen.

Our Lord replenish you with his Grace and Goodness, and grant you a long and
holy life together Amen.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
AS I have mentioned the differences between the Protestant Dissenters and the
Church of England, and the great respect paid her, by the reformed Foreign
Churches; So I think fit to conclude, by hinting to the Romanists, Quakers,
etc. That the Differences between Reformed Foreign Churches and the Church of
England, are not so material and great as some have maliciously reported. The
present Controversies of Papists with Papists, and of Quakers among themselves,
are considerably greater in my Opinion; and the Breach between our English
Presbyterians and Independents I take to be wider.

As for that amazing Point of Absolute Predestination, it is not so much
disputed amongst the Reformed as the Roman Churches. One Order of Monks has
hotly engaged another; The Jesuists and Jansenists have written so many
hectoring and swelling Volumes upon that knotty Subject, that a small Library
will scarcely contain them.

Whereas, in my poor Apprehension, it would be much better to practice the
Doctrines we profess, than to quarrel about them; and to use the words of the
Learned, Let us, confessing that nothing can be done without the Providence of
God, Adore in humility the Secrets which are hid from us, without our enquiry
beyond our measure, and rather apply to our use that which is shown us in the
holy Scriptures for to be in repose and security. The World had been much
happier if all who follow that Judicious Divine Mr. Calvin (as well as others)
had embraced this sound, this useful and pious instruction.

As for the Government of the Church by Bishops, the Learned Calvin had neither
a seasonable time or opportunity to use it. It was not feasible or practicable
for him to maintain it; for how could he establish Protestant Bishops where
Popish Bishops were settled? But I Appeal to the world, if the Calvinian Clergy
has not generally shown a great Veneration, both for the Orders and Persons of
our Bishops; whether they have not admired their Books, and received holy
Orders from them. And for a further Demonstration of their entire Agreement,
few of them, (if any) have ever refused a Prebendary, a Deanery, or any
Episcopal Preferment.

But were there a real Disagreement in any point, with what Forehead could a
Romanist object it? The Archbishop of Paris, uncharitably Damns the
Archbishop of Cambray; the Bishop of Meaux and others join with him; whilst
the Prelate of Cambray does not want a Party who adhere to him: The Pope and
his Cardinals are stunned atit, and for all the Infalibility they pretend to,
they cannot easily tell on which side to determine. The great God compose all
Divisions amongst Christians of what Denomination soever, let us humbly beseech
him to inspire continually the Universal Church with the Spirit of Truth, Unity
and Concord, and grant that all those who confess his Holy Name, may agree in
the truth of his holy word, and live in Unity and Godly Love; grant this O
Father for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

FINIS.
FOR the satisfaction of all such persons that doubt of the Truth of this
preceding Translation, they may please to observe, that it has been Examined
by us, and found to be faithfully translated from the French Form of Prayers,
which was in use in the Reformed Churches in France among our Ancestors, and in
our days, whose Names are here subscribed.

Ministers of the French Church in the Savoy. T. Satur, P. Larriviere, C. G.
Lamothe,
Ministers of the Old French Church in London. C. Piozet, Chapter Bertheau,
Dubourdieu, Minister of the Old Frnnch Church in Soho. A. Gilbert, Minister of
the French Chapel at the Palace of St. James. C. Pegorie, Minister of the
French Church near Leicester Fields. La Place, Minister of the French Church in
Newport-Market, Soho. Blanc, Minister of the Old Patant French Church in Soho.
Gally Degaujac, A French Minister of an English Church. J. Lions, Minister to
several French Churches in and about London. Ministers of the New French
Churches in London and in Hungerford-Market. J. Doules, J. Lombard, Peter
Degaleniere, John Graverol, P. Roussilions,
De Milly Melin, Minister and Reader of the New French Church in London.

This Translation has been carefully compared with the Original, and Corrected
by S. Lions, a French Minister.




