Forgery Detected, AND Innocence Vindicated.

BEING A faithful Account of the seasonable Discovery of an Horrid and
Detestible Slander raised on the Anabaptists of New England, in that Diabolical
Pamphlet, entitled, Mr. Baxter baptized in Blood; designing so maliciously the
Reproach and Exposure of all under that Denomination.

Mat. 11.12. Blessed are ye when men shall Revile you, and Persecute you, and
shall say all manner of Evil against you falsely, etc.

Psalm. 120.2, 3. Deliver my soul, O Lord, from Lying lips, and from a Deceitful
Tongue.

Psalm. 35.11. They laid to my charge things that I knew not.

London, Printed by J. D. for Fr. Smith at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange, and at the same Sign first Shop without Temple Bar,
1673.

Forgery Detected, etc.
IT has been always the Malicious Practice of that grand Slanderer Satan and
his Instruments, since the first times of Christianity, when they could not
resist the Power of Religion, to defame the Persons and Assemblies of all
Christians, with foul and hateful Crimes laid to their charge; putting them
into Skins of Beasts, that Dogs might devour them, as appears by the Apoligies
of Tertullian, and other of the Ancients, who wrote in their behalf. By which
it appears that those Defamations fixed no lasting blot upon Men and Meetings,
unless with some Rash and very Credulous Persons.

But this unparalled Slanderer has hatched a Forgery beyond all Story, not
only under the specious pretense of Piety (intitling God himself, his holy
Word, and all that is sacred therein) but set forth with the formalities of
Names, Speeches, Actions, Time and Place; Orderly and most Pathetically
discribing the most Execrable Murder that ever was known; Exceeding the
Cruelties of the most Savage Heathen; And as his own words to the life
expresses it, such a villainy which the Myrmidons, and Scythians in the midst
of Barbarism it self never heard of, viz. of first Stripping and cruelly
Whipping, then Unboweling and Fleying alive a Reverent Godly Minister in his
own House, in the midst of the howling Groans and Scrichings of his dear
Relations lying bound before him; And this by Anabaptists, and that for no
other provocation, but being worsted by him in Disputation. And the better to
create belief, this dreadful Story must here be made public by his pretended
Mournful Brother, as a known Inhabitant in this City, and the real Stamp of
Public Allowance (suruptitiously obtained, to avow the truth thereof) put upon
it.

That by so faining (yet credibly relating the Fiction of this unspeakable
Villainy perpetrated in New England by such Anabaptists that never were) he
might bring into Obloquy, Hatred, and Hazard, all of that name in other places,
as accessory to a Murder done, which was never done.

And may it not be truly said that the Bounds of Christian Profession are not
wide enough to afford us an Example parallel to the prodigious Malice of this
lying Defamer, pretending this horrid Fact as done by Anabaptists, that he
might the better expose the whole Profession of them in all Parts, though never
so Innocent, to the Hatred and Rage of the People in all places against them;
the whole design of the Pamphlet being no other than to put them into
Sambenita's, that is, painting them like Devils, both in corrupt Doctrines, and
wicked Conversations, that he might render them the more odious and obnoxious
throughout the World; concluding it in these words, viz. I have penned and
published this Narrative in perpetuam rei memoriam, that the world may see the
Spirit and Temper of these Men, and that it may stand as an Eternal Memorial of
their Cruelty and Hatred to all Orthodox Ministers.

But thanks be to the God of Truth and Righteousness, who has timously and
seasonably discovered so horrible a Slander and Imposture, by the arrival of a
Ship which came from New England, above twenty days since this Murder was said
to be committed; the Master of which Ship, and a Merchant living at Boston in
New England, the place where this Fact is said to have been acted, testifying
upon Oath that they knew of no such Fact, no such Persons, either Murdering or
Murdered; Nor any Causes or Circumstances, of any such deed done, in the place
from whence they came, or in the whole Plantation of New England; and that they
hold it for a mere Fable and absurd Fiction, as appears by the Affidavit it
self before the Lord Mayor, hereto annexed, viz.

The Affidavits of the two New England Men.
RICHARD MARTIN, Master of the good Ship the Blossom of Boston, of New England,
Merchant; and HENRY MOUNTFORT of Boston aforesaid, Merchant, make Oath, That on
the 26th Day of February last past, they these Deponants set sail from Boston
aforesaid, for the Port of London; and these Deponants also say, and affirm,
that they the said Deponants for diverse Years last past have had their
constant Residence and Abode in or near Boston, aforesaid; But these Deponants
and either of them for himself says, that they never heard of or knew any
Minister called or known by the name of JOSIAH BAXTER, nor was there, to these
Deponants Knowledge or Belief, any Dispute or Controversy whatsoever between
the said BAXTER, and the ANABAPTISTS in New England, of or concerning any Point
of Religion: Neither was there any Report at Boston aforesaid, or any other
Place in New England, of or concerning any Murder pretended to have been
committed upon the said BAXTER, or any other Person or Persons whatsoever by
any ANABAPTISTS in New England. And these Deponants do verily believe that the
late Book entitled Mr. BAXTER baptized in Blood, is an absolute Pamphlet, and
a very great Falsehood, for that these Deponants were residing at Boston
aforesaid two and twenty Days after the said Murder (in the said Pamphlet
mentioned) is pretended to have been committed.

21 May 1673. Ambo jurat. suer. coram me, RICHARD MARTIN. HENRY MOUNTFORT. TO.
HANSON, Mayor.


Hereupon the Lord Mayor was pleased by his Officers not only to interdict the
vending the said scandalous Pamphlet, but to seize it in the hands of the
Hawkers and Mercuries that sold the same, and to suppress a second Impression
thereof in the Press, committing also to Prison several of the Publishers.

And whereas this barbarous Murder is said to be published by Benjamin Baxter
living in Fen-Church-street, the the mournful Brother of the said Josiah Baxter
(falsely said to be murdered) whom after all our diligent search both in
Fen-Church-street and elsewhere, we cannot find; as appears by the Testimony of
the Churchwardens, Overseers, and Beadles of Fen-Church-street here following,
Viz.

The Certificate of the Officers of the Ward.
WHereas We have lately seen a Pamphlet, entitled, Mr. Baxter baptized in
Blood, said to be published by his mournful Brother, Benjamin Baxter living in
Fen-Church-street, London, We the Churchwardens, Overseers and Beadles, do
Certify that there is no such Man does or has within our memory lived in the
two Wards of Aldgate and Longburne, in which Fen-Church-street is situate. To
the Truth of which Attestation we whose Names are underwritten, have set our
Hands this present 27th day of May, 1673.

Churchwardens. Thomas Baylie Will. Wickins Gordard Fletch Thomas Fisher
Overseers. Sam. Loveday Ralph Almond
Beadles. Will. Tyrlington Thomas Smith



It is true we find one William Baxter a Packer living in Fenchurch-Street, who
declares that he never had a Brother at Virginia or New England; that he had
never heard of this Josiah Baxter, a Minister, nor knew any thing at all of the
Story or its writing or being published.

We have by diligent search, providentially found out the first Publishers of
this lying Pamphlet, one of whom by name Seymer (a pretended Doctor of Physic)
we have met with; the other who is known by the name of Lawrance Savil (yet
through guilt hiding his head) we have not met with; who confesses himself (by
a Letter to one of us) drawn in and cheated by this imaginary and
supposititious Benjamin Baxter: but how likely a story he tells, and whether
there is not good cause to conclude him the man himself, let the intelligent
Reader judge by the perusal thereof, hereunto added, viz.

Lawrance Savil's Letter.
SIR,
THE Doctor ( viz. Seymer aforesaid) has urged and pressed me by several
Letters to give the world a full and satisfactory account of this business of
Mr. Baxters Pamphlet: Mr. Benjamin Baxter, the Author of the late Pamphlet,
about nine Weeks since insinuated into my Acquaintanice, first in Gray's Inn
Walks, and afterward at a Coffee-house in Holborn; I met him often in the
Walks, from thence we went to the Coffee houses; I was well pleased with his
Company, because he seemed an ingenious Person, a good Scholar, and an
Orthodox Member of the Church of England; He used always to dispute against
the Anabaptists, and in Coffee-houses to be so fierce in his Invectives against
that Party, that sometimes he became ridiculous to the company; he would often
much comment on the increase of that party. Afterward he told me, he was
composing a general History of the first Original and Progress of the
Anabaptists, with a full confutation of their Tenets; which he was confident
would be a work very acceptable to the sober part of the Nation.

Then be told me he had a particular Kindness for me, and that I should have
the publishing of it, by which he was sure I might gain no les then 100 l. I
returned him thanks for his Kindness, and told him I was not as quainted in
things of that Nature, but that it was more fit for some Bookseller to deal in,
and that it would require a Disbursment of a considerable Sum of Money, which
I was loath to venture. He instantly replied, that though I was ignorant in the
business of Printing, yet he understood it well, and had printed several
things, but now his Business coming on so fast, he had no time to follow it
himself, but (if I pleased) would wholly employ me in it, and would disburse
the Money for Printing and Paper, but leave the Profit entirely to me. I must
confess these Offers seemed very fair, I could not handsomely refuse such
Kindness. So the Business was concluded, and I every Day expected this
Elaborate Work for the Press. I saw him no more for eight Days together (at
which I much wondered) but one Evening at Gray's Inn I met him in a most heavy
and disconsolate Condition: after I had pressed him to discourse the Causes of
his Grief, he told me his Sorrows were unexpressible, that his dear Brother
that was formerly gone to Virginia he heard was killed by the Anabaptists; and
then in a great Passion he flung me three Letters, and had me read them; He
said he was resolved to immortalize the Fact, and let it stand for ever as an
Eternal Memorial against that Party. I was much troubled at the sad Fate of his
Brother, and so we parted. Some three Days after we met again, and then he
showed me the Copy of this Pamphlet, and told me be came just then from
Lambeth, and that Doctor Parker had Licensed it, for (said he) I showed Doctor
Parker the three Letters, and could not forbear Weeping. Could you your self
have doubted of the reality of the business, if you had seen the License to it,
his Tears and passionate expressions, and also the three Letters? So at last I
condescended to do it. The next day I went to Mr. Darby, and desired him to
print it; he took a veiw of the Copy, and said he was not satisfied of the
truth of it: But he would recommend me to a Cavalier Printer (as he expressed
it) in Jewen-Street, who would readily perform the business. I deferred the
publishing for seven or eight days, expecting to hear some Objection against
it, but meeting not with any, I published it. Mr. Baxter constantly met me
every day, and always urged the expedite and sudden publication of the
Narrative. I told him it was coming forth. He told me I should command what
money I desired, for this and several other Books he had to come forth. I
replied, that none was wanting yet, but when it was printed, the Printer was to
be paid. Upon May 15 I showed him a proof-sheet; he said he was glad the
business was so forward, he would go to the Goldsmith to Morrow; for, said he,
that will be soon enough for the Printer; But in the mean time, says he, pray
let me have 4 or 5 Guineys till to Morrow. I told him I had not so much about
me, but what I had he should have: So I let him have 40 s. So we parted. The
next Day I expected him, but he came no more, neither have I ever seen or heard
from him since.

Formerly when I asked him concerning his Lodging; he said he lived in
Fen-Church-street, but he was seldom at home, and it was impossible for me to
meet with him: He said he was an Attorney, and had good employment that way.
Thus has this Fellow put me upon a business, and now unworthily deserted me.
And now I begin too late to perceive him either to be a Cheat, or to be grossly
cheated and gulled with false Letters; For he several times said he had not
heard of his Brother since his Departure out of England till now. If I can do
any further Service in the Matter, I shall be very ready and willing, for
unless Baxter appears in his own Defense, and pay me the Money I lent him, I
shall certainly conclude him a Cheat.

As for my Friend the Doctor, he was altogether unconcerned in the matter, and
did only recommend me to a Printer at my Request. All this that I have writ, I
will avouch to be most true, and if you please to print it, I will stand to it,
and justify it to be the naked Truth of the Business.

May 20 1673. Your real Friend, Laurance Savill.


An address being made to the Council Board; they, upon the Examination of the
business, finds it False and Fictitious, and accordingly ordered the publishing
the same in the Gazette, viz.

The Order of Council.
Whereas there is a Pamphlet lately published, Entitled Mr. Baxter Baptized
in Blood, containing a horrible Murder committed by four Anabaptists upon the
Person of Mr. Josiah Baxter, near Boston in New England. The whole matter
having been inquired into, and examined at the Council Board, is found
altogether False and Fictitious.

Edw. Walker.

The Licenser being also made acquainted with the whole matter, confesses his
mistake, and too sudden Credulity in the Licensing so strange a Pamphiet, as
appears by the Testimonial hereto inserted under his hand, viz.

Dr. Parkers Testimonial.
Whereas there was a certain Pamphlet lately published under the Title of Mr.
Baxter Baptized in Blood, containing a Narrative of a Murder committed on the
Person of one Josiah Baxter a Minister near Boston in New England; which
Narrative was allowed of, Licensed, and publicly exposed to Sale. These are to
certify that the Allowance and License thereof was obtained at the desire and
suggestion of one Lawrance Savil, who in Order to procure the same, did really
produce to the Licenser Letters and Testimonials under the hands (as he
pretended) of several Persons in New England, containing the particular
Circumstances of the said Relation, and asserting the truth of the same, as in
the printed Copy is expressed. All which upon further inquiry and examination,
the said Licenser has since evidently found to be Fictitious and untrue,
contrived and invented here in England, without any Warrant or Attestation from
beyond the Seas. And so much he has thought fit to publish, to the end that no
Person may be abused or Imposed upon by a Report, which, as he is now
sufficiently convinced, is both false and groundless.

Read in Council, 30th May 1673. Sam. Parker.

BY all this, and what more we hope yet to find out of this wicked and inhumane
design, (as cruel in the intention, as the fact is in the fiction, and both
equally detestible) our Integrity and Innocence will the more appear.

And although to be falsely accused, directly or indirectly, is a great
exercise; yet to be cleared, and timely acquitted we look at to be a good
providence of God to us. For what have we done, or what are our Principles in
Religion, that men should think us any wayfitted or disposed to conceive,
commit, approve, and not abhor such abominable crimes as these are? what is in
our Practice of being Baptized in Water upon the profession of Faith, that
should incline us to such henious doings, above all others, in the thoughts of
any sensible or rational men?

And although perhaps this Pamphlet has wrought some prejudice in the minds of
many men against us for a while, yet considering how seasonably it has pleased
God to detect and defeat the malicious and cruel design of this Diabolical
Stratagem,

We have cause to acknowledge the goodness of God therein; and patiently to
bear such slandrous Reports, especially remembering that what is now our Case,
was the common Case of all Christians heretofore, to be defamed and evil spoken
of without cause, though it has not befallen many to be so clearly and fully
acquitted.

We leave this Record to posterity, as a signal example to future Ages, how
injuriously and cruelly the Malice of some men has vented it self against us
and our Profession, and how speedily and opportunely the Goodness and favor of
God has appeared in our timely and successful Vindication. When as that which
this wicked Author has boasted to the perpetual Memory of the Fact, will be
found to turn upon him to his eternal Shame.

FINIS.
The Booksellers Advertisement to the Reader.
That since the detestible Pamphlet has so designed, not only to reproach and
villifie the Professors of Baptism by this his villainous attempt, but the
Profession it self also, as guilty of much Ignorance, Wickedness and
Sacrilegious Impiety; He hereby signifies to the impartial Reader, that if he
desires Information into the Principle or Practice of that reproached Truth, he
can furnish him with most of the judicious Treatises written upon that Subject,
and amongst them of most Note,

The learned Treatises of Mr. John Tombs. The Works of Mr. Samuel Fisher, in
Folio. A judicious Piece, by Henry Lawrance, Esquire And a Treatise of Baptism, by
H. D. (lately come forth) wherein that of Believers and that of Infants is
examined by the Scriptures. With the History of both out of Antiquity.
Imprimatur,

Sam. Parker.
June 5. 1673.

