A FURTHER ATTEMPT Toward the Reformation of the COIN. WITH Expedients for
preventing the stop of Commerce during the Re-coinage. AND Supplying the Mint
with a sufficient quantity of Bullion.

Humbly offered to the Consideration of the King and Parliament, By R. Ford.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Cockerill Sen' and Jun' at the Three Legs in the
Poultry, 1696.

A Further Attempt Toward the Reformation of the COIN, etc.
INTRODUCTION.
THough I may seem to incurr the Censure of Vanity and Ostentation, by
pretending to advance any thing New, on a Theme that has already employed so
many able Pens: Yet on an Impartial Perusal of all that is extant on this
Subject, I doubt not but there will be found such ample Scope for so many
Considerable Alterations and Additions as will render this Further Attempt not
only Excusable but Necessary: Great part of what has been hitherto done of
this Nature, not having been performed with that Candor and Impartiality, nor
with all that Accuracy and Exactness as were to be wished, in an Affair of such
grand Importance and Difficulty. And how Deficient soever I may be, as to the
latter of these Qualifications, yet I dare assure my Readers, they shall not
have any just Cause of Complaint of my Failure in the former and more Essential
Point of an unbiassed Integrity. The Consciousness of which Sincerity of
Intention, flatters me with some Hopes of these Endeavors meeting with a
Favorable Reception; wherein, if I should be deceived, yet should I be
sensible of no other Displeasure thereat, than any Lover of his Country may be
supposed to have, for the Miscarriage of a Design he conceives might conduce to
the Promotion of the Public Good.

I shall not wast any Time in an unprofitable Inquiry into the several Means
and Degrees whereby our Coin has been reduced to its present ill Condition,
but forthwith apply my self to the Search of the properest Methods of Restoring
it unto a good one. The only effectual Expedient for which purpose, is agreed
on all hands to be the Re-coining of all the old clipped and Counterfeit Coin,
into good new and milled Money: So that there is an universal Consent, as to
the Matter it self, that it is necessary to be done, but as to the Manner of
performing it; there are almost as many different Persuasions as Persons, out
of which variety of Methods, to select those which seem most Rational and
Practicable, is the Design and Scope of this Discourse, which shall consist of
an Inquiry into the following Heads, which will comprehend all that is
necessary to be said on this subject. viz.

First, Whether it be most for the Interest of the Nation, to Reduce the price
or value of an Ounce of Silver unto Sixty two Pence, or to advance it
proportionable to the present Scarcity and Want thereof.

Secondly, By whom shall the Loss that will ensue on the Re-coining the Clipped
and Counterfeit Money be sustained.

Thirdly, By what Means may the Mint be supplied with a sufficient Quantity of
Silver Bullion, to make near as much good Money in Tale, as there is at this
time of good and bad together.

Fourthly, What Methods are proper to be insisted on, to prevent the stop of
Commerce during the Re-coinage.

The first, and indeed most material Point that offers it self to our
Consideration, is the Value that ought to be fixed on the Ounce of Silver; or
whether it be more for the Public Interest to have it reduced unto Sixty two
Pence, or to have it advanced proportionable to the present Scarcity and Want
thereof. The latter of which two Opinions, viz. That it is most for the
Interest of the Nation to advance the Price of our Silver, seems most Rational
in it self, and Beneficial to the Kingdom in its present Circumstances, and
that for several Cogent, and (if I mistake not) unanswerable Reasons; whereof
the following are some of the principal, which when I can find satisfactorily
answered, I engage to change my Opinion; until which be done, I hope those of
the contrary Persuasion will alter theirs. These Reasons I shall dispose under
two Heads.

1. I shall Enumerate some of the grand Inconveniences that will attend the
Non-advancement of Silver.

2. I shall represent some of the Advantages that will accrue to the Nation by
raising the Price thereof. And

To begin with an Enumeration of the Evil Consequences that will attend the low
Valuation of Silver, some of the principal whereof are,

1. The Want of a sufficient Quantity of Money for Payment of the Taxes and
Rents, and carrying on of the Trade of the Nation.

Now if I can but prove, that such an Excessive Want and Scarcity of Money will
be the certain and fatal Consequence of fixing so low a Rate on Silver. I think
this single Consideration were sufficient to dissuade the Practice of it. For
certainly such a Method of regulating the Coin, as carries with it such fatal
and pernicious Consequences, as the occasioning so great a Scarcity of Money,
as to render us incapable of paying our Taxes and Rents, and Management of our
Trades; and that will Impoverish the Nation to that Degree, as to Incapacitate
us for the Continuance of the War; and thereby oblige us, and consequently the
rest of Europe, to truckle to the Ambition and Power of France. I say, such a
Method, that draws with it such Consequences as these, must be acknowledged of
all hands, to be very unfit to be pursued. Now that the low Valuation of Silver
would cause so great a Scarcity of Money, as would in a great measure produce
such fatal Effects, may I conceive be evinced from the ensuing Considerations.

1. That the fixing a low Rate on Silver, will produce such an Excessive
Scarcity of Money, may partly be evinced, if we consider, That what Silver
shall be Recoin'd, together with what milled and unclipp'd Money is still
remaining, will not go so far by near a Million of Pounds Sterling, if it be
Re-coin'd at a low Rate, as it will if the Value be augmented; which will be
evident, if we compare what quantity of Money in Tale, may be Recoin'd out of
the Clipped Money, reckoning the Silver at 62 Pence per Ounce, with the
Quantity that may be made out of the same Silver, reckoned at a fourth part
more, viz. at 6 s. 5 d. per Ounce. There may be (as is computed by the
Judicious Mr. Lowndes) about 5600000 l. of Sterling Money left in the Kingdom,
whereof he supposes about 1600000 l. may be in milled and unclipp'd Money, and
the other Four Millions in clipped Money; which one with another (as appears by
several Bags weighed at the Exchequer) is diminished full one half of its
weight. So that the said four Millions, Re-coin'd according to the present
Establishment, will not make above two Millions of milled Money, which, with
the 1600000 l. supposed to be remaining in milled and unclipp'd Money, and
making in all 3600000 l. will be all the Silver Money we are like to have in
the Kingdom, in lieu of about eight Millions of good and bad Silver together,
which are supposed to be now therein.

Now he that can inform me, how we may be capable of paying every Year between
five or six Millions of Pounds for defraying the Charge of the War, a great
part of which Sum must also be transported for the use of the Landforces; and
how at the same time we may pay our Rents, and manage our Domestic and
Foreign Trades, on account of which latter also there must be great Sums
yearly transported, to make good the Balance of what the Goods we Export fall
short of those we Import. I say, He that can propose the means of performing
all this out of 3600000 l. of Silver, and our small quantity of Gold Coin
(which by the way will be very inconsiderable, when it is fallen to the Rate
these Gentlemen would have Silver fixed at,) -- erit mihi Magnus Apollo,
I Will erect Altars to his Praise, and Sacrifice to his Memory.

But on the other hand, if Silver be advanced a fourth part, viz. from 5 s. 2
d. unto 6 s. 5 d. per Ounce (as it ought to be in proportion to the present
Scarcity thereof, of which more in the sequel of this Discourse) then the same
quantity of Silver will furnish us with a fourth part more Money than it would
if it were coined at the rate of the present Establishment. So that instead of
but 3600000 l. we shall by this proposed Advancement of Silver, have 4500000 l.
in the Nation, which is Nine hundred thousand Pounds more, and is no
inconsiderable Addition to our Coin at such a Juncture as this. And besides
this Augmentation of our Silver Coin, the Advancement of our Silver will raise
our Gold proportionally full a fourth part: So that supposing there may be
about two Millions of Pounds Sterling in all sorts of Gold Coins in the Nation;
which if Silver be raised to the proposed Value, will pass for a full fourth
part, or 500000 l. more than they otherwise would: Which advance of the Gold,
added to that of the Silver, demonstrates there will be 1400000 l. more in tale
in the Kingdom, by the fixing a higher Rate on Silver, than there would be by
setting a lower Valuation thereon.

But before I can pass to the next Reason, to prove that such an excessive and
fatal Want of Money, will be a consequence of reducing Silver to a low Value, I
must obviate one grand Objection, which I foresee will be urged against what I
have already advanced, and which is this.

Object. That though it be granted, that the same quantity of Silver or Gold,
will make more Money in Tale, by advancing the Value of the Bullion, than it
will if debased to a lower value; yet though the Money coined at such a low
rate will not go so far in Tale, yet it will purchase as much Goods as if it
did. The Real and Intrinsic, not the Nominal and Imaginary Value being that
which is regarded by those who sell their Commodities. -- To which I answer,

That though it be in some measure true, that the Price of Goods bears some
proportion to the Goodness or Badness of the Coin wherewith they are purchased.
Yet is not this proportion so exact as fully to balance them: For I dare
undertake to purchase more Goods with a Coin in quantity of Silver coined into
Money set at a pretty high rate, than with the same weight of Silver coined
into Money, and fixed at a lower rate. For though indeed the Real and
Intrinsic Value is principally regarded, yet not so, as totally to exclude all
Consideration of the Extrinsick Value and Denomination that is put upon it; to
which also all Persons, especially the Subjects of the Prince, whose Money it
is, bear some respect unto, and will accept it in Payment for something more
than the bare Intrinsic Value: As will be further evident, if we consider,

That though I think its granted, that our Coin is, if taken altogether full 50
per Cent. or one half less worth at this time, than the first Intrinsic Value.
And therefore that according to the rule of Goods rising or falling fully so
much as to balance the several degrees of the Goodness of Money, all our
Inland and Foreign Commodities should have advanced full one half above their
former Price, and the exchange for our Money have fallen one half from its
former Rate. Neither of which we find to have happened, not even when our Money
was reduced to its worst estate, and e're it was certain whether it would be
reformed or not.

For if we examine the Price-current of all Commodities, 'twill be found they
are not advanced near 50 per Cent. one with another; and so much as they are
risen, is not only on account of the Badness of our Coin, but is in great
measure occasioned by the extraordinary Demand there is for many of them both
here and Beyond Sea; and by the great difficulty and hazard of Importing them
during the War.

And then as to the course of Exchange, that also never fell so much from its
former Rate, as our Money is from its former Intrinsic Value. For I think,
when our Coin was in its perfection of Weight and Purity, the course of
Exchange at Roterdam, Amsterdam, etc. seldom exceeded 37 Dutch Shillings for a
Pound sterling. And when our Coin was debased to its worst estate, the Exchange
at the same places was seldom lower than 26 or 27 of the same Shillings for a
Pound sterling, which is not above 30 per Cent. difference from what it was
when our Coin was in its best condition; though (as I said before) our Money is
become generally 50 per Cent. worse than its first Intrinsic Value.

So that I think it is evident, that neither do Goods advance, nor the Exchange
sink so, as fully to balance the Baseness and Lightness of our Coin.

Whence it follows, that the same weight of Gold and Silver valued at a higher
rate, will go further in purchasing Commodities, as well as in Tale, than the
same weight, if a lower Value be fixed; since our Clipped and Counterfeit Money
buys more Commodities of any sort in proportion to its real and intrinsic
Value, than our Money, when in its best estate, ever did in proportion to the
real and intrinsic Value thereof at that time. And therefore our quantity of
Silver valued at 4500000 Pound, will go something farther in the purchase of
even foreign Commodities, as well as in Tale, than the same quantity valued at
but 3600000 Pound will do; which was the Point I designed to prove.

And if this hold in some measure even as to our Foreign Traffic, it is much
more certain, that with relation to our Inland Trade, the Advancement of the
Price of Money will not only make it go further in Tale, but also in Purchase,
and furnish us with a larger Stock to traffic with among our selves; the
extrinsick Value and Denomination of our Coin being regarded, as well as the
real and intrinsic one in our Dealings one with another: so that the increase
of the Extrinsick Value or Denomination of our Money will cause it to go
further in Payments, and purchase more Goods than it would otherwise do.

And in every regulation of the Coin, there ought to be had an equal, if not
superior regard to the Interests of our Domestic, as well as Foreign Commerce.
For the service of which former, Money seems to have been principally intended,
as being designed to answer such things as could not be easily reckoned, or
equally divided, and made to answer one another.

But a due consideration of the Interest of our Inland Traffic in the
Regulation of our Money, seems to be wholly neglected by the great Sticklers
for a low Valuation of our Money, whose measures seem chiefly calculated for
the Meridian of Foreign Trade, and their own particular Interests; insomuch as
I hope it will be judged no breach of Charity to conjecture, that the true
Motive by which some of that Party are acted in this Affair, is, that many of
them being Foreigners, and trading in Commodities coming from Holland, the
Sound, Streights, etc. may, instead of making their Returns in Goods, remit our
Money thither in Specie, by the extraordinary goodness whereof they propose to
gain 20 or 25 per Cent. in the exchange; which they know cannot be done, if our
Money be fixed at a pretty high rate.

But though this may be true as to some of them, yet I doubt not but there are
many Persons of the same opinion, whose Intentions are undoubtedly generous and
honest, but have been wheedled by some designing self-interested Persons, to
think and act otherwise in this Affair, than they would have done, if left to
have pursued the Dictates of their own better and more impartial Judgments.

Having, as I hope, sufficiently enervated the force of this grand Objection,
in which I have been the more prolix, because it is one of the most plausible
the Cause will afford; I proceed to the mention of a Second Reason, to prove,
That an excessive Scarcity of Money, will be a consequence of the
Non-advancement of Silver: Which is,

2. That the Reduction of Silver to so low a Rate; will not only prevent its
going so far in Tale and Purchase, as it otherwise would; but will also be such
a great discouragement to the Importation of Gold and Silver into the Kingdom,
and carrying of it into the Mint, as will thereby cut off all hopes of
procuring Bullion to increase the Coin.

I need not prove that Increase of our Money at a Juncture, when by Melting,
Clipping, and other indirect means it is reduced to so small a Quantity, must
be concluded to be for the Public Good; and consequently any Proposal that
tends to deprive the Nation of such an Advantage, as the augmentation of our
Coin is universally acknowledged to be, must necessarily be judged Repugnant to
the public Interest.

And that a low Valuation of Silver tends to prevent the Increase of our Money,
will be evident, if we consider, that no Persons will carry any Silver into the
Mint at 5 s. 2 d. per Ounce, when besides that, it is likely they gave
considerably more for it themselves. It will yield a better Price elsewhere. So
that the fixing so low a state on Gold and Silver would be as effectual a
Prohibition of the Importation of it into the Kingdom, and carrying of it unto
the Mint, as any Law that could be Enacted for that purpose.

A Third Reason to evince that such an excessive want of Money will ensue on
the non advancement of Gold and Silver, is, That fixing so low a Value on
Silver, will not only so discourage the Importation of it into the Kingdom, and
carrying of it into the Mint, as will cut off all hopes of increasing the
Quantity of our Coin, but also will be such a Temptation to persons to melt and
Transport it, as will render it impossible for us to preserve even the little
we shall have left, from being conveyed out of the Nation. So that supposing
the Government should impose the hard terms of carrying in our Plate to be
coined, at 1 s. or 1 s. 6 d. per Ounce less than it cost, and thereby the
quantity of our Money should be for the present augmented. Nay, imagining we
had double the Quantity of money that is possible for us to have: Yet if the
Value were settled at the Rate of the present Establishment, or 5 s. 2 d. per
Ounce, in the process of a few Years it would be insensibly melted and
Transported, until there would not remain a sufficient Quantity for the
supplying our most urgent Occasions, but the Nation would be involved in a
greater Exigency and Distress than it ever did (or I hope ever will)
Experience. Now, that what I have here urged is not a mere Scarecrow to
Terrify Children and Fools withal, I Appeal to our own sad Experience, which
never spoke clearer in any Case than it does in this. Does not this Inform us
in General, that though there should be Enacted the Severest Laws, backed with
the Execution of the most Rigorous Penalties, against the Commission of a
Crime, by which there is a prospect of certain Gain, yet that there will never
be wanting Persons who for the sake thereof will hazard the enduring the
greatest Punishments. And does not Experience further teach us in general, that
few Laws are obeyed, the Violation whereof is more gainful than the
Observation, and where the Profit of breaking them is great and certain, but
the Penalty dubious, or easily avoidable? But does not even our own present
Experience furnish us with pregnant Instances in relation to this particular
Subject of the Coin, since of above Fifteen Millions of Silver Money, which as
appears by the Register of the Mint, have been coined since the time of King
Henry the Eighth, not above one Third part are computed to be remaining in
Specie, but all the rest either melted down, or Transported? So that we may
rationally judge of the future by what is already past. Nay, rather we may
conclude that Silver and Gold being scarcer and dearer now on many Accounts
than for several Years past, should they be settled at so low a Rate, the
Encouragement to melt and Transport it being greater than ever, their Industry
therein would consequently be more than ordinary; for we have no reason to
imagine that when the Reason and Temptation of doing it will be so much
augmented, that their Diligence will be lessened. For if Persons will not stick
at the commission of a Crime for the obtaining of a less Advantage, they will
not scruple it for the procuring of a greater.

And this Reason will appear yet more unanswerable, if besides the Clandestine
and Illegal conveying the Silver out of the Land, which I have proved will be
an inevitable Consequence of the Scarcity and Goodness of our Money, there will
also thereby ensue this further Inconvenience, viz. That our Neighbors
supplying us with more Goods than we do them, we thereby become their Debtors,
and consequently must pay what we owe them in such as they will please to
accept; and we may be certain they will choose to have their Returns in that
whereby they shall gain most. So that if our Silver be reduced to a low value,
they will choose to have their Returns in as much of it as they can, whereby we
shall be at length so drained of our Money, as to be reduced to such a Scarcity
and want of Money, as I affirmed* and I think, have proved, will be the
consequence of the non-advancement of Silver, and the cause of such a Poverty
as will disable us to pay our Taxes and Rents, and manage our Trades. Which
though it be but a single Instance of the Mischievous Effects of setting a low
Valuation on Silver, yet is one of so black and extensive a Nature, and draws
such a Numerous and Dismal Train of Ill Consequences along with it, as will
spare me the Labor of adding much more to prove the Disadvantage of such a
Practice. However I shall mention a second grand Inconvenience that will attend
the non-advancement of Silver, viz.

That the making our Money of a great Weight and a low Value, will mightily
obstruct the Sale of our Manufactures and Inland Commodities, both to our
Neighbors abroad, and amongst our selves at home. For as to our Neighbors, if
our Money be made of so extraordinary Goodness, they will (as I said before)
choose to have their Returns made in that, and in as few of our Goods as
possible. Which will cause our Commodities to fall very much on our hands for
want of Buyers. In the mean time our Neighbors taking as much Money, and as
few Goods from us as possible, will thereby (together with the concurrence of
some other causes mentioned in the foregoing Head) occasion such a want of
Money, as will mightily obstruct the Vent of our Inland Commodities, even
among our selves, and so very much prejudice our Domestic as well as Foreign
Commerce. For a great scarcity of Money will oblige Persons to retrench their
usual Expenses, and employ their Money in such things only as are of pure
Necessity. So that most of the Trades that subsist by furnishing things for the
Pleasure and Ornament of Humane Life (of which kind the Greater part of the
Trades of the Nations subsist) must necessarily droop and decline; for Persons
not having Money sufficient to gratify both their Necessities and their
Pleasures, will be obliged to baulk the latter to serve the former, or at least
to disappoint one of the two; and then amongst other Commodities, that will
fall so much by reason of the Scarcity of Money. We may be certain that Corn,
Cattle, and the other Products of Land will bear a Proportion; And if a Tenant
cannot make so much of the Product of his Farm, as he used to do, then it will
be impossible for him to pay his Landlord the usual Rent: So that all the Lands
and Tenements must of necessity sink, considerably below their present yearly
Rents: Which will not be the only Diskindness that this hopeful Project, of
Reducing the Silver to so low a Rate as 5 s. 2 d. per Ounce, (if it succeed)
will procure to the Gentlemen's and Landlords Estates in England. For this low
Rate of Silver causing a Scarcity of Money, and this Scarcity of Money
naturally causing the Advancement of the Interest thereof, to perhaps double
the present Rate, and the Advancement of the Interest of Money will certainly
lower the Purchase of Lands by several Years; for that when the Increase of
Money was high, Lands yielded but a few Years Purchase. But on the contrary,
When the Interest of Money was lowest, then Lands sold for the most Years
Purchase; as will be evident, if we compare the Purchase of Lands in King Henry
the Eighth's Time, when Interest of Money was at 12 or 14 l. per Cent. per
Annum, with the Purchase of the same Lands now, when Interest is not above a
third part of what it was at that time: It being always observed, That as the
Price of Money was advanced, and thereby the Species increased, that the
Interest thereof fell and grew less; and according as the Interest of Money
fell, so Land advanced several years Purchase; as will be manifest, if we
observe how much the Land of England has been improved since the aforesaid
time of King Henry the Eighth, when Interest of Money was so very high. So that
upon the whole, we may see how much the Gentlemen and Landlords of England are
obliged to these Persons, for proposing such a Method of Regulating the Coin,
that will not only, by introducing a Scarcity of Money, cause all the Products,
and consequently the yearly Rents of Lands, to fall considerably; but also
advance the Interest of Money, and thereby lower the Purchase of Lands by
several years.

And I conceive I have by this time so thoroughly represented the fatal
Consequences that will ensue on the fixing Silver at a low Rate, that the
Impartial Reader by this time cannot but be sensible, how destructive that
course would be to the Public Good.

I should now (as I proposed) enforce my Reasons for advancing the Price of
Silver, by representing the Advantages that would accrue to the Nation by doing
thereof. But these being in some measure handled under the former Head, when I
enumerated the ill Consequences of the contrary course. And these Advantages of
raising Silver, being but, as it were, the Reverse of, and directly opposite
unto the Disadvantages of fixing a low Value thereon. The good Effects of the
one, are best seen by opposing them to the bad ones of the other Method, which
I shall do very briefly, if the setting a low Valuation on Silver will cause,
that it will pass but a little way in Payments, the contrary method will make
it go as far as possible. If the former be such a Discouragement to the
bringing in of Silver to be coined, as cuts off all hopes of increasing the
Quantity of our Money, the latter affords all imaginable Encouragement both to
the Importation of it into the Kingdom, and to the carrying it into the Mint to
be coined: By which means we may hope to have as great a Plenty of good Money,
as ever was yet in the Nation. Again, If the setting too low a Valuation on
Silver, be a Temptation to convey it out of the Kingdom, the fixing a high Rate
thereon, will be a means of preserving the Coin entire and unmelted: And if the
low Rate of Silver will obstruct the Exportation of our Commodities, because
our Neighbors will choose our Money before our Goods: On the contrary, The
advancing Silver to a pretty high Rate, will induce them to choose our
Commodities rather than our Money, and thereby encourage our Trade and
Manufactures, and preserve our Money in the Kingdom to manage our Inland Trade.
In short, If the low Rate of Silver will cause such a Scarcity of Money, as
will oblige Persons to retrench their usual pleasurable Expenses, and thereby
occasion the Decay of a great many Trades depending thereon; but the setting a
high Price on Silver, thereby causing a Plenty thereof in the Nation, will
enable Persons to spend freely to the Advantage of Trade. Again, If the one
will produce such a Scarcity of Silver, as will cause all Commodities, and
among the rest, all the Products of Land to fall considerably, and consequently
all Lands to sink something in their yearly Rent. The other, on the contrary,
by advancing Silver, would keep Commodities up at such a tolerable Price, as
would preserve the present yearly Rent of Land. Finally, If fixing Silver at a
low Rate, will cause such a Scarcity, as must of necessity advance the Interest
of Money, and thereby cause Land to fall several years Purchase. On the
contrary, The Advancement of Silver, causing, as I have proved, a Plenty of
Money, which Plenty must consequently lower the Interest thereof. And the
Lessening of the Interest of Money, will, as Experience evinces, advance Land
several years Purchase.

Having, as I Hope, sufficiently evinced the Necessity and Advantage of raising
the Price of Silver, I come now to fix the particular Rate, to which I humbly
conceive it is requisite to be advanced, which, with the Judicious Mr. Lowndes
(who seems to have understood this matter better than most who have treated of
it besides) I judge to be one fourth part above the present Establishment; so
that the Ounce of Silver must consequently be raised from 5 s. 2 d. unto 6 s. 5
d. per Ounce, which may be done two ways, either by Retaining of the same
Weight and Fineness as before, with the addition of a fourth part of Extrinsick
Value; and so every milled Crown must be ordered to pass at 6 s. 3 d. and the
other pieces proportionable. The other Method of advancing the Silver, is by
Coining it of a less weight than before, but still affixing the same Value; by
which Regulation, the Standard of one of the new Crown pieces to pass at 5 s.
will consist of 15 penny-weights and an half within an inconsiderable Fraction,
and the other Pieces proportionable. Both which methods come to one and the
same effect; only if it shall be thought fit to make use of the latter method
of diminishing the weight, but retaining the extrinsick value. Then the better
to make the New Crowns answer to such as shall be left of the old
Establishment, it will be requisite that besides Half Crowns, there should be
also Coined Quarter Crowns, or pieces of 15 d. one whereof added to a New
Crown, will make it exactly answer the Old Milled Crown pieces that shall
remain of the former Standard.

This Rate settled on our Silver Coins, will soon reduce our Gold to the same
proportion, according to which a Guinea is worth 25 s. at which rate I humbly
conceive it is for the Public Interest to have them fixed by Authority. And
moreover to prevent the extraordinary Loss that will fall so heavy on some
particular persons by their falling 5 s. per piece, viz. from 30 s. unto 25 s.
at one instant, as they are like to do if left to take their course; I judge it
would prevent that Inconvenience, if the Loss that will ensue upon them, be
equally born by the Nation, which may be effected by Ordering them to fall 6 d
per piece ever month for the first six months next ensuing the date of an Order
to be published for that effect; and to fall 4 d. per piece every month for the
next six months, to commence from the Expiration of the first six months; and
all Persons shall be commanded to take them at the Rates they shall be current
in each respective month, under the Penalty of forfeiting the value of the
money they shall so refuse: And all other Gold Coins to fall by the same
proportion. Whereby in 12 months time we should have our Gold Coin reduced to
their true value, with a Trouble and Loss, that being thus divided among the
Nation in general, would be very inconsiderable, and almost insensible. But
were it to be born by each particular person, would very much impoverish some
Families, whilst the rest escape Scot-free; for all persons that shall be thus
obliged to take Guinea's for their Goods, would reimburse themselves in some
measure by making a better price of their Commodities, and be likewise in hopes
of paying their Guinea's away again before a month is expired: So as I am
persuaded that such an Ordinance would be received with almost an Universal
Satisfaction.

Thus have I gone through the First and indeed Principal Point I intended in
this Discourse, and therefore shall be more brief in what remains. The Second
General Head I proposed to enquire into, is, By whom shall the Loss that will
ensue on the Re-coining the Clipped and Counterfeit Money be sustained?

Unto that part of the Query that relates to the Clipped Silver Money, the
Resolution of Parliament, That the Loss thereof shall be made good by the
Public, is a sufficient Reply. But it being yet undetermined, By whom the Loss
occasioned by the Counterseit Money should be sustained; I hope I may be
permitted to communicate my Opinion: Which is, That the Loss thereof be born,
one part by the Public, and the other by the several Proprietors, in the
sollowing Proportion, viz. That for all such Counterfeit-Money as has any
Mixture or Incorporation of Silver in it, and is not entirely Brass, Copper,
Iron, or some such Metal, the Owner shall, upon their carrying it into the
Mint, be allowed for so much as the said Money shall weigh, after the rate of 5
s. per Ounce, Troy-weight, to be paid them, partly out of such Silver as shall
be found in the said Money that is Carried in, after the Melting and Separation
thereof, and the residue out of such a Tax as the Parliament shall think fit to
lay for that purpose. Until which Money can be raised, they shall have Notes
given them, entitling themselves or the Bearers thereof unto so much Sterling
Money as the said Counterfeit-Money they carried in amounted unto by weight, at
5 s. per Ounce, to be paid as before, and to have an Allowance of 5 per Cent.
per Ann. for the said Value of their Counterfeit-Money, until the time of
Payment. By which Method the Poorer sort of People, in whose hands great part
of the Bad Money is lodged, would be extremely eased, and with no great burden
to the Nation. For supposing there should be about 2500000 l. Bad Money in the
Kingdom, whereof we may suppose at least 500000 l. entirely Brass, Copper, etc.
which Loss is to fall wholly on the Proprietors. And the Two Millions that may
be supposed to be Mixed Metal, would hardly weigh One Million; the Bad Money
being generally less and lighter than the Clipped Silver. So that the Loss of
another Million at least will by the lightness of the Money fall also on the
Proprietor. So that the Public will only have the Loss of about a Million of
Pounds Sterling in weight, or about Four Millions of Ounces of mixed and course
Silver to make good: which said Metal may one with another be worth about 3 s.
an Ounce, according to the advanced Price of Silver. So that the Loss on the
part of the Public would not exceed 4 or 500000 l. which yet would be a great
Ease to the Poor, who must otherwise be obliged to dispose of their Bad Money
at unreasonable low rates to the Goldsmiths, or others that will buy it of
them. And I think there can be hardly be any good reason given wherefore the
Public should sustain the loss of the Clipped Silver: which will not be of equal
force to prove that the Nation is as much obliged to sustain at least some part
of the loss of the Counterfeit Money. Which shall suffice for an Answer to the
Second General Enquiry, By whom the loss of the Clipped and Counterfeit Money
ought to be sustained.

The Third Head I proposed to enquire into, is, By what means may the Mint be
supplied with a sufficient quantity of Bullion, to make near as much good Money
in Tale, as there is at this time of Good and Bad together?

To which I answer briefly in general, That the only effectual means of
accomplishing this, is what I have already so strongly urged, viz. the
Advancement of the Price of Silver, which will be the only Encouragement to the
Importation of Silver into the Kingdom, and carrying of it into the Mint. But
to propose some more particular Means of effecting this, I would humbly advize,
That all the Gold and Silver Plate throughout the Kingdom (excepting such
Quantities and sorts of each as shall be judged fit to be reserved according to
Persons several Degrees and Estates, be ordered to be brought into the Mint,
and coined into Money at the rate of 6 s. 5 d.. per Ounce, answerable to the
other Silver; whereby, notwithstanding the Reservation of such a certain
Quantity as should be judged fit, there would be near Two Millions of good
Sterling Mnney added to the Coin of the Nation, without oppressing any
particular Persons, who can have no cause of Complaint, when they are allowed
so good a Price for their Plate: Which will be more beneficial to the Owners,
as well as the Public, after it is coined into Money, than it was before, when
it served more for Ostentation, than for Use.

I am come at length to the Fourth and Last General Head of Enquiry, viz. What
Methods are proper to be made use of to prevent the stop of Commerce, during
the Re-coinage? To which I will make as brief and satisfactory an Answer as I
can in the following Particulars.

1. That it will be requisite that all the Milled and Unclipt Money that is
remaining, be immediately ordered to pass, the Crown-piece at 6 s. 3 d. and the
other Pieces proportionably, the proposed Advancement of Silver one fourth part
above the present Value.

2. That the Price of Guinea's ought to be fixed, and they ordered to fall
gradually so much per Mensem, as was before proposed, that Persons may not, by
the uncertainty of their Price, be deterred from accepting them in Payment.

3. That the clipped Silver shall be carried in to be Recoined; There shall be
Notes, given out, intituling the Bearer, to the Value of so much clipped Silver
as he carried in, to be paid in milled Money as soon as coined, with Interest
at 5 per Cent. per Annum, until the respective Bills shall come to their course
of being paid. And these Notes shall be ordered to pass in Payments as Money,
and made transferrable from one Person to another, the Bearer being entitled
to the Receipt of the Money when it 'comes due. And these Notes, by reason of
the 5 per Cent. annexed to them, will be judged preferable to any Goldsmith's
or Bank Bills; which, together with the remainder of the milled and unclipt
Money, which upon the Advancement of the Value would presently come abroad; and
will with the assistance of the Gold, so well supply the place of our Clipped and
Counterfeit Money, that we need not apprehend any considerable Stop of Commerce
during the Re-coinage.

Thus have I, with what Brevity and Perspicuity I could, communicated my
Thoughts on these Four Important Points, which, I think, do include all that is
most material to be said in relation to the Reformation of the Coin.

FINIS.

