THE DIFFERENCES of the TIME, IN THREE DIALOGUES.

The first, anent EPISCOPACY.

The second, anent the Obligation of the COVENANTS against EPISCOPACY.

The third, anent SEPARATION.

Intended for the quieting the minds of people, and settling them in more
Peace, and Unity.

Psalm. 122.6, 7, 8, 9. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that
love thee. Peace be within thy walls, etc.

Psalm. 133.1. Behold how good, and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell
together in unity.

Mark. 3.24. If a kingdom be divided against it self, that kingdom cannot stand.

Heb. 10.25. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner
of some is.

Opinionum varietas and opinantium unitas non sunt (...)

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Hei^ of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
MAJESTY, Anno Dom. 1679.

READER,
SEPARATION, which is the Epidemical Disease of the Time, came to such a height
the last Summer, 1678. that like a Flood, it almost carried all before it, in
many places of the Land. These DIALOGUES were then written. The Author living
among a People who were in hazard to be drawn away with the Spait of the Time,
thought it his duty to fortify them against the danger, by letting them see
the sin, and unwarrantableness of these dividing Practices, which were now
grown to be in fashion. And this, together with the Activity, and Concurrance
of Magistrates in the Place, who were careful to suppress the beginnings of
Schism in the Bud; was found not to be in vain; for through the blessing of God
that People has hitherto stood their ground: for which, they indeed deserve
their commendation: though at first, sundry of them out of Novelty, went to
field meetings, yet presently they returned to the ways of Peace, and Order, a
very few excepted. When these DIALOGUES were first written, there was no design
of making them public, but a Manuscript coming to the hands of some of Note,
both for Authority and Learning; It was their Judgment they should see the
Light; and that through the blessing of God, some might receive good by them:
yet probably they might had lurked, notwithstanding of this: But now seeing it is
too evident that these Schismatical Principles, and Practices are not laid
aside, but endeavors made to carry them on vigorously as before: It is
therefore not only fit, but a matter of conscience, to discover to any who is
not unwilling to receive information, how unwarrantable, and sinful such
courses are; If Scripture, and the Doctrine, even of Presbyterian Divines (not
to speak of others) shall be impartially consulted, and admitted to be Judge.
It may indeed seem strange to see, not only great numbers of the common
multitude, but sundry of better Note, out of zeal to Presbytrie, led away with
the humor of Separation, and drinking in the principles of the Brounists:
Notwithstanding, these ills have been zealously testified against, and disputed
down, even by Non-conformists, and Presbyterians of former, and later times.
Only the third DIALOGUE, which is anent Separation, was at first intended: But
seeing people make Episcopacy, and the Covenant the great grounds of their
Separating. It was conceived, that to speak of Separation alone, would not be
enough, unless something were first spoken of the other two, to show what a
sandy ground Separation is built upon; Especially if Episcopacy shall be found
in it self lawful, at least, and the Covenant in every case not obligatory. In
speaking to Episcopacy, not only is the mere lawfulness of that Government
asserted (a thing not questioned by any of the Ancients, Zanchius (speaking of
Episcopacy) Observe. in sum ipsius confessionem, Cap. 25. Aphoris. 10. and 11.
fides mea nititur cum primis and simpliciter verbo Dei. Deinde non nihil etiam
communi totius veteris Catholicae Ecclesiae consensu, si ille cum sacris
literis non pugnet. credo enim quae a piis patribus in nomine Domini
congregatis, communi omnium consensu citra ullam Scripturae contradictionem,
definita and recepta fuerunt: Ea etiam (quanquam haud ejusdem, cum sacris
literis, authoritatis) a Sp. Sancto esse. Hinc fit, ut quae sunt hujusmodi, ea
ego improbare, nec velim nec audeam bona conscientia. Quid autem certius ex
Historiis, ex Conciliis, and ex omnium Patrum scriptis, quam illos Ministrorum
ordines, de quibus diximus, communi totius Reipub. Christianae consensu, in
Ecclesia constitutos receptosque fuisse? Quis ego sim, qui quod tota Ecclesia
approbavit, improbem? Blondel as in other places of his Apolog. So
particularly, page 193. roundly approves of Episcopacy. Vt (says he) (...) per
se considerata ad Ecclesiarum Regimen absolute, (...) annexa (...) ad Regiminis
modum and (...) pertinet; quam suo semper arbitrio permissam, saeculorum omnium
credidit Ecclesia -- nec opus est quicquid Humana Christum profitentium
consuetudo in divinorum usu ausa est, nefas putare -- suasque in rebus
hujusmodi Christianae prudentiae parts obire licere in confesso sit, nec ulla
nunc Ecclesia in exemplum trahi potest, quae ex generali hoc praecepto 1 Cor.
14.40. quaecunque and decentiora, and commodiora sequendi, plenam sibi
potestatem factam, non censeat.
except Aerius, and rarely by any of the Modern, even such who think it was not
the primitive Government left by the Apostles, if we except some of our Divines
in Britain, who betake themselves to Aerius, and go a greater length in
opposing of Episcopacy, than Jerome can be reasonably thought to have done, and
whom Blondel Praefat. ad Apolog. page 59. vindicats from Aerianism) but also
some of these proofs are set down which may, and use to be adduced, to show
that it is the only Government that has best warrant in the Word, and was
continued in the Church downward from the Apostles, for many years without
interruption. If the unlearned Reader find the first DIALOGUE too high for his
Capacity (though for his help, care is taken to translate the Latin
Testimonies into English) he may pass unto the other two, especially to the
third anent Separation, which he will find more plain, and easy to be
understood: And in it all the reasons which are brought for the Separation of
the Time (in so far as the Author could learn) fairly propounded, and answered
without passion, or provoking expressions, which do no good, but are apt to
gender more strife, and alienation of minds and affection. These Conferences
are now suffered to go abroad out of real commiseration toward well meaning
but misled people? Here is brought some Water to quench those fierce and
unnatural Flames, which threaten to burn this poor Church to ashes. In the
Preface before the Corpus and Syntagma of the Protestant confessions, Edit.
Genev. The Church of Scotland has this great commendation, Est Ecclesiae
Scoticanae privilegium rarum prae multis, quod sine Schismate, nedum Haeresi,
unitatem cum puritate Doctrinae retinuerit. i. e. The Church of Scotland has
this rare privilege above many others; That (since the Reformation) they have
without Heresy, or so much as Schism, retained Unity, with purity of Doctrine.
O but how have we now lost our good Name! How is the Staff, BANDS, broken in
the midst of us, Zech. 11.14. The Author could have wished a work of this
nature had been undertaken by some able hand, or at least this had been in a
better dress, but now, Reader, you have it such as it is, and if thou be one
concerned, be entreated to lay aside prejudice: Consider what a woeful thing
division in a Church is, and what the fearful consequences may be; A kingdom
divided against it self cannot stand, says Christ, Mark 3.24. If we bite and
devour one another, take heed we be not consumed one of another, says Paul,
Galat. 5.15. Dissolution is the daughter of division, says another; Omne
divisibile est corruptibile, says the Philosopher. Divide and impera, says
the Politician. Si collidimur, frangimur, said the two earthen Pots in the
Fable that were swiming down the Stream together. These expressions tend to
show the bad consequences of division. We have lately received a loud warning
from Papists to unite: Rome knows how to fish in our troubled Waters. The Lord
convince us of the necessity of Union, and teach us to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace; and discover to many what small evidence they give
of friendship to the Protestant Interest, by keeping up divisions.

The Reader is desired to correct these following Errors with his pen before he
reads, at least to read them right as they are here marked.
ERRATA.
P. L For Read. 17 17 Evangelist Evengelists 23 16 Polycrats Polycrates 23 20
either Usher 39 24 Ministrum Christi Ministrum 39 25 Christ's Minister a Servant
55 20 d^clared decreed 57 15 and ^o change and the change 57 16 but the vestige
but no vestige 74 5 (...) me 85 12 P^^^t puti^t 94 11 page 2^. page 52. 94 25
^ayeth he, says he, page 39. 99 21 Author Author^ 104 15 protestant^
protestants 133 19 ve^^. 1^. verse. 7.14. 142 11 Rac^el Rachab 150 10 fuer^^t
fuerint 155 4 d^b^^^ debate 157 16 Opinionem Opinionum 157 17 Opiniantium
Opinantium 161 8 deney deny 165 8 Zauchius Zanchius. 166 21 Chap. Chap. 7 167 5
one ^n 169 21 became become 172 1 (...) 172 16 Lu^. Luke 177 7 uses use it 186
19 really real 188 12 are not all are not at all 189 4 unwarrantably
warrantably 195 8 Lectures Lectores 195 27 another other 215 23 favor fervor
216 8 we leave in we live in.

The Pages 46. 47. are in one another place. Also some Sentences wrong
pointed, which the Reader may advert to.

THREE DIALOGUES Betwixt a Doubting Person and an Informer. The First anent
Episcopacy. The Second anent the Obligation of the Covenants, abjuring
Episcopacy. The Third anent Separation.
The first Dialogue anent Episcopacy.
Doub. WHat news Neighbor?


Inf. All the news now are about our growing Confusions and Disorders.


D. I doubt you can ever expect better under Bishops: I could wish they were
taken away.


I. Why so? what ill have they done?


D. I never heard of any good Bishops did: I doubt a Bishop can be a good Man.


I. Say not so, the Histories of the Church tell us what singular good men
Bishops have been, and that hundreds of them have died Martyrs for the Gospel
under heathen persecutors: besides what many excellent men of them suffered
afterward by Arrians and other Heretics.


D. I doubt these were Lord Bishops, such as ours now are?


I. If by Lord Bishops you mean such as have a superiority over ordinary
Ministers, it is clear they were Lord Bishops in that sense: but if you mean
Bishops Dignified with Titles of Honor by the secular powers, I grant they
were not Lord Bishops, nor could look for any the least respect from the powers
of those times, who for the most part were enemies, either to Christianity
altogether, or to the Orthodoxy of it. Yet at the time of the Reformation from
Popery in England, in Queen Mary's days, we find sundry Lord Bishops (as you
call them) were Martyrs for the Truth: As for Bishops their acting in civil
affairs sometimes, I will make it none of my business to debate it with you.
Only that it is not altogether incompatible with Ecclesiastical Functions, may
appear from these few things. The Jewish Sanhedrim (made up of the seventy
Elders, at first appointed to be assistants to Moses in the civil Government,
Numb. 11.) did consist partly of Priests, which, I suppose, few versed in the
Jewish Learning will deny; see Goodwinus, his Moses and Aaron, lib. 5. Cap. 5.
Junius on Numb. 11. and others. Consider Deuteronomy. 17. v. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Eli the
Priest judged Israel forty years, 1 Samuel 4.18. and after him Samuel the
Prophet, (though from his birth lent to the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.28.) went in circuit
yearly, judging the people, 1 Samuel 7. v, 15, 16. And under the New Testament,
how much Bishops were employed in Civil Matters, after Emperors became
Christian, you may see confessed by Smectimnuus, Sect. 12. Its true Churchmen
should be as abstract from these encumbrances, as possibly they can; nor are
they needlessly, or of choice to entangle themselves, for no man, etc. 2 Timothy
2.4. And therefore, some ancient Councils have discharged them to follow
Military Employments, to take Farms or the like. And some of the Fathers have
complained, that themselves were too much diverted and overcharged with secular
matters: Yet its hard to say that its absolutely, and in every case unlawful
for Churchmen to meddle in these things, for then, it will follow, that a
Minister may not look after any civil affair that concerns himself, and family;
and yet whatever Christian neglects this, is worse then an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8.
Some of the Fathers were a against Churchmens being Tutors or Curators, yet, I
believe, your selves do not scruple this now adays, nor Country Trysts
neither. I need not tell you how much some Ministers in our late times meddled
in State affairs; Saravia at some length defends Church-mens actings in these
matters. But passing this, I suppose you question the lawfulness of the
Episcopal-Office it self.


D. I do so, because I find no command, or express warrant in the Word for it.


I. That proves it is not simply necessary, because not commanded, but proves
not the unlawfulness of the Office: Many things may be lawful, yea, and
expedient too, which are not commanded, unless under some General, such as,
That all things be done decently and in order, or, to edification, and such
like: That in a meeting of Ministers, there be a Moderator and a Clerk, I know
you will not say is unlawful; yet this is not any where commanded: And many
learned men have thought Episcopacy lawful, though not commanded, or by any
Scripture president particularly warranted, so neither prohibited, but left to
the prudence, and choice of Christians, as they shall find it expedient, and
conducing to the good and peace of the Church.


D. I think it is forbidden in the Word, and therefore unlawful.


I. Let me hear in what Scripture?


D. In Mat. 20. ver. 25, 26, 27, 28. Where Christ forbids any of his
Disciples to be greater than another.


I. If you think all superiority among Churchmen there forbidden, you are in a
mistake: for, 1. Christ there speaks to the twelve, among whom I can grant
there was to be no inequality, in respect of power, yet they were superior to
the seventy Disciples, whom Christ also sent to preach the Gospel, as Divines
commonly think; and appears from Act. 1. Where Matthias one of the seventy, as
Clemens Alexandrin: Dorotheus, and others affirm him to have been; is solemnly
chosen and advanced to the Office of Apostleship, in the room of Judas; and he
was numbered with the eleven Apostles, verse. 26. 2. The thing Christ there
discharges, is Ambition, and not Inequality, otherwise the Argument he takes
from his own example, verse. 28. would not suit his purpose: For without
controversy Christ was in Power and authority above the twelve. But take the
words as spoken against ambition, or a sinful desire of superiority (which
afterward was Diotrephes his fault) the reason from his own example suits well;
for though in power he was above all, yet in humility he was a pattern to all.
Humility and Imparity can well consist together.


D. Christ there says, The Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion; but it
shall not be so among you: Therefore it seems he discharges all superiority
among Churchmen.


I. He only discharges that kind of dominion, which civil Princes exercise,
which is dominium civil and despoticum; a civil, princely, or Lordly power:
but the power of the Church is of another nature. And besides, sundry
Interpreters think that Christ there speaks against the Tyrranny, which
heathen Princes of the world exercised over their miserable Vassals and
Subjects. You may consult Mr. Pool's Collection of Interpreters on the place.


D. The Apostle, 1 Pet. 5.3. says, Be not Lords over Gods Heritage, Is not
superiority among Churchmen there clearly forbidden?


I. Not at all: only Domineering and Tyranny is there forbidden, which may be
the fault of an ordinary Minister toward his flock. The Apostle is not there
speaking of the carriage of Churchmen toward Churchmen, nor of the equality,
or inequality of them among themselves: but of Church-mens behavior and
carriage, what it ought to be toward the people, who are there called the
flock, and Gods heritage.


D. In the New Testament, Bishop and Elder are two words signifying one and the
same Officebearer: for Act. 20. these who in verse. 17. are called Elders, verse.
28. are called Bishops; also, Tit. 1. verse. 5. and 7. compared together. So
that Bishop and Elder are the same in Scripture: And the word Elder, signifies
no more, but a Minister of a particular Congregation.


I. I grant these two words are ofttimes in the New Testament used
indifferently to express one and the same Officer; yet it will not be granted,
nor can ye ever prove, that the Officer meant by these words, is never to be
understood of any above the degree of an ordinary Minister, or that the word
Presbyter, or Elder signifies only a Minister of a single Congregation, and no
more. For, 1. We find the name, Elder, given to the Apostles themselves, 1 Pet.
5.1. Joh. Epist. 2.1. and Epist. 3.1. And if the Apostles be called Elders, Why
may not Bishops be called so too? 2. Your selves say, that the word, Elder,
signifies not only the Preaching Elder or Minister, but also the Ruling Elder;
I can upon as good, and better ground, say, It signifies the Bishop and the
Minister, both being Elders, but of different degrees: and consonant to this in
some after ages, we find those who were unquestionably Bishops, yet sometimes
designed by the name of Presbyter, that is, Elder, Thus we find Victor Bishop
of Rome, called Presbyter, and Iraeneus Bishop of Lions, called Presbyter
Ecclesiae Lugdunensis: Though ordinarily at that time, such were called Bishops;
yet some times they are called Presbyters, as still remembering the first times
of the New Testament, when the name was indifferently given to Bishops and
Ministers.


D. The Apostle, Philip. 1.1. Speaks of Bishops in the plural number in that
Church, who were only Ministers, since there could not be many Bishops over
Ministers in that one Church of Philippi.


I. Ambrose, a Father of the Church, thinks the Bishops in that place not to be
understood of Bishops at Philippi, but of certain Bishops who were present with
Paul when he wrote that Epistle, and in whose name he writes to the Philippians,
joining them with himself. Others think there might be sundry Bishops of the
Churches about conveened at that time, at Philippi, and Paul knowing of this,
might write to, and salute them together with that Church: For ye see, he first
names all the Saints at Philippi, as those to whom he mainly intended to write,
and then the Bishops and Deacons. But granting by these Bishops and Deacons,
the Officers of that same Church of Philippi, to be meant; I ask you where are
the Ruling Elders here? If you say they are included in the word, Bishops, I
can upon better ground affirm, that Bishops, there signifies both the superior
Bishop, and the ordinary Ministers under him. Ministers may be called Bishops,
even as in that same Epistle, Epaphroditus is called Apostle, Chap. 2. verse.
25. For the word in the Greek is Apostle; But further, I say, may be, there was
no Bishop over Presbyters settled as yet at Philippi.


D. In Ephesians. 4.11. The Apostle reckoning up Church Officers, makes no mention of
Bishops.


I. It is ill reasoning, that because such an Officer is not found, in such a
particular place, or in such an enumeration; Therefore such an Officer is no
where to be found in Scripture; For how prove you that the Apostle in that
place intended a full and complete enumeration. 2. I say Bishops in that place
may be comprehended under Pastors and Teachers, Bishops being such, though in a
superior degree to ordinary Pastors, and Teachers. And if you will have a
perfect enumeration of all Church Officers there, you must comprehend Ruling
Elders and Deacons, under some of those words in that place, and why may not I
do so with Bishops?


D. Well, though may be, there is no discharge of Episcopacy, so I suppose,
neither is there any ground in the word for that kind of Government, more then
any other, and thus the best you can make of it will be, that it is not
unlawful, so neither necessary; and therefore when it comes to be inexpedient,
it may be altered, and a better put in its place.


I. If ye will promise not to stand out against Light, I shall endeavor to let
you see warrant from the word for Bishops.


D. I am not so settled in my persuasion against Bishops, as to stand out
against light, that is offered to me from the Word (for this were a great fault
in me, or in any man else) yet I believe it will be hard for you to let me see
any convincing Scripture Evidence for them.


I. Under the Old Testament, setting aside the High Priest, who was a Type of
Christ there was a subordination among the rest of the Priests, mention is
often made of the Chief-priests, 2 King. 19.2. Ezra. 8.29. Mat. 2.4. Act.
19.14. and over these again, there was a Chief, or High Priest, under the
Highest of all, who only was Typical; hence sometimes two Highpriests are
mentioned, Luke 3.2. So there was a subordination among the Levits, Ex. 6.25.
Number. 3. verse. 18, 19. compared with verse. 24, 30, 32, 35. and in other places,
Neh. 11. We find one over the Levites verse. 22. named Episcopus by the Greek,
and another over the Priests, verse. 14. So you see subordination among
Churchmen, is no such new, nor odious thing as some would make the world
believe.


D. I see indeed there was a subordination under the Old Testament, but that
proves not that there ought to be the like under the New?


I. I know no reason why the Lord would have a subordination under the Old
Testament, but to maintain Order and Unity in his Church, and this reason is
still the same, for a subordination under the New; yea, is now stronger,
because the Christian Church is of much greater extent than the Jewish was, and
so the danger of divisions and schisms, and the necessity of preventing them,
greater. And what better way for this, than Gods own way, which he prescribed
under the Old Testament, whereby the same way and course is examplarly pointed
out to Christians, although the New Testament gave no other ground for the
like. What better pattern for modelling of Church Government can we now have,
than his own pattern, who knows best what is most behoveful for his Church? and
this you see was a subordination under the Old Testament.


D. Yet I desire to hear what warrant you can produce for Bishops out of the
New Testament?


I. First I produce to you the superiority of the twelve Apostles above the
seventy two Disciples, as is granted by Divines generally.


D. That was extraordinary, personal and temporary, and to expire with the
Apostles.


I. Indeed in some things the Apostles were extraordinary, and their
privileges to cease with themselves, such as their immediate calling, their
sending to all Nations, their Infallibility, Gifts of Tongues, or whatever else
was necessary for the first founding of the Christian Church. But in some other
things, wherein they were superior to other Ministers; their power was not
extraordinary and temporary; but was necessary, and still to be continued in
the Church after they were gone, such as Ordination of Ministers, and governing
of them by Ecclesiastical Authority: Those things which were thus necessary,
they transmitted to others after them, even to the Bishops, says Augustine, on
Psalm. 45.16. In stead of thy fathers shall be thy children; By the Fathers, he
understands the Apostles; by the Children, the Bishops, who followed after the
Apostles, Hodie enim, says he, Episcopi qui sunt per totum mundum, unde nati
sunt? that is, the Bishops who are this day over the whole World, Whence are
they born? and adds, that the Church calls the Apostles Fathers, and did
bear the Bishops as Sons, and placed them in the room of the Fathers. In the
next place, I produce to you Timothy and Titus, both Bishops, the one at
Ephesus, the other at Crete.


D. All the Ministers who were at Ephesus and Crete, were Bishops too, for so
Paul names them in these Epistles.


I. Its true Paul names Ministers, not only Presbyters but also Bishops; yet I
say, Timothy and Titus were Bishops in that sense, that the word (...) or
Bishop, was afterward ordinarily taken in, that is, they had a power in
Ordination and Jurisdiction over and above inferior Ministers. Our debate is
not about the Name, but about the Office.


D. That Timothy and Titus had a power in those matters over other Ministers at
Ephesus and Crete, I grant, for they are taught by the Apostle how to ordain
Ministers, what qualifications to require in them, how to proceed in their
trial and censures, etc. But this power they had as Evangelists, that is, they
were companions to the Apostles in their labors and travels, and appointed by
them to settle and water those Churches they had planted.


I. Then it seems you would unbishop Timothy and Titus, and make them
extraordinary Officers, whose Office was not to continue in the Church.


D. I think so, Paul, 2 Timothy 4.5. wileth Timothy to do the work of an
Evangelist, therefore I think he was an Evangelist and no Bishop.


I. Indeed he was an Evangelist in a large sense, that is, one who preached the
Evangel, or Gospel; but that he was an Evangelist in the strict sense, can no
more be proved from that Scripture, than that he was a Deacon, because the
Apostle in that same place, says, Fulfill thy deaconship, so the Greek word
signifies, we have it translated, Ministry, or that Philip was an
extraordinary Evangelist, because he is called an Evangelist, Act. 21.8. For he
was a Deacon, Act. 6. And we read, Act. 8.5. that upon the dispersion he also
preached the Gospel; but find no ground, that therefore he was one of those
extraordinary Evangelist, whose Office was to cease in the Church: and besides,
Ordination, and Jurisdiction, is properly no work of an Evangelist, but rather
preaching and spreading the Gospel.


D. Philip might be both a Deacon, and an Evangelist.


I. If you will have him so, why might not Timothy and Titus as well be both
Evangelists and Bishops, if you will needs have them Evangelists in your sense,
even as Jerome, in Epistola ad Euagrium, and de scriptoribus ecclesiasticis,
makes Mark the Evangelist, Bishop of Alexandria.


D. Bishops they could not be, because we find them very unsettled, especially
Timothy; had he been Bishop of Ephesus, he had been confined to his charge; but
1 Timothy 1.3. He was left there only for a season, and upon an occasional
business.


I. Timothy and Titus were rare and singular persons, and useful to the Apostle
in those first beginnings of the Gospel; and so no wonder though the Apostle
sees fit now and then to call them from their particular charge, when the good
of the whole Church required it, Phil. 2.19, 20. 2 Cor. 8.23. Has it not been
usual in any time, and have we not seen it practiced in our own time, that a
Bishop or Minister be called away from his settled charge for a season, when
the good of the Church requires their service elsewhere, and to return when
that service is over, Gerhard Locor. Theologic. Tomo sexto, page 358. Thinks
that Timothy and Titus were first Evangelists, and afterward settled Bishops
by Paul, the one at Ephesus the other at Crete.


D. Paul Act. 20.27. Gives a charge to the Elders or Ministers of Ephesus and
not to Timothy, which he would not have omitted, had Timothy been their Bishop;
and it is very probable that Timothy was present at that time, for verse. 4. we
find him in Paul's company.


I. May be, according to Gerards opinion Timothy was not as yet settled Bishop
of Ephesus. 2. Iraeneus who lived not long after the Apostles, and was Bishop
of Lions in France, lib. 3. cont. Valentin. cap. 14. is of the mind, that there
were of the Asian Bishops mingled with the Elders of Ephesus, and with
Timothy their Bishop, and that to them all in common Paul made that
exhortation; and Bishops might very well be comprehended under the name of
Elders in that place, since I show you before that Apostles are sometimes
called Elders.


D. How prove you that Timothy and Titus were Bishops, for I have great doubt
about it?


I. I prove it first from this, because in these Epistles more particularly and
fully then any where else in the New Testa, directions are given by Paul to
Timothy and Titus, how to carry in Ordination and Jurisdiction, which two
comprehend the Episcopal Office. He shows them what qualifications they must
require in those that are to be ordained, that they lay hands suddenly on no
man, and gives them sundry directions anent Church Government, how to rebuke
offenders, no to receive an aecusation against an Elder, but before two or
three witnesses, how to deal with Heretics, etc. 1 Timothy 5.1, 19, 21. Tit.
3.10. and 1. v. 5, 10, 11. 1 Timothy 5.22, 17. also chapter 3.10. And in other places
of these Epistles. Now these are directions which concern not that Age only,
but all Ages of the Church; and therefore were given, not personally to Timothy
and Titus, but in them to their Successors. Why I pray you, will any have
Timothy and Titus to be extraordinary Officers in their acting of these things,
which they cannot deny are of ordinary use in the Church. What wonder (as the
King in his last reply at the Isle of Wight hints) that some have affirmed
those Acts of Ordination and Jurisdiction, were in themselves extraordinary,
for ye have led them the way, in saying that Timothy and Titus, in their
exercising those Acts, were extraordinary Officers. Then I prove it from this,
because their commission at Ephesus and Crete, was not voided upon the first
settling of Ministers in those places: and therefore their Office was to be
constant. For, if merely as Evangelists they were to settle a Church there,
then as soon as some fevv Ministers had been ordained, Timothy and Titus were
to cease, and give way to the Presbytrie there settled, frustra fit per plura,
etc. but they did not so, nor did their Commission run so; Titus was left in
Crete, to ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1.5. that is, Ministers, which had
been needless, if some fevv Elders after they were ordained themselves, might
have ordained others. Jus divinum Ministerii Evangelici, page 185. Defending
Ordination by Churchmen, against such as claimed that power to the people,
says, Why was Titus left in Crete, to ordain Elders in every City: or Timothy
at Ephesus, might not the people have done that themselves, if they have a
right to do so? May not the Argument be turned against the Authors of that Book
themselves; thus, Why was Timothy left at Ephesus, or Titus at Crete, after
Ministers were there ordained by the Apostle himself, when on the place, or
after some fevv were ordained by Timothy and Titus, if those Ministers so
ordained, could have ordained the rest. 3. I prove it from 1 Timothy 6.13, 14.
Where Paul solemnly charges Timothy to keep what he had commanded him till the
appearing of Jesus Christ; Now the Presbyterians in their Jus divinum
Ministerij, page 74. say, that the directions given to Timothy, were not for
that age only, but for all ages of the Church, and bring this place to prove
it, which is like Mat. 28.20. I am with you always even unto the end of the
world, and they compare the foresaid charge, with 1 Timothy 5. ver. 7, 21. Whence
it would follow, that Timothy and Titus were not extraordinary Officers, but
were to have successors in those Offices they then administrated; which we see
were superior to ordinary Ministers, and page 160. they say, Apostolical
examples in things necessary for the good of the Church, and which carry a
perpetual reason and equity in them, have the force of a rule: Now the Apostle,
his setting Timothy and Titus single persons over those Churches, is an
Apostolical example done for the good of the Church, and has a perpetual
reason and equity in it. Lastly, I could prove this by the Testimony of many
great men in the Church, both Ancient and Modern: Polycrats, born within forty
years after John wrote his Epistle to the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. In an
ancient Treatise, de Martyrio Timothei (as it is cited by either in his
original of Episcopacy, page 58.) affirms, that Timothy was Bishop of that
Church. Eusebius lib. 3. cap. 4. affirms the like. Leontius Bishop of Magnesia,
in the general council of Chalcedon, Act. 11. declares, that from Timothy
there had been a continued Succession of twenty seven Bishops in the Church of
Ephesus. Jerome, de scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, makes Timothy Bishop of
Ephesus, and Titus of Crete. Eusebius lib. 3. cap. 4. does the like. Abraham
Scultetus, on Titus affirms, that Timothy and Titus were properly Bishops in
their several places; and that the directions given by Paul to them in these
Epistles, were given to them, and to their Successors. Gerhard, Tom. 6. makes
them both Bishops, as I told you before, I might produce more Testimonies, but
these may suffice.


D. Albeit you say much to make Timothy and Titus Bishops, yet Paul says that
Timothy was ordained by the Presbytrie, 1 Timothy 4.14. Therefore I think he could
not be their Bishop: for a Presbytrie, which is but a company of Ministers,
cannot make a bishop.


I. Some, among whom Calvin, think that by Presbytery, the Apostle means not
a company of Ministers, but the Office of a Minister, or Presbyter. But suppone
the company of Presbyters be meant yet these might be, not the inferior degree
of Presbyters, or Ministers, but the Superior degree, who are bishops: and that
bishops be called presbyters, ought not to seem strange, since I told you the
Apostles themselves are sometimes called Presbyters. 3. 2 Timothy 1.6. The Apostle
says, Timothy was ordained by the laying on of his hands, so that what was
substantial in that Ordination, as Interpreters of good note, think, was from
Paul; although the Presbytry of Ministers, if you will, might share in the
ceremonial part of it. 4. If you say Timothy an Evangelist, was ordained by
inferior Elders, you must confess that ordinary and inferior Officers, might
ordain a Supe^ior cxtraordinary Officer, which is absurd.


D. Have you any proof more for bishops out of the New Testament?


I. The Angels of the seven Churches, Rev. chap. 2. and 3. were Bishops, for it
is undeniable there were many Ministers, for example, at Ephesus, Act. 20.27,
28. Yet Revel. 2. When that Church is written to, which was long after Paul's
exhortation, Act. 20. and the Church was on the growing hand; yet, I say, we
find but one Angel among all these Ministers, and he alone spoken to, and
commended for what was praiseworthy in that Church, and blamed for what was
faulty, as he who had the chief hand in that Churches affairs: So may be said
of the rest; the Epistle always directed to the Angel, and he commended for
what was right and discommended for what was wrong; seeing by his place and
authority, he ought to have seen to the preventing, or reforming of those
things.


D. The word, Angel, Rev. 2. and 3. denotes not one single person, but is
taken collectively for all the Ministers that were in each of these Churches.


I. I know that is the answer usually given, but have often wondered at it. No
doubt, this Scripture pincheth sore, when ye flee to such a shift; Scultetus, a
learned Protestant, in his observations upon Titus, has these words,
doctissimi quique interpretes per septem ecclesiarum angelos intenpretantur
septem ecclesiarum Episcopos, neque enim aliter possunt, vim nisi textui facere
velint, that is, the most learned Interpreters, all expound the Angels of the
seven Churches to be the Bishops of those Churches, neither can they expound
the words otherwise; unless they offer violence to the text.


D. But Rev. 2.24. Christ by John speaks to more then one, for it is in the
plural number (...) vobis. Hence it is clear to me, that by the Angel of that
Church, he meant all the ministers.


I. Will you be content to stand to Beza's exposition of the place, he says
(...), is to you the President, and to the company of ministers, and to the
rest of the people. You see the word, Angel, in his opinion, is still to be
taken for a single person, and that in this place more then the Angel are spoken
unto. This is, as some think, an Apostrophe, which is an ordinary Figure in
speech, when the speaker turns his discourse to some other than he had at first
been speaking to; but that which I think should put it out of question, is the
Light we have from antiquity, declaring to us that these Angels were single
persons, and condescending upon some of their Names: for I suppose the
practice, opinions, and assertions of such as followed hard after these Angels,
should by any rational man, be acquiesced in, as a sufficient commentary on
this and the like Scriptures, that speak of Church Governors.


D. Well, What say they?


I. I told you before that Polycrates who was Bishop of Ephesus, and born near
to the Apostles times, speaks of seven of his predecessors, who had been
Bishops there before him; and Leontius Bishop of Magnesia, in the council of
Chalcedon, speaks of twenty seven Bishops of Ephesus, successively from
Timothy: We find the Bishops of those seven Churches of Asia, present at the
first Council of Nice, and designed by their several Churches, Ephesus, Smyrna,
etc. and subscribing the Acts of the Council with the rest of the Bishops.
Jerome, de Scriptoribus Ecclesias. tells us, that Polycarp, who had been John's
disciple, was by him made Bishop of Smyrna; so Eusebius, lib. 3. cap. 32. So
Tertullian praescrip. cap. 23. And Iraeneus, lib. 3. cap. 3. contra Valentin.
says, Polycarp was by John ordained Bishop of Smyrna, and that he saw
Polycarp, when he himself was a child; for, says he, Polycarp lived long. Now
should not these testimonies, think you, have weight with any man that is free
of prejudice. And further, among Ignatius his Epistles, who was contemporary
with the Apostle John, we find one written to this Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna,
who is thought to be the very same Angel to whom John writes, Rev. 2.


D. I think indeed much of these testimonies, especially of that of Irenaeus,
who, says he, saw Polycarp, and so knew the better that he was a Bishop: And I
have heard that Irenaeus himself was a Bishop too; but for Ignatius, his
testimony, I am not much moved with it, because I hear say, that these Epistles
of his are forged and counterfit.


I. Of these Epistles, we may have occasion to speak afterward, but if you will
be at the pains to see, what the most part by far, and with all the most
learned of Protestant Writers, and Interpreters, think of these Angels; you
shall find Beza, Diodat, Marlorat, Bullinger, Gualter, Piscator, Sibelius,
Pareus, Aretius, Fulk, Our own Countreyman Napier of Marchistoun, Cartwright,
the learned Reynolds in his conference with Heart, yea, and Blondel, in the
preface to his Apologia pro sententia Hieronymi, all expounding the Angel in
each of these Churches, to be a single person. So true is it what I told you,
Scultetus observes, doctissimi quique interpretes per septem Ecclesiarum
Angelos, interpretantur septem Ecclesiarum Episcopos.


D. Beza, and may be, others of these Divines, though they interpret the Angel
to be a single person, yet they never thought that person to be a Bishop, but
merely a Moderator and President, among the rest of his brethren.


I. He could be no less than bishop, because the Epistle is still directed to
him, though it is true, the whole Church be concerned in what is written; yet I
say, the Angel is chiefly commended, or discommended, according as matters were
right, or wrong, which clearly imports that he had the chief hand in business,
and so he chiefly capable of what Christ by John says to him: And the power we
saw before in Timothy and Titus, above inferior Ministers, may oblige us to
think, no less can be allowed to the Angels. And further, most of the Divines I
have named do say, that these Angels were Episcopi, Bishops. And Beza himself,
de Minist. Grad. does in effect, cap. 13. give to the Angels an Episcopal
power, for, he says, Horum authoritas in Ecclesiae regimine fuit eminentior,
that is, their authority in governing the Church, was more eminent than the
rest's. I might also show you how Mr. Mede is misunderstood, as if in his Key
of the Revelation, he did teach, that the word, Angel, is commonly through the
Revelation taken collectively, that is, not to signify one person: you may see
the contrary in his Key, Apocal. 9.14. and 14.6, 7. And he says, the twenty
four Elders about the Throne, do represent the Bishops, and Prelates of the
Churches. You may also see Brightman, on cap. 7, 8. and ordinarily, through the
Revelation, he expounds the word, Angel, of some single person. I shall produce
one place more from the New Testament, to prove Episcopacy viz. John Epist. 3.
ver. 9. Diotrephes loves the preeminence.


D. I have heard that place brought against Episcopacy, But never for it, till
now; The Apostle there speaks against preeminence.


I. Not at all: He only speaks against ambitious seeking after preeminence, and
finds fault with Diotrephes, that he was (...), that is, he did ambitiously
love to be first, or to have the chief place. An Office may be good and lawful,
and yet an ambitious desire after the Office, sinful. Look what the most
judicious Interpreters say on the place: Beza renders the Greek word thus, qui
primatum ambit. Now your selves confess it was authority over other Ministers,
he looked at; and from this ye infer that the Office he aimed at, was unlawful;
which will not follow, but rather that there was such an Office then in the
Church, and at this time void, unto which he meant to put himself, or had
already done so, out of an ambitious desire to be great, which was a sinful
end. It was not the good of the Church, but himself he looked after. Blondel
confesses as much in his Apologia, page 54. Saying, that Diotrephes would be
Primus Presbyter, to which place he willingly grants authority over the rest
did belong, though he will not call him Bishop, yet he grants to him an
Episcopal power, in effect, Quis enim (says he) praesidentiam sine authoritate
somniet, page 39. But of this and the like Concessions of his, I may have
occasion to speak to you afterward.


D. If Bishops were by the Apostles left to rule the Church, as you seem to
prove from the New Testament, why then do we not find them in the Church after
the Apostles left the world?


I. We do find them after the Apostles left the world.


D. But not for a long time after the Apostles were gone.


I. You are mistaken; we find Bishops immediately after the Apostles, which
confirms what I have been saying for Episcopacy from the New Testament: For
the Bishops found in the Church immediately after the Apostles, or even before
all the Apostles were gone, are a good commentary on Timothy and Titus, and on
the Angels of the seven Churches, and on the passage anent Diotrephes.


D. I would gladly hear what you can say for Bishops, about, or immediately
after the Apostles times.


I. If you will credit Jerome, whom you take for the Patron of your cause, he
(de Scriptor. Eccles.) speaks of sundry of these first Bishops; of James made
by the Apostles, the first Bishop of Jerusasalem, whose successor, he says, on
Galat. 1.19. was Simeon, etc. Epaphroditus Bishop at Philippi, and Mark Bishop
of Alexandria, etc. Eusebius, lib. 3. Hist. Cap. 4. Cap. 33. Cap. 31.36. lib.
4. Cap. 14.25. and in other places is very express to this purpose. It Is known
there were in some of the Churches, many Presbyters, or Ministers; yet in these
most ancient Records we can read, but of one Bishop at a time, and after him
another succeeds in his place, and that by a new Ordination; For, Jerome says,
Jacobus ab apostolis Episcopus ordinatus est. Of Episcopal Ordinations, see
also, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 5. But passing these, I produce to you Ignatius,
contemporary with the Apostle John, he was Bishop of Antioch; and, as is
thought, an Archbishop, for in his Epistle to the Romans, he styles himself
Bishop of the Church in Syria, which is supposed to have hade more Episcopal
Seats in it, than only that of Antioch. This Ignatius died martyr about eight
or nine years after the Death of John, he wrote Epistles to sundry Churches of
that time, in which he frequently speaks of the Bishops of those Churches, and
sets down these three degrees of Church Officers, viz. Deacons, Presbyters,
or Ministers, and Bishops: And exhorts those Primitive Christians to be subject
to the Bishop, as the only mean to avoid Schism, and that without him nothing
be done.


D. I have heard learned men say, that these Epistles are much falsified, so
that we have them not now, as they were written by Ignatius: and therefore any
testimony taken from them, is the less to be valued.


I. Indeed the Archbishop of Armagh, Usher, a man well read in Antiquity, as
also Vedelius, who has written on those Epistles, show, that the Copies of
these Epistles which were used, till of late years, are very faulty, which is
proved from this, among other things; that many of these Quotations, which in
the Fathers are found to be cited out of Ignatius, are not to be found in those
Epistles, as they have been used. But of late years, Usher found two very
ancient Manuscripts of these Epistles in some Libraries in England, and about
that same time Is: Vossius found a Greek Manuscript of them at Florence; All
which three Copies agreed together, and differed much from these, that were
used before: and in these three were found the Fathers Quotations, which were
not found in the old ones: and even in these late found Copies, the Testimonies
for Bishops are most clear and full. And this so much troubles Blondel in the
Preface to his Apologia that he is forced to seek a new shift, viz. that even
those Epistles, as we have them in the Copies found by Usher, and Vossius, are
vitiat also: and thinks the Fathers who cite them, were deceived by them: he
thinks they have been vitiat, or forged about the year 180. Salmasius thinks,
Circiter medium aut initium secundi seculi, about the middle, or beginning of
the second age: Now Ignatius lived about the beginning of the second age; and
is it probable they could then be meddled with? The reasons for this forging of
them, are alleged by Blondel, and answered by Doctor Hammond. Can it be
imagined they should be so far vitiat that the very Scope of sundry of them
should be altered, which is to persuade obedience to the Bishop, as he without
whom nothing ought to be done, as they would avoid Schism, The Divines who
debated with the King, at the Isle of Wight, found themselves so pinched with
these Epistles, that they found no way to escape, but utterly to reject them
all as counterfeit: Which, the King told them, they did without any regard,
either of Ingenuity, or Truth. Sure I am neither Scultetus, nor Rivet, did
presume to do so; for seven of these Epistles they own as written by Ignatius;
Howbeit, they think some corruptions through time, had crept unto them: which
corruptions they observe: but say not, that their mentioning of Bishops as
Superior to Presbyters, is one of these corruptions. Certainly, had these two
judicious Divines thought this a corruption crept into these Epistles, they
would have observed, and mentioned it. You may see Scultetus in his Medulla
patrum. And Rivet in his Criticus sacer, what their judgementis of these
Epistles. But now of late, Doctor Pearson in England, has largely and fully
vindicat Ignatius, his Epistles; and therefore to him I refer you.


D. Yet I shall be the more cleared in my doubts of these Epistles, if you can
produce any other convincing Testimonies from Prime Antiquity in favors of
Bishops.


I. I offer to your consideration, what Pius Bishop of Rome, about the year
146. writing to Justus, newly elected Bishop of Vienna, in the room of Verus,
says, Very loco a fratribus constitutum and collobio Episcoporum (It Is
thought this was the Bishop's Habit, then in use) vestitum te Presbyteri and
Diaconi, non ut majorem, sed ut Ministrum Christi observent, That is, Let the
Ministers and Deacons reverence and obey thee, not as one greater, but as the
Servant of Christ. This passage is found in his Epistles, in Bibliotheca
Patrum, Tom. 3. Fol. 15. Now by Presbyters, in that place, as all along in
Antiquity, are meant these, whom we call Ministers, which I suppose, will not
be denied; for both the Apostles in their Writings, and all Antiquity that
followed, call them so: and yet we see these Presbyters at Vienna, had Justus a
Bishop over them, and that Verus another Bishop had been there before Justus.


D. It seems Bishops were not then acknowledged superior to Presbyters, or
Ministers, since it is said, Presbyteri te non ut majorem observent, that is,
let not the Ministers reverence thee, as one greater than they.


I. By that same reason you should make the Bishop no greater then the Deacons
neither, since it is said also, Te Diaconi non ut majorem observent, that is,
let not the Deacons reverence thee, as one greater than themselves: Yea, you
will make him inferior to both, for it is added, Sed ut Ministrum Christi,
that is, as Christ's Minister. Pius there exhorts Justus to humility, (a very
necessar and seasonable counsel for these who are promoted to higher dignity
above others) and therefore bids him carry rather like a Servant, then a
Superior; I told you before, that humility and imparity consist well. In the
next place, hear what Hegesippus, says, who lived in the time of Hadrian, the
Emperor, before the year 140. a renouned Historian, the ancientest of any that
wrote the Church History of the New Testament, next to Luke, who wrote the Acts
of the Apostles; Jerome (as the Magdeburgenses, and Rivet report) says,
Hegesippus actus omnes a Christi passione ad sua tempora complexus est in sua
historia. He was more ancient than that Hegesippus, who wrote de excidio
Hierosolymae; nothing of his History is now extant, except a few fragments,
cited by Eusebius, who, lib. 4. cap. 21. brings him in giving this account, Se
plurimos Episcopos, cum Romam peregre proficisceretur, convenisse, and eandem
apud omnes doctrinam deprehendisse, That is, when he went to Rome, he met with
many Bishops, and found they all held the same Doctrine; and a little after he
mentions Primus, Bishop of Corinth, and afterward, Romae haesisse usque ad
Anicetum, Aniceto successisse Soterem, isti Eleutherium: in singulis
successionibus and civitatibus ita habet sicut lex and dominus praedicant, that
is, He stayed at Rome till the time Anicetus was made Bishop, to whom Soter
succeeded, and to him Eleutherius, and that in all the successions, and Cities
matters were constitute, as the Law and the Prophets, and the Lord Christ did
Preach. Then speaking of the Church of Jerusalem, he says, after James,
surnamed Justus, suffered Martyrdom, his Uncle Simeon was made bishop, whom all
preferred, because he was Domini Consobrinus, a cousin of Christ's. Further, he
shows that Thebulis turned heretic, because he missed a Bishopric, Quoniam
non fuit Episcopus constitutus, and that till then the Church of Jerusalem was
called a Virgin, because it had not been corrupted with any false Doctrine.
From which Testimonies of Hegesippus, we may gather, 1. That he speaks of
Bishops in all these Churches which he mentions. 2. In every Church he speaks
but of one Bishop at a time, to whom, when he is gone, another succeeds: Yet
I hope it will not be denied by you, that there were sundry Ministers or
Presbyters in any one of these Churches, at one and the same time. 3. That the
succession of Bishops was by election, and not by Seniority, as the instance of
Simeon, chosen after James at Jerusalem, clears. 4. That some were then
ambitious of a Bishopric, as he reports of Thebulis, which also was
Diotrephes, his fault. And Lastly, All this so shortly after the Apostles
times, that none have any reason to doubt of Hegesippus, his certain knowledge
what had been the Government of the Church from the Apostles times, to his own
time, more than we can doubt what has been the Government of the Church among
our selves for forty years bygone: For Hegesippus lived next after the first
succession of the Apostles, as Usher in his Original of Bishops, page 62.
gathers out of Eusebius.


D: I would hear what you can say more out of prime Antiquity?


I. I offer to your consideration what Dionysius, who was Bishop of Corinth,
about the year 170. says, in his Epistle to the Church of Athens (Eusebius. lib.
4. cap. 22.) he mentions Quadratus, their former Bishop, and Publius, Bishop
and Martyr before him, and then Dionysius the Areopagite their first Bishop,
of whom we read, Act. 17. Then in his Epistle to the Church of Gortyna, in
Crete, together with the rest of the Churches there, he commends Philip their
Bishop; Usher thinks Philip was Archbishop in Crete, Orig. of Bishops, page
73. for Philip is called Bishop, not only of Gortyna, but also of the rest of
the (...) in Crete, Paraecia signified then a whole Diocese, as can easily be
made out from antiquity, and we find was afterward also Metropolis, and the
Bishop, the Metropolitan of the whole Island Council. Chalcedon. Act. 6. Council.
Constantinop. sub Mena, Act. 5. and 5. general. Council. In which places, the
Metropolitan of Gortyna, is found subscribing, and this authority of his over
whole Crete, Eusebius deriveth from the times of Titus. Dionysius writes also
to the Gnosians, and exhorts their Bishop Pinetus, ne grave servandae
castitatis onus necessario fratribus imponat. that is, that he would not lay
upon his brethren the heavy burden of an unmarried life. Where by the brethren,
he must mean the Ministers under Pinetus, his Jurisdiction: For you can not
think, that by the Brethren, Dionysius meant private Christians: or that
Pinetus, did press private Christians to such a life. It appears then that
Pinetus was above the rest of the brethren, that is, of the Ministers, and that
with a power to enjoin, as is clear from Dionysius, his counsel to him, not to
make use of his power in that particular. Hear next what Irenaeus Bishop of
Lions, says to this point, he was a Bishop pious and peaceable, and so
answerable to his name, and lived about the year 180. You need not fear he will
deceive you, but may say of him as David of Ahimaaz, he is a good man, and will
bring good tidings.


D. Well, let us hear him.


I. Irenaeus contra Valent. lib. 3. cap. 3. says, Habemus annumerare qui ab
Apostolis usque ad nos instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesiis, and successores
eorum, etc. that is, we can reckon on who have been Bishops in the several
Churches, and who their successors, from the Apostles even to our own times:
and because, he says it were longsome to go through all, he mentions the
succession in the Church of Rome, until he come down to Eleutherius, who was
his own Contemporary: And this he does to prove the falsehood of Heretics their
Doctrine, because not agreeing with the Doctrine of the Bishops, who, from the
Apostles downward, had been in the Church. And in that same place he speaks
of Polycarp, who, says he, had conversed with them who saw the Lord, and was by
the Apostles made Bishop of Smyrna, and that when himself was young, he had
seen Polycarp, for says he, he lived long. Now hence we may observe, 1. that
Polycarp, contemporary with the Apostles, was even such a Bishop as Eleutherius
of Rome, who lived in the time of Irenaeus: for Irenaeus, makes no difference;
and no doubt, Eleutherius was such a Bishop as Irenaeus, who was Bishop of
Lions in France, which, I suppose, few will question. 2. That, as some have
observed, Polycarp behoved to be the very same Angel of Smyrna, who was written
to, Rev. 2.8. for, Irenaeus says, Polycarp was ordained Bishop of Smyrna by
the Apostles themselves, who all lived before John, and he surviving the rest,
wrote at Christ's command, these Epistles to the seven Angels, so that Polycarp
must be that Angel of Smyrna to whom John wrote; for Polycarp lived till
Iraeneus, his time, who says, when himself was a child he saw this old Bishop,
for says he, Polycarp lived long, and continued in Smyrna until his last, and
died a martyr. Usher in his Orig. of Bishops, page 60. reckons his martyrdom
to have been seventy four years after John's writing that Epistle to him: and
that he continued Bishop there until his death, is collected from Eusebius. lib.
4. cap. 15. 3. We see clearly, though there were in the Church of Rome many
Presbyters or Ministers; yet without taking notice of them; Irenaeneus only
names one at a time, who was more eminent than the rest, and after he is gone,
names another, who succeeded him: Now if all comes only to this, that these
whom he names, had no more but the same authority and succession with the rest
of the Presbyters; Why are these we contend for, singled out and named, and not
the other Presbyters as well as they? Why are the Presbyters or Ministers
passed over in silence, and only Linus, and Cletus, and Soter, etc. taken
notice of in their several successions, one after another? No doubt, because
they were the Bishops, and had an authoritative inspection above the rest, as
has been showed already in Timothy and Titus, and in the seven Angels, Revel.
2.3. and from the Epistles of Ignatius, and other instances. And to say they
only are named for the more expedit reckoning is gratis dictum, and as good as
to say nothing: and whereas some object, that writers differ about the line of
succession among these Primitive Bishops, therefore it may be doubted there was
any such thing as Bishops, or a succession of one Bishop after another at all:
The King answers at the Isle of Wight, this will no more follow, than that
because Chronologers differ about the line of ancient Kings, in such a Kingdom;
therefore there was no Kingly power, nor Kings there at all. 4. Observe, that
Irenaeus says, these these ancient Bishops succeeded one another by
Apostolical institution, Qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt, says he, usque ad
nos Episcopi. 5. This Valentinus, against whom Irenaeus writes, was a
Presbyter, and turned Heretic, because he came short of a Bishopric, Tertul.
adversus Valent. cap. 4. See also Irenaeus, lib. 4. cap. 43, 44. and to add a
word of Irenaeus himself, he was Bishop of Lions in France, (...), Eusebius. lib.
5. cap. 23. But after the Latin, 21. Paroeciarum per Galliam quas Irenaeus
moderatus est. Hence it is clear he was their Bishop, or Archbishop, as some
think, for, (...) then signified as much, as a Diocese now; See Can. Apost.
Can. 14. Council. Antioch. 9.14. Council. Ancyr. Cap. 13, 18.


D. Against what you speak of Irenaeus calling him a Bishop, and an
Archbishop, I have this to say, that the Gallican Church in their letter to
Eleutherius, calls Irenaeus Presbyter, and so does Eusebius, lib. 5. cap. 4.


I. Peter calls himself a Presbyter, or Elder, 1 Pet. 5.1. And yet we know he
was more. Irenaeus himself in his writings, calls Bishops Presbyters: Victor
who succeeded to Eleutherius in Rome, is called Presbyter. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap.
4. and yet without all contradiction he was a Bishop,, and a great one too,
when he would have extended his Jurisdiction, not only over his own, but over
the Asian Churches also, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 21, 23, 25. Salmasius in his Walo
Messalinus, freely confesses, page 265. Romani Pontifices vocantur Presbyteri
etiam postquam Episcopatus apicem supra presbyteros consequuti sunt singuli in
toto orb Episcopi. But hardly will you find the name of Bishop any wherein
those times given to a single Presbyter.


D. What more can you say for Bishops out of the ancient Fathers?


I. I could produce you Testimonies from Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, who was
contemporary with Irenaeus: but something of him I spoke before, and from
Clemens Alexandrinus, and other Fathers, who lived in the second age. And from
Tertullian, about the year of Christ two hundred, who shows, de prescript. cap.
36. That the Apostolical Chairs at Corinth, Philippi, Thessalonica, were
possessed, not by a Presbytrie, but by single persons. Also, cap. 11. and de
baptismo, cap. 7. Dandi Baptismum jus habet summus sacerdos qui est Episcopus,
Dehinc Presbyteri and Diaconi, non tamen sine Episcopi authoritate, propter
honorem Ecclesiae quo salvo salva pax est, etc. That is, the Bishop has the
power of giving baptism; then the Presbyters and Deacons, yet not without the
Bishops authority, etc. I might produce much more from those first times, in
favors of Bishops. Eusebius the ancientest Church historian, now extant, all
along makes it his work to set down the succession of Bishops in the Churches
of these first times, Rome, Alexandria, Antioch, etc. from the Apostles
downward unto his own time; in every of which Churches, none that has any
skill can deny, that there were sundry Presbyters, or Ministers at the same
time; and yet without noticing these, he sets down the line of Bishops, one
after another, in these several Churches. And for the time that followed after
Tertullian, it is undeniable by you all, there were Bishops in the Church, and
the Fathers who followed, were not only most of them Bishops themselves, but
looked upon Episcopacy as descending unto them from the Apostles, as can be
made out from their Writings.


D. You know Jerome, who lived toward the end of the fourth, or beginning of
the fifth Century, says, Episcapocy was not from the beginning in the
Christian Church, Epist. ad Euag. which is the 85. Manifestissime comprabatur
eundem esse Episcopum and Presbyterum quod autem postea unus electus est qui
caeteris praeponeretur, in schismatis remedium factumest, ne unusquisque ad se
trahens Christi Ecclesiam, rumperet. That is, It Is most manifest that Bishop
and Presbyter are the same, and that afterward one was chosen and set over the
rest, it was done in remedy of Schism, etc.


I. Jerome's meaning is, that in the very first beginnings of the New Testament
times, it was so, while the Apostles were yet alive, and did by their own
presence and industry supply the room of Bishops, but as their presence began
to sail by death, or even sooner, as their other great business called them
elsewhere, upon the daily increase and enlargement of the Church, then to
prevent Schism, that arose from equality, there were Bishops set over
Presbyters. And that Jerome must be understood speaking so early of the Church,
appears from what immediately follows in that same Epistle, Nam, says he,
and Alexandriae a Marco Evangelista usque ad Heraclium and Dionysium Episcopos,
Presbyteri semper unum ex se electum and in excelsiori gradu collocatum,
Episcopum nominabant, quomodo si exercitus Imperatorem faciat, aut Diaconi
Archidiaconum, That is, at Alexandria, from Mark the Evangelist downward to
Heraclius and Dionysius Bishops, the Presbyters alwise elected one from among
themselves, whom they placed in a higher degree, and called him Bishop, even as
an Army would choose a General, or Deacons an Archdeacon. Now Mark is reckoned
to have died before either Peter or Paul; and even from him downward, Jerome
says, there were Bishops in that Church. It is strange to see how warily and
defectively Smectimnuus cites these words of Jerome, quite beside Jerome's
intent, to prove that Bishops were not from the beginning, and to show how they
were brought in by Presbyters; Which if Smectimnuus mean to have been in the
Apostles own times, we agree that so it was, but because they (for Smectimnuus
is a Name composed of sundry Authors) would fain have Jerome to be meant
speaking of Bishops coming into Alexandria, not until the Apostles were gone,
therefore they leave out his first words, a Marco Evangelista; they take what
they think may seem to make for them, and leave out what is directly against
them, which is scarce fair dealing: But Calvine, Institut. lib. 4. cap. 4. number.
2. cites this passage entirely, and from it concludes that Jerome makes
Bishops ancient enough. Also, you may observe, how the learned M. Durham, on
Revel. page 225. making use of this passage of Jerome, that you do, to prove
that Bishops were of later date than the Apostles; Yet he mentions not
Jerome's words, Alexandriae a Marco, etc. in which, Jerome clearly makes the
Original of Bishops in that Church, as high as Mark; which passage, either
destroys the gloss you would put upon Jerome's former words, if in them you
think the Father speaks of bringing in Bishops into the Church, not till after
the Apostles times, as Mr. Durham says expressly, or else you would make Jerome
contradict himself. 2. Mr. Durham, as he takes no notice of the Succession of
Bishops at Alexandria, from Mark downward; so neither of the first Simile which
Jerome makes use of, viz. Quomodo si exercitus imperatorem faciat: But only of
the second Simile of Deacons, making an Archdeacon, for helping them, says
he, in what belongs to the orderly management of their business, which shows
what kind of Precedence this is he attributes to the Bishop, even such as he
would allow to a Deacon, who is advanced to some Peculiar Care by others, for
some special end. Thus Mr. Durham, as he is very loath to bring in Bishops till
after the Apostles times, so after they are brought in, he would have their
power, as insignificant as may be; but takes no notice of Jerome, his
comparing the Bishop to an Emperor, or General of an Army, who has, not only
a Precedence, but without all controversy, a Superiority of power and command.


D. Jerome on Tit. 1. is very express that Bishop and Presbyter are the same,
Idem est ergo, Presbyter, qui and Episcopus, and antequam diaboli instinctu
Studia in religione fierent, and diceretur in populis, Ego sum Pauli, ego
Apollo, ego autem Cephae, communi Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae
gubernabantur: Postquam vero unusquisque eos quos baptizaverat, suos putabat
esse in toto orb decretum est, ut unus de Presbyteris electus, superponeretur
caeteris, ad quem omnis Ecclesiae cura pertineret, and Schismatum semina
tollerentur. That is, Presbyter and Bishop are the same, and before through
Satan's instigation there were divisions, and some said, I am of Paul, I of
Apollo, and I of Cephas, The Churches were governed by Presbyters in common:
but afterward when every one thought those to be his, whom he had baptized; it
was declared through the whole world, that one should be set above the rest,
and on him all the care of the Church devolved, and the seeds of Schisms rooted
out:


I. Some think Jerome in that place speaks of the power, Bishops in his time
had come to, beyond what the first Bishops had, That at the first, Presbyters
had a hand in Government, but afterward, Omnis Ecclesiae cura ad unum
pertinebat, The whole care of the Church was put over upon the Bishop alone.
But if you think Jerome there speaks of the first Introduction of Bishops unto
the Church, then I say, he must be meant speaking of the Apostles own times.


D. What reason have you to think so?


I. First, because Jerome's words import this, while he says, that the thing
which gave occasion to the introducing of Bishops was the divisions that arose
among Christians, and some said I am of Paul, I of Apollo, etc. And then
Presbyters began to think these to be theirs whom they had baptized: Now thus
we read it was among the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1. And though Jerome on Tit. 1.
take occasion from the Community of Name, that the Apostle there uses, while he
calls the Presbyter, Bishop, ver: 5. and 7. compared together, to show, that at
first there were no Bishops above Presbyters: yet this will not necessarily
infer that there was no distinction of Office betwixt Bishop and Presbyter,
when the Apostle wrote to Titus, or that Jerome thought there was no such
distinction then: But that as the names were then promiscuously used by the
Apostle, so sometimes there was no distinction of the Offices, till necessity
introduced it, which change Jerome takes occasion to speak of from the
community of Name still used by the Apostle even after the change was made.
Secondly, because that decree which Jerome says was made over all the world for
introducing Bishops; had it been after the Apostles times, we should have some
account of it in antiquity, about what year, after what manner, in what
Council, etc. that Decree was made, and no change that followed upon it: but
the vestige of this is to be found. Thirdly, The supposing such an universal
change of Government after the Apostles were gone, will infer, that shortly
after the Apostles there was an universal defection in all the Christian world
from that Government, which ye think the Apostles left as unalterable in the
Church: which is very hard to imagine. What! Not one honest man in all the
world, that we hear of, to open his mouth and oppose this innovation, but
without contradiction, Toto orb decretum est; how cold will you make the zeal
of those Primitive Christians, to have been in respect of your own now adays.
Fourthly, because Jerome tells us this change was made, ad tollenda schismata,
And, in remedium schismatis, to take away Schism. Now to think, that the
Apostles left a Government in the Church, which was liable to this great
inconvenience of Schism, and that those who came after saw cause to change that
Government unto another, for shunning of the foresaid evil; Is too great an
Imputation upon the wisdom of the Apostles, and too great a preferring of
Posterity before them: But this is salv'd, if we say, that the Apostles
themselves, forseeing that parity would breed Schism, did before their
departure for preventing of this, set Bishops over Presbyters. Fifthly, because
this same Jerome in sundry places of his writings, derives the Original of
Bishops, as high as the Apostles, if not higher, de Scriptor. Eccles. he says,
Jacobus ab Apostolis statim, etc. James was by the Apostles immediately after
Christ's Ascension made Bishop of Jerusalem, and that to him succeeded Simon. And
on Galat. 1.19. He says as much of Titus at Crete, of Polycarp at Smyrna, of
Epaphroditus at Philippi, and again, de Scrip. Eccles. He makes Mark the first
Bishop of Alexandria, and in Epist. ad Euagrium, says, Vt sciamus traditiones
Apostolicas sumptas de veteri Testamento, Quod Aaron and filij ejus and
Levitae, in Templo fuerunt, hoc sibi Episcopi and Presbyteri and Diaconi, in
Ecclesia vendicent. That is, that we may know the Apostolical Traditions to be
taken out of the Old Testament; What Aaron and his Sons and the Levites were in
the Temple, that Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons are in the Church: And Epist.
54. Apud nos Apostolorum locum tenent Episcopi; With us the Bishops hold the
room of the Apostles. And Epist. 1. Ad Heliodorum. And dialog. adversus
Luciferianos, and Epist. ad Riparium adversus Vigilantium, Miror Sanctum
Episcopum, in cujus Paraecia esse Presbyter dicitur, acquiescere furori ejus
and non virga Apostolica confringere vas initile. Where you see, he calls the
Bishop's power, Virga Apostolica, The Apostolical Rod, or which was derived
from them. These, and more Testimonies are brought out of Jerome's Writings, to
show that he deduces Episcopacy from the Apostles themselves: So that if you
think in some places he cries down Bishops as an invention later than the
Apostles, you shall find that in many more places, he makes them high enough.
And if you will needs have this Father to contradict himself, it will be with
advantage to Bishops; For, for one word against them he speaks three for them.
But if you will save his Credit, you must understand that change he speaks of,
to have been in the Apostles own times.


D. But Jerome says, Episcopi noverint se magis consuetudine quam dispositionis
dominicae veritate, Presbyteris esse majores, That is, Let Bishops know that
they are greater then Presbyters, rather by custom, then by the truth of the
Lords appointment. Which words show, that Episcopacy came into the Church by
custom, not by any divine right.


I. Some are of opinion that Jerome speaks of that authority Bishops were then
invested with over Presbyters, beyond what the first Bishops were; this, he
says, they had attained to by custom: for in the same Epistle he makes three
subordinate degrees of Clergy, and that Ex traditione Apostolica, By
Apostolical Tradition (which words have much perplexed those of your
persuasion) So that, if you think Jerome by, Consuetudo, means Custom which
came in after the Apostles times, you shall make him say, and unsay in one and
the same Epistle. But if by, Consuetudo, be meant that Authority the Bishops in
his time did exercise, beyond what the first Bishops did, no such inconvenience
will follow. And that he is so to be understood appears from this, that in
equalling the Bishop as he was at first with the Presbyter, he says, Quid
facit Episcopus, quod non facit Presbyter, Excepta Ordinatione, That is, What
does the Bishop, which the Presbyter does not, except Ordination: Where you
see, though he make the Bishop above the Presbyter as to Ordination, yet he
seems to equal them as to Jurisdiction. And this seems agreeable to what he
says, that at first, inter plures Ecclesiae cura divisa, and, Communi
Presbyterorum consilio gubernatae Ecclesiae. i. e. Presbyters did at first by
common counsel govern the Churches, which does not necessarily exclude the
first Bishops. And afterward speaking of the power that accresced in after
times to Bishops, he says, ad unum omnis Ecclesiae cura delata est, all the
care of the Church was put over upon one. He seems to mean, that the Bishops
afterward acted solely, to avoid schism that arose from the disagreeing of many
Counsels, thus some answer that place of Jerome. 2. Others, as the learned
Davenant, think, That by, dominicae dispositionis veritas, Jerome meant
Christ's express Command, and by, Consuetudo, Apostolical practice begun by the
Apostles, and continued by their Successors. And this is very probable, for
this same Jerome writing, ad Marcellum, about the observation of Lent, says,
it is apostolica traditio, and adversus Luciferianos, calls it Ecclesiae
consuetudo, so that according to him, what was begun by the Apostles may be
called Church custom, because continued by the Church, So then, this will be
Jerome's meaning, Bishops are greater than Presbyters, not by Christ's express
Command, but by custom brought into the Church by the Apostles and continued
by their Successors. And now to say no more of this Father, whom you take to be
the great prop of your Cause in antiquity; consider seriously these few things
anent him, 1. Does not Jerome expressly speak of an Apostolical right, at least,
that Episcopacy has, and that in very many places of his writings, as I hinted
before. 2. Where he seems to speak otherwise, suppose he were to be understood
in your meaning, which is, to make Bishops of later date than the Apostles: Yet
does he not with all say, that there was a necessity of bringing Bishops into
the Church, that thereby Schism might be put out and kept out? And that this
was done by a Decree through the whole Christian World. And, 3. Did he not
approve of Episcopacy from it is first Institution, down to his own time, as
still necessary for preserving Unity and Peace in the Church? and submits to
it. Now would ye all thus far go along with Jerome, our contests about Bishops
and their first rise, might soon cease. Mr. Durham on Revel. page 227.
answering the objection, that all antiquity did condemn Aerius, because he took
away all distinction betwixt Bishop and Presbyter, answers, that Aerius was
condemned, not simply as maintaining any thing contrary to truth in this, but
as imprudently brangling the order than established in the Church, to the
hazard of their Union: Now setting aside the dispute anent the antiquity of
Bishops. Have not we in this Land been, and are not you and many others, as
chargeable with this imprudence, as ever Aerius was: for ye would take away the
difference betwixt Bishop and Presbyter, to the hazarding of Peace and Union,
and so brangles that order which under Episcopacy has been maintained in the
Church for many Centuries of years?


D. You say Episcopacy is necessary for preserving the Church in unity and
keeping out of Schism; but I think not so, or that ever God did appoint it for
this end: for the Holy Ghost would never ordain that for a remedy, which could
not reach the end: but became a Stirup for the Pope to get into his Sadle, for
if there be a necessity of setting up one Bishop over many Presbyters for
preventing Schism, there is the same necessity of setting one Archbishop over
many Bishops, and one Patriarch over many Archbishops, and one Pope over all;
unless you imagine there is hazard of Schism only among Presbyters and not
among Bishops and Archbishops.


I. When you say you think not Episcopacy necessary to keep out Schism, in this
you forsake Jerome who makes the taking away and preventing of schism the
reason of bringing Episcopacy into the Church. Also you forsake Calvine who
Institut. lib. 4. cap. 4. number. 2. Says, Bishops were set over Presbyters, ne
ex aequalitate, dissidia, ut fieri solet, orerentur, that is, lest discords
should arise from equality, as is usual to be. As for the setting up of
Archbishops, and Patriarchs, it is a thing anciently practiced in the Church,
as antiquity shows, and something of this I hinted to you before from Titus,
and his Successors supposed to be Archbishops in Crete. And from Ignatius who
calls himself Bishop of Syria, etc. And the first Council of Nice speaking of
Patriarchs, call their Precedence, Mos antiquus, Can. 6. This was found to
contribute to the Churches Unity; and Calvine expressly approves of it,
Institut. lib. 4. Cap. 4. Sect. 4. Quod autem singulae provinciae unum habebant
inter Episcopos, Archiepiscopum, quod item in Nicaena Synodo constituti sunt
Patriarchae, qui essent ordine and dignitate Archiepiscopis superiores, id ad
disciplinae conservationem pertinebat, i. e. That every Province had an
Archbishop over Bishops, and that the Council of Nice did approve of
Patriarchs over Archbishops, was a thing that belonged to the preservation of
Discipline. And in that same place Calvin says, that although he likes not
the word, Hierarchy, yet if we look upon the thing it self, says he, that is,
Church Government by Bishops, Archbishops and Patriarchs, Reperiemus veteres
Episcopos non aliam regendi Ecclesiae formam voluisse fingere ab ea, quam
dominus verbo suo praescripsi^, i. e. We shall find those ancient Bishops had
no thought of seigning any other form of Government from that which the Lord
prescribed in his Word. And further, that for order's sake there was one
Patriarch above the rest of the Patriarchs, with a certain kind of Priority,
who was called Episcopus Primae Sedis, Council. Carthag. 3. can. 26. and is a
thing granted by Protestant Writers. Among others, see Mysterium Iniquitatis
Philippi Mornaei, page 203. 204. etc. and Bucer, inter Scripta Anglicana, page
583. and all this was done to maintain order. You say there is no less hazard
of Schism among Bishops and Archbishops, etc. than among mere Presbyters. I
deny not but there may be, and have been Schisms, and clashings among Bishops;
yet I say, it is a Government not so liable to this inconvenience as a mere
parity is: No Government is so exempted, but it may be abused by corrupt men;
yet one form may be better in it self than another, and more conducing to the
ends of Government: Aristocratie may be abused, yet it has in it more of the
nature of Government than a mere confused Democratie. So Episcopacy is the best
Government, although the Pope has abused it. Certainly the best and most
useful things in the World may be abused through the corruptions of men: are
not the Scriptures of God perverted by Heretics, and must the Scriptures be
therefore cried down? Monarchy is often through the default of men turned into
tyrrany, must all Monarchy therefore be cried down? Bucer de vi and usu
mnisterij, cap. de disciplina Cleric. inter scripta Anglicana, page 583.
speaking of the Bishop of Rome abusing his primacy, says, Episcopacy must not
therefore be abolished, quia, says he, omnino necesse est ut singuli clerici
suos habeant custodes and procuratores, instauranda est Episcoporum authoritas.


D. But let us return to the Fathers. Mr. Durham on Revel. page 225. says, not
only Jerome was of Aerius his mind about the equality of Presbyter and Bishop,
but also some other Fathers, as Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostom, etc.


I. Mr. Durham brings this as Medina's assertion, as he is cited by Bellarmine;
to which I say, 1. Suppose these Fathers to be of Jerome's opinion, no great
prejudice will hereby ensue to Bishops, as have already showed. 2. It Is strang^
Mr. Durham should upon any's testimony cite Augustine as being of Aerius his
judgment anent Episcopacy, since he knew very well that Augustine directly
makes Aerius herein to be erroneous, and inrolleth him in his Catalogue of
Heretics, even for his judgment in this, Haeresi 53. Dicebat etiam
Presbyterum ab Episcopo nulla differentia debere discerni, i. e. Aerius also
said there ought to be no difference betwixt Presbyter and Bishop. 3. Ambrose
and Chrysostom whose words are cited by Mr. Durham, are mistaken; for their
Testimonies will not come up the length intended. Ambrose or one Hilary as it is
thought, says, Presbyteri and Episcopi una est ordinatio, uterque enim
sacerdos est, sed Episcopus primus est, ut omnis Episcopus Presbyter sit, non
tamen omnis Presbyter Episcopus: ille enim Episcopus est qui inter Presbyteros
primus est, i. e. both a Presbyter and a Bishop is a Priest; but the Bishop is
the first, so that every Bishop is a Presbyter, but every Presbyter is not a
Bishop: but he is Bishop who is first among the Presbyters. And Chrysostom
says, That betwixt a Bishop and a Presbyter there is little difference. Yet
both these Fathers, you see, acknowledge, that a difference there is, and they
were both Bishops themselves: Their opinion might be that Bishop and Presbyter
differ, gradu non ordine, that they might be both one Order and differ only in
Degree; Which is still a debate in the Schools. So may be said of the rest
cited by Medina. 4. That these Fathers were for a difference, even by Divine or
Apostolic warrant, will appear from other places in their writings.


D. What; For a Divine Right, Mr. Durham on Revel. page 225. says, that after
distinction was made in the Church, betwixt Bishop and Presbyter, yet was it
never accounted by antiquity to be jure divino, by Divine Right.


I. I show you the contrary from Irenaeus, Tertullian, and others, yea, and
from Jerome himself. Now for those other Fathers, First, hear Ambrose in his
Comment. on 1 Cor. 12.28, (Quosdam posuit apostolos) he says, ipsi sunt
Episcopi, firmante illud Petro, Act. 1. and Episcopatum ejus accipiat alter.
And on verse. 29. (Nurquid omnes apostoli) verum est, says he, quia in ecclesia
unus est Episcopus. Also on Phil. 1.1. Rather then he will allow by, Bishops,
in that place single Presbyters to be meant, he, expounds those Bishops not of
such as resided at Philippi, because, says he, in one Church there could be
but one Bishop: but of Bishops and Deacons who were with Paul when he wrote that
Epistle, as I told you before. So on 1 Timothy 3. Timotheus Episcopus erat. And
for Augustine on Psalm. 45.16. by, Fathers, he means the Apostles, and by, the
Sons, the Bishops, who, he says, succeeded to the Apostles. And contra
Cresconium, lib. 2. Cap. 37. Ecclesiam Hierosolymitanam primus Jacobus
Episcopatu suo rexit. i. e. James was the first Bishop of Jerusalem. And,
Epist. 122. he says, divina voce laudatur sub Angeli nomine praepositus
ecclesiae, Speaking of the Angels, Revel. 2.3. and contra literas Petiliani
lib. 2. Cap. 51. Quid tibi fecit ecclesiae Romanae cathedra in qua Petrus
sedit, and in qua hodie Anastasius sedet i. e. What ill has the Chair of Rome
(so he calls the Episcopal Authority) done to thee in which Peter once did sit,
and in which Anastasius now sits. From these and the like passages in
Augustine, we man know what his meaning is, when writi^g to Jerome, he says,
Q^anquam secundum honorum vocabula quae jam ecclesiae usus, obtinuit
Espiscopatus Presbyterio major sit. there he speaks of the use of these words,
what it was at that time in respect of former times. Honorum vocabula, clearly
shows this. Then hear Chrysostom on 1 Timothy 4.14. (Cum impositione manuum
presbyterii) Non de presbyteris loquitur sed de Episcopis: neque enim
presbyteri Episcopum Timotheum ordinabant. i. e. That place speaks not of
Presbyters, but of Bishops, for Presbyters did not ordain Timothy who was a
Bishop. Sundry Testimonies might be produced out of other Fathers, deducing the
original of Bishops from the Apostles, or higher. Cyprian is full to this
purpose. Epist. 27. ad Lapsos,, he says, that Episcopacy is founded, divina
lege, by the Divine Law, and Epist. 68. he calls it, Traditio divina and
observatio Apostolica, and for this adduceth Act. 1.15. Quando in ordinando in
locum Judae Episcopo, Petrus ad plebem loquitur. i. e. Peter there speaks to
the people of ordaining a Bishop in the room of Judas. See also, Epist. 69.
Epist. 42. and Epist. 10, 11, 12. etc


D. What antiquity says, moves (...) not; nor resolve I in this matter to be
concluded by Fathers, or Councils, who were fallible; or by Apostolical
Traditions. There were many corruptions which crept into the Church in the very
infancy of it, and were generally received, as the millenary opinion, and
giving the communion to Infants.


I. Yet you can grip very closs to the least shadow in antiquity, which seems
any way to make for you in this controversy, and can manage it to your best
advantage: but when you say that you resolve not to be concluded by antiquity
herein: by this you clearly confess that antiquity pincheth you sore; and you
are like to be born down by the stream of it. Tertullian says, Id verius quod
prius, id prius quod ab initio, ab initio id quod ab Apostolis, id ab Apostolis
traditum, quod apud Ecclesias Apostolorum fuerat sacro sanctum. As for these
corruptions you name, which early crept into the Church, they were not so
generally, and universally received, as Episcopacy was, nor could they ever so
clearly deduce their Original from the Apostles.


D. Notwithstanding all you say to make Bishops as ancient as the Apostles, yet
the authority of those great protestant Divines, who have opposed Episcopacy,
prevails much with one to suspect Bishops cannot lay claim so high.


I: Suffer not your judgment to be captivated by the Name or Authority of any
man without proof. I fear there be too much implicit faith among us, which we
condemn in Papists: and besides, may be, the opposition of the most knowing,
and learned Protestants to Episcopacy, is not so great as you imagine.


D. What think you of Calvin, is not he much against Episcopacy in his
Writings? as he was also in his practice, when he lived a Minister at Geneve in
an evenly parity with the rest of his brethren there, where Presbyterian parity
as it had been in purest primitive times, was again revived.


I. Before you take the Government of Geneve to be a reviving of primitive
parity, as you say: It is fit you first solidly answer all I have produced to
show that from the Apostles dounward, there were always Bishops over Ministers,
or Presbyters even in the purest times. I will not insist to show you, that
when Geneve reformed Religion, she had no purpose to put away Episcopacy, if it
could have been preserved. You may read Durel's view of Government from page
151. to 161. who will inform you in this. Nor will I debate whither Calvin
lived in an evenly parity with the rest of his brethren, only hear what Mason
apologizing for the Government of Geneve, defense of ordin. page 175. speaking
of Calvin and Beza says, They being chosen to a place of eminency, and endued
with Jurisdiction, they having preeminence in every action, and consequently in
Ordination, none can with reason deny them the substance of the Episcopal
Office. This he speaks of them in respect of the rest of the Ministers at
Geneve. And B. Andrews, Resp. 3. ad Molineum, speaking of Calvin and Beza,
says, Quid attinet abolere nomen, retinere rem? Nam illorum uterque dum
vixerunt, quid erant, nisi abolito nomine re ipsa Episcopi? i. e. To what
purpose is it to abolish the name of Bishop, and retain the thing, for both
these ( Calvin and (...)) what were they while living, but indeed Bishops,
though without the name? And was it not so even among our selves, when the name
of Bishop could not be endured? a mere parity is hardly practicable any where,
unless it be in Vtopia. Now since you think Calvin, a great adversary to
Bishops (a mistake that many are under) I will produce some few places out of
him to undeceive you. Institut. lib. 4. Cap. 4. Sect. 2. speaking of the first
Bishops, he cites Jerome's words ad Euagrium, and then subjoyneth, alibi tamen
docet quam antiquum fuerit institutum, dicit enim Alexandriae a Marco
Evangelista usque ad Dionysium, etc. i. e. Nevertheless in another place,
Jerome teaches how ancient the institution of Bishops is, for he says, that
at Alexandria from Mark downward, there was still a Bishop, etc. Where you see
Calvin passing that place of Jerome, that seems to make against the antiquity
of Bishops, he rather lays hold on that other place that speaks them as
ancient as Mark the Evangelist. And a little before, Calvin says, Bishops were
brought into the Church, ne ex aequalitate, ut fieri solet, dissidia
nascerentur. Observe this, he says, equality of Ministers breeds strifes,
and, ut fieri solet, so it uses to be. And from these words of Calvin, we may
collect that he gives to the first Bishops some superiority in power above the
Presbyters, without which, says he, dissidia nascerentur, Strifes would arise,
and so he makes them more than mere Moderators. Another passage of Calvin I
cited to you a little before, Institut. lib. 4. cap. 4. sect. 4. Si rem omisso
vocabulo intueamur, reperiemus, etc. And Institut. lib. 4. Cap. 5. Sect. 11.
Supersunt Episcopi and Paraeciarum rectores, qui utinam de retinendo officio
contenderent, libenter illis concederemus eos habere pium and eximium munus, i.
e. Now we are to speak of Bishops, who I wish would contend about the retaining
of their Office, we would willingly grant unto them (He is speaking of the
popish Bishops) that they have a holy and excellemt Office, if they would
rightly discharge it. Where you see he calls the Office, pium and eximium
munus, Holy and excellent. And again a little after, showing how, when it is
objected to the Papists, that their Regnum, i. e. Church Government as managed
by them, is antichristian tyranny, they answer, it is that venerable Hierarchy,
so much and often commended by holy and great men. Which answer of theirs he
repells thus, Sect. 13. Quasi vero sancti Patres quum Ecclesiasticam
Hierarchiam aut spirituale regimen ut ipsis per manus ab Apostolis traditum
erat, commendarent, hoc deforme and vastitatis plenum chaos somniarent, ubi
Episcopi vel rudes, etc. i. e. as if forsooth the holy Fathers when they
commend that Ecclesiastical Hierarchy as it was delivered, or handed unto them
from the Apostles, did mean it of your deformed Government. Where you see, he
says, that the ancient Episcopacy was delivered down to the Fathers, per manus
ab Apostolis; from the Apostles hands, or from the Apostles by hand to hand.
And on Titus 1.5. He says, We may learn from that Text, that then there was
not such an equality among the Ministers of the Church, Quin unus aliquis
authoritate and consilio praesset, i. e. But that some one person was in
authority and counsel above the rest. And in a long Letter of his to an old
friend, who now was made a Bishop in the Church of Rome, Veteri amico nunc
Praesuli, it is to be found in the Volume of his Opuscula, page 72. he says,
Episcoparus ipse a Deo profectus est, Episcopacy it self is from God, and
institutus, and institute by God: and within a few Lines after, adds, In
aestimando Episcopi munere neque recte neque tuto credi populo: Judicium unius
Dei esse audiendum, Cujus and authoritate est constitutum illud and legibus
definitum, i. e. In esteeming of the Episcopal Office, we must not regard the
people's judgment, but Gods only, by whose authority it is constitute, etc.
And sundry other clear Testimonies in that Epistle, which were tedious here to
recite. There he speaks not one word against the Office of a Bishop, but only
against the abuses of it in the Romish Church. In one place of it, he says,
omnino tibi sane quod ab Episcopo requiritur praestandum, aut fedes Episcopi
deserenda, i. e. either do the duty of a Bishop, or leave the Bishop's Seat: He
wills him not to leave it on any terms, no, but if he minds to be faithful
keep it still. And in an Epistle of his to the King of Poland, he approves of
all the degrees of the Hierarchy in the ancient Church, even unto Patriarchs.
And in a long Epistle to the Duke of Somerset Protector of England in Edward
the sixth, his Minority, as it is cited by Durel View of Govern. page 165.
Giving his advice anent reforming of many things in Religion, yet never
advises to remove Episcopacy out of the English Church, which had he been of
your opinion, he would not have failed to have done: Only he advises that both
Bishops and Ministers be put to swear they shall deliver no other Doctrine, but
such as is contained in the articles of Religion. And what is worthy the
observing in that Letter, he says, Audio esse duo seditiosorum genera, quae
adversus Regem and Regni statum caput extulerunt: alij enim cerebrosi quidem,
viz. sub Evangelij nomine (...), passim invectam vellent: alij vero in
superstitionibus Antichristi obdurantur: ac merentur quidem tum hi tum illi
gladio ultore coerceri, i. e. I hear there are two sorts of seditious persons,
who have gotten up the head against the King and State of the Kingdom: The
first a kind of heady humorous people, who under pretense of the Gospel would
bring in confusion, and disorder every where: The other are such who are
hardened in their antichristian superstitions: and these in authority should
restrain both. Now how near what he says of the first sort, may touch your
selves, I leave it to your consideration: There is one passage more in Calvin,
I cannot ommit, in his Treatise to the Emperor Charles the fifth, and States
of the Empire, entitled, de necessitate reformandae Ecclesiae, speaking of the
Popish Bishops, he says, Talem nobis si Hierarchiam exhibeant, in qua sic
emineant Episcopi, ut Christo subesse non recusent and ab illo tanquam unico
capite pendeant and ad ipsum referantur, in qua sic inter se fraternam
societatem colant, ut non alio nodo quam ejus veritate sint colligati: tum vero
nullo non anathemate dignos fatear, qui eam non reverenter, summaque obedientia
observent: haec vero mendax Hierarchiae larva quid habet simile? That is, if
they will give us such an Hierarchy, in which Bishops will so be great, that
withal they refuse not to be subject to Christ as their only head, and aim at
him, in which they so intertain brotherly society among themselves, that they
be not knit together by any bond but his Truth; Then if there be any that shall
not reverence and obey such an Hierarchy, there is no curse or anathema which
they are not worthy of. Thus he. So that if the Popish Bishops would renounce
their dependence on the Pope, as their head, and in his stead own Christ, and
embrace the truth of the Gospel Doctrine; Calvin would have all to reverence
and obey them, and thinks them worthy to be cursed, who would not. By this time
you may perceive Calvin is not such an opposite to Bishops as you took him to
be. He knew very well what great difference there was betwixt Primitive and
Popish Episcopacy; nor would he cry down all Episcopacy as intolerable,
antichristian, and I know not what, as is ordinary for many now to do, who
understand little, either of the nature or antiquity of it. Saravia says, he
defends Calvin's opinion against Beza: and truly although Beza be no such
unfriend to Bishops as many apprehend, yet Calvin far less. B. Hall, speaking
against the common report, that fathered Presbytery upon Calvin, says, I
cannot find the Father of Presbytery: and Mr. Durel View of Government, Page
151. says, neither was Geneve it is mother: and thinks that the juncture of
affairs brought it to the doors of these Churches, where it was taken in, and
maintained, and that (as he says afterward) it was a Government not of choice,
but of chance or necessity: He cites Mr. Hooker, who in the preface to his
Ecclesiastical Policy, says, that the Popish Bishop and Clergy being departed
Geneva (the Bishop was put away not by the reformed, but by the Papists
themselves. See Durel, Page 157, 158, 159.) it had been a thing impossible to
have chosen another in his room. And Durel, Page 152. says, it does not at all
appear that the Ministers who first reformed Geneve (Calvin was not then come)
did settle equality out of any dislike to Hierarchical subordination, but were
bent upon the reforming of doctrine, and then finding themselves in an equality
without any Church Superior over them, they even continued so.


D. Yet since that time many able men who lived under Presbyterian parity, have
defended it as good and warrantable.


I. True, many have indeed brought what they could in defense of it, but the
ablest and most judicious of them have only brought reasons to prove the
lawfulness, as they conceived of what was done among them, but not that there
was any necessity of doing so in other reformed Churches, which had retained
Bishops. Blondel concluded his Apologia pro sententia Hieronimi, with words to
this purpose: By all which, we have said to assert the rights of Presbytrie, it
is not our purpose to invalidat the ancient and Apostolical constitution of
Episcopal Preeminence, but we believe, wherever it is established conformable
to the ancient Canons, it must be carefully preserved, and wheresoever by some
heat of contention, or otherwise it has been put down or violated, it ought to
be reverently restored. See for this Durel's view of Government, Page 339, 340.
Where also is showed, how by the importunity of some, the author was prevailed
with to leave out these words at the Press. Beza de Ministrorum gradibus, Cap.
18. Speaking of England's having Bishops, says, fruantur sane ista Dei
benificentia, quae utinam illi nationi sit perpetua: That is, let England enjoy
that goodness of God to them, which I wish may be perpetual to that Nation. And
Cap. 21. Page 343. Nedum ut quod falsissime and impudentissime quidam nobis
objiciunt, Cuipiam ecclesiae sequendum nostrum peculiare exemplum praescribamus
imperitissimorum illorum similes, qui nihil nisi quod ipsi agunt rectum putat.
i. e. Much less as if (which some most falsely and impudently charge us with) we
did prescribe our example of Government to be followed by any other Church,
like those unskilful persons who think nothing right but what they do
themselves. You see then, Beza thought not other Protestant Churches were
obliged to write after Geneva's Copy, nor did he wish a change of the English
Episcopacy.


D. Beza is no friend to Bishops, as appears by Saravia's writing against him.


I. Beza looked not upon all kind of Episcopacy as unlawful, as you do, it is
true he thought Episcopacy but an humane Institution, as he expounds his
Episcopus humanus, yet he was far from your way of condemning Episcopacy
absolutely, but thought it a lawful and useful order in the Church. In his
dispute with Saravia, he says, Si qui sunt (Quod sane mihi non facile
persuaseris) qui omnem Episcoporum ordinem rejiciunt, absit ut quisquam sanae
mentis furoribus illorum assentiatur, i. e. If there be any (as I hardly
believe there are) who reject all the order of Bishops, God forbid any man of a
sound mind, should assent to their madness Beza was not against Protestant
Bishops at all, for in a Letter to Archbishop Whitgift, related in the said
Archbishop's life, written by Sr. George Paul, he speaks thus; In my
writings, I ever impugned the Romish Hierarchy, but never intended to touch or
impugn the Policy of the Church of England, or to exact of you to form your
selves to our pattern. How respectfully writes he to Grindal Bishop of London,
Epist. 23. he says, Quo majore posthac poena digni erunt, qui porro
authoritatem tuam aspernabuntur. i. e. How much greater punishment shall they
deserve who shall despise your authority. Thus Beza speaks to that Bishop, and
thinks his authority ought to be reverenced. And in the close of that same
Epistle, he says, Jesus te custodiat, and in tanto tibi commisso munere sancto
suo spiritu regat, and magis ac magis confirmet. i. e. Jesus preserve you,
govern, and more and more confirm you by his holy spirit, in that great Office
which is committed to you. And Epist. 58. To the same Grindal, he says,
Dominus te isthic speculatorem and judicem constituit. Now from these
favorable Testimonies of Beza in behalf of Episcopacy, we may conclude; 1.
That he did not think Episcopacy unlawful, else would he have wished the
continuance of an unlawful, sinful Government in England, as I show you a
little before expressly he does? 2. If Beza thought Presbytrie the first and
Apostolical Government, yet certainly he judged it not unalterable, otherwise
would he have spoken with such respect of Episcopacy, as you see he does. The
same may be said of Jewel, Bilson, Morton, etc. their concessions laboriously
set down, in jus divinum Ministerij Anglic. Page 59, 60, 61. Certainly these
Bs. if they thought not Episcopacy, jure divino, neither thought they Presbytry
so, else would they have been Bishops themselves? And Calvin how respectfully
writes he to Archbishop Cranmer, beside what I cited out of him before? Durel
View of Government, Page 161. Speaking of Calvin, says, he is of the mind that
Episcopacy was the Government that Calvin approved most, and that he took it to
be of Apostolical Institution; though his opinion was, that the Church
according to her exigencies, in relation to places, times, and other
circumstances, may dispense with it. Thus he speaks of Calvin, and subjoyneth a
passage out of his Epistle to Cardinal Sadolet, which he conceives is to that
purpose; Disciplinam qualem habuit vetus ecclesia nobis deesse, neque nos
diffitemur, etc.


D. I confess I am somewhat moved with these clear Testimonies you cite out of
Calvin, and Beza; whom I ever looked on before. as stout impugners of all kind
of Episcopacy; Yet that I may add some more of greatest note, who have withstood
Bishops. What say you to Salmasius, Moulin, Chamier, Blondel? These four may
come in the second rank of Protestant worthies, and have all declared
themselves against Bishops; Moulin de munere pastorali, and in his letters to
Bp. Andrews; Salmasius in his Walo Messalinus: Chamier in his Popish
Controversies: Blondel in his Apologia pro sententia Hieronymi?


I. Salmasius did retract his opinion, and turned to the Episcopal persuasion,
as himself declares in his answer to Milton, cited by Durel, Page 297. speaking
of Bishops, and of his own Observation how confusions and strange errors sprang
up in England, immediately upon the removal of Bishops, he says of himself,
experientia edoctum, ut dies sequens est magister prioris, sententiam mutasse,
etc. i. e. He being taught by experience, as the following day is teacher of
the former, he changed his opinion. But setting this aside, as also what we
heard Blondel closed his Apology with, let us but hear how far by evidence out
of antiquity they are forced to yield: Salmasius in his Walo Messalinus grants,
rem esse antiquissimam, ut hi duo ordines in ecclesia fuerint distincti,
Episcoporum and Presbyterorum; si excipiantur Apostolica tempora, i. e. It is a
most ancient thing, that Presbyters and Bishops have been distinct in the
Church, if we except the Apostles own times, and Cap. 4. Page 253. cirea medium
aut initium secundi seculi primus singularis Episcopatus supra Presbyteratum
introductus est, Where he grants Episcopacy about the beginning of the second
age, so very near he grants Bishops to the Apostles times; for the Apostle John
died about the beginning of the second age. Moulin grants, Statim post
Apostolorum tempora, aut etiam eorum tempore, ut testatur historia
Ecclesiastica, constitutum esse ut unus inter caeteros Presbyteros Episcopus
vocaretur qui in collegas haberet praeeminentiam, ad vitandam confusionem, quae
saepe ex aequa^itate nascitur, i. e. Immediately after the Apostles, or even in
their time, one among the Presbyters was set over the rest with the name of
Bishop. Where he says, this might have been, Apostolorum tempore, even in the
Apostles time. Chamier de Oecumen. Pontif. lib. 10. cap. 6. confesses from
Jerome's making Bishops as ancient at Alexandria as Mark, Inaequalitatem hanc
esse antiquissimam, that this inequality among Churchmen is most ancient. And
a little after he says, Conjicere licet innovationem hanc factam, aut nondum
elapso aut vix elapso primo seculo. i. e. We may conjecture this change into
Episcopacy was made either before the first age of the Church was ended, or
scarce ended. Now John the Apostle outlived the first age, and died in the
beginning of the second. Now do not these concessions amount to as much as a
yielding of the whole Cause. But let us allow any of those four Divines as long
a time after the Apostles as they will demand before Bishops were introduced:
and we shall hear Blondel say, and the authors of jus divinum Ministerij
Anglic. Page 124. from him, that before the year 140. there was not a Bishop
over Presbyters, and that the, Toto orb decretum, in Jerome was not long
before the said year 140. Thus Blondel who takes the longest time for bringing
in Bishops, yet acknowledges them so early, that within 40. years and less,
after the Apostle John, Bishops are every where settled in the Church. Now from
your opinion of the unalterableness of Presbyterian Government left by the
Apostles, and from Blondel's concession, that within less than 40. years of the
Apostle John, Bishops were by an universal decree received into the Church: I
thus reason. If there were Bishops found in the Church within less then 40.
years after the Apostles times, there behoved to be Bishops in the Apostles
times, otherwise one of these absurdities will follow, none of which can be
admitted. 1. That that Generation of Christians who lived about 40. years and
less after the Apostles, was altogether ignorant of Christ and his Apostles
mind anent the continuing of Presbyterian parity as the unalterable form of
Government, else they would not have adventured, and that so unanimously upon a
change of that Government which had a jus divinum, for it is warrant. And is
this probable, or is it possible, that those who lived so near to the Apostles,
that without question, sundry of them had seen John and conversed with him:
That these, I say, should all be ignorant of John's mind anent
Church Government. Or else it will follow (which is yet worse) that that
Generation brought in Episcopacy notwithstanding they knew Christ and his
Apostles had left Parity as unalterable in the Church. And that thus over the
belly of knowledge and conscience, they did all as oneman (for we hear not of
the least opposition, as we read there was against other Innovations, which
perverse and Heretical Spirits labored to bring early into the Church)
conspire against Christ and his Apostles Government. Were not this hard to be
imagined, that those Christians who were daily dying for Christ and the Gospel,
should at the same time be guilty of bringing into the Church, a Government
contrary to his mind: and that against their own light? What remains then, but
this, if within forty years after the Apostles, Bishops were generally
received in the Christian world, by the confession of your ablest Writers;
there behoved to be Bishops even in the Apostles time. For it is not
conceivable how such a great change should be made in so short a time; and that
without any noise or opposition, for any thing we hear, unless you admit these
absurdities, which I think you will be loath to do. For had there been either
knowledge or conscience in but a few, whither Ministers or other Christians of
that time; is it possible they would have suffered that change, which imported
so gross a violation, pass so smoothly, and without very great contradiction?
But further, to let you see that those Divines come even as great a length as
needs to be desired. Blondel in his Apologia, Page 25. Speaking of the very
first meetings of Presbyters, that were in the beginning of Christianity, he
says, Antiquissimo inter Collegas primatus contigit, i. e. The primacy fell
upon the eldest, and Page 53. he grants, that this first Presbyter had the
chief hand in Ordination: and afterward that it was for this place that
Diotrephes made so much ado, and is called by the Apostle (...). And Thebuthus
did the like at Jerusalem shortly after. And again he confesses that this
Primus Presbyter had authority with his precedence, quis enim, says he,
Praesidentiam sine authoritate somniet? and lest, it seems, he be thought to
give too much power to that (...) or chief Presbyter, as indeed he gives him
an Episcopal power, he adds, Ego sane hanc Politi^ formam ab initio
observatam, and Christianis traditam, libere crediderim, sed ut mutabilem and
pro usu and arbitrio Ecclesiae mutandam. Where, after he has confessed a first
Presbyter with an Episcopal power in effect, finding this too high a
concession, which yet truth enforces him to, he says, that that form was
mutable at the pleasure of the Church. And Chamier confesses that there was
always from the beginning, a Primus Presbyter or first Minister, and that he
had Novam potestatem and Jurisdictionem, ne esset Episcopatus merus titulus, i.
e. A new power and Jurisdiction, that his Episcopacy might not be a mere title.
This he confesses when pressed with Testimonies out of antiquity. And what
needs more than we find Blondel and him confessing. And Moulen in Epist. 3. to
Bishop Andrews at last grants, that Ordo Episcopalis est juris Apostolici, i.
e. The Episcopal Order is by Apostolical right: and then lest he should seem by
this concession altogether to have yielded up the Cause to the Bishop: he
subjoyneth a distinction betwixt jus Apostolicum, and jus divinum. And that
although he grant Episcopacy to have Apostolical warrant, yet that will not
infer a Divine unalterable warrant; for, says he, some things which were
brought into the Church by Apostolical prudence, as fit for that time, are now
abrogate as Deaconesses. Stillingfleet in his Irenicum, Page 230. uses this
same evasion. To whom the learned and judicious Author of the account of
ancient Church Government, among other things returns this answer, that it is
granted, that some Apostolical practices, yea, and constitutions are alterable,
because they were introduced by the Apostles, upon reasons and considerations
not holding equally for all places, times and persons: but if some be thus
alterable, yet it follows not that therefore any or all are so. And then the
question will be, who shall judge what practices are alterable, what not? or
when the reasons of them are dispensable, when not? Now I suppose none can
rationally say, that any private man, or lesser part of a Society is competent
Judge of these practices and reasons; else what confusion will ensue, every one
establishing, or abrogating what he pleases, but this belongs to the Church
in her Representativ's; and accordingly we find Bishops and Councils have
retained and declared Episcopacy downward from the Apostles, through many
Centuries of years, as the standing unalterable Apostolical Government, and
that reasons of its first Institution do hold still, to wit, preservation of
Unity, shunning of Schism and the like: But these Apostolical practices which
were founded on temporary reasons and occasions, were permitted to run into a
desuetude. Thus you see what shifts the ablest Pens who have set themselves
against Episcopacy, are driven unto, to shun a Conquest. And truly by their
great concessions which they are forced to from evidence in antiquity, they
yield the whole Cause. Hence it is we find them speaking so uncertainly in
their Writings. Sometime one would think disputing down all Bishops, or rather
up Presbytrie: at an other time setting up Bishops higher, and more early than
their purpose can well allow, or consist with the Scope of their Debates:
sometime again expressing their great respect for Bishops, and sincere wishes
that such Churches as had them might still retain that happiness, as I hinted
before. And I also show that their purpose mainly was to vindicate the practice
of their own Churches in having parity, and not to cry down Episcopacy,
especially that which was in Protestant Churches, as Beza expressly professes;
so did Blondel in the close of his Apologia, of which, I spoke before.


D. There have been many more Protestant Divines of great note, who lived since
the Reformation in Europe, may be many of those have been no friends to
Episcopacy.


I. Durel View of Government, supposes a Council to be called, consisting of
the most famous Protestant Divines, who since the Reformation have lived in all
the Churches abroad, France, Geneve, Switzerland, Bohem, Poland, Holland, and
the sundry parts of Germany, etc. And makes Calvin Moderator, and puts
Episcopacy to the Vote among them, and out of their Writings delivers their
opinions in favors of Episcopacy. You may see this at length in Durels View of
Government, from Page 199. to Page 309. And to them I may add our own John
Knox, who, as is to be seen before the old Psalm Book, in the year 1560.
preached in Edinburgh, at the admission of the superintendent of the three
Lothians (a diocy large enough) which act was more Episcopal like than
Presbyterian. Thus I have deduced unto you Episcopacy from Scripture, from the
most primitive times which followed after the Apostles, and from the
confessions and concessions of the ablest Protestant Divines: all which, I
think, ought, and will be very convincing to any who is pleased to lay aside
prejudice, and impartially make search after truth in this point.

To what I have said before, I add these few things. The Author of Jus Divinum
Ministerij Anglicani, are at great pains to produce some Fathers, Schoolmen,
and some Episcopal Divines in England, who were of opinion, that betwixt
Presbyter and Bishop there is little or no difference. To which, I say, that
the debate among the Schoolmen is merely, whether Bishop and Presbyter, are
diversi ordines, different orders, or only diversi gradus ejusdem ordinis,
diverse degrees of one and the same Order. Now this says nothing against
Episcopacy, for even these, who think they differ only in degree, yet
notwithstanding might be of the mind, that always from the Apostles downward
there were Bishops distinct from Presbyters; howbeit the difference was not so
great as to constitute a different Order, but only a higher degree, or eminency
(as some speak) in the same Order. And these Fathers, and late Episcopal
Divines might be of the same mind. This is sure, all of them looked on
Episcopacy as lawful and useful in the Church.

The said Authors of Jus Divinum Minist. Angli. Page 64. say, that Eusebius,
Irenaeus and others, etc. were in many things deceived themselves, and the
cause of deceiving others. Answ. 1. They are hard put to it when they seek to
relieve themselves by discrediting these ancients. 2. Suppone it were granted
that Eusebius was in some things deceived, must he therefore all along be
deceived when he speaks of Bishops superior to Presbyters. He makes it a great
part of his work to set down the succession of Bishops in the most famous
Primitive Churches, and to say, that in all this he was deceived, is Gratis
dictum, said, but not proved. 3. It Is strange if also Irenaeus was deceied, who
flourished above a hundred years before Eusebius, and had seen Polycarp, who
was the Apostle John's contemporary and disciple. Who can believe he could be
ignorant what the Government of the Church had been from the Apostles downward,
living so near to their times. 4. Is it not much more probable that Jerome
might be deceived, if we understand him to speak of the introducing of Bishops
after the Apostles times? Certainly it is more like he might be mistaken than
either Eusebius or Irenaeus, who lived long before him. They say further, that
Irenaeus by Bishops meant no more but Presbyters, Page 114, 115. And Page 65.
that the Fathers and Councils spoke of Church Officers of former times,
according to the Style of their own times. And again when pressed with the
Catologues of Bishops out of Irenaeus and others, they say, that these Bishops
were only the first ordained Presbyters, and therefore this first ordained
Presbyter is named and the rest passed by for the more expedit reckoning, and
the Line of Succession only drawn from the first ordained Minister. Some of
these answers are inconsistent; For 1. They say, Eusebius and Irenaeus were
deceived when they spoke of Bishops: and next they say that by the Bishops,
Irenaeus only meant Presbyters. Now how unsatisfactory these answers and the
like are, the impartial Reader may judge. Only hea^ what Bucer says, De
animarum cura inter scripta Anglicana, Page 280. Where after he has related
Jerome's words, which seem to make Bishops of later date than the Apostles, he
says, Credibile non est, diu neque etiam in cunctis Ecclesiis ita observatum
esse. Nam apud patres Hieronymo ^etustiores clara habemus testimonia quod etiam
Apostolorum temporibus unus e Presbyteris electus atque ordinatus est qui
caeteris omnibus praevit -- and Ministerium, Episcopale praecipue and in summo
gradu gessit. Where he shows, that even from the Apostles downward there was in
the chief Churches always a Bishop over Presbyters. And so he goes on to show
that James was Bishop of Jerusalem, and that the like Order was kept in other
Churches, Quantum ex omnibus historiis Ecclesiasticis cognoscere possumus, and
cites Tertullian, Cyprian, Irenaeus, Eusebius, to prove this; All more ancient
than Jerome.


D. I confess you have cleared me of sundry doubts I had anent Bishops, I
thought little or nothing could be said for them, but that they were a mere
groundless, and godless usurpation in the Church: for we have been taught to
cry them down by all means, yet there is one thing, ought, I think, bar them
to the door of this Church for ever: and that is the Covenants by which we are
sworn against them. But since I can stay no longer with you at this time, I am
content to hear what you can say to this at next meeting.


I. Much more might be said for Bishops Yet there is enough said if you be free
of prejudice. And since you can stay no longer, I shall be willing to commune
with you anent the Obligation of the Covenant against Bishops, at another time:
and so I bid you farewell.


If Blondel when he says, page 53. Eg^ sane hanc politiae formam ab initio
observatam libere concederem, sed mutabilem tamen, etc. Speak of a primitive
parity, yet says, that form was mutable. Prefat. ad apolog. page 59.
Hieronymus hanc formam (i. e. Episcopacy) non modo non improbavit, sed pro
pacis bono semper admisit. And in that same place vindicats Jerome from
Aerianism. And in that same place he says Episcopacy is forma regiminis non per
se mala and damnabilis, sed adnatis sensim corruptelis (viz. under poprie)
vitiatae; and denis not, but that protestanti sola corruptelarum resectione
contenti esse poterant, and vitiatam deplorabant. And more to this purpose, he
thought therefore Episcopacy in it self lawful.
Cassand. Consult. Artic. 14. Illi certe merito reprehendendi sunt, qui odio
abusuum in his ordinibus and dignitatibus, universum hunc ordinem quem
Hierarchicon appellant, ut nervum Antichristi sublatum volunt. Nec minus illi
accusandi, qui inani titulo inflati, eoque ad dominatum quendam vel etiam ad
cupiditatem and avaritiam abutentes, neglecto quod Ecclesiae debent officio;
hominibus etiam non malis huic Ecclesiastico ordini, detrahendi, and ab eo
deficiendi, occasionem dederunt.
THE SECOND DIALOGUE Anent the Obligation of the Covenants against Episcopacy.
Doub. HAving some spare time, I am come to spend it with you (as I promised at
our last parting) I told you then, that Bishops are abjured in the Covenant, so
that none may with a good conscience either submit to, (...) them: and we look
upon all these (...) ^^sters that preach under them, as perjured persons.


I. Ye use indeed upon all occasions to be liberal enough in charging Ministers
and many others in the time with Perjury, and this ye do with the greatest
freedom and confidence imaginable, but it is sooner said than proved. Ye would
act more Christian like, if ye were more sparing in judging another man's
Servants, who stand or fall to their own Master. Ye use to impute unto us
acting against our own Light also. I pray, learn to be more Charitable.


D. You know there were Covenants sworn, wherein Bishops are abjured, and we
all stand bound against them.


I. All bound! There are many both people and Ministers at this day who never
took the Covenant, and think you them bound against Bishops?


D. Yes, I think they are: For the Covenant binds all, not only those who
took it, but their Posterity also.


I. That is a strange fancy: Casuists say, Juramentum est vinculum personale,
i. e. an Oath is a personal tie, that only binds him that took it. And so
consonant to this, the Covenant says, We, every one for our selves: and not,
for our selves and our posterity. I suppone the Father who was in his judgment
against Bishops did take the Covenant; his Son who grows up afterward is in
his judgment for Bishops: It seems very hard that the Son should be by the
Father's Oath prelimited in his judgment about a disputable point, or else
obliged to act contrary to his judgment. Is not this very hard, think you?


D. If the Fathers Oath cannot bind the Child, What say you to the Baptismal
Vow, where the father voweth for the child, and that vow obliges the child
when he grows up?


I. The father at Baptism does not formally bind in the name and room of the
child, he only binds for his own part, that, he shall bring up the child as
becomes a christian parent, and mind him of his Baptismal Vow when he comes
to years: Indeed the child comes under a Vow at Baptism, which arises from
the binding matter, which in it self is obligatory, and from the nature of the
Sacrament in which the Lord and the Party Baptized do Covenant; and this makes
the child's obligation so much the stronger when his Vow is superadded to the
matter, which is of it self binding, like that, Psalm, 119. verse. 106.


D. Yet those persons who took the Covenant, are bound never to acknowledge the
Bishops, and now after they have sworn they must not anymore dispute or
question the obligation of the Oath: for Prove. 20. verse. 25. It is a snare
after vows, to make inquiry.


I. Solomon there speaks of those who sacrilegiously meddle with things
consecrate, and would pervert them to their own private use: and who, that they
may do it the better, make enquiry how the Vow may be eluded, by which those
things were consecrate Questionless it is a snare to make inquiry out of such
sacrilegious design. But Solomon means not that it is simply and in every case
unlawful, after we have vowed or sworn an Oath, to enquire whither our Vow or
Oath be in every case: binding, yea or not: otherwise you shall lay a very
great snare indeed upon such as tie themselves with a rash or sinful Oath, if
you will not allow them to reflect on what they have done. What! I pray you,
had it been a fault in Herod to have made enquiry after his rash Oath to
Herodias, and to have retracted it too? Or for those who bound themselves under
a curse, they would neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul? Verily I
think there should be liberty allowed to many who did swear the Covenant, to
make enquiry, if there were no reason but this, because many took it when they
were very young at Schools and Colleges, and so by reason of none age, could
very little judge of the nature of an Oath, and far less of the matter abjured:
and so did not swear in judgment, contrary to Jerem. 4. verse. 2. such have
even but reason to make a review when they come to be better able to judge.


D. It may be so, yet I think when they have enquired they shall find
themselves bound against Prelacy by a double tie, viz. the National Covenant
and the League.


I. You think Episcopacy is abjured in the National Covenant, under the name of
the Popes wicked Hierarchy. But Protestant Episcopacy is not there meant, as
the author of the Survey of Naphtaly fully shows, Part 2. from page 114. to
130. 1. Because King James and his Council who were the imposers of that
Covenant, and took it themselves, Anno 1580. did the very next year after 1581.
ratify the agreement made at Leith betwixt the Commissioners of State and
Church, Anno 1571. Which agreement was in favors of Episcopacy. Now if the
King and his Council had by the Popish Hierarchy meant all kind of Episcopacy,
is it probable that the very next year they would by that Ratification have
acted so palpably contrary to the Covenant so lately taken by themselves, and
imposed upon the Land by their Authority. 2. That Protestant Episcopacy was not
meant, appears from this, because in all the strivings the Church in those
times had with the King to get him to put away Bishops even after the taking of
that Covenant, we never find this used as an argument to persuade the King,
because all Episcopacy was abjured in the Covenant. Which reason, no doubt,
would much have been insisted on, if Ministers then had thought all kind of
Episcopacy to be meant by the Popes wicked Hierarchy; and their not using this
argument may be very convincing to any, that by the Popes Hierarchy no
Episcopacy could be meant, but such as depended upon the Pope: for I suppose
the Ministers of that time were not ignorant of the meaning of these words of
the Covenant. I also told you at our last meeting that Beza professed be never
intended to write against Protestant Bishops.


D. What can the Popish Hierarchy be meant of, if not of Bishops?


I. The Pop's Hierarchy is meant of Popish Bishops, who actually depended on
the Pope: but can no more be meant of Protestant reformed Bishops, who have
renounced their dependence upon the Pope, then of reformed Presbyters, or
Ministers and Deacons: Otherwise according to you, all Ministers and Deacons
should be abjured there als well as all Bishops: because Presbyters and Deacons
are parts of their Hierarchy, as the Council of Trent determines.


D. The Apologetical Narration, page 395. says all Bishops depend upon the
Pope: therefore all kind of Episcopacy is Popish, and as such, abjured in that
Covenant.


I. He says indeed, all Bishops, in esse and operari, depend on the Pope, but
how proves he it? Because, says he, the Pope acknowledges they depend on him
alone, and have no other ground to stand upon. Now what a poor, because, this
is, and how weakly reasoned from the Popes saying so, ipse dixit, is too
evident to any ordinary capacity. The Apologist reasons like a Papist, that
maintains the Popes infallibility, and gives him that advantage of his
arrogated supremacy and usurpation over all Bishops in the Christian world now
and from the beginning; as if the very first Bishops in the primitive times had
depended on the Bishop of Rome. The Pope craveth no better than this. But
herein Protestants oppose his usurped Supremacy, and show from antiquity that
the Bishops of Rome have been opposed by Councils and Fathers, when first they
attempted the Supremacy. Remember what I cited to you from Calvin, at our last
meeting, Talem si nobis Hierarchiam exhibeant in qua Episcopi a Christo ut
unico capite dependeant, tum nullo non Anathemate, etc Calvin thinks them
worthy of a curse, who will not submit to such Bishops, who renouncing the
Pope, take Christ for their head. The Ministers who did dispute with the
Doctors of Aberdeen, declared that the Doctors might take the National
Covenant, and notwithstanding, debate and vote for Episcopacy in a free
Assembly. It seems then they thought, by the popes Hierarchy, all kind of
Episcopacy not necessarily meant.


D. But the assembly at Glasgow, Anno 1638. has put the matter out of doubt,
and by their authority expounded the Popes Hierarchy to be meant of all
Episcopacy, and so all Episcopacy is abjured in that Covenant.


I. You would all along remember in this debate, that at our last conference I
show you, Episcopacy had a Divine, or Apostolical warrant at least: and if so,
then the Covenant against Episcopacy (suppone it were there abjured) is null
from the beginning. But passing this, to what you say of the Assembly of
Glasgow's expounding the Popes Hierarchy to be meant of all Episcopacy, I
answer, that was more than they could do; For 1. How could the Assembly put a
sense upon that Oath, that was taken 58. years before, and few or none of the
first takers of it were than alive; or if alive, few or none were Members of
that Assembly? How then could the Assembly come to know certainly, that their
exposition of the word, Hierarchy, was according to the mind of the first
imposers. 2. All that the Assembly 1638. produces in their Act Sess. 16. to
prove Episcopacy to be abjured in the National Covenant amounts only to this,
That the Church about the time of the first taking of that Covenant, and after,
was laboring against Bishops; but proves not that Episcopacy was abjured in
it, or in any words of it. 3. By what warrant could the Assembly impose upon
others that sense of the Covenant in which they took it themselves; they might
declare their own sense of it, which might not be the sense of the first
imposers, when all is done: but how could they oblige others to their sense,
who had taken it before? The first imposers gave the Assembly no power to do so.


D. Yet those who took that Covenant after the Assembly 1638. had put their
sense on it, have thereby abjured Episcopacy; for the Assembly explaineth it so.


I. I suppose it was not the Assemblies intention, that any should take that
Covenant in the sense they put on it, unless it were agreeable to the sense of
the first imposers, and takers, to whom the Assembly thought themselves
subservient i^ what they did. Now that the first imposers, and takers never
meant it against all Episcopacy, is showed: and therefore the Assemblies ground
failing, that which they built thereupon must fail also. For it were absurd to
say that the Assembly putting a meaning on that Oath no way agreeable with the
meaning of the first imposers; that yet this posterior meaning should oblige
also, though much differing from the former: this is to make of an Oath what we
please.


D. In that Covenant we are sworn that we shall join our selves to this Church
of Scotland, in Doctrine, Faith, Religion, and Discipline; and that we shall
continue in the Doctrine and Discipline thereof. Where, by Discipline, is
meant, Presbyterian Government. So then, we are sworn to maintain it by the
National Covenant.


I. By Discipline, cannot be meant Presbyterian Government, because at the time
of the first imposing of that Covenant there was no such Government in
Scotland, nor for a considerable time after. Whatever essays Ministers in those
times made to introduce it, yet the King who imposed that Covenant, owned
Episcopacy. Therefore, 2. If by Discipline, some one particular mode of
Government be meant, it is more then probable that it must be Episcopacy,
because it was the Government then practiced in this Church: And the very year
after the King and Council ratified the Treaty that had been concluded at Leith
in favors of Episcopacy, Anno 1571. But by Dicipline, is not meant any one
particular form of Government, but the substantials of it, or the essential and
utterly necessary policy of the Church, as it is expressed in the first Book of
Discipline, Cap. 9. And this is indeed unalterable, though, as some think,
there may be a change of particular Forms of Government.


D. Yet in the second Article of the League, Bishops are expressly abjured, and
I hope you will confess that Protestant Bishops are there meant.


I. Although Protestant Bishops be there meant, yet I question if every kind o^
Protestant Bishops, Timorcus Epist. dedicat. Sect. 25. and page 14. 16.
Doubts not to say, that all kind of Prelacy is no^ there abjured, but that
notwithstanding the said Article, they (the English Presbyterians) could freely
submit to the Primitive Episcopacy, that is, the precedence of one over the
rest, without whom ordinarily nothing is to be done in Jurisdiction or
Ordination: and asserts that it was only the English kind of Prelacy that was
meant in the second Article of the League: as also appears from the explanation
of that Article enclosed in the body of it, by a Parenthesis. Which kind we
have not in Scotland, nor had before: although many of you think there is no
difference. Mr. Vines, and Mr. Baxter, two great men of the Presbyterian way in
England, say, that that second Article was not intended against all kind of
Episcopacy, but only against that complex frame that consists of all the
Officers mentioned in the Article. And Mr. Gataker, that the most part of the
Assembly of Divines was reconcilable to a Moderat Episcopacy. And further,
Timoreus, That the English Parliament, with the Commissioners from Scotland,
never intended the extirpation of all kind of Episcopacy, but only of that in
England, page 16. 23. See also Mr. Croston, Page 70, 78. So that the most
judicious of the English Presbyterians who knew the mind of the Imposers, and
the circumstances of that business, you see, would not cry out upon us as
guilty of breach of that Article, as ye do.


D. What was the Parliament of England or the Assembly of Divines, their sense
of that Article, I know not: nor think I my self much concerned to enquire: but
the Kirk and State of Scotland who imposed that Oath on us, meant it against
all sort of Bishops.


I. I pray you consider we are now speaking of the League, which was not a mere
National Covenant of this Kingdom alone, but a common League of all the three
Kingdoms; and therefore behoved to be sensed by the Representatives of all the
three. So it is not the sense that any one of the Kingdoms puts on it, you or I
are to stand to; but that meaning and sense which all the three imposed on it.
And what was the Parliament of England's sense, was as Timorcus tells us, with
the joint concurrence of Commissioners from Scotland.


D. In the first Article the preservation of the Government of the Kirk of
Scotland is sworn to be maintained, which was Presbytrie; and therefore in the
second we swear against all kind of Prelacy: because Prelacy and Presbytrie are
inconsistent.


I. If you think in the first Article Presbytrie is sworn to be maintained, and
ye^ that there is a liberty left in the second Article for some kind of
Prelacy, which I told you the English Divines confess; and if withal you think
there is an inconsistency betwixt Presbytrie and any kind of Episcopacy; then
it will follow, that we have sworn things contradicto^y, viz. In the first
Article that we shall admit of no kind of Prelacy, and in the second, that we
may admit of some kind of Prelacy. 2. It Is much doubted by learned men, whither
in the first Article there be any Obligation to maintain Presbyterial
Government in Scotland; For 1. There is no express mention there at all of
Prosbyterial Government; The words are ( We shall endeavor the preservation of
the Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, In Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline and Government) 2. Many known Independents took that Covenant, and
yet never thought themselves bound thereby to maintain Presbytrie in any of the
Kingdoms, because they thought it no part of the reformed Government: and no
question the Independents had a hand in wording that Article so, that the words
might not necessarily import the maintaining of any one form of Government in
particular contrary to what themselves conceived to be right: and indeed the
words do not express any one form, nor yet necessarily import any one form, but
with this general proviso, in so far as reformed, now they did not think
Presbyterial Government such.


D. Yet the body of the English Parliament, who, together with our Scots
Commissioners imposed that Oath, did by the Reformed Government in this Kirk
mean, Presbytrie, which was then settled here: and therefore we were to take,
an^ did take that first Article in the sense of the imposers; whatever were the
thoughts of few Independents.


I. We are indeed to take an Oath in the sense of the Imposers: but that the
English Parliament sensed the first Article as if Presbyterial Government were
there sworn to be maintained, may justly be doubted, because, had that
Parliament looked on Presbytery as the Reformed Government, sworn to be
maintained in this Kirk, they consequently would have acknowledged themselves
bound to reform England according to our pattern; but they thought themselves
not bound to do so, for Anno 1647. in their Declaration to the Scots
Commissioners, they profess they could never find that Presbytrie is necessary
by any Divine Right, and charges them for thinking there is no other lawful
Church Covernment, but that which they call Church Government. And also charges
them with mis-interpreting the Article of the Covenant concerning Church
Government.


D. It seems then that England and Scotland did not understand that Article in
one and the same sense, yet since our State and Church understood it of
Presbytrie, we are bound to it in that sense.


I. It seems indeed England did not understand it in our sense: but that
therefore we are bound to it in the sense of our Church and State, will not
follow; but rather that it is an Article, as to that part of it, that speaks of
Government, without sense: since the Imposers who only could give the binding
sense, are not agreed about it: for to say that we are bound to that sense,
which our State, and Church too, if you will, had of it, is irrational,;
because they were but a part of the Imposers, and the lesser part too, in
respect of England and Ireland. And further, suppose it were granted to you,
that in that first Article Presbytrie is meant, yet that therefore there can be
no room left for any kind of Episcopacy in the second Article, will be denied:
for if you think there is an inconsistency betwixt Presbytrie and any kind of
Episcopacy, either you are mistaken, or Beza. And others were, who
notwithstanding their writing for Presbytrie; yet confess there is a kind of
Prelacy as ancient as the Apostles; beside what I cited to you from Blondel,
Chamier, Moulin, at our last meeting; see Beza apud Saravium, page 207, 233,
235, 240, 242, 251. etc.


D. I perceive you bear off all you can from acknowledging the Episcopacy now
settled in this Church to be meant either in the National Covenant, or in the
League: For if that were once granted, then ye could not but confess your
selves guilty of Perjury.


I. My denying the present Episcopacy of this Church to be meant in either of
the Covenants, is grounded upon reasons which I suppose can not easily be
disapproven. And to what you say, that upon our acknowledging the present
Episcopacy to be meant in both, or either of the Covenants, we could not but
acknowledge our selves guilty of Perjury: Though I see no reason to acknowledge
this present Government to be meant in either of the Covenants, but much reason
to the contrary, yet I am content to make the supposition that it is abjured:
giving then, though not granting that this Episcopacy was abjured in one, or
both of the Covenants, you cannot so easily conclude thence, as you imagine,
that therefore those who took that Oath, and now again submit to, yea, or own
this re-established Episcopacy, are perjured.


D. That seems very strange: those who did swear against Bishops in the
Covenant, have they not by acknowledging them again, done contrary to their
Oath, and so are perjured?


I. That you may receive answer to this, you must consider the nature of
Episcopacy, which is the matter supposed to be abjured. Episcopacy is either a
necessary unalterable Government, as having a Divine warrant, or at least
Apostolic, which amounts to little less then Divine, if to any thing less at
all. Or it is an unlawful, sinful Government, as being contrary to some other
Government, which has the warrant of Christ and his Apostles. Or, 3. It is of
an indifferent Nature, neither commanded ^or forbidden, but left to Christian
prudence, to be used in the Church, or not, as shall be found expedient, all
circumstances considered. If Episcopacy be found grounded on the Word, and to
have been the only Government practiced from the Apostles own times downward
through the purest ages of the Church, I hope you will not think an Oath taken
against it obliges to any thing but repentance, for engaging in so
unwarrantable an Oath. You are a people who cry out Perjury Perjury; but
consider what I said to you at last meeting, to let you see what warrant
Bishops have in the Word of God, and that it is the only Government found in
the first and purest times of the Church, search when you will, and that even
those who have set themselves to maintain another Government, have from
evidence of reason, and Light that shines to them out of Antiquity, been forced
by their own concessions to set Episcopacy high enough: and till you be able
solidly to answer what I said to you then on this head, be more sober, and
sparing of your hard censures: and take heed lest while you charge others with
Perjury, your selves be found doing all you can sacrilegiously to robb the
Church of that Government which Christ and his Apostles left her in possession
of, and have bound your selves with an Oath so to do. If Episcopacy be sinful
then we are bound against it antecedently to our Oath, and whether we had
abjured it or no^. And if you think Episcopacy thus unlawful, you should not so
much decry it upon the account of the Covenant; but because it is in it self
sinful, as contrary to some Divine, or Apostolical warrant: although it is true
a supervenient Oath makes an Obligation against a thing in it self sinful, so
much the stroner. But as I told you before, the ablest Champions for
Presbytery, have not adventured to assert Episcopacy unlawful, as being
contrary to any Divine, or Apostolical warrant. If it be indifferent, that is,
neither commanded nor forbidden, or lawful but not necessary, but left to
Christian prudence: Then the question will be, if we could by our Oath make it
absolutely, and in every case unlawful to our selves, so that we can never in
any case after, own or submit to it. You are mistaken, if you think an Oath
against the use of a thing in different, so binds, that in no case after, the
swearer can lawfully use that thing. Casuists say, an Oath taken about an
indifferent thing, may in some cases cease to bind (we now suppone Episcopacy
to be in it self indifferent) if the thing sworn against be a matter, wherein
our Superiors have power to command us, They by their authority given them of
God, may require obedience from us in any thing lawful; and so in that
particular, they may command us to do or use that which we have sworn against,
it being a thing in it self lawful: and in this case our Oath ceases to bind.
2. If after we have sworn, there come to be such an alteration in the State of
affairs, that what was lawfully promised, cannot now be lawfully performed; In
this ease the Oath ceases to bind, Si res non permanent in eodem statu, say
Casuists, cessat juramenti obligatio. Or 3. When our Oath comes to be
Impeditivum majoris boni, that is, a hinderance to a greater good, if we still
stand to what we have sworn. In such cases as these the obligation of an Oath
about a matter in it self not sinful, ceases to bind: as Casuists commonly
teach, and the Author of the Seasonable Case; and of the Survey of Naphtaly at
length applies to the Oath of the Covenant abjuring Episcopacy, and shows, that
upon supposition of the lawfulness of Episcopacy in it self, and that the
Episcopacy of this Church is meant in the Covenant; As matters now stand, none
ought to think themselves bound by their Oath to stand out against it, on^
Superiors now having commanded u^ to obey and submit to that Government; etc.
And solidly repells any thing that is brought by the Apologist, or Naphtaly to
the contrary. An Oath about things in their own nature not sinful, but
alterable, is always to be taken with this re-restriction and limitation, if
not expressed yet necessarily to be understood, so long as lawfully I may, for
the very nature and matter of such an Oath requires this: And the reason is,
because the takers of such an Oath may be under prior and greater obligations,
(viz. Obedience to their Superiors, and the like) then any obligation they
come under by their Oath, about a matter indifferent: and therefore when it
comes to this, that they cannot both satisfy those greate^ and prior
obligations and keep their Oath too; Then the Oath being the lesser obligation,
must cede and give place to the greater, especially those greater such as
obedience to Superiors in things lawful, and the like, being such as God
himself has brought us under, and our Oath about a thing indifferent, being
but a knot of man's casting. This should be clear and undoubted to any, that
when two duties at one and the same t^me, seem to require performance of us,
and we cannot get them both satisfied, then and in that case, the greater must
take place of the lesser, and the lesser is omitted without sin, Matthew. 9.13.
and 12.7. Go and learn what that means, I will have mercy and not Sacrifice.
And therefore Divines teach, that every Command does not oblige at every time.


D. To what you say of the first case, in which a promissory Oath about a thing
indifferent, may cease to bind, viz. The Authority of Superiors interveening:
you would do well to consider that the obligation of an Oath is a very Sacred
Bond, and I think it is hard to say, that the authority of any man can loose the
Oath of God; In that case we should say, We have opened our mouth to the Lord,
and cannot go back.


I. And do you think that by your Oath you can warrantably bind your self up
from obeying the Law of God in the fifth Commandment, and in many other express
Scriptures, that bids you honor and obey your Superiors. I told you that
the Law of God enjoining obedience to Superiors lays the first and greatest
obligation upon you. And further, consider what a door you would open to
frustrate Superiors of all that obedience, which Inferiors owe to them: for
when these in Authority shall require obedience of their Subjects in such a
particular, they may answer, hold us excused, we cannot obey you, for we have
sworn not to do this thing. And if we may thus warrantably shift in one thing,
why not in another thing? And so may by our Oaths pre-limite and bind up our
selves from obeying any thing, which those in Authority can require of us. And
thus you may see, whether that opinion of yours tends, even to cast off the
Yoke of all Obedience and Subjection, which the Lord so expressly in his Word
has laid upon the necks of Subjects. Read the 30. Chapter of Numbers. and
there you will see, that if the Wife, or the Daughter in the Fathers
Houseshould bind themselves by a Vow, the Husband or Parent had power to anul
and make it void: and by proportion and analogy, the King who is Pater
Patriae, has the same power over us.


D. Yet in that 30. of Numbers, If the Father or Husband did once confirm the
Vow of the Wife or Daughter, though but by a tacit consent, then there was no
more voiding of it: Now our Superiors have confirmed the Oath, and therefore I
think it can never be made void again.


I. Read the 15. verse. of that 30. of Numbers, where you find that even after
the Husband has heard, and by his silence confirmed the Wifes vow (of which
was spoken, verse. 12.) he has notwithstanding of his tacit confirmation,
still a power of anulling and making void her Vow; and if he do so, she is
bound to yield to her Husbands commands, and is exonered of her Vow. Indeed if
the Husband (the like may be said of the Parent) do thus without good ground,
irritate and make void the Wifes Vow, he is culpable, he shall bear her sin,
but she is free, because bound to obey her Husband, as being under a prior
obligation of obedience unto him by the Law of God. You may consult
Interpreters on that 15. verse. of Numbers 30. and shall find them expounding it
of the Husbands voiding his Wifes Vows, even after he had confirmed them, and
if he do so, he shall bear her sin: that is, say some, If there be a guilt here
it shall lie one the Husband who made the Vow void, not on the Wife, who by a
prior obligation was bound to obey her husband, and which her posterior Vow
could never free her of. Others expone these words, he shall bear her sin,
thus, he shall take away her sin: Now the Husband may take away the Wifes sin,
she doing but her duty in obeying him; and yet he may be guiltless too, if he
revocked his former confirmation upon just and rational grounds. And as to the
Wifes part, some Interpreters say, Mariti authoritas uxorem absolvit voto and
culpa, That is, the authority of the Husband absolves the Wife of her vow and
sin too. Now the application of this to our own case is easy.


D. Your second case wherein you say the obligation of an Oath about a matter
in its nature indifferent may cease to bind, is when there comes such a change
of affairs, that the Oath can no longer oblige without sin: how apply you this
to the Oath against Bishops?


I. Upon supposition that Episcopacy is indifferent, and that it is abjured in
the Covenant: Since that Oath there is this great change of affairs, Episcopacy
is by Law Re-established, and we commanded to submit to it: so that now we can
no longer think our selves bound by our Oath, without palpable disobedience to
Authority.


D. But my Oath against Bishops had the first obligation on me, from which I
can not be loosed by any Law of Authority that is made after.


I. Your Oath has not the first obligation on you, but the Law of God that
commands you to be obedient to your Superiors, viz. the fifth Commandment, 1
Pet. 2.13. and such like Scriptures. You came under an Oath at Baptism that you
should obey the will of God, now this is a part of his will, that you obey the
lawful Commands of Authority: and this Oath or Vow you were under before the
Covenant Oath. If you think your Oath can secure you from obedience to the
Magistrate, commanding to do contrary to what you have sworn: you are in a very
dangerous error, and by this means would easily elude the express Command of
God, Ecclesi. 8.2. The Author of the grand Case, Page 56, 57. tells, that in
King James his time, sundry Jesuits went from England to Rome, and there took
an Oath, according to a constitution of the Pope, that they should return unto
England, and there Preach the Catholic Faith. Wherefore there was a Law made
in England, prohibiting such practices: Hereupon arose the case, whether those
who had taken that Oath at Rome were obliged to obey the Law, though made after
their taking of the Oath: and it it was resolved (abstracting from the
unlawfulness of that Oath in it self) that an Oath can not bind against a Law,
though the Law be made after the Oath is taken.


D. Your third case wherein an Oath cease to obliege, is, when it becomes an
hinderance to a greater good. This seems to allow people too great a liberty,
for how easily may they pretend that some greater good is hindered by adhering
to their Oath.


I. When that greater good is a certain good, and no otherwise attainable, but
by the discharge of our Oath, and especially if it be a good, we are
preoblieged to before ever we took the Oath; then as Casuists commonly teach,
the Oath cease to bind. Now by our Oath against Bishops, these goods are
hindered, as matters now stand, obedience to Authority, avoiding of Schism,
Ministers serving God in the work of the Ministry, to which they were called,
etc, by our still adhering to the Oath all these good things are hindered, and
are in themselves greater and better goods than our adhering to the Oath, which
we now suppose is about a thing indifferent: and as to that of Ministers,
choicing rather to lay aside their Ministry than their Oath, it deserves our
serious thoughts, whether a Minister can warrantably by any deed of his,
especially about an indifferent thing incapacitat himself, or do that which by
consequence may incapa^^tat him for the Ministry. Now many Ministers think,
that by their Oath they are warrantably obliged not to continue in their
respective stations, as matters stands. It is incontroverted among Divines, as
I hinted before, that lesser duties must give place to the greater, when they
come in competition together, and the lesser is omitted, or even, may be, the
contrary to it committed, without sin: as David's eating the Shewbread, when he
could have no other meat to keep him from starving. Paul and his company, their
casting the good Creatur's of God unto the Sea, to save their lives, Act.
27.38. Christ will have mercy even to our Beast (much more then to the souls of
people) to be preferred to ceasing from all our works on the Sabbath. He will
have mercy and not sacrifice: No doubt where he can have both, he will: but
where not, he will have mercy although he lose sacrifice, yea, rather than lose
mercy he will have no sacrifice, he prohibits sacrifice; Therefore go and
learn, says Christ: what that means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, as
if little understood and less practiced, even by the Pharisees, the great
teachers of those times, and much admired and followed by the people, yet
Christ sends them to School again to learn better, and lets them see they were
but blind guides, notwithstanding the great opinion the people had of them. So
the Rechabits judged themselves discharged of the strict observance of their
Vow in case of hazard, and self-preservation, Jer. 35. verse. 9, 10, 11.


D. Yet for all you have said, you know Joshua and the Princes when they had
sworn to the Gibeonits. Josh. 9 They looked on their Oath as so binding that
they would not adventure to break it, even after it is discovered to them that
these Gibeonits were of the Canaanits with whom God had commanded them to make
no peace, but root out: and Joshua and the Princes might have said the command
of God loses us from our Oath, and the keeping of it will be a hinderance to
a greater good: yet the tie of the Oath was so sacred to them, that they chosed
rather to dispense with the command of God in that particular than with their
Oath: and that their so doing was acceptable to God, appears from his
displeasure against Saul, who many years after killed sundry of these
Gibeonits, to whose predecessors Joshua and the Princes had sworn.


I. I confess, I wonder much you should make use of this argument in the manner
you do to prove the obligation of your Oath against Bishops: for that place is
quite mistaken by you. Therefore first. If you think Joshua was forbidden to
make peace at all with any of the Canaanits upon any terms, but was to root
them all out; and yet because of his Oath he spared the Gibeonits, though it
was contrary to an express command of God; you run your self into a most wild
and gross opinion that can not be admitted, viz. That an Oath can bind against
a Command of God, whether it be a Moral, or particular Command, it is all one.
And so as before you asserted an Oath to bind against the command of men in
Authority; Now you go a greater length in saying an Oath binds against the
more immediate Command of God. What man of sound judgment will admit the
first, much less the second. 2. You are in a mistake if you think Joshua had no
warrant to make peace with any of the Canaanits, but was commanded without so
much as once treating with them, to root them all out. For Deuteronomy. 20. v. 10. He
is commanded to proclaim peace to any City indefinitely he came to fight
against, the Canaanits not excepted, only with this difference; 1. No Peace was
to be concluded with any of the Canaanits, unless they became servants, and
yielded up their Lands, which the Lord had bestowed upon Israel, and embraced
the true Religion, abandoning their heathenish Idolatries: And hence so
frequently Leagues are discharged to be made with them, they reserving their
heathenish Worship, lest they should draw away the Children of Israel from the
true God. 2. If any City of the Canaanits did refuse peace, (for there is
difference betwixt a mere Peace and a League, as some have observed; and that
Joshua at the first, made a League with the Gibeonits, but as soon as he knew
them to be Canaanits he breaks the League as being contrary to the Command of
God, and merely allows them a peace, Josh. 9. verse. 20, 21, 22, 23.) They
were to be worse dealt with than any other City that was not of the Canaanits;
for Deuteronomy. 20. verse. 16, 17. in case of their refusal, nothing was to be saved
alive, while other Cities were but to lose the lives of the Males only, verse.
12, 13, 14, 15. Read Interpreters on the place: that the Israelits were to
spare the lives of the Canaanits on these terms, appears from their sparing
Rachel and her friends, Josh. 6.17. Which otherwise had not been lawful for
them to do. And from Josh. 11. verse. 19, 20. Which place clearly shows, that if
other Cities of the Canaanits had submitted; as Gibeon did, Joshua might have
spared them. And from Solomon's kindness to those Canaanits in his time, 1 King.
9.20, 21. Ezra 2.55, 58. Therefore 3. I say, Joshua and the Princes by that
Oath did swear nothing contrary to the Command of God, but their Oath was
consonant to Gods Command, that upon such and such terms they might have peace,
so that Joshua and the Princes were bound to spare them, although they had not
sworn. And, 4. The Lord was angry with Saul for slaying the Gibeonits, because
it was contrary both to the Command of God, in giving them peace upon their
submission, and also to Joshua's Oath made to their Fathers: and not merely
because it was contrary to the Oath, as you much mistake, when you think it did
bind contrary to the Command of God. You may consult the Critics, and other
Interpreters, collected by Mr Pool, as also others, on Joshua 9.18. The English
Annotations on verse. 15. etc. And you shall find that some indeed are of the
opinion, that Joshua and the Princes were discharged to make any peace at all
with any of the Canaanits (though herein they are opposed both by the most
judicious and numerous) yet those who think that Joshua was commanded to make
no peace with them, whom herein you follow, say not, that Joshua after he
discovered the Gibeonits to be of the Canaanits, was bound to stand to his Oath
(as ye say) It being contrary to an express Command of God: but they say Joshua
and the Princes Oath did not bind. And why Joshua and the Princes did not break
that Oath, which they conceive was not Obligatory, yo^ will find, their
conjectures on that plac^ You use also to bring Zedekiahs breach of Oath that
he made to the King of Babylon, with which breach the Lord wa^ so much
displeased, as a great argument for you. To which briefly, I say, tha^ Zedekiah
held the Crown of Nebuchadnezar, and that the Lord by the Prophet had expressly
commanded him and the Jews to submit to the King of Babylon, Jer. 27. verse. 6,
7, 8, 9, 12. And Jer. 38. verse. 17, 20, 21. So that whatever may be said for,
or against the obligation of Zedekiah's Oath in it self, considered with the
circumstances of it: yet the Command of God being superadded, enjoining
Zedekiah peaceably to submit under him, and no rebel. It Is clear, Zedekiah was
obliged to have done so according to Gods Command, whatever he could pretend
to the contrary. So that his breaking the Oath, had in it clear disobedience
against Gods Command.


D. David Psalm. 15. verse. 4. Gives it as a mark of a blessed man, he swears
to his own hurt and changes not.


I. Indeed a man may stand unalterably obliged by an Oath he has taken to his
^wn hurt in many things: yet you must ^now, not in all things: I suppose a man
should swear to take away his own life: here an Oath to his own hurt, which I
doubt you will say oblieges to any thing but repentance. But besides, when a
man swears to the hurt of others, of those in Authority, of those of his
Family, of the souls of people. You will not say such an Oath oblieges.


D. But say what you will, we are a people very tender of Oaths.


I. Every Christian ought to be so, ought to consider well before he come under
an Oath, and be well advised before he think himself discharged of that Bond,
after he is come under it. But to think a man can not at all be discharged of
an Oath about a matter in it self not necessary; is to be more tender then we
ought or lawfully can be. You say you are a people very tender of Oaths, how
then did the Assembly at Glasgow, Anno 1638. by their Act loose all the
Ministers of the Kingdom, that had entered by the Bishops, from their Oath they
had given to the Bishops at their entry to the Ministry? But to come nearer,
how was that before Bishops were last restore your selves owned Commissaries,
thoug^ they be expressly named in the Covenan^ as a part of, or Officers
depending on the abjured Hierarchy, according to your ow^ sense: And if the
Bishops of this Church b^ there abjured, so are the Commissaries.


D. Commissaries then had no dependence on Bishops, and therefore might be
owne^ as not contrary to the Covenant.


I. Upon that ground you might have owned a Dean too, and said that then having
no actual dependence on the Bishop the owning of him was not contrary to
Covenant: yea or owned a Bishop too, and said, he had no dependence then on an
Archbishop, for I can not see why any of those other Members of the Hierarchy
under the highest, might not have been owned and retained as well as the
Comissary. 2. Do you not by this answer of yours come near to what I before
told you from the English Divines, viz. that all kind of Prelacy is not abjured
in the second Article of the League, but only that species or complex frame
that consists of all the members there mentioned. But, 3. What can you say for
your ownin^ ^f Commissaries now, when again actual^^ they do depend upon
Bishops: I ^now none of you who at this day scruples or declines the
Commissaries Authority and Courts, though actually they do depend upon Bishops.
Yet give me leave, I think according to your principles, ye ought to disown and
decline them: otherwise I shall be glade to learn of you how you free your
selves of Perjury. And if ye can acknowledge a Commissary notwithstanding the
Covenant, pray, give me your reason, why not a Bishop too? But I have yet
another breach of Oath to charge you with, which ye give me but too just ground
for, and that is, Schism, which is both a grievous sin in it self, and also
expressly abjured in that same second Article of the League: And yet ye have
been, and still are carrying on a fearful and stated Schism, whereby this poor
Church is robbed of that Peace and Unity which our Lord Christ bequeathed to
her in Legacy: and this ye do with the greatest activity imaginable, as if you
were about some unquestionable duty. But because I can stay no longer with you
at present, I shall be content to speak more of this at our next meeting. So
praying the Lord to give you understanding in all things, I bid you farewell.


THE THIRD DIALOGUE Anent Separation.
Doub. AT our last meeting our conference was anent the Obligation of the
Covenants, with breach whereof we use to charge you: And at parting, you by way
of Re-crimination charged us with Schism, which indeed is both a sin in itself,
and also expressly abjured in the second Article of the League. But I hope we be
not guilty of it.


I. Schism is a very grievous evil indeed, even a renting of the Body of
Christ, which is his Church. An evil, which the Apostle sets himself much
against, Romans 16. verse. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 1. verse. 12, 13. etc. and Chap. 3. Ephesians.
4. verse. 3, 4, 5. etc. Phil. 2. verse. 1, 2, 3. and in other places. An ill that
Satan began to make use of as one of his main engines against the Church, even
in the Apostles times, and in sundry ages since. An ill, which sundry of the
Fathers of the Church have in their Generations withstood, and given testimony
against Cyprian is full to this purpose in his Book de unitate Ecclesiae, where
among other things, he says, An secum esse Christum, cum collecti fuerunt,
opinantur: qui extra Christi Ecclesiam colliguntur? Tales etiamsi occisi
fuerint in confessione n^minis, Macula ista nec sanguine abluitu^^, in
expiabili^ and gravis culpa discer a^^^^ nec passione purgatur: Esse Martyr non
potest, qui (...) Ecclesia non est: Ad regnum porvenire n^^ poterit, qui eam,
quae regnatura est, derelinquit. Pacem nobis Christus dedit, Concordes atque
unanimes esse praecepit, dilectiones and charitatis foedera inviolatae servare
mundavit. exhibere se non potest Martyrem, qui fraternam non tenuit charitatem.
Ita Paulus, 1 Cor. 13. Etsi habuero fidem, charitatem antem non habeam, nihil
sum, That is, Do those, who gather themselves together without the Church,
think Christ is with them so gathered? such though they were even slain in
confessing his Name, yet that blot (Schism) is not washen away with their
blood, the inexpiable sin of discord is not purged by their suffering. He
cannot be a Martyr, who is not in the Church: He cannot come to the Kingdom,
who forsakes her (the Church) that is to reign Christ left and commanded us
peace, and that we keep inviolable the bonds of Charity, etc. And much more to
this purpose that Father has in the foresaid Book. Jerome says, Nullum
Schisma est, nisi sibi aliquam Haeresin confingat, ut recte ab Ecclesia
recessisse videatur. Where he shows that Schism and Heresy, at least something
like it uses to go together. And Epist. ad Pamm^chium, Quis scindit Ecclesiam,
nos quorum omnis domus Bethlehem in Ecclesia communicate, an tu, qui aut been
credis and superbe de fide taces, aut male and vere scindis Ecclesiam? That is,
Who rents the Church, we who communicate in the Church, or you who believing
well, proudly holds thy peace: or believing ill, truly rents the Church. Where
he seems to say, That even he who holds his peace, and declares not against
Schism, is guilty of Schism too. Aug^stin Tractat. 27. in Joannem, Anima tu^
non vivificat, nisi membra quae sunt in ca^^ ne tua, etc. Haec dicuntur ut
amemus unitatem and timeamus separationem: Nihil enim debet sic formidare
Christianus, qua^^ separari a corpore Christi: Sic enim non est membrum ejus
nec vegetatur Spiritu ejus. Where he shows, That Separatists are like members
cut off from the body, and so can receive no life from the soul, that quickens
the body. The Church is like the Lilly among Thorns, Cant. 2.2. And Schism is
one of those Thorns, and the harder to be pulled out, because Schismatics have
always looked on themselves as the only men, and Christians of the first
Magnitude, and so do ye, and I am heartily sorry ye give me such ground to
charge you with this sin.


D. Every Separation is not a sinful Schism.


I. True, every Separation is not a Schism, as the word, Schism, is ordinarily
taken to signify a causeless separating. For Protestants justify their
separating from the Church of Rome, since they could not hold Communion with
her without sin: That Church being idolatrous in her Worship, and in Doctrine,
erroneous even to the perverting of Fundamentals by consequence at least, as
Protestant Divines show. But I think you guilty of a sinful Separation, which
is Schism: and that als groundless and unreasonable as any you shall read of in
any age of the Church.


D. Wherein are we guilty of Schism?


I. First, in your dividing from us in that Christian Charity which ye owe unto
us, which I may call Heart-schism, and is the ground of your external Schisms,
in dividing from us in Acts of Religious Worship. Ye are a people (at least
many of you) who make difference in judgment about matters only of a secondary
nature, such as the outward Policy or Government of the Church, a ground for
difference in affection, and uncharitableness; as if such who are not of your
way and persuasion in these matters could not be real Christians with your
selves: And thus you put disputable points of lesser concernment into your
Creed: And many of you can with great freedom un-saint all who are not of your
opinion in these things: And so ye Un-church and condemn all Christians that
have been in all ages almost, and places of the World since Christ's time, who
ye will find have owned Bishops, yea, and Liturgies, Festival-days, and other
Ceremonies, etc. And with whom therefore ye would have taken more ground to
quarrel than with us; and if ye be come the length to think the removing of
these things necessary to make a true Church (as may be some of you are) then
according to you there has not been a true Church in the World for much above
a thousand years together, if according to your own calculation we begin but to
reckon from the second or third Century downward.


D. You cannot deny that many things crept into the Church. that were not from
the beginning, or of Christ's and his Apostles institution, and such are these
things you have named.


I. That all these things named have crept into the Church, as you say, since
the Apostles times, will not be granted. You know Bishops are said to have been
even from the Apostles times. And Eusebius, Hist. lib. 5. cap. 22. says, that
in the dabate about the time of keeping of Easter betwixt Polycrates Bishop of
Ephesus, and Victor Bishop of Rome, Polycrates alleges the Apostle John's
authority and practice for himself in that matter. But suppone it were granted
to you that these things are of later date than the Apostles, will you thence
inter, that those who used them could be no good Christians, or that you can
not allow them your Charity. Know you not that there may be many things used
about the ordering of Gods House, and his Worship, which in themselves are
indifferent, neither commanded nor forbidden, and therefore the Church as she
sees fit, may use her Christian liberty about such things. I pray you,
consider Romans Chap. 14. There was a great debate among those first Christians
anent the use of the Ceremonial Law, and albeit such as thought they were now
no more bound by that Law, having purchased their liberty by Christ, and
therefore neither regarded one day, nor one kind of meat above another, were in
the right; yet Paul commands them to bear with the infirmities of the weak and
not despise them, but still account them brethren, and retain Charity,
notwithstanding of their error. The weak again were much like your selves, very
ready to judge the strong, and to be uncharitable to them: This the Apostle
forbids, Who art thou who judge another man's Servant, verse. 4? Socrates in
his Church History, lib. 5. cap. 22. Tells what diversity of customs was among
Christians in those first times, and yet no uncharitable judging of one
another, as ye use. How justly and severely was Victor Bishop of Rome blamed by
Irenaeus for his rash uncharitable zeal, much like your own, in excommunicating
all the Eastern Churches, because they did not keep Easter on that day that he
did. Though Irenaeus was of Victors judgment about the thing in debate, yet he
much discommended his uncharitable behavior toward Polycrates and the Asian
Churches. Eusebius. lib. 5. Cap. 23. Now as ye are guilty of heart Schism, which
is uncharitableness, so expressly forbidden in many Scriptures, especially in 1
Cor. 13. Chap. throughout. So ye are guilty of External Schism; in separating
from our Church Communion in the Word, and Sacraments, and all other duties of
Religious Worship, contrary to the Apostles Direction, Heb. 10.25. Forsa^^ not
the assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some is. It seems
there were some Separatists even at that time, who being misled by a
misinformed Judgment, or by pride and singularity, (as Calvin notes on the
place) did forsake the ordinary and orderly Assemblies of Christians. It is a
received Maxim among Divines, Opinionem varietas and Opiniantium unitas, non
sunt (...). That is, Variety of Opinions about matters of a secondary Nature
and Unity among those who vary in such Opinions, may well consist together.


D. All of us do not altogether forsake your Assemblies, some do but now and
then leave their own Paroch Churches.


I. Indeed ye are not all guilty of Separation in the same degree, yet the
least degree is unwarrantable and ought to be avoided. It may be observed how
people turn not Separatists of the highest degree at first; but proceed from
step to step: First they begin to withdraw sometimes from their own
Congregation, then they come to withdraw more ordinarily, and at length
altogether: Some when they withdraw from their own Paroch, will not go hear,
ordinarily at least, such as are discharged by Law, but some other Minister who
either preaches under the Government, or is Indulged by the King and his
Council: and within a little, will hear none of them. Some will hear, but not
partake of the Sacraments in their own Congregation, and so acknowledges their
Minister in one part of his Office, but not in another: Upon what grounds they
do so, I confess I am not able to understand; for I hope they disclaim the
Popish error, that the Efficacy of the Sacraments depend upon the intention of
the Minister. Now I say, an advised Christian will do well to take heed, and
beware of any the least degree of Separation, both because unwarrantable in it
self, and because it makes way for a further degree, and that second for a
third, and so uns^^t people may take a running that they shall not know where
to make (...) stand. Have we not seen some turn at ^ength Bronnists, and some
Quakers: yea, Mr. Baxter in his Cure of Church Divisions, Page 268. tells of
some in England who turning Separatists, at length died Apostat Infidels,
deriding Christianity, and the imortality of the Soul.


D. There are among your selves who will not be constant and ordinary hearers
in their own Congregations, What say you of them?


I. I say, such are very reprovable, for doing that which has in it the seeds
of greater Schism. And those Ministers though conform, to whom people of
another charge, use to resort, are bound to declare against it, unless great
distance of place from their own Paroch Church, or other insuperable lets
hinder their ordinar frequenting of their own Congregation, and their absence
be not grounded upon any disrespect unto, or disesteem of their own Minister:
Otherwise, I say, that Minister to whom they come is bound to declare against
such practices: And if he do not, it is presumed, desire of applause, and
self-love makes him hold his peace, and prevails more with him, than love to
the peace and unity of the Church.


D. It Is very hard to hinder me from going where I can be most edified, we are
bidden covet the best Gifts, 1 Cor. 12. verse. last. And a man may go where he
can have the best dinner.


I. I hear that uses to be your language: as for that place, 1 Cor. 12. last,
The Apostle is not directing private Christians what Gifts in others to seek
after for their edification: but shows that though there are diversities of
Gifts, and every one should be content with his own Gif given him for the
edification of others, yet so that he seek after better, not in others but in
himself. 2. The Apostle in that Chapter is clearly pressing the Corinthians to
Unity, from the consideration that Christians are all one body; and therefore
the meanest Gifts must no more be despised than the meanest members of our
body; and Schism must be avoided, verse. 25. 3. Suppone coveting the best Gifts
were spoken to Christians, in your sense, yet it must be understood with due
Limitations, such as that we covet them in an orderly way, and with respect to
the Churches peace, and such like. And so many general directions in the Word,
are to be understood with necessary cautions, as your self can not deney.
Edification indeed is much to be set by, yet let none imagine that it is
warrantable for them to seek it in a way that marrs the Churches peace, breeds
in people a neglect and despising of their own Ministers, who are set over them
in the Lord, and whom they are commanded to honor and reverence; that takes
away the distinction of Parochs, and of one man's labors from another; as we
would shun confusion; And that is contrary to laudable Canons, and Acts of the
Church. You know we must not do evil that good may come of it, Romans 3.8.


D. What, Canons or Acts of the Church are against my leaving my own Paroch
Minister, and going to another, by whom I think I get more good?


I. I might produce sundry ancient Canons commanding Ministers not to excise
their Pastoral Office within another's charge without leave, and that they
receive not any man of another Paroch to Divine Service who neglects his own
Pastor. The First Council of Nice, Can. 16. The second Council of Carthage,
Can. 11. and Council 3. Can. 20. Concilium Nannetense, cap. 1. In which Council
Presbyters or Ministers are commanded that at their entry to Divine Service
they ask the people if there be any present of another Congregation, who
despising his own Minister desires to join with them, and if any such be found,
that forthwith he be thrust out of the Church. And again in that same Council,
that no minister reset one that belongs to another charge, unless he be on a
journey, or upon some other such relevant ground that keeps him from attending
in his own congregation for the time. But passing these, there is an act of the
General Assembly, of this same Church of Scotland, Anno, 1647. To be found
among the printed Acts of it, Entitled, Act against such as withdraw
themselves from the public Worship in their own Congregation; And it is
express in discharging all Members of this Kirk from withdrawing from their own
Congregation usuallys, except in urgent cases made known unto, and approven by
the Presbytrie: And if any contraveen, it is recommended first to the Minister,
to whom such persons resort, to deal with them to stay at home in their own
Paroch; And then to the Minister and Session of the Paroch they belong to; and
if need be to cite them to the Presbytrie, etc. Now, I suppose you will not
decline the Authority of that Assembly, nor think the General Assembly of this
Church were such enemies to edification, as to have deprived Christians of this
way of attaining it, if they might have allowed it to them without manifest
hazard of Schism. You may think they were competent enough to judge in such a
case; yea, that Act was purposely conceived to curb the beginnings of
Separation, and Schism, which at that time began to appear in this Church.


D. If Ministers had all alike abilities, and gifts, for edification, I could
say the less against that Act: but it is not so, for some Ministers excel
others very far in an edifying gift.


I. Yet you see what the Assemblies mind was in this matter. Now to what you
say of an edifying Gift, I wish many of you mistake it not, if a man have a
stentorian voice, or a ton, can speak loud and boldly, and can rail upon the
Civil Powers, and cry down Bishops, and Curats: O, that is an edifying man! It
fears me, many of you who are pretenders high enough to knowledge, and piety,
can little judge of men's Gifts when all is done: and I make no doubt, often times
leaves better at home then what ye go to. But passing this, I offer to your
serious consideration these few things anent the diverse measures of
Ministerial Gifts, and Edification by them. 1. The Lord has not given to all
Ministers alike measure of Gifts, but the Spirit distributes in what measure he
pleases, 1 Cor. 12. and therefore to undervalue men of low Gifts, is to
quarrel with the Almighty. 2. Though all have not received alike measure, we
must not therefore think the meanest Gifts are useless, 1 Cor. 12. verse. 21.25.
3. The best Gifts can not of themselves work on hearts and consciences, it is
only the Spirit can do this by what means pleaseteh him, weak or strong, 1 Cor.
3. verse. 6, 7. And therefore peoples too much magnifying of Cifts is but an
idolizing of men, and giving Gods due to the Creature, this seems to have been
the fault of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. chap. 1. and chap. 3. The learned
Hieronimus Zauchius in the Epistle Dedicatory to the seventh Tom. of his Works,
tells, that when first he left Italy, he came to Geneve, and there observing a
French man who used always to hear Calvin, and none else, he asked him his
reason why he did not hear Viretus as occasion served, he answered, that if
Paul were to come and preach at Geneve, Ego relicto Paulo, audirem Calvinum, i.
e. he would leave Paul and go hear Calvin; which answer amazed Zauchius, and
says that he heard him, cum summa animi offensione, i. e. Zauchius was much
troubled and offended at his answer, and observes from it, how dangerous it is
for people to admire any Minister too much, and make gods of them, as he says,
and to despise others. 4. The Lord uses oft-times to do more good by men of
weak Gifts, than by greater. Christ was very far beyond Peter in Gifts, for he
received not the Spirit in measure, and his enemies did bear him witness, that
never man spoke like him. And in another place, They wondered at the gracious
words that proceeded out of his mouth; And yet Act. 2. Peter a poor sinful man,
and very weakly gifted in comparison of Christ, at one Sermon converteth three
thousand. We read no where of the like success of Christ's Ministry, but we hear
him often complaining of small success, as was before prophesied, Isai 49. verse.
4. and Chap, 53. verse. 1, 2, 3. etc. And in the Gospel frequently upbraiding
these to whom he had preached, because of their unbelief, Math. 11. verse. 20,
21, 22, 23. etc. Chap. 13. verse. 14, 15. etc. Chap. 23. verse. 37. John. 5.
verse. 40. and in other places. And in that famous Sermon he had on the Mount,
Mat. 5.6, 7. It Is said Chap. verse. 28. that when he had ended his Sermon, the
people were astonished, but not a word that many were converted, but ground for
the contrary, from Chap 8. verse. 10, 11, 12. where commending the Centurion's
faith, he says to the multitude that followed him down from the Mount, That
many should come from the East and West and sit down with Abraham, etc. And the
unbelieving Jews, who were the children of the Kingdom, should be cast out.
Therefore, I say, if people would in one orderly way, attend the Ordinances in
their own congregations, and would lay aside prejudices, and pray that the
Gifts of their own Ministers may be blessed to them; they might expect it
should not be in vain, 2 Cor. 4.7. We have this treasure in earthen vessels
that the excellency, etc. And surely the more weak and insufficient the
Instrument is, the more is his Omnipotency conspicuous, and his Arm revealed in
doing good by weak means. Ponder these things well, which you will find do
little favor your Separation upon pretense of being edifyed.


D. Though some withdraw, all will not.


I. The fewer the better: yet if you withdraw, why may not others, and if some,
why not all? for it is natural to people to be led by ill example. And if all
withdraw, we shall have Pastors without Flocks: and is it not by your means
almost come to this already in sundry places; but, as I have shown, none ought
to withdraw.


D. None ought to withdraw! that i^ strange. What obligation lies on me to be
an ordinary hearer in my own Congregation?


I. I spoke somewhat before of the obligation we are under to maintain the
Churches Peace, and of the Acts of the Church in ancient times, and in our own
times to this purpose. And now further, do you not know that there is a
reciprocal obligation betwixt a Minister and his People, which can not be so
easily broken as you imagine. As the Minister is obliged to labor among the
people of his charge, diligently and faithfully, and that upon his peril, Ezekiel.
33. verse. 8. Heb. 13. verse. 17. So the people of his charge are bound to attend
on his Ministry among them. To esteem him highly, and love him for his Works
sake, Mal. 2. verse. 7. 1 These. 5. verse. 11, 12. To obey him, Heb. 13. verse. 17.
Now how obey ye these injunctions when ye turn your backs upon your Ministers,
will not receive the Law from their mouth, but do undervalue, despise,
discountenance, discourage, and weaken their hands by this your contempt, and
by your reproaches too, which often ye are pleased to cast upon them? Do ye not
fear what Christ has said, He that despises you despises me? Hear I pray you
what Mr. Durham (whose testimony I think ye ought to regard) says, he speaking
of a Ministers relation to a particular Congregation, on Revel. Page 105, 106.
After he has showed that there is warrant from those Epistles directed to the
Angels of the seven Churches, for a more special relation betwixt a Minister
and such a Flock, rather than another Flock, and betwixt a Flock and such a
Minister, rather than another Minister: for the Angel of Ephesus was not the
Angel of Smyrna, nor yet the Church of Ephesus equally bound to the Angel of
Smyrna, as to the Angel of Ephesus, he says, Upon this delegation by the
master, such a people became peculiarly the people of such a Minister, and by
the Masters appointment are to submit to the Ordinances administered by him;
because that same Lord and Master of the Minister who warrands him peculiarly
to treat with such a people, being also Master of that Flock; calls them
peculiarly to submit to that Minister from which, according to his appointment
there arises a mutual obligation betwixt such a Minister and such a people; he
is bound to Minister to them in the Gospel, and they are bound to submit to
him, strengthen him, acknowledge him, communicate to him in all good things,
etc. And further, he there shows, that this Obligation is not founded upon mere
voluntar consent, but on these Scripture commands, 1 These. 5. verse. 12. Heb.
13. verse. 17. Galat. 6. verse. 6. and the like; although there be no explicit
covenanting betwixt a Minister and a People in reference to these ends. And,
page 106. he says, From this mutual obligation there arises a nearer sympathy
betwixt that Minister and People, than betwixt him and any other People, and
betwixt them and that Minister, than betwixt them and any other Minister: They
have common interests, common hazards, common joy and grief: and a cross to one
should be to both. And a little after he adds, that there are peculiar duties
called for on both sides to each other, which are not so required betwixt them
and others; and that there will be a peculiar reckoning that will follow
hereupon; As the Minister must reckon for his People, ^o the People for their
reverencing, and incou^aging of him in a special manner: And that ^n this
account Paul did aggredge particu^arly the Gentiles, their slighting and
griev^ng of him, in his Epistles to the Corinthi^ns, and Galatians; Because of
his parti^ular delegation in reference to them. Thus Mr. Durham, who, you see,
speaks ^ome to this point, and upon Scripture ^rounds binds you faster to the
Ministers of your own Congregations, than you ^re aware.


D. But there are other reasons that keep ^ack many of us, why we cannot have
free^om to hear and own the Ministers of the ^ime, were they never so able to
edify.


I. What are these Reasons?


D. First, They have not entered by a all from the People, as all Ministers
should ^o, Act. 14. verse. 23. But by a Pre^ntation from some Patron.


I. Sundry of those whom ye refuse to ^ear, entered by the peoples call, and
^ch ye ought to hear, notwithstanding ^is reason of yours. As to that place,
^ct. 14.23. I know many have pleaded ^e peoples right to Elect their own
Minister from the Greek word (...) there used, which is borrowed from the
Custom used in some of the ancient Greek States, where the people signified
their Election of their Magistrates, by the stretching forth of their hands,
for so the word signifies. But that place, Act. 14. and the word as it is
there used, will not necessarily import the peoples choicing of their own
Ministers: For, 1. Some learned Interpreters, and Critics on that place, among
whom especially, see Hammond, shows that this word is often used by Writers, to
express the action of one single person, and thus it is used by the same Lut,
Act. 10.41. Speaking of Gods choicing or appointing: So that the word is not
necessarily to be understood of the action, or deed of many, choicing by
suffrage^ or voices. 2. It Is observed that the Gree^ Writers ordinarily used
this word to signify the ordaining of a person to a certain charge, which is
done without suffrages, or choicing by votes. And tha^ so it must be taken
here, appears from this because it is Paul and Barnabas, wh^ are said to do
this work expressed her by the Greek word, and not the people. Now you will not
say, that Paul and Barnabas did elect Ministers to these Churches, that were to
yield the question: Therefore in our Translation it is said, when they, that
is, Paul and Barnabas had ordained them Elders in every Church, they prayed and
commended them to the Lord. Now all these were the actions of Paul and
Barnabas, not of the people. And, 3. If you mean by this Word, the peoples
electing Ministers by suffrages, you lose by it, and gives great advantage to
Independents, who are for popular elections of Ministers: Whereas ye give this
power, not to all the people, but to the Session: And therefore observing
Presbyterians have forborne to press this place, as you expound it. But, 2. If
you think the Ministers election either by People or Session essential, that
is, so necessary to make one a Minister to such a people, that he cannot be
their Minister without it, you by this do not only nullify the Ministry of
almost the whole Christian World for above a thousand years upward, but also in
particular, the Ministry of this Church of Scotland, ever until the year 1649.
for not till then were Patronages taken away, and the election by Sessions
brought in use. Now what thanks will you get for this, even from many of your
selves? For not only were all the Protestant Ministers before the year 1638.
entered by Presentations, but also all the Presbyterian Ministers after the
year, 1638. till the year 1649. And there are some of them still in Office at
this day in the same Congregations, to which they entered, not by the Sessions
election, but by the Patrons Presentation: yet I think none of you will scruple
to hear or own them upon that account, nor ever did.


D. But I look upon Patronages as a corruption abjured in the Covenant.


I. I pray you let me see in what place. And further, if Presentations and
Patronages be abjured, how came it to pass that this Kirk did continue so long
under Perjury? For from the first taking of the Covenant, till the year 1649,
Patronages were still in use. And it is strange if all that while this breach of
Covenant was not discerned. And I told you presently your selves do without
scruple hear Ministers of your own persuasion, who entered by Presentations
from Patrons.


D. Many of your Ministers are ordained by Bishops, and this is another reason
why we cannot hear them.


I. Yet all the Ministers whom ye refuse to hear were not ordained by Bishops,
even all who were ordained betwixt the year 1638. and 1662. or thereby, and
there are very many of these at this day in this Church, whom ye will not hear,
though they were ordained by a Presbytrie without a Bishop. As for your not
hearing of such as received Ordination from a Bishop, ye would for the same
reason have refused to hear those ministers whom Timothy ordained in Ephesus, 1 Timothy 5.22. or whom Titus ordained in Crete, Tit. 1.5. You may see what Calvin
says on the place. And ye would have refused to hear any Minister in the World
for many hundreds of years together, for all were ordained by Bishops. It was
early said in the Church, Quid facit Episcopus quod non facit Presbyter,
excepta Ordinatione. Ordination, then was accounted the proper act of the
Bishop, and now Bishops ordain not without the concurrence of Ministers, who
also have a hand in that action. And by this reason of yours ye would have
refused to hear those Ministers who were the Members of the Assembly of
Glasgow, 1638. For though they voted down the Bishops, yet all of them
generally had been ordained by Bishops, few or none excepted, and had sworn
obedience to them too. And further, by this reason ye should refuse to hear
some at this day, who though they do not conform now to Episcopacy: yet were
ordained by Bishops before the year 1638. and without scruple ye can hear such
of the validity of Ordination by Bishops, see at length the London
Presbyterians in their Jus Divinum Ministerij Anglicani, from Page 17.
especially from page 25. to page 32. or further if you will to page 49.


D. Though many of the Ministers of the time were ordained by Presbytrie
without a Bishop, yet now they are turned Curats, no less than such as are
ordained by the Bishops, and we can hear none who preach under Bishops, what
ever way they were ordained, they are now all of them the Bishops Curats.


I. By your calling Ministers, Curats, I know not whither ye manifest more
strength of passion or weakness of judgment. For as all ye who use that word,
uses to express your spleen and disdain, not fearing Christ's word, be that
despises you despises me: So there be very few among you who know what the
word, Curate, signifies: And even those who know that it signifies one who
has, Curam animarum, the care of souls (a name no Minister needs be ashamed
of, but should strive to be in some measure answerable to it) yet I suppose,
know not well, many of them, how, or in what sense it has been used, else they
would not so ignorantly misapply it: For those use to be called, Curats, who
serve the Cure, as they speak, though they be not the Ministers who are
presented to the place, but substituted by them to officiat in their room, and
hence are called, Curats, the presented Minister being none resident. Now it is
not so in this Church. But because ye call a Minister the Bishops Curate, ye
seem to run upon another mistake, as if the Bishop were, or did assume to
himself to be the sole and proper Pastor of the whole Diocese, and Ministers
were but his substitutes, deputed under him, as so many helpers. I know no
Bishop who has such thoughts of himself, or of Ministers, what ever ye think
or say to cast an odium upon them. But why can ye not hear them who preach
under the Bishops Government?


D. They are perjured persons, and therefore we cannot hear them?


I. All who preach under the present Government, yea, I suppose the most part
of them, never took the Covenant, and therefore are not to be called perjured.
For I told you at our last conference, the Covenant, as such cannot bind them
who never took it, and so such Ministers may be heard, notwithstanding of this
reason, and even those Ministers who took the Covenant, and now upon this
alteration continue in their Ministry under Bishops, are not perjured (suppose
our Episcopacy be meant in the Covenant) for the reasons I gave you at our last
communing. An Oath made against a thing in it self not unlawful, can not bind
absolutely or in every case; therefore when it is taken, is necessarily to be
understood with certain limitations and restrictions; otherwise it may come to
be a bond of iniquity, as this Oath, may be, is to many through their mistake
hereof. But giving though not granting, that all the Ministers who took the
Covenant, and now preach under Bishops, are perjured, it will be hard for you
to prove, That therefore they are not to be owned as truly Ministers of the
Gospel, nor submitted to. It is true, personal faults and vices make a Minister
justly liable to Church censure; and if they be of a high scandalous nature, to
deposition; especially if he be impenitent in them: But so long as he is not
convict and censured, the question is, whither or not the people may, yea, and
ought to wait on his Ministry? You know Judas was sent forth to preach with the
rest by Jesus Christ himself, and who will say that it was unwarrantable for
any to hear him who came clothed with such a mission and commission from
Christ, as long as he was not convict, even though they had known what a knave
he was, for Christ knew very well what he was. And ye know what great
exceptions might have been brought, both against the Life and Doctrine of the
Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 15.23. and in other places. They were most bitter
active enemies against Christ the Messiah, by all means sought to undo him,
they neglected the weighty duties of the Law, such as Mercy, Judgment, and
Faith, were full of Pride and gross hypocrisy: I will not insist to tell you
how Naphtaly in a great distemper, miscalls the Ministers of the time very ill:
though much were true of what he says, as God forbid, yet they would be no
worse than the Scribes and Pharisees, yea, not so ill; for they did most
maliciously oppose Christ Jesus himself, and that directly: neither have I any
pleasure to make that parallel betwixt the Scribes and Pharisees, and your
Preachers, ye so much glory of, that some have done, in their long prayers,
devouring of widows houses, compassing Sea and Land to make Proselits, etc.
They have given but too much ground for these comparisons. But to our purpose,
as the Scribes and Pharisees were very gross in their lives, so there was much
Leaven in their Doctrine, they brought in a number of humane Traditions into
the Doctrine and Worship of God and taught for Doctrines the commandments of
men, they took away the Key of Knowledge, etc. Christ in his Sermon on the
Mount, Mat. 5. purges the Law from their corrupt glosses: and yet for all this,
Simeon and Anna, two old Saints, did not forsake the Temple, Luke 2. Nor turned
Separatists, though it was turned into a den of thieves. Joseph and Mary went
up yearly to the Temple to keep the Passover, and Christ himself went with them
at twelve years of age. And Mat. 23. He bids hear the Scribes and Pharisees
who sat in Moses Chair, notwithstanding their bad lives, and corrupt Doctrines,
only he gives a Caveat, to bewar of their Leaven, and their ill example: Read
Mr. Durham on Revel. Chap. 3. Commenting on the Epistle to the Angel of Sardis,
who had a name that he lived, but was dead, Page 187. He says, that comparing
that Angel with him of Laodicea, There is ground to say that men who are for
their own case unsound, may yet be Ministers in the Church of Christ, and ought
to be esteemed so, while they continue in that room; seeing Christ does so here.
And again, says, The Ordinance of Christ ought not to suffer derogation in
whatsoever hands it be; And that hence the Lord recommends to his hearers to
give due Ministerial respect to the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23. Even when
he is about to discover their rottenness, and that Judas was by the people to
be accounted an Ambassador of Christ with the rest, because it is not grace
that intituleth one to that charge, but Christ's Call and Commission; And seeing
a call may be separated from grace, as grace from a call, it will follow, that
according to his Soveraignity he may make use of whom he will, he may make use
of men even more sinful than others, that it may be known that edifying of
souls does not necessarily depend on the holiness of the Instrument, Act. 3.12.
Mat. 7.23. Thus Mr. Durham. Now how can you justify your Separation, when you
dare not with any face say the Ministers of the time are as corrupt as were the
Scribes and Pharisees, if there be any other knowledge or moderation in you.
And suppose you think them as bad, yet they are to be heard, as these were,
read the London Ministers, their Jus Divinum Minist. Anglic. page 2.


D. Christ, Math. 23. verse, 1, 2. Bids not hear the Scribes and Pharisees,
the words will not bear that.


I. I hope ye will not say that he forbids to hear them, as ye use to forbid
people to hear among us: a thing your Preachers are much on, as a ready way to
gain followers to themselves. It Is said, some of them are so far transported as
to threaten people with damnation if they hear the Curats (so they call
Ministers) how true this is, I will not positively say, the matter reported
being so gross, renders it hardly credible: What truth may be in it you know
better than I. You say Christ bids not hear the Scribes and Pharisees; yet I
told you, Mr. Durham says, Christ there recommends to the people to give due
Ministerial respect to the Scribes and Pharisees: Now is not hearing of them a
part of due ministerial respect, think you? Certainly without this their
ministerial respect should be very lame. Christ bids the people observe and
do what the Scribes and Pharisees from Moses Chair enjoined them to observe and
do, and how could they obey Christ's injunction in this, unless they heard the
Scribes and Pharisees teach them those things from Moses Chair. He that bids
me obey my Ministers Doctrine delivered to me from the Word of God, his
injunction carries also in it, an injunction to hear the Minister deliver
those Doctrins to me, or presupposes my hearing as the ordinary mean, or
antecedent of my obedience. Be pleased to consult Interpreters on the place,
and you will find them generally expounding that place, both of hearing and
obeying. And truly it is too clear a Scripture for you to elude, but will stand
against you to your great conviction. Brounists and such like Separatists in
Queen Elizabeth's time, and since, found the dint of it from the old
non-conformists, who disputed against their dividing practices, which ye so
much follow.


D. It may be so. Yet many Episcopal Ministers have entered in upon honest men's
labors: and for this reason ought not to be heard, but discountenanced as
Intruders.


I. All the Episcopal Ministers entered not so, very many of them kept still
the places the change of Government found them in: Others entered unto Churches
upon the vacancies by the death of those who had been there before, or upon
their transportation to some other Church. You must confess this reason says
nothing against any of those. Yet you say, many Episcopal Ministers did intrude
themselves upon other men's labors. If hereby you mean a sinful intrusion, as I
know you do, let me ask you, first, were these Ministers whom you charge with
Intrusion active in outing their Predecessors, or did they come in upon their
places till they were out, and their places declared vacant? 2. Would you, or
would these Ministers who were not clear to keep their places on the terms of
the change, but chosed rather to step out, have the people of such
Congregations left without a settled Ministry, because they were not clear to
brook it themselves? Is this all their kindness to their people, or looks it
not rather like a piece of petted self, that will neither do nor let do? And
what you talk of coming in upon other men's labors, is as applicable to one
that comes in upon a Ministers charge, who against his will is transported to
another charge, by those who have power to dispose of him: The Minister so
transported, may be, thinks there is a wrong done both to him, and to the
people he is taken from, and the people think so too; and possibly it is so:
yet he who succeeds him upon an orderly and fair call, you know, cannot be
said to be an intruder, or in your sense, to come in upon another man's labors.
I think an injury, suppose really done to the former Minister, by those who put
him to the door, ought not hinder well advised people from submitting to
another, for there is a necessity of a Ministry, and knowing conscientious
Christians should make the best of what they can not help in their Superiors.
And if they cannot get such a Minister as they would, ought to take such as
they can have. These Ministers who were put from their charges, for asserting
their duty to the King in the year 1648. had far better ground to complain that
others were brought in upon their labors: yet they were silent and submissive,
nor did they stir up the people to discountenance such as succeeded in their
places: and if the people had withdrawn, and refused to hear them that
succeeded, as Intruders, as people are taught now to do, without doubt, the
Judicatours at that time would have noticed them severely. But Lastly, ye who
make so great a clamor of coming in upon other men's labors, what think ye of
your own Preachers who go up and down from Paroch to Paroch through the
Country, and any one of them will intrude himself not upon one Ministers
charge only, but, in so far as he can, upon the charges and labors of all the
Ministers in Scotland. Alace, tell us no more of Ministers among us, who have
entered upon other men's labors, they are but petty intruders, that confine
themselves to one Paroch; but these among you are intruders indeed, and to
purpose, Romans 2.21. When Alexander accused one that he was a Pirate, he
answered, I am but a petty one, but you are the great Pirate that makes prey of
whole Kingdoms and Nations.


D. We are sworn by the Covenant to extirpat all that depend upon the
Hierarchy, of which number the Episcopal Ministers are: and therefore cannot
lawfully hear them, without breach of our Oath.


I. Ministers are not all expressed in that Article: but suppose they were meant,
yet it is said, All Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy, that
is, as I told you at our last conference, on that kind of Hierarchy that
consists and is made up of all these Officers mentioned in the Article, as the
English Presbyterians sense it, which kind of Hierarchy we have not in this
Church. But further, if Ministers depending on Bishops be there meant, then ye
by binding your selves not to hear them, have bound your selves to sin; for I
told you a little before, Ministers may be very faulty, and sinful Creatures,
and yet ought to be heard. But besides, I have shown you before that Episcopacy
is a most warrantable Government, which neither you nor I, nor any man could
ever unwarrantably abjure, nor Ministers depending on it. So this reason of
yours will come to nothing. And Lastly, by your exposition of that Clause of
the second Article, ye were bound not to hear any Ministers who were in Office
at the time of taking the Covenant, but to root out and extirpat them all,
because all these Ministers depended on Bishops as to their Ordination still,
even after they took the Covenant, unless they had renounced their Ordination
which they received from Bishops, and had been ordained of new by mere
Presbyters, which they did not, nor thought themselves bound to do,
notwithstanding of the Covenant, otherwise it would follow, that all the time
before, they were Ministers without a true Ordination, and so what should
become of all their Ministerial Acts they had performed by virtue of that
Ordination they had received from Bishops: and yet to this day ye never
scrupled hearing such of them as took the Covenant, notwithstanding of their
dependence foresaid, which is still a dependence in part, if they but disown
the Bishops Government for the future.


D. Besides the reasons already named against hearing I have this to add: we
are warranted by the Word to separate from a corrupt Church.


I, If you think Bishops are a corruption in the Church, it will not be granted
to you. And then you are mistaken, if you think, that every Church that has
corruption in it, is straight way to be separated from. There may be even great
corruption in a Church, and yet Separation from her not lawful. Was there not
great corruption of Doctrine in the Church of Galatia, and many infected with
it? and in the Church of Corinth, was there not an Article of the Creed (the
Resurrection of the dead) questioned? Yea, by sundry flatly denied, 1 Cor. 15.
Chap. We read of great faults in sundry of these Churches, Rev. Chap. 2. and
Chap. 3. And in the Church of the Old Testament sundry times, read the Books
of the Kings and the Chronicles, and the Prophets, and you shall see what great
corruptions often were in that Church, and yet no command to the godly to
Separate, as ^ong as the very substance of the Worship was not corrupted, as it
was in the case of Jeroboams Calves, 2 Chronicles. 11.16. in the first ages of the
Christian Church, it is known what Censures past against the Novatians,
Donatists, and others, because they were Schismatics, and, may be, there was
as great corruptions in the Church at that time as any ye can pretend now, if
not greater.


D. If we may not Separate from a corrupt Church, what then mean these
Scriptures? 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 These. 3.6. Rev. 18.3.


I. I deny not but a Church may be corrupted in that degree, that Separation
from her is warrantable, yea, and necessary. Yet I told you every corruption
is no sufficient ground of Separating from her. As for these Scriptures ye
name, they prove not your point. In 2 Cor. 6.14. The Apostle is speaking of the
duty of Christians in Separating from Idolaters, and Heathens in their
Idolatries and ungodlie fellowships, not of withdrawing from Christian
Assemblies. In 1 Cor. 5.11. and 2 These. 3.6. He tells Christians their duty,
not to keep needless fellowship in their private converse with such as are
scandalous, but bids them not withdraw from the public Worship of God, even
though there be scandalous persons there; Wicked scandalous persons pollute not
the Ordinances to us, nor is their presence at the Ordinances a ground for us
to Separate, though it may be the fault of Church guides, if they be careless
in keeping them back from such of the Ordinances as they have no right to, Rev.
18.3. is ordinarily expounded by Protestants, of leaving the Idolatrous
Worship of the Church of Rome, where Doctrine also is much corrupted, but gives
no warrant to Separate from a sound Church, where no such corruptions are.


D. We think we have better reason to charge you with Schism, than ye have to
charge us; for ye have departed from the Government of this Church by
Presbytrie, to which we still adhere: so that ye have made the Schism from us,
not we from you.


I. What, little ground ye have to charge us with Schism in respect of
Government, may appear, if ye consider, 1. That our sumbitting to the present
Government by Bishops, is in obedience to the Commands, of our Superiors, whom
both ye and we are bound to obey in things in themselves not sinful: So that
our submission is duty, and your non-submission is both disobedience and
Schism, disobedience to Authority, Schism from the body of the Church. 2 If ye
will consider, that Episcopacy (as at some length I show in our first
conference) is the only Government of the Church left by Christ and his
Apostles, and practiced in the first and purest times after them, and so
downward: Not we who now submit to this Government are the Schismatics, but ye
who refuse submission to it; hereby ye are guilty of Schism from the whole
Primitive times, alswell as from us. But besides, when we charge you with
Schism, we mean it not only, nor mainly of Schism, in respect of Government,
but of your dividing and separating from our Christian Assemblies especially,
and Divine Worship there performed; which indeed is a great Schism, even
suppose there were many things wrong among us, that needed amendment, I pray
you consider, I hope ye will not say, we have departed more from you and from
the truth, than the Scribes and Pharisees, and the Jewish Church under them had
departed from Moses Law in Christ's time, and yet neither Christ nor the godly
at that time, such as Simeon and Anna, Zacharias and Elizabeth, Joseph and
Mary, with many others, thought themselves obliged to separate from that
Church. Alace, then how will ye be able to justify this Separation of yours?


D. Your Ministers Lecture not to the people, therefore we will not hear them.


I. Some among us did continue to Lecture, but that did not keep the people
from the disease of the time, Separation. 2. We have the Scriptures publicly
read in the Church, which is a very ancient practice, both in the Jewish and
Christian Church. The Jews had the five Books of Moses or Pentatuch, which was
commonly called the Law, divided into 53. Sections by Ezra, as some think, and
every Sabbath day one of those Sections, together with a part of the Prophets
was read in the Synagogues, See Act. 13. verse. 15, 27. and Act. 15.21. And that
there were Lectures, that is, Readers in the ancient Christian Church, is well
known. So that ye who on this ground Separate now, would have separate from the
Church in all ages. 3. Lectures as now used, have no authority from the Church
nor ever had: For they are not according to the first appointment, which was,
that the Minister should read a Chapter in the Old Testament, and another in
the New, and where any difficult place occurred, briefly give the meaning
without any more, but that way was soon left, and Ministers held with one
Chapter, and many with a part of one, and not only expounded, but also raised
practical observations: so that in effect, as some have expressed it, the
Lecture came to be a short Sermon on a long Text: And indeed a Lecture and a
Sermon after it, are two Sermons at one diet, and they that separate for want
of this, would for the same reason separate from one who uses shorter Sermons,
to another who preaches longer: And yet long tedious Sermons are judged less
edifying, caeteris paribus, and it may be a question whither it be not fitter
for peoples edification to hold them with one Sermon at one diet, than to give
them two, considering their forgetfulness, when a great variety of purposes is
accumulat, one thing puts out another: And considering their dullness, and
backwardness to receive divine things, and how soon corrupt nature will weary
and sit up, when about these exercises; is it not safer to hold with a few
things, and press them home at one time? Therefore that ancient Christian
Pembo, an unlearned man, recorded in Church History, desiring another to learn
him a part of a Psalm, and having heard the first verse of the 39. Psalm read,
would hear no more, saying it was a lesson great enough at that time, and a
long time after that another asked him, if he was yet ready for another lesson,
he answered no, for he had not sufficiently learned his first lesson. 4.
Suppose our want of Lectures were a fault, yet I told you every fault or
neglect in a Church is not a ground to Separate from her. And know you not that
the ancient Jewish Church some times wanted Ordinances even of Divine
Institution, and that for a long time together, as Circumcision, the Pasover,
etc. And will any say, she ought therefore to have been Separated from. 5. On
this ground of yours ye would separate from all the Protestant Churches in the
World at this day; in none of which ye will find a Lecture: Yea, ye would have
separate from the Church of Scotland, ever till about the year, 1645. for till
then we had no Lectures. I could wish indeed all our Sermons were more like
Lectures, as Lectures have been, and are by some used, that is, that Ministers
would take long Texts, and reduce them into some few points, especially
insisting on the Scope, as is usual in Churches abroad, I make no doubt, people
would please this way better, and retain more of what is spoken, than when
Ministers confine themselves to short Texts, and then too often rack both the
Text, and their own Brains, seeking matter to hold out the time with. But
herein I only give my own judgment.


D. There is another thing yet keeps me back from joining with you in your
Assemblies for Divine worship: If I should join with you, many good people
would be offended, who look upon hearing among you to be a sin: and the Apostle
says, we must not give offense, nor lay a stumbling block before others.


I. When the word forbids us to give offense; First, it is meant of not
doing that before others which is in it self sinful, whereby we indeed offend
or grieve the godly, as also, lay a stumbling block in the way of others by our
ill example: Now when you do your duty in obeying God, you cannot be said to
give offense unto any: And if any will be offended at you, it is their own sin
and weakness, for they take offense where none is given, and in the present
case if any will be offended at you for your maintaining unity and peace in the
Church, and for not forsaking the assembling of your self together with the
rest of his people; It Is their own weakness while you give them no Offense at
all, but on the contrary, by your good example is in a holy way provoking them
to their duty with you: and if you shall ly by for fear of their offense, you
shall both omit your own duty, and harden them in their sin. 2. Ordinarily
where the Apostle forbids Christians to give offense to others, he is
showing how they ought to use their Christian liberty in things indifferent:
That they must not use it to the offense of their weak brother; when either
thereby he shall contrary to his conscience be emboldened to sin, 1 Cor. 8.10.
or yet should be grieved with us because he thinks we sin in doing what he
conceives we should not, Romans 14. verse. 15. Yet you must know if the Command
of Authority interpose, and enjoin me to use a thing in it self indifferent, or
not use it; then and in that case it is no more indifferent to me as to that
particular and time, my liberty, pro tunc, is determined and restricted by
Authority; and the thing though in it is own nature indifferent still, is by the
supervenient command of Authority made necessary to me in my using, or not
using it, according as Authority has determined, Act. 15. verse. 28. These
necessary things. though some of these things were not necessary in themselves,
yet abstaining from them was at that time made necessary by the Authority of
that Council, for the good of the Church. Then and in such a case as this, my
obedience to Authority will preponderat the other of not giving offense, the
first being the greater duty of the two, as Divines and Casuists show. And even
in this case I give no offense, but do my duty, and if any take offense, it is
causeless on my part, and is occasioned through my brothers weakness. It is
Scandalum acceptum non datum, Scandel groundlesly taken by him, not at all
given by me. When the Apostle forbids Christians to use their liberty to the
offense of the weak, he speaks to those who were not determined by Authority.
Have you any more to say for your Schism?


D. You still impute Schism to us.


I. And in doing so I wrong you not, but am sorry ye give me too just ground.
either ye are Schismatics, or the christian Church never had any, ye have
miserably rent the bowels of the poor Church your mother. I pray the Lord
discover to you this sin, and give you repentance, ye both forsake the Church
Assemblies, and also erect Separate meetings of your own, both in private
houses, and in the fields.


D. What ill in so doing? did not Christ preach in private houses and in the
fields, and people hear in any place, and why may not we do the like?


I. It Is true, Christ preached in houses, and in the fields, and people heard.
But did he so upon such grounds as ye do, to wit, that he might separate and
teach people to separate from the Jewish Church: Or did he either think or
teach that the Jewish teachers at that time ought not to be heard? I trow not.
He was often in the Temple, and in the Synagogues, he allowed of hearing of the
Scribes and Pharisees, only with this proviso, to beware of their leaven and
bad lives, some whom he miraculouslie healed, he sent to the Priests to offer
their Offering according to the Law, and did not bid people decline or disown
them, for as corrupt as they were. But ye on the contrary erect meetings of
your own, because ye think ours unlawful to join with. But further, Christ
preached in any place. 1. Because he was about the bringing in of the Gospel
Doctrine into the World, and of Preaching himself the true Messiah, which was
necessary to be done, and therefore took all occasions for doing it in any
place, and the rather, because of the opposition this Doctrine, (though in it
self most necessary) met with from the Jewish teachers. And 2. Christ was the
head of the whole Church, and therefore was not to be limited in the way and
manner of his Ministry, as other Teachers ought and must be, but might Preach,
when, and where, and to whom he pleased, for all belonged to his Ministry, and
I know none in the World will say, that he is universal Pastor of the whole
Church, except the Pope: Nor will any say that it is warrantable for mere men
to do what Christ did in every thing. These meetings of yours ye hold and
frequent in despite of the Laws of the Land, which are very express against
them. And so to Schism ye add disobedience to the Civil Powers.


D. Should I be hindered by the Law of the Land from hearing the Word of God,
and other parts of his Worship: Or Ministers hindered to preach. You know it is
better to obey God than men.


I. The Laws of the Land hinder not, but allow and command you to hear the Word
of God in your own Congregations, where ye have the Gospel purelie preached by
the allowance, and under the defense of Authority, a mercy ye too little
value. Is it not better to Worship God in a way not contrary to the Law of the
Land, the Law allowing me to Worship him purelie, than in a way that is
contrary to the Law, and joined with disobedience to it. As for what you bring
out of Act. 4.19. From the Apostles their not obeying the Council of Jerusalem,
discharging them to speak at all, or teach in the Name of Jesus, it does no
way quadrat with your case. For First, The Apostles had an immediate
extraordinary call from Christ himself, to Preach in his Name, and so were not
to be discharged by any Power on Earth. 2. The Prohibition given to them was
intended to suppress the Gospel absolutely, and as such, and therefore it was
not lawful for them to obeie: Nor was there any other visible way to
propagate the Gospel through the World, but by their Preaching. But among us,
though some Ministers be silent, there are many others not discharged, but
allowed to Preach. And, blessed be God, the opposition of Authority is not
against the Gospel it self, but against your disorders.


D. Can the King and the Laws silence a Minister that he may not preach the
Word of God?


I. You now give me occasion to tell you briefly how your Preachers behave
themselves in this Schism, who are indeed the great propagators of it. 1. They
exerce their Ministry contrary to the Command of Authority; concerning which
you ask, whether the King and the Law can silence a Minister, that he may not
preach the Word of God. To which, I say, you read of Solomon's thrusting out
Abiathar from the Priesthood, 1 King. 2.27. That it was a deposing of him
simply from all Priestly power. I shall not debate, yet sure it was a
restraining of his Priestly power as to the actual exercing, and officiating,
which he was bound to submit to. This a King may do, he may inhibite a Minister
to Preach in his Dominions, and the Minister so discharged, ought to be silent,
and not counteract, even suppose he think, the King and the Law wrongs him,
especially when there are others to preach the Gospel, though he, or sundry be
silent. May be you have heard what Beza says to this case, Epist. 12. In
answer to some in England, if in case the Queen (Elizabeth) and the Bishops
would either have Ministers Preach on their Terms, or not at all; they might
Preach, notwithstanding of the Prohibition of Authority: To which he answers,
Tertium enim illud nempe ut contra Regiae-Majestatis and Episcoporum voluntatem
Ministerio suo fungantur, magis etiam exhorrescimus, i. e. As to the third, to
wit, that Ministers exercise their Ministry contrary to the will of the Queen
and the Bishops, is a thing we yet more abhore. Next, These who preach among
you make themselves Ministers of the whole Church, without any fixed or settled
charge.


D. I have heard say that every Minister, is a Minister of the Catholic
Church.


I. That it is true, and that you may see in what sense, and on what grounds we
say so against Independents, read Mr. Rutherfoord in his due right of
Presbytrie, page 204. (though wrong figured) and he tells you, that though a
Pastor be Pastor of the Catholic Church, yet he is not a Catholic Pastor of
the Catholic Church, as were the Apostles. And that by a Calling, or
Ordination, he is made a Pastor, but by Election is to be restricted to be
ordinarily the Pastor of his Flock: So Mr. Durham on Rev. page 106, 107. says,
a Minister, though he be a Minister of the Catholic Church, yet is not a
Catholic Minister of the Catholic Church, and that there is great odds
betwixt these two. The Apostles, says he, were Catholic Ministers of the
Catholic Church, and such the Pope claims to be, that is, to have an immediate
access for exercising his Office equally, and indifferently to all places.
Ministers, says he, actu primo, have a commission, and power to be Ministers
of the whole Church, and Watchmen of the whole City indefinitly: Yet, actu
secundo, They are specially delegated for such and such Congregations, and
Posts. But Ministers among you have made themselves actu secundo, Ministers of
all the Congregations of the Country where they can come. And from this
follows a third step, they incroach, and intrude upon the Charges of other
men, of which, I spoke before, and now only shall question you by what
Authority they do so: What call have they to preach, and administer the
Sacraments to people of another Ministers Charge, not being called, or desired
by the Ministers of those people, so to do? Their call is either Ordinary or
extraordinary. Ordinary they have none, never being called to be Ministers of
those Congregations, nor so much as employed by the Minister of the place, to
exercise any Ministerial act among his people. And for an Extraordinary call, I
think they will not pretend to it. It may be seen by Acts of Councils in
ancient times, how the Church has guarded against this kind of incroaching by
one upon another Charge: Otherwise what confusions, and absurdities would
inevitably follow? When these Ministers who went to Aberdeen, to persuade the
taking of the National Covenant, preached there without leave of the Ministers
of the place, the Doctors and Ministers asked them, how it was, that without
their consent, and against their will, they publicly preached to the people of
their Congregations? Which they tell them was a thing repugnant to Scripture,
and to Canons of ancient Councils. I might further let you see by what
practices ministers among you advance this Schism. They are careful to or dain
men of their own way, that hereby the Schism might be perpetuated, and kept on
foot. They are much in inveighing against Bishops and Curats (as they call the
Ministers) Hereby to alienate the minds of people from their own Pastors. Of
late they have great mixed communions, at which, persons ignorant of the common
principles, and vicious persons, may be, and I little doubt are admitted, it
being hardly possible by their way, to keep them back. I might also speak of
their great disswasives to people, not to hear their own Pastors, and of their
strange, and dreadful uncharitableness to such as differ from them, which sin,
they have with too much unhappie success diffused among their ordinary
hearers. Mr. Baxter says to this purpose, in the preface to his Cure of Church
divisions, To Preach without love, and to hear without love, and to pray
without love, to any that differ from your Sect: O what a loathsome Sacrifice
is it to the God of Love? If we must leave our Gift at the Altar, till we are
reconciled to an offended brother, what a gift is theirs, who are unreconciled
to almost all the Churches of Christ, or to multitudes of their Brethren,
because they are not of their way: Yea, that make their Communion the very
badge and means of their uncharitableness, and divisions.


D. I cannot deny but there may be some truth in these things, I have heard,
from you. And now I must take my leave, and shall have my thoughts of what has
past betwixt us, now and then, when I am alone.


I. Do so I pray you, and seek Illumination from God, and that he would remove
prejudices, which too often stand in the way of our embracing Truth. Only let me
give you a few advices further before we part. And 1. Be not too confident of
your own opinions, as if you were undoubtedly in the right, but consider
seriously what I have said, to inform you at our three Conferences. 2. Think
not that the matters in debate among us, are the very substantials of Religion,
or that people may not be of different persuasions in these things, and yet
both sides maintain Love, and Church fellowship: for this were to run unto
manifest sin, and evil, viz. Schism, which is a renting of Christ's body, the
Church, and neglecting public Ordinances, upon fears of what is only
disputable, and supposed to be evil. There have been far greater differences
among Christians in former times, and yet Church Communion not broken. I might
show you that not only different opinions about Church Government, has been no
hinderance to keep Protestants from joining together in the Worship of God, and
other parts of Christian Communion; but also when such as differed from others
in the manner of their performing Worship, have been occasionally in one
another Churches, they have without scruple conformed to the custom of the
Church, they were in for the time. I pray you consider, if you Separate from
the Church, because of Bishops, you should on this ground have been a
Separatist, in almost all ages, since Christianity began: And if you think
Episcopacy such an error, and corruption, that none ought to hold communion,
with a Church where it is; then you must think, Christ holds no Communion with
such a Church: and if so, then it will follow, that there have been sundry
ages since Christ's time, wherein he had no Church on Earth to keep communion
with; Yea, that these thousand six hundred years bygone, there has been but
rarely, and very seldom a true Church on Earth. And so what should become of
his Promises to his Church? that she should be built on the Rock, and against
her the gates of Hell should not prevail: and that he would be with her always
unto the end of the World, And also this were to make Christ a head without
members, a King without a Kingdom, etc. Therefore, 3. Have charity for such as
differ from you in the time, and beware of either thinking, or saying, they
have no grace, because they are not of your way. The Apostle spends a whole
Chapter in commending, and recommending charity to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 13.
chap. Among whom there were corruptions, and differences, in greater matters
than among us, 1 Cor. chap. 11. and chap. 15. And remember, it is usual with
those, who have least truth on their side, to have least charity too, Romans
chap. 14. These weak Christians who understood not their liberty in being
loosed from the Cerimonial Law, as they had least truth on their side, in
respect of the strong, who knew their liberty; so had they least charity, for,
verse. 3, 4. They judged the strong. Papists will have no charity for
Protestants, yet Protestants, who are in the right, dare not met back to them
with that measure. 4. Consider what hazard we bring our selves under, by our
unchristian divisions, Gal. 5.15. Mark 3.24. And what advantage we give to the
common Enemy, not only to make us a mock, but also a prey. It was long ago
observed by the Historian Dum singuli pugnant, universi vincuntur. i. e. While
they fight among themselves, they are all overcome. And the Story of Scilurus,
injoining his Sons to maintain concord among themselves, which he elegantly
examplified by the Sheaf of Arrows, is known. 5. Acquaint your self with the
writings of the old non-conformists in England, Cartwright, Bredshaw, Ball,
Paget, Hildersham, etc. Who wrote, and testified against the Brounists, and
such like Separatists, for their separating from the Church of England, for
which separation, much more could have been pretended, than ye can for
separating from us: And you will see, how zealously, and by what good arguments
these men battered down Separation. Also, Mr. Baxter, one of the present
non-conformists in England, has written a whole Book against Separation from
that Church, which he calls, the Cure of Church divisions, where he gives
sixty directions to people, to guard them against the sin of Separation, some
of which, I shall but name, omiting his enlargements. The 6. is, That we make
not our Terms of Communion with any Church stricker, than Christ has done. 7.
That we have deep and true apprehensions of the necessity and reasons of
Christian unity, and concord, and of the sin and misery of division, and
discord; and consider what the Scripture says herein. 19. That we engage not
our selves too far in any divided Sect, nor Spouse the Interest of any party of
Christians, to the neglect and injury of the Universal Church, and the
Christian cause. 20. That we be very suspicious of our religious passions, and
carefully distinguish betwixt a sound, and sinful zeal; lest we father our sin
on the Spirit of God. 25. That we be not overtender of our reputation, with any
sort of people on Earth, nor too impatient of their displeasure, censures, or
contempt, but live above them. 26. That we use not our selves needlessly to the
familiar company of that sort of Chistians, who use to censure them that are
more sober, catholic, and charitable than themselves, etc. Where he says, if
ever we shall have peace, and love recovered, it must be by training up ^^ung
Christians under the precepts, and examples of grave, judicious, and peaceable
Guides. 31. That Christians never begin too soon with doubtful opinions, nor
ever lay too much weight upon them. 41. That the bare favor of a Preacher, nor
the loudness of his voice, or affectionate utterance, draw us not to admire him
without a proportion of solid understanding, and judiciousness. 43. That we
reject not a good cause, because, it may be owned by bad men, and own not a bad
cause, for the goodness of the Patrons of it. 44. That we take the bad examples
of Religious Persons to be one of our most perilous temptations, and therefore
learn to discover what are the special sins of Professors in the age, we leave
in, that we may be fortified against them. 56. Keep still in our eye the state
of all Christ's Churches on Earth, that we may know, what a people they are
through the World, whom he keeps communion with, and may not ignorantly
separate from almost all the Churches of Christ, while we think we separate but
from those about us. 60. That we count it als comfortable to be a M^n tire for
love and peace, by blind Zealots as for the faith by Infidels, and Heathens.
You may perceive that many of you have need of such counsels as these. The old
English non-conformists, though they did dissent from the Ceremonies of that
Church, and desired a forbearance in those things, as to their own practice,
(which is not our case) yet fully declared against Separation, both by their
Practice, and Writings; some of them have called it the bitter root of
Separation, the way that God never blessed with Peace and Holiness.

Some Passages out of the English Presbyterians, their Jus Divinum Ministerij
Anglicani, anent the Unwarrantableness of Separation, I shall name briefly.

Page 10. It Is agreeable to the will of Christ and much tending to edification,
that all those that live within the same bounds, should be under the care of
the same Minister, or Ministers, to be taught by them, -- and to remove
altogether these Parochial bounds, would open a gape to thousands to live like
sheep without a shepsherd, -- And in a little time would bring in all manner of
profaneness and atheism. Page 11. Object. What if a godly man live under a
wicked or heretical Minister, Ought such a Man to hear such a Minister? Ans. In
such a case that man ought rather to remove his habitation, than that for his
sake, the bounding of Parishes be laid aside. Page 12. In Scripture to appoint
Elders in every Church, and in every City is all one. They that were converted
in a City (who were at first but few in number) joined in Church Fellowship
with the Elders and Congregation of that City, and not with any other. Page 25.
Some evil men may, and alwise have, de facto, been Officers and Ministers in
the Church. In the Jewish Church Hophni and Phineas: In the days of Christ,
Scribes and Pharisees, yet the wickedness of such did not null or evacuat their
Ministerial Acts. The Scribes and Pharisees were to be heard, though they said,
and did not. Christ's commission did as well authorize Judas as any other to
preach and baptize -- The leprosy of the hand does not hinder the growing of
the Corn, which that hand sows. Page 42, 43. The ten Tribes did not only
worship God after a false manner; by setting up their Golden Calves in Dan and
Bethel, etc. -- Yet notwithstanding all this when the Prophet came to anoint
Jehu, he says, thus says the Lord God of Israel, I have anointed thee King
over the people of the Lord, even over Israel, etc. In Christ's time, it is
evident that the Office of the Priest, and high priest was exceedingly
corrupted, they came ordinarily unto their Office by bribery and faction -- The
priests, and highpriests had the chief stroke in the crucifying of Christ. And
yet we read, Joh. 11.51. Caiaphas is owned by the holy Ghost, as high priest,
etc. Act. 23. When Paul said to the high priest, God will smite thee, thou
whited wall, etc. And they that stood by said, Revilest thou the high priest?
Paul answered, I wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest. For it is
written, thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people. Paul, as many
think, acknowledged him as high priest, though the priesthood at that time was
Tyrannical, Heretical, and they came by most unjust ways into their places, and
offices. From all this it appears, that corruptions cleaving to Gods
Ordinances, do not null his Ordinances. Thus they. Mr. Rutherfoord (a witness
whom ye will not refuse) in his due-right of Presbytrie, from page 220. to page
256. (though wrong figured) discusseth the Question, in what cases it is lawful
to separate from a Church, where among sundry other things, he says, page 232.
Separation from a true Church, where the Orthodox Word of God is preached, and
the Sacraments duly administered, we think unlawful: And at great length he
vindicats, 2 Cor. 6.14. against Separatists. Page 233. The personal sins of
others are no warrant for Separation: For Christ himself and the Apostles did
eat the passover and worship God, with one, who Christ said had a devil, and
should betray the Son of Man, and was an unclean man, Joh. 13.11, 18. Ibid. If
it be said, Judas was neither convicted of his treachery against Christ, nor
was he known to the Apostles by name to be the man: For some of them suspected
themselves, and not Judas to be the traitor. Answ. Christ told the Disciples
that they were an unclean society, and that one had a devil: And therefore
though they knew not the man by name, who had the devil, yet they knew the
society to have a devil, and to be unclean for that one man's cause, yet Christ
and the Disciples did communicate at that Supper, notwithstanding of this. Page
250. It was not lawful to separat from the Pharisees preaching the truth in
Moses, his Chair. Page 253. The godly laudably did not separate from the Israel
and Church of God, because the Altar of Damascus was set up, and because of the
high places. Things dedicated unto Idols, as Lutheran images, may be called,
and are called, 1 Cor. 10.34. Idolatry, yet are they Idolatry by participation,
and so the cup of devils, 1 Cor. 10.21. Paul does not command Separation from
the Church of Corinth, and the Table of the Lord there. Page 254. The godly in
England who refused the Ceremonies, and Bishops, did well, not to separate from
the visible Church in England. He says indeed they separated from the Church
in the worst and greatest part: which he understands of their disowning Bishops
and the Ceremonies, but yet they kept communion with that Church in
unquestionable duties, as is well known, all except the Separatists, against
whom, Mr. Rutherfoord is here reasoning, and against whom, the old
Nonconformists did write. Ibid. If a Church be incorrigible in a wicked
conversation, and yet retain the true faith of Christ, it is presumed, God has
there some to be saved, and that where Christ's Ordinances be, there also his
Church presence is: And therefore I doubt much if that Church should be
separated from, for the case is not here as with one simple person, for it is
clear, all are not involved in that incorrigible obstinacy, and that is yet a
true visible communion in which we are to remain; for there is some Union with
the Head Christ, where the faith is kept sound and that visibly. Though a
private brother being scandalous and obstinatly flagitious, be to be cast off,
yet are we not to deal so with an Orthodox Church, where the most part are
scandalous. Ibid. I see not but we may Separate from the Lords Supper where
Bread is adored, and from Baptism, where the sign of the Cross is added to
Christ's Ordinance, yet are we not Separated from the Church, for we professedly
hear the Word, and visibly allow the truth of Doctrine, maintained by that
Church, and are ready to seal it with our blood, etc. Page 254, 255. There may
be causes of non-union with a Church, which are not sufficient causes of
Separation. Paul would not separate from the Church of the Jews, though they
rejected Christ, till they openly Blasphemed, Act. 13.44, 45, 46. Act. 18.16.
Ibid. There is no just cause to leave a less clean Church (if it be a true
Church) and to go to a purer and cleaner: Though one who is a member of no
Church, may join to that Church which he conceives to be purest, and cleanest.
You see then that Mr. Rutherfoord, and the English Presbyterians, in their Book
cited before, teach, that neither personal faults, whether in Ministers or
People (suppose they be real) nor yet real faults about the Worship of God, are
sufficient grounds of Separation; much less when but only supposed. Now to make
an end, try all things impartially, and know that it is no disparagement for
you, nor any to retract that, wherein you have been wrong, either in opinion,
or practice. It is indeed somewhat hard for men to confess they have been
wrong, and such are rare to be found: yet Augustine one of the most learned of
all the Fathers, wrote whole Books of retractions, for which he is as
deservedly famous, as for any thing else. And, says Jerome to Ruffinus, never
blush to change thy opinion, for neither you, nor I, nor any person alive, are
of so great Authority as to be ashamed to confess, we have erred. The Lord
bless us with Truth, and Peace, Peace be within the Walls of our Jerusalem, and
Prosperity within her Palaces, and let them prosper who love her, and her
peace. Amen.


D. I thank you for your free, and friendly communing with me. I know the
Apostle bids me prove all things, which I resolve to do, And to beg
illumination from the Father of Lights, and that he would give me understanding
in all things. And what upon due trial, I find to be right and good, I shall by
his Grace hold it fast. Farewell.


Schisma proles superbiae, male perseverando fit Haeresis, and matter Haereseos.
FINIS.
Differences of the Time.


