AYTOKATAKPITOS OR, THE SINNER Condemned of Himself: BEING A Plea for God,
against all the Ungodly, proving them alone guilty of their own Destruction;
and that they shall be Condemned in the great Day of Account, not for that they
lacked, but only because they neglected the means of their Salvation.

And also, Showing, how fallacious and frivolous a Pretense it is in any, to
say, They would do better, if they could; when indeed all men could, and might
do better, if they would.

By One, that wishes better to All, than most do to themselves.

Hos. 13.9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help.

Ezech. 33.20. O ye House of Israel, I will judge you every one after his ways.

(...)

Chrysostom. (...). London, Printed for Edward Brewster, and are to be sold by
Giles Widows, at the Maidenhead, over against the Half Moon, in
Aldersgate Street, near Iewen-street, 1668.

The PREFACE.
WE are all by nature, as much inclined to hide and excuse Sin, as we are to
commit it. Sin and Shifting (as one says well and truly) came into the World
together: And we have drawn both alike, from the loins of our first Parents.
No sooner had they sinned, but they hid themselves: And no sooner had God found
them out, but they fell to excuse themselves. The Man puts the fault upon the
Woman: Genesis 3.
And she again turns it over to the Serpent. Yea, Neque hoc cont^ntus D^um
simul accip^t in c^^men, etc.
(as Calvin and others observe upon Genesis 3.12.) Adam spared not to charge God
himself, by saying, The Woman, whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of
the tree, and I did eat. As much as if he should have said, If thou had left
me alone, as I was, I had never done as I did.

Now among all those many inventions, which men have sought out, to excuse
themselves in their sins, this is one, and a chief one, viz. That they never
had Light enough to convince them, that their way was not good before God. They
confess, their Ministers have cried out against them, and often passed sentence
upon them, as men running headlong to their own destruction: But they never met
with such Ministers, as had Arguments strong enough to persuade them to alter
and change their way. Had this been once done to the purpose, there had been no
more ado; They should soon have amended all, that others knew to be amiss. But
in this the Ministers are still wanting, and so long as they are so, they have
reason (as they think) for what they do. For themselves, they are good natured,
and well disposed, and their endeavor has been, and still is, to do their
utmost, so as if there be a fault, they know not how to help it, the blame must
lie somewhere else. They love God with all their hearts, and labor (what in
them lies) to keep his Commandments, repenting every day with hearty sorrow,
for all they have done amiss. Indeed, they meet with many hindrances, so as
they cannot do as they would. But so long as they are willing, and well minded,
they are confident God will bear with them, though they cannot make so fair a
show, nor flourish it, as some Professors, who (as they think) in their doings
and dealings are none of the best. Having these, or the like persuasions, they
keep up an inveterate prejudice against all pretenses to more circumspect and
precise walking, such as the Apostle advises, Ephesians. 5.15, 16. and bless
themselves in their own hearts, promising rest and peace to their Souls, even
when they walk after their own devices, because they do (as they persuade
themselves) the best they can, and would with all their hearts do better, if
they could.

Now, that which is intended in this ensuing Discourse, is to demonstrate, That
all these are fallacious pretenses, and that there is no want of means and
helps to their Conviction and Conversion, but they have Light enough, which
they suppress, and keep under, as the Gentiles did, To. 1.18. and out of a
desire to satisfy their fleshly lusts, refuse to follow whither Scripture and
Reason lead them.

For their Quarrels and Exceptions, they are like those of the Jews, in our
Saviors time. Why do thou make us to doubt? Joan. 10.24.
If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly. Joan 6.30.
What Sign show thou, that we may see, and believe? As if they wanted
nothing but Light, to see, whether he was the Messiah indee^. If they could
once be assured of that, they needed not to be persuaded any further, he should
have Disciples and Followers enough. Yet none of us (I hope) will say of those
Jews, They had not Light enough, when the Sun of Righteousness arose to shine
upon them. Nor dare we (I suppose) excuse them, notwithstanding all their
exceptions from the guilt of crucifying the Lord of Glory. And then, how can
any of us look on our selves, as more excusable than they?

Hereupon all they, who retain so good an opinion of themselves, and are
always questioning and quarrelling others, that are dealing with them, for the
good of their Souls, (just as the Jews did our Savior) might do well to
enquire, Whether the same Spirit of contradiction be not in them, that was in
those Jews. To pick Quarrels, and make Objections, and put others to answer
them, is no hard work for any to do, that have a mind to it. But to do the Will
of God, as he requires it to be done, is hard work to flesh and blood, and
calls for Self-denial, and renounicing our own Wills. And what if this be it,
and nothing else, that lies at the bottom of all those fair pretenses, which
are made by many, of their being not convinced and satisfied in their
Judgments and Consciences, about the matters of Gods Kingdom, and their own
Salvation. Wherefore they should consider more seriously, Whether he that
searches the hearts, and will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, do
not see, they pretend one thing, and mean another; and whiles they like not the
Light that shines to them, they would fain excuse it, by saying, They have not
Light enough.

Wherefore I would fain persuade all, to have no such good opinion of
themselves, but rather to search and try their hearts and ways, till they
discern and discover that enmity which is in them against the righteous and
holy Wills of God. For the Apostle resolves, To. 8*7. That such a root of
bitterness there is in all men by nature, and he that knows any thing of
himself, cannot be ignorant of it. I say again therefore, Let no man bless
himself in a fond conceit (no better than a sick man's dream) of the goodness of
his own heart. For so long as men do this, they do but lock and bolt up all the
passages of their Souls, that nothing God does or says, can have entrance into
them, or make any impression upon them. These are far from judging themselves,
or justifying God; But say in effect, as Israel of old, Ezech. 18.25. The way
of the Lord is not equal. These men are indeed far from righteousness, and
wholly indisposed to learn it. Their Souls are as some old Sores, so nasty and
filthy, as they must be washed and wiped, before any healing Plasters can be
laid on them. Or as some men's Bodies, so foul, and full of bad humors, as they
must have Preparatives, to make way for the intended Medicines, which otherwise
will have no efficacy or operation. Now this Discourse is intended only as a
Preparative, to make way for other Physic, by rowsing men up to consider, in
what a condition they are, and that there is an enmity in them against God, and
his Laws; and that this enmity is it, which causes so many disputes and
exceptions about Gods Dispensations of Grace and Providence; and that they do
but flatter and deceive their own Souls, in thinking themselves so well
inclined to God and goodness, and should do well enough, if they had somewhat,
which they want (as they think) without any fault of their own. For what hope
is there, to persuade men out of their ungodly ways, so long as they conceit
themselves to lie under a fatal necessity of being as they are, and so it is no
fault of theirs, that they are no better? Or how shall men be prevailed with,
to change their course, so long as they lie under such gross mistakes of God,
and his ways, as to think, he is wanting to them, and they are not wanting to
themselves? Such mistakes do a great deal of mischief in the World, and keep up
cursed prejudices in the hearts of men, against the ways of Gods Commandments,
and make them to cry Peace to their Souls, even whiles they are walking after
their own imaginations, and running headlong to the pit of destruction.

Now this Discourse be-speaks men, to consider, Whether Gods ways, or their
own, are unequal; and whether God or they shall be justified in the last and
great day of account.

There needs no more to be said in way of Preface. That the God of all Grace,
will vouchsafe to give his Spirit, for convincing men of all their Mistakes and
Prejudices, so as they may learn to judge themselves, and justify him, (which
is the work the^ have to do, in order to their Sal^vation) is the hearty Desire
an^ Prayer of him that penned, an^ them that published this ensuin^ Treatise.

T. F.

AYTOKATAKPITOS; OR The Sinner Condemned of Himself.
WHat the Apostle says of an Heretic, Tit. 3.10, 11.
after the first and second Admonition, may truly be said of every one that
goes on in his wickedness, He Sins being condemned of himself: He sins
wilfully, and without excuse, he has no cloak for his sin; for he condemns
himself in what he does, in that his practice is contrary to his principle.

That this is the case of all, or most ungodly Sinners, I shall endeavor to
make good in the ensuing Treatise. And in order thereunto, I shall lay down the
sum and substance of all, in one general Proposition, which I offer, as the
conclusion to be proved, viz.

That, whatever excuses or pretenses, are or may be made by any, all the
mistakes, The general proposition to be proved*
and miscarriages of men, about the matters of Gods Kingdom, and their own
Salvation, are only, and altogether from their not improving the means, and
helps, which are allowed them; and that this also is only from the sinful
corruption, and cursed inbred enmity of their own hearts and nature.

1 Argument.
To prove this, I argue, first from somewhat employed in the Proposition it self,
viz. The sufficiency of helps and means on Gods part allowed to men. And

The Argument may be formed thus: If God have sufficiently provided for men's
Salvation, so as he is not wanting in what lay on him to do, then men's neglect
is the only cause of their destruction. But God has sufficiently provided,
etc. Ergo, etc.

Here I shall not stand to prove the consequence of the first Proposition,
because if God be not, of necessity man only must be wanting to himself. If any
shall allege, that the world, the flesh, and the Devil are great enemies, and
hindrances to men's Salvation, I grant it, but deny withal, that therefore God
is to be charged with men's destruction, or that any man who dies in his sins,
is the more excusable. For the fault is in men only, that they willingly give
themselves up to be led aside by those enemies of their Souls, and so neglect
their own Salvation. Sure I am, nor one, nor all of those enemies, could
prejudice our everlasting estate, if we did not freely and willingly give our
selves over to their power.

And this will appear in my proving the second Proposition, viz. That God has
sufficiently provided for men's Salvation, etc.

Here I shall first instance in particulars, and therein show, what provision
God has made.

1. To rise no higher than Adams fall; when man stood in most need of Gods
help, was there not a speedy provision made of an all sufficient Savior, and
help laid upon one that was mighty, and able to save to the utmost all that
come unto God by him? Heb. 7.25. No sooner had God convinced our first Parents
of their sin and misery, but he presently revealed his Son, to be made the seed
of the woman, Genesis 3.15.
and in man's nature to fulfill whatever was needful to the reconciling of the
world. In this Salvation so prepared, and promised, there was no defect, as
appears by the Apostles testimony, Heb. 7.25. The only defect is on man's part,
in not coming to God through Christ, that he may be saved. Who dare say, that
God has made but a scanty provision for our salvation? Surely it cannot stand
with his faithfulness and goodness, Act. 7.30.
who commands all men every where to repent. Would he (think you) invite so
many guests, if he knew not before hand, that there is entertainment enough for
them all? No man (for ought I have heard) ever made question of this, That if
all would come to Christ, all should be saved by him. And this is the tenor of
the Gospel Covenant, (which alone reveals the way of Salvation) He that
beleiveth shall be saved, etc. Mar. 16.16. For any Objection that may be made,
I shall answer it in its due place.

2. As God has provided an all sufficient salvation, so has he also allowed
sufficient means for the applying of it, so as it may be effectual.

1. There is the word of Grace, or the Gospel full and clear in all
particulars, so as there is nothing necessary to be known concerning this
salvation, but a man may run and read it* What was sufficiently discovered in
the Old Testament, according to the dispensation of God for those times, is
more clearly revealed in the New; so as we may well say with the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.25. The Scriptures are able to make us wise unto Salvation.

2. There is the Spirit to teach us inwardly and in the heart, what is laid
before our eyes in the word. And both these are promised, Isa. 59.21. If any
object, That that promise is made only to the Church, I may grant it, and yet
answer well enough thus; That the Word and Spirit promised to the Church,
proclaim and offer Christ to the world; and they that ar^ without, are bound to
receive what is offered* and to join themselves to the Church. For wha^ is it
that makes and constitutes the Church? I^ it not harkening to, and obeying the
voice o^ God in his Word? There is the sound of the Gospels voice, which the
world is bound t^ hearken to, as I hope to show hereafter. An^ if the wicked
world refuse, and will not en^quire after it, that is their own fault, and Go^
is not wanting, as shall be more fully cleared i^ its due place.

For present it may suffice, that there is a^ abundance of the Spirit, and of
the Word, e^nough to enlighten and enliven all the world if they would heed and
attend them. Wh^ dare say, that Gods Word and Spirit are no^ sufficient to
instruct us in all things necessary* and to lead us into all truth? For Papists
quarrelling the sufficiency of Scripture-revelation, I have nothing to do with
it now; it serves my turn, if it be acknowledged, that God has made a
sufficient revelation of his will, and the way of our Salvation.

3. That God might not leave himself without many witnesses, we have also the
work of Creation, that shows us the way of glorifying him, Psalm. 19.1, 2, 3.
else how could the Apostle upon this one ground, prove the Gentiles to be
inexcusable in their Idolatries? Romans 1.19, 20. And is there not also a
goodness of God in his providential dispensations, that leads men to
repentance? Romans 2.4. Yes, the Psalmist shows it at large, Psalm. 107. And this
amongst others seems to be one thing, that is very observable in that Psalm,
viz. That men otherwise void of all piety, and such as care little for Gods
company at other times, when distresses, and dangers assault them, even by
nature, and natural conscience, are led to call upon God. This shows
sufficiently, that their neglect of God in times of prosperity, is a stifling
the natural principles of Religion, implanted in all men, for the improvement
of divine providence.

4. To say no more, God has made us reasonable creatures, and given us a mind
to understand, so as to choose the good, and refuse the evil. And have we not
all of us a conscience to accuse and excuse, to encourage us in that which is
good, and affright us from all that is evil? In one word; The way of Life is
laid before us, and we have eyes to see it, if we had a mind to walk in it.
Men do not go to Hell as a beast goes to the slaughterhouse, or as one led
blindfolded, not knowing whither he goes, but they refuse the way of Life, and
choose the ways of Death; as I hope to show hereafter more at large.

Now let me sum up all that has been said, and thus argue; If God has
prepared an all-sufficient salvation, and provided all means necessary for the
applying of it, what have we to complain of more, than what we find in our
selves? May not the Lord say as he did, Isa. 5.4. What could have been done
more, that I have not done? or as Ier. 2.5. What iniquity have you found in me?
Have I been wanting to you? Rather, have not you wronged your selves, and been
sinners against your own Souls? And will not the Lord say thus one day?
Questionless he will; else how shall he clear himself in condemning the wicked
world? For suppose God to be wanting in any thing necessary on his part for our
salvation, may not a condemned sinner justly reply thus? Lord thou have now
passed the sentence of death upon me, and thou art now sending me to dwell with
everlasting burnings, which I should never have run my self into, if thou had
done that which lay upon thee to do. May not such a soul say, alas! I knew
nothing of what I should have known in order to my salvation, but was left in
the dark without any light to show me the way of Life. Had God done his part, I
might have done mine, and so it had never been with me, as now it is. Shall any
of the damned (think you) ever have cause, or just occasion to quarrel God in
this manner? Or if any should, I must confess, I know not how to clear God in
his condemning the world of the ungodly.

But God will certainly clear himself one day, and convince all the ungodly,
Jude 15.
that their damnation is just: Else why is God so often clearing himself upon
all occasions, from having any hand in the destruction of those that perish?
For certain God would never clear himself (as often he does) if he knew not
himself to be clear; and he must have most unworthy thoughts of God that thinks
otherwise. God is not as man, to justify himself in any thing, but what is
right and true.

Now, how often does God clear himself, and cast all the blame of men's
destruction upon themselves? Ezech. 18.31, 32. Cast away all your
transgressions, etc. for why will you die? I have no pleasure in the death of
him that dies. Hos. 13.8. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self. To this
purpose also read Esaias 5. v. 1, 4.

Obj. But some will reply and say, Who denies or questions this? you labor to
little purpose, and might well have spared this pains.

Sol. To clear my self, give me leave to say; 1. That many are charged with
making God the author of sin, and the contriver (in a sort) of man's damnation.
I do not say they are justly charged, but that some are so charged by others,
is most true.

2. There are but too many in the world, who charge God foolishly as faulty and
guilty of men's destruction. I say not, they do it expressly, and in terminis,
but interpretatively, and by consequence they say, that the fault is on Gods
part, and not on theirs, if they die and are damned. What else is their
meaning, when they pretend, as they do, so much love and good liking to God,
and the ways of his Commandments? Are there not many that say in their hearts,
and some upon occasion with their mouths also, Far be it from us to hate God,
or any of his ways? God forbid that we should procure to our selves the
damnation of our own souls? Nay, they will not be well pleased with any other,
that shall charge them for so doing. If others will believe them, they are as
willing to be saved, and as willing to walk in the way of Life and Salvation,
as any man can wish them to be. But alas! what would you have of them? If they
knew better, they should do better; and for their part, they do the best they
can, and as far as God gives them grace. Now, is not this in effect all one as
to say, if we are cast away, and die in our sins, it is no fault of ours? How
could we help it? We have done all that we were able to do, and should with all
our hearts have done more, if God had given us wherewithal. Is not this to
quit our selves, and cast all the blame upon God only? Yes; it is to charge it
upon God alone, that we die and perish in our sins.

Now for the sake of these, and such as those I have undertaken to plead for
God, as well as I can. For (to speak as it is indeed) God is much spoken
against in the world; and as there are too many of whom it may be said, God is
not in all their thoughts; or, there is no God, is all their thought, Psalm.
10.4. so there are many mouths opened against him, to charge him with all the
fault of men's destruction. And I know not in my capacity, how to do him better
service, than to speak a good word for him in this case, and let the world know
it.

To return where we left before; I shall a little further, and more fully show,
that God is (if I may so say) exceeding careful to clear himself of having any
hand in the death of him that dies: He thinks he has done what was to be done
on his part; What could have been done more, that I have not done? Esaias 5.3, 4.
As if he should say, there wanted nothing to their being a fruitful people, if
they would themselves. Consider also what our Savior says, John 5.40. And (or
rather, But) you will not come unto me, that you might have life. Verse. 39. he
had told them, that the Scriptures testified of him, that he was the light and
the life of men; But (says he) you will not come unto me that you may have
life. Is not that as much as to say, Here is life laid up in me all-sufficient
to all intents and uses and safe enough, but you will not come and take it,
though you may have it only for the asking? If this be not the full purport and
meaning of those words, I cannot imagine what it should be. For our Savior
speaks plainly to them, that if they die in their sins, it is not because
eternal life is not to be had, but because they will not have it. And is not
this enough to clear God, and condemn the unbelieving world? Add to this that
affectionate passage of our Savior, Mat. 23.37. I would have gathered them as
an hen gathers her chickens, but they would not. This clears him; and dare
any man say or think, that our Savior meant otherwise than he spoke? O! how
happy had that people been, if they had taken him at his word! Take one place
more, Luc. 19.41, 42. how pathetically he wishes, If thou had known in this
thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace! Was it not in his heart (think
you) that Jerusalem was the only cause of her destruction? And by all you may
see, the Lord is willing to clear himself, and we may assure our selves he is
as able to do it. He well knows, that all his dispensations of grace and
providence are such, as will clear him against all the world. Our Savior knew
well (and has not forgotten it to this day) that when he was on earth, he was
no way wanting to the work which his Father had put into his hands. And this
appears Esaias 49.4. that God will justify him, that it was not by any default
of his, that his labors had no better success; His judgment is with the
Lord, and his reward with his God. He knew (and knows still) that he had done
all that he had to do, for the reclaiming of his Countrymen, and for the
reconciling of the world. Did the Jews want any means, whereby they might know
him to be, as he was indeed, the promised Messiah? True, they thought so then,
and were ever calling upon him for farther and fuller evidences; but they were
but vain, and false pretenses, somewhat the same, or very like to what others
still have, as I shall hereafter prove. But whatever they pretended then, I am
confident they are now of another mind. Whiles men are on earth they have too
good thoughts of themselves, and are too apt to entertain hard thoughts of God,
and his dealings with them. But I am apt to think, that the damned in Hell
complain most of themselves. Sure the Parable (some will have it a story) Luc.
16. seems at least to sound this way: For though it sore troubled the Richman
to be in that place of torment, and fain would he have had some relief, though
never so little, yet he complains of none beside himself for his coming
thither. One says indeed, That no man goes to Hell, but he has some excuse or
pretense for it: And I am of his mind in this, if he mean it of men, whiles
they are upon earth. But I much question, whether the damned, when once they
arrive at their long home, be not forsaken of all those pretenses, and begin to
change their minds: However it be (for I resolve nothing in the case) the
Rich-mans desires for his brethren that survived him, show he thought, that
while men are upon earth they may prevent their own damnation. And though he
would have had some extraordinary way taken for the Salvation of his brethren,
yet Abraham's answer clears it beyond all question, that they and others like
them, have means enough if they will but use them; They have Moses and the
Prophets: And have not we moreover the Evangelists and the Apostles? Read Luc.
16.31. and resolve, if men will not hear these, no extraordinary appearances
will work upon them. Questionless Abraham in Heaven knew the truth, as well as
the Rich-man in Hell. But for what may be said of strange providence, and the
good effects of them in some, I shall have occasion to discourse hereafter.

Though what I have said might serve to clear God, as to his making sufficient
provision of means, in order to man's Salvation, yet I may not yet lay aside
this part of my task. For there lies a great Objection that is very obvious,
and must be answered: The Objection arises from the forlorn condition of the
Gentiles, whiles the partition wall between them and the Jews stood firm; and
the same Objection lies now as to Pagans, who are without God in the world. For
it may be said, Since the Gentiles of old, Obj.
and many now are denied the ordinary means of grace, and saving knowledge; How
can it be maintained, that there is a sufficient allowance of means on Gods
part, and that no man has cause to complain of any but himself.

Sol.
In answering this Argument I have (I hope) the Apostle to help me, and he helps
me to answer thus; That even those Gentiles who had not the written Law, (which
the Jews had) were without excuse, Romans 1.20. Now if they be without excuse,
there needs no more to clear Gods justice in their condemnation. But the
Apostle proves what he says, and shows why, and how they are without excuse,
verse. 19. Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them; (...),
Quod de Deo cognosc^re fas est, vel expedit. Calvin.
For God has showed it unto them, therefore they are without excuse. Whatever
served to set forth the glory of God, or whatever might excite and move them to
glorify God, all this is manifest in them. And the same Interpreter thinks
there is a special emphasis in the Preposition [ In.] It notes (says Calvin)
such a manifestation, Indicat manifestationem qua proprius urgeantur, quam ut
r^fugere queant.
as would admit of no evasion, they could not put it off. Whatever be the
emphasis of that Preposition, or whether any at all, it is enough for our
purpose, that they withheld the truth in unrighteousness, verse. 18. They
suppressed the inbred true notions, which they had of God. These they kept (as
we use to say) under hatches, they obscured and clouded them, and would not
suffer them to shine out, and show themselves. And this they did in
unrighteousness, i. e. by force and violence, says Piscator, and Calvin too.
Some count of an Hebraism in the expression; but if it be otherwise, it serves
our turn well enough. It was the base corruption of their hearts that made them
oppress, and keep under the natural light that was in them. The eternal power
and Godhead were manifested in them, so as they were not, could not be ignorant
of them. Hence I argue, that they wanted not light, or means to show them a
better way of worshipping God, than the way they took, which was indeed against
all reason, as the Apostle there proves. Consider farther, that they liked not
to retain God in their knowledge, verse. 28. i. e. They hated, and were willing
to be rid of that knowledge of God, which they had, and v. 25. They changed the
truth of God into a lie. They heeded not the true, implanted notions of God,
but followed their own devices, which carried them to false ways of
worshipping God, under the similitudes of his creatures. Now this was an act of
their perverse Wills, in opposition to, and in dispight, as it were, of their
natural principles. Nay further, says the Apostle, verse. 21. When they knew
God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, etc. They glorified
him not as became his most excellent Divine Majesty, which they knew, or might
have known so well, as to have served him in a better manner, if they would.
They were not thankful: They had a talent, and would not improve it as they
might and should have done: Their returns were no way suitable to their
receipts. Now consider the Apostles arguing in this case, and it appears
plainly, that he clears God, in condemning the Gentiles, upon this account,
that they had means and helps to know, and do better, but they rejected them to
follow their own inventions. And the same may be said now of any of the
Heathens alive, to show, that they also are without excuse, as others that were
before them.

Obj. Yea, but God denied them his special grace, which being denied, though
they had done their utmost, they could never have improved their natural Light
to discover Christ, who is the only name given under heaven, whereby men must
be saved, Acts 4.12. How then had they a sufficiency of means?

Sol. This argument is grounded upon a supposition, which the Apostle never
takes notice of, even when he labors ex professo, to prove the Gentiles justly
liable to Gods wrath and condemnation. And therefore such a supposition to me
seems to be of no great force, though some take much notice of it in their
disputings. For my part, I have nothing to do with the controversy that is
among the learned, or with stating the question between them. My design in this
discourse is only to remove a stumbling block out of the way of the blind,
that hinders too many from walking in the way of Gods Commandments. And this I
may do (I hope) without engaging so far in the controversy, as some others
have done.

I am to prove, that it is not the want of means to be allowed on Gods part, but
a wilful neglect of means on men's part, that will be their condemnation: And
has not the Apostle said enough to this purpose in the case of the Gentiles?
Romans 1. Yet let me argue a little: What will it avail those Gentiles, or any
the like, to say in the great day, By all the light which God did lend us, we
could never have discovered the only way of Salvation? For may not God answer,
What Is that to you? It concerned you not at all to enquire what would, or what
would not be. I never told you, what I would, or would not do more, in case you
had improved the talents which you had. I gave you the knowledge of my self,
and mine infinite excellencies so far, as to show you a way of worshipping me
in a better manner, than under the resemblances of my meanest creatures. But
you have buried your Talent, and rebelled against the Light you had, and
therefore are wicked and idle servants. What is it to me, or any others, what
God will, or will not do, in case we do our utmost with what we have? God, I am
sure, is not, cannot be bound, farther than he is pleased to bind himself: And
how far God has bound himself to answer the improvement of natural gifts, by
an addition of supernatural grace, if I have not learned, I suppose, I need
not be ashamed. Scripture indeed says, That to him that has it shall be
given, Luke 8.18. And reason shows, that the use of any gift natural, or
spiritual, is a means to increase it. But seeing grace and nature are not of
the same kind, (...) confess my self ignorant, how far the improvement of
nature will avail to the procuring o^ grace. And yet I dare not say, God will
no^ give grace to such as improve nature to the ut^most. For I know not what
God will do, an^ so it is meet, I leave him to his liberty, as h^ has left
himself. I am bold to think, that suc^ a supposition, as some make in this
case, is al^most to as little purpose, as that question, Whe^ther the Son of
God should have come in the flesh, if Adam had never sinned? This we are sure
of, that the Gentiles, and others have their talents, more or less, and all to
be im^proved accordingly; and if they be not, is Go^ unrighteous in requiring
what he has given* The idle servant indeed charged his Master with austeritie;
Mat. 25.24.
but they trifle lamentably, who thereupon dispute the vigor of Gods dealing
with men, seeing it was not in the mind of Christ to note any such austerity,
more than to commend usury. Yet this is worthy our notice, that no servant made
any complaint of his Master, besides that idle one. For the scope and drift of
the Parable, it is to show (what is to my purpose) that they have no color of
excuse in the least, who stifle the gifts of God, and make no advantage of
them: Yea, it proves clearly, and undeniably, that God will require of all
according to the measure of their gifts, as you may see further confirmed, if
you please to consult, and compare Ephesians. 4.7. 1 Pet. 4.10. and Luc. 12.48. For
certain God will require no more than he has given, and it is as certain he
will require so much, and this is but reason. And now let any man that is but
reasonable resolve, whether the veriest Heathens, who had the least means and
helps, perished for lack of them, or for neglect of them: For to speak as it
is, they are condemned for abusing their gifts, and choosing to walk in
darkness, when they had light to lead them into better ways and practices.

Obj. But may not they say, Lord, if we had walked by that light, it would not
have served for our everlasting salvation?

Sol. And may not God stop their mouths by saying, What is it to you, whether
it would have served your turn or no? What did you know of what might, or would
be? I gave you a stock to trade withal, and you have misspent and wasted it.
Why did not you that which was your duty to do, in using what I had given you?
You lacked nothing to that, but you had no mind to do what you might have done.
You had light enough to convince you of your abominable Idolatries, but you
would not be turned from them. You knew, or might have known, that I cannot be
resembled by any of my Creatures, and yet you would needs worship me in the
Images of men, and beasts, and birds, and creeping things. And now what can
they say in reason, to be a sufficient excuse? They are condemned for their
sinful neglects, and not improving their talents: And is not their
condemnation just? Whether what they had, would have gained eternal life, if
they had done their utmost, will be no plea with God; but they will be found
guilty, for not doing what they might have done, by the means they had. Take
it, if you please, in a plain and familiar similitude. A Master gives his
Servant a task, and so much light to do it: The Servant says, the light he
has will not serve him to finish his task, and therefore never takes his
Masters work in hand, or does any part of it, but spends his light in doing
nothing, or somewhat of his own business. I ask whether such a Servant may not
justly be made to suffer? What was it to him, whether his light would serve for
all his Masters work? He ought and should have done as much of it as his light
would serve him for. What knew he, whether his Master would not have supplied
him with more light, if he had found him at work by the light which he had? I
need not apply this, but only add, that the Gentiles never had such a thought,
as we suppose the Servant to have: But what light they had, they resolved to
waste it, and never to regard their Masters work. Nay moreover, what if there
was this in it too, that if they had had more light, they would have done as
they did? Sure many have far more light, and do as bad as they. But I shall
discourse this supposal no farther* the case, I hope, is clear enough, by what
has been said.

If any shall further pose me with the case of Infants, that never attain to
years of discretion, I may truly and justly say, that this case is far beside
the Question, as I have stated it. However, I shall not so pass it by, but give
an account of my thoughts and apprehensions about it, after I have first
proclaimed my ignorance in those things, wherein God has left me no
manifestation of his mind and will.

That they are (as all Adams children) dead in trespasses and sins, and by
nature the children of wrath, I verily believe, because that which is born of
the flesh, is flesh, John 3.6. so as they must be born again, ere they can see
the Kingdom of God.

That they are capable of grace, and by consequence of glory, I also believe,
because the Lord ordained and appointed such little ones, Genesis 17.12. To. 4.1^.
to receive the seal of the righteousness of faith.

But for their everlasting estate, it is to me (as I suppose to all others) a
secret, so as I can resolve nothing. Only I incline to think, that some of them
are saved, and some perish in their sin. But who are the one, and who the
other, who can say? One of the Ancients (quoted and allowed by some of our
eminent Divines) says thus, viz. It is even by Infants manifest, Aust. Ep.
107. ad Vital.
that many be not saved, not because of themselves, but because God will not.
And that they perish not for any actual, wilful sins, or rejecting the light
either of grace or nature, we may (I suppose) justly and safely yield, because
they never use or exercise reason or discretion. Yet all of them being the
Cockatrice Eggs, if they are some of them crushed, and killed in the shell,
there is no cause nor occasion of questioning the judgment of God, since it is
for sin only they are condemned. May not the Lord use his liberty in punishing
sin sometimes in such young sinners, so long as (we all grant it) they are of
the Serpents brood? And now I am afraid to wade any further, lest at next step
I should be over head and ears. I shall therefore rest in the Answer I gave at
first, desiring only, it may be considered of, That God, who knows all most
perfectly from eternity to eternity, cannot but know what those castaway
children would have done, if they had lived to years of discretion. But these
are secrets, such as I should never meddle with, if I were not accasioned to it
by others curiosity. That some infants are saved, no man (I suppose) questions,
as also that they are said only by the grace of the Covenant in our Lord Jesus
Christ. Yet here is a secret of divine providence in governing the world, to
cut off such grafts newly implanted into Christ, so as they never grow to bear
any fruit. But these (I say again) are secrets which belong unto the Lord: The
revealed things belong unto us, and with these we ought to content our selves.
And the same is to be said in the case before, viz. That some sinners die in
infancy, others in youth, some in middle age, and others not till they are very
old, and all perish, though all attain not to the same pitch of rebellion
against the Lord. To say no more, in such cases, I must confess, I know not
what to say, because I desire to be wise only according to what is written, and
for the ways of God in his providence* I had rather in silence adore them,
than in pride and curiosity (as some) to pry into them.

If any shall object, that it is a glorious and singular privilege to have the
means of grace, as the Jews had above others, Psalm. 147.19, 20. Romans 3.1, 2. I
grant it, and say also, that it is a most dreadful calamity to want them. But
this is no argument against what I have undertaken to prove, seeing God has
not left himself without witness toward all, so as they are without excuse
upon this account, viz. Because they neglected, and no way improved the talents
with which they were entrusted. God (as we see) gives some persons more wit,
and others more wealth, etc. yet they who have less, are liable to accounts for
what they have, because it is a trust, though less than some others have.

As for others, who are not as the Gentiles, nor as Infants, one would think
the case, as to them, were much clearer. For they have means as much as any
ever had; and yet even these have somewhat to say for themselves.

Obj. True, we have the Gospel Preached to us, and plenty of precious means (as
you call them) to know Christ: But to what purpose, so long as we are one way
or other shut out, so as not one, nor all, nor any of these means shall ever
have any effect on us for our salvation? For this purpose they allege, 1. An
absolute and irrecoverable decree of God, that shuts out more than shall be
received in. 2. The narrowing of Christ's death by some, as to the extent of it,
that a great many may well think themselves incapable of any benefit by it. 3.
The lamentable estate of all men since Adams fall, under an invincible
inability, to recover themselves from that estate, more than a dead man has to
raise and lift himself out of the dust.


These are the stumbling blocks which too many lay in heavens way, to hinder
their own salvation; and I cannot pass them by, without using my endeavors to
remove them. For these have been, and still are, unhappy occasions to many, of
putting off all the blame from themselves, yea, and obliquely, by consequence
at least, to charge God himself.

In answering these objections, I am no way bound to engage in the
controversies that still are among the learned, nor shall I resolve one way or
other to the prejudice of any party, but leave them to end their quarrels as
they can.

All the business I have to do, is to apply my self to the capacities (and if
the Lord so please, to resolve the doubts) of those that understand nothing, or
very little of these matters, more than to make them so many stumbling blocks,
to hinder themselves and others in their way to heaven, and sad occasions of
blessing themselves in their own hearts, whiles they walk on in their own
imaginations, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
to add drunkenness to thirst. And now I come to Particulars after I have
premised this one thing in general, viz. That let the decrees of God be as
absolute, as any of the learned have made them; or the death of Christ as much
narrowed in the extent of it, as ever it has been by any, yet my conclusion
will stand firm, that men only are wanting to themselves, and no charge in the
least can justly be laid upon God.

Sol. 1. In answering the first objection from Gods absolute decrees, I shall
say enough in this, that they are to us secret things, and cannot be known by
us till the event declare them. We will suppose every man's name, who is
certainly and infallibly ordained to eternal life, to be recorded, and all, and
every of them and no other to be saved. This, I say, we suppose, resolving
nothing in the question: But this I say too, that if this be granted, yet there
will be no excuse by it for any ungodly men. And my reason is this, Because no
man can know himself left out of that Book of Life, till he comes to lie down
under the power of death, and so be past all possibility of working out his
salvation. Whatever is said in Scripture of Gods electing some, and leaving
others (take it in the strictest and most rigid sense of any) certainly no part
of holy writ has revealed to us, who those men are, so as we can know them.
The day is yet to come, when the books of Gods decrees shall be opened: The
written Word of God serves only to show the revealed will of God, which if any
man, without all exception, be careful to observe, Tit. 1.2.
he is sure of eternal Life, unless God fail of his promise, which indeed he
cannot do.

Gods decrees are his arcana imperii, mysteries of state not to be pried into,
but in all humility to be adored, because though never so secret, yet they are
always most righteous. In Kingdoms and Commonwealths on earth, Subjects have
nothing to do with reasons of State, but are bound to obey the known Laws,
which if they be careful to observe, they may justly expect to lead a peaceable
and quiet life: The Lord has shown thee, Mic. 6 8.
O man, what is good, and what he requires of thee. Be careful to do this,
and thou needst take no other care for thy Salvation; thou may assure thy
self that thy name is written in the book of life. And for thy fuller
assurance* consider what is clearly revealed in Scripture, viz. that the
sentence of Life and Death shall pass at the last day, only according to what
men have done, with respect to Gods Commandments. Hence we read so often in
Scripture of Gods rewarding men according to their works, and according to what
they have done in the body. I need not quote the several Texts that are to this
purpose. In suum exitium insaniunt qu^cunque omisso Christo quidnam de se in
arcano Dei consilio constitutum sit, in quirunt. Calv. in Ep* 1. Joan. c. 3. v.
10.
The grand inquest at the great day of the Lord, will not be, Whether thou art
elected, or not, but whether thou have observed to do as God has commanded
thee. If thou have received the Lord Jesus Christ, as he is tendered to thee in
the Gospel, and have denied all ungodliness and worldlly lusts, and lived
soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world, there will be no
question of thy Salvation in the world to come.

Sol. 2. I answer yet further, that Gods decrees (be they never so absolute and
infallible) do no way in the least infringe the liberty of second causes, but
men act as freely in all they do, as if there were no decrees at all: Suppose
there was a decree of Adams fall (we assert nothing, but only suppose it) yet
Adam was at liberty, whether to stand or fall. 'Twas never said by any sober
man, that there was ever any decree, Non negamus decretum permissionis, etc.
more than of permitting the fall of man. For certain, God did not force him to
fall, or cast him down, but he might have stood if he would himself. Illud
tamen a^cte tenemus Adami peccatum non ab hoc decreto, sed s^cundum hoc
decretum evenisse. Determinat. Qu. 25.
The Reverend and learned Davenant (with others) so resolves, That man fell
according to Gods decree, but not because of it. And the Schoolmen resolve
unanimously, Decret^m non tol^it lib^^tatem.
That Gods decrees do not infringe man's liberty.

Suppose again all the actions of men to be under a decree, yet no man has
said, that men's actions, good and bad, are alike under it. For if they were, no
man could possibly clear God from being the Author of sin: But there is this
difference, that God decrees the good actions of men, so as to allow of them,
yea, and to effect them by his grace and power; the evil only to permit them,
to order and overrule them, for his most righteous and holy ends.

Alvares and others, conceive it impossible for us in our understanding to
reconcile these two, viz. The absoluteness of Gods decree, and the liberty of
man's will; but they say not, that they are inconsistent, and there is reason to
show they are not:

1. Because (as it is confessed by all) when the will of man determines it self
to one thing* it does not loose its liberty; but though it actually choose one,
yet even then it has power to choose another.

2. Gods decree does not abolish, but only order man's liberty, by inclining the
will one way or other, according to its nature.

3. The decree of God establishes the liberty of man's will. For he so
determines in his will, as the agency of second causes shall be according to
their condition, i. e. Natural causes shall work naturally; voluntary causes,
freely.

Though Gods decree excludes the act o^ event that is contrary to it, yet not
the liberty of man to the contrary, as was said before. Moreover, God decrees,
not only the things that are to be done, but also the manner how they shall be
done, either voluntarily, or necessarily. Now things are done necessarily or
contingently, ^n respect to second causes, not to the first, who works all
most freely, according to the counsel of his will. And so, what God has
decreed to come to pass by free agents, always comes to pass most freely.
Judas was as free, Luc. 22.22.
and might have forborne to betray his Master, as ^f there never had been any
thing foreseen or foretold about it. And so were the Soldiers ^ree to have
broken Christ's bones, Joan. 19.33.36.
as well as the others.

I shall shut up this with what I find in one of ours, whose judgment I much
value, as does every one (I suppose) that is any way acquainted with his
Writings. Io. White, The Way to the true Church, Sect. 40. Digress. 41.
Our adversaries (says he) belie us, when they say, our opinion touching
Predestination, makes us deny Free Will. For we think indeed our will is moved
effectually by Gods will in all our actions: which being the most effectual and
universal Cause of all things, qualifies our will, and inclines it to the
action: yet does it not follow hereupon, that therefore we think our own will
has no freedom, but only that the freedom thereof depends upon a former
freedom, which is the freedom of Gods will. And if we hold further (as some
Divines do) that Gods will determines ours, and his decree flows into all the
effects of our will, so that we do nothing, but as he directs our will, and
purpose; yet this excludes not our own freedom, nor makes God the Author of
sin, nor implies any inevitable necessity in our doing. The reason is, because
God moves not our will violently enforcing it, but leaves an inward motive
within our selves, th^^ stirs it up, which is the act of our Understanding
whereby we judge the things good or evil, that w^ will or nill. For in the
proceeding of our will First, the mind apprehends some object, and o^^fers it
to the will; Then upon the full and perfe^^ judgment of the understanding, the
will follow^ or refuses it, as the understanding judges it goo^ or bad. And so
this act, or judgment of our ^^^derstanding, is the root from whence the (...)
choice of our will arises, in such manner, (...) whatsoever it be that goes
before the act of (...) will, or sets in with it to incline it (as Go^ will
does) as long as it destroys not, nor enforc^ this practical judgment of
reason, the liberty (...) our will is not taken away. And herein stands (...)
true concord between Gods Predestination and ma^^ Will, That the free and
immutable counsel (...) Gods will, goes indeed in order before the opera^^^on
of our will, or at least together with it, (...) determines and circumscribes
it. But for (...) much as it neither enforces our will, nor takes ^^way our
judgment, but permits it freely to lea^^ and persuade the will, it expels not
our liberty but rather cherishes and upholds it: For wheres^^ever these two
concur, viz. Freedom from vi^^lence and necessity, and the full consent of
Reason there is the whole and true reason of Liberty.

Now I desire, it may be observed, that thi^ reverend and learned man says
only, Tha^ some Divines (not all) do hold, that Gods wi^^ determines ours, and
his decree flows into all the effects of our will, etc. And indeed, it is yet a
great question (as well it may) with many* ^ow far the decree and unchangeable
counsel ^f God does determine our will about any thing we do. To me it is, and
(I think) ever will ^e a mystery, as some profess it is to them; and therefore,
from a matter so difficult and disputa^le, it is dangerous and desperate in any
man to ^^ferr, what is directly contradictory to his du^y, so plainly laid
before him in the written Word of God. For this is plain, and there can ^e no
question about it: But the other (I say ^gain) is to us very uncertain; and
what some ^alk of Gods determining our wills, and all our ^ctions, is very much
questioned, and doubted of by others, and that for good reason, it being so
mysterious, and so hard, if not impossible to be apprehended by us, as it is.

But whatever our Divines hold touching Predestination, the meaning is not (as
that learned man in the place before cited has it) That God by his Providence
infuseth any constraint into the mind of man to enforce it, or any error to
seduce it, or imposes any necessity to bind it; but only that he enclines, and
orders it to work freely, that which he has determined for his own glory; And
besides, his preserving the faculty thereof, moves and applies it to the
object, and work, that it wills, or nilleth. And all this is no more, than
that man's Will is subject to Gods Providence, which no sober man will deny, or
question.

But to reason the case more familiarly; 1. Let men ask themselves, Whether
they do not freely and willingly choose their own ungodly ways, and they cannot
(I am sure) say to the contrary. For their Consciences will te^^ them, that in
all their ungodly ways, the^ only consult to satisfy their lusts, and never
have one thought of what God has decreed.

I ask further, 2. Whether any man can possibly act in a way of wickedness,
with a respect to the fulfilling of Gods decrees, seeing no man can know, what
those decrees are? We re^^ indeed, Act. 4.27, 28. That Herod and Pi^late, etc.
did what the hand and counsel of Go^ had determined beforehand. Yea, the Devil
himself, in all his doings, is within the compass o^ Gods counsel; else what
sad work would h^ make in the world? But how can a man act, so as to intend his
action, according to that which he knows not, nor does ever consider of? Wha^
is it to any ungodly man, what God has de^creed, when he resolves with
himself, that (...) will do according to his will, and serve his lust^ whatever
God has said to the contrary? Tha^ it falls out according to the counsel of
God, (...) beside, and against his intention, who wal^ only after his own
counsels: And so he do^^ whatever he does, wickedly of choice, and free^ly. How
can it be otherwise? For he does (...) gladly, and he rejoices to do evil.
Free-wi^^ (as one has observed) is so far from being (...) in a sinner, Nihil
m^gis subest ^ibero arbitrio quam quod ab eo fluit libenter, and gaudenter.
Parisienfis.
as that all, who sin with delight an^ pleasure, do more especially sin by
their Free-wil^* It Is not the absolute decree of God, that sway^^ them to their
ungodly courses; but they deligh^ in their abominations, and sin, and dye in
their sin, because they freely choose so to do.

I need say no more to this, if men would spea^ what they know by themselves.

God is not so much (if I may so say) beholden to them, that they should do any
thing for his s^ke. They do not damn their Souls, to fulfill his will, but
their own lust. They talk ^ndeed sometimes (as men do in their sleep) of they
know not what themselves, What God has decreed must be, and there is no
avoiding it: But they do not serve their lusts, with any respect to Gods
decree, more than Judas, who in ^elling his Master, looked at nothing but the
money that was to be gained by the bargain.

To show more plainly, how little there is to be had from Gods decrees, to
excuse ungodly men, consider, That all who had an hand, or heart in the death
of Christ, were therein guilty of most horrible sin, though they did what the
^and and counsel of God had determined before, Act. 4.27, 28. and Act. 2.23.
Though he were delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God,
yet was he crucified and slain by wicked hands. Whereas Joseph, a Counselor,
was a good man, and a just, though he consented not to the counsel and deed of
them that slew Christ: Yea, therein he proved himself a good, and a just man;
whereas if he had acted, or consented, as others did, he had been guilty, as
far as they.

Sol. 3. No man sober, and in his senses, ever said, or thought, that men are
damned, because God has decreed them to be damned. Scripture (I am sure)
speaks another reason of men's damnation. Death is the wages of sin, To. 6.23.
Tribulation and anguish upon the Soul of every man that does evil, To. 2.8. God
shall come in flaming fire, to render vengeance on them that know not God, and
that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. The
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God* 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. And in this
place we have a Catalogue of them who shall be damned; as also Ephesians. 5.5, 6.
where, after the naming o^ some, as Whoremongers, unclean persons, th^^ shall
not inherit the Kingdom of Christ, and (...) God, v. 6. the Apostle gives this
caution, L^^ no man deceive you with vain words, for because of these things,
comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. For these, and such
a^ these, Fornication, Adultery, and all Uncleanness, Drunkenness, and profane
Swearing, etc* for these men are damned. There Is no noti^^ taken of Gods
decree, as the cause or occasion of men's damnation. They on Christ's left hand
at the last day, plead indeed, that if they we^^ faulty, it was unwittingly,
and they were not a^ware of it: But not one word of Gods decree fore-ordaining
them unavoidably to damnation as some men plead now. And as wise as the count
themselves, I am confident, they will se^ better at the last day, and know,
that their ow^ evil ways, and doings, and not Gods decree^ brought death and
destruction upon them. In^deed, God never passed any decree to condem^ any man,
but for his sin and impenitency; (...) which, if he be not found guilty, I know
of (...) decree of God to damn him. But as we say o^ some men, for their
excessive feeding, that they digg their graves with their own teeth: So w^ may
say of others, for their inordinate living, that they digg their Hell with
their own hands. They are damned for nothing, but their wickedness, wherein
they were incorrigible, and would not be reclaimed. Would ungodly ones repent,
and reform, and choose the ways of Gods Commandments, they would answer this
Objection to better purpose, than I, or any man else can. And yet this I Will
warrant them, upon no worse ground than Gods Word, that if they repent, and
cast away all their transgressions, there is no decree of God shall rise up in
judgment to condemn them.

But for the further clearing of this 3 d. Answer, I shall add somewhat out of
some of the Ancients. God may save a man, without his merits, because he is
good: Potest Deus sine bonis meritis liberare, quia bonus est: Non potest
qu^mquam sine malis meritis damnare, quia justus est. August. Ep. 10^. Deus de
suo bonus est, de nostro justus. Tertul. de Resur. Ca^n.
But he cannot damp a man, without his demerits, because he is just. For (as
another has it) When God shows mercy, and pardons, he gives of his own, and
does it of himself: But when he condemns, and punishes, he could not be
righteous, if there were not something in us to deserve it. How far God may
use his absolute Sovereign power, and Prerogative-Royal, in exposing the most
innocent creature to suffer torments, I have no mind to dispute, though I am
not wholly ignorant, of what some have discoursed about it once; this I am
confident of, that God never dealt so with any of his creatures, nor ever will,
Lam. 3.33. He does not afflict willingly, etc. His bounty and kindness flows
from him freely of it self: His severity arises from somewhat in us. True, he
inflicted the greatest torments, that ever were, upon his own Son, who was in
himself more innocent and unspotted than any Angel. But the reason is obvious.
The Son of God voluntarily engaged himself to be surety for sinful man, and so
by his own act and deed contracted a debt, which he was bound to pay upon that
account, and not otherwise.

And now, though I have said so much, I must yet say more, in answer to this
first Objection; For it will be said,

Obj. That where there is an absolute Decree (as some hold) there is an
impossibility, for some at least, to escape damnation. And though God damn no
man, but for his sin; yet the event is infallible, so as they who are not under
the decree of Election, must needs be damned however.

Sol. 1. We know no Decree, leaving men destitute of all such Grace, Davenant
against Hoard.
as would save them, i^ themselves were not in fault.

Sol. 2. All necessity is not inconsistent with man's liberty, but he may be
said to choose his own destruction, notwithstanding any such dedree. When a man
is doing any thing, it is necessary, because he cannot do, and not do at once,
Omne quod est, quando est, necesse est.
But when he is in doing, he has still hi^ liberty, not to have done it, or to
have done otherwise. Though there be a necessity of the Consequence, there is
none of the Consequent. And if there be any force in this Argument, then by the
same reason, God must be ignorant, who shall be saved, and who damned. For let
it be granted, that God knows precisely, who shall be saved, and who damned,
there is an unavoidable necessity of the event accordingly, or God must not be
omniscient, and infallible.

Obj. If any object, A knowledge in God, whereby he foresees things to come,
not absolutely, but conditionally, what men, or Angels may do, by the freedom
of their will, (no decree of God going before) considering them in such and
such a condition, with such and such circumstances.

Sol. I answer, That God knows such conditional things absolutely and
perfectly, though they never take effect. So he foresaw, that Abimelech would
have defiled Sarah, and therefore hindered him. He knew certainly, Gen 20 3.
that the men of Keilah would have delivered up David, 1 Samuel 23.
and therefore prevented it, by sending David away* He saw the people would
repent, when they should see War, and return into Egypt, Ex. 13.17.
and therefore led them about by another way. These were things that should
come to pass in case only, if they had not been prevented, and yet God knew
them absolutely and certainly. For an Hypothetical may be true in the
connection and consequence, though it be false in both the parts of it. Saul
came not down, nor was David delivered up to him; yet this was true, that if
Saul had come down, the Keilites would have delivered up David: And this God
knew absolutely and infallibly. And as certainly does God know, what wicked men
will do, if he leave them to themselves, and what will be the end of them; and
cannot, by reason of his infinite understanding, he puzzled (as we poor
creatures are) with conditionalities. Now if he certainly knows the end of
ungodly men, (whatever his decree be) the event must be according, or God is
not infallible in his foreknowledge.

I would also be answered in this, viz. Why men quarrel so much with the
decrees of God, in the matters and concernments of their Souls, and never make
any question about them in other things? Why do they dress, and plow, and sow
their Land, and never question, what God has decreed about the harvest? For, I
hope, all men will grant, that when they have used their utmost skill and
endeavor in Husbandry, they may yet carry out much, and bring in little, and
perhaps nothing. Else, Why do they say their Prayers, and beg of God their
daily bread? I take it for granted also, if they pray at all, they pray for
grace to do Gods will, and to keep that way, wherein they may have eternal
life. And do not they in these Prayers acknowledge, that whatever their
endeavors are, the end and event of all is from God only? Now here is somewhat
which I cannot sufficiently wonder at, viz. That men will neglect no means,
likely to effect their ends, in and about civil and worldly affairs; and yet in
the matters of their Souls, will not be persuaded to use the means which God
has appointed, pretending they know not, what God has decreed. No man says,
Let my Land lie fallow as it is, I Will not be at the trouble or charge to plow
or sow: If God have so decreed, I shall have a good harvest however. Or if any
man should so argue, and make no improvement of his Estate, but come to
beggary, his Neighbour-good husbands will not be much puzzled, to give a reason
of it. They will say presently, He might have maintained himself as well as
they, if he would have been a good husband. For they find by experience, that
by their pains in manuring their Land, they have enough to live upon; and
whiles they do what belongs to them, and leave the issue to God, he is not
wanting to them, in his blessing upon their endeavors. I need not apply this
to the present case, whoever reads, may do it.

I shall therefore proceed to tell thee, whoever thou art that reply, or
disputest so much in this case, That Gods Decree (whatever it be) never
excludes, but always implies the use of means on our part, for obtaining our
desired ends. Thou know not the number of thy days, and yet wilt not
forbear thy daily bread, and say, I shall live so long as God has determined:
Nor will thou, for that reason, stabb thy self at the heart. Why will thou be
so perverse, as to argue so unreasonably about thy Soul, and Salvation, when
thou never do so about any thing else, that concerns thee never so little.

But it is no hard matter to know the reason; and these men might easily see it,
if they had but a mind to it. They are wedded (as we say) to their wills, and
resolved to serve their lusts: And being thus resolved, they are ashamed to own
so base a design; and therefore set their wits on work, to find out somewhat,
that may serve to set a fair gloss upon their unworthy and base practices. And
this will one day be found to be so indeed, however they state the question
now. They love their (...) and will not leave them, though they lose (...)
Souls: But they would not have others think so of them; nor can they abide to
reason it alone, with their Consciences in cool blood. Hence they consider, how
they may lay the blame some-where beside themselves; and rather than fail, let
God himself bear it, though of all others he least deserves it. This, and
nothing else, causes all the ado, that is made in the world about Gods Decrees.

But learn in time, O vain men, whoever you are, that so quarrel: For God will
easily wipe off all these aspersions, and needs not for your sakes, to lay
aside his infinite excellencies. What! must God have no certain foreknowledge
of things future, nor any disposing hand or counsel over and about his
Creatures, but presently they must rise up, and say, He has determined them by
an infallible decree, (no less in effect, than to say) he has enforced them
against their wills, to do wickedly, and to damn themselves for ever? I tell
thee, in Gods name, whoever thou art, whatever God has decreed, (for that I
determine not) Life and Death are before thee, and thou art free to choose which
thou will. He does indeed order and overruled thee* in all thou do: How else
should he be, what he is? But he does not compel, or enforce thee to any thing;
but leaves thee to act, as a reasonable Creature, according to thine own
choice; as I shall hereafter show in my Answers to the third grand Objection.

What has been said in answer to this first, may suffice, I hope, to satisfy
such as have indeed a mind to save their Souls. For such as will not leave
tampering with Gods Decrees, in hope to find some color for their impenitency,
and obstinacy in sin, I shall leave them to try it out with God, when he shall
come to judge the World, in assured confidence he will then plead his own
cause, as they shall have nothing to answer.

The second great Objection against my Conclusion, may be thus formed.

Obj. 2. IF Christ died not for all, and every man, (as many say) then God has
not sufficiently provided for all men's Salvation: But Christ died not for all,
etc. Ergo, etc.

The force and strength of this Argument lies on this, That our Salvation
depends upon Christ's Satisfaction for us. Hence it follows, That if Christ, by
his Death, have not satisfied for a great many, they are left to perish, for
want of that provision* and so they are not to be blamed, though they die in
their sins.

Sol. The Dispute, that has been, and still is, about the extent of Christ's
death, I shall not meddle with, so as to determine any thing one way, or other,
because I hope to do my work, without engaging my self so far. For Gods intent
and counsel in delivering his Son to death, and Christ's intention in undergoing
death, they are to me, and (I suppose) to others also, hidden, so as we cannot
say, For these Christ died, and not for those. It belongs to Gods will of
purpose, whatever it be, and therefore we cannot resolve any thing about it.
For Gods will of precept, we know what it is, viz. He that believes, shall be
saved; and he that believes not, shall be damned, Marc. 16.16. This is the
Gospel, which Christ before his Ascension charged his Apostles to preach, and I
know of no other, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting life,
Joan. 3.16. This Gospel I believe with all my heart, because I never find in
Scripture, that men are condemned, because no price was paid for them, but only
for unbelief. Heb. 3.19. So we see, they could not enter in, because of
unbeleef. An evil heart of unbelief, is all they are warned to beware of, v.
12. vid. also Heb. 10. fin. with many places besides in the New Testament,
which I need not cite. Hence I am bold to resolve, That no man lies under a
necessity of perishing in his sin, who lives and dies not in unbelief: Or thus,
That Christ died, and satisfied so far, as whosoever believes, shall he
saved; and that men shall be damned, only upon the account of unbelief. For
this (I say again) is the Gospel we are bound to preach; and this is the
Gospel, according to which God will judge the World. In that day, the question
will not be, Whether we were of the number, for whom Christ died; we shall be
questioned only, Why we did not believe in Christ, offered to us in the Gospel.

Quest. But here it will be asked by some* Whether they, who never had the
Gospel preached to them, as we, and many others have had it, shall be condemned
for not believing on Christ, whom they never heard of?

Sol. 1. I dare not say (as some) That if they had improved their natural
knowledge of God to the utmost, they might have been saved by the kindness and
mercy of God, without the knowledge of Christ the Mediator, because the
Scripture says, There is no other Name given under Heaven, etc. Act. 4.12.

2. Whatever the account be, upon which they perish, the Apostle has resolved
in terms, To. 1.20. That they are inexcusable.

3. I am not able to apprehend, How Gods Works of Creation, as Sun, Moon, and
Stars, etc. did preach Christ to them.

4. I shall only offer somewhat, wherein I dare not be peremptory, but shall
leave it to the consideration of such as are judicious, viz. Israelit or
fuerunt depositarie^, and Oeconomi foederis, Calvin in Rom: c: 3: v: 2: ^: ^:

They had the honor and favor to carry the light, which others were bound to
follow.


That the Heathen of old, who had not the Law of God, as Israel had; yet heard
the report and fame of the God of Israel, and thereupon ought to have inquired
after him, the only living and true God, who alone is to be praised, and served
in such ways, as he himself has appointed. And the rather, because by their
natural light, they might have discovered, that what they worshipped, could not
be God, and that the true God cannot be worshipped by men's hands, Act. 17.25.
That which first inclined and encouraged me to this conceit (as most may count
it) was, what the Apostle has said of Rahab, Heb. 11.31. By Faith the Harlot
Rahab perished not, with them that believed not, etc. Here are two things,
which I desire may be observed concerning her. 1. Her Faith, which was no less
than a justifying, saving Faith; else her Name had not been enrolled amongst
those Worthies, that are there recorded. And Iac. 2.25. She is said, to be
justified, in the same manner as Abraham was. 2. That she came by he^ Faith,
only by the report she heard of the God of Israel, as she professes; Josh.
2.11. The Lord your God, he is God in Heaven above, an^ in Earth beneath. And
v. 9, 10. She professes, She had heard, what God had done for Israel, such as
no other God could do; and for this cause she desired to join her self to the
people of the God of Abraham, and to have her lot with them. Heb. 11.31.
And so doing, She perished not with those that believed not. Who were they?
Questionless her Neighbors, the men of Jericho, and all the Am^rites (except
the Gibeonites) who, notwithstanding they heard the same things reported,
resolved to fight it out against God, and his people Israel. And did not the
Gibeonites the same? Josh. 9.24. For they so answered for themselves, when
Joshua questioned them: It was certainly told thy servants, How that the Lord
thy God commanded his servant Moses to give you all the Land, and to destroy
all the Inhabitants of the Land from before you; therefore we were afraid of
our lives, because of you, and have done this thing. What they did, the rest of
the Canaanites should have done, and have been content to be hewers of wood,
etc. that so they might serve and worship the living and true God. Sure, the
rest of the Inhabitants of Cana^n heard and knew as much as the Gibeonites did;
but they hardened their hearts, and so perished in their unbelief. We read also
of the Kenites, Judic. 4.11.
who were the children of Hobab, the Father in Law of Moses, who chose to join
themselves to the Israelites; and why might not others have done ^he like? And
may not the Queen of Sheba be ^n instance to the same purpose? Read the Sto^y,
1 Reg. 10. and Mat. 12.42. And why should not the Syrians all believe, as well
as Naaman, 2 Reg. 5. seeing they knew as well as he, the miracle which the God
of Israel had wrought upon him? Questionless, that and other miracles were done
to convince the Heathen.

Once this is clear and certain, That the Jews were a people hated of all other
Nations, and that upon this account only, because their Laws were different
from all people, Ester 3.8. How should they be otherwise? For they were the
Laws of Jehovah, the living and true God, condemning all the ^dolatries, and
superstitious Vanities of the Heathen. But the Heathen should not therefore
have hated the Israelites, as they did; but rather have cast away their
abominations, and sought, and served the God of Israel, as he had commanded.
Questionless the spite of all other Nations against Israel, was the old hatred,
that is in all men by nature, against God, and all that is of God. It might be
said of the Israelites then, as some of them said of the Christians afterward:
Act. 28.22.
They were a Sect (or sort of people) every where spoken against. Now (...)
could never have been so, but that the Gentiles had heard of the Israelites way
of worshipping the Lord Jehovah, and yet hated them upon that account. And do
not all Nations, at this day, hear the report of our Lord Jesus Christ? Do not
Turks and Tartars know the God of the Christians, and blaspheme him? So do
Infidel Jews, and all the Pagans at this day in Asia, Africa and America; and
yet they enquire not after him, care not to own, or serve him; but still
worship the works of their own hands, yea, (to speak with Scripture) Devils.
May we not therefore say, Have they not heard? Yes verily the sound of Christ,
To. 10.18.
and the Gospel, is gone out into all the earth.

Quest. If any shall yet quarrel Gods Dispensations toward the Gentiles, both
of old, and now adays, because the light of Gospel Truth is not alike imparted
to all, by an equal proportion of means; For that end,

Sol. I shall ask them, Whether God may not take the same liberty, that men do
many times, and yet are no way questioned for it? Must he be tied up, and bound
to terms, such as we our selves would not? May not he take, and use his
liberty, in the dispensing of his own gifts, specially when he leaves none
without witness? I wish men would read and meditate on Mat. 20.15. where you
may see, how ill the Lord takes it, to be questioned and quarrelled in that
inequality, which seems to be so to us. What if God see, that if they had more
light and means than we, and some others have, that they would rebel the more,
as we, and many others do? Is it not enough, to make them inexcusable, that
they hear, where Life and Salvation is to be had? Sure, they cannot say truly,
They have not heard. They hear (for ought I know) as much as Rahab did; and
they must say, if they speak truth, We have heard of Jesus Christ, but we did
not like him, to believe in him, as the Christians do. And may they not then be
said to perish, as the men of Jericho, Heb. 11.31. Who believed not? They
should have given credit to those common and confessed reports of God, and his
wonderful works for his people: But they despised them, as light news; and
refused to be at the pains of any further enquiry after God. And for this they
are charged with Unbelief, as Rahab, on the contrary, is commended for her
Faith. And do not the Turks and Heathen now the same, or the like?

I have yet one thing more to offer, viz. That the Gentiles of old, who were a
people far off, had wilfully separated themselves from Noah's and Shem's
Families, in which the worship of God was preserved, and kept pure for a while:
And so did others, before the Flood, separate themselves* and therefore in
their Idolatries (unto which they were given up) received the recompense of
their error, that was meet; God most righteously punishing the iniquity of the
Fathers upon the Children in after-ages, by leaving them without the means of
grace and knowledge, which some others had. And yet (as you heard before, he
left not himself without sufficient witness against them.

But the chief design of this Discourse being (...) show, How inexcusable they
are, who have the light of Gospel Truth, but do nor walk in it; shall proceed
to enquire into the case of these that turn the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
into wantonness, some way or other receiving it i^ vain. For these (I say
again) do not perish for want of a Remedy, but only for not applying it.

For proof hereof, I appeal to Joan 3.16* God so loved the World, that he gave
his only be^gotten Son, that whosoever believes on him, should not perish.
Here Is enough said, to show, Tha^ God is not wanting to men, but that they ar^
wanting to themselves. There Is provision made such, and so much* as none can
perish, (...) they who refuse to make use of it. Whosoeve^ believes on him,
shall have everlasting lif^* What can be said or done more on Gods part* What
constructions are made of this Scripture b^ many, I shall not mention, but
shall give the sense of Calvin upon it. The Love of Go^ here testified ( says
he) respects Humanugenus, mankind; and a note of universality (...) added, to
invite all promiscuously to the par^taking of this life, and to cut off all
excus^ ( observe that* from such as believe not. For this purpose ( says he)
the word [WORLD* is used, to show, that though there be nothing in the World
worthy of Gods love and favour^ yet to show himself gracious to the whole
World, he calls all without exception to the Faith of Christ. Indeed he says
too, That life eternal is offered unto all, so as notwithstanding Faith is not
of all. And in this he confesses, the special grace of God to some particular
persons.

Let it also be considered, That the word [WORLD] cannot rationally be taken in
any other sense. For in the next Verse, it is meant of the World, whereof some
are saved, and some perish, (as Reverend Davenant observes) and that they who
perish, perish only because they believe not on the Son of God. I shall not
debate, what advantage the coming of Christ into the World brought to such, as
make no use, reap no benefit by it. Certainly it states the question beyond all
dispute, That as Faith only saves, so Unbelief only condemns, which is all I
have to prove. For there is not the least hint of any defect on Gods part, but
all the fault is said on man alone, in not believing on the Son of God sent
into the World, not to condemn, but to save it. And here let Calvin speak what
he thought in this case: Certum quidem e, non omnes ex Christi morte fructum
percipere: Sed hoc ideo fit, quia eos impedit sua incredulitas. In Ep. ad Heb.
cap. 9. v. 27. It Is only by Infidelity, that all are not partakers of the
benefits of Christ's death.

Let me now argue a little further, Why do we persuade all men, without
exception, to believe on Christ, with a promise of Salvation by him, if they
believe? Is it reasonable to do so, if we are not persuaded, there is
sucfficient provision made, so as nothing is wanting, if there be Faith to
receive it? As I take it, we should not persuade men to believe on Christ, by
telling them, If they believe, then Christ died for them: Rather, as I suppose,
we may safely tel^ them, That Christ died for them, and thereupon persuade
them, to believe on him. We are bound to believe, that the thing is true,
before we can believe our share in it. The Object is in order of Nature, before
the Action. My belie^ makes not a thing true; but it is true in it self* and
therefore I believe it. And this is the method of Scripture* as far as I know.
The Feas^ was first prepared, and then the Guests were invited: All things are
ready, come unto the Marriage, Mat. 22.4. The Jews, who are the guests there
invited, refused to come: But were they not cast utterly off, and put into that
condition, wherein they abide unto this day, upon this account, That the Son of
God came to his own, Joan. 1.11
and his own received him not? How could they refuse, if there were no
provision made for them? Or justly perish only for refusing? I am very willing
to believe, That Christ was offered for me, before he was offered to me; and
that, if I dye in my sins, it is only for my not receiving Christ offered to
me. Sure I am, that Scripture never lays the death of Sinners, upon the want
of a (...), or Price of Redemption; but always upon unbelief, disobedience,
neglect of, and setting light by Christ, and the things of Christ. And this is
enough to ser^e my turn* That Scripture never hints any impediment to men's
Salvation, more than an evil heart of unbelief. For the intention of God, and
Christ, what is that to me, or any man else, seeing it is secret? The revealed
things belong to us; and we shall (for certain) be questioned one day only, Why
we did not accept of Christ, when he was tendered to us? It will not then excuse
us, to say, We could not tell, whether we were of those, whom Christ intended
to save. Once we have the command of God, to believe on the Son of God; and we
have a sure promise, if we believe, to be saved. And this, and nothing else,
will be the condemnation of the World, viz. That they disobeyed Gods command,
and believed not his promise.

Thus all Gods Messengers have a Warrant to invite all men to believe. But not
to invite the Devil, though they had an opportunity to speak with him, as any
man may speak to another: Yea, I am bold to think, it would be any man's sin, to
promise Salvation to the Devil, upon his believing in Christ. It were indeed a
belying the Lord, and saying, He says, what he has not said. And it were a
deceiving the Devil, in telling him, that which is not so. For the consequence
of this Hypothetical [If thou believe on the Son of God, thou shall be saved]
is true, as to any man, without exception: But as to the Devil, it is (for
ought I know) false in the connection, as well as in the parts of it; because he
is none of those, to whom God has promised Salvation, upon condition of
believing on Christ, Joan. 3.16. For the Command of God to believe, and his
Promise of Life upon believing, is all the groundwork upon which our Faith is
built; and this foundation the Devil has not, for his warrant and
encouragement to believe on the Son of God. For the Son of God took not on him,
or took not hold on, or helped not the Angels, Heb. 2.16. but the Seed of
Abraham. Where [ Abraham's Seed] notes not the Jews only (as all will grant) but
the Gentiles also; and that expression is used, to show, that Christ was the
same, that was promised to the Fathers; and sets out the benefit of Redemption,
as belonging to mankind, but not (if I may so speak) to Devil-kind.

Beside, It is not the Devils Sin, not to believe on Christ, or not to receive
him: He has sins enough besides, both for number and nature; and questionless
is a greater sinner, than any man can be; having sinned himself out of the
greatest happiness (and that in actual possession) that a Creature is capable
of, and sinned against that Light, which no man on earth can attain unto. But
Unbelief is not his sin, because there is no command obliging, nor any promise
inviting him to believe on Christ. But Unbelief is the sin of men, yea it is in
a manner all sin, as it seals upon a man his other sins, and causes the wrath
of God to abide upon him, Joan. 3. fin. Yea, it is the great aggravation of all
sins in this respect, that they might have been all pardoned, on such easy
terms, as Believing in the Lord Jesus Christ.

We may now bespeak sinners, as Naamans servants bespake him: If the Prophet
had commanded thee some great matter, 2 Reg 5.
would thou not have done it, etc. So, if God had required some great matter
of us, for our Salvation, should we not willingly have done it? But it is a very
easy thing, that he requires us to do. The Word is nigh us, as the Apostle
shows, To. 10.8. We have nothing to do, or suffer, for ^he appeasing of Gods
Wrath, or for the satisfy^ng of his Justice, or for purchasing the heavenly
^nheritance. The Son of God, in our flesh, has ^one and suffered all; and we
have nothing to ^o, but to receive him, as he is freely tendered and offered to
us. The Feast is prepared, without any cost or care of ours; and we are called
^o partake of it, with a sure promise of welcome.

All this while I forget not, what a contro^ersie there is among the Learned,
about the extent of Christ's death, but I dare not touch with it; and the
rather, because it no way concerns me, in the main design of this discourse. ^
have no controversy, but with the frowardness and wilfullness of sinners, who
are willing to make God the Author, both of their sin, and condemnation; and
pretend, That if all men would believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, as they are
required, they should not however be saved. These are the men I now deal with,
and these I desire to try, (whatever is controverted amongst the more Learned)
whether this be not a truth, viz. That Christ has satisfied so far, as they
shall be saved, if they believe: And to these I say, if they dye in their sins,
it is not upon the account of Christ's not dying for them, but only for their
not-believing on him. And for this I appeal to the whole tenor of Scripture,
and in particular to Joan. 3.16. where the gift of Christ is common, but the
efficacy of it limited to believing. And good cause why, since Christ dyed for
none, to save them whether they believe, or not.

It Is neither my design, nor desire, to disput^ with any, but with unreasonable
and wicke^ men. And therefore I shall take no notice, (...) what is commonly
said, viz. That Christ dye in the stead, and sustained the persons of all,
un^to whom the benefit of his Death was intende^* Only I say, If a sum be
paid, sufficient to re^deem so many poor Captives, provided the^ shall all
their days serve him that is their R^^deemer; are they not all redeemed,
thoug^ some should refuse the condition, and choose (...) be Slaves still?
However, this I affirm, Th^^ the extent of Christ's Death is such, and so gre^^
as I never read, or heard of any one, that p^^rished in his sin, because Christ
had paid (...) price for his Redemption. For the tenor of (...) Gospel, I gave
it before, and I have (...) learnt any other, Marc. 16.16.
than, That he that believe^^ shall be saved; and he that believes not, shall
(...) damned. Let others dispute, for whom Chr^^^ dyed, (I cannot hinder them)
I am sure Chr^^^ never suffered or satisfied for any, so as th^^ shall have the
saving benefits of his death, wi^^^out laying hold on him by a lively Faith.
An^ I shall be as sure, on the other side, That wh^^^ever shall believe on the
Lord Jesus, with all (...) heart, he shall be saved by him. And this I tak^ to
be sound Doctrine, that may be safely preach^ed to all, and every one, without
exception viz. Thou, O man, whoever thou art, Christ dyed for thee; and if thou
believe on him, wit^ all thine heart, as God has commanded thee thou shall be
saved. In this we preach the tenor of the Gospel, as you have it before; and
he that thus preaches Christ, will give little encouragement to sinners,
except to repent, and turn to God; and so all sinners should by all means be
encouraged. But here is no encouragement to impenitency, or unbelief, because
there is no promise of any benefit by Christ's death, but only to true believers,
and penitents. This then I resolve, That if I, or any other, dye in our sins,
it is only, because we believe not on the Son of God. For of a truth, I know
not how to clear and justify God, (as I desire to do) if any thing done, or
not done on his part, be it, that shuts us out from having eternal Life. I am
(I confess) altogether for this, That a wicked, proud, filthy, evil heart of
unbelief, and nothing else, stands in the way of men's Salvation; and if that be
once taken away, there will be no other hinderance. I have such thoughts of
God, as I cannot think, but he has done his part, so as nothing will be
wanting, if we are but heartily willing to do ours.

I could indeed say (what is sufficient in this case) That no man knows, or can
know, (supposing Christ's death to be so confined, as some will have it) Whether
he be one of those, for whom Christ dyed not. And therefore, if it were an
adventure, a man had better run the hazard, than do worse, by wilful
shipwracking himself, through final impenitency and unbelief. As a man (one
would think) should not refuse to cast the Dice for his Life, though he knew
for certain, that some or other must dye; and he cannot be sure, that he shall
not be one of them* Only (I say still) there is no hazard in believi^^ on Christ,

But in t^is I desire to be resolved, Whethe^ he that beileves not on Christ
offered in the Go^^pel, does not refuse a fair offer of somewha^ that he might
have had, if he had believed? Th^^ is no Position, but only a Quaere. If it be
an^swered, That Unbelievers are damned for not obeying Gods Command, and for
not-believin^ his Promise, I grant, it is so, and their con^demnation, upon
that account, is most just* Only give me leave to think still, That such
re^fuse, what they might have received, and so (...) guilty, as they were, who
made light of the i^^vitation, Mat. 22.5. and went their waye^* They might have
shared in the wedding Feast, (...) well as others, if they would have come. An^
therefore I wish all, whom it may concern, t^ be very wary, that poor ignorant
Souls, wh^^ are too much bent, and set upon undoing themselves, may have no
occasion given them of so doing. For what danger can there be, in saying
indifferently, what Scripture says often in terminis, and so pressing all to
believe on him? Herein they will remove a stumbling block* which otherwise many
will set up, to cast themselves down. But there is no occasion of stumbling,
unless they preach and teach, what they never learned from Scripture, viz. That
Christ gave himself a ransom for all, live as they list, and do as they
please, their Redemption is purchased, and they are sure to be saved however.
This indeed would be false Doctrine, with a witness, yea, and a vengeance too
upon many. But no poor Souls will ever complain of their Ministers, for telling
them the good news of Christ's dying for them, so long as they tell them
withal, How the Death of Christ will be effectual to them, and not otherwise,
viz. by a sound, and a working Faith.

For the Question about absolute and conditional Redemption, I am not wholly
ignorant of it: But I still resolve to wave all controversies of that nature,
and only reason the case with poor Souls, that they may not cast themselves
away in their perverse disputings, about they know not what; and in their
wilful neglecting of that Salvation, which they are sure to obtain, in a way
of believing, and obeying God, and not otherwise. To these I say again, that
which is the Word of God, who cannot lie: Let them repent of their unlawful
deeds, deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, lead sober, and righteous, and
godly lives; and therein give a sure evidence and proof of their real closing
with, and accepting of Christ by Faith, that they shall be as certainly saved,
as any that are now in Heaven. For this is indeed Gospel, and this is the Word
of Grace, as they may easily read, if they will but open their Bibles. But they
may turn over their Bibles long enough, or ever they find any Text to this
purpose, That Christ dyed to save them, though they never believe. Paul and
Silas told the Jailer, Act. 16.31. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved. They never scrupled, Whether he were one of them, for whom
Christ dyed; but preached to him the Gospel, as they had received it of the
Lord: And he doing, as he was commanded, had forthwith as much as he desired,
or needed.

Before I close up this, I shall add one thing more. Is there any man alive, of
whom any other can, or dare say, This is one of them, for whom Christ dyed not?
If there be not, then make no difference, where thou know none; but be wise
according to that which is written. This we may all safely resolve upon, We
shall never suffer at Gods hand, for our ignorance, or neglect of any thing,
that God has not revealed in his Word. Deuteronomy 29.29.
The things that are revealed, belong unto us, etc. These we are to believe,
and obey, and so live. And if there be any man excepted in the Act of Pardon,
except Unbelievers, and that only for their unbelief, it is more than I ever
read of, or could learn by reading the Bible.

The third great Objection Answered.

Obj. 3. WHat is all this that you have said, of Christ's dying for us, in case
we believe, so long as we have no power of our selves to believe, or do any
thing, toward the working out of our Salvation? Alas! We would fain relieve
our selves, and rise out of the misery we lie under: but we are insufficient of
our selves to do any thing; and thus we have been always taught by our
Ministers. Now it being thus with us, whose fault is it, if we perish, and die
in our sins?

Sol. Let the fault lie where it will, I hope to make it certain and clear,
that it lies not on Gods part; yea more, that it lies only on our part.

1. If I say, There is no inability in sinful men, but what they have brought
upon themselves, I suppose, much is said, for the clearing of God in this case:
And this is most certainly true, but I shall not insist upon it, because there
is much more to be said, and more to our purpose.

2. I say, in Answer to this grand Objection, That there is no inability in man
to repent, and believe in Christ, and to bring forth good fruits, such as
become Repentance and Faith, which he might not put off, if he himself would.
And if this be made good, I suppose, the Objection from man's inability, will
have little force in it.

That man has brought himself into a miserable incapacity, there is no
question; and that the Devil helps to keep him under it, is as unquestionable:
But that man may put it off, if he will, may seem at first to be strange,
however I hope anon to prove it true.

For the insufficiency and inability of a natural man to all, or any spiritual
good, I am (I hope) as much as any man else, can justly and reasonably be, and
I hope to show my persuasion in this sufficiently, by what I have to say. Only
I am impatient to hear some discourse (as sometimes they do) of man's inability
by nature, as if it were a natural and necessary, more than a sinful infirmity.

To prevent all mispr^^ion of me in this point I profess my unfeigned Faith in
these Particular^ viz. That no man can come to Christ, except the Father draw
him, Joan. 6.44. That Christ dyed for us, when we were weak, To. 5.6. S^ weak,
as if he had not lifted us up by his power we should never have risen again. I
know an^ acknowledge, That the carnal mind is enmity (...) the Law of God, To.
8.7.
and cannot be subject, till Go^ circumcise the heart, and take away the stone
(...) of it. I willingly grant, That God works in (...) both to will, and to
do, Philip. 2.13. That (...) begins, continues, increases, and accomplishe^ the
work of his grace in all his people. No^ have I any quarrel against any, that
cry dow^ the ability of man by nature; for I am fully (...) wholly with them,
if they will say (as I) Th^^ man's weakness is also his wickedness: As (...) Law
also determines, that there is Infirmitas, (...) well as Necessitas culpabilis.

Here it will be said, That every one says (...) much. And I take it for a
satisfying answer, (...) as we shall not further quarrel about it. All tha^ I
aim at, is this, That they that understan^ would express themselves in this, so
as vain an^ foolish men may not please themselves, We have not (as Papists
report us) turned men into beasts or stones, by taking away Free Will; but
acknowledge it so far, as to make al^ flesh unexcusable before Gods judgment
seat. Io White, Way to the true Church, S^^t. 40.
in a mis^conceit of their natural infirmity and weakness, (...) if it were not
their wickedness, and they we^^ to be pitied only, but not blamed for it, or
(a^^most) not very much. For thus, or to the purpose, many will discourse upon
occasion* That as far as God shall give them grace, and wherewithal, they are
not, and they will not be wanting in their endeavors, to do the best they can.
They are by nature, and of themselves, able to do little, or nothing, that good
is; and wish it were otherwise, but how can they help it? They have a good
heart and will; but they want strength to do what they desire. And what is
this, but a favoring themselves, with a kind of reflection upon God, as if he
were wanting in somewhat; and that they might do better, if he had done his
part?

Besides, I am not ignorant, what an Argument is urged by some, upon this
ground of pleading man's natural inability, and what ado there is to answer it;
when (I think) one word would be enough to choke it, as I hope to show anon.

Now, for the satisfaction of all these, I grant, There is a lamentable
inability in every man by nature; But this I contend for, That man has a
Liberty also, which he shows abundantly, upon all occasions; and never more,
than in his sin, and his resisting God, in all the saving methods used for
bringing him to repentance. I do not mean by Free Will, a power in man to will
good and evil alike: Nor do I set Free Will against the grace of God, as
Papists do.
Whatever inability he has, (and let him make as much as he can of it) he has
a liberty too, so much, as he does most freely choose all the ungodly ways,
wherein he walks. And this I intend to discourse a while, in answer to the
third Objection.

To say, That a man by nature has Free Will, may seem strange to some; but it
is true however; and no disparagement at all to the free grace of God, but
serves to make all flesh inexcusable before Gods Judgment seat.

To clear this, we must distinguish, as Zanchy, and others do, between the
nature, and the power of man's Free Will. And to this purpose speaks Zanchy, in
Tractat. de lib. arbit. cap. 6. If we respect the nature of Free Will in man,
Liberum arbitrium per peccatum factum est servum.

Liberum arbitrium semper liberum est, non semper est bonum.


it is always free: But if we consider the power of it, it is a servant to
sin, and can of it self do nothing but sin. And to this purpose he cites
August. Tom. 3. in Euchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 30. Man using his Free Will
amiss, or abusing it, lost both himself, and it. And therefore learned men
teach, Libera est homini voluntas, sed ad malum. Aust. contr. Pelag. Ep. lib 1.
That man's will is rather a slave than free. Yet the same men, with one
consent, write, That the will of every man, whether good or evil, is always
free; so as whatever he wills, whether good or evil, he wills it freely, and
without force. And then again he cites August. Tom. 7. contra Iul. Pelag. lib.
1. cap. 2. Per illud p^ccant qui cum delectione peccant.
Free Will is so far from being lost in a sinner, as by it all do sin,
specially such as sin with delight, etc. And then he prosecutes this Thesis,
Serva voluntas est, quae propter corruptionem sub malorum cupiditatum imperio
captiva tenetur, ut nihil quam malum eligere possit, etiamsi id sponte, and
libenter faciat. Calv. de lib. arb.
That man after his fall, though he became a servant of sin, has not lost all
his liberty, but still retains that which is natural. And this is nothing else,
than what the Greek Fathers call (...), which imports a man to be Sui juris
Free Will is the operation of the will, in choosing, or refusing, what the
judgment of our understanding offers.
, as every man is to the elicite acts of his will, wherein he cannot be forced,
Absolute freedom of will is properly in God, who can neither be compelled, nor
yet ordered, or over-wrought by any other: But we give it to man, so far, Nos
non alibi statuimus peccandi necessitatem, quam invitio voluntatis, unde
spontaneant esse ipsam sequitur. Calv. de lib. arb. Ex ho^ enim quod ratio
deliberans se habet ad oppofi^a, voluntas in utrumque potest. Aq. 12. Qu. 6.2.
Solumid quod habet intellectum potest age^^ judicio libero in quantum cognoscit
universalem rationem bonis ex qua potest judicare hoc, vel illud esse bonum.
Aqu. p. ^. q. 59. c. 3.
as he is free from all force and compulsion. So any man uses his Free Will, as
often, as according to the judgment of his own reason, he chooses that which
seems best to him; not forced by any principle without, but freely inclined by
a principle within him. This then is the worst of my meaning, That a Sinner is
a reasonable Creature, and follows the determination of his own reason and
judgment, in what he does. And if man have not this liberty, I know not how he
can be a sinner. He has indeed no good will to what is of God, but the best
part of him is enmity against it, To. 8.7. Yet he retains his Liberum
arbitrium, though he has lost Facultatem ad bonum. The imaginations of man's
heart, since the fall, are only and continually evil Gen: 6: 5:
. He hates the good, and loves the evil, but both freely. Non amisimus naturam,
sed gratiam.
We have not lost our Free Will, but our Good Will. Indeed we have too much
Free Will, unless we could use it better; and this will be our condemnation,
that we so willingly and wilfully refused the good, and chose the evil.
Voluntas in natura, etc. a bono patest declinare, ut faciat malem, quod fit
libero arbitrio: Et a malo, ut faciat bonum, quod non fit sine divino
adjutorio: August: de Civit: lib: 15. c: 21.
We cannot now will that which is our only good, but we freely and willingly
refuse it. Man alone has cast himself down: But he cannot alone raise himself
up again. It is God that works in us, to will, and to do, Philip. 2.13. And
in this we are his workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10.

Therefore one has resolved in this case (to my thinking) as well as can be:
Toll gratiam non est, quod salvet: Toll liberum arbitrium, non est quod
salv^tur.
Take away Grace, and there is nothing to save: Take away Free Will, there is
nothing to be saved. God gives all grace to all; but he gives not grace to any,
but reasonable creatures. And when he gives that grace, which effectually
changes the heart, he no way infringeth man's liberty. For though it be
granted, That God working the will to determine it self, it must determine
accordingly; yet Gods working takes not from man's will the power of dissenting,
and doing the contrary; but so inclines it, as having liberty to do otherwise,
Voluntas etiam a Deo cogi non potest, etsi possit ab illo de necessitate
mutari, operando in illa sicut in natua: Aqu: 12: q: 6: Contra rationem ipsiu^
actus voluntatis est, quod sit coactus, etc: 12: Qu: 6: a: 4: C:
yet it actually determines one way, and not another. So man's Free Will is
still preserved, since without it, I know not, how he can do any thing
commendable, or blameable. For what any man is enforced unto, is not his good,
or evil. Paul says indeed, That he compelled some to blaspheme, Act. 26.11.
Which cannot be understood otherwise, than that he used all rigor and
extremity to draw and drive them to it. But they were not purely compelled; if
so, the sin had been his, and not theirs. But they chose to blaspheme, rather
than suffer; and this was their sin, which they would have avoided, had they
been sound in the Faith, as those Worthies mentioned Heb. 11. Though perhaps
Paul speaks more his own endeavor, than the event or effect of it upon others.

Here by the way observe, What a great de^^sion there is in the World, in and
about this ^articular, viz. If men be strongly tempted to (...), by any sore
penalty threatened, and ready to (...) inflicted, they presently call it a
[FORCE] and persuade themselves, the sin is only theirs, ^ho compelled them to
it. This is a delusion, ^or no man can be forced to sin, though he may ^e
strongly tempted more ways than one. For ^o far as a man is forced, he does
not sin.

The force of Temptation may make a man do, what else he would not: Passiones
animi non possunt cogere voluntatem, licet alit. moveant inclinando affectum:
Aquin:
As a storm causes the Mariners sometimes to cast their lading over^oard. But
the Casuists resolve all mixed actions of this kind, to be more free, than
otherwise. Men would not indeed do such things, if there were not some weighty
consideration moving them; yet they are not compelled, for they might do
otherwise.

A man may be purely forced to do somewhat, that he would not; but his will
cannot be forced without destroying the nature of it. As far as a man wills or
nills any thing, he wills or nills it freely, though the will has (as most
think) necessary dependence in its elicite acts, upon the understanding.

Obj. But though the Will be thus free, yet there is an unavoidable necessity
on every man, in his natural estate, so as he cannot but sin in all he does:
For a bad tree cannot bring forth good fruit, Luc. 6.43. A man by nature is
dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1. Can a dead man raise himself to life
again? Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Then may
ye also do good, who are ac^customed to do evil, Jer. 13.23.

Sol. For what is urged from Scripture, I a^ far from gainsaying it, because
it contradict^ not me, in saying, That every man sins willingl^ and wilfully. A
man by nature is dead in (...) and say, The spiritually dead can no more rai^^
themselves to life, than they who are naturall^ and corporally dead; Yet know,
there is a vast^ difference between the one, and the other. H^ that is
spiritually dead, has a will: But the n^^turally dead, has none at all. The
spirituall^ dead, shows a wicked will, in resisting the means used for his
recovery; Whereas he that naturally dead, cannot be said to be unwilling (...)
rise again. A man in his sin, is as a sick ma^^ yet the sick in body, and the
sick in soul, are no^ in all alike* A man sick in body, would with (...) his
heart rise, if he could; and keeps his (...) only, because he is forced to it,
and cannot sit up* A Soul-sick man, let him be, as you will have him, I am
sure, is as unwilling, as he is unabl^ to rise. He is indeed like the Sluggard,
tha^ will not rise, because of cold, finding his Be^ warm and easy. So is a
sinner, in his sinfu^ condition, he loves and likes it, and is loath t^ change.
Nay, he will quarrel any one, tha^ goes about to rouse or raise him; he will
not en^dure any rebukes for sin, but loves it, so as t^ hate any, that would
divorce him from it. Not is he as a block, or a beast: He sees what is good* as
God has showed it him, and he abhorrs it* and chooses to abide in the condition
wherein he is, as best for him.

And thus Scripture speaks of man's weakness, as his wickedness, and his
infirmity is his iniquity too. Take him as he is, and you will find him thus:
He cannot will that whith is good, because he will not: His [CAN] and his
[WILL] being all one. Such is his natural bent to evil, that he voluntarily
chooses it, and refuses the good. And now let any man judge, Whether such an
inability can be any excuse for sin, it being at most but a moral Impotency (as
we call it) and not a natural.

Hence (methinks) I cannot make good sense of what some are wont to say, That
they would repent, if they could. I suppose, it would be more sense, to say,
They would repent, if they would. For certain, If a man be heartily willing to
repent, there is nothing left to hinder his repentance. Perkins of Gods
free grace, and man's free will.
A serious and instant will to repent and believe, includes in it the hatred of
sin, and a purpose of not sinning. He that truly desires to repent, does indeed
repent, because he hates his own evil ways.

I grant it willingly, That no man can turn to God, without the grace of God;
but that is all one, as to say, No man will turn to God, without the grace of
God. For there is nothing that hinders him, but his wicked, froward will. A man
may have a charitable disposition, and be heartily willing to relieve others in
their necessities, and yet may not, because he has not wherewithal to do it.
His heart may be large, when his estate is strait enough. And in this case, the
will is accepted for the deed. For almsdeeds are imperate, outward acts,
wherein the will cannot sway all; and therefore it may be rationally said of
such a man, He would with all his heart, if he could. But to repent and believe
are elicite, inward, immediate acts of the will, and are not exercised by
another power, as the imperate are. To. 10.
With the heart man believes, and with the heart man repents. There is, I
grant, an outward reformation of the life, which is a fruit of Repentance; but
Repentance is a root in the heart, and when a man is changed, so as to hate the
evil, and love the good: Or when ever a man of unwilling, is made willing, then
he repents. And therefore it cannot be said with good sense, Men would repent,
if they could: There Is more sense, and truth too, in saying, Men could repent,
if they would. To say, I am willing to repent, but I cannot; is all one, as to
say, I am willing to repent, but I will not. I may be willing to work, or to
walk; but because I am sick and weak in body, I cannot. But if I am willing to
repent and believe, the work is done: For these are the immediate acts of my
will.

Obj. But some may object, That many gracious Souls may heartily desire, what
they cannot do; and Divines commonly resolve, That good desires are accepted
with God, when there are failings in the performance.

Sol. I fully accord with all those Divines in this, and say, That the best on
earth are defective in doing what they desire: Their desires are indeed beyond
what they are able to do. They would pray with more fervency, and ardent
affection; they would hear with more attention and intention, than they do; and
this is their great burden, that they cannot do as they would. But it must be
considered too, That they are defective in their desires also; and then we may
soon answer, what is here objected, viz. That as to the immediate acts of the
will, they cannot what they would. For they would love God more than they do;
and it is their burden, that they love him no more: And blessed (say I) are all
such poor Souls, and I wish there were more of such in the world. For too many
(I fear) think they love God well enough, and that in this, they are not
wanting. But to answer the Objection, consider,

1. That the fervency of the Saints love to God, is much allayed by many things
without them, such as are unavoidable to them, whiles they are in flesh.

2. All the defects of their love, and other spiritual affections, are from the
imperfection of the work of grace; their wills being not so thoroughly
sanctified, but that there is flesh lusting against the spirit. Hence, when the
spirit is willing, the flesh is weak, Mat. 26.41.
so as they cannot do what they would. They cannot love God so, as they would
love him. But this makes nothing against what I said before. For so far as
they are sanctified, they are willing; but so far as they are flesh, they are
not so. The spirit makes them willing, to what the flesh will not suffer them:
and this is their burden, that they have so much of the body of death in and
about them. But I say again, so far as a man's heart is renewed, so far he
loves God; and the imperfection of his love, is from the defects of his will,
not thoroughly and perfectly sanctified and changed. But still I am to seek, and
cannot imagine, how any man can be willing to love God, and not actually love
him at all, as certainly they that are carnally minded, do not. A man may not
love God, so much as he would, and I have given a reason why. But I cannot
apprehend, how a man can be willing to love God, and not love him at all. And
the case is all one in Faith and Repentance. A man by nature loves not Christ,
but loves his sin; and this makes him distaste the terms, upon which Christ is
offered to him; and he is unwilling to believe on him, because of the old
hatred. This natural old enmity makes him unwilling to close with Christ; but
if that were once cured, he would forthwith believe, to the saving of his Soul.
Now if it be man's enmity (as indeed it is) that makes him unable, consider, I
pray, how far such an inability will excuse. I never heard, that any man was
an enemy to another, against his will. There Is no Virtue, or Gift of God in us,
without our wills; and in every good act, Gods grace, and man's will concur.
Perkin^ of Gods fr^e grace, and man's free will.
The voice of the corrupt will of man, is, I do that which is evil, and I will
do it: I do not that which is good, and I will not do it.

That which keeps men fast bound in the cords of their sins, is the frowardness
of a wicked heart, wilfully choosing to walk on in their ungodly ways, and
refusing all means of reclaiming them.

Quest. But how shall that enmity and wilfullness be removed? Or is it their
fault, that it abides upon them? It has been preached for sound Doctrine, That
a man can never repent. or believe, till God circumcise the heart, and take
away the stony heart, and give a new heart, and a new spirit.

Sol. And I do allow of this Doctrine with all my heart. But what then? All
this will not clear us, if we do not repent. For our sin is never the less
sinful, because (as I said before) we love it, and will by no means part with
it. I subscribe to what Luther says: Impius lubenti voluntate malum facit, and
haec est voluntas: Luth. de serve. arbit.
Verum hanc lubentiam faciendi malum, non potest omittere, aut coercere, and
haec est necessitas. I know well, that the infirmity of a natural man is great
upon him, and invincible to any thing, but Almighty grace. But I know too, that
a natural man loves his sin with all his heart, and resolves to serve his
lusts, and will not be persuaded to renounce them. And for the ways of God, he
hates and scorns them, and will not walk in them; Yea, and does what he can, to
keep up the old hatred, resisting all the assaults, that are made upon him, for
the subduing of him to the obedience of Christ's Laws. What think you? Is not
every wicked man free, in making all the opposition that he can, against the
means of his conversion? And now let any man ask himself, Whose fault it is,
that he is an enemy to God, and the ways of godliness: Or that he chooses the
ways of death, when he is often and earnestly invited to walk in the way that
leads unto life? What kind of question is this? I wonder men are not ashamed
to ask, How the enmity of their hearts against God shall be removed? They may
answer themselves if they please, thus, That they love their lusts, and for
their lusts sake they cannot abide Gods Laws. I ask them therefore in the Name
of God, and let them answer as they should, or (I assure them) they shall
answer one day as they would not: Why do not all you profane, ungodly,
debauched men, leave your wicked ways; and why are you so unwilling to leave
them? Why do you slight, and set at naught, scorn and deride the ways of God
and godliness? I hope you will blush to say, You are forced to do so, when your
hearts know, you take pleasure in so doing. Is it not your delight and pastime
to do wickedly? And are not the ways of God, the things you abhor, and cannot
abide? Are you reasonable men, and can you say or think, you are necessitated
and compelled to take these vain and wicked courses, when your own hearts know,
you love them, and choose them, and will not be persuaded to the contrary?

Hence I say further, That I cannot believe, God will damn any man, for doing
that, which he was heartily unwilling to have done, but could not, or was not
able to refrain. I believe also, That God will damn no man, Neque enim sic
necessario peccare impios dicimus quia voluntaria deliberata que malitia
peccent. Calvin. de lib. a^b. contra Pighium, in 2. lib.
for not doing the good, which he was heartily willing to have done, but could
not. And I believe, all men shall be condemned for this, That they would not
walk in Gods ways, and for that they would go on in their own ways. And if
the whole tenor of Scripture speak not this, I may be ashamed to understand it
no better. And to say no more, I confess my self unable to conceive, the
righteousness of God in his Judgments, if he should pass sentence of death and
condemnation upon any poor Souls, that have been sincerely willing to do what
he commanded, and only wanted strength and ability to do it. The natural man
cannot know spiritual things: 1 Cor. 2.14.
But it is also said, They are foolishness to him, and he scorns them.

As to what is alleged from Ier. 13.23. Obj. from Ier. 23. answered.
I answer, There is so great a dissimilitude, as the Argument a Simili will not
hold, to prove what is pretended. The Ethiopian, though he be never so
willing, cannot change his skin. Hence we say of a man that labors in vain,
that he is washing a Blackmore. And the Leopards spots are of the same nature.
But the wickedness of the wicked is not so. I am apt to think, many a Blackmore
would be made white, if he could: But no wicked man is willing to be made
clean. I have heard indeed (how true it is I know not) that the blackest
Aethiopians with them, are the beauties, even as the fairest are with us. Now
if a Blackmore might change his skin, and would not, I should think him to be a
just and fit resemblance of ungodly sinners. For these Aethiopians (as I may
call them) are not willing to change their skins: Such black Souls will not be
made white. Nay, the blacker they are, the better they seem in their own eyes;
Ier: 9: 6: They have taught, etc. i. e. enured, or accustomed themselves, they
have g^t such an habit and custom of sinning, that they cannot leave it.
and the deeper they are dipped in that dye, the more they are pleased with their
black hue. And let it be observed, what that Text has in terminis: How can ye
that are accustomed, etc. Or, Ye that have learnt, and are instructed? For the
Original has in it the notion of teaching or learning. They had enured
themselves to do evil. Old Sinners accustomed to their wicked ways, are as one
that has learnt what he cannot forget. And yet if a man learn any thing that is
bad and base, he is never the more commended, nor yet the less blamed, because
he cannot forget it. A custom in evil is far worse, than the first single act
of sin.

And I have yet one Consideration more, that will clear this matter beyond all
exception, and it is this, That the more unable any man is to repent, the more
hateful he is in the sight of God. Custom in sin, draws a crust upon
Conscience, hardens the heart, and makes a man more unable to repent. And will
any man say, That such an obdurate Sinner, is therefore the more excusable?
Nay, he is the more abominable, even for that reason, in the sight of God and
man. The more sick and weak in body any one is, the more he is pitied, because
men know, he would be better if he could, and is glad to hear of any good means
to recover him. But we cannot so pity Sinners, that have an hard and impenitent
heart; but account them therefore the greater Sinners, because they cannot
repent. They cannot indeed, because they will not; and their greater inability
is nothing, but their greater obstinacy and malignity; so as the best that can
be made of it, is no more, than if a Thief should plead for himself at the
bar, That he has been used to filching and stealing so long, as he cannot
leave it. The same Plea it is for any man to say, I have sinned so long, and am
so much hardened, as I cannot repent. And though every Sinner be not alike
hardened in sin, yet every one has the same inclination, which by frequent and
continued exercise, will become a custom. For the difference of Sinners is
much in degrees; and if the impotency of an old Sinner be no plea, neither will
the impotency of any.

Obj. If any yet say, It is no fault of ours, that we are so much inclined to
evil, and so averse to God, and all that is good,

Sol. I hope they will remember, That God made man righteous, or upright, Eccl.
7. ult. And that we are now born in sin, is the corruption of our nature, for
which we are beholden to our selves, as much as Adam was to himself, [They] i:
e: Mankind: It was not Adams sin alone; so some understand it.
for his first transgression, and falling from God. For we sinned as well as
he, and then contracted the guilt and filth we now lie under, even before we
are born. And so much the Apostle aver^s plainly, To. 5.12. which if it be
denied, all the Apostles Argument in that place, to prove the Lord Christ to be
our Righteousness, will be of little force, or rather none at all, as I
conceive, with submission to better judgments.

Obj. If it be said, Man had never fallen at first, if God had not left him to
himself?

Sol. I answer, That God did not first leave man, but man first left God; and
judge, if it were not so: Posse quod voluit.
For God gave him a power to stand, if he himself would: If he gave him not a
will to use that power, is God to be faulted for that? V^lle quod potuit:
Would you have God to make him unchangeable?

Obj. But Man might have stood unmovable though he had not been made
unchangeable, (...) God had upheld him, as he did the elect An^gels.

Sol. No question, but God could, and might have upheld him; but he was not
pleased so t^ do. And yet he is not to be charged with the fall of man. For he
gave him sufficient power and strength to stand, if he would, and was (...)
this enough? If a Father gives his Son a stock (...) Money, or an Estate,
whereupon he may liv^ comfortably, by his good management of it; an^ the Son do
(as we read of one Luc. 15.) spen^ and waste all, and come to beggary; can an^
man justly say, the Father did not his part for h^^ Sons good? What would men
have of God* Or what they make of him? God made Man (...) glorious Creature,
and gave him a reasonabl^ Soul, and liberty to choose for himself, such as (...)
other earthly Creature had. And when God had made him a reasonable Creature, He
dealt with, and by him, as became the nature and quality of such a Creature. If
God had divested Man of his Liberty, he had abas'd his Nature below it self,
and indeed made him to be no Man, or reasonable Creature.

Obj. But God might have preserved him in the estate, wherein he was first
made, holy and righteous.

Sol. What will men make of God? We read how ill God takes it, to be thought
such a one as we are, Psalm. 50.21. The men that argue thus, do much worse. For
they would make God to be such, as they themselves would not be. They will not
be tied up to the wills of other men, (though perhaps better than themselves)
in every transaction, or concernment of their own. They will say, Why should we
be bound to them? These are our own concernments, and why should we give others
an account of them? May not we do with our own, as we will? And no man
questions such men for their doings, specially so long, as nothing is done, but
what is comely and equal. But when the great and mighty God does any thing
like, and disposes of his Creatures with infinite wisdom, vain men will
presently question, Why does he so? Let any man show any the least
unrighteousness in God, or that man could not have preserved himself, in that
blessed estate, wherein God had set him, and then they say somewhat. But the
contrary is most certain and true, viz. That Man might, and should have been
happy, if he had not wilfully cast himself away. And therefore, Why does a
living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sin? Let us search and try
our ways, and turn again unto the Lord, Let us lift up our hearts, with our
hands, unto God in the Heavens. We have transgressed and rebelled, and thou
have not pardoned, Lam. 3.39, 40, 41, 42. Nothing becomes us in our sinful
condition, so well as such a confession. Do we believe, there is a God that
made us, and dare we question his dealings, as if he punished us upon any
account, but our transgressions? Surely God will not do wickedly, neither will
the Almighty pervert judgment, Job 34.12. And v. 11. You have an Argument for
it: The work of a man shall be render unto him, and cause every man to find
according to his ways. Had man continued in his obedience,; or being fallen,
humbled himself, and then God had rejected him, there might have been supposed
some occasion of complaining* But it is quite otherwise: For God ran after man,
when man had run away from him; an^ provided for his recovery, to a more
blessed an^ glorious estate, when he could think of nothing* but a few figg
leaves to cover his shame. An^ God is still reaching out his merciful arms, to
lay hold on him, inviting and wooing him, and never refuses any Soul, that
turns to him; and what would men have more?

Obj. But if it be said, I cannot, in the case I am, turn my self*

Sol. I say thou lie in what thou say: For, to speak as it is, thou art
not willing to turn unto the Lord; and this, and nothing else, will be thy
condemnation in the great day of account C^sset voluntas propria, and non erit
Infernus: There would be no Hell, but for our wicked will.
* There is a price paid, and a purchase made, and thou art invited to come, and
take possession of it. But thou had rather abide where thou art, and hold
thy sins as Sweetmeats under thy tongue, and wilt not let them go, though
thou have been often told, they will be the bane of thy Soul. And how dare
thou say, Thou can not turn thy self; when God, and thine own Heart, and the
World too, know, thou art enamored on thy sin, and have such a liking to it,
^s thou will by no means be persuaded to part with it? Will thou wilfully
prosecute thy sinful designs and courses, and set thine heart upon ^hine
iniquity, and say, Thou can not turn from it? For shame speak sense, and talk
no more so absurdly. Will a man be at cost and ^ains to serve and feed his
lusts, and he not love them? And if thou love them, they have thy will; and
when thou art willing to part with them (I say) heartily willing, the work of
Conversion is done. But whilst thou art not willing to part with thy lusts, say
as it is, I will ^ot, I will not. Say the truth, for so it is. Thou had
rather part with thy Soul for ever, than part with the pleasures of sin for a
season. Thou delightest in thy own ways, and art one of them that say unto
God, Depart from us, Job 21.14
for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. It is not with ungodly ones, as
they pretend: For they choose their own ways, and when they eat the fruits of
them, they are but filled with their own devices. They first sow iniquity, and
then reap shame and misery. When they go down to Hell, they go where they had
a mind to be. They have been often and earnestly called upon, to pity and
favor their poor Souls, but they would not be persuaded. How many a Sinner
has parted with his life for his lusts sake? And all do so, as to their Souls.
If men would study Scripture more, and search their own hearts more, than they
do, they would soon answer their own Arguments. Let me now commend ^o them one
place, viz. Pro. 1. from v. 20. to the end of the Chapter; and let them
consider what the wisdom of God judges, concerning the wicked ways of men.
And O! that me^ would read, and weigh our Saviors words Joan. 3.19, 20. This
is the condemnation, tha^ light is come into the world, and men loved darkdess
rather than light, because their deeds were evil. Christ, and his Word, and all
his Ordinances, are a Light; and wicked men, lik^ Thieves, cannot abide them,
because they would not be discovered by them. This is the judgment, that
Scripture passes upon ungodly men; and if they would pass the same, and s^
judge and condemn themselves, they might fin^ peace in approaching to God. But
to argue an^ whartle about the ways of Gods Providence an^ Grace, as if they
were not equal; when God and their own hearts know, they are passionately in
love with, yea and madd upon their Idols* I mean their Lusts, and loose
practices; the will turn to no good account one day, whateve^ men count of now.
They that are so apt t^ quarrel God, should rather call themselves to an
account; and if they would be exact in this work* we should have more
complaints of themselves, that their own ways are unequal, and all the ways
of God most equal, and just, and good. To shut up this, I shall only mention
one Text, Pro. 8.36. All that hate me, love death. They are the words that were
spoken by the infinite and eternal Wisdom of God; who says a^ much in effect,
Joan. 3.19, 20. before cited* Wicked men love darkness, and death. They are not
damned (as they pretend) to Sin and Hell against their wills; but they love
them, Non appetitu naturali, aut per electionem, sed in nature. Aquin.
and choose them, when they might forbear and avoid them. They love their Sins,
and therefore hate their Souls: They love Sin, and in so doing love Death: They
are willing to be damned, as willing (for certain) as a man that wittingly
takes Poison, is willing to kill himself.

Obj. But some will say, That few are so wilful, till God hardens them, and
makes them to err from his ways, Esaias 63.17.

Sol. For Gods making men to err, etc. I think the Learned Annotator has
rightly observed, That the Original notes only a permission, and therefore
might be rendered, Why do thou suffer us to wander out of thy ways? For God
tempts no man to sin, Jac. 1.13, 14. But a man is led away by his own lust.
And how did God harden Pharaoh? No other way, than by delivering him up, and
leaving him to the hardness of his own obstinate heart, by Gods forbearance and
mercy, more and further obdurated, as is to be seen in the Story. God does thus
harden others, and leave them to themselves; and then it is sad with them, as
it is with a Child left to himself, Pro. 29.15. But when is it? Even when they
give themselves up to serve their own desires, and resolve to walk after their
lusts, hating to be reformed, and casting Gods Word behind them, as is to be
seen, Psa. 81.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. This is cleared from Psa. 95.8. Harden not your
heart. On which place Calvin: Non ex alio font manare nostram adversus Deum
rebellionem, quam ex voluntaria improbitate dum illius gratiae aditum
obstruimus. Calv. i. e. Our rebellion against God, flows from no other
fountain, than our own perverseness, whilst we shut up the passage to his grace,
that it cannot enter.

One thing more, that may be objected, must be answered, and it is this:

Obj. That the special Grace of God puts the last difference between man and
man (as some say) and that Grace is not given to all. How then can it be said,
That God has sufficiently provided for all? Or how can he be cleared, (...)
his condemning some, seeing these also would have repented, and closed with
Christ, if the Lord had persuaded, and overpowered them by his effectual
Grace, as he did others?

Sol. And yet God will clear himself; and for this purpose consider,

1. That there is little more in this Objection than in somewhat before, about
the Fall of our first Parents. And as God was righteous in letting them fall,
because they might have stood, (...) they would: So God is righteous in his
dealing^ with men, notwithstanding he deny them tha^ special Grace, he gives to
others, because they might be saved, if they would. When I say, Men may be
saved, if they will, my meaning is, That they are not saved, because they will
not, and that their wilfullness is their condemnation. For if Christ, and the
Word of Grace revealing Christ, and all the Methods of conveying him to poor
Souls, and Exhortations, and entreaties to accept of him, be enough, then God
is not wanting on his part. For I may now ask all who complain, What is lacking
to them more? Were there not an all-sufficient Savior, and sufficient means of
knowing him to Salvation, there might be perhaps some occasion of complaint.
But it is far otherwise; and if men will make use of these means, as they are
commanded and entreated to do, I am sure, they shall be saved, because the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Never did any man dye in his sins, that was
heartily willing to receive Christ offered to him, and to improve the means of
grace allowed him for that end. And may I not then say, Men may be saved, if
they will? They have enough to live upon for ever; and when they play the
Unthrifts part, have they any cause to blame God, and say, He might have done
more for them? What should he have done more for them? And what can they answer
to this question, when their own hearts know, they never liked or loved Christ,
or any of his ways; but wilfully scorned and rejected all? They liked and
loved a Savior to deliver them from Death and Hell, after they had taken their
full swinge in their own ways, and sinned themselves out of breath, and could
no longer serve their lusts. But they would not have Christ to reign over them,
so, as for his sake, and at his command, to deny themselves, and all
ungodliness, and worldly lusts. They know, that the Power of Godliness was the
thing their Souls loathed, and they scorned it, as savouring of nothing but
folly and fancy, calling it a Precisian nicety. And when Christ called them to
suffer for his sake, (who suffered so much to save their Souls) they would not
part with a penny, or lose an hair of their head for him. I say then, in one
word, Look what hindered Israel from seeing the good Land which God had promised
them, the same hinders these men from possessing the Heavenly Inheritance, Heb.
3. ult. They could not enter in, because of unbelief* And yet, as Moses tells
them, Deuteronomy. 9.4. The Lord had not given them an heart to perceive, and eyes to
see, and ears to hear.

2. How would men have God to save them? Would they be saved in such a way, as
if a Block should be lifted from the Earth, and carried up to Heaven? This
cannot be, without perverting the whole course of Gods Providence, in governing
his reasonable Creatures. For they being made after Gods Image, and acting by
an inward Principle of Reason, must be governed in a way and manner suitable to
their Nature. God indeed draws men thitherward; but I never read, he drives
them against their wills, or without their privity, Hos. 2.14. I will allure
her, etc. Though Conversion be not altogether suspended on the liberty of man's
will, but God undertakes for it; yet his way is sweet, and taking with Sinners,
who are allured, as one observes on the place. God by Grace destroys not
Nature, but rectifies and perfects it, whiles (as Austin says) Omnipotenti
facilitate ex nolentibus facit volentes. He bends and enclines men's hearts, as
the Rivers of Wa^e^, Pro. 21.1. Now Water, that runs one way, may be turned,
and made to run another way: But the Water in its course, always runs
according to its natural inclination. Certainly, the worst these men can say of
God, is, That he would have turned them, and they would not be turned; but they
resisted him, in all his strivings with them. And then where lies the fault?
Let any reasonable man judge.

3. This Argument (as I said before) aims at making God to be not only such a
one as our selves, but much lower.

4. God is just, as well as merciful; and his Justice is as natural, and as
essential to him, as his mercy. And if so, Why (I pray) may not God glorify
himself in the one, as well as in the other? If he may not, give some reason,
Why. But if God may glorify his Justice, as well as his Grace, I ask, How God
can glorify it more, beyond all exception, otherwise than thus, viz. In
destroying those who have had all means sufficient to save them, and willingly
rejected all, because they did not like them?

5. I have yet somewhat more to say, in answer to this Objection; and it is so
much, as (I hope) may satisfy any, that are soberly minded. They who thus
argue, might do well to consider, What that Grace is, which (they say) is not
given them. For that Grace, wherever it comes in its full power and efficacy,
sets men at the greatest distance, yea and defiance with all their wonted
sinful ways. Now here may be a great mistake; and these men may seem to
desire, they themselves know not what. I believe, they would fain have the
Grace of God, to preserve them from suffering Hell Torments, when they are
going out of the World, never again to serve the desires of their flesh. But do
they desire indeed, to shake hands with, and to bid an everlasting Farewell to
their filthy Lusts, so long as they have any ability or opportunity to serve
them? For to this the Grace of God calls them, and for this they have had many
gracious earnest invitations, which they have sufficiently slighted, and cast
off, with as much scorn and contempt as could be. They have never heeded, what
they have heard from God himself, speaking and calling to them, by the
Commands, Promises, and Threatenings of his written Word, or by the motions of
his Spirit, or the checks of their own Consciences, or any Dispensations of
his, in any Providence. Now, what do these men mean, in saying, God has not
given them grace, when they slight and set at naught all the saving Methods,
which he makes use of, to affect their hearts, and work them over to ^
thorough-compliance with himself? Why do not they attend their own work, which
is, to heed what God commands, promises, and threatens in his Word, and to
reform their hearts and lives accordingly? Why do they not lament and bewail
the baseness of their own sinful hearts and natures, humbly acknowledging all
their iniquities, and loathing themselves, because they are loathsome in the
sight of the Lord? Why do they not confess and forsake their sins, that so they
may find mercy, as Solomon assures them, Pro. 28.13. Why do they not beg of
God strength to resist Sin, and use the means which God has ordered for that
end, viz. Fasting and beating down their bodies? Why do not they avoid the
occasions of Sin, and keep themselves far from those places and companies*
where they are sure to meet with many temptations? Why do they not frequent the
company of those, who will admonish them upon all occasions, and advise them
about ordering all their ways? No, They Will do nothing of what is their duty,
nor what (I am sure they have power to do, but only sin, and seek all occasions
to sin; and then quarrel God, and say, He has not given them grace. This is in
effect to say, They would have God to save them against their wills.

Obj. But God can make me willing, if he please.

Sol. I know God has a Sovereign power over the hearts of all men, but what
then? Would they have God to alter all the saving Methods of his grace, and
force upon them, what they have refused so often, with all disdain and
indignation imaginable? They desire no grace, but what may keep them out of
Hell: And scorn all grace that is offered them, for reforming their hearts and
lives. They are like those froward Patients, that would have their Physicians
cure them, without any applications made to them; as our Savior healed the
lame, and the blind, by a word of his mouth, working wonders, such as had not
been heard or known. Not to say, that such arguings are absurd and
unreasonable, These men must have low thoughts of God, and his infinite
Excellencies, who would have him shape the whole course and method of his Grace
and Providence, according to their sinful Interests and Humors. To say no
more, make it our own case. When once we have done our endeavors, used all
entreaties, yea, and (it may be) added due corrections to our instructions and
admonitions, and waited long for a desirable issue, knowing the Party we have
to deal with, might, if he had a mind, change his course; we think we can
acquit and clear our selves (as indeed we may) before all the World, from
having any hand in his undoing himself. And will not the righteous Judge (think
we) acquit himself at the last day, in condemning all the ungodly refusers and
despisers of his Grace and Mercy? I shall say no more, but as God said to Job,
He that reproves God, Job 40.2.
let him answer it. As if he should say, He that reasons the case (so the word
may well be rendered) or argues against me, Let him answer, if he can, what I
have said, and have yet to say. Thou Job have been very bold and forward to
question and quarrel my ways of Providence, as if they were not such as they
should be. But I would have thee know, I am able to guide and govern the World,
without any assistance or advice of thine. Have thou so mean, low, and unworthy
thoughts of me, and mine infinite Excellencies, as to imagine, I am to learn of
thee, or any other, how to order and dispose the works of my hands? I think, I
have said enough to convince thee: But if this do not satisfy thee, I have yet
more to say, and beware in time to provoke me no further; for if thou do, thou
shall be sure to know after another manner, that I will not be taught by thee.
So I shall answer no more, but only advise all who thus argue, Job 40.4, 5.
to read how Job answered the Lord, and to give over such malepert daring him,
with their disputing his Royal Prerogatives; which if they considered, as they
should, they would count such reasonings but a little beneath blasphemies.

I shall only say further, Though we may awhile plead our weakness, yet God,
and our Consciences know, it is only our wickedness, that hinders our
Salvation. For my part, I, and others too, can say very much of our weakness,
that when we have promised fairly many times, we have performed little or
nothing answerable. But we can say much more of our natural wickedness, and the
baseness of our deceitful hearts. Others may speak as they list, I think it
best and safest for me, and every one else, to shame our selves before the
Lord, by charging home upon our selves the frowardness of a deceitful naughty
heart. For this we may know, if we have a mind to it, That we love sin too
much, when it is best with us; and God too little, when we love him most; and
whom can we blame for this, but our selves? Therefore, God forbid, I should
entertain the least thought of charging God foolishly. Let me ever say, God
has not been wanting to me, only I have been wanting to my self. I dare not
say, I would be, or do better, if I could; seeing God, and my Conscience know,
I could be, and do better, if I would. It is not any fault in God, but my self,
that I have no more grace, and that I walk not more uprightly and evenly. For I
do willingly yield too often to the suggestions and insinuations of Sin and
Satan: And I do not entertain and cherish the sweet motions of Gods Spirit, nor
improve the means of growing in grace, as I might, and ought to do. And, in a
word, I am verily persuaded, if any thing undo me, it is the frowardness of an
evil heart of unbelief. In hac fide vivo, in hac moviar. So let me justify
God, both in life and death, whatever becomes of me.

And now I remember, what I before referred to this place, concerning an
Objection, that is commonly made to this purpose.

Obj. That all Exhortations to Faith and Repentance are absurd and vain, if men
are unable to do any thing of themselves, without the effectual Grace of God
over-powering them.

Sol. I shall say nothing of the Answers, that have been made to this Objection
by others* But only say, There is no such absurdity, as is imagined, because
men are exhorted to that which they are unwilling to do. Now what absurdity is
there in this? Or if there be, I am not able to see it. Nor can I apprehend it
unreasonable, to persuade a man to that, which is for his good, when we find
him not willing to it. For man's natural inability to any spiritual good, I do
not question it, if we count of it, as I said before, and as (I think) we
ought. But I know full well, that man's weakness is his wickedness, and his
inability is his untowardliness; and how can we deal with a froward wilful man
more rationally, than to lay before him the error, and the evil of his way;
and by reasoning the case, persuade him to leave it? They, whom we deal with,
are men, and have reason, whereby they are able to judge of what is spoken to
them; and they can discern of good and evil, and so choose, as they see cause.
And when the most is made, that can be, of man's insufficiency, we cannot (as I
showed formerly) deny him a liberty. And then, where (I pray) lies the
absurdity? Deny a natural man that liberty, which (as I said before) must be
allowed, I must confess, that to admonish or exhort him, is all one, as to
exhort or persuade a beast, or a block. But so long as wicked men do wilfully
refuse the ways of God, and as wilfully go on in the ways of their own
hearts, I am bold to think, the absurdity will lie at their doors, who say, it
is absurd, to persuade a wicked man, to turn from his evil ways. And how much
less absurdity is there, in exhorting those, in whom the spirit is willing,
though the flesh is weak?

And now I shall proceed to prove by other Arguments, That men are wilful in
their own ways, and willingly neglect the things of their peace, and so perish
only upon that account, and no other.

Arg. 2. MY next Argument shall be, from the equity and reason that is and
appears in all things, which concern men's Salvation, so as it is easily
discernable by man's natural light and understanding. Men (as you have seen
before) are apt to quarrel God for his dealings, as if his ways were not
equal: And my design is to prove them alone guilty of their own destruction,
and that they shall one day appear so to their own Consciences, and before all
the World. And my Argument is this, That all the ways of God toward men, and
all the mean^ he uses for the reclaiming of them, are so rational, even to
men's natural understanding, a^ they can have no cause to quarrel any but
themselves. And you may draw the Argument into a narrower compass thus: If all
the counsels and ways of God, and his methods about men^ Salvation, be
equitable to the apprehension of sou^^ reason in men themselves, then they can
lay the blame of their destruction upon nothing besides their unreasonable,
wilful, and peevish disposition* This I intend to exemplify in some
Particulars and add further, That all the Sins of men, for which they are
damned, are against Natural Reason, as well as against Divine Revelation.

But before I proceed, let me premise the Reason, for which I urge this
Argument: And it is this, Because God, to clear himself, does eve^ and anon
appeal to men; which he does, because he knows, that the Reason and Conscience^
of men, when they are put to it, must give evidence on his side. To mention one
Text, that was hinted before somewhere, Esaias 5.3, 4. Judge, I pray you (says
God) between me, and my Vineyard. Who are the Parties appealed unto in that
case? If you look; you shall find none other than the Delinquents themselves,
The men of Judah, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem. Why so? Even because God
knew, that nothing could be pleaded, wherefore he should come short of what he
expected; but the case was so clear, as he would leave the Delinquents
themselves to be Judges. Surely God would not do thus, if he knew not, that he
has a witness for himself in every man's Conscience; and that his ways are
rational and equal, even when men themselves are Judges.

And now I make this challenge in Gods name and behalf, Show he that can, what
in all the counsels and ways of God, is dissonant or contrary to right and
sound Reason. My meaning is this, There is nothing in any of them, but what by
sound natural Reason, a man may apprehend to be equal, righteous, and rational.

And yet in all this, I shall (I hope) keep my self free, and far enough from
over-magnifying of man's Reason; and also from any thought, that the corruption
of man's Nature is not in his Understanding, as well, and as much, as in his
other faculties. I willingly grant, what I heartily believe, That we are all
born blind, and that Ignorance is no small part of man's inbred corruption, and
Original Sin. Notwithstanding, I say again, That natural Reason in men, is
Light enough to descry, that the ways of God, and all his transactions with
men, are reasonable; that is, None of them are against reason, though some of
them be infinitely far above it. And now I come to particular Instances.

First, I instance in such things, as God has offered us in his Word, to be
believed by us.

1. And what one among all those seems more incredible and irrational, than the
Resurrection? Yet the Apostle thus reasons, Act. 26.8. Why should it be thought
a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead? The Apostle (you
see) makes strange of it, that any of the^ should strange at it, as a thing
incredible. (...) confess, he had then to deal with the Jews, an^ such as owned
the Jewish Religion (at least many of them) and therefore might well ask the^
the question, because the whole Worship o^ God, upheld amongst them, was an
unreasona^ble thing, if the Dead should never rise again* But (as I take it) he
might as well question (...) Gentiles, after the same manner. Though know, some
may reply, That there is not (...) same reason, because the Gentiles might
((...) they did) exercise some Religion (such ar^ was) upon the account of the
Souls immortali^^ whilst they believed no resurrection of the B^^dy. And that
The Platoniks, though far wide from the mark, as Beza in arg. Psalm. 90.
observes.
some of them had some Noti^^ of the Souls immortality, without any
appr^^hension of the rising again of the Body, I do (...) much question; though
those Notions, in all (...) them, were but empty conceits, and as co^^^sed as a
sick man's dreams. But this I desire^ be observed, That the Apostle, 1 Cor.
15.3^ argues the Resurrection thus, That if the De^^ rise not, the Epicures
Opinion may take place But that Opinion is erroneous (says the Apo^stle) and
pernicious too, and not to be allow^^ among Christians, who ought to believe
firm^^ the Resurrection of the Dead. The Apostle Argument is a Consequente
absardo, and he sai^^ in effect this, If there be no Resurrection, they might
then side with the Epicures, and sin^ their Ede, bibas, ludas, post mortem
nulla vo^upt (...).
Song, Let us take our pleasure while w^ live, for after death we shall have
none. Yet observe also, v. 32. If after the manner of men, that is, as far as
men could do, Humanae vitae respectu, it^ ut nobis constet praemium in hoc
mundo. Calv.
or with regard only to this present life, which all men live, I have fought
with beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the Dead rise not? Does not
the Apostle lay the groundwork and foundation of Not this, or that, but all.
all Religion, upon the Resurrection? It is as much as to say, What need I
suffer, and (by the same reason) what need I do any thing about Religion, if
there be no Resurrection? His whole Argument is grounded upon Reason, and his
Conclusion is the absurdity of Religion, if there be no Resurrection. And that
it is so, appears from his reasoning, v. 36. Thou fool, that which thou sowest,
is not quickened, except it dye. Where Calvin observes, That the Apostle might
have answered their Question, [How are the Dead raised, etc.] by showing, how
easy it is to God Almighty, though it seem incomprehensible to us, and that we
are not to judge of such things by our own sense, but according to his infinite
power. But the Apostle answers otherwise, by showing, That the Resurrection
is so far from contradicting the course of Nature, as we have continually a
clear proof and instance of it, in the fruits of the earth, which arise and
grow out of the seeds that are sown, and rot in the ground. Now seeing all
Generation is from Corruption, in the seed sown, we have therein an image and
resemblance of the Resurrection. And the effect of all the Apostles discourse
is this, That there is as much reason for the bodies rising again, as there is
for the growing again of the grain we sow in the earth. And hence he rebukes
them thus, Thou fool, confuting Atheists from the course o^ Nature, as men that
have not common sense. A^ if he should say, How unreasonable are you, t^
question the Resurrection, when the like things before you every day, and you
see with you^ eyes ordinarily, what is as strange as that? From the whole (to
say no more) it is clear, That there is a ground in reason, for every man to
be^lieve the Resurrection; though I deny not, tha^ it is further cleared, and
we are most confirm'^ in the belief of it, by the written Word; ye^ and that
our blind Reason would never have dis^cover'd it, without Divine Revelation.

2. The Incarnation of the Son of God, is (...) thing (I confess) above all
man's Reason, an^ yet not therefore against Reason.

3. The Apostle stands admiring, O the depth, (...) How unsearchable are his
judgments, To. 11.33
and (...) ways past finding out! And yet whoever believ^ these, as they are
by the Spirit revealed in the Word, does nothing but what is most rational* For
if there be one Almighty, Infinite, Eternal God, (as Socinians, I hope, grant)
then it is most absurd to think, that his judgments, ways, works, and
counsels are such, as can be measured by the standard of man's reason. No reason
will persuade a man to measure what is infinite, by that which is finite, more
than to think of taking up the Ocean in a Nut-shell. And if it should be
thought, that the Socinians have the advantage at Reason against us (if it were
not for Scripture) in the highest Mysteries o^ Divinity, I thing otherwise,
because it is against all reason, to allow of nothing in the counsels and ways
of God, that is not commensurable with man's understanding. For that is all one,
as to make him such a one as our selves; whereas our owning him as God, is an
acknowledgement of his Being and Excellencies infinite beyond all our Reason.

4. Reason is not able to apprehend the Mystery of the Trinity: And yet it is
but reasonable for us to believe, what Scripture has revealed about it,
because it is agreeable to Reason, that God must be such an Essence and
Existence, as no Creature is able to comprehend. For God were not God indeed,
nor like himself, if his Subsistence were such as we could apprehend. Even
Reason will enforce us to grant, That God can be comprehended by none but
himself. For how can a man apprehend God aright, without apprehending him
infinite? That which is finite, even in the judgment of Reason, cannot be God.
And therefore the Heathens were most absurd in their Polytheism, or
multiplicity of Gods, because there can be but one infinite, and so but one
God. Now the true God being indeed such, it is unreasonable in us to think, by
searching, to find him out in his Essence, Subsistence, or Attributes. And for
this purpose, let it be considered, what the Apostle says concerning man's
Reason, when it is used about the things of God, 1 Cor. 2. How should a beast
understand the things of a man, and how much less can a man understand the
things of God? I think I may rationally say, He must be a God, that knows
perfectly what God is. True, we may understand what he has revealed for our
learning; but our understanding is according to his revealing it, only by our
Faith, which sees that which Reason cannot discern; and yet our Faith is not
unreasonable: For we can give a reason of our believing such things, as God
has revealed, viz. Infallible, Divine Authority, though we cannot give a
reason of some things believed by us. And there is nothing more reasonable,
than to believe, whatever God says, to be true; though we can give no reason
more, than that God says it. For a God that can lie, Reason it self will say,
is not, cannot be God, but an Idol, or a Devil. And hence I infer^ That Reason
teaches us to believe the highest Mysteries revealed in Scripture, as the
Trinity, the Incarnation, etc. and they that think otherwise, therein show
themselves unreasonable. And for the Counsels of God, in disposing of his
Creatures according to his pleasure, what reasonable man can question them? Or
if any man do it, may it not justly and rationally be said to him, as Elihu
spoke unto Job? Behold, in this, thou art not just: I will answer thee, that
God is greater than man. Job 33.12, 13.
Why do thou strive against him? For he gives no account of his matters. And
if so, it is indeed most unreasonable in any man to expect it. Certainly, if
any, God may challenge this Prerogative, viz. To give no account of his ways
and counsels. And for men to pry into them, further than he has revealed; and
demand a reason of his will and pleasure, when he is pleased to give none, is
indeed to do against Reason. For there is nothing more reasonable than this,
That God may do what he pleases, and not to be questioned by any for it,
seeing all things else are the works of his hands. And this was the Apostles
mind, when he said, To. 9.20, 21. Nay but O man, who art thou, that reply
against God? Shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it, Why have thou
made me thus? Has not the Potter power over the clay, etc. And does not the
Prophet (whom the Apostle cites, or alludes to in that place) say as much, and
more? Esaias 45.9. Woe to him that striveth with his Maker, etc. i. e. quarrels
God about his Providence, as if he meant to control him.

To clear and confirm my Argument yet further, Does not the Apostle argue from
Reason, upon all occasions, even about the things of God, specially when he had
to do with Heathens? Act. 14.15. says he to those who would have sacrificed to
to him, We preach unto you, to turn from these vanities, unto the living God,
which made Heaven and Earth, etc. As if he should have said, If you will serve
a God, serve him that is God indeed, and who is the living and (...) God, your
own reason will show you: It is he that made Heaven and Earth, etc. You are
unseasonable in sacrificing to any other, because no other can be God. (...) v.
17. he goes on to show, That they, and their foreFathers, had light enough from
Gods Providential Dispensations, to teach them, that Jupiter, Mercurius, and
such Vanities, or Idols, could not be the true and living God, so as they were
inexcusable. And so he argues, Act. 17. That we ought not to think the
Godhead like unto Gold or Silver, etc. seeing it is against all reason, as he
proves from v. 24, to v. 29. So likewise To. 1. he proves the Gentiles
Idolatry, in making Images and Representations of God, to be against the light
of Nature, and natural Reason, which was able to see so much of his eternal
Power and Godhead, in the things that are made, as they might easily conclude,
that God was not to be represented by any similitude of earthly things, because
they cannot be like him, Act. 17.29.

I shall yet in other instances labor to evidence, That there is nothing in
true Religion, but what is reasonable.

For Moral Duties toward men, our Savior lays down an undoubted Principle
of Reason, Mat. 7.12. and adds, That this is the Law, and the Prophets, i. e.
This is the sum and substance of all they have taught, concerning the duty of
man to man, the most equal Law, to do, as we would be done unto. All the
Commandments against Murder, Adultery, Theft, etc. are Principles of common
Reason, and the Law of Nature. For Children to obey their Parents, is
reasonable; and so the Apostle presses it, Ephesians. 6.1. because it is just, or
right. How can Children be thankful, but in being dutiful to their Parents? And
for Servants to obey their Masters, it is equal, for they maintain and from
them necessaries for their lives. And to obey Principalities and Powers, is but
reason, because by them the people are kept in peace* and there would be
otherwise no safety or society amongst men. Whatever some may fancy or feign,
True Religion, in the highest and strictest practice of it, is no teacher of
mis-rule; but teaches obedience for conscience sake, and shows the right way
of yielding it according to Gods Commandment. And it is not reasonable to think,
it teaches obedience in some only, and not in all Relations. Yea, it is
impossible to serve God, as we ought, and not to serve one another in love.

Nay, the most Spiritual Duties of denying our selves, and crucifying our
lusts, are most reasonable. To part with our lives, and all we have, for
Christ's sake, is most equal, seeing he dyed for us. And if I were to dispute
for the Christian Religion, against an Infidel, I would dare him to show any
one thing in Scripture, that is contrary to sound Reason; or any Article of the
Christian Faith, that is not rational, as I have showed before in some of them.

And now I lay down these three Conclusions, which I avouch rational, and by
Reason demonstrable, viz.

1. That there is more Reason in any Religion, than in no Religion at all.

2. That there is more Reason in the true Christian Religion, than there is in
any other.

3. That there is more Reason in the life and practice of true Religion, and
the power of Godliness, than in the empty form, and outside profession of it.

These I should further dilate upon, but that all of them are most excellently,
and undeniably, of late, discoursed at large by others. Yet I shall not content
my self with the bare naming of them.

1 st. For the First, I say, That the ways wherein Atheists have gone about to
undermine Scripture-Authority, and so overthrow all Religion, are contrary to
sound Reason. For is it not more rational in us, to believe, That one Eternal,
Infinite Being, made this whole frame of Heaven and Earth, than to fancy an
empty, infinite Space, and an infinite number of Atoms coursing up and down in
it, and by a fortuito^ concourse (as it were, by hap-hazard, no sobe^ man can
imagine how) to fall into order, an^ so produce this frame of the World, as now
we see it? I shall not dispute in the case, but on^^ appeal to the judgment of
any man that is sobe^ and in his senses, which of those two is most cre^dible to
the apprehension of Reason. And is no^ our Faith of one eternal God, as
rational, as ^^thers conceit of an eternal Pre-existent matte^^ Not to say, How
precarious the Principles of ^^thers, that are against us, are, I add, How
absurd and unreasonable they are to the apprehension of any sober intelligent
man, and far more incredible and improbable, than what we believe of the
Worlds Creation, according to the written Word. Let those who count so light of
Scripture-Doctrine, and set so highly by some alery Speculations and Notions
(whether of old, or of late cried up) show us somewhat more rational, than what
is Scriptural. And whether the Philosophy of Moses, etc. be not as agreeable to
any sober man's reason, as any opposition of Science, which by some is so much
admired. It is not my design, to engage with such Notionists, who had best deal
first with others, that have said enough. I think it enough to declare, that
they have done little to satisfy the sober reason of intelligent men. For (I
say again) Let all be weighed, not in the balance of the Sanctuary (which they
sufficiently slight) but by the standard of true Reason, and if they be not
found too light, I grant, they have said somewhat to their purpose. There is a
World framed and constituted, as we see; and a dispute there has been, and (I
think) still is with some, How it came to be so framed and constituted? Now I
only plead, That the account, which Moses has given of the Worlds beginning,
is much more credible to mere Reason, than any other. And thereupon ask, Why
should it seem incredible, that one who had his being from none, but of
himself, should make all things out of nothing? They, whose interest it would
be, to have no God, are willing to persuade themselves, and others too, that
there is none. And these say, That some men have, for their own turns, made
others believe, there is a God, and so the World is troubled about something,
which is indeed nothing. We who believe the being of one God, appeal not to
Scripture (of which these men count nothing) but ask them, How this frame, and
all its furniture, came to be first set up? That this World made it self, is an
absurdity, beyond all reason, and common sense. Hence some have devised ways
of fashioning the World, such as I hinted some before, that they may stand in
no fear of any God or Devil, nor live in expectation of any Hell or Heaven
hereafter. But herein they go against all Reason, which is the only Judge, to
whose sentence they are content to stand. That the true notion of a Deity is
most consonant to Reason, and the light of Nature, is excellently proved by the
Learned Stillingfleet. Orig. Sac. lib. 3. c. 1.
And they that deny, there is a God, do assert other things (as he says) on
far less evidence of reason; and must by their own Principles, deny some
things, which are apparently true. And he instances in these, viz. That the
World was as it is, from all Eternity, or else it was first made by a
fortuitous concourse of Atoms, both which Hypotheses being urged with the
same, or greater difficulties, are more weakly proved, than the existence of a
Deity. And whoever shall be pleased to enquire, will find it so, Therefore we
contend for Religion against Atheists, upon grounds of Reason. And I say again,
That none of them all have produced any thing so rational, as that which is
Scriptural.

2 dly. And for the truth and reason of the Christian Religion, the same
learned Author has said enough in the learned discourse aforesaid. All that I
shall say, is this, That if any man please to examine all the several religious
persuasions, that are, or have been in the World, beside that which Scripture
has revealed and warranted, and weigh them in the balance of sound Reason, he
need not be much puzzled about the choice of his Religion: For it will soon
appear, even to Reason, That all Religions, beside the truly Christian, are
unreasonable.

If any strange at this, because many in all ages, who had good natural Reason,
have rejected the Christian Religion. I answer,

1. That they had Reason, but made not a due and right improvement of it, and
therefore showed themselves unreasonable, as the Apostle proves it against
them, To. 1.19, 20, etc. And that God did therefore give them up to vile
affections, as a punishment of their unreasonable Idolatries.

2. We having Scripture Light, which they had not, have our Reason more
rectified and enlightened, than they had, or could have. And without the light
of Divine Revelation, we, in all probability, might have been as vain in our
imaginations, as they. But then, I say, both we and they had been unreasonable.
And God himself uses no other Argument against the Gentiles Idolatries, than
the absurdity and unreasonableness of them, Esaias 44. They that make a graven
Image, etc. they are their own witnesses. They see not, nor know, that they may
be ashamed. And after a large account of their doings about their Images and
Idols, v. 18, 19. he says, They have not known, nor understood. And again,
None considers in his heart, Esaias 44.10. Who has formed a God, etc? i. e.
Who but a mad man, etc. Ga^ak. Annotat. in Loc.
nor is there knowledge or understanding, etc. As if he should say, These
Makers of Idols, that know whereof they are made, and how handled in the
making, are the best witnesses, that can be brought against them: For if they
were not sadly besotted, and void of common sense, they would never imagine,
the stock of a Tree could be made a God. The main thing to be observed for my
purpose, is this, That they had light enough by their own reason, to discover
the vanity of making Idols. For this they are charged with, That they did not
debate the matter with themselves, nor reason the case as they might; which if
they had done, they could never have been so brutish and senseless, as they
showed themselves to be, in saying to the work of their own hands, Ye are our
Gods.

And now, Let none desire me to instance in any other, having spoken of
Idolaters, because all the World of Mankind, that worship not the true and only
God, in the alone Mediator, and no other, are Idolaters. This is plain and
clear* and needs no proof; except any will say, The Turks are no Idolaters,
because they like no Images. But however, they are affected to Images, they
must be ranked amongst Idolaters, that honor a Varlet (such as Mahomet was)
more than the Lord Jesus Christ. They have not the Son, and therefore have not
the Father, 1 Joan. 2.23. And then, what can they be other, than Idolaters? The
same is to be thought of the Jews, who worship the true God, but not in our
Lord Jesus Christ.

To instance in the particular absurdities of all other Religions, would be
endless, and (for ought I know) to no great purpose. It may suffice to hint in
general, what any man may improve, (when ever he pleases, in his own thoughts)
by running over in his mind, the ways and doings of all that serve not one God
only in the mediation of the Lord Jesus Christ. Though we had our Religion by
Revelation, and that be enough to confirm our Faith; yet we have this to boot,
for our further confirmation in it, That it has more of Reason in it, than any
other.

Hence we infer, That an Atheist is the veriest fool of all, that for the
pleasures of this World, which he may not enjoy one hour, cannot (by his own
confession) enjoy one hundred of years, dares run the hazard of losing himself
for ever. As long as it is disputable with him, Whether there be a God, or no,
his wisest and safest way were, to choose the strongest side: For if it prove at
last, that there is no God, he gains a very little, as much as comes to
nothing, no more than a beast, that has as much as he, and more too. But if
there be a God (such as we believe) in what a case will he be, at the great day
of account? And to think, there is a God, that cares not what becomes of the
World, and will never judge the World, is all one, as to say, there is no God.
Now a man had need of infallible and undeniable Principles, to prove, there is
no God, who dares to live in this World, as if there were none; because the
adventure is of infinite concernment and consequence.

And for the choice of a man's Religion, I say again, He need do no more than
use his Reason, That will give him light enough to choose the best. I do not
say, nor mean, That Reason alone could ever have discovered the only way of
Salvation, or the right way of worshipping God, so as to please him in it. But
when God has in his Word discovered to us his good will, in all that concerns
his glory, and our everlasting good, we dare appeal to Reason, for the truth
and goodness of our Religion; and challenge all the World, to show us any
other, that is half so rational.

3 dly. I should be much more large in proving my third Position, about the
power and practice of true Religion, if another hand had not of late so happily
prevented me; Vindicia Pietatis,, by R. A.
yet somewhat I have to say of this also.

It Is no strange, or new thing, to see all godliness, and circumspect walking,
cried down, under an odious imputation of folly and fancy. 'Twas said of
Christ, Vix compos mentis.
He is beside himself, Mar^* 3.21. or one transported with a Fanatique Ecstasy.
And of the blessed Apostle, That too much learning had made him madd, Act.
26.24. His plain manner and method of preaching Christ crucified, was by the
worldly-wise counted and called, the foolishness of preaching, though it were
indeed, the wisdom and power of God to Salvation* 1 Cor. 1.23. Therefore we
have the less need to be troubled at the language of many in our times, seeing
they speak but what they have learned from their Forefathers. For certain, we
pretend to no Enthusiasms, beyond all sense and reason; but appeal to Christ,
and his written Word, to be tried by them in all things; for which we are
counted Fanatiques.

For the aspersion of Folly, upon all that desire to remember God in his ways,
and to walk humbly with him, we may safely appeal to the same Judges, now
before spoken of, because the wisdom of God in Scripture give the name of
[FOOL] to none but to such as are ungodly; Witness David's Psalms, and Solomon's
Proverbs, etc. But I shall argue a little further thus: If the Principles of
our Religion be such, as we are bound to contend for it against all
Adversaries, then the practice which agrees best with, and comes nearest to
those Principles, deserves not the imputation of Folly, nor can be so accounted
of by any, but unreasonable men. Hence I am bold to ask, Who are the veriest
fools? They that know the Laws of Christ, and labor to walk accordingly: Or
they that pretend to know them, but in all their works deny them? The
Principles of true Christian Religion are these, Tit. 2.11, 12. That we deny
all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and live soberly, etc. That for every idle
word that men shall speak, they shall give an account, Mat. 12.36. That God
shall bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and bring them to
judgment, 1 Cor. 4.5. Eccles. 12.14. Now compare men's practices with these
Principles, and it may be easily seen, who are the veriest fools. Many there
are, that glory much in their being Protestants; and will sometimes pity
Papists, for being misled, as to their religious persuasions. But I am bold to
think, That some Protestants have as much need to pity themselves, for their
ungodly practices. For if any under Heaven, be in the way to Hell, some of
these Protestants are. If you desire to know, which of them? I answer, All
those, who are common ordinary Drunkards, Swearers, Fornicators, and
Adulterers, with all of the same stamp; and that (to fill up the measure of
their sins the faster) do show the greatest hatred and scorn, that can be, of
all that profess and practice godliness. This I have against these Protestants
(or rather for them, if they will make a right use of it) That a Papist,
leading an honest, temperate, and sober life, can give a more rational account
of his Religion, than any of them, or any others like them. But I say further,
Does not Reason teach every man, to be true to his own Principles; and that we
should not profess one thing, and practice another quite contrary? Nay, do not
lewd and vicious persons cry out against others, that they are not, what they
seem to be? These (say they) are your great Professors, and they can do so and
so. Is this according to their profession? And I say, If great Professors, be
not also precise and strict practisers, they are to be blamed, yea, and without
Repentance, shall be damned.

But I say withal, That whoever proclaims himself a Protestant, is a great
Professor in so doing. For the true Protestant Religion teaches and obliges to
all possible circumspection, and holy conversation, and godliness. The Gospel
is called, The Doctrine that is according to Godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3. As for any,
that are accounted more than ordinary Professors, I heartily wish, that none of
them might deserve the charge, that is commonly made against them; and to them I
say, If they be indeed faulty, they shall dearly rue it: I mean, they must
reform their lives, or their profession will stand them in no stead one day,
when all shall be judged according to their works. And for many of them, I am
confident, and well assured, That such a charge is no better than a calumny,
and reproaching of Christ in his members. For there are many of them (I hope)
Nathaniels, and true Israelites, in whom there is no guile.

However it be, this agreed upon, on all hands, That it is unreasonable, to
profess one thing, and practice another. And hence I say, That all Protestants,
so called, who are vicious in their lives, do therein show themselves
unreasonable* as well as ungodly men. For many of them, I believe, (and not
without reason) that they know not well themselves, what they profess. Sure
many of them (the more pity) are profoundly ignorant of the very first
Principles of the Protestant-Religion? and can give no rational or tolerable
account, why they are Protestants, and not Papists, or Pagans. But whatever
they know of their Religion, I am sure, many of them little consider of any
conversation suitable to it. And therefore I shall mind them of what they do
profess, and it is this, That they profess the strictest and precisest way of
serving God, and walking with God, that ever was made known to the Children of
Men. They profess to believe the Gospel of Christ, and that Gods written Word
is the only Rule of Faith and Manners. Now the Gospel, and the Word of Grace,
do certainly prescribe the most exact and accurate way of Life, that can be.
And I need not be long in proving this to any professed Protestants. But if any
make question of it, let them enquire, what they engaged for, and to, when they
were baptized. For then they must acknowledge themselves Professors of a very
strict Religion, unless they will renounce their Baptism.

The Fanatiques are not the only great Professors; but every one, that owns
himself for a Protestant, must either disown his Baptism, and blaspheme Christ,
and the Gospel openly; o^ else he must look on himself as a great Professor of
Godliness. For as Christ commanded, so Baptism obliges to the most severe and
precisest way of Godliness. And if he live in the constan^ practice and
allowance of all uncleanness, he is an unreasonable, as well as a wicked man.
The Apostle joins both those together, 2 These. 3.2. And if those wicked ones
there meant (perhap^ professed Infidels) were unreasonable, mu^^ more they that
profess the Faith, and are in their conversation worse than Infidels. Those
indeed contradicted their own Principles: But professe^ Christians much more,
and are therefore most unreasonable and wicked men. For Grace an^ Nature, Law
and Gospel, cry out against them* and will one day come in, as witnesses for
their conviction, because they walked contrary to them all. Let them count of
themselves as they please for a while, Christ, when he comes to judge, will
number them with those, Who cry, Lord, Mat. 7.21, 22, 23.
Lord, and do not the will of his Father which is in Heaven; and therefore they
must depart, and be gone, because they are the workers ^f iniquity. And what do
these mean by their going to Church, and joining in public Prayers, and
hearing of Sermons, and receiving the Sacraments? Sure in these they profess,
and pretend to somewhat. They will not (I hope) say, They profess Adultery, and
Swearing, and Drunkenness, etc. And yet all the World knows, many of them live
in the constant practice of such, or the like abominable vices.

1. These I wish first to consider what they do, when they mock and scoff at
others, for their preciseness. For if they dealt, as becomes rational men, they
would, as often as they see any more strict and precise, presently say, These
men do honestly, and rationally too, for they practice, as they profess;
whereas we profess as much as they, but do nothing alike.

2. I wish them also to consider, That when they cry out against others, as
Hypocrites and Dissemblers, in so doing, they condemn themselves. For they
profess the Religion that Christ taught, and they will not say (I hope) that
Christ taught men to be Swearers, and Drunkards, etc. Now they must say thus,
and so be most horrid Blasphemers; or confess themselves to be Dissemblers, for
practicing quite contray to what they profess. And that they do so, is beyond
all contradiction; and when they can prove others to be the same, we will say
as much of them. But till then, we have reason to look on these, as
unreasonably wicked, so unreasonably uncharitable toward others, to say no
worse of them.

I might here enlarge my self, by showing the unreasonableness of most Sins,
that are of ordinary and daily practice, with many called Protestant. But
somewhat tending this way, was hinted before, in showing the Reason that is in
all the Commandments. Yet I shall add, That whereas they have cried out against
their Ministers, for being so harsh and severe, they forget what their own
Consciences have told the^ oftener, and more sharply, than ever any Minister
did, or could. But of this I may say more elsewhere. For present, I urge them
with the unreasonableness of their constant daily practices, and ask them, Is
not profane Swea^ing an unreasonable Sin, when there is not (...) (as in some
other fleshly wickedness) any the least seeming sensual profit or pleasure? A
(...) may be a very Epicure (as one says) and (...) bate Swearing. What does a
Drunkard make himself to be, more than a two legged Bea^^* Nay, is there any
Beast almost, that will (...) to drunkenness, except it be a Swine? I (...) not
instance in more particulars. But to shut (...) this, All or most of the Ten
Commandments have been, and still are, justly accounted (...) of moral and
natural equity. And the Fourth* though yielded to be but Positive-moral, has
so much Reason in it, That since God has allowed us six days, we may well
allow him the seven^^. And they that make no conscience of this, (...) many
other Commandments, as appears by their practices, are unreasonable men, which
was the thing to be proved.

Arg. 3. ANother Reason, to prove ungodly men guilty of their own destruction,
and so altogether inexcusable before the Lord, may be drawn from the inward
secre^ workings of their own Consciences. For when they pretend, That they want
Light, to see the good, and the right way, their Consciences will rise up, and
be as so many swift witnesses against them. How many times have they been
rounded in the ear, and told by a voice within them, that their way was not
good before the Lord? How often has Conscience stood, as the Angel did in
Balaams way, with a drawn sword in his hand, to turn them back again? What
dumps, and fits of melancholy (as some call them) have they had, when those
everlasting burnings have flashed in their faces, to fright them out of their
ungodly ways? And will they yet say, They had not Light enough, to see the
good, and the right way, when they notwithstanding have posted on still, and
pressed forward against all opposition and contradiction of Consciences? For
certain, many wicked ones have had much of their H^ll upon Earth; so much, as
might have served (if they had been wise enough) to mind them of Heavens way.
It may be, that some of them have their Heaven here, though a very short,
uncertain, and inconsiderable felicity. But there are few of them, that meet
not with rubbs enough, to stop them in their career Hell-ward, if they would
but heed them. They are not so merry, as the World takes them to be; But even
in the midst of laughter, the heart is sorrowful, to think what will be the end
of their madd mirth.

I need not say more to these, than only advise them to abide at home, and hear
what their Consciences tell them. But this perhaps is labor in vain, when they
are resolved beforehand, to give Conscience as good as it brings. However, I
cannot forbear to stick this, as an Arrow in their sides, and let them pluck it
out again, if they can: That they can with no face, or color of truth, say,
They have not Light, to see the good, and the right way. For God has put a
Light into their hands, and they have put it out on purpose, that they may go
on in darkness. And this God himself charges them with, Annon sibi sunt Conscii?
Psa. 14.4. Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge, etc? The
Interrogative has in it a more vehement denial. It is not of ignorance, or
infirmity, they do thus wickedly; but wittingly, and willingly, against all
conviction of Conscience. And therefore there will be need of no other
witnesses against these men one day, than what they themselves shall bring
forth; and God will, in his judging of them, appeal to their own Consciences,
that will then be ready to justify him before all the World, that he gave them
a Light to see plainly the perverseness of their own way; but they cast it
away, or put it out, and would not walk by it. I need say no more, but only
desire men to consider, how they will answer their own Consciences, in the
great day of account, when they have resisted so long, and so often gone
against, what they have known by the Light that is within them. If they can
deal with Conscience hereafter, a^ they do at present, they may do themselves a
pleasure: But I much doubt it.

Arg. 4. I Shall add another Reason, to prove, That men have had Light enough
shining round about them, and would not endure it. And this is their
impatiency, and peevishness of Spirit, when they have been again and again
admonished of their faults, by such as have known them, and have had
opportunities of doing them such a good Office.

And here I may, upon this occasion, take up a complaint, and say, Who, or
where is he, that will bear a seasonable reproof, when it is given him? Some
such (I hope) there are; but truly it is not easy to light on them. A man had
need run to and fro to seek them; and if any should ask me, Where such dwell? I
cannot easily give an answer, such as I would.

It Is said of Cranmer, That to do him a shrewd turn, was the way to make him a
Friend for ever. If it were so indeed, I cannot enough admire the most
excellent frame of his Spirit, that could turn Poison into Medicine; and take
occasion to love, even from that which only tends to hatred and strife. Surely
the contrary is to be seen in too many. Do them the best office of love, that
can be done, you make them your Enemies for ever, they will never care for you
more.

And this is an infallible Demonstration, of what I am now discoursing. How can
men say, they want Light, when they run from it, and will not suffer it to come
near them. The Law is a light, and the reproofs of instruction are the way of
life, Pro. 6.23. So says the Wiseman, by the wisdom of God in him. And I may
say of Christian brotherly admonition, that it is a a most singular help to
preserve and improve the life and practice of godliness. It is, as it were, the
snuffing of the lights, to make them burn more clearly. I need not show how
much the Scripture commends it: He that turns over the Bible, cannot be
ignorant of it.

It is, in one word, a Duty, that lies on all men; but on professed Christians
more especially; to give it wisely, as there is occasion; and take it kindly,
when it is given.

Now for men to storm and rage, upon all occasions, against all reproof, and
show themselves such, as others dare not come near them, is a sufficient
Argument of Conviction, and cannot be answered. For with what face can a man
plead, that he is well disposed, and willing to do what is right, when, be he
never so much out of his way, be scorns to be told of it? Yet many such there
are, who have shut up their Consciences under hatches; and for others, they
dare not tell them of their faults, lest they be made to feel their fingers.
And I wish this were the fault of Ruffians and Roysters only: But many more
sober to look upon, and perhaps inoffensive otherwise, as to other men, will
rage like madd, if you come near them, with the least touch of a reproof,
though never so gentle and seasonable. Yea, a man had need beware of them, Esaias
29.21.
Lest they make him an Offender for a word, and lay a snare for him in the
gate. Nor I, nor others need to marvel at the great miscarriages of so many,
if we but duly consider, what I am now speaking of. There must needs be an
abounding of all ungodliness, when it overflows all the banks, and no man dares
put a stop to it, by saying to another, Why do you thus? And this, to say no
more, is enough to show, That men might, if they would, know more of God, and
his will, but that they despise admonition, and will not abide reproof. They
cannot pretend want of Light, who put it away, whenever it is offered to
them; and would, if they could, put it quite out, that they may go on in
darkness.

Arg. 5. THere is yet more Light to show men their way, if they would but heed
it, and not wilfully shut their eyes against it. Every sincere and sound
Believer is a Light, Philip. 2.15.
shining in the midst of a crooked Nation. And herein ungodly men condemn
themselves, that they cannot abide the light of other men's profession and
practice, holding forth the word of life. They are ever quarrelling those, that
are more eminent in profession, for their miscarriages in practice, whether
truly or falsely charged upon them. For what is this more, or better, than the
enmity that is in their hearts against God, and his ways? And let it not
offend any, that I say so, till they have heard what I have yet to say.

That many eminent Professors have faulted and fallen, and that most foully,
cannot be denied, because the Scriptures have furnished us with so many sad
Instances in this kind. And that the most of Gods faithful Servants have been
famed, or defamed rather, as guilty of the same, or the like, is clear from
Scripture, and from experience in all ages. But whether the faults of
Professors be real, or only feigned, still (I say again) the Scandal that is
taken by so many, is an Argument of the old hatred; and shows an inbred desire,
to have the ways of God slurr'd, that they may have an excuse for slighting
them. And if it be so (as I hope to make it appear) we have another Evidence,
that men have Light enough, but have no mind to walk by it. For why should any
man cry out (as many do) against Professors, and profession of Religion, if
there were not somewhat more, than what they are willing to have known by
themselves? But I shall argue it a little further thus.

First, I Will suppose the Scandal to be indeed real: What then? Is that a
ground sufficient to say, I will never go in the way, that such pretended to?
A man indeed may, and ought to say, I will never do, as such have done, wherein
they have done amiss. And this both Religion and Reason will teach us. But
therefore to slight, and set at naught all Profession, and the very face and
show of Religion (to say no more) is most unreasonable, and a sufficient
evidence of that enmity, which is by Nature in the hearts of all men against
God, and his ways. For what is Gods way the worse, because such and such have
turned aside from it? Nay, is it better than blasphemy, to cry out with open
mouth, against that which is of God, because of that which is vile and base in
men? David committed Adultery, and Murder too, and therein occasioned the
enemies of God to blaspheme, which was the great aggravation of his sin and
punishment. But observe, It was blasphemy in the enemies of God; and they were
Gods enemies, that took occasion to blaspheme. For those enemies might have
known, and should have taken notice, that David's God had forbidden those
horrid sins, by his righteous Laws, written in the hearts of all men; and
therefore had no cause to speak or think the worse of him, for his Servants
offenses. Was Christ the worse, or the less to be esteemed, because Peter
denied and forswore him? What reason then is there, in making the ways of God
to suffer for the faults of those that pretend to them? The ways of the Lord
are right, and the just shall walk in them; but the transgressors shall fall
therein, Hos. 14.9. The best Master may have a base Servant, and the best
Prince may have a Traitor amongst his Subjects; must the good Prince or Master
bear the fault of the bad Subject or Servant? Or is subjection and service to
be denied by others, because some Servants and Subjects are not so good as they
should be? And in such cases, every man will say, There is no cause. And what
reason, I pray, is there in this case, more than in those? These be the people
of Jehovah, said the enemies of both, Ezech. 36.20. These be your great
Professors, say many: But who? None but enemies to God and godliness. Oh! say
they, See what such an one has done. We will grant it, and it is but too true.
He has done, what he ought not to have done* But why is this cast, as dirt, in
the face of all Professors, and profession of Religion? The God whom they
serve, allows them not in their so doing: He has forbidden them to do so,
and commanded them the quite contrary. And all the ways of his Commandments
are holy, just, and good. To profess the true Religion is good, and according
to the mind of God, though it be not all that is good: For to a good profession,
must be added a good conversation; and the Power of Godliness must go along
with the Form of it. If a man profess, and practice not accordingly, thou have
no cause to slight his profession; but rather to do what he did not, viz. Adorn
thy profession with a suitable conversation.

In this I plead not for empty, outside Professors, that dishonor, as much as
may be, the profession of Religion. I shall rather advise them to one of these
two, viz. To let their conversation hold pace with their profession, that the
Name of God be not blasphemed; or else to lay aside their profession. For such
loose Professors of Religion exceedingly wrong themselves, and others, and God
most of all, as might be easily shown in many Particulars. But I shall only say
what is enough, That they do, as if they designed to make all the World scorn
and hate God, and his ways. Men should not indeed slight Gods ways, for the
looseness of those that pretend to walk in them, as was said before. But too
many are so minded, as they will blaspheme; and these Professors give them
occasion of so doing.

And just so in a manner do all they, who from their Pulpits will declame
against the Vices of others, when all their Auditors know them to live in some
or other of those same Vices, and repent not. Such preaching of such Preachers,
is a fair Argument, to encourage the looser sort in slighting all preaching,
and all profession of Religion. For what will they say, other than this? If
there be such danger in such ways, as we are told; and so much necessity of
taking up a more precise course, why does not our Minister, and others like
him, practice their own Doctrine? Whatever they say, when they are in the
Church, we see well enough, what they do elsewhere, and at other times. Why may
not we run the adventure, as well as they. And indeed, it is the ready way to
persuade people, That all the matters of God and Religion, are of no great
concernment, when they see, they are discoursed of sometimes for fashion, and
in a form, by such as believe not what themselves say. They that preach thus,
as it were, in jest, are not likely to bring others to practice in good
earnest. And to speak all in a few words, Such Preachers and Professors (as
before) if they would set their wits on work, to make all the World Atheist (as
once it was Arian) cannot devise a more compendious way and method for the
purpose.

But though such Preachers and Professors there be, yet whoever shall therefore
stand off, or turn aside from the ways of Gods Commandments, will in the day
of account be inexcusably guilty before the Lord, of neglecting his duty. Is
there so much as common sense, in saying, Why should I do what is good and
right* when others do not? Even Reason may teach us, That since God is so much
dishonored by the looseness of others, we should labor the more, by an
unblameable conversation, to vindicate the honor of Gods Name, in despite of
the Devil, and all his devices. For this ungodly humor in many, to cry down
all Religion, and profession of it, upon the account of some Professors
miscarriages, argues nothing more, than enmity against all godliness; which yet
they would fain hide and excuse, by the faults of others, that pretend to more
than themselves. He that is glad of any occasion, to pick (as we say) a quarrel
with another, for certain hates him, and has not the least respect for him.
And to clear it yet farther:

Secondly, Such Wretches, when they can find no occasion, will be forward
enough to feign and frame one. Hence have sprung all those reproachful
nicknames, cast upon Professors, and the profession of Religion. Hence are
false reports raised on purpose, to cause an Odium amongst all that hear of
them. And if there were no more, I should say less. But God himself is
reproached, and made to suffer. For all these lies and falsities are intended,
to make Religion and Godliness to be an abhorring (if it were possible) to all
flesh. This, this is the design, that lies in the bottom, to render the ways
of God (in themselves most amiable) as odious as may be, so as men may have the
greatest prejudice that is possible against them. For when they have so
disguised them, they, and others have a fairer pretense to shun and scorn them.
Thus, as little Children, they make the Bug-bears, wherewith they affright
themselves, and their fellows. And do as the Heathens of old, who first
clothed poor Christians in the spoils of Beasts, and then exposed them to be
worried, and torn in pieces by Lions, and other ravenous Creaures.

There is certainly a beauty in Holiness, and all her ways are ways of
pleasantness, Pro. 3.17. But to a man in his natural condition, they are not
pleasing, but rather hateful and loathsome. And hence he does by them, as men
do by those whom they hate, and cannot abide, render them in all companies, as
odious as may be, that others may hate them, as well as themselves do. When
John Hus was brought forth to be burnt, his enemies put on his head a triple
Crown of paper, painted over with Devils; and the Bishops said, when it was set
on his head, Now we commit thy Soul unto the Devil. Such in a manner is the
rage and madness of all ungodly men. They would damn, if they could, all whom
they hate and persecute for Christ's sake; and therefore raise the vilest
reports of them they can, to make the World believe, they are gone to Hell, as
soon as they are gone hence. And why is all this ado? Only to obscure and
stifle all the glorious beauty of holiness, that shines in Gods Servants, so as
it may not be seen. And this out of hatred against God, who sets up his people,
as so many Lights in the World, to show men the way wherein they should go.
But the World, that lies in wickedness, hates the good, and the right way; and
therefore does what it can* to put out those Lights; and therein prove, that
they love darkness. But however, all that pretend to the ways of God, do not
walk in them; yet (blessed be God) there have always been such, as will not be
turned out of them, for all that can be said or done against them. And these
will be witnesses one day, against all that have rejected them. And in this
sense (if in no other) the Saints shall judge the World, 1 Cor. 6.2. Ye^, in
this sense, they do now judge and condemn the World. Their piety, faith,
holiness, and fear of God, are a Light, and leave wicked men without excuse:
And as Noah by his faith prepared an Ark, by which he condemned the World, Heb.
11.7. so do they. Some indeed, too many pretenders, have caused many to stumble
and fall: But through the grace of God, all are not such. As there is indeed,
and in truth, such a thing as true Holiness; so there are Israelites indeed,
shining as lights, and holding forth the Word of life, Philip. 2.15, 16. And
these Lights many times are so bright, as their enemies are forced to bear
witness unto them, as Saul did to David, 1 Samuel 24.17. Thou art more righteous
than I. They cannot, after all their prying, find so much as a flaw in them, so
as to have a just complaint against them. And this will be one day a convincing
Argument against ungodly ones, That they had seen so many examples of those,
that loathed their ways of excess, and riot, and uncleanness, and yet refused
to follow them; but rather set them at ^ought, upon this account, That they
would not run into the same excess with themselves, 1 Pet. 4.4. Now the real
Apologies of Christians examples, being so many witnesses for God, and his
ways, how can men say, They want Light, to show them, what they have to do?
How must they not one day be without all excuse, even upon this account?

Arg. 6. ANother Argument for proving my general Proposition, is this, That the
failings of all men are mostly, if not altogether, in practice; so as they
know, but do not. This shows, that it is not for want of light, that they walk
on in darkness. The first and chiefest part of man's sinful corruption lies in
his will and affections. The Woman indeed was deceived, 1 Timothy 2.14. But it was
by deceitful Lust, Genesis 3.6. When she saw, that the tree was good for food, and
pleasant to the eye, and a tree desirable to make one wise, she took of the
fruit of it, etc. It was the inordinacy of her appetite, that transported her
to taste, what God had forbidden her, so much as to touch. I grant, she was
deceived, and that the Serpent deluded her, to believe a lie. And it is (I
conceive) a truth, Nullum unquam peccatum errore vac^t. Nam ut maxim sciens,
ac vo^ens quis pecc^t, excaecatum tamen sua cupiditate esse oportet, ne r^cte
jud^cet im^ ut se ac Deum obliviscatur. Nunquam enim in suum exitium ruerunt
homines, nisi Satanae fallaciis implicit, a recto judicio aberrarent. Calv. in
Ep. ad. Hebr. c. 9. v. 7.
That in every evil, there is an error. Hence we read, Heb. 3.13. of the
deceitfulness of sin; and Ephesians. 4.22. of deceitful lusts. We should not sin, if
we were not deceived. Lust is as a mist, that mis-leads us. A man that has
eyes, cannot see his way in a mist, but roves and runs up and down, and cannot
hit on the right. A man would never choose the worse, and leave the better, if
he were not in a mistake. The Apostle describes the Gentiles, as Strangers to
the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, Ephesians. 4.18. And the
first work of grace on any Soul, is, to turn it from darkness unto light, Act.
26.18. And to turn a man from the error of his way, Iac. 5.20.

But all this (for ought I can see) does not contradict what I said before,
viz. That a man's inordinate affections, and his enraged appetite, do raise the
mist, that clouds and darkens him, so as to wander after vanities and lye^, and
forsake his own mercies. And all serves (as I suppose) to our present purpose.
Men are commonly worse in their practices, than in their principles, as I said
before; and yet I deny not, that they are corrupted in both. For it is not, to
me, imaginable, how a man should be corrupted in one, and not in the other. But
this we find by experience (which is all I mean) That men commonly have better
principles than practices. Hence so many, that are sound in the Faith, as to
their persuasions of the truth of Religion, in their lives are most abominable.
And what need we any more witnesses, to convince and condemn these men? Their
own opinions are enough to confute their practices, and prove them rebels
against the light. And can they complain, they have not light to see their way
^o Heaven? They have enough, and too much, unless they could use it better.

How usual is it for notorious Sinners, and most abominable vicious persons, to
plead for the Ten Commandments, when I know no body against them, but such as
they, and their fellows? They know, and can repeat the Ten Commandments, and
say they are Gods Commandments: And yet a civil man cannot abide within the
breath of these men, because every other word almost is an Oath with them. A
man would hardly believe, that men should lead their lives all the week in such
excess, and all manner of uncleanness, and yet on Sundays cry out so devoutly
(as they seem to do) at the reading of every Commandment, Lord have mercy upon
us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law. Do not these men proclaim Gods
commands to be their principles, and yet contradict them in all their
practices? They dare not, they cannot for their hearts, say with their mouths,
that Swearing, and Drunkenness, and Adultery, etc. are not Sins, and
transgressions of Gods Laws; and yet they live in a constant practice of all
such abominations.

Now what shall we think of these men? They have a Light sufficient to show
them the error of their way. They do not indeed set it on a candlestick, but
rather under a bushel. Though it be not quite put out, yet it shines not so, as
they can see any thing by it, as they ought. And I can conceive no other
reason, Why the light in these men is so useless, but only that it was never
strong enough, to work an absolute through conviction, as when Gods Spirit
convinces of Sin, etc. Joan. 16.8. The lusts of these men were never subdued
to the power of their principles. They could perhaps, some of them, discourse
the vanity of the creature, and the emptiness of all worldly things, even to
admiration; and ye^ all the while, love the World, and the things of the World,
no men more. Grant that there is in such men sometimes a reluctance, it cannot
but be faint and feeble, and in effect as good as none at all. Nay, what if I
say, it serves only to enhance their lusts the more, as weak opposition gives
an enemy the greater advantage, (...) let out more of his rage and strength,
than otherwise perhaps he would. Certainly, men ^o made up of a mixture of
passion, and some reason, are as much plunged into all sensual and beastly
pleasures, as any; because the stream of their lusts is stronger, than to be
stopped by any principles they have. Yea, they are in a more ready way, to put
darkness for light, and to call evil, good, than any men alive; so as at last*
the light that is in them, is no better than the blackness of darkness It was
even so with the Pharisees, Luc. 16.14. When our Savior had most excellently
discoursed the right use of all earthly riches, and showed, that men cannot
serve God and Mammon, They heard these things, and derided him. A practice too
common amongst others, when a savory Doctrine about some duty, pressed home
upon Conscience, has found no better entertainment with many of the Auditors,
than a dry scoff, or some bitter reproachful language against the Preacher. But
why did the Pharisees deride our Savior? There was a reason, and it is
expressed in the same place, They were covetous. The love of money is the root
of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. There never was an Heretic, or Apostate, or any man
reprobate to every good work, that had not this, or some other root of
bitterness springing up, and turning him aside to be hardened, past all hope, in
his ungodly way. Demas has forsaken me, 2 Timothy 4.10. And if you read on, it is
to be seen in the next words, Why? He had embraced this present World. All ages
afford great store of such s^d Instances. Many, like Jonathan (as one says)
follow the chase with a greedy pursuit, till they light on the honey. Demas had
no sooner left Paul, but he went to Thessalonica, where he became an
Idol-Priest, as some report. When such men have been provoked, by missing of
expected preferments, or have had the lure of promotion flung out to them, the
next news you hear of them, is, that they are not where you left them, but are
gone some-where; and if you desire to know, look in Iud. v. 11. and you shall
find, what way they are gone, and upon what account, and what will be the issue
of all at last, if you please to observe that also by the way. They (you must
know) hoyse up, and strike sail again, as the wind serves, and sometimes tack
about, only to steer a course, that will serve for present security, or future
further advantages. When Religion is in fashion, they presently fall in with a
goodly outside profession, so as few can keep pace with them. But when once
the wind, that was on their backs, begins to turn, and blow in their teeth,
then (as we say) faces about, and who more zealous Persecutors, than such
hot-spur Professors?

Now may I not say of these, Have they not heard and known? Doubtless they
cannot be ignorant. Balaam knew well enough, that he ought not to curse Israel;
and yet the wretched Wizard attempted it again and again, because he loved the
wages of unrighteousness; 2 Pet. 2.15.
and Balack's proffered rewards blear'd his eyes, as he saw not, what he did
see. So is it with every man, that has no more grace than he. It Is no hard
task for any man of ordinary understanding, to conclude, That the way of
Uncleanness, Drunkenness, Swearing, etc. is not for professed Christians, or
civil rational men to walk in. Yea, many have sometimes resolved against them,
with vows and imprecations; and yet the next opportunity of a temptation breaks
all these bonds, 2 Pet. 2.22.
and the Dogs are turned to their vomit again. The reason of all is clearly to
be seen, and it is this: They have their lucid intervals, as other madd men
have; and then they can see a little, the baseness of their own ways. But as
soon as Lust is stirred, there rises a mist, and then they are as if they had
no eyes; and whatever principles they have, they serve them for nothing that
good is. The Light in these men, is as the uncertain blazings of a Candle,
burnt down into the socket, that will not serve a man to do any work; and after
it has flashed a while, goes out with a snuff, and a stink. It Is not long
e're these men lie down in a dead sleep, and there is no hope of awakening them,
after their interests and passions have subdued their principles, so as to have
no more reflection upon their consciences and practices. These are awhile
perhaps Orthodox in their principles, but no thanks to them, for they are
honest only, because not tempted to be otherwise; and being always Hypocrites
in heart, no marvel, if they come at last to be Heretics, not only in their
practices, but in their opinions also.

However, we must say of these, That they say, and do not: Or (which is all
one) they know, Mat. 23.3.
and do not. They profess what they do not practice; and is not this enough to
silence them, when they say, If we had known, we would have done better? For
they lie in what they say; and if they had a mind to fight it out with their
lusts, they would never complain, they have not Light enough.

No wicked men are so ignorant, as not to know, that they are out of the way:
Only the violence of their sinful affections hurry them o^ against their
reason. And will this (think you) excuse them? It may indeed blind them a
w^ile, but it will not bear them out, when God shall call to an account.

Arg. 7. ANd now I shall a little enforce the former Reason, by adding another
Argument, if you please to ^all it so, viz. That profane and ungodly wretches,
who profess the Faith of Christ, do condemn themselves, by allowing the
practices of the Saints recorded in Scripture. They say, the Apostles, and
others, were good men, and are now in Heaven. And what can they answer, if they
be asked, Why do you not then trace their footsteps? They dare not say, Those
Saints in Heaven, (whom they so much magnify) went thither in that way they
themselves walk in. And truly it is much, that some men should so magnify the
dead Saints, and show themselves Devils all the while, in vexing those that are
alive. A man may truly say to those wretches, That the Saints in Heaven, led
not such lives on Earth, as they do, and therefore will be witnesses against
them. I have heard indeed, that some impudent hardened Sinners have been so
bold, as to speak of the Saints infirmities, recorded in Scripture; as if their
own enormities might be passed over, as well. But if they were not
unreasonable, as well as ungodly, they might know, That those good men once
fell into great Sins, but did not lie in them, or make a trade of them. If
these men would repent and turn, as those Saints did, their case were quite
otherwise, than now it is. Those Saints were in their constant practice holy
and righteous men, no such debauched and vicious persons as these. And how
comes it to pass, that they have so much respect for those holy men, whose
lives and conversations they never care to follow? Certainly, in honoring
those good men, they in a sort allow of goodness and holiness, and so condemn
themselves, in doing contrary to what those men did. Saint Paul, and Saint
Peter, and the rest, were men that led their lives in all purity and holiness,
free, and far from the pollutions, and unclean practices of these men, that so
much cry them up. What do they then, in their thus magnifying the Saints of
old? Why, they do, as the Scribes, and Pharisees, Mat. 23.29. who built the
Sepulchers of the Prophets, etc. and thereby labored to gain a reputation with
the vulgar, for bearing so much respect to the memory of those men of God. For
by this, they seemed to assert their Doctrine, and so would make the world
believe, that they were zealous professors, and followers of that way of
worshipping of God, which the old Prophets had taught long before. But alas!
they were strangers, and enemies to all that the Prophets had taught, and
practiced. And just such Hypocrites are others, who pretend to honor, and
respect very much the old Saints, and Martyrs, and yet are in their affections,
and conversations all one, with those that slew them, and showed all rage, and
madness against them. Nor will it suffice to say, as the Scribes, and Pharisees
did, verse. 30. If we had been in the days of our Forefathers, we would not
have been partakers with them, etc. For (as one says well on this place) an
Herod, and Herodias to John Baptist, would have been an Ahab, and a Iezabel to
Elias. They that declare against their Forefathers cruelties, do not thereby
disclaim them; specially, when they are the same to good, and Godly men now, as
their Fathers were to those of old. For what do many wicked wretches have, and
scorn, and persecute now? Is it not the life of holiness, and power of
Godliness; such as was in the Saints of old? Nay; they cannot abide to hear the
very Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets preached to them, in the manner that
the Apostles and Prophets preached it of old in their times. And do not these
ungodly men prove by their daily practices, that they are such as they who
persecuted the Prophets, and Apostles. Well; however they have this as an
evidence against them, that they seemed so much to allow of Holiness and
Godliness in the Saints departed, and yet walked clean contrary to them. They
that will but observe the Acts of the Apostles, and their Epistles* may easily
perceive the vast difference and dissimilitude, that is in the lives and
doctrines of them, and these that pretend so much reverence to their names. And
whatever men may imagine for a while, those old Saints will one day be so many
swift witnesses against all that have seemed to reverence their memories* and
yet never imitated their examples. For the most they do, is no more than the
Pope does: He is (if you will believe him) Peter's Successor; but for Life and
Doctrine ho^ like to Peter, any man may see that reads the Scripture. Even as
many others, who would be thought of the same Religion with the Primitive
Christians and ancient Martyrs, but if they would live as holily and
unblameably as they did, what they say would be sooner believed by others, than
now it can be.

Arg. 8. MEn say, they want light, and means to know, and do better; but they
lie in so saying: for they will not endure sound doctrine, nor any that preach
it. In this I appeal to the practice of ungodly men in all ages, which furnish
us with Instances enough, of such Rebels against the light. For
Scripture-instances, they are well known to all that have read the Bible: There
is to be seen, how the Jews mocked the Lords messengers, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Acts
7.52.
and despised his Prophets; so as Stephen makes the challenge, Which of the
Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted? And what they did to Gods servants,
the Prophets, the same and worse they did to him that was the Son of God; They
cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him, Mat. 21.39. And afterward held on
to persecute the Apostles and other dispensers of Gospel Grace, seeking, if it
had been possible, to extinguish that light which the Sun of righteousness had
brought into the world. And was it not so with others afterward? how long did
the Roman Heathen Emperors persecute the Faith of Christ, in the preaching and
profession of it? In one word, they did what they could, to make the name of
Christ and Christian to be no more remembered. And for their Successors,
(excepting Constantine the Great, and some that succeeded him at times,) they
drove on the same wicked design, though in a way somewhat differing: Julian
(who came not long after Constantine) is infamous among all to this day, for
his Apostasy and politic designs to root out all Christianity. And what has
been since done by the power of the Beast, is well known to all that felt his
clutches by sad experience, and to all others by certain report. The Gospel is
still, through Gods mercy, preached and professed, yea more openly and
avowedly in this and the last Age, than in many Ages before. But no thanks to
many ungodly men, who have let the Light shine, because they could not put it
out. Who has not read, or heard what hazards the first Reformers ran, and what
despightfull opposition they met withal? and to this day, how impatient are
many of some kind of Preachers and Preaching? O the frequent quarrels that
have been against the most able and painful Ministers, for nothing but their
labors and endeavors to turn the people committed to their charge, from their
ungodly ways! The same Spirit that swayed the Scribes and Pharisees, and others
against our Savior, in his time on earth, breathing still in too many, who
will have always somewhat to say against faithful and painful Ministers, as
the Jews had against Christ, though to no purpose more, than to bewray their
own ignorance, malice, and madness. And I shall now give some instances, as I
find them, that so men may see themselves precedented in the Scribes and
Pharisees, and Infidel hard-hearted Jews that lived in our Saviors time. Mat.
22.23. The Sadduces could not believe the Resurrection, and a stout Argument
they bring to puzzle our Savior withal; an instance of a Woman that had seven
Husbands successively, etc. and what did all this prove more, than their
ignorance of Scripture, as Christ tells them? verse. 29. At another time, when
some said, This is the Christ; others said, Shall Christ come out of Galilee?
Joan. 7.41. and they allege Scripture for it, That Christ comes out of
Bethlehem, v. 42. and this bred a quarrel among them, of which there was no
cause, nor the least occasion, more than their own Ignorance: for had they had
more grace, or wit, they might easily have reconciled themselves by knowing
that Christ was born in Bethlehem, though bred up in Galilee, for good reason,
according to the Scripture, Mat. 2.23. Such was their exception against Christ,
Joan. 6.42. Is not this the son of Joseph? He was indeed God manifest in the
flesh; and the Scriptures had plainly enough pointed him out as Abraham's Seed,
and David's Son. To say no more in this kind; Nothing but ignorane of the
mystery of Faith, and a froward humor could make them say, How can this man
give us his flesh to eat, Joan. 6.52. it shows they had a mind to quarrel, and
nothing else; as when Joan. 7.15. they asked, How knows this man letters,
having never learned? says Calvin on the place, Hoc ipso despiciunt gratiam
Dei, quia ipsorum captum superat. Nam ea est hominum ingratitudo, ut in
aestimandis Dei operibus, semper sibi accersant errandi materiam: Men study
ways and means to make themselves mistake, when they have to deal in the
matters of God, and their own salvation: they are blind enough in the things of
Gods kingdom, and yet quick-sighted too in devising stumbling blocks to hinder
themselves and others from obtaining a sound and saving knowledge of the truth.
And hence, Joan. 7.28. when they were a quarrelling, and saying, When Christ
comes, no man knows whence he is, he cried in the Temple as he taught, Ye
both know me, and ye know whence I am. Where (says Calvin) Christ inveighs
against their madness, that pleasing themselves in their false conceits of him,
they shut up against themselves the right way of knowing him as they ought: as
if he should have said, By your knowing all things, you know nothing at all.
And so they were, as some since, apt to pick quarrels with some Ministers
especially, and to gain a reputation of knowing men, do talk at a very high
rate of others low parts* and learning: These are the Champions, that lead up
others to quarrel all Doctrines preached, unless they please their humor, or
suit with their high-flown conceits and notions: but (as Calvin has it
somewhere,) There is no worse plague or pestilence can take hold of men, than
to be intoxicated with a conceit of their own understanding, and to be carried
by it, to a confident slighting whatever agrees not with their own opinion;
such great Rabbis are ready to say, Joan. 7.49.
This people who knows not the Law, are cursed; they know so much, as others
can know nothing; and yet know nothing as they ought to know, or what is worth
others learning; seeing in their lives they savor nothing of true Religion and
Godliness: whatever their Learning be, their Religion (if any) is very
ordinary, and they are ignorant enough too of the right way and method of
bringing poor ignorant souls to the sound and saving knowledge of Christ. There
is (let me say) a simplicity in the mystery of Christ, and of Godliness, which
if a man once savor, he has the only best way to teach others convincingly;
and he that is not acquainted with it, will be but a sounding brass, and a
tinckling Cymbal, though he should speak with the tongue of men and Angels. And
therefore, if the men that quarrel the simplicity of Preaching, that suits best
with the capacities of people, be not guilty of ignorance, it is to be feared,
there is somewhat else as bad, or rather much worse. They had need look, that
this quarrelsom humor proceed not from a root of malice, and enmity against
the things of God, as I fear it does; for the Mysteries of Gods kingdom being
of highest concernment, and most excellently useful to all, deserve none of
our quarrellings. But when men cannot abide to deny their humors and
interests, to receive the kingdom of God as little children, no marvel if they
kindle a fire, and are all in a flame, even to rage against God and his pure
Word; which because they are ashamed to own, they must color it over with
somewhat that may be thought worthy of their indignation. And it is strange to
see, how witty the most are, to cover the shame of their malice, in devising
and finding out occasions of quarrelling at those things which concern their
Salvation. Sometimes they have quarreled a Ministers infirmities of body,
which are not his sins, but his sufferings; and if they can spy out any other
failings, (though no more than infirmities, incident to the best of men) what
sad work will their little wit make of them, to hold up a cursed prejudice
against all that is taught them, in order to the saving of their souls?
Sometimes he is a man of no great parts, and sometimes he is not so well bred,
as to know very much of complement; or is utterance is bad, or somewhat else
there is, that they do not like him: some are too wordly, and many are too
fashionable. And I verily believe, there is not one of them without his faults;
nor am I now about to excuse any thing that is blameworthy. Only, I say again,
there is a root of bitterness in the hearts of all men, and from this root
spring all, or most of the quarrels, that are against painful, and faithful
Ministers. Were it not for this, men could never be so apt to pick up, and spy
(...) so many occasions of exception against them. In a word, They like not the
Doctrine, and how should they be pleased with him that brings it? He that likes
not the Physic, will never be pleased with the Doctor, whatever he be. Truly,
that which the Holy Ghost has recorded of Ahab is worthy our observation: when
Iehoshaphat said, Is there not here a Prophet of the Lord besides, that we
might enquire of him? Yes says Ahab, there is yet one man, but I hate him; for
he does not prophecy good concerning me, but evil, 1 Reg. 22.8. he confesses
him to be a Prophet of the Lord, but yet he cannot away with him, and you see
his reason for it. Alas! what should a man of God (as Micaiah was) prophecy
other than evil, concerning such a one as Ahab, Who had sold himself to work
wickedness in the sight of the Lord, 1 Reg. 21.20. I know no occasion given by
some Ministers, more than Micaiah gave to Ahab; and yet they are hated. And
therefore the quarrels of many (whatever they say) are against God, and his
Word. 'Twas God that put the word into the mouth of Micaiah, and it is God that
puts the sentence of condemnation into the mouths of Ministers, that ungodly
Sinners are damned, if they live and die impenitent. And all these quarrel some
people cannot but know, it is so. And yet they quarrel the Ministers, for
preaching damnation, and driving men to despair. For my part, I never knew, or
heard of a Minister, that had forgotten God and himself so far, as to pass
sentence upon Sinners, otherwise than as God has passed it in his written
Word, and as Christ has twice expressed it, Luc. 13. v. 3, and 5. Except ye
repent, ye shall perish. And this exception is always intended and employed,
though in many Texts of Scripture it be not expressed in terminis. And thus the
most thundering denunciations of vengeance, against ungodly Sinners, from the
Ministers, should be by all understood; so as there would be no quarrel upon
that account, if there were not in men's hearts a root that bears gall and
poison. To. 2.8. The Apostle joins the contentious, and the disobedient
together. And why? Because they never go asunder. When a man cannot frame
himself to obey, then he seeks out some occasion or other, to contend against
the truth; else how shall he satisfy himself and others in his disobedience?
Seldom do men arrive at such an height of desperate rebellion against God, as
to proclaim their enmity, with open mouth, in plain downright terms: No, there
must be some color, and this is one, That they are not satisfied about their
Ministers. And it is not strange, for they are indeed unsatisfied with the very
Word of God. And hence some are ever and anon questioning, how such or such a
place of Scripture may be reconciled with another. Now, for my part, I blame no
man for seeking to satisfy himself in any seeming contradiction: And more than
seeming, I am sure, there is none; unless the Transcriber, or Printer, may have
abused the Text in some one Copy or Edition. But men had need look to their own
hearts, whether there be not an inward secret desire, to find out somewhat,
that may countenance that contradiction, which is naturally in all men against
the Laws and Wills of God. One thing I have observed too often, That some are
very inquisitive this way, who seem not to be overmuch affected toward
Scripture: Or, however they be affected, they show little conformity to it in
their conversations.

Now, my advice, upon this occasion, is* That most men would let more difficult
places of Scripture alone, and study those which are more easy to be
understood. There can be nothing plainer than Gods Commandments, and all those
Precepts which concern our duty in denying all ungodliness, etc. In all those*
I am sure, there is not the least show of contradiction, And for the places,
that seem not so well to agree, let the advice of sober and learned men be
desired, with an unfeigned intention, to know the mind of God, in order to our
practice. It Is the observation of one, That it is the sign of a man inclined to
Atheism, to keep a register of many difficult places, not to be satisfied
himself, but to puzzle others. Sure, they that are often in setting many places
of Scripture to fight one against another, may be suspected of a desire to make
a real contradiction, where there is but a seeming one. To say no more of this,
The contradictions in Scripture, that seem so to us, are not therefore such
indeed; and if we, and others, cannot reconcile them, we should rather impute
ignorance to our selves, and think, that we mistake things that differ, as if
they were contradictory.

The Argument I have next before prosecuted, was drawn from the aptness that is
in most to quarrel their Ministers. And what manner of Ministers are they, who
are so much exposed to quarrels? To be sure, they are none of the worst. For
they that are so apt to quarrel some, upon any account, can like others well
enough, though indeed they deserve little respect, being the unsavory Salt, fit
for no place, but the dunghill. But they like them well enough; the worse they
are in themselves, the better they are to them. If the Ministers will deal by
them (as David would have had his beloved Absalom dealt withal) gently and
fairly, and not speak too loud, for fear of waking them, it is as much as they
care for. So there be somewhat, called Preaching, and the Minister be sometimes
in the Pulpit, no great matter what he, or his preaching be. They love a
Sermon, that will lay them asleep; and sometimes somewhat, that will set them
(perhaps) a laughing. And when it is so, they can sit out a whole glass, and
have much patience. But they cannot abide* railing (as they call it.) They
would have Preachers keep to their Texts, when indeed they cannot abide sound
Doctrine, that ransacks Conscience, and searches out their sins, though it be
delivered in the very language of Scripture, and be the express Doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles. And yet they are pleased at heart many times, to hear,
that which is railing indeed, that is, Gibing, and jeering, and girding at the
ways of truth and holiness, under such nicknames and misprisions, as the Devil
has devised to put upon them. These are the men, that in all their lives,
never met with any solid Arg^ments, or Reasons sufficient to convince them*
They could never light on such preaching, or Preachers, as could persuade them
to go in some men's ways of preciseness, or prevail with them to change their
way. And all this is too true, and I am sorry for it; though not so sad, as
these men will be one day, if they be no better persuaded. True, they have
heard some of those Ministers, that are so much cried up by some; but they
could never see in them, any such light, as was to them convincing. And all
this I believe, without any more proof, though it be nothing to their purpose.
There were multitudes that heard the Son of God preaching to them, and were not
persuaded or convinced, but many were the more hardened: What then? Was it
because there was not light enough in the Sun of Righteousness, that so many
did not see it? He knew well enough how to preach so, as the Auditory might be
most profited. He taught* ^s one having authority, and not as the (...)* Mat.
7.29.
Never man spoke, as he spoke, Joan. 7.46. At Nazareth all bare him witness,
and wondered at the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth, Luc. 4.22.
And yet were offended at him, as appears in the next words: Is not this Joseph
's S^n? So it is still (as one says on that place) The course of our Hearers
is, to look round about, if possibly they may find any hole in our coat,
through which to slight, and slip the cords of our Doctrine, though they cannot
but admire it. Our Saviors Doctrine was not his own, but his Fat^ers that sent
him, Joan. 7.16. And for the manner, He had the tongue of the Learned, Esaias
^0.4. He delivered himself so plainly, that the simplest might understand him;
and yet so powerfully, that his enemies confessed, He t^^ght the way of God
truly, Mat. 22.14. He was none of those illiterate, careless, and cold
Preachers, that can only tire out their Auditors, o^ ^^ll them asleep. And yet
all his labor was in vain, as to the most of those that heard him. Surely the
fault was in them. For they must needs have seen the glorious Light, that
shined in his Sermons, if they had not shut their eyes, that they might not see
it. We may well think of them, as of others, who will go after their ^^ind
guides, even when the light of the glorious Gospel shines most clearly before
them. Our Savior in the days of his flesh, was as much cried down by many,
yea, as any of his Servants since, or before. This is an hard saying, who can
hear it? Joan. 6.60. So spoke some of his Doctrine. Yet there are none amongst
us, but will say, It was the fault of his Auditors; and that all his Doctrine
was true, and right, and good. If an Angel from Heaven should preach the Gospel
of Christ, he should not persuade, or please some men. And it is no marvel,
seeing God himself could not preach to persuade the unbelieving Jews. There Is
light enough in the Sun, though blind folk cannot see it. Surely, the light of
Gospel Grace has broken out, and shone most gloriously in these our times,
though many thousands have shut their eyes against it* and still remain in the
blackness of sin and ignorance, because they loved darkness rather than light,
Joan. 3.19. And as light as men make of it now, God will come, and not keep
silence; (...) fire shall devour before him, Psalm. 50.3, 4.
and it shall be very tempestuous round about him: He shall call to the Heavens
from above, and to the Earth, that they may judge his people. His people are
Israel after the flesh Saints at large.
, such as were outwardly in Covenant with him, and an holy Nation, to whom were
committed the Oracles of God, Exodus 19.6.
as they are now to others. They are in our English Translation called his
Saints, or holy ones; by others, his meek ones. The Original (as far as I
understand) notes those that have obtained favor and kindness from the Lord:
So had all Abraham's Seed, in comparison of the Gentiles; though we may say with
good reason, that all are so called, because some among them were truly
sanctified, inwardly and really in Covenant with God. Certain it is, that God
in that place, sounds an alarm to all ungracious and hypocritical Professors,
that applaud themselves in the ceremonious outside of true Religion, when they
are as far from the life and power of it, as professed Infidels. Such are too
many now adays, that have nothing of true Religion, beside the name and
profession; showing in their lives and conversations, an implacable dislike of
true holiness. They will abide no more, than a bare outside form of somewhat
that is called Religion; and a Ministry they will have for the management of
this Religion, as suitable as Ieroboams Priests were to his Calves. As for such
a dispensation of Gods Ordinances, as has life and power in it, they will not
endure it; for they are resolved to serve their ^^sts, in all manner of
unrighteousness and ungodliness. And these are the men, that cry out, they are
not satisfied in their Consciences, but they must have more Light to convince
them, and better Arguments to persuade them, or ever they can embrace those
precise ways, which some would have to be the only good way, that leads men to
their happiness. Such were the Jews of old, that persecuted the Prophets, and
would abide none, but those that cried peace, peace to them, even whilst they
walked after their own imaginations, and did those things that brought upon
them the curse and vengeance that God had threatened against them. Now, whether
these, and such as these, have any just cause to complain of God, for being
wanting to them in the means of Grace, and saving Knowledge, let any judge. I
must proceed.

Arg. 9. TO all aforesaid, I shall add that humor in many, so like to what was
in the Scribes, and Pharisees, and others in our Saviors time, who would have
of him a sign from Heaven. Mat. 16.1.
So are many now adays, that cannot be satisfied, without some extraordinary
appearances of God, that may be an infallible Demonstration of the Doctrines,
so much commended to them, for their instruction in righteousness. No question,
they that have filled the World with stories of strange Miracles, pretended to
be done by their Party* in all ages, for confirmation of their way, were
sufficiently aware of this humor in men; and the Apostle has given all the
World a fair warning of it, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10. The rich man in H^^ was of the
mind* That if one went from the Dead unto his Brethren, Luc. 16.30, 31.
they would repent. But we have no great cause to be much taken with his
opinion, when we consider in what place he was* specially when we have the
opinion of Abraham in Heaven to the contrary. He was indeed in a great mistake,
as well as many others on Earth. An uncircumcised heart will not regard the
commands of God, though they be sent by the hand of an Angel. Israel had the
Law from the mouth of God himself, and yet they continued not in his Covenant
R^^d Act. 4.16, 17. where we have an Instance, what Miracles will do upon some
men.
. Many instances there have been of men, that, in the midst of Gods most
terrible and miraculous appearances, have taken occasion of letting out their
malice the more. Israel provoked God at the Sea, even at the Red Sea, Psa.
106.7. Psa. 78.32. For all this they sinned still, and believed not for his
wondrous works. I will not say, that all wicked men have been always alike
affected, as they were then and there: For Gods Judgments in the Earth, have
sometimes cooled the courage of his stoutest enemies, so as they have not dared
to go forward, as otherwise they would have done. The Plagues upon Egypt, put
Pharaoh sometimes into a good mood, and made him to relent a little for the
present: But he was never the better, though awed a while by the hand of God
against him. We read indeed, Act. 9.6. that the Lord Jesus appeared to Saul
(afterward called Paul) in a dreadful manner, and struck him down to the
ground, in order to his conversion: But that was only to tame him, that so he
might be talked withal. If the Lord had then left him, and taken no more
thought and care of him, I may well question, whether Saul would have ever been
the better man, for that terrible appearance of God to him. Sure I am, that God
instructed him by his own immediate voice from Heaven, and then afterward sent
him to A^anias, by whom (as a Minister of God) he was taught, what he must do.
And if it had not been thus, we may justly doubt, whether Paul had ever been
settled in a sound belief, or encouraged to a zealous profession, and preaching
of the Gospel. I am willing to grant, That the Lord has taken some such course
with some others, for their conversion: I mean, He has, by his hand, brought
them down to the earth* and made afflictions to tame their proud and haughty
Spirits, so as they have said, It was good for them, that they were so handled
and humbled. But afflictions do but tame men, Gods Word and Spirit alone teach
them, and bring the heart to a due acknowledgement of Gods authority. And this
is certain, because though some have been wrought upon by Gods more than
ordinary appearances to them, in his providential dispensations; yet others
have remained as Pharaoh did, and never were humbled so, as to make their peace
with God. Men may think* if an Angel from Heaven did preach to them, o^ a
damned Soul from Hell appear to them, to confirm by their testimony, the truths
that are often tendered them, by men like themselves, they should certainly
believe, and obey, and make no further question: But they know not of what
Spirit they are. Never was there such a sign from Heaven, as the Son of God
dwelling in our flesh; and yet how little were the Jews satisfied with it? No,
not in the least, but they must have some other sign to demonstrate him, to be
what he was, or else they could not believe on him. Yea, and though they had
their desire in this also, yet all was to as little purpose: For though he had
done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him, Joan. 12.37.
If any suppose, they could not see the Sun of Righteousness, because he was
clouded over with our flesh: I say, That that veil served only to allay the
exceeding brightness of his glory, which otherwise no mortal eye could have
been able to approach or behold. It did not hide him so, as they could not
possibly see him; but it showed him so, as they might be able to look on him,
as we can abide to look on the Sun, shining through a bright cloud, which would
dazzle, and almost put out our eyes, if it shined out in his full strength. And
therefore our Savior appeals to his works and doings, which were abundantly
enough to show, what he was, though covered under a cloud. If I had not done
among them the works that no other man did (says he) they had not had sin: But
now have they both seen, and hated both me, and my Father, Joan. 15.24. Where
by [WORKS] he means all the evidences and demonstrations of his Divine power,
given by him, for their conviction. And to instance only in one, Did ever man
command and control the Devil, as he did, and that only in his own name and
power? This work of his, was such a clear and undeniable proof, as he thereupon
charged some of them with the unpardonable sin, Because they said, he had an
unclean Spirit, Marc. 3.30. They said, that what he did, was no more, than what
Witches and Conjurers can do, by virtue of a compact; when they could not but
see, it was by the finger and power of God. This was blasphemy, not of
ignorance, as Paul's was, 1 Timothy 1.13. but of voluntary contumacy. For (as
Calvin) They sin against the Holy Ghost, who maliciously pervert, to Gods
dishonor and reproach, the mighty works of God, manifested to them by his
Spirit for this end, that they might thereupon show forth his glory; and so
profess themselves enemies of God, such as the Devil is. Hence our Savior
charge them with malice, Joan. 15.24. Ye have seen and hated both me, and my
Father; because they so basely undervalued and blasphemed that power, which
showed it self in him, to be altogether Divine. For he was not wanting to the
work, which his Father had given him to do; and that work was, to show himself
to the World, to be, as he was, the Son of God. For this end and purpose he
did, what no other had done, or could do. But all could not satisfy an evil
and adulterous Generation, as he calls them, Mat. 12.39. They were still
calling upon him for a sign from Heaven. He had done indeed some miracles (they
could not deny it) in curing some poor, sick and leprous persons: But what were
these? Not enough, nor great enough to convince them, that he was the very
Christ. They must have a sign from Heaven, such as Ioshu^ showed, when the Sun
stood still, Ios. 10.12. Or as Esaias showed, when the Sun went backward, (...)
Reg. 20.11. Or as Moses showed, when he mad^ bread to come down from Heaven.
And thi^ last they mention, Joan* 6.30, 31. What sign show thou, that we may
see, and believe the^* Our Fathers did eat Manna, as it is written, He gave
them bread from Heaven. They must have such a demonstration, as might be an
evidence beyond all contradiction. Alas! Our Savior knew, as well as
themselves, nothing he could do, would keep them from contradicting him. 'Twas
only a vain and wicked pretense in them* that if they could be assured, he was
the Messiah, they would forthwith believe in him. But they dissembled, and
Christ calls them Hypocrites, Luc. 12.56. And he sighed deeply in his Spirit,
Marc. 8.12. knowing it was their hardness and mal^ce, to make so much ado
about miracles. And this he proves, Luc. 12.56. Ye can discern the face of the
Sky, etc. They were wise enough in other matters, and could make observations
one day, what weather would be the next. And therefore he pincheth them close,
v. 57. Yea, and why even of your selves judge ye not what is right? If they
would but have examined their own Consciences, and enquired there, what was
right, and to be resolved upon in the case, they need be no longer in doubt. I
have been the larger in this Instance, because it serves to show, what Spirit
they are of, who are ever and anon harping upon the same string, and making in
a manner the same demands. O! If they had but a sign from Heaven, if they could
once be certainly assured of such and such matters, what would not they do?
They are as ready, as any men alive, to receive and entertain whatever shall be
offered to them, as the mind and command of God. It Is pity they should live,
that are otherwise minded. But you must bear with them, if they are not so well
satisfied with some things; For truly (believe them he that lift) they never
had light clear enough as yet, to convince them. If these Preachers, and they
that pretend so much to preciseness, could but show some sign from Heaven,
could but give some evidence of their way, such as could not be contradicted,
they need not compass Sea and Land to make Proselytes; For they, and many more,
would be at their devotion.

But all this while, these men, that cannot be satisfied with any Arguments*
can satisfy themselves in the constant practice of such abominations, as the
Heathens would be ashamed of, and swallow down every day such foul evils, as
the Light of Nature and Reason have sufficiently discovered to all. Truly these
men are sick of the Jews disease, who expected a Messiah, such as God never
promised or intended; and when the Messiah came in another way than they
counted on, they would none of him, he was not for their turn, what should they
do with such a one? Or what could he do for them? They must have a Messiah to
reign in all worldly pomp and state, so as they might be a people, to rule over
all the Nations. A poor despised fellow, with a few Fishermen to attend him, to
be the Messiah, so long expected. They can never be perswade^ to this, unless
there were more cogent Arguments, than he had given them. Just so do others
fancy to themselves a way to Heaven, such as God never counted upon; but the
way of God indeed, such as Christ has laid out in his Word, and traced it
himself before them, a way of self-denial, and crucifying the flesh, with the
affections and lusts, who shall persuade them, that this is the way to Heaven?
They can never believe it, unless a man come from the Dead to assure them of
it. And so they go on quarreling with any thing, that looks but like true
Religion, and Holiness, and circumspect walking, which Scripture makes the only
way to Heaven. They see no such thing in Scripture, nor can those strait laced
Preachers say enough to persuade them, there is any necessity of so much
preciseness, unless they could work some strange and unheard of thing, to
demonstrate their nice opinions. And for the parts and gifts of those
Preachers, they know not but some others have as much learning as they, and yet
are not of their mind. They must therefore do somewhat more than ordinary, or
these men will never be persuaded to their way. To these men I shall say no
more, than that the mind of God in Scripture has as full and uncontrollable
authority, as any extraordinary Revelations possibly can have; 2 Pet. 1.19.
and let them except what they can, I Will undertake to show as much, and more to
be excepted against any way of Revelation which they would have. They who are
not satisfied with Scripture, will be satisfied with nothing, whatever some
pretend or imagine. And to say no more, it is a most absurd and unreasonable
thing, for any man to expect Revelations of Gods will, in an extraordinary way,
when he has so fully and plainly made known all things, in a way less liable
to exception than any other. 'Twere easy to show, how hard it would be for
most men to discern true miracles from false. And what a business would it be,
for every particular person to have a particular Revelation. Besides, such
appearances of God would be more dreadful to poor Creatures. Not to say, how
often the Devil might transform himself into an Angel of light. Whereas
Scripture is a sure word, that has been tried, and always found constant and
consistent with it self. And for the truth of it, (if there were no more) it
may contend upon rational grounds, for probability, with any pretense, that
has been, or (I think) can be to the contrary. And therefore to those that
must have extraordinary ways to convert them, I say, they are tempters of God,
in tying him to miracles, when he has appointed ordinary means; and do in
effect refuse the food that is offered them, looking when God will rain bread
from Heaven upon them.

Arg. 10. THat I may yet further evidence, that men want not Light, but only
neglect the means allowed them, I give this Reason, That so many make a kind of
profession, to be what indeed they are not, and cannot abid^ to be counted as
they are, and to be called by their own names. They that are as debauched as
any mis^reants on earth, will not abide to be so accounted, yea, will avouch
themselves to (...) far otherwise. He that uses deceit in bargaining upon all
occasions, would be thought as honest as any man alive. The Adulterer waitet^
for the twilight, Job 24.15. And the Adulteress wipeth her mouth, and says, I
have done (...) wickedness, Pro. 30.20. Now, when the vilest of men give it
out, and would have others believe, that they are such as they should, and
ought to be, is not this an Argument of conviction, that they do know what they
ought to do, and do the contrary? Where do you meet with any, that will openly
proclaim their wickedness, or affirm that vices are virtues; that Drunkenness,
Swearing, etc. are duties that ought to be done? No, for the most part, men are
ashamed, and will not own these; and yet continuing in the practice of them, do
they not sin condemned of themselves? They do know the baseness of their evil
ways, and notwithstanding go on in them. And with what face can they plead,
That if they had known the good, and the right way, they would have walked in
it? Wherefore they shall be their own Judges, when they are to be condemned
before the Lord at the last day.

Arg. 11. ANd why do many betake themselves to do somewhat for making their
peace (as they pretend) with God? This (if there were nothing else) serves to
prove, they are somewhat convinced of their ways and doings, that they are not
so good as they should be. But in the doing of it, they discover the wretched
untowardliness of their hearts, and how little they prize the things, which God
has promised to all them that diligently seek him. For commonly they betake
themselves to pitiful poor shifts. It may be, when they are going out of the
world, they can find in their hearts to spare a little somewhat to some good
uses, after they have all their life long been making more poor, than all their
estates are able to relieve; yea, done more wrong, than their estates are able
to recomp^^ce. And some will keep their Church better, than ever before, if
they live to it; and sometimes read a Chapter, or in some good Bo^k. But for
ransacking of Conscience* and ripping up old sins to the bottom, and renouncing
the vain ways, whereunto they are (as all others) inclined, and turning from
all iniquity, and betaking themselves to the most strict and precise way of
walking with God, in all his Commandments blameless, as Zechariah and Elizabeth
did, Luc. 1.6. As they never knew before, what belongs to them, so they are
still willing to let them alone. They cannot be ignorant (unless willingly)
that their duty is to be humbled, as low as Hell, and to receive the sentence
of death in themselves, and show it in all possible contrition and humiliation,
and denying themselves in all they formerly delighted in, and in walking so, as
all that see them, may have cause to say, Surely God has wrought some great
change upon them. But they can content themselves with less, and hope, God will
be as well pleased with it, as they themselv^^ are. So you shall have some
turned, it may be from open profaneness and debauchery, to (...) more sober
civil way of life, and perhaps somewhat of an empty outside formality. This is
an acknowledgement, that God must have somewhat more, than he has had
formerly. But this poor pittance will be a strong evidence against them one
day, that they did not follow hard after God, as they might and should have
done. For if men did not wilfully shut their eyes against the light that shines
in Scripture, to show the good and right way of see^ing after God, they could
not but know, that the utmost degree of self-denial and mortification, with
deepest humiliation before God, and all holy conversation and godliness, is the
only way to find him. Such slight work as they make, serves only to show, they
are not willing to do better, and therefore can in reason expect no great
reward. For (I say again) men cannot be ignorant* (except willingly) that the
enjoying of God for their portion, is so rare and rich a prize, as nothing can
be thought enough for procuring it; and such a slight dealing in a matter of so
great concernment, is an Argument to evidence, that they go against their own
light, and so are condemned of themselves.

And what do many in the whole course of their lives, more than trifle about
somewhat, which is indeed nothing to any purpose? They know after a sort, the
only true way to eternal life, which is believing on the Son of God. They are
also (we suppose it however) sober and ci^il in their behavior toward others.
But for their Religion toward God, it being (we grant) as to the outward
profession, right as it should be, they content themselves with the outside,
which is the easiest part of it, being least irksome to the flesh, and that
which pinches least upon their worldly and fleshly interests. And thus they
approve their skill, in finding out an easy way to Heaven. For this I may (I
hope) affirm without offense to any, That the Protestant Religion (so called,
and to me the only true Religion) in the bodily exercise, and outside
observance, is far more easy than any other. And there is good reason for it,
seeing the grace of God, in these Gospel Times, calls mostly for worshipping
God in the Spirit. The Jews had an hard task (indeed a kind of bondage) in the
outside of Gods service, which put them to great pains and cost. But Christians
now have as little as may be of the bodily exercise, because the more full
discoveries of Gospel^ grace call us now, to offer up our selves, as so many
living Sacrifices, holy and acceptable unto God, and called a reasonable
service, because according as God has prescribed. And 'ti^ indeed the main and
chiefest part of Gods service now, to mortify our earthly members, and
crucify the flesh, with the affections and lust^* with abridging our selves in
all that may gratify Self; conforming our selves, and coming as n^^r as
possible, to that more blessed and glorious (...)* wherein there will be no use
or need at all o^ these present comforts and accommodations.

Now what do many called Protestants other* than by their practices deny the
great things o^ the Gospel, and contradict our Savior Jes^^ Christ, in what he
said, Mat. 7.14. That the gate which leads to life eternal, is strait, and the
way narrow? For they make it as wide and easy as any man can devise to make
it. Surely it is no^ hard labor to go to Church once in a week, and receive
the Sacrament once or twice in a year, and say over by rote a few conn'd
Prayers once or twice in a day, when they are half asleep: And yet this is the
most service that many do to God, and it may be doubted if many do so much.
Now, if the course these men take, b^ the good, and the right way, they need
not strive much, the gate is wide, and the way is broad enough, who can miss
it, or go beside it? Questionless, the very Heathens serve the Devil* and
their Idols, at more cost, and charge, and pains taking, than all this comes
to. To speak as it is, the true Religion is the most easy of all others, as to
the outward bodily exercise; and all the difficulty that attends it, is in
Self-denial, being crucified to the World; and in the more spiritual part of
worship, whiles a man labors to keep his heart in a due frame and order, by
watching against the secret risings of his inward corruptions, with all the
subtle insinuations of Satan, so as at all times, and upon all occasions, as
well as in his more direct addresses to God, he is put to watch and ward, to
fence and fight, and all little enough to prevent the assaults of his enemies,
and preserve himself from the infection of sin. Oh! What a difficulty is there
in gathering up a man's thoughts and affections in duty, and keeping a strait
hand upon them all the while? To abandon vanity in discourse, and in our own
hearts, to curb, and keep in, what will be ready to break out, yea* and to nipp
the early buddings of corruption, e're they grow, and get head, is work that
will require labor, and care, and pains. So is it also, to have our
conversation always in Heaven, by setting our affections on things above,
continually musing and meditating on Eternity, and that happiness which never
shall have end; with minding always what may serve for the accomplishment of
our desires, in the enjoyment of God; and watching against all hindrances from
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, that may obstruct our passage* whiles we
are here in our pilgrimage. It Is no easy matter to deny our selves, in the
desires of the flesh, specially, when we see the most to use a liberty, with a
fair pretense of convenience, and necessary accommodation. It Is hard to keep a
bridle on our lips, and much harder to keep it on our hearts. And what ad^ must
there be, to observe and try our ways, so as all may be according to Rule; and
what diligence also is required, in calling our selves to an account every day,
so as to clear up our Evidences, that there may be nothing to interru^^ a fair
and free correspondency between God (...) our Souls? Now this harder part of
Christianit^ many curtall, yea, cut it off, and cast it quite ^way, never
caring for it, so much as seriously (...) have any thoughts about it; and
content themselves with an outside carcass (as I may call it) of the true
Religion, that has nothing of life (...) Soul in it. However, they will one
day fi^^* that this easy and empty formality of bodily exercise, will be a
swift witness against the^* that they might have done better, if they would.

Arg. 12. TO say no more in way of Argument, Let it be considered, Wh^t many,
yea most are wont to do, when they ar^ in apparent hazards of death, or in any
deadly dangers. Do they not then, as the Mariners, cry every man to his God?
Jon. 1.4* 5. Psa. 107.28.
Then men are affected mostly one of these two ways: Either they cry out
lamentably, yea, even howl for vexation of Spirit* bewailing their loss of
precious time and their mis-spending those Talents, which might have been
employed for their Souls advantage: Or they lie as men struck in the head, and
their heart (as Nabals) dies within them, so as they become as stones or
stocks, that have no sense. Now what does this signify? Even that, which I
have been discoursing hitherto. So long as men have ease and health, youth and
strength, and feel no evils or troubles, their lusts are lively, and always
kindling into a flame; and hence there is always a mist of smoke and darkness
in their Souls, such as hides and overwhelms all the notions they have of God,
or any thing that is good, so as they never consider, what shall be the end of
their madd mirth, sinf^ll vanities, or horrid impieties. But the sense of
approaching Death quenches all the ^lame of their lusts, and when the smoke of
that fire is ^^ce dispelled, their natural principles, or any other light they
have had, appear again to act, as they would have done before, had they not
been ^^ppress'd, and as it were buried under the rubbish of fleshly and filthy
lusts.

To this purpose we may observe, what the Psalmist has, Psalm. 9.20. Put them
in fear, O Lord, that the Nations may know themselves to be but men. They were
intollerably insolent and outrageous, taking no notice of God, nor caring for
him, so long as they had their wills, and felt no troubles. Hence the Psalmist
prays God, to put them in fear, i. e. to bring upon them some horrible tempest
of his wrath, and to give a proof of his power in some remarkable judgment,
that so they might come to themselves. I have cited this Text only to show,
That David was of this mind, That men will quake and tremble at the sense of
Gods Judgments, which they would not before, so long as they feared no danger.
And why? Because in times of prosperity, the smoke of men's lusts smothers the
operation of all their principles, so as they can have no effect. But Death
has a ghastly look* because it is a forerunner of Judgment, and men are
appal'd at the very thoughts of it, p^^ting them off so long as possibly they
can. However at last it comes, and then, when there is ^o longer help nor hope,
Oh no such welcome ^^sitants as good people, nothing so desirable (...) their
prayers. They do not then rejoice, (...) boast themselves in their wickedness.
No, (...) are sorry for their sins, and wish they had (...) their lives in
ways of godliness, truth and rig^teousness. Questionless they are then tam^^*
and may be talked withal, at least the most of them. For now their eyes are
opened, to see, what before they would not, but might have seen if they would.
And is not this a cogent Argument, to convince ungodly Sinners, that they
wittingly and willingly stifled the Light that shined in them, to show them the
only way to rest and peace. Who then shall bear the blame, but themselves? This
one Evidence, if there were no more, is enough to give the Verdict for God,
against all ungodly men.

I hope now enough has been said, to prove the general Proposition, laid down
in the beginning, so as I may now proceed to make some Application of the whole.

But there is one Objection more, that must be removed, and it is this, or to
this purpose, Vizt.

Obj. That I have discoursed a great deal, to prove men guilty of their own
destruction, by showing, that they go against their own Light and Consciences,
and so condemn themselves in what they do. But I have not all this while showed
them, how to find that good and right way, which leads unto life. This had
need be done, and never more, than in these, and the late times. You tell us
(will some say) a great ^eal of our wilfullness and frowardness, in going
against our light. But can you tell, What light ^^all lead us, in so many
perplexities of Opinions, ^hen every one calls us to his way, and none of them
knows how to assure us, which is the good, and ^he right way? You seem to make
but one right (...), and how shall we know where it lies, when ^^ere are so
many ways cried up, and every one is ^^tended to be the only good way? We have
need of ^ clue to lead us out of such a labyrinth, for else it is impossible for
us to find our way.

Sol. This is indeed a Question worth the an^wering, and 'twill not be much
beside my de^ign, to say somewhat about it.

For the many various and different persuasions of men, in matters of Religion,
are enough ^o stumble those, who will be glad of any occa^^on, to quarrel the
way of their own Salvation. and for their sakes, I shall say, what I am able,
^o give them satisfaction, if it may be.

That there are many and different persuasions (...) men, about the matters of
God, is that which cannot be denied. But that those different persuasions ought
to hinder our enquiries, or are a sufficient excuse for our carelessness, about
the concernments of our Souls, I deny, and for my denial I give these following
Reasons.

First, If such differences were a ground su^^^cient to excuse us, then all
that went Heaven way, since the beginning of the World almost might plead it,
as well as we. For what age or time can be showed, when it was otherwise*
Differences of Religion are indeed sad, but th^^ are no new things. Adam's
Children were (...) divided about Religion, or else we had not (...) of the
Sons of God, Genesis 6.2.
and the Daughters of men, (...) early in the World. It Is plain, they all (...)
professed not one way; or if they did, they (...) far divided in their
practices. As Noah walk^^ with God, Ibid.
when all flesh had corrupted his way* And after the Flood, were they not
divided i^ their Religions, as much as in their Language^* Who so reads the
Story recorded in Genesis, may see the World was peopled with those, tha^
served some one God, and some another; and few were they that served the living
and tru^ God, in a right manner, and yet some such ther^ were in all ages. How
was Israel divided, about the way of worshipping God, after the re^^ made by
Jeroboam? And not to be tedious in I^^stances, How many Sects were there in
Christ time, and before? Yea, and presently after the Gospel was published, how
did Sects arise an^ swarm in every corner of the World? And (...) it has been
ever since, they must be very ign^^rant, that do not know. But what of all
this? God had his faith^ul Servants, that followed him in the good old way of
truth and holiness, in all those times; and we never read or hear of any
complaints they made, That there were so many opinions and persuasions, as they
could not tell which to follow. No, they did, as all others ought to do, apply
themselves to search and enquire what way God had prescribed, and seeking it in
sincerity, with all their hearts, they found out that way, wherein they found
rest to their Souls. For this purpose, observe the resolution of Gods people,
as you have it, Micah 4.5. Though other people pleased themselves in their
superstitions, and opposed themselves against them, yet they resolved to stick
fast to the ways of God in his Word. Act. 14.16.
God indeed suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways, before Christ's
coming in the flesh, otherwise than afterward, in that Gospel Grace was not
published throughout the World equally and indifferently to the Gentiles, as to
the Jews. And God has since suffered men to arise in the Christian Church, and
teach perverse things, and so there have grown many Sects and Parties in
matters of Religion, very different and contrary. But God never left men
without light, to discern of things that differ, and to descry the good, and
the right way, if they had pleased to make use of it* The Apostle faith, 1 Cor.
11.19. There must be Heresies, or Sects, and gives a good reason for it, as our
Savior says, It must needs be, that offenses come, Mat. 18.7. Yet no man has
any cause to complain, and say, We cannot see which is the right way, because
of those Heresies and Offenses. God by them puts us to use our best skill and
endeavors, for finding out the good, and the right way; and by those
differences makes appear, who are sincere and sound at heart. For such there
were, notwithstanding those differences, and such there are, and will be to the
Worlds end. Hence nothing can be spoken more frivolous, than to say, There are
so many Religions, a man cannot tell which to choose. It is all one, as for a
man to say, There are so many lanes and turnings in his way to such a place, as
he will never think of going thither, though his whole Estate be in hazard, and
no way to help it, but by such a journey* What do men, when they are bound to
travel, but resolve to go on, and make the best enquiry they can to find out
the way? And so should we in this case; and to be otherwise minded, is a very
madness.

2 dly. The way to Heaven is not so hard to be found, if we had hearts resolved
to walk in it. There Is a great fallacy in the Argument, which had need be
discovered. For in truth, men deceive themselves by it, whiles they consider
not, that their hearts are naturally at enmity with God, and his ways; and
because they have no mind to go where God commands and sends them, they frame
an excuse, and pretend there are so many ways, as it is impossible to find the
right. And to speak as it is, this is all the cause, and here lies all the
fault. If men were willing to go in Gods ways, they would never complain so
much, of the difficulty in finding them. It Is an easy matter to find an
excuse, when a man wants a good will to any thing, whatever it be. A Lion is in
all ways, Pro. 26.13.
where the slothful man is to go.

3 dly. And for this purpose consider farther, That the way to Heaven must be
discerned and discovered, by that which is the proper mark and character of it,
as we find it in Scripture. Now, in the matters of Gods Kingdom, some are more
essential, substantial, and of greater consequence, than others; so as they who
differ about some particulars, may yet be right in the main, and all in Heavens
way. 'Twere sad indeed, if every difference in a punctilio, should make another
way to Heaven. Where are there two men in all the World, that are of one mind
in every thing? God forbid, that among the different persuasions, that are
about some things, in the way of administering Christ's Ordinances, we should
allow of none to be in the way to Heaven, that is otherwise minded in some
Particulars, than we our selves are. There are many roads to a great City, and
yet they that go the one, or the other, come alike to it, because all those
several ways have a tendency toward it. All the question is, and must be,
Whether the way we take, be such, as has a tendency toward Heaven? And by the
way, I think it the great mistake of some, to value men mostly, according as
they are affected to their own private way, whatever it be; whereas the
valuation ought to be according to what men are in the main and great matters
of Godliness, viz. Faith, Hope, Love, and all the fruits of them,
Righteousness, Mercy, etc. For he that in these things serves Christ, is
acceptable to God, and approved of men, To. 14.18. There are some
Foundation-truths of the Gospel, wherein to mistake deliberately and
constantly, is of desperate consequence. And there are the great matters of the
Law, wherein a willful constant neglect is inconsistent with true Holiness.
Yea, though the error or evil be in it self none of the greatest, yet when
there is a persisting in them, after conviction, and against admonition, out of
malignancy, I know not what to resolve better, than that the way of such men is
not safe. But when there is an unfeigned desire, and an earnest endeavor, to
know the good and right way, and a constant course in the practice of all
services and duties to God and men, with a conscionable carefulness to avoid
offense toward all, I know no reason, why such, though under different
persuasions, in some Particulars of no great concernment, should be otherwise
looked on, than as the Children of our Father in Heaven.

Therefore, as for the different persuasions of so many divided about some
things, for want of light, they need be no occasion of stumbling to any. The
way to Heaven is easy to be seen, notwithstanding those differences. For
whoever they be among those Parties, that, in obedience to Christ, have learned
to deny themselves, and all ungodliness, etc. and to take up Christ's Cross, and
to live in the constant exercise of mortification, and crucifying the flesh,
and do indeed lead their lives, in the main, according to the only rule of
righteousness, they are in Heavens way. Thou, it may be, do not like the
persuasions of some of them: And I say, If thou like them not, for me thou
may let them alone. But thou perhaps likest not Holiness, Self-denial, and
crucifying of thy Lusts neither; but art resolved to take thy full swinge in
the pleasures of sin, and thy daily practice is, to serve thy fleshly desires
to the utmost. Thou art (may be) a Drunkard, a common Swearer, an unclean
Beast, living, lying down, and wallowing in the mire. Now to thee, I say,
Whoever be in Heavens way, (to be sure) thou art out of it. And thou must
certainly resolve, to change thy way, or perish for ever. Thou say, There
are so many Religions, a man cannot tell which to choose. But in the mean time,
thou art of no Religion, thou have not so much as a form and face of it. Set
aside thy going to Church on Sundays, (with what mind, thou thy self best
know) what is there of Religion to be seen in thee? In thy Family, there is
no show of it, in Prayer, and Praise, and reading the Scripture, and
Catechizing thy Children and Servants. There is to be seen all the Week,
laboring for the food that perishes, by early rising, and late going to bed.
There a man may hear Oaths, and Curses, and Lies, and filthy Communication, and
the best but vain and idle discourses; but not a savory word, to show any sense
of God, and his goodness, from morning to night. There Is Provision for the
necessities of Nature, to cloth the back, and fill the belly; and Provision
too for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof: But there is nothing of God and
Godliness to be seen, no conscience made of sin to shun it, or of any thing
that is good to practice it. Now, whoever thou art, that leadest such a life, I
tell thee, Whatever becomes of others, it cannot be well with thee in these
ways of ungodliness. Thou vain foolish man, think thou, that any Religion
can be worse than thine? Thou have none at all, no not so much as a show of it*
Even Turks and Pagans may be, and some of them are, sober, temperate, just, and
honest in their doings and dealings with others, which thou art not. Wherefore,
let there be never so many Religions, I Will rather choose the worst of them, than
to do as thou do. And this I assure thee, Whatever becomes of those many
Sects and Parties, thou art in a sad condition, and had need think of
changing it, as soon as thou can. And if thou ask, Which way thou shall take
among so many, I answer thus, That I will not persuade thee any way, but what
(I am sure) is right, viz. To be honest and godly, and to forsake those ways,
wherein, whoever walks, shall never find rest. To follow peace and holiness,
Heb. 12.14.
without which no man shall see the Lord. To repent of all thy ungodly courses,
and ways of wickedness, whether open or secret. To walk circumspectly, and
make straight steps to thy feet. To be holy and unblameable in all
conversation, and to make conscience of every duty, according to the rule of
the Word. And this thou may do, without much ado or dispute, except it be
with thine own wicked heart.

For those many Parties that are, I am bold to tell them all, and every one of
them, That they will find no comfort one day, in being of this side, or that,
if they be not found in ways of righteousness and holiness. And these are the
ways I would have thee take, and these thou may soon learn from Scripture,
where they are so plain, as a man may run, and read them. But one thing I must
mind thee of again, viz. That thou who so quarrell'st at the many Religions
abroad, have perhaps a quarrel in thy heart against God and Godliness, and thou
can not endure any Religion so, as to be tied to any Rule or Law, more than
thine own Lusts. Thou love to live at ease and pleasure, and likest no
Religion, but such a one, as will give thee leave to be licentious. To thee I
say again, dipp and choose, thou can never change thy Religion for a worse.
And to change it, thou have need, as soon as may be: For 'twill be sad with
thee, to dye in such a Religion, which is indeed none at all, or good for
nothing. Do not thou look, how many Religions and Opinions there are, for
that is nothing to thee: But look to thy conversation, and see, whether that be
such as becomes a Christian. Do thou love Christ, and fear to sin, as much as
any of all those different persuasions; and show thy self as humble, as honest,
as upright, as conscionable, and every way as careful to please God, as any of
them all, and then thou do well indeed. Alas! poor Soul, what will it avail
thee, to say, There are so many Religions, thou know not which to take, so
long as thou art resolved to walk in ways of ungodliness, and to serve diverse
lusts and pleasures, and deny thy self in nothing, that will serve to please
the flesh. This, to be sure, is not Heavens-way, whatever it be. And therefore
make no more question, about the many Religions* that are in the World, till
thou art better resolved for that Religion, which is plain and easy enough to
be learned by any, that has not a wicked heart against God, and all that is
good* Resolve once to serve Sin no more, and thou will presently see the way to
Heaven, as plain before thee, as thou know the way to thine own house or
home.

AND now I shall make some Application ^f all that has been said, after I have
giv^n one Proviso, to prevent a mistake that may be* I have hitherto showed,
How willful the wick^^ World is, and how apt to take offense, even t^ contend
with God himself, about the ways and workings of his Grace and Providence. Say
and do what you can or will, they will not be persuaded, but perhaps the more
hardened. Bu^ though it be so with most of the World, yet beware, whatever you
do, you give them no occasion of falling or stumbling. Say not in thine heart,
They are such as will perish, and it matters not, how we carry our selves
toward them; if they will be offended, let them be offended, we cannot help
it. Some, yea too many, will be offended; yet take heed of giving them the
least occasion of offense: For so has the Lord commanded, Levit. 19.14. Thou
shall not put a stumbling block before the blind, but shall fear thy God. Yea,
Deuteronomy. 27.18. There is a curse upon him, that makes the blind to wander out of
the way. And our Savior denounces a woe to him, by whom the offense comes,
Mat. 18.7. They are blind, and out of the way; but in that, they deserve the
rather, to be the object of thy pity, and prayers, and endeavors, to turn them
from the error of their way. What know thou, that they may not recover
themselves, and come to repentance? Secret things belong to the Lord, Deuteronomy.
29.29. That we are to labor their repentance, and by all possible means to
endeavor it, in our capacities and relations, is revealed to us as our duty;
and if they will perish notwithstanding, we have delivered our own Souls, their
blood will be upon their own heads. Our Savior indeed said of some, Let them
alone, etc. Mat. 15.14. i. e. Have no regard to them, trouble not your selves
about them, if they be offended, be not you offended however, because of them.
But he allows not his Disciples to offend them in the least. If men show
themselves contentious, malicious, and wilfully contumacious, as the Scribes
and Pharisees, some of them were, Let them alone, pass them by, but yet provoke
them not to be more wicked than they are. True, we cannot do, what is our duty,
but some will be offended, as the Scribes and Pharisees were at Christ, for
doing the will of him that sent him. But the offense was only taken by them,
there was none given by him. He proved to be by accident a stone of stumbling,
and a rock of offense, but never offended any. If we cannot do, what is our
duty, without offense to some, the fault is theirs, not ours, because we may
not, to please them, offend God, by disobeying his commands. Some will be
offended, if we will not pledge them in a drunken health: Let them be offended,
it need not trouble us. If we tamely do, as they do, we encourage them in their
debaucheries, and so we offend them indeed, by helping them on toward the pit
of destruction. Wicked men make too much have to the Devil, we need not
provoke* or put them forward. Indeed we have need be very careful, and as the
Apostle, Jude v. 22. advises, To put a difference. Some perhaps will rage, if
we will not run to the same excess of riot with them: But better they rage,
than we, by doing what they would have us, to provoke Gods wrath against our
own Souls. A patient forbearance to do, as they do, and a withdrawing from
them* may be an effectual reproof, and work upon them afterward. If there be
no hope to fasten an admonition, Solomon has resolved the case for us, Pro.
9.8. Reprove not a Scorner. However comply not with him, to allow of his
wickedness in the least. But be sure, not to give any occasion of falling to
such as are weak, Lest thy poor Brother perish, for whom Christ dyed, To.
14.15. The Apostle was a singular Precedent for this, He would eat no flesh
whiles he lived, rather than offend his Brother, 1 Cor. 8. fin. How did he
yield upon occasion, to avoid offense to the weak? But as far as I can
remember, not otherwise. He yielded in those things, wherein he was fully
satisfied in his own conscience and judgment. But how, and upon what terms?
Never (as I remember) but to prevent the offense, that might be taken by weak
Brethren; lest they might take occasion, by his not yielding in some things, to
cast off all, and turn back again with the Dog to his vomit. We do not read of
his so yielding to wicked willful Sinners, that would have made no other use of
it, than to reproach him, and (which is worse) the Gospel too, by saying, He
was a man of no Principles, that would comply with any thing, to save his skin.
We have a notable Instance for this in Galat. 2.3, 4, 5* When false Brethren
went about to infringe the liberty of Christians, and bring them into bondage,
(...) gave no place by subjection, no not for an hour. For therein he had built
again the things that he had destroyed, and encouraged the enemies of the truth
in their opposition against it. Yield i^ any thing thou can, to save a Soul,
to draw men on to a good liking of Gods ways, and putting them forward in
them: But not one hairs breadth, to encourage them in their ungodliness; For
that is offending them, contrary to the command of Christ.

And now I must call loud upon many, and even conjure them, to consider their
ways, whereby they have given so great occcasion of offense, to such as are
openly and avowedly wicked. O! Do not say, or think, Such ungodly men show
themselves, what they are; when they declare their sin as Sodom, they are past
shame, and past hope; Let them dye, and be damned, who can help it? It may
prove so, that they will dye, and be damned, and nor thou, nor any man else can
help it, because they will not help themselves. But thou have need look to it,
that their death and condemnation add nothing to thine account. They perish for
their contempt or neglect of that, which they should more carefully have looked
after: But what if your careless and loose walking, have been the occasion of
making them to think, they need not be so careful; yea, perhaps, of slighting
and setting at naught all the ways of Gods Commandments? Surely, if it be so,
the best that can be made or said of it, is this, That they are Principals, and
you are Accessaries, as to their destruction; and what comfort you can take in
that, I beseech you seriously to consider. For be you well assured, that the
ungodly lives of professed Christians, will one day be aggravated by this, that
when they lived (as many thousands now do) amongst professed Infidels, they
gave them occasion to have hard thoughts of Christ and Christianity, and to
resolve, they would never go to that Heaven, where Christians hope to come.
For how shall such poor Souls be brought to enquire after God, when they that
profess themselves to be his Servants, walk ordinarily in ways of uncleanness,
excess and deceit, etc. such as Heathens know by Natures light, to be against
the mind of God? The Devil himself (whom those Barbarians serve) can teach them
no worse, than what they are learned by the evil conversations and examples of
Christians. How shall they be turned from the power of Satan unto God, when
they cannot see it will be for the better, but rather for the worse? Here I
cannot omit, what the Turks are wont to say, when another will not believe
them, What do take me for a Christian? It seems they have observed too much
falsehood amongst Christians. Now this is a Lamentation, and let it be a
Lamentation, that the mouths of Infidels are so much opened against all
Christians, and the mouths also of many professed Christians against more
eminent Professors, to blaspheme, and say, Are these the ways and doings of
those that serve Christ? Are these practices becoming them, that pretend so
much to Godliness, and would be thought more ex^ellent than their Neighbors?
What inference (think you) will Infidels, and ungodly profane men make from
it? Surely this, and no other, Let them go alone for us, we are as well where
we are already, we are not like to mend our silver, by taking the courses and
ways of these Christians, these great Professors; nor can we be worse in the
way wherein we now are: If they be not in all, as we are, they are certainly in
some things as bad as we can be. And now I could ex tempore, and without any
study, draw up a black bed roll of many and manifold gross miscarriages of
many, that would be thought more eminent Christians than their Neighbors. But
I shall content my self with this general Admonition, in hope it may be
improved to the right end of it, by such as cannot but know themselves faulty
in many particulars, unless the God of this World has quite blinded the eyes
of their minds. O that these men would consider as they should, what to answer
in the great day of account! Specially when it cannot be denied, that such
horrid things have been done, as Natures light (if there were no other
evidence) cannot but condemn. I shall only add, They have been such, as
whosoever (that is but civil and sober) hears, his ears cannot but tingle at
the very report of them.

The Application.
IF all the ground and reason of all mistakes and miscarriages about the
matters of Gods Kingdom, and our Salvation, be our contempt or neglect of the
means and helps which God has allowed us, Let every one by himself, make a
serious enquiry, how he shall be able to clear himself in the great day of
account. For God will certainly come, and judge, and try every man's work, and
reward accordingly.

And in this Application of the foregoing Discourse, I shall apply my self to
all, and every one, that has but so much of Religion, as to acknowledge, That
there is a World to come, after a little time spent here on Earth, and that men
shall be rewarded hereafter for ever, according to their present behavior.

This is no more of Religion, than all, or most of Heathens ever had, and still
have; though their conceptions about it, have been, and still are, but
confused, general, imperfect notions, without any effect considerable. But yet,
the main intent of all, shall be with a more especial respect to such as do, or
might know more clearly, the things of their peace, than Heathens can. To these
I say, They cannot but know, that all who have lived since the World began, and
shall live till it have an end, shall not be for ever as they were here on
Earth. And this our Savior shows plainly in the Parable (as I take it to be)
of the Rich man and Lazarus, Luc. 16. v. 19. -- 31. Some receive their good
things here, and some must wait for them till hereafter. And a great turn there
will be, so as the Scene shall be quite changed, as you may see v. 25. of Luc.
16. For Lazarus is comforted, and the Rich man is tormented.

Now consider what has been discoursed before, and see whither you are a
going, and where you make account to arrive at last. There is, by your own
confession, an happy estate and condition for some in glory, and honor, and
immortality. And by what has been said before, you may see (if you will) that
nor you, nor any others, lie under any fatal necessity of perishing in your
sins; but that if you dye, and be damned, it is only through your own default.
Now be entreated, whiles it is called, To day, to consider your ways, and
bethink your selves, how those blessed Souls, that have all their desires and
hopes accomplished in the sight of God for ever, came to the enjoyment of their
happiness. Was it not in the way of Repentance toward God, and Faith toward
our Lord Jesus Christ? Did they know by immediate and extr^ordinary Revelation,
before they repented and believed, that they were of the number that should be
saved? Or was the Book of Life opened to them, that they might read their own
names there recorded, and so be encouraged to repent, and turn to God? You
cannot, when you are awake, imagine it; or if you should, it is but as a sick
man's dream, that never entered into the head of one that is sober, and in his
right senses. Alas! Those now blessed Soul^ were once (while upon earth)
Foolish and disobedient, Tit. 3.3.
serving diverse lusts and pleasures. They were by nature the children of wrath,
Ephesians. 2.3.
even as others. They were of themselves inclined to the things of this World,
and traded and traffiqu^ for them, as others do, till afterward they came to
know better. Yea, all that died in the faith, before God was manifested in the
flesh, and never had the discoveries of saving grace, such as have been since,
even they by dimmer light chose the way to that place, where they shall be for
ever with the Lord. And who among us now, would not desire to be with those
Patriarchs, and Prophets, and other holy men of God before and since the coming
of Christ? Now consider well, whether we take the same course that they took.
Read the Eleventh Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and see, what so many
Worthies of old did and suffered, and so by faith and patience inherited the
promises. They stood not arguing and whartling, as many now do, putting
questions, and framing exceptions, to excuse themselves from necessary duties,
and to gain a little allowance to their fleshly desires. They were not frighted
out of Gods way, by Bugg-bears of their own fancies, no nor by real fears and
expectations of the greatest hazards. You never read in Scripture, that they
made Queries about Gods Decrees; or resolved, as some do, that if they were
elected, they should be saved however; or that, if Christ died not for them,
there was no hope. You never read, that any of those, who are now in Heaven,
reasoned thus, That they could do nothing of themselves, and therefore would
sit still, and fashion themselves to this World, because if God had any grace
or mercy in store for them, they should be sure to have it in his time, though
they never sought after it. Did any of them do thus, and let all the care of
their Salvation lie somewhere else, without ever looking after it? Where do you
read these things, or who told you so, that others may learn and know as much
as you? I have read much of their faith and patience, and patient continuance
in well-doing; and how by these they possessed the Kingdom, prepared for them,
through the grace of him that is Heir of all things: But amongst them all, I
read not of one, that took the course, that so many do now adays. They were
all of them humble Souls, submissive in all things to the wills of God, and
resolved to walk with God, in the midst of all the ungodly ones amongst whom
they lived. They denied themselves, many of them, to the very death, and took
joyfully the spoiling of their goods, and would not renounce the ways of God,
for all that a wicked World could do unto them, or lay upon them. This (I say)
this was the way, wherein they went to Heaven; and they that know of any other
way thither, than that of Self-denial, and crucifying the flesh, with the
affections and lusts, have made a discovery, such as none, who are now in
Heaven, could make before them. What remains then, but that we tread in their
steps, do and suffer as they did, if we are called to it, and so wait for our
happiness, and try, if we fare not as well as others that went before us. It Is
sad to think, how most men fool themselves out of all their hopes, by their
dallying about their greatest and only concernments, and flatter themselves to
their destruction, by conceits and fancies of their own framing. The way to
Heaven is now as open, as ever it shall be, till Christ's coming again; and the
Doctrine of our Salvation, as much cleared up, in all particulars, as nothing
can stumble us, if we will but lay aside our peevish and froward humors. Were
we but once resolved to deny our selves, and to follow Christ wherever he
goes before us, whatever the way be, fair or foul, the work is done, we need
make no other question: There Is as good security, as can be given, and we may
safely build upon it.

But alas! It is not so with us, as it was with the Saints, who are now in
Heaven. We stand blessing our selves in our own way, be it never so bad; and
think we do well in all we do, though all Scripture and Reason be against it.
This is the trade that Sinners drive, as the Devil would have them, and their
own hearts incline and carry them. The Devil (you must know) ever since he
undid himself, has made it his business to undo all the World of mankind, as
much as in him lies. And he is now as hard at work as ever he was, and drives
as great a trade, for gaining Souls to himself, as ever he did. And what is his
way, to cheat the World, and gull men of all they have, worth saving or losing?
Truly, the very same, or very like to that, which I have before discoursed. He
cannot by all the arts and methods he uses, heighten men's sinful corruption
to the same degree of malice and madness against God, that himself is guilty
of. But yet he has a way that serves his turn, to bring men into the same
place of torment with himself for ever. And what way is it? It i^ even this,
and no other, viz. To keep men in a persuasion, that their way is good, and
that they have no such enmity in their hearts against God, as some charge them
with; but that they love him, and all his Commandments truly, and do the best
they can, to choose the best way to their everlasting happiness. And these
conceits are strong in those that have them, so as it is no easy matter to
convince them of the contrary. These they nourish and cherish, even when they
are in ways of all ungodliness, running headlong to their own destruction.

Now my desire is, to reason the case a little further with these men, and try,
if God may be pleased to give them Repentance, that they may recover themselves
out of the snare of the Devil.

1. And First, I ask them, If Turks, and Infidel- Jews, are not as much
persuaded, that their several respective ways are good, yea, and better than
any other? Yea, do not all men, of what Sort and Sect soever, though never so
vile, and vicious, and barbarous, persuade themselves, that their way is good?
Can you light on Man, Woman, or Child, that will not say, They hope to be
saved; and the way they take (whatever it be) is, as they think, the ready way
to Heaven? Nay, if you tell them, they are in the broad way toward Hell, will
they not be ready to fly in your face, and say, You do them wrong? Yet no
sober man will say, That all and every one of these is in the right, but many
of them (whoever they be) are quite beside the way to Heaven.

2. I ask, If any of all those Persons and Parties (which are numerous and
various) do not so far allow of their own respective ways, as to abhor the
different ways that others take, and count them accursed of God for abusing
themselves in their mistaken ways, as to undo their Souls for ever? Do not
Turks and Jews condemn all Christians to the Pit of Hell? And I know but few
others, that are better minded toward all, that are not of their own way.
Papists say for certain, There Is no Salvation for any out of their Church. And
the vilest of men amongst us, spare not to pass sentence upon others, that dare
not be so vile as themselves. Now when God shall come to judge all, will he
(think you) allow of every plea, that shall be made by every one of these, and
say, Well done, You are all my faithful Servants? Will he commend and reward
all, according as they all persuaded themselves, that their way was good? No
certainly, he will not so acquit the wicked World, that condemn all besides
themselves, and their followers. Nor will he count, that every man has a right
to eternal life, of what Religion soever he is, (as some have dreamed) because
he seemed to mean well in it. The Lord has showed all men, what is good, and
what he requires of them, and that so fully and plainly, as he will have
ground enough to proceed against them, and to execute vengeance on all
Idolaters, and all other ungodly and unrighteous men, whatsoever Religion they
professed. He will easily and suddenly find out all, that have inquired and
sought after the only true way of worship, which himself had appointed, and
have made conscience of walking before him in holiness and righteousness, with
an utter abhorring of all false ways. And to these only will he say, Well
done, good and faithful Servants, You, and you only, have done as I commanded
you.

If any shall say, That an allowance must be given to some, because all that
go in the good way, walk not at one rate, but some come behind and faulter
sometimes: I say so too; and that the righteous God will put a difference
between those that are upright in the main, though falling behind others in
degrees of true grace; and others, that wilfully choose their own ways, which
God has expressly forbidden, and as wilfully refused the good old way of Gods
Commandments. He knows, and will own all, that have denied themselves, and made
it their work to find and keep the way of God. There are, and always have been
such in the World, (though a few in comparison) that knew the straight way to
Heaven, amongst all the crooked ways of men's devising; and set themselves to
keep that way, notwithstanding all opposition or temptation. And these only
will God look after in the great day of account. For others, he will have
enough to answer them, though they were of never so many and different
persuasions, in point of Religion* they must be all packed together in that
day, and bound in bundles, to be cast into the fire, because they were all in
their life time, Workers of iniquity. They shall prevail little by pleading
then, They could never see reason enough, to persuade them out of the way that
they took; For they shall be made to see in that day, there was a right and
good way of holiness and righteousness, wherein they should have walked, (and
it was easy enough to be seen) but they would not walk therein. Nay, they
found fault with it, and raised false reports of it, and used all the Arguments
they could, to keep themselves and others from walking in it. They would never
stoop their high Spirits, to enter into the strait gate; nor would they bear
the contempt of the World, and the reproach that must be undergone for Christ's
sake, and the Gospels. They thought, to be religious, was to be melancholic;
and thought it an hard bargain, to part with the pleasures of sin, for somewhat
(that some crack-brain'd people talked much of) in another World to be had, but
no man knew when or where. They were such, as would be merry while they might,
and take as much of this World as they could; and for Religion, in respect to
another World, they could never well understand it. There were indeed some,
that talked much that way, but they could not well agree among themselves, and
therefore they left them to quarrel about it, and took the way that themselves
best liked. For the Religion which some cried up, as the only way to Heaven,
they conceived it very strait and narrow; nor could they see so much in it, as
might persuade them to it. In a word, they never liked any Religion, that would
tie them to deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts. And hence it is easy to
conceive, how God will proceed against all Sects and Sorts of men, of what
persuasion soever, that never were persuaded to deny themselves for God, and
the Gospels sake.

It should be also considered, That, though all men have not Talents alike (as
that may be granted) either for weight or number, yet all have enough, to show
them a better way, than what the most take, and that their way is not good
before the Lord. Hence it will be clear, That there has been a wilful neglect
of the trust that was committed to them, and so without further evidence, the
verdict will pass against them. They all know (though not all alike) their
Masters will, and yet do it not, and therefore must be all beaten, though not
with the same number or measure of stripes. This the Devil knows well enough,
and that no plea (such as men frame many to themselves now) will then find
place. And therefore, his work is to blindfold men with such conceits as were
mentioned before, and so fill them with as many prejudices against God, and his
ways, as they can possibly hold, that when they are hood-winked, he may carry
them whither he pleases. Men are not easily (if possibly) brought to despite
God as the Devil does: Therefore they must be deal^ with so, as to be
persuaded, there is some cause without them, and without any fault of theirs,
which puts them upon those vain and vile waye^ and courses wherein they walk.
What those pretenses are, you have heard before, and I need not repeat them.
Only I say, That so lon^ as the Devil can hold men under such mistake^* and
prejudices, or the like, he has them fast enough, and does not fear an escape.
Men, I say, will have excuses for the worst of their evil ways, and this is
one, and a great one, That the way they are in, is the best they can see; and
they could never meet with any, that could show them a better. They are willing
enough to save their Souls, and have done as much as lies in them for that
end. They love God heartily, and abhor, that any should say, They hate his
Commandments, which they labor to keep as well as they can. And all this
serves to clear themselves, and cast all upon God: But he will not bear all,
that men cast upon him; nor will he say in the great day of account, Alas! poor
Souls, you were willing enough to be saved, (...) loved me, and my ways well
enough, and would have walked in them, if I had tendered your souls, as much as
you your selves did. Will the Lord (think you) at that day, take upon himself
all the blood of so many, as shall then be condemned to Hell for ever, and say,
If I had done for these, as I might, and ought to have done, they had never
come into this place of torment? Will the Lord say, That he made men as he
pleased, and then cast them away, and left them to suffer shame and confusion
of face, for no fault of theirs, but only because he had a mind to see his
Creatures slain, and tormented before him for ever? Will he say, It was in his
heart to damn them before they were born, and that for nothing, but because it
was his will and pleasure? And that he sent his Son into the World, to condemn
the World, and not that the World through him might be saved? Will he say
indeed, That he set men in such a way, as they could not but perish in it, and
left them wholly deprived and destitute of all means and helps to save
themselves from wrath to come? Consider, I say, and bethink your selves
beforehand, Whether the righteous God will take home all this to himself, and
say, It was he alone that has been the cause of all the ruin and misery that
is come upon his Creatures; and so quit them from any the least blame of their
destruction. Yet this is it, or very like it, that men would fasten upon God,
if they knew how to do it. This is the tendency of all their disputes about
Gods Decrees and Dispensations of Grace and Providence. It is this, and no
other, even to charge it on God, That if he had purposed and provided better
for them, it had never been so sad with them, but they might have been happy
and blessed for ever. But le^ God alone, and it will appear one day, where the
fault lies. He is the Judge of all the Earth, and will not he do right? Genesis
18.25.
Yes, he will do right to all; and this the Apostle lays down, as a^
unmovable Principle, To. 3.5, 6. God is not unrighteous, who takes vengeance.
For then ho^ shall God judge the World? He will then acquit himself, and say
for ever, These are the work of my hands, and I made them so, as they might
have been happy for ever in communion with my self. I allowed them means
sufficient for that en^* but they cast me off, and chose somewhat else to (...)
their only good; and though I have besought (...) entreated them, again and
again, with all poss^^^^ earnestness, and admonished them of the danger of
their own ways, they would go on however; (...) their frowardness and
wilfullness in their own devices, against my express command to the contrary,
has brought them to this, which they now see and feel, but would never believe
till now. I have passed the sentence of condemnation upon them, an^ it cannot
be recalled, nor can there be any reprieve or respite. But I have not done it
without cause, and only for that I had a mind to see them lie for ever in
torments and misery. It was indeed (...) will to damn them, but I willed their
damnation only for their sin, and because they would not be re^claimed. I
delighted not in their damnation, (...) as to condemn them, merely for my will
and pleasure. I have only done justice upon incorrigib^^ Offenders, such as
have despised my grace an^ mercy, and the reward of these wicked ones is
according to their works, yea as they would have it. For I fore-warned them of
it, as often and as earnestly as needed, and they would not beware; nor could
any entreaties prevail, to turn them from those ungodly ways, which led them
to their destruction, as they knew.

Let men say now as they please, This is that which God will say, to justify
himself against all the World. And O! that men were wise, to consider it in
time, and apply themselves to make their peace with God, which I assure them
they may do, if they be not wanting to themselves.

And for their encouragement* I shall give them the best account I am able,
how, and in what manner, God will proceed in the last and general Judgment.
The way that he will take in that day, will be this, That every man shall be
tried according to a known Law. It Is a gross mistake in men, to imagine, That
God will judge the World according to that, which was never made known. The
question will not be, Whether a man's Name were written in the Book of Life, but
how he has behaved himself, according to the Rule laid down in the Bible. That
is more particularly and plainly thus, Whether, when Christ was offered to
them, they accepted of him, and closed with him upon his own terms. For as they
have answered the dispensations and overtures of his grace, so shall their doom
be. If they counted all but loss and dung, for the excellency of the knowledge
of him; and valued nothing else in comparison, so they might serve and honor
him, whether by doing or suffering, in life or in death, To. 2.7. Luc 22.28, 29.
Peace, and Life, and Glory, and Immortality, will be their portion, and the
lot of their inheritance for ever. The Cause will for certain go on their
side, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. But if they have been
contentious, and disobedient, and would not have the Lord Christ to reign over
them, To. 2.8, 9. 2 These. 1.7, 8.
but would walk after their ungodly lusts, whatever could be said or done to
reform them, th^re's a declared Law to condemn them; God will not, needs not
look into any other Records about it.

Obj. If any say, That all shall not be judged by the Gospel:

Sol. I shall not contend, but only say, That all shall be condemned by a known
Law, one or other.

And if it be said further, That as many as have sinned without law, To. 2.11,
12.
shall perish without law: I answer,

That the Apostle shows what he means in the 14 th. Verse of the same Chapter.
They that sin, and shall be condemned without Law, are the Gentiles, who had
not the Law delivered to them (as the Jews had it) in writing: But yet they had
the Law written in their hearts, and that will be plain enough, because it bare
witness, and accused them, while they were in their sins. And this we may well
infer from that place, That if there be a Law, that condemns men now in this
World, by witnessing against their wickedness, much more will there be a Law
found, for their condemnation, in the last day of account. Or this, That the
same Law that condemns them now, will certainly condemn them then. And let that
be observed also, That as Sin is the transgression of the Law, so Condemnation
for Sin cannot be otherwise, than according to that Law. Once, it cannot be
according to that which never was a Law; and that cannot be a Law, which was
never declared to be a Rule of Life and Duty. Gods Decrees and Counsels are all
righteous, but they were never made known to us, as a rule of moral actings.
When God is pleased to declare his counsel by the event, we cannot without sin
go against it, and it is impossible for us to alter it. But still the rule we
are to walk by, is the will of God* revealed for that end and purpose, that ^e
may know what to do, in obedience to him who is our Sovereign Lord. And as we
do, or (...) not, according to this will of God, so we are guilty or innocent
before him. And good reason why it should be so, and not otherwise. For,

1. How can we be obedient to God in any thing, but that which we know to be
his will? Obedience in the very notion of it, imports as much as hearing and
understanding what the will of the Lord is. Nor will the righteous Lord of all,
expect obedience to any will of his, we ^ever heard of. Sure we are, that he
never declared to the Sons of men any way of life, but in ^he two Covenants,
viz. of Works before the ^all, and of Grace ever since. And though the means
and manner of imparting to men the way of life, have been various; yet no man
can, or could ever say, That God had concealed his mind from him, that he could
not know, and so do it. We read, That there are Decrees and Counsels of God:
But who knows, what they are, besides God himself, till he is pleased to
declare them, in the events of them? And those events show us only, what God
will do, and not what we are to do.

2. We show no Faith in God otherwise, than in obedience to his Commandments.
This is the only way of walking with God, as Noah, Genesis 6.9. When a man has
the Promise of God in his eye, and the Commands of God in his heart, and the
encouragements he has by the one, lays an obligation and engagement to the
other. So did all those Worthies, Heb. 11. who are recorded for example, to all
that shall come after. The believing of the Promises, and obedience to the
Commands of God, are the trial of men on Earth, and that by which they shall
be tried hereafter. He that has not Faith, cannot forgo what is in hand, to
purchase a reversion of he knows not what. Faith alone is the ground of
things hoped for, etc. Heb. 11* 1. And so it sets a man on work to do and
suffer the wills of God, because it assures a man of Gods Faithfulness and
All Sufficiency. This obedience of Faith is that, which God rewards in his
Servants, and nothing else. This is that which (as I may say) takes much with
God, when men can pass by present enjoyments, only because of his promise, Who
cannot forget any work, or labor of love, which they have showed unto his
Name. Heb. 6.10.


3. A man shows no Love to God, in doing according to his decree and counsel,
because he cannot but do it, whether he will or no. Now God rewards no work,
but the labor of love, when we delight to do his will, Psa. 48. and desire the
knowledge of his ways, as David did, Psa. 119. that we may walk in them.

4. The Devil, and the worst of wicked men, fulfill the counsels of God, in all
they do, and cannot do otherwise. Herod and Pilate, etc. in crucifying Christ,
did nothing, but what the hand and counsel of God had determined before, Act.
2.23. Act. 4.28. and yet it was their sin; and their condemnation too. Joseph
of Arimathea is commended, for a good man, and a just, Luc. 23.50, 51. because
he consented not to the counsel and deed of them, who crucified Christ. The way
of Gods Commandments, is the only way to life, and this the Devil and his
followers cannot abide to walk in. For the way of his Counsels, they are
always in it, and cannot go besides it, even when they do their worst. And
indeed, how should they? unless we will suppose (what is not to be imagined)
That God should lay by all care, and looking after the affairs of the World,
and leave them to be managed and ordered, as the Devil, and his Instruments
will have them.

To say no more of this; God has laid before us the way of Faith and
Obedience, or the way of Truth and Holiness, and commanded it, as the way that
leads unto life; and in this way alone, can we find rest unto our Souls.

Away therefore with all disputes and questions about Gods Decre^s in this
case, as being no rule for us to walk by: And look only, what God has
commanded, and be careful about that, and you need not fear, it will be well
with you for ever. The whole course and tenor of Scripture speaks this, if it
say any thing about the things of God, or the concernments of men's Souls.

Secondly, Considering the Premises, we have occasion to enquire, and search
diligently, till we come at the root of all our sinful mistakes and
miscarriages. And here I shall First admonish you of that, which most are not
aware of: And Secondly, I shall advise, what is best to be done about it.

First, Whereas there is such an aptness and inclination in all to excuse and
put off all from themselves, yea, and to put upon God himself, as much as in
them lies* the sin and misery which they alone have procured; I cannot forbear
to fore-warn all of that accursed bad humor, which has no other rise or root
than Ignorance, and want of acquaintance with themselves. This, and nothing
else, causes them to quarrel, and pick occasions of so doing, with God, and
his ways of Grace and Providence, and any thing, but that which alone is in
the fault. Poor Souls, ever since the old Serpent dropped his poison into them,
are infected with the same disease that the Devil is sick of. And what is that?
Even all the sinful corruption, that he contracted to himself, by his
rebellion against God. His fall began in his pride, and that pride abides upon
him* 1 Timothy 3.6.
as our saying is, As proud as the Devil. Certainly Man, since his fall, is
extremely proud and conceited of himself, though there be no cause for it, and
cannot abide to be thought, what indeed he is. And yet he is but a proud fool,
that thinks himself somewhat, when he is indeed nothing, or that which is
worse. And this proud fool stays not at home, but is always abroad, looking
to what others do, and living in a gross mistake of himself, and all his ways.
He thinks little of that inbred corruption, which has leavened the whole lump
of his nature, both in soul and body. He is asleep, and dreams of a good
nature, and of an honest heart toward God, and a good desire after the things
that concern his Salvation. He cannot believe himself to be an enemy to God,
and his own Soul, and that he was born so. Far be it from him (he thinks) to
be such a one, as procures and works out his own damnation, and is willing to
think of nothing else. Yea, this proud fool will be very pettish, if he be
told, that the best part about him, is enmity against God; To. 8.7.
and that he hates the ways of Gods Commandments, and therein shows, that he
loves death. But whatever he thinks, and will not believe it, all this is true;
and that which he helieves of himself, is a very falsity and lie. And being a
fool, he does as a fool, and no instruction or correction will put him out of
his foolish conceits. Truly in this, the misery of sinful man is great upon
him, viz. He never looks inward or homeward, to consider how it is with him,
notwithstanding there are so many witnesses against him, of his folly and
madness.

1. Scripture is large and plentiful in setting out the corruption of man's
heart and nature. If I should mention particular Texts, I should abuse the
Reader, who cannot but know them. But if any desire to peruse any of them, let
them turn to Genesis 6.5. To. 3.10. etc. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. Tit. 3.3. etc.

2. Woeful Experience (if there were no more) is enough to convince men, if
they would but sit down, and consider, how it is with them. What sober man can
doubt of it, when he cannot but see, that he is much inclined to the Earth, the
World, and the Flesh; and so averse from, yea and contrary to the things that
concern his Soul? Does not every man find it so, or might he not, if he would?
I wish men would but question themselves sometimes about such matters, and say
to their own Souls, What ails me? I can think and talk of this World, from
morning to night, and never be weary, nay, I am always so: And for Heaven, and
the estate of my Soul, and how I shall do to Eternity, I never think, nor care
to think of it. If men (I say) would but sit down sometimes, and consider, what
they affect, and what they abhor most, could they possibly be ignorant of the
natural inclination that is in them to present things, with a neglect and
loathing the matters of another World?

3. There is one thing more, that puts it beyond all dispute or question. How
apt are all men, even from the Cradle, to close with, and run after the toys
and vanities of this World? And how, without any teaching or prompting, they
learn to do vainly and wickedly? They need not be learned to lie, and swear,
and curse, and speak untoward things. And yet what ado is there, to make them
heed or learn any thing that good is? Zophar was right in what he says. Job
11.12. Man is born a wild Asses Colt. An Ass, and a wild Ass, and the Colt of
a wild Ass: And all little enough, to set forth the desperate brutish
perverseness and blockishness of man's nature. The Apostle calls a natural mind,
not an enemy, but enmity it self, To. 8.7. And so it is, whatever men may
think. We are all born, as full of enmity against God, and all that concerns
our everlasting good, as we can possibly hold; and there is not one piece or
particle of us, but is wholly depraved by that enmity.

Now man by Nature so framed, shows himself an Asses Colt, in his blockish
brutish ignorance, and lamentable unacquaintedness with his own estate. There
is somewhat, which the World calls Wisdom, but it is indeed Folly. The sound
knowledge of God, and ones self, is the only true wisdom. Sure, whatever a man
knows else, whiles he is ignorant of these, he knows nothing as he ought to
know.

And since it is thus, we may soon discover, whence it comes, that men are so
captious and quarrelsome, to catch at any thing, that may serve to excuse
themselves, though it be with charging God foolishly and wickedly. When people
are sick and sore, they will complain of their beds, and those that attend
them, and every thing about them, though it is their grief and disease within,
that alone troubles them. So do men in their sins, complain of every thing, but
that which is indeed the only cause of all that ails them.

And now the work that lies upon us, is to get an inward lively sense and
feeling of all those disorders and distempers of our own hearts and natures,
that carry us on to all the ways of our undoing. He that has a due and right
apprehension of his own condition, as it is by nature, will soon perceive, that
he has no cause to complain of any thing more, than his own wicked heart. But
herein the Devil has the advantage against poor Souls, that are already
entangled in his snares, that he keeps them in a g^zing posture, to look on
every thing without them, and so their eyes are held, as they see nothing of
that which is the true cause both of their sin and misery. Now to such I say,
That our own hearts and natures, infected with the poison of the old Serpent,
procure and cause to us all that we shall suffer for ever hereafter. The Devil
tempts and enticeth us, and the World is an object, that occasions our corrupt
hearts to work and move disorderly. But neither of these could hurt us, if it
were not for our Flesh, i. e. the Sin that dwells within us. But this we take
no notice of, and so are out at first step, and run on in mistakes, till we
come to charge God himself with our mis^arriages, rather than fail of an excuse
for our selves.

If any ask, What is to be done in the case? The Answer is obvious, and at
hand, and it is this, viz. That every man that wishes well to himself, begin
the work of his Salvation at home. I mean it thus, Let every man resolve, that
he is of himself an enemy to God, and his own Soul, and inclined to nothing so
much, as to his own utter undoing. For certain, such is every man by nature;
and he that thinks otherwise, knows not himself, which to do is the beginning
of wisdom. To know ones disease is the first step to health, and without it all
medicines applied are but arrows shot at random, that seldom or never hit. The
method of God, in turning a poor Sinner to himself, is first to open his eyes*
and the first sight that such a Soul has, is the sinfulness of his way, whence
he comes to loath it, and can no longer abide in it. This discovery of sin to a
Soul never stops, till it come to see all the sink and puddle, or (as I may
call it) the Hell of corruption and filthiness that is in it, so as it cannot
abide it self upon that account. And when any man comes once to such a
discovery, then he finds so much at home, as he never complains of any but
himself. He is so far from charging God, as he takes no great notice of the
Devil, but he falls foul only upon his own heart, and says, That, and nothing
else, has undone him, as far as he is undone; and if he could but obtain a
better heart, the work of his Salvation would go on as well as he could wish.

My Advice therefore in the case is this. O all you poor Souls, that are so
unsatisfied about the matters of your Salvation, as you are ready to call even
God in question, Go home, and search diligently, what you find in your own
hearts. If you please once to do this to some purpose, I Will be your warrant for
quarrelling and questioning the ways of Gods Providence and Grace
hence-forward. You will then be ready to justify God, whatever he does; and as
ready to say, It Is I, it is I, and no other, that have brought my self to this,
that now I am; and if God leave me to suffer for ever, I have none to thank for
it, but mine own wicked heart. When men are (as too many) ignorant of the rule
to try themselves by, or else unwilling to search and know their own estates,
it is no marvel if they quarrel at others. But he that knows himself, as he
ought to know, has no quarrel in comparison against any thing but himself.

This therefore is my Advice, That every poor Sinner fall to study himself, and
never leave, till he apprehend the height, and depth, and length, and breadth
of his natural sin and corruption. And for all that undertake the charge of
Souls, I believe it to be the first and main part of their work, to bring poor
silly people to a true sight and sense of the badness and baseness of their
hearts and natures; and in order thereunto, to bring them to a right
understanding of the Law, that discovers sin, and works wrath; I mean, to
understand it, in the spiritual sense of it. As long as people think the
Commandments are not broken, otherwise than in overt acts of cruelty,
uncleanness, deceit, etc. it is no marvel if they please themselves in a
Pharisaical righteousness. A right understanding of the Commandments, in the
spiritual sense of them, will lay open many evils, that otherwise men are not
aware of; and lead them on to see the root of bitterness, that bears all those
cursed fruits. As long as people are persuaded they are born Christians, so as
to need no conversion, but only go on in an outside profession of that
Religion, which they never chose for themselves, but was chosen to their hands,
it is no marvel if they are pleased with their condition, and look no further.
But they should be made to know, That the Children of Christians,
notwithstanding the privilege of the Covenant, are by nature, and of
themselves, the Children of wrath, and born in sin, even as others. They should
be made to know, the absolute necessity of the new birth, Joan. 3.3, and 5.
Tit. 3.3, 4, 5. Ephesians. 4.20, -- 24.
and that there must be a thorough change of the whole man, so as to be no
more, what they were by natural Generation; But to be renewed in the spirit of
their minds, to the putting off the old man, and putting on the new, which
after God is created in righteousness, and true holiness.

And for this end, there ought to be a frequent and earnest inculcating of such
Doctrines, as serve to discover the sin and misery of man by nature, and the
method of men's being translated out of the power of darkness, into the Kingdom
of Christ. A learning of the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the Ten Commandments,
(though that must be) and a rehearsal of them, being only learned (as we say)
by rote, is not enough to bring men to a due apprehension of their natural
condition, and the way of recovering out of it. No, the mystery of all those is
to be opened to them, with all plainness and power; and they must be called
upon, to consider, what kind of Creatures they were in their conception and
nativity, and what course must be taken for their recovery from under the
bondage of Sin and Satan. And if poor ignorant Souls were once thoroughly
informed of their sinful and sad condition, as they are descended from, and
bear the Image of the first Adam, they would find such distempers and
disorders, such horrid unreasonable lustings in way of rebellion to all that is
of God, as no complaints should be heard out of their mouths, except of their
own base and wicked hearts.

These therefore I advise, First, To study and know themselves in manner and
form aforesaid: And when that is once done to the purpose, I am confident, they
will find themselves more inclined to a favorable construction of all the
ways of Gods grace and Providence. Pride and Ignorance (that seldom go
asunder) are the main things that engage men to dispute and quarrel about those
matters, which can never be apprehended aright by any but humble Souls. For
men's parts and learning, I am willing to value them, as far as they may
deserve. But I cannot account of them, in comparison of learning Christ, Ephesians.
4.20, 21.
as the truth is in him. And if there were more of this spiritual
Christ-learning, there would be less of dispute about the Counsels of God,
which are rather to be adored in silence and reverence, than prated of by every
audacious, malepert and pragmatical Spirit, (as some^imes they are) without
either fear or wit. For whatever be the pretense, it is a wicked design to
excuse our selves, that makes us so willing to find out somewhat elsewhere,
that may serve our turn. And when we are once humbled low enough, in the sense
of our own baseness, we shall have so much work at home, to keep us doing, as
we shall have no list nor leisure to quarrel any other.

And to enforce this part of the Application a little further, by showing the
desperate untowardness of man by nature; Consider, how far it is infected with
the poison of Satan, to oppose, and (if it were possible) to abase God, and all
his infinite Excellencies. The Devil (whatever his sin was) for certain, did
not submit to Gods order, and thereby he forfeited his right to all the glory
and happiness in which he was first placed. And his doings ever since his fall
have been such, as have showed his pride, and spite against God, to the utmost.
And is there not a spice of this in all the children of men? Are they not
inclined to set up themselves, in opposition to God, upon any occasion? Has
not every sin somewhat of this in it? And is it not evident, in that we are so
prone to contradict, and go against the will of God, even where we have no
temptation by the profit or pleasure of sin, more than Augustine, who bewails
his robbing of Gardens and Orchards in his youth: August. in Confess:
When (as he says) the fruits were sour, and had no ^auce, more than the sin
of the eater.

Nay, is there not in every sin more than an intimation, that we would have
Gods will stoop to ours, and so have our wills to countermand his? There is
certainly so much of disdain in us, as if it were in our power, God should have
no authority over us. We cannot indeed break his yoke from off our necks: But
would we not break it off, if we could? Would any man, by his good will, and of
his own inclination, be restrained from his sinful pleasures, or give any
account to God of any thing he does, if he could help it? Nay, does not the
Spirit in us, lust toward dethroning him, that he may have no command in the
World? And if any question this, I referr them to all those insolent, proud and
arrogant expressions and practices of many wicked ones, Ex. 5.2. 2 Reg. 6.33.
Esaias 14.13, 14. Ezech. 28.2.
of which there are so many instances in Scripture, and other stories. And to
shut up this; If all be well considered, it will appear, That all the questions
and quarrels of men about the matters of Gods Kingdom, and the methods of
Salvation, are chiefly occasioned, because there is so much of the Devil, and
so little of God in us. Were there in us a due acknowledgement of Gods Infinite
Excellency, and Sovereign Authority, we should never question in the least,
whatever he does, to be holy, just and good. Yea, we should confess roundly,
That whatever befalls us, or however it be with us, we our selves have procured
and caused it, by our own ways and doings. 2 Samuel 24.17. Dan. 9.5, 6, 7, 8.
Psalm. 89.51.
We should say (as Gods Servants did of old) We have trespassed, and done
foolishly and wickedly, unto us belongs shame, and confusion of face for ever:
And blessed be the Lord for evermore.

If any desire further Advice in this case, I say, Whoever thinks there is a
God, must think of him so, as may become his infinite Excellency and Glory.
Psalm. 10.4. We have this property of an ungodly man, God is not in all his
thoughts. Not that he thinks, there is no God; but that he thinks not, there is
a God, i. e. He never minds or heeds him, in the whole course of his life and
actions. So many never eye or heed God in his Excellencies, to stand in awe of
him, and tremble before him. They are too bold with him upon any occasion, and
their words and deeds show, they are not seasoned inwardly, with an holy humble
reverence of his infinite Majesty. They speak not (it may be) at the same rate
as Pharaoh, Ex. 5.2. Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice, etc. I know
not the Lord, etc. As if he should have said, You (Moses and Aaron) come, and
command me, in the Name of Jehovah, who is Isreal's God, as you say. Who is this
Jehovah; I pray, that I must be commanded by him? I tell you, I know him not,
nor do I care for him. I Will do what I have a mind to, let him command what he
will. Though few act to such an height of insolency, as appeared in him; yet
there is the same haughty Spirit of disdain in all men by nature against the
heavenly Majesty. They think much to be ordered and overruled by one, of whom
they know so little. And whoever observes, may easily see, that God has little
regard amongst worldly men, who will talk indeed a little sometimes, as if
there were somewhat called a God; and yet in all their words and deeds, show no
apprehensions of his Excellencies, such as do awe them to reverence and
obedience, becoming his absolute Sovereign Majesty.

Now, as to believe, there is a God, and yet live as if there were none, is
practical Atheism; so to speak and think of him, otherwise than he is, is
little better than Blasphemy. And of such Atheism and blasphemy the World is
full; and it is evident by this, that most have so little respect for God, and
show it in all they say and do. Respect, I say, for God, such as should be, and
such as becomes his infinite Glory. And how unreasonable are men in this? Hear
and consider what God himself says, Malac. 1.6. A Son honors his Father,
and a Servant his Master. If then I be a Father, where is mine honor? If I be
a Master, where is my fear, says the Lord of Hosts unto you, O Priests, that
despise my Name? Here the Lord complains of their slighting him, more than any
Creature, calling for such respect, as was by any man commonly given to his
betters. A Master or Father could get more respect than he, who was both, in an
eminent way, to that people. And here one observes it, As the grand delusion,
that blinds the visible Church, to give good words, and fair titles to God,
when no care is had of answerable walking. And the Lord makes use of that,
which every one acknowledges to be a witness in the case, and so proves, That
men in their duties to God, come far short of that, which very Nature will
teach them is due to Creatures, standing in (...) same relation. And this also,
That want of reverence to, and an high estimation of God, is the root and rise
of all our miscarriages, and an evidence, that we behave our selves neither as
Sons nor Servants. Not to esteem of God as he deserves, is to dishonor him; as
not to bless him, is in a sort to blaspheme him. Deum si quis param metuit, ^
valde contemnit: Fulgent.
God hates and abhorrs base and unworthy conceits of him, and his Majestic
Name, when men take him not into their hearts, under the notion of an infinite
HIGHNESS. It shows, there is no awe of God upon them, and that they count of
him, as one like themselves, yea, and much below them.

And here I could easily enlarge in many Instances of a profane and proud
Spirit in ungodly men, not only in speaking and acting, as if there were no God
above them, but speaking and acting many times in such a way, as if they
studied to make God as vile as might be. In one word, showing no reverent
esteem, but rather a base undervaluing and contempt of him. They do not only
act, as if there were no God, that would call them to an account, but in a way
of opposition and scorn, as to show, how little account they make of him. And
for instance; Let one that fears before the Lord, be so bold, as to check a
rude and ungodly company, met about some lewd and vile pranks and practices,
(such as are too frequent and familiar) by minding them of God, and his
commands; how ordinary is it, for such a knot of Companions, to vent themselves
the more in scorn and indignation, as if they were affronted by one, that has
nothing to do with them. He that comes among them* with no better authority to
awe them, had need look to himself, that they fall not down right upon him.
When righteous Lot said no worse to the Sodomites, than, I pray you, Brethren,
do not so wickedly, Genesis 19.7. They said, Stand back, and they said again, This
one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a Judge: Now will we deal
worse with thee, than with them. A command or entreaty in the name of God
(though the highest Majesty) commonly proves an occasion, through men's devilish
pride and disdain, of more and greater impieties and indignities. And if any
should question this, let them but open their ears and eyes, and there need be
no great dispute about it now adays, Oh! Look round about, and see, how little
regard there is of God, and his commands in the World; and whether there be any
account had or made, whether God be pleased, or no, with that which is commonly
done among men. This, this is enough to sadden any gracious Soul in the
expectation of Gods appearances, to vindicate the honor of his great Name, by
some remarkable judgments on the World.

And therefore I advise once more, and entreat, That there may be some regard
had of God, and that it may be showed so, as it may be seen, that God is in
men's hearts and thoughts. An awful regard, or reverential esteem of God, would
put a check upon men's ungodly practices, and upon their malepert disputes and
questions about his ways and doings. There would need no Arguments in print,
to confute them in what they say and do: The awe of God would soon order them
to another behavior, than what commonly appears in the most. And therefore I
say again, Go alone, and seriously resolve thy self of this, That there is a
God, who made thee, and all this World, which thine eyes behold. And if thou
art once so resolved, thine own reason, and common sense, will teach and prompt
thee to a further consideration, That this God, as he is infinitely above thee,
so he is to be admired and adored with all possible humble reverence, such as
becomes an incomprehensible heavenly Majesty. If thou once resolve, That he is
in Heaven, and thou upon Earth: Act. 17.28.
That in him thou live, and movest, and have thy being; and that he alone
disposes of thee, and all thy ways, and will one day call thee to account for
all that thou have done, thou will then see cause enough to fear and tremble at
any the least mention of his Name and Glory. Thou will no more dispute, what he
is pleased to do; but presently bethink thy self, how thou may do in every
respect, so as to please aim.

Men talk much in ordinary discourse, of serving God, and a service there is
done to God by many; but whether any were done at all, or none, such as many
perform, may be a question, as to the advantage of them that do it. Read for
this, 2 Chronicles. 13.8, 13.
Wherever God is acknowledged and owned in the way of worship which he has
commanded, there is an honor given him, more than amongst Infidels and
Idolaters. But they that serve the Lord in his own ways of worship, must look
further, and consider, whether the service be such, as does some way suit with
the glory of his most excellent Majesty, so as he will accept it. The Jews
after their return from captivity, were much in Sacrifices and Offerings: But
yet says the Lord, Ye despise my Name, Malac. 1.6.
because they offered polluted bread, v. 7. The blind, and the lame, and sick,
v. 8. This God takes in scorn, and bids them offer it to their Governor, to
try, if he will be pleased with them, v. 8. Nay, he curses the deceiver, v. 14.
for offering a corrupt thing. And why? Because (says he) I am a great King,
and my Name is dreadful among the Heathen. v. 14.
God expects to be dealt withal in such a way, as men may show that awful
regard they have of him, which when they neglect, it is all one to him, as if
they did nothing at all. The customary, formal and superficial service done to
God by many, is of as much account with him, as if they mocked him to his face
Hag. 2.11, 12, 13, 14.
. And that for this reason, viz. Because they show no regard of God, such as
they owe to his infinite Sovereignty, Power and Glory. The service of God so
performed, shows men's prophanness and impiety* more than their devotion. And
yet this profane contempt of God is born with us, and bred (as I may say) in
our bones. And till we be thoroughly convinced of it, and humbled for it, we are
in no capacity to close with God, so as he may be pleased with us. If thou will
serve God with acceptance, resolve first of this natural enmity, that is in
thee against God, and be humbled as low as Hell, for the pride of thine heart,
swelling so much against him. And when thou know indeed, as thou ought,
the distance 'twixt the glorious God of Heaven, and such an earth-worm as thy
self, thou will find thine heart inclined to more favorable thoughts of God
and his ways, which is the main thing I am persuading men to, in this
Discourse.

I shall yet a little further enforce that which has been formerly hinted,
more than once, viz. A serious consideration of that enmity which is naturally
in us against our selves, and our own souls. There is indeed a cursed self-love
in all men by nature, which causes them to walk contrary to God; yea, and in
some degree, to despite him, as the Devil does: And this appears to be the root
of all man's rebellion against God, in that our Savior, calling all men home to
God again, imposes upon them nothing else but self-denial, Mat. 16.24. But
this natural, sinful self-love, is indeed no other than perfect enmity to our
selves; so as we may truly say, we are such as hate our own Souls: How else do
we all that we can, to undo and destroy our selves? and do we not thus? and are
we inclined by nature to any thing else? For certain, there is no way to
advance, and (as I may say) to make our selves, but by walking in the way,
wherein we may come to the enjoyment of God; and this is not the way of our own
hearts, nor the way of the wicked and corrupted World of mankind; for The world
lies in wickedness, (...)^ In maligno positus est.
1 Joan. 5.19. or, in the wicked one, i. e. is wholly under the power and
vassallage of the Devil. And this appears by the constant inclination of all
the World, to walk in those ways, unto which the Devil prompts, and tempts
them, i. e. the ways of sin and rebellion, against the righteous and holy wills
of God. This is the way of death and destruction, wherein men depart from God,
and so cause him at last to say unto them, Mat. 25.6.
Depart from me, etc. How can we come to God, but in the ways of his
Commandments? this is the way wherein he has promised to be found of us; and
to leave this way, and go in the way of our own hearts, is no other than
turning our backs upon God, and casting him off, in hope to be happy in the
enjoyment of somewhat else; this is the way of self-destruction, wherein men
run on to ruin and perdition.

Now I say again, consider, and that sadly, whether we are not all enemies to
our selves, and our own souls, in choosing those ways, which we cannot but
know, have a direct tendency to our everlasting undoing? True, men do not
consider this, but that is their folly and madness; the same that is in many,
who never look after their worldly Estates to improve them, but spend; and
squander them away, they care not ^^ow; we use to say of such ill husbands,
that they are enemies to themselves, and will undo themselves and their
Families, as indeed they do, according to what the Wise man says, The drunkard
and the glutton shall come to poverty, and drowsiness (or sloth) shall cloth a
man with rags. Prove. 23.21.
Just so do men impoverish, and undo themselves, as to their everlasting
estates, by taking those ways and courses, that carry them on to the
bottomless pit. The glutton and the drunkard would not be poor, nor would
ungodly men go to hell; yea but both the one and the other, take the ready way
to their undoing; and it is all one, as if they said, we will undo our selves,
and we will be damned; seeing they go on in those ways wherein they cannot
avoid and escape damnation: whatever they pretend, they do just as a man that
should cast himself into the wide sea, and say, I will not be drowned, but swim
out again; or should stab himself at the heart, and say, I have no intent to
kill my self: let such intend what they will, all rational and sober men know,
they cannot live, but must die. There Is an indissoluble tie between sin and
death, so as we cannot take the one without the other. Cast away from you all
your transgressions, etc. For why will you die? Ezech. 18.31. as if he should
have said, If you do not the former, you must have the latter, and in the way
you now go you seek your own death. He that sins against me, wrongeth his
own soul, Prove. 8. ult. And how does he wrong it? the next words show, He loves
death. To hate, and scorn the ways of Christ, is to love death, it is so in
the effect: he that hates to be reformed, (and too many such there are) hates
to be saved; he that loves to be wicked, loves to be damned. The wicked World
is wild, and stark mad in this respect, and does as all mad men do; a mad man
casts off all care of himself, and is pleased in nothing, but his ravings and
frantic pranks, and will not be persuaded to any better: such mad men are we
in our sins, pleased with nothing so much, as that which most displeases God,
and has a direct tendency toward our own destruction. Bring a Physician, or
Chyrurgeon to a mad man, and you set him the more a raving, so as you must bind
him, and overmaster him by force, or he will admit of no applications to be
made for curing him; all hi^ business is to do that which does torment him, and
will undo him: So do all wilful sinners; they devise, and do nothing, but what
makes for working out their damnation; they are troubled about nothing, but
that they cannot sin enough, and serve their worldly and fleshly desires, so
much as they would; and is not this enmity against themselves, and their own
souls? For what can a man do, to destroy his soul, and pull upon himself the
most intolerable condemnation, more than to sin, as much as possibly he can?
The ways of sin are the ways of destruction to poor souls; and the only way
to life is a turning from all the ways of sin, with loathing and indignation;
and this no sinner will deny, if he please to sit down and consider it. But
such is the impetuousness of our lusts, as they will not give us leave to
entertain one serious thought, about the sad consequence of what we are a
doing. Mad men have sometimes their lucid intervals, but so soon as any
occasion sti^^ their frantic humor, they are as mad as ever; in those
intervals they are as mad as before, but do not act their madness so much. The
worst of men are not alike wicked at all times, in acting their wickedness,
though their hearts are always set upon their wicked ways. For their fair
promises sometimes of amendment, they are no more than what a mad man will
promise in a good mood.

And now, all you poor sinful Souls, consider your ways, and be wise; Be not
as the horse and mule, that have no understanding, Psalm. 32.9. You are so by
nature, and of your selves, through the poison which the Devil has infused to
you; only you have Reason, which Beasts have not; and you have a liberty to do
otherwise than you do, if you had a mind to it: you are told, and you know the
dangerous consequence of your sinful ways, and why will you die? Is there
profit in destruction? Can there be pleasure in sinning for a moment, when the
pains of Hell will be endless, and intolerable? Or can you devise a way, how
you may enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, and yet escape the torments of
Hell for ever? Have you so much power in your hands, as to reverse the Acts and
Decrees of Heaven, established by a declared Law, so as death shall not be the
wages of sin? Or do you think to put off the righteous Judge of all the earth,
in the last day, as well as you can abuse and baffle your Consciences, and
faithful Ministers now? I believe you have some such thoughts, or you would
not take the courses that you do: But O ye fools, Psalm. 94.8. verse. 11.
when will you be wise? The Lord knows the thoughts of man, that they are
vanity. Can you be such brutish sots, as not to know, that the World to come
will be quite another thing than this present evil World? Here is a place to
sin in; there will be only suffering for impenitent sinners; Here wicked men
talk wildly, as if their tongues were their own, and there were no Lord over
them: There the righteous Lord will deal with them, and they will not have a
word to answer. Consider how dead folk are dealt with here; are they not bound,
and laid up where they cannot stir Oh! think of it, as a presage of that estate
wherein your souls, as well as your bodies, will be in another World. There
your hands and feet will be tied, and your mouths will b^ stopped, so as you
shall not be able to peep, o^ mutter one word: or if you should rage, and cry
out in those everlasting burnings, what will it avail you, so long as your
bonds are made strong, and you cannot break them? Oh! think of this you
presumptuous, daring sinners, while there is time for repentance; for this is
the sad condition you are hastening to, and nothing can be said or done to stop
you in your career. When you are most frolic, you are but heaping up fuel, to
feed the everlasting burnings. And when you are most froward in your ways, you
show only the enmity that is in you, against your own souls. You say in effect,
Let us alone, and trouble us not, we are in the way to Hell and destruction,
and we will not be turned out of it; you are not willing to be damned, you will
say, but hope to be saved, as well as others: So are Robbers and Murderers,
etc. not willing to be hanged, more than honest men; but honest men know that
rogues and thieves take the ready way to the gallows. They may, some of them,
escape men's judgment, and no question, some of them sometimes do, but how will
you escape the judgment of God, who knows all, and can do every thing? And
will he not (think you) make good his Word, and execute his own Laws? How else
shall he quit himself, and show that he is above you? Think, when you see dead
folk imprisoned, and bound up in their graves, how you will be hampered, and
pinioned, when you shall be brought forth to Judgment, and what pitiful poor
sneaking worms you will then appear to be, when God shall sit on the Throne of
his glory, and call all Nations before him, to be judged by him.

Now this is all the work you are a doing, viz. To pinion your selves, and lay
upon you, those everlasting chains of darkness, wherewith you shall be bound,
and cast into the fire unquenchable. Every sin you commit with greediness, and
will not be persuaded to lay it aside, is one twist more, to strengthen the
cords that shall bind you fast for ever, and puts more fuel to those
everlasting burnings.

If all this do not convince you, cast your eyes back, and take a review of all
those reasons, I have formerly given to prove, that you your selves only are in
the fault, and that God is in no respect wanting to you. I shall repeat, and
press some of them a little further.

Not to say (what is most certainly true) that Gods decrees have left you at
liberty, to choose the way you have most mind to, and that you are not left
out, as excepted persons, in the Act of General pardon, if you will be
persuaded to receive Christ, as he is offered to you; and also that you have a
liberty to act in order to your happiness, if you would use it, and not
wilfully run on in your own ways.

1. Consider, what equity, and reason there is in all the ways of Gods
commandments, specially now under the New Testament, when we have that, Romans
12.1.
which the Apostle calls our reasonable service; We need not be prompted (as
the Jews were) to understand why they are enjoined us, for that, they are not
good, because they are commanded; but rather commanded, because they are good.
And for the ways of his Providence and Grace, I would have you ask your own
consciences, what prerogative God challenges to himself, more, than even
mortal men are ready to count their due. Oh! that men would but think, how he
can be indeed a God, and not have liberty to do what he himself pleases.
Though I stand still to defend, that all Gods ways are righteousness and
truth, being all according to the counsel of his will, Ephesians. 1.11.
and managed by infinite wisdom. Yea our belief of a Deity, and one absolute
sovereign Lord God, does necessarily infer a belief of all his ways to be
most holy, just, and good. And will you not then obey, and submit? Oh!
consider, what can be said against it.

2. Consider further what your own consciences say in this case, and if they
speak out now, what sometimes you would not hear, how will you be able to abide
the clamours of them, when there will be no way left you, to bribe them, or
stop their mouths, as now you can make a shift to do. You now find them to
stir, and work strongly upon occasion, and therefore may presume, they will one
day be too hard for you, and have the dominion over you. I tell you, those
consciences of yours, are Gods witnesses against your wicked ways, and your
forewarnings to flee from the wrath to come; so that you have no excuse upon
this account.

3. Ask your selves, so as to answer the question seriously, Why you are so
impatient of sharp rebukes, and sound admonitions, from the Word, whether by
faithful Ministers, or others, applied to you. Will not your own Consciences
then tell you, that your case is the same with those sick and wounded people,
who had rather dye, than endure the pain of having their wounds searched, or
their diseases cured by untoothsome medicines? Yea, will not your Consciences
say, That you might have been healed, as well as others, that were content to
submit to the methods of cure prescribed them? You cannot say, There is no balm
in Gilead, there is no Physician there: Jer. 8. ult.
Why then is not your health recovered? Surely, for this reason, and no other,
That when the Lord would have healed you, you would not be healed.

4. Ask your selves again, How it comes to pass, that you are always wharting
and quarrelling those, that pretend so much to God, and the ways of his
Commandments? Is it indeed, because they are so bad and base, as you would make
them? Or is it not rather, because they shine before you, to show you the good,
and the right way, and you have no mind to walk in it? Is not their eschewing
your ungodly ways, ^ check upon you, that you cannot so freely take your
swinge in them, and therefore you hate the light of their good works, because
it discovers the filthiness of your beastly conversation? Oh! Remember and
consider, they shall be your witnesses, to l^^ve you without excuse. Yea, if
they were as bad as you would make them, yet that will be no excuse to you, who
should have done what they did not, your own Consciences being Judges.

5. Once more. Do not you accuse your selves, in calling so often for such
extraordinary appearances of God in providence, as may convince you, when you
have had many such, and are but the more hardened and enraged against God? How
usual is it, for men to have strange and almost miraculous rescues and
recoveries, or to see and observe such in others, and yet it is not easy to
give many instances of Converts by occasion of such wonderful deliverances. To
say no more, the appearances of God in this age have been as remarkable and
admirable almost, as in any, and yet the ungodliness of men generally, is most
notorious notwithstanding. Now, what have you to say against this? Shall not
these be witnesses against you?

6. Answer me yet in one question more. Why (I pray you) do you so much
magnify the Sain^^ of old, who are now in Heaven? Shall not they (think you)
be your Judges? Why, (Sirs,) they were all of them holy men, that led their
lives on earth, as becomes Saints? and they were so far from spending their
time in sinful^ pleasures, as you do, That their righteous Soul^ were vexed
with the filthy conversation of the wicked, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. Your Consciences
will tell you, that you lead a life, as contrary to theirs, as black is to
white, or darkness to light* Do not you then, in your applauding them wit^ your
mouths, and confessing them to be now Saints in Heaven, judge and condemn your
selves, and call them to witness against you, that you had light held out to
you by their examples, but you wilfully refused to walk in the way to Heaven,
wherein they went before you?

7. I shall say no more of this, after I have posed you with this one question
more. There are some of your good fellows (you know it to be so) that have
cried out most lamentably upon their deathbeds, as one did once, O! Call time
again, call time again. O! What would not they have given, to have recovered
the time which they had misspent? Now these will be your Judges. For whatever
they thought before, then they were of the mind, that a wise and careful
expending our time here, whiles we are alive, is the way to obtain peace and
comfort when we come to dye. They could not then say* (as some do in their
youth and strength) If we are Elected, we shall be saved, and if not, we must
be damned; and so quietly sleep away, and put it to the adventure. No;
Conscience (if it be then awakened) will tell you somewhat else. It will tell
you then, That you might have employed your selves to better purpose; and that
if you had taken the same course, that the Saints do, while they are on earth,
you might depart in peace, as well as they. Yea, let me tell you, Conscience,
when you come to dye, will not trouble you about any other matters, than your
wilful rejecting the offers of grace and mercy, when they were made to you;
and your choosing the ways of sin, when you had been often told, they were the
ready way to Hell and Destruction.

And now I say again, Whatever disputes and reasonings there be among some,
about the method, and manner, and matter of Gods Decrees, Let all poor Souls
consider, in due time, what is that way of life, which is held out, and offered
to them in the Gospel. We cannot know, what God has decreed, till it be some
way revealed to us: But we may know (if we will) what is the way of life, as
certain as God is true, who has revealed it. God (I am sure) cannot lie, and
his mouth has spoken it, and his finger has written it, That whoever
believes, shall be saved. I need not cite or quote the Texts of Scripture,
that speak, with one mouth, the mind of God in this: Whoever has read or heard
the Scripture, cannot but know this to be an unmovable Foundation-truth.

And therefore I desire men seriously to consider, how they will excuse
themselves one day, when they shall be questioned, Why they did not believe on
Christ offered to them in the Gospel. For no doubt, if they do this, as God
commands and requires, they shall be saved, or God must prove a liar. And for
any decree of God, to hinder men from believing on Christ, I hope enough has
been said before, to show, there is no such thing. Besides, the extent of
Christ's death (as has been showed) is large enough to reach, and take in all,
that will come to him. And there is nothing but a froward wicked heart stands
between men, and their happiness, in the enjoyment of God. Wherefore, I say
again, in the name of the Lord, as our Savior in a different sense said to
Martha, Joan. 11.40. If thou would believe, thou should see the glory of
God. He that believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believes not
the record that God gave of his Son. And this is the record, that God has
given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. He that has the Son,
has life; and he that has not the Son, has not life, 1 Joan. 5.10, 11, 12.
He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life; and he that believes not
on the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him, Joan.
3.36. Here we see, as in all the Scripture beside, That Faith, and Faith only,
gives us an interest in eternal life; and that this, and nothing else, will be
the condemnation of the World, that they believed not on the Son of God tendered
to them, Heb 7.25.
as one that can save to the utmost, all that come unto God by him.

If any say, That some have never heard of Christ, and then how can they
believe on him, of whom they have not heard? To. 10.14. I shall not here
dispute with them about this, but re^er^ them to what I have said before,
desiring them withal, to understand me now, as meaning all that have heard of
Christ, amongst whom there have been many that shall not be saved. And of these
I say again, their condemnation shall be only upon the account of their
unbelief. Either because they set light by Christ, when they heard of him, as
many do to this day, not so much as owning the profession of the Gospel; or
else they receive the gra^e of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1. Jude 4. Gal 5.13.
and turn it into wantonness, by using it, as an occasion to the flesh.

Now, For a Conclusion of this whole Discourse; I shall deal with these last,
desiring them to consider, Whether they give all diligence, to walk in the way
of life, which God has laid before them. And all that I intend, is to show
their mistakes about it, and to advise and direct them in it.

But whiles I was about this, there were brought me some Objections, which
though they be (as I conceive) sufficiently answered already, at least the
chiefest of them, yet somewhat I shall add further, to explain what was said
before.

Obj. If God be so willing, that men should repent and believe, why do they not
repent and believe? For who has resisted his will, To. 9.19. This we find by
our selves, that if we will do ought, we do it if we can; and if we do it not,
it is because we have not power to do as we would.

Sol. For the Will of God, as to the Salvation of all, in case they repent and
believe, there is no question; and so (as I remember) some understand the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.4. But that is not the question, but this rather, How God
wills the repentance of men, who never repent. For seeing God can do whatever
he will, why are not they also converted? And to this I answer, That God wills
the conversion of Sinners, so as their conversion is well-pleasing to him* and
accepted with him; as on the contrary, he is displeased with Sinners, so long
as they live in impenitency. Luc. 15.10.
The holy Angels rejoice over one Sinner that repents, and God much more,
seeing it is his command, that they repent. And how should God will men's
repentance, otherwise than he does? He declares his will in his command, and in
his promise of acceptance, and in his refusing none upon their repentance; and
for any other will of God, concerning this or that man's repentance, who knows
it, or where has God revealed it? What! Would you have God to decree and
effect the conversion of all and every one, whether they will or no? If any
say, No; but we would have God to deal with all indifferently, as being all the
work of his hands: I answer, That saving to God but so much liberty, as all men
ordinarily take to themselves, his dealings with men are indifferent, and his
ways most equal, seeing he has so prepared, as men need not perish, except
they will themselves. And therefore, I say once more, they perish and dye in
their sins, only because they choose the ways of their destruction. How then
dare any man make any further question about Gods will of saving men, when he
has so decreed, and so provided, that men may be saved if they will? I mean it
thus, If they do not wilfully refuse their Salvation, when it is offered them;
by an obstinate rejecting the way he commands them to walk in, and to which
they are invited and encouraged by his promise, wherein it is impossible that
he should lie. And this we affirm still, according to what has been said
before.

Obj. Seeing it is Gods will, that men shall be damned, in case they believe
not; It does not appear, that there is in God a will of saving, rather than of
damning, because there is in all men a proneness and inclination to unbelief
and impenitency, more than to faith and repentance.

Sol. We grant, there is a proneness and inclination in all men by nature, to
unbelief and impenitency, with an untowardness and enmity to faith and
repentance. But we say again, as before, That men may repent and believe, if
they will. For men are not damned, for that they cannot repent, though they be
never so willing to it; but they are damned only, because they will not repent,
nor turn from their evil ways, but wilfully go on in them, against all means
and methods used for the reclaiming of them. And may not God then say, and
swear too, as he does, Ezech. 33.11. As I live, says the Lord God, Ezech.
18.30, 31, 32.
I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from
his way, and live.

Obj. I want the helps that others have, and was never brought up in learning,
as many are.

Sol. To this I answer, That Christ may be learned by the veriest Idiots, if
they have but a willing mind, as soon, and as easily, as by the greatest
Masters of Arts and Sciences. And in this case we may say, what has been
commonly said in a different sense, That the greatest Clerks are not always
the wisest men. The Devil is certainly the greatest Scholar below Heaven, as
to all things pertaining to this World: Yet he is never the nearer to the
learning of Christ, and the knowledge of God in Christ. Humane learning is a
very precious ornament and endowment in them that have it: But through the
sinful corruption of man, it many times proves to be an occasion of hindering
them, in their being taught by Christ, as the truth is in him. Ephesians. 4.21.
The great Rabbis (you know) were Christ's most bitter enemies; and Not many
wise men, after the flesh, are called, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.26. The
Gospel preaches only Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God; 1 Cor.
1.24.
so as the weakest understanding is as capable of this Heavenly and Spiritual
learning as any others. Suppose thou can not so much as read a Chapter, what
hinders, that thou do not hear others read? Whatever thy apprehension, and
memory be, there wants nothing to thy denial of thy self, and all ungodliness,
and worldly lusts, if thou do not retain a wilful, and froward heart against
Christ, and his commands. Learn only what the Grace of God teaches thee, Tit.
2.11, 12. and thou have learnt enough. It Is not thy want of other Learning, can
hinder, or keep thee from Heavens way, if thou will repent heartily of thy
sins, and turn from all iniquity, with a full and absolute resignation of thy
self to serve the Lord Christ. This knowledge (I may truly say) is easy to him
that does understand, Prove. 14.6. Where he that does understand, cannot be
meant otherwise, than of a man that has an humble and an honest heart; because
in the same place, he is set in opposition to A scorner, who seeks wisdom,
(as it is there said) and finds it not. The Original is only [ and not, (...)
] and the meaning is plainly this, That proud scornful men can never attain to
true Wisdom, which is easy to an humble, and willing mind. And this you have
set forth at large, Prove. 2.1, 7. to the perusal of which place I refer the
Reader, and so proceed.

Obj. I want time to attend the working out of my Salvation; for I am a
servant, and must work to please my Master, etc. I have but little to live
upon, and must spend all my time, to maintain my self, and my Family.

Sol. Strange! Cannot servants work to please God, and their Masters too? the
Apostle thought they might do both, though Servants then were mostly Slaves,
and many of them had Heathens and Infidels to their Masters. Thou art a
Servant, and can not have so much time, as others who are free; yet know this
for thy comfort, that thy faithfulness, and diligence in thy Masters business,
is pleasing to God, and an honor to the Gospel. 1 Timothy 6.1, 2.
If thou have not so much time as some others, Tit. 2.9, 10.
for waiting on God in his Ordinances, and in all the duties of his Worship and
Service, yet a careful improvement of the time thou have; and what cannot be
denied thee* will be accepted, when thou have no more. I say not, thou
should serve thy Master in the ways of sin, with a neglect of thy duty
toward God: But I say, use the time thou have, to the best advantage; and thou
shall be accepted according to what thou have. But beware, thou be not one of
those Servants, who have Masters, that are willing to teach them, and they have
no mind to learn the ways of God: Beware also, thou pretend not thy Masters
business, when thou art not careful to redeem the time, and improve the
seasons, which may be recovered by thy diligence, and care.

The same in effect I say to such as are poor; if they cannot spare so much
time, as others can, they may be accepted in what they have, if there be but a
willing mind. And to all these I say further, though there is need for all to
address themselves to God in prayer and praise, etc. as we all need our
ordinary repasts to recruit our faint spirits, and frail bodies; yet the life
of Religion is showed most in the duties of our particular callings, and
personal relations; in these we must spend, and express the strength, and grace
we obtain of God, by our waiting upon him in Ordinances, and Religious
exercises. A Christian is not bound to spend all his time in Reading, and
Hearing, etc. much, yea most of it, must be laid out on the works of their
callings, wherein our diligence, and integrity, and faithfulness is our living
to God. And if in our Earthly employments, we retain Heavenly affections,
making Conscience of all we do, as desirous, to approve our selves to God, in
this we do Gods work, and keep on, in our way to Heaven. No honest Calling is,
or can be any hinderance to the life of Godliness, if we labor, in all we do,
to keep a good Conscience. If our small stock, or mean estate will not allow us
so much time, for some Religious exercises, as others have, we may
notwithstanding practice Holiness, and exercise our selves unto Godliness, in
our lawful employments, if we have honest hearts, as well as they.

Obj. God requires no more than he gives; Now God has not given me to Repent,
etc. and what can I do?

Sol. This (I think) has been sufficiently answered already, yet I shall add a
word or two more. God requires no more than he gives; so say I; but I say also,
he will require so much as he gives. Now can thou, or dare thou say, that
God has not given thee time, and space to Repent? yea has he not waited long
for thee? yea dare thou say, he has not given thee to Repent, etc. when he
has given thee light, to see the error, and the evil of thy ways? what
would thou have? God has commanded thee, and entreated thee, and by many,
and sundry motions made to thee, sometimes allured thee, and at other times
affrighted thee. His Word, his Spirit, his Works of Mercy and Judgment, have
bespoken thee, again and again, to cast away thy Transgressions, but thou
would not; and only because thou loved'st thy ungodly ways, and found'st
pleasure in them, thou would not be persuaded to leave them. And will thou
say yet, that God has not given it thee* to return to him? I hope thou will
not blaspheme God openly, in saying, that he has tempted thee to thy evil
ways. Neither did he, or any other force thee, for thou wast wholly inclined,
and addicted to them, and angry at all* that would put thee out of them. I
shall say no more, but only desire thee, to answer thy self, and thine own
Conscience, in this one Question, viz. why thou do not forsake thy wicked
ways? I say again, ask, and answer that Question sincerely, and as in the sight
of God, and thou shall find thine own Heart will tell thee, that thou like,
and love the profits, and the pleasures of thy sinful ways, so as thou have
no mind to leave them. And if thou find it not so, call me liar upon this
account. Now whose fault is it, that thou love thy sins? But I must go on to
finish this Discourse. And for a conclusion, I shall very plainly and briefly,
show the mistakes of men, about the only way of life, with the best advice I
can give about it.

The only way of Life, that I know of, is believing on the Lord Jesus Christ.
For this we have a command, and a promise, as is to be seen in very many Texts,
which I need not mention, because they are obvious to the meanest
understanding. This is the tenor of the only Covenant of Peace and Life, If
thou believe with all thine heart, thou shall be saved, To. 10.9, 10, 11.
Joan. 3.16, and 36, etc. Yea this is received among all professed Christians,
that believing on the son of God is the way of Life, and Salvation. But the
most of those, who profess the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, are much to
seek, and at a great loss, about the way of believing, to the saving of their
Souls. For their sakes therefore, I shall lay before them, the good, and the
right way of Salvation, by Faith in the Son of God, and assure them in the name
of God, that whoever is resolved to walk in that way, shall as certainly be
saved, as those who are already in Heaven. And this I shall do, that (if it be
possible) they may be persuaded, no more to dispute, or quarrel Gods Decrees,
or Christ's dying for all Sinners; or the inability, that is in all men by
nature, to all that is spiritually good, or any thing else, besides the
frowardness of their own corrupt, and perverse hearts.

For the way of Salvation by Faith only, it is this: The Gospel, which only
reveals the way of living by Faith, makes an offer of Christ, to all without
exception, in case they Believe, Joan. 3.16. and many other places. And when
any man is effectually persuaded to receive Christ, as he is offered, then he
Believes, to the saving of his Soul. If any desire to know further, what it is
to receive Christ, I answer, that it is the Souls hearty consenting to have
him, upon the same terms, on which he is offered. This is that, which (as I may
say) makes up the match between Christ, and any Soul; so as thence forward, it
stands in relation to Christ, as a Woman to her Husband, after her consent
obtained, and declared, and so has an interest in him, and all his Estate.
This is the eminency, and precedence of Faith, to all other Graces, that it is
the Souls consenting to have Christ, as her all in all. For when the Soul so
consents, a man is thereupon justified, and accepted with God. This consent
indeed does imply love and obedience, and faithfulness to Christ, all our
days; and if there be not afterward a performance of all accordingly, for
certain the consent at first, was not sincere, and hearty. For we are delivered
from the hands of our enemies, that we may serve him, etc. Luc. 1.74. We are
redeemed from all iniquity to be a peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit.
2.14. But yet the consent which is first given, sets a man in the state, and
relation of a justified person, which afterward he proves himself to be, by
yielding willing obedience to all the Commands of Christ. For Love, and all the
fruits of it in a Christians whole course, are but the performance of what was
promised, when he first consented to have Christ for his only Lord and Savior;
and where these do not attend, there never was any hearty consent. But Faith (I
say again) has the precedence, in that it is the Souls consenting to take
Christ upon his own terms, and so Faith alone justifies us.

Now, if what has been s^id of our being justified by Faith alone, be rightly
apprehended, there will need no dispute about the concurrence of works in our
justification. But leaving all such disputes, as no way concerning my present
purpose, I shall only take notice of such mistakes, as are ordinary, and do
offer themselves (as it were) to us, upon this occasion, to be considered of.

For certain, the way of believing, is the only way of living with God for
ever. But the mistakes of men about this way, are the great occasion of their
miscarriage: I mean it of such as hear the Gospel, have Christ offered to them,
and do profess to believe on him, as all or most do with us.

There are only two that deserve our notice, and if there be any other, they
may be reduced to these. And these two are extremes, not so far from one
another, as both are from the right way of living by Faith.

First, Some (though they pretend not to merit) do almost turn the Covenant of
grace into a Covenant of works, and so pervert the Gospel of Christ to their
own destruction. I do not mean, That they make account to be saved by virtue of
the first Covenant, made with Adam in innocence: For never was there a man, Jew
or Gentile, that did not acknowledge himself a sinner. And this appears, in
that all of them have used means, true or false, right or wrong, to make an
atonement for their Souls. But I mean such as the Jews, Who attained not to
the Law of righteousness, because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were
by the works of the Law, To. 9.31, 32. (...).
[ As it were] Not wholly, or altogether, but in a sort, as it were, or after a
manner. And how was that? Surely thus* When they knew themselves sinners before
the Lord, and should have looked to Christ only, as the alone propitiation for
sin, they applied themselves to their legal services and sacrifices, hoping to
find acceptance with God, though they looked not at all by faith unto him, who
was the end of the Law, and all the righteousness of men before God. Thus they
perverted the Covenant of grace, and made it of none effect to them, and so do
others to this day. And if you desire to know how and wherein, I answer, thus:

When God has showed us Christ, as our only Salvation, and given us means for
bringing us near to him, and building us up in acquaintance with him, viz. His
Word and Sacraments, etc. What do the most of professing Christians count of
more, than hearing, and receiving the Sacraments, and their good Prayers, etc.
as so much good service done to God; and make account they please God well
enough, so long as these services are not wholly omitted or neglected by them.

This is a great mistake, and for a further discovery of it, take notice,

1. That working and doing what is commanded us of God, being the condition of
the Covenant made with Adam, there is in every man since, an inclination to
think of pleasing God, by somewhat that he himself does. And this is to be
ignorant of the righteousness of God, which is nothing else, but the obedience
of the Lord Jesus Christ to the will of his Father. For this the Apostle
avouches, To. 5.19. That by this alone we are made righteous. For our own
performances, they are all imperfect; and when we do our utmost, we do but
endeavor to perform the promise which we made to Christ, when we first
consented to receive him as our Lord and Savior; and those performances have
all of them need to be pardoned, as to the defects of them, through the
application of his righteousness to our selves by faith. Yea, and if we are not
first united to him, by a sincere and sound faith, all our performances are an
abomination, as the Scripture speaks often, Pro. 15.8. Pro. 28.9. Psalm. 66.18.
etc.

2. The way that God has laid out for us to walk in, that we may live, is
first to know and acknowledge our own lost estate and condition by sin, with an
utter impossibility to recover our selves otherwise, than in a way of free
pardon by grace, which we receive by faith. And when we have thus closed with
Christ, and received him, as our only righteousness before God, then in way of
thankfulness for such an unspeakable grace, we are to set our selves about the
service of Christ our Lord Redeemer. This our obedience to our Lord and
Savior, is not any the least part of that price, which was paid to procure and
purchase our pardon. Nor is our consenting to receive Christ, as he is offered
to us, by faith, any part of amends made to God, for the wrong done him by man's
sin and transgression. Only the righteousness and obedience of the Son, in
doing and suffering all that was enjoined him by his Father, is the price of
our Redemption, and that wherein God is well pleased. And so is Christ offered
to us, as our all and only righteousness, which we receive by faith, as a man
receives a rich gift freely given him, upon no other condition, than his
willing and hearty acceptance of it. The gift is not the less free, because a
man cannot be enriched by it, unless he receive and take it. No more is our
justification by Christ's righteousness less free, because we have not the
benefit, till by faith we apply it to our selves. The Feast is prepared without
our cost or care; and all we do, is but to come and partake of it, which is
done only by our believing on the Lord our righteousness. As for our obedience
to Christ, and serving him all our days in holiness and righteousness before
him, Luc. 1 74.
it is but going on to the full possession of the heavenly inheritance, and the
same with Working out our Salvation, Philip. 2.12. Or, Finishing our
Sanctification, 2 Cor. 7.1. That is, employing all our abilities, and using all
the means which God has appointed for the accomplishment of our Salvation.
When we first believe with the heart, we are put into the right way; but we are
not presently at the end of our Race. We are only as Travailers, pressing on
toward our home; or as Racers, posting toward the goal. There is a rich
Inheritance purchased for us, without any cost of ours; only we must go, to
take possession of it. And this cannot be in works, and ways of ungodliness,
(for they tend to Hell, and destruction) but in ways of Righteousness and
Holiness, which God has appointed to be the way to the Kingdom, though not
the cause of Reigning.

Besides, In the ways of Righteousness, we show, and approve our selves, to
have believed from the heart, which is the Justification by Works, which the
Apostle meant, Quod ve^a ^sse inde comprobe tur. Calvin.

Materiam habet se exerendi, quam se prodit hominum infirmitas. Id.


Iac. 2.21. and v. 22. he clears it sufficiently in saying, By Works was Faith
made perfect. That is, declared, or showed, and proved such as it is, even as
Gods power is said to be perfected in weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. that is, declared
to be as it is, All-sufficient for our relief, and so to be acknowledged by us.
And thus are our Works the only good evidence, of our believing on the Lord
Jesus Christ, to the saving of our Souls. For by adding one Grace to another,
i. e. acting every Grace in its due season, and order, We give all diligence,
to make our calling and our election sure, 2 Pet. 1.5, 11. This, and this alone
will be the evidence of our Faith, in the great day of Account; and hence it is
said so often in Scripture, That God will judge every man according to his
Works: That is, he will judge, and try Men by what they have done, to prove and
approve themselves sound Believers, in the sight of God, Angels, and Men.

Now by what has been said, many may learn to know their foul mistake in this
particular. It Is not, O vain man, the good Service, thou have done to God, that
is, or will be thy Righteousness before him. What is it to him, that thou have
wept, and prayed before him, or been at any, never so great cost, and pains
about doing any work, that he has commanded thee. He has no need of thy
Services, or Sacrifices, Psalm. 50.8.14. Neither can thou be profitable to
God, Job 22:2, 3.
as thou may be to thy self, or another. And when thou have done thy best,
thou have need of Grace to pardon that which is wanting. Tell me, Did thou
ever pray, or praise God so, as thou durst expect acceptance, upon thine own
account? Sure, thy desire to be heard, and accepted upon the account of the
Lord Jesus Christ, shows the contrary. Why do thou then talk idly, of what
thou have done and suffered?

Obj. I make no account of meriting at the hands of God?

Sol. I know not what thou make account of; but why do thou build so much
upon so rotten a foundation, as thine own Works, and Doings? And that thou do
so, is apparent, by thy Pharasaical boastings, Luc. 18.11, 12.
that thou art not, as other men are. Why do so many, when they are asked a
reason of the Hope, that is in them, so readily answer, that they have not so
behaved themselves, as not to hope well about their Salvation? The best Saints
have made it an evidence of their Faith, and Hope, and Joy in God, as Nehemiah,
and Paul, etc. Neh. 13.^4* and 31. 2 Cor. 1.12.
But too many (we may fear) make it the ground, and foundation, and therein
miserably deceive themselves. For it is Faith alone receiving Christ, as he is
freely offered, that gives us all our interest in God, as it disclaims all
Self-righteousness, and Creature-confidence, and gives God all the glory of our
Salvation, by his rich Grace. For our good Works (whatever they are) they are
no part of our Righteousness before God, but only our evidences, that we have
Believed, as God has Commanded; and so are in the only right way to our
everlasting Salvation, as we hope for it in Heaven. But this is a Mystery far
above thy reach, viz. To do all, as if thou must be saved by thy Works; and yet
when all is done, to look on all, as abominable before God, and to rest thy
self, and all thy Works, upon Gods free Grace in our Lord Jesus Christ for
Acceptance, as much as if thou had done nothing at all. Thou reckon'st upon
Works of Piety, Mercy, and Charity, which thou have done; not considering, that
thou have somewhat even in them to be p^rdon'd, and that no Satisfaction to
Gods Justice can be made by any thing, never so well done, by any Creature, or
by all of them together.

If any shall think I wrong them in this, I confess (what I hope, and believe)
that there are many sound, and sincere Believers, who are really acquainted
with the Mystery of Living by Faith. But I have not Charity enough, to
persuade my self, that all Professing Christians are such, as know by
experience, what it is to live by Faith in the Righteousness of the alone
Savior, whiles they see nothing in themselves, but just matter of
Condemnation: Once, for certain, to deny our own Righteousness, is the hardest
part of Self-denial, and every experienced Christian, will (I am confident) be
ready to avow this.

But too many, that profess Faith in Christ, are too like the Jews, who made
great account of Sacrifices, and Offerings; not understanding, or heeding
Christ in them, though he was the Life, and Soul of them, and without him, they
were but an empty shadow, or an unsavory Carcass, indeed an Abomination. What
ado is made by many about the Sacraments, to be applied to young, and old; as
if the opus operatum in Gods Ordinances, were of such avail, where, there is no
Grace concurring with them? Nec^ssitate P^aecepti, Medii.
The Sacraments are indeed Necessary, by reason of Gods Command, and as means
of his appointment, for our edification in Grace, and Communion with God. They
are the Seals which God has annexed to the New Covenant; and the contempt, or
neglect of them, when they may be used, and applied in Gods way, and order, is
no small transgression. Nor can we justly expect the End, so long as we neglect
the Means, which God has appointed for obtaining it. But yet there is not such
a necessity of the Sacraments, as of Christ, and Faith in him; and we may have,
and hold fast these, without the Sacraments; else woe to those poor Souls, who
by the hand of God one way, or other in any kind, are debarred the use of them.
It Is more than probable, that many children died in Israel, before they were
circumcised, which was not, by Gods order, till the eighth day: And yet we dare
not therefore say, they were cast-awayes. The Passover was probably, in some of
the Kings reigns, utterly neglected, (or else observed only in private, if yet
it was so) as in Ahaz his time: For he shut up the doors of the Lords house, 2 Chronicles. 28.24. 2 Chronicles. 29.3. Ezech. 11.16.
which so stood shut, till Hezekiah opened them, in the first year of his
reign* And how could the Jews in Babylon keep the Passover, or offer any
Sacrifice, for 70. years together? And yet who dare say, that the faithful and
godly among them, all that while, had no communion with God? Was not the Ark in
a private place, so as the people inquired not at it, in the days of Saul, 1 Chronicles. 13.3. True; the want of Ordinances duly administered, in the public
Assemblies, is a sad calamity, and a token of Gods displeasure against a
people. But yet God never leaves his people, without sufficient helps, to
acquaint themselves with him, in such a sad condition; and there is no such
necessity of them, as enforces any to an undue and disorderly administration of
them, besides the rule of that Word and Law, which has enjoined them. We had
need beware of giving to them, what we owe to Christ alone, and faith in his
name, lest we be guilty of seeking after righteousness, as it were, by the
works of the Law, To. 9.32.

What ado is made also, by too many, about duties of worship, when it is to be
feared, their Religion goes very little further, and there is little care of
improving the Word and Prayer to any other purpose, after attendance on them is
once at an end. The Word is precious, and so are all duties of worship, to all
such as know by experience the blessed effects of them upon their own Souls.
But it is an easy mistake for men to rest in the duty done, and think all is
well, if they have been at it, though little be done after it, to express the
virtue and power of it, or to show any impressions of it on the Soul. There are
other duties to be done of all Christians, to show the life and power of
godliness in them, and if these latter be wanting, all attendance on Ordinances
will be little other than an empty outside Formality.

The same may be said of Family Duties* Morning and Evening daily performed, if
there be not a conscionable performance of the moral Law in justice, fidelity,
mercy and charity, used and practiced in all our dealings with men. And when we
have done all, both the one and other, yet Christ, and his righteousness, are
all in all to us, and the rest no better than a filthy ragg. But of this more
in the next that follows.

Secondly, A second Mistake seems to lie as much on the other hand, viz. When
men count of being s^ved by faith and hope in Christ alone, and live all the
while in a constant practice of all ungodliness and unrighteousness, which is
to turn the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ into wantonness or lasciviousness,
Jude 4. Such were the Jews of old, that cried, The Temple of the Lord, etc.
Ier. 7.4. And yet continued to steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear
falsely, etc. v. 9. And what account God had of them, is to be seen at large,
Esaias 1 cap. 10. -- 16. v. Esaias 66.1. -- 5. Psalm. 50. and many other places to
the same purpose. The sum of all is this, That they, and all their services,
were an abomination to the Lord. And so is the faith of all profane and
ungodly men, who profess their hope in Christ alone, to be saved by him. Such
faith as Saint James says, cap. 2. is dead, having no works to prove and
justify the life and power of it. The Devils believe, and tremble, Jac. 2.19.
which these profane wretches do not. And shall their Faith save them? Just as
the Devil's faith shall save him, and no otherwise. These are the believers,
that have so much faith, as carries them to the places of public worship,
where perhaps they sometime laugh, or sleep out the time, as if they had naught
else to do there. And what is done there by their Ministers, somewhat, or
nothing, or somewhat to no purpose, with them, it matters not. The worse, and
the less, the better. As for heeding what they hear, or practicing as they have
prayed, (Alas poor Souls) they regard little more than the dogs, that go to
Church on Sundays sometimes, as well as their Masters. These are believers,
that live in all manner of sensual delights and pleasures, and make no
conscience, no not so much as Heathens, of any thing that savours of common
honesty. But because this has been touched upon before by the way, I shall say
no more of it here. Only these men, all of them, are out of the way of life,
which is believing with all the heart; To. 10.9, 10.
and what believing with all the heart is, I shall yet show as plainly, and as
briefly as I can.

When once a poor Sinner is convinced of the error and evil of his way, and
also of the infinite transcendent excellencies of Christ, as all in all to him,
he then sees, there is somewhat hereafter to be expected, more than can
possibly be had here. And thereupon he is wholly and altogether taken up in his
thoughts and affections, about those things which are laid up in Christ, and
never to be enjoyed, till his appearing in glory. This hope and expectation of
future glory, so works upon him, as he becomes every day more and more
crucified to the World, and all things here below, and accounts them (as they
are indeed) nothing but vanities and lies. And as all his hopes are in Heaven,
so all his endeavors are only for this, that he may not fail and fall short of
those everlasting enjoyments. And ^ccordingly he resolves, that whatever it
costs him in doing or suffering for Christ's sake, come life, come death, he
cares not, so he may have his desires in these. In this way of believing, all
the Saints now in Heaven came thither. No temptation on the right hand, or the
left, could turn them aside, but they would still hold on in the way of Gods
Commandments, whatever became of them. So did Moses, Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. Who
refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh 's Daughter, choosing rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, etc. Not as Elihu charged Job, Job 36.21.
That he had chosen iniquity, rather than affliction. But as Zuinglius has it,
Quas non o^or^^t m^rt^s p^aeeligere, etc. Zuingl. Ep 3.
What deaths had we not better choose, what torments, yea, what Hell not suffer
rather, than go against Conscience rightly informed? So did all those Worthies,
recorded Heb. 11.33. ad fin. These are the Saints indeed, that take Heaven by
violence; Praeparaetione animi.
and they that are not such, at least in the purpose of their hearts, will
never approve themselves in Gods account, to be sound Believers. I know well,
there are many Sects in the World, but all those are but of two sorts, and no
more will be found at the last day. One of these is that company of men, which
will have their reward here, and their portion in this life. It is all they
look after, and the best Heaven they desire, is to be left here upon Earth for
ever; and to these, the thoughts of Death are very terrible. ^ut there is
another sort, who count this Earth to be their Hell; and all their Expectation
and Hope is after they are gone hence; and upon this account, they little value
what befalls them here. And these are Christians, and Believers indeed: Their
^aith is the ground of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1.
and the evidence of things not seen: It is such a confidence of the Heavenly
Inheritance, as makes a man fear nothing; Heb. 11.26, 27.
Having his eye upon the recompense of the reward, and as seeing him that is
invisible. Such Believers will not be frighted, nor flattered out of Gods
ways, because they know them to be the only way to Life eternal. Can thou do
thus, and for the Joy set before thee endure the Cross, and despise the shame?
If thou can, this is a sound Faith indeed, that will get thee a Living, and
that for ever.

Obj. If any object, That some good men have been afraid, and yielded in
suffering times.

Sol. I say so too: But I say withal, that never any good man did wholly, and
finally deny, and forsake the cause of Truth, for any Torments, and Sufferings,
and for those who staggered a while, and perhaps recoiled, they came on again,
and found no comfort, till they had recanted their Recantations. All may not
have the same degree of confidence and courage; but all sound Believers will
hold out to the end, though some with more ado, than others. It cannot be a
sound Faith, that can be totally overcome by any Temptation. To believe
sincerely, is the work of Christ, in a Soul; and, He is stronger than he that
is in the World, 1 John 4.4. so as true Believers are sure at last, to
overcome, whatever be their conflict. But thou art one, that carest not for
fighting, or striving against Sin, with the least hazard, to any of thy
smallest Earthly comforts. Thou art more like those Soldiers that watched our
Savior whiles he lay in the Tomb, Mat. 28.11. etc. who though they knew, that
he was Risen, as they had seen, and could not but know it; yet verse. 15. Took
the money, that was offered them, and said as they were taught, i. e. quite
contrary, to what they knew in their Consciences. If there be any thing to be
got, Money, or Money-worth, thou will deny Christ, and his Truth, or any thing
thou know of God. Or if any thing be to be suffered for the Truth, let it go
for thee, it is not worth the purchase. I shall say no more to discover, who are
sound Believers, and who not.

I shall only add a word of Advice to such as profess their Faith, and hope to
be saved by Christ; but for certain, never yet gave any proof of it: because of
this sort are many, that quarrel the ways of Gods Grace, and Providence, as
not equal.

1. Know O vain man, that God has promised thee Eternal life, as much as any
other; and there is no hinderance to thy enjoyment of it, but thine
impenitency, and unbelief: and what that is, has been plainly showed before.
There is, I say again, no bar to thy Believing, unto the saving of thy Soul,
but what thou thy self have put, by thy wilful and wayward rejecting of
Christ, tendered to thee. Consider it therefore, and look to it in time, for
thine Eternity depends upon it.

2. Thou have nothing to do, but to humble thy self before the Lord, and
acknowledge thine Iniquities, and loath thy self for them, and so flee to lay
hold on the Hope set before thee, Counting all but loss and dung, Phil. 3.8.
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus the only Lord and Savior;
and resolve, To serve him all thy days, Luc. 1.74.
in holiness, and righteousness before him. If this be done, thou shall be
Saved, and shall never meet with any Decree of God, to reject thee. And for the
Merits of Christ, thou shall find them as all-sufficient to thee, as to any
Saint in Heaven. And now say not, thou would believe, if thou could; for
the contrary is most true, as has been proved before. O! be at last persuaded,
to quarrel no more, about what will avail thee nothing, but presently set about
the work, that lies plain before thee.

If thou will know what, I say again;

1. Love thy Sins no more, count not the profits, and pleasures of them, to
be so sweet, when they will be bitterness in the latter end. For they are but
well-tasted Poison, that goes down sweetly, but works sadly in the Bowels
afterward. This Poison indeed, is in thee already; but it will not kill thee,
if thou art persuaded to cast it up. And this I give thee to encourage thee,
That I know some Sinners yet alive, that have taken in as much Poison as thou
have, who, by casting it up, as I have now persuaded thee, have much sweet
peace, and comfort in Believing, whiles they tread another trace, than once
they did. They are now Holy, Devout, and Righteous; who were before Ungodly,
Profane, and Vicious. Go thou, and do likewise, and try, whether God will save
thee, or no.

2. Lay hold on the ways of Gods Commandments, and Write them upon the table
of thine heart, Prove. 3.3. were thou may read more to this purpose; as also
Prove. 1.5. besides many, very many places of Scripture, which all cry loud upon
thee, to hearken, and hear what God requires of thee, to the saving of thy
Soul. Be but once persuaded to Believe, that God knows the way to Heaven,
better than thou do, and that he has told thee plainly enough what that way
is. And then consider, whether God has, or can have it in his heart, to abuse,
and deceive thee. Yea, to put no further trouble upon thee, go to thine own
Conscience, and ask seriously, whether the ways of sinful Vanity, and all
manner of Iniquity are, or can be the way to Heavenly happiness, in the
enjoyment of God.

And for a Conclusion; be pleased to consider of all that has been aforesaid,
whether thou have nothing to do, about the work and business of thine own
Salvation. For one of these two must be: Either thou have something to do, or
nothing at all. If there be somewhat for thee to do, (as I suppose there is)
why art thou not about it, and hard at it, and that presently, without delay?
Can thou be so unreasonably negligent about thy Soul, when thou art so
uncessantly, and excessively careful of every other, the least concernment? Is
it nothing to thee, what becomes of thee to all Eternity? Has God willed thee
to be doing, all thou can, for thy present Subsistence, and nothing at all
for thy everlasting Salvation? Or has he left it to thy Choice, whether thou will do any thing, or nothing at all? Read the Scriptures once more, and see,
if there be nothing commanded thee in order to this? And be sure in the first
place, that thou art left to thy liberty, and under no obligation; or else
consider, how thou will answer for thy disobedience to Gods Commands.

But if there be nothing for thee to do, or if it be in vain for thee, to
bestow thy care, or pains about it, because there is somewhat impossible to be
done, without any fault of thine; I shall say no more, but leave thee to be
tried by what thou know to be Gods Law, at the last, and great day of
Account; resolving for my self, that if I am saved from Wrath, and Death, it
will be only through Gods free Mercy, and Grace; and if I perish, and die in my
Sins, it will be only through mine own default, because I would not (whilst
I might,) know the time of my Visitation, and the things of my Peace.

AN APPENDIX To the whole Discourse foregoing, which may be called a Seal, set
to the only way of Life and Salvation, by the alone Savior.
Luc 13.23, 24, etc. Then said one unto him, Lord, Are there few that be saved?
And he said unto him, Strive to enter in at the strait gate, etc.


HE that made this Question, seems to be (upon what occasion soever he made it)
of a curious and inquisitive humor, (as most men are) desirous to know, what
no way concerned him. He would be satisfied, Whether few or many shall be
saved. Our Savior in answering him, sufficiently shows his dislike of such an
impertinent Question: For he resolves nothing about it directly, but clearly
intimates to him and others, that it concerns them not to be resolved in it,
one way or other: But falls upon that, which every man is bound to look after,
viz. A careful endeavor to do the will of God, revealed in his Word, which
shows the way of life, so as whoever walks in it, is sure to be saved.

Now this one Scripture is enough, to stop the mouths of all, that quarrel and
question (as many do) the ways of God in his Decrees and Counsels about the
Salvation of men. For our Savior not only intimates, that all such Questions
are impertinent; but he fully shows, upon this occasion, what is the only way
to Life, wherein whoever goes, is sure to be saved, whatever becomes of others:
And never takes the least notice of any bar, by reason of Gods Decrees, or any
thing else of that kind.

We must strive, etc. i. e. We must not think the Kingdom of Heaven can be
gotten by a lazy and empty profession of true Religion, or by having the
external means of grace, and the outside privileges of Christians, (as it is
said) v. 26. But we must strive for it, by sound denial of our selves,
renouncing all worldly and fleshly delights and contents, and a serious
industrious endeavor after godliness, which will put us to hard labor, and
pain, and trouble. And then he makes Affidavit for it, That whoever is resolved
to seek Heaven and Happiness in this way, shall not miss, or fall short. Go
thou, and do thus, and thy Work is done, if God be true in his Word.

FINIS.

