A GOSPEL CHURCH: OR, GOD'S Holy TEMPLE OPENED.

Wherein is showed from the Scriptures, 1. What a Gospel Church is: 2. That
such a Church is of Divine Institution. 3. With what Materials such a Church
should be formed. 4. The Form of such a Church, and how it should be built. 5.
The several Officers and Offices in the said Church, and their respective Works
and Dutys there. 6. The Duties of Church Members to their Officers. 7. Their
Duties to one another. 8. Their Church Priviledges, and several other matters
and concernments which may not here be mentioned, but may be found in the
Epistle; all intended for the spiritual profit of Church Members.

By Stephen Ford, Preacher of the Gospel in London.

These things I write unto thee, that thou may know how thou ought to
behave thy self in the House of God, 1 Timothy 3 14, 15.

Blessed are they that dwell in thy House, they will be still praising thee:
They go from strength to strength, every one appearing before God in Zion,
Psalm. 84.4.7.

London, Printed in the Year, 1675.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
To my entirely beloved, the Elders, Deacons, and to the rest of the Church of
Christ, over whom the Holy Ghost has made me an Overseer.
Friends,
I Am yours, and I hope you are Christ's. 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. You are exceeding
dear to me, and ly deep in my heart; 1 These. 2.8. Phil. 1.7. and you are my
joy, and crown of rejoicing: especially, some of you. 1 These. 2.19, 20. Phil.
4.1. Your welfare and happiness is mine; your thriving and growing in Grace,
and in the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3.18. is mine, and your
standing fast in the Lord, and bearing much fruit is my comfort, 1. These. 3.7,
8, 9. your Trials and Afflictions are mine, and your witherings and
languishings are my great afflictions and sorrows. 2 Cor. 11.29. Romans 12.15.
whatever some of you may think or say of me: yet I can boldly say (if I know
any thing of my heart) that God is my Record, how greatly I long after you all
in the bowels of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.8. how thoughtful, and studious I am to
serve you, and to promote your present and eternal Blessedness, and that by all
the ways and means I can. And if I am not succesful in my designs and
endeavors, it is my burden, and I cannot help it. I know that Ministers may
and ought to plant and water, but it is God that gives the increase, 1 Cor.
3.7. I know that I am weak, and I know also, that the happy success of good
men's labors, lies not in, or proceeds not from their Abilities, but from the
Power of God, and his Spirit working with and by them; or else even a great
Prophet Isaiah may say, I have labored in vain, Isa. 49.4. yet I say, my
Conscience is my witness, that it is my desire, aim and endeavor to be
faithful to Christ and you, and to give all diligence to my work and your
service; to Preach the word in season, and out of season, 2 Timothy 4.2. to feed
you with the Bread of sound Doctrine, and to give to every one their portion of
meat in due season. I know and believe, that the all-seeing-eye of my great
Lord and Master is still on me, and that I must shortly give unto him an
account of my Stewardship; Luke 16.2. how I have performed my work, and
discharged my Trust to you: and therefore, I dare not but endeavor to be
faithful in my Duty to Him and You. Should any of you suffer loss, by any
neglect or unfaithfulness of mine, the sight and conviction of it would
exceedingly afflict me: for I do greatly love you. I would be eminently
Instrumental in nursing, educating and building you up in Christ, in knowledge,
faith, love, peace, joy, holiness and spiritual consolation, unto eternal life,
and am really afflicted that I can do no more toward the attainment of it, and
that I am no more successful in what I do.

I hope you have some clear proofs and evidences, of what I have said of my
self and endeavors, from my practices among you. For what other ends can I
have in all my labors and spendings, but to serve Christ and your Souls,
especially, in and by those that are extraordinary? what should I aim at and
design in the Monthly Lecture to and with you only; in my Lords days
fortnights Lecture, and in writing this and some other books, but your good?
you know, that I have spent my strength in a more than ordinary manner to
convince, regenerate and educate your Families; your Children, Servants, and
other Relations of yours. For as I have told you; It was for their sakes that I
set it up, and have continued it many years; but how you have esteemed and
encouraged it, and how your Relations have improved it, I leave to all your
Consciences to judge. But however, I have given you a sufficient proof of my
love to you, and care of them, by spending my strength and spirits with, and
for their good: and all unprejudiced persons cannot but acknowledge it. I could
have sit down (as others do) with Preachi g to you twice every Lords day, and
one Lecture in the weekdays; had I not seen a necessity of doing more, and had
not my cordial Love to your Souls constrained me to the taking of extraordinary
pains with you, and for you. My ends and designs in the said Monthly Lecture
were (1) To acquaint you with, and convince you of your duties in the Church,
and that every one of you might know how to behave your selves in the house of
God; 1 Timothy 3.15. and what duties were or are incumbent on you there. (2) To
acquaint you with your Church Priviledges and spiritual advantages, that you
might value and esteem them; own and embrace them; improve and walk worthy of
them; and that you might be thankful for them. (3) That you might know on what
bottom you stand in your Church State, and that you might stand there
unmovably. (4) That you might know your miscarriages in your Church State and
Relation, and be humbled for; and repent of them in Dust and Ashes. (5) That
you might know the Evils and Temptations you are liable to in a Church State,
and that you might watch against and avoid them. (6) That you might be enabled
to answer Gainsayers, and refell their objections. (7) That you might look
for, and expect all the promised good in your Church State, and endeavor the
obtainment of it. (8) To quicken and provoke you, to move and persuade you to
all possible diligence, care and faithfulness, to, and in your own, Jesus
Christ's, and one another concerns in your Church State. That you might be
pleasing to God, and profitable to your own and each others Souls in the
Ordinances of Christ, and in your Union and Communion one with another. These
were some of my ends in setting up that Lecture, and which I have with some
measure of sincerity of heart carried on, though under no small discouragements
from within and without.

And in pursuance of these and other holy ends, I have written some of the
matters that I preached to you, and have made them ready for your eyes to read
and behold them, your judgments and understandings to judge of them, and for
your hearts to receive and embrace them: and that upon your desire I have done
it; as you know.

They are your matters, and therefore to you, I do dedicate and commend them,
because I love you: and if you give me encouragement, I could willingly spend,
and be spent for you, 2 Cor. 12.15. Brethren, I grudge not at any pains and
endeavors, cares and labors, I have taken and expended on you or yours: for,
I think, that all that I can do for you is too little. I do heartily wish, I
could be more serviceable and profitable to you; and the more you shall
encourage and strengthen my hands to serve you, the better I shall do it. I
have taken pains to write this Book, or to compose, and set forth the matters
contained in it, as well as I could: had I been able, I should have done it
better. But however it be done, be you sure, that the matters discoursed of,
are of great weight and moment to you. You will find but little in it of man
(human frailties excepted) but therefore I hope, you will find the more of God
and Gospel Truth there. For the Truths of God shine forth more gloriously, when
they appear in their naked native beauty and simplicity, than when they come to
us clothed with humane Eloquence, and with the Rhetorical flourishes of men's
wits. They are such glorious things in their own nature, as that they are never
more powerful on, and acceptable to holy gracious hearts, than when they are
represented to them pure, clear and entire in their own words and language,
stripped of humane Ornaments and Garnishes.

My design was not to commend my self, but the real, the holy, and acceptable
will of God: not to show you, what any men think or judge of these matters, but
to show you, what the Holy Ghost thinks and speaks of them. I expect severe
censures from others, (because far better men's works do usually meet with them)
but I hope to meet with none from you, for love will cover a multitude of
weaknesses in those, whose aim, end and design is good in any good work; and
you cannot but judge that mine was good in this good undertaking. You put me on
the work, and I hope you will find nothing but Truth and plainness in it, and
cover my infirmities with a mantle of charity; judge that I have performed it
as well as I could, for Christ's, my own and your sakes, and conclude, that I
have not wilfully, knowingly or carelessly failed in any part of it. Now it is
prepared for you, and brought to you by a hand of love, I hope you will take
the pains to read and mind it, to understand and practice the duties contained
in it: and although the form of it (as made by me) may not have your esteem and
consideration, yet do not fail to give the matter of it it is due Respects and
acknowledgment, let your Head and King, his Truths and ways, have their dues
from you; as also your own Souls; and you will greatly gratify the Author,
who is your real friend.

In this Book, I have showed you in several Chapters (1) What an instituted
Gospel Church is. (2) That particular Congregational Churches are of Divine
Institution. (3) Of what materials they should be constituted and formed. (4)
What is the form of such Churches, or how fit materials should be joined
together, and made a formal house. (5) The several Officers of a Church, with
their calls, qualifications, works and duties. (6) The duties of Church Members
to their Officers. (7) Their duties to one another. (8) Their
Church Priviledges and advantages. (9) I have showed that all Believers are
indispensibly bound to join themselves to some Gospel Church, if they can. (10)
What the Ordinances are, that God has given to his Churches. (11) How all
Church members ought to walk toward God and men, and what Evils and
Temptations they are subject to, or in danger of. (12) I have spoken something
of the Lords Supper, and of many other things and matters of great moment, as
you will find in your reading of the Book throughout: As that Church Members
ought not to break off from the Churches, to which they are joined, but in
extraordinary cases. I have not yet done; but shall present a few Requests to
you, for my self, my God, and your own Souls; and which I hope you will not
deny me, but freely grant me, because you will find them very reasonable
Requests, and such as do nearly concern you and your God, as well as my self.

1. I do earnestly entreat and beseech you, for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake,
and for the love of the Spirit, to do all you can, and are bound in duty to do,
to encourage me in my work, strengthen my hands under my weights and burdens,
and help me to run my Race, and finish my course with joy, 1 Cor. 9. Act.
20.24. and avoid whatever may justly discourage, tempt and provoke me; or that
may weaken my hands, grieve and sadden my heart, unfit and indispose me for and
in my work and duty with you. For if you do not avoid it, you will tempt and
provoke me to sin, and hinder me in my work and duty. And my sin will be your
sin, my loss your loss, and my sorrow will be your sorrow at long run. I can
appeal to God, that I seek, desire and endeavor to do you good in whatever I
do or propound to have done for, or among you; and therefore, when you neglect
to come to the worship of God, and keep your place; and when you neglect to set
forward any good work in the Church for the honor of Christ, and the profit of
the whole, you do discourage me, and tempt me to sin: and the like you may do,
many other ways; which for brevity sake, I shall not mention. Only this one
namely, by your non-proficiency under the means of grace, which will be my
great Affliction, because I dearly love you. Your serious, conscientious and
constant attendance on the administration of the Ordinances of Christ with me;
your growing in grace and profiting by them; your readiness to help and assist
me in promoting and carrying on of good works in the Church, and standing by me
in the Lord's work will exceedingly comfort and encourage me in my Ministerial
work. And pray consider, if it be not your duty, and the will of God you should
so do. Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your
selves, for they watch for your Souls, as that they may do it with joy and not
with grief: why? why (says he) that is unprofitable for you.

Oh! give me your helping hand, and do not load and burden my work, but
endeavor to make my work easy, and my life comfortable to the utmost of your
power.

2. Pray for me, Heb. 13.18. and that with all possible importunity and
constancy. For the more you do so pray to God for me, the more profitable he
will make my labors to your Souls. Pray for me in your Closets, and wrestle
with God for me: for you, (especially) you who walk with God, may do much for
me in your Closets. I do remember you in mine; Oh! let me be remembered by you
in our Closets also. For a stock of Prayers, of hearty, believing, fervent
Prayers, kept a-running one for another, will bring in a great Revenue of grace
from Heaven to us. You cannot expect, that I should Preach warmly, profitably
and powerfully to you, unless you so Pray for me. Therefore in obedience to the
will of God, and for your own profit, do you continue in fervent Prayer unto
God for me. Entreat him to pour out much of the Spirit of grace and the grace
of the Spirit upon me, fill me with Ministerial gifts, and make me an able
Minister of the New Testament. That God may give me the door of utterance, and
enable me to speak, as I ought to speak, Ephesians. 6.20. That God may work in me
whatever is wel-pleasing in his sight, Heb. 13.21. fulfill in me all the good
Counsel of his will, and the work of faith with power, 2 These. 1.11. that the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in me, and by me. Oh! Pray for
me, that I may be kept faithful to Christ and you; that I may labor and not
faint, run and not be weary; that I may be able to bear up under all Burdens
and Temptations, and be able to overcome and conquer them all; That I may
rightly divide the word of Truth, and administer the holy Ordinances of Christ
according to his will, so, as that he may be magnified, and your Souls
profited; That my heart may stand clear off the World, and that I may not be
taken and entangled with any snares, and that I may perfect holiness in the
fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. and for whatever else you may rationally judge, I may
stand in need of, as your Minister.

3. I do request you, that if at any time you do certainly see, and undoubtedly
know any failing or miscarriage in, or by me, that you will speedily,
seriously, meekly, humbly, and as you ought to do, enform me of it. It is your
duty to do so; if you do it as you ought, and may do it, I shall (through grace
assisting) receive it, thank you, and bless God for it, and account it my
mercy. But I shall desire you, to take heed and beware of these three evils
toward me in this matter. (1) That you do not fancy and make evils or
miscarriages for me, and then charge them on me, as mine; when in truth they
are not so. It is a very dangerous thing to condemn the Righteous, and justify
the wicked, as you know, Prove. 17.15. and it is most dangerous, and abominable
in the sight of the Righteous God to condemn, or falsely to charge his
Ambassadors, because they stand in his stead, bear his Image of Authority, and
do his Ministerial work in his Churches* And yet how common is this evil among
Professors, as I can testify? (2) Do not take up a Report from others against
me, and take it for granted, because you hear some Professors of the good ways
of God tell you so. For the World, yea, and the Churches also are too full of
slanderous and back biting Tongues. They are not aware of this evil, but hug
and embrace it in their bosoms, practice it without fear, and commit this
abomination with both hands, as the Prophet speaks. Remember that Jesus Christ
has strictly charged you, in 1 Timothy 5.19. that you do not so much as receive
an Accusation against an Elder, under two or three witnesses; and that on their
certain knowledge of the Fact, not upon their conjectures, and feigned
Circumstances. For God is very curious and tender of their good Names, Credit
and Reputations, and he knows, and all wise and holy men do know, that they are
more obnoxious to the Envy, and that they lie more open to the wrath and hatred
of men, than other men do. Therefore, I say, God has set a higher mound about
their good Name, for their security, than about others. (3) Do not take up my
real or supposed miscarriages, and spread them before others. Oh! my Brethren,
let not this filthy devilish wickedness be found in you: let not others hear of
my faults, before I do my self: be not you Back-biters and Whisperers against
him, who loves you so much, as that he could spend and be spent in the service
of your Souls, and who seeks your good all he can. Requite not his love to you
with such mischief and wickedness against him, for the Lord's sake. You may do
him much wrong thereby, but you will much more wrong Christ and your own Souls.
And let none of you think, that Jesus Christ is an idle Spectator of what you
do herein, that he observes you not, or that because you imagine you intend him
no hurt in what you say of him, that therefore he will hold you guiltless. No,
no: be not deceived, for God will not be mocked: what a man sows, that shall
he reap, Gal. 6.7. God does not say, you may speak evil of his Ministers, or
other men, if you intend not to hurt them thereby; no: but he death expressly
forbid you to back bite, or speak of their evils (though real) at all, behind
their backs, until they prove incorrigible, and have rejected your reproofs and
endeavors to convince and convert them, Levit. 19.16, 17. Jam. 4.11. Tit. 3.2.
Romans 1.30, 31. Psalm. 15.3. 2 Cor. 12.20. But in truth this excuse or pretense
is but a carnal, blind, and diabolical delusion, to shut the eyes of men, and
harden their hearts against the evils of it, that they may commit it with the
more peace and satisfaction, that neither men nor their own Consciences may
reprove or control them, and cry shame on them for their sins, and that they
may not be obstructed, or any way impeded in their doing of that wherein they
find pleasure. Neither indeed, can they prove that they do not hate them, or
intend their hurt. For it is infallibly certain that they do not really love
such, and that they are prejudiced against them, and do not in truth seek their
good. For can I persuade any reasonable man by the rules of Reason, that I love
him, and seek his good in the dark (as to him) by doing or speaking that which
experience shows, will inevitably tend to his hurt, to his shame and reproach,
and to the alienating of others affections from him. Well then, tell me of my
real faults to my face, that I may mend and do so no more, for that is the Will
of Christ, Matthew. 18.15. (4.) I do request you to Visit me, and let me have
your good Company as often as conveniently you can; and when we meet, let our
coming together be for the better, and not for the worse. Surely, I think it is
your Duty to give me loving Visits, as well as I you, and that when you come,
you show a readiness to spend our Time, and improve our Visits to the profit of
our Souls, unless the meeting be designed for other business. The strangeness
of some is no small burden to my spirit, and I know not how their Consciences
do dispense with such Omissions. How can we think that such do really Love one
another, who regard not each others Company, nor, though they live near
together, will vouchsafe to give them a Visit in a whole year together? For
true Love inclines to Communion, free and open-hearted Society together; and it
is so far from being burdensome to true Lovers so to do, as that it is their
delight. Church Members are bound in duty to give their Teachers friendly
Visits, to encourage them in their Works, and to get some good from them to
their own Souls. They should come and propound Cases to them, that concern
their Faith, Practice, Peace, and Comfort, and declare to them their Soul
troubles and temptations, and likewise their profit and gettings by their
Ministry. They should open unto them their Soul-wants and Spiritual diseases,
that so they may know the better how to suit their Ministry to them, and apply
words in season to their Conviction, Instruction, and Comfort. For the Priests
Lips should preserve knowledge, and the People should seek the Law at his
mouth, for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2.7. Mark it, It is
not said that they should always, or mostly go to their People, but that the
People should seek to them. Thus the Disciples came to the Lord Jesus with
their Cases. And truly Friends, you would greatly rejoice my heart, if I might
see the same practiced by you in a holy and serious manner. I do assure you,
that you should be very welcome to me, and I shall most freely afford you my
help, and give you what assistance I can. And I do further request and entreat
you, that when I come to visit you, that then I may find you ready to entertain
me with some profitable discourse, that may better us in the Inner man; for
that is the best Entertainment I desire or expect from you; and it is that
which I am sure will turn to the best account now, and at the last day. These
are some of my reasonable requests to you for my self, which I hope you will
not deny me.

2. I have a few requests to you for God, and your Head and King, the Lord
Jesus Christ. (1.) That you would still remember how you have received him, as
your Lord Jesus Christ, and so walk ye in him, Col. 2.6. Examine the Foundation
you stand upon, and take not up with Reformation without Regeneration and real
Union with Christ by Faith. It is to be feared that too too many Church Members
sit down short of Christ, a new State, and a through change of heart; that they
content themselves with their being in the Churches of Christ, the use of
Ordinances, and with their Church Priviledges. We read of five Foolish Virgins
in fellowship with five Wise Virgins; and we read of bad Fishes in the Nets
with the good; of Tares growing amongst the good Wheat; and of Hypocrites in the
Kingdom of Heaven, (the Churches) which Christ shall gather out and cast into
the fire, Matthew. 25.2. Matthew. 13.47, 48, 49, 50. Isa. 33.14. Take good heed
that none of you be such: You have past the Test of men's judgments, and they
take you for true Saints in their Char table judgments; but you may be
notorious Hypocrites for all that, and you must pass under the Infallible Trial
and Judgment of God too, who can and will make a true Judgment of you.
Therefore do you endeavor to know your own States by serious and diligent
search, 2 Cor. 13.5. 2 Pet. 1.10. You may be Members of a true Church of
Christ, and yet not be true Members of Christ; you may be United to his People
in Church Fellowship, whilst you are Strangers to Christ. And know, that if you
are Hypocrites in the Churches, you are an Abomination to him; you defile his
holy Temple, and his Soul abhors you.

But I say, if upon your serious trial of your selves, you find indeed, that
you are new Creatures, and have really received Christ the Lord on his own
terms, then do you walk in him, and worthy of him, Col. 1.10. Own him, Trust
him, Love him, Obey him, Subject and Live to him, as to your Head, Lord, and
King. Receive, and walk by his Laws and Rules only, and give him the Honor and
Glory of his Headship, and Authority over you, in, and by your so doing, Luke
6.46. Remember that you are the Servants of Christ, bought with a price, even
the price of Christ's Blood, that you should be his Servants and Subjects;
therefore be you not the Servants of men, in his matters and concernments, 1
Cor. 7.23. (2.) Do you stand up, and be Zealous for, and in the cause of your
Lord and King, Rev. 3.19. You are redeemed to it, Tit. 2.14. and your Head
expects it from you. Keep your hearts with him and for him, and suffer no
Stranger, no Lust, Self, or any Creature to Vsurp and Possess his Throne in
you. Show your Zeal against all Intruders, and fight them off when ever they
assault you, or attempt to get possession of your hearts. Be you Zealous for,
and in his pure Gospel Worship and Ordinances; for, and in upholding,
sanctifying and celebrating of them in the Church. (3.) Encourage and promote
the Interest of Christ in each others hearts, and to enrich one another with
the Truths and Grace of Christ as much as you can; for it is your duty so to
do, and you will thereby please and glorify him, 1 These. 5.11. Jude 20. You
should labor to augment, increase, and nourish the Graces, Comforts, and
Experiences; provoke, strengthen, and stir up one another to Love, Trust, Fear,
Honor, and Serve Christ more and better, For this is the Will of God
concerning you, 1 These. 5.18. (4.) Honor Christ by reproving your
sinning-Brethren, and endeavoring all you can to hide it from the knowledge of
others, and to restore them with a spirit of meekness, not suffering sin to
rest upon them, Gal. 6.1. Lev. 19.17. Lift them out of the ditch of Sin,
whereinto Temptation has cast them, and that with all possible secrecy and
privacy for the honor of Christ and your Brethren, and for the good of their
Souls who have sinned. Sin (especially in Church Members) carries Reproach in
its mouth, on Christ, his Ways and Temples; and therefore by the same Argument
and Reason, and for the self-same cause, that we are to honor Christ, and
prevent all Reproach to his Name, Gospel, and People, we should hide each
others sins as long as possible, and there is hope; and endeavor privately to
heal offenses, and cure the Offenders. (5.) Labor to shine as Lights in all
manner of holy Conversation and Godliness, 2 Pet. 3.11. Declare whose you are,
and what you are, to all men, by your fruits of Holiness and Righteousness,
Matthew. 5.16. Phil. 2.15, 16. O remember that you are the Living Witnesses of
Jesus Christ in the World, Isa. 43.10, 12. Isa. 44.8, 9. Rev. 11.3. and
therefore you should endeavor all you can, negatively and positively, by
words, deeds, and carriages, to make full proof of, and give in your good
Testimony to the holy Name, and to the Excellency of the Grace and good ways of
Jesus Christ. The Churches of Christ in the World, are as Beacons set on Hills,
which attract and draw the eyes of all men to them. They watch for your
halting, and are very curious in marking your steps; and that will be made a
fault in you, which is not in others, Psalm. 27.11, 12. Therefore you must be a
singular People before all men, and so walk as to shame your Enemies, and that
they may have no evil thing (justly) to say of you, 1 Pet. 3.16. And you must
not only be good negative Professors and Walkers, but you must also shine and
be fruitful in every good work, and in gracious words and carriages. You should
be excellent living Witnesses to Christ and his ways, by shining in Humility,
Meekness, Temperance, Love, Charity, Kindness, Self-denial, Justice and
Righteousness, in Seriousness and Gravity, in Sweetness and Affability, and in
all Holiness, Heavenly-mindedness, Zeal, and Spirituality; in Goodness,
Peaceableness, or in whatever Grace or Virtue may adorn the Doctrine of God
our Savior in all things. These are some of the things I do request of you for
God and your King. As likewise that you lay to heart his Love and Grace to you,
and endeavor to affect your hearts with them, stir them up to all cordial
thankfulness, and oblige them to live and love forth praises to his holy Name.
Remember, that you are under Electing, Redeeming, Regenerating, Quickening,
Teaching and Comforting Love and Grace; and that you are entrusted with, and
have the enjoyments of many glorious privileges in your hands, for the filling
you with all the fullness of Christ, and nourishing you up unto eternal Life in
your Church State, Joh. 1.16. Ephesians. 4.11, 16. Psalm. 92 Psalm. 132. I have some
Requests to you for, and in the behalf of your own Souls. Indeed all the other
things desired of you already, have respect and relation unto the good and
profit of your own Souls, as well as to my good and God's Glory. But that which
I shall now desire of you, respects your Soul directly and immediately; and
therefore I hope you will easily and readily grant them for your own sakes;
although Jesus Christ, and my self are concerned in them also.

1. Endeavor to profit by your means and privileges, and to grow in all Grace
in your Churchstate and enjoyments therein. Do not rest satisfied with your
Church State and Privileges, but make serious enquiry after your gettings; and
what good, what spiritual profit you find in them, make use of them all to the
gracious and holy ends for which they are given to you. Namely, to Teach and
Instruct you; to Feed and Nourish you; to Arm and Strengthen you; to Comfort
and Refresh you; to Confine and Establish you in the Faith of Christ; to Purge
and Sanctify you; to Confirm and Seal you up unto the day of Redemption, and
to convey the Spirit and Grace of Christ into your hearts. To acquaint you with
your selves, and enable you to know and discern the worst and best of your
selves; what God has done for you, and what sin, the world, and Devil have
done against you. To acquaint you with Jesus Christ, his Love, Grace, Truth,
Providence, and Benefits, and to bring him into your Hearts, and into
Fellowship and Communion with you. Therefore look after these Ends, and other
of like Import, and see that you do indeed and in Truth prosecute and obtain
them, and take not up short of them. Oh! be you sure to mind your Earnings in
all your Enjoyments, and God's Ordinances.

2. Take hold of such Counsels, Reproofs and Instructions, as your Brethren
shall give you in time of need, to prevent your Sinning, or to reduce and turn
you back from Sin to Duty. O remember, that it is a choice means, and one of
God's Holy Ordinances to do you good: yea, to do you a great deal of good, and
an unexpressible Pleasure. And therefore, if you love your Souls, turn not a
deaf Ear to them; slight them not, nor harden your Hearts against them. But
hearken to, and close up with them: Embrace them as choice Mercies to you;
bless God exceedingly for them, and love and thank your Counselors, and
Reprovers heartily. For it is an invaluable mercy, to have such true Friends at
hand; who will express so much love to, and care of us, as that when they see
us in danger of falling, shall give us their preventing succouringhand, to
support and hold us up; or when they see us fall and need their help, they
shall not Hamlike, Genesis 9.22. go and tell others of it, but seasonably give us
their hands, to help us up again. Oh! be not angry with them, but love and
thank them, and take, receive and reverence their Voice, as the Voice of God.
And know, that if you reject and slight it, or are displeased with them for
their Work and Labor of Love to you; you do thereby reject and slight the
Voice of God, and are displeased at his Merciful dispensation to you for your
good. For your Instructors and Counselors, were sent to you by God himself;
and it was he that inclined their Hearts to go, and opened their Mouths to
speak to you, and do for you so great an office of Love. Therefore, be you of
that wise sort of Men, who will hear Reproof from their Friends. Prove. 1.5.
Prove. 9.8, 9. Prove. 10.8. Prove. 12.15. Prove. 25.12. and own it as the Voice of
God.

3. Be careful that you stay not, or take up in Ordinances, but go to, and have
your eye on Christ in them. We are exceeding apt to stick fast in the way of
coming to God, and to sit down short of the end; of the God and grace of the
means; and without great heedfulness and circumspection in this matter, we may
easily run our selves deep in sin; and thereby wrong our Souls, as also by the
want of the God and grace of the means. Mind that Text in Esa. 64.5. Thou
meetest him that remembers thee in thy ways; namely, such as seek God in his
ways, and pass through them, unto himself. But observe, that by sticking in,
and taking up with Ordinances you greatly sin against God, by making a God of
Ordinances; setting up his Creatures in his place and Throne, giving unto them
his Honor and Glory, and robbing him of his due. You neglect the fountain of
living waters, and hew out to your selves broken Cisterns, that can hold no
water: which the Holy Ghost calls two evils, Jer. 2.13. You will thereby grieve
the Holy Spirit, cause him to withdraw from you, and withold the blessings and
good of his Ordinances from your Souls. Oh! my Brethren, little do many of you
think how deep you are under the guilt of this sin, and what a Controversy God
has with your Souls for it; and little do you think what losers and sufferers
you are thereby. Little do many think how often they are caught in this snare,
and how exceedingly offensive it is to God, and detrimental to their own Souls.
Wonder not that Ordinances profit you not, and that God is not with you in
them; if you stick in, and take up with them. In love I give you warning of it,
that you may consider it, watch and pray against it; that you may carefully
mind and do what God requires in his Worship and Ordinances; namely, that you
go to, and seek him in them indeed. And remember, that it is your Duty, that
you must; and your Privilege, that you may go to, and find him and his Grace
in them.

(4.) Live by faith in all your ways, and make use of all God's Ordinances in
Faith and Hope. For it is faith in Christ, and on the Covenant and promises,
that will keep you steady and unmovable: that will hold your Souls in Life, and
with joy draw water out of the Wells of Salvation, Esa. 12.3. Romans 15.13. It is
faith and hope that will unite your hearts to Christ and his Promises, and
encourage you in your doing and sufferingwork, Romans 5.5. 1 John 3.3. unbelief
holds off, and keeps back mercies from you; but faith and hope draws them to
you. You cannot see God in his Worship and Ordinances, but by Faith; neither
can you see the beauty, and glorious Excellency of the Promises,
Gospel Ordinances, and Gospel-precepts and obedience to them, but by Faith. You
can get no good, no encouragement in the Gospel, and ways of God, but by faith
and hope. Therefore live by Faith and in a well-grounded hope.

(5) Be sure to prepare to meet God in his Worship; and do all you can to get
your Hearts ready. Do not rush unadvisedly into his Presence; but be sure to do
it with much consideration and deliberation. Prepare to meet thy God, Amos.
4.12. and prepare thy work without, Prove. 24.27. Get ye Idols out, and get your
hearts into a holy frame and disposition for your God and his service: get a
holy awe of him on your minds, a deep sense of your wants, weakness, and
vileness, and of his greatness, purity and holiness on your hearts; that you
may draw nigh unto him with fear and trembling, Heb. 12.28. Psalm. 2.11. For if
you draw nigh to God, without such preparations, be sure you do not, cannot
honor and worship him, as God; neither will he meet you and bless you.

6. To conclude: let me request you to cleave to the Lord with full purpose of
heart, Act. 11.23. Walk with God, and serve him in sincerity and Truth, Joshua.
24.14. Be you always able to say with Paul and other Saints; that your
rejoicing is this, the Testimony of your Consciences: that in simplicity and
Godly sincerity, you have your Conversations, 2 Cor. 1.12. Be you much in your
closet-work; I mean in secret Prayer, Meditation and Examination, and make what
earnings you can of these Duties and Privileges. Let your Hearts be set on
things above, and not on worldly things, Col. 3.2. cling to Christ in Love, and
keep your Affections warm and lively for him. Converse much with Christ, his
Love, Grace, Death, and with his Resurrection and Intercession; with his Laws,
Promises and Dispensations, and with the fullness of grace he has received for
you. Acquaint your selves with your future glory, and consider much, what you
shall be hereafter. (I jumble many things together, for brevity sake.) By these
and other Means and Duties, you will glorify God and profit your own Souls:
you will rejoice my heart, and engage me to bless God for you; and the fruits
of all will appear in your walkings in the Church, as becomes the Gospel of
Christ. Finally my Brethren, will you grant me these few reasonable Requests?
Truly, I desire them of you for your own good and Christ's honor, because you
are exceeding dear to me, and I do entirely love you, and sincerely seek your
present and eternal happiness: I shall present you with a few Considerations,
and so conclude.

(1) Consider, that you are a holy People in Name and Profession, and a happy
People in Privileges and Dignities. And therefore you must walk and carry your
selves answerable to them.

(2) Consider, the time when you were built up a spiritual house: Was it not in
the Sickness-Year, (in the beginning of the Year): even then, when God was
about to cut down Scores of Thousands round about you, and when he was ready to
make great devastations in this City, by the Plague? Are you not as Brands
plucked out of the Fire, and continued in your Church State, in the midst of
devouring Judgments; that you might be a peculiar People unto God?

(3) Consider, how wonderfully the Lord has preserved and continued your
Privileges and Mercies to you, and that in very Evil times and places, when
many of your Brethren have lost theirs: and wherefore he has dealt so
graciously with you, and whether you have answered his Ends in reality and
truth?

(4) Consider, your solemn Engagement, when you en red into, and became Members
of the Church. Did you not engage to walk with God therein; wait on and
constantly celebrate the Service, Ordinances and Worship of his House, and
perform your respective Duties to one another? And have you done so? The vows
of God are on you, and therefore you had need look to your selves, and consider
your ways.

(5) Consider, what Enjoyments and Communion with God you have had, since your
embodying together, and growing up into a Temple in the Lord: and what earnings
and improvements you have made of them? what growth in grace and increasing
with the increase of God? what have been the fruits of all, to the glory of
God, the profit of your own and others Souls?

(6) Consider, what esteem your Lord and King has of you, and what honors he
has conferred upon you? he has made you a House or Temple of Kings and
Priests, and he has set you near himself, Rev. 5.10. Ephesians. 2. You are the holy
Temple and Household of God, the Palace and Gallery of the great King; and you
are his Habitation and Garden, wherein he walks and dwells with great delight.
He honors you with his special Presence, (if you walk with and please him) and
he calls you by his own Name. You are his glory, joy and Crown, and he glories
in you. You are exceeding dear to him, and precious in his account, and you are
entrusted with his Richest Treasures. And therefore consider.

(7) What he may and does require of, and expect from you? you know, that where
much is given, much is required and expected; and you know how to apply it to
your selves.

(8) Consider what you shall be hereafter, and what is now preparing for you in
Heaven? You have your Race to run, and you have a great prize to win, 1 Cor. 9.
You have a Wilderenss to go through, and a Heavenly Canaan to possess. You are
now to fight the good Fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12. and you shall be Crowned in
the end, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Now you are to Sow in Tears, that you may Reap in Joy;
and now you are to sow and gather Fruit unto Eternal Life, Joh. 4.36. and
hereafter you shall Reap Life everlasting, Gal. 6.8. Your Head and King is gone
to Heaven to take possession for you, and make ready Mansions of Glory for your
Reception and Entertainment, Joh. 14.2, 3. He will not fail to come again in
glorious State and Triumph, to fetch you home unto himself, and to present you
spotless and glorious before his Father with exceeding joy. Because he lives,
namely, at his Fathers right hand in eternal glory, you shall live there also,
and you shall be ever with the Lord, Joh. 14.3, 19. Math. 25.32, 33, 34. 1
These. 4.16, 17. Ephesians. 5. Jude 24. You are now of the Church Militant; shortly
you shall be of, and with the Church Triumphant. You are entitled to an Eternal
Inheritance, and shortly you shall be put into the peaceable and joyful
possession of it, as soon as you are of full Age. Your Names are now enroled
among the general Assembly of Believers, and Church of the Firstborn, written
in Heaven, Heb. 12.23. But it will not be long e're you shall be taken in among
that Heavenly and Glorious Society, where you shall see and know as you are
known, 1 Cor. 13. 1 John 3. Oh that you would (now) apply these things unto
your selves, and rejoice in the faith and hope of them, 1 Pet. 1.8. Oh that you
would be looking for, and hastening to that blessed Hope, and glorious
Appearance of your great God and Savior Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.13. 2 Pet. 3.12.
Oh that you would be steadfast and unmovable, and always abounding in the work
of the Lord, for as much as your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1
Cor. 15. ult. Now is your working-time, hereafter you shall have a rewarding
and resting time. The one is very short, the other Eternal. Oh consider! how
fast your glass is running out, and how near you may be at your Journeys end?
how gray hairs are coming on you, and what a great change Death will shortly
make among you? The Lord Jesus is at work for you in Heaven, and you lie deep
in his heart and dearest Affections. He will send you many Love Letters by the
holy Spirit, that shall ravish and greatly rejoice your hearts; if you carry
your selves dutifully to, and walk pleasantly before him. He will open the
richest Treasures of his Love and Grace unto you, and cause his fountain of
pleasures to flow in upon your Souls; and after a little while, he will instate
you into, and give you an Eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. Oh, that I
might so run as to obtain! so Preach, Walk, and Minister unto you, as to make
you fat and flourishing in the House of God, and approve my self a faithful
Steward of the mysteries of God to you! Oh that you, who are Ruling Elders and
Deacons, and are honored with noble Works and Offices in his House, would
carefully, diligently, faithfully, and profitably mind your work, and do your
duty there; and that all the Members would mind and practice their works and
duties also! O what a happy and renowned Church would you (then) be! and what
peace you might obtain to your selves thereby? Oh! what advantages and
opportunities have you all to honor Christ, convince the World, profit your
own Souls, and be useful to one another? which I do once more entreat you to
consider and lay to heart, and so walk as to obtain the ends of your
Church State and privileges. And in order thereunto, pray read this Book over
and over again, and that with a single eye, and unprejudicate minds. Read, and
ponder wel^ what you read. Read, and pray for a Blessing from Heaven on your
hearts; and Read, that you may know and practice your Duties therein held
forth, not that you may find matters to cavil at, and except against. Receive
and use this Book as a Pledge and Testimony of my true and unfeigned Love and
Respects to you, and an evidence of my Cordial desires and intentions to
promote the everlasting welfare of your Souls. Brethren I call Heaven and Earth
to witness, That in all my ministrations to you, in all my writings and doings
for and with you, I do heartily, earnestly, and unfainedly seek and design your
present and eternal Good; your Peace and Unity, your Comfort and Holiness, your
Growth and Stability in the Grace and Truths of Christ; and that you may be a
Glorious Temple of God, and a Church of Renown for Fruitfulness and
Spirituality; for Peace, Concord, and true Holiness, Oh! how do I desire it,
and long to see it! And know, that what is wanting in my Ability to do you
Service, shall be made up in Diligence, Love, and Faithfulness, while I live.

And now Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among all them that are
Sanctified. And shall remain for ever,

Yours in the Lord Jesus, to Love and Serve to his power, S. F.

ERRATA.
Candid Reader,
Thou will find many faults committed by the Press, which I do entreat thy
Wisdom to Correct, and thy Charity to pardon, seeing they are not the Authors:
The chief are these,

PAge 17. line 2. read suffragia, p. 20. l. 19. f. either. r. other, p. 29. l.
34. f. now r. own, p. 41. l. 17. r. rooted, p. 44. l. 9. f. that r. yet, p. 45.
l. 5. f. if r. that, p. 63. l. 12. put out with, p. 64. r. Chapt. 4. p. 88. l.
35. r. gravity, p. 121. l. 18. r. and, p. 124. l. 34. f. them r. you, p. 145.
l. 31. r. back-bite, p. 150. l. 32. after in r. and, p. 177. l 8. r. have, p.
201. l. 1. r. handed, p. 226. put cause out of l. 7. and r. it in l. 9. p. 236.
l. 14. f. in r. about, before to r. is, p. 238. l. 6. f. and r. as, p. 243. l.
2. r. and, p. 249. l. 7. r. careless, p. 258. l. 1. r. and, p. 270. l. 1. f. to
r. for, p. 271. l. 35. f. but r. for, p. 308. l. 10. f. of r. and, p. 310. l.
11. after and put in that, p. 314. l. 23. r. the, l. 35. f. continued, r.
confirmed, p. 315. l. 19. r. to, p. 320. l. 9. r. smell.

A GOSPEL-CHVRCH: OR, GOD'S Holy Temple. A brief Discourse of A New Testament
CHURCH.
from Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21, 22. Now therefore ye are no more Strangers and
Foreigners, but fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God,
and are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets; Jesus Christ
himself being the chief Cornerstone: In whom all the building fitly framed
together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord: In whom you also are builded
together for an Habitation of God, through the Spirit.


OUr Apostle having showed the believing Ephesians what they were before their
Regeneration and Conversion to Christ, in the 1, 2, 3, 5, 11, 12. verses; he
proceeds to show them their present state and condition (with the efficient,
meritorious and instrumental causes thereof.) And first, he shows them what
they are not verse. 19. Now therefore ye are no more (as once you were)
Strangers and Foreigners. 2ly. What they now were, in what state and
condition. 1. You are (says he) fellow-Citizens, (and that) with the Saints.
2. And of the household or family of God. 3. You are in a happy and secure
state, for you are not built (says he) upon your own sandy foundation, but upon
the Rock of Ages: namely, 1. The Covenant of Grace, the Doctrine of the
Apostles and Prophets. 2. On Jesus Christ the chief Cornerstone, verse. 20. The
only foundation laid by God the Father and God the Son, which by Them was laid
before the world was, 1. Cor. 3.11. Math. 16.18. 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 1.2. and
which is sufficiently able to uphold, support and secure all that build and
bear themselves upon it.

In the Text, you have an account of the matter and form of a temple,
habitation, or a particular Church of God; together with the maker and builder
thereof. First, The matter or materials wherewith God builds him a house to
dwell in. 1. They are quickened and enlivened persons; verse. 5. 2. They are
Gods workmanship, recreated or regenerated in Christ Jesus unto good works,
verse. 10. 3. They are brought nigh to God by Christ his blood, verse. 13. 4.
They are built upon Christ Jesus and the Covenant of Grace, verse. 20. 5. They
are fellow-Citizens with the Saints and of the household of God: (that is, of
the Invisible Catholic Church of Christ) verse. 19. Secondly, The form. 1. They
are said to be fitly ^ramed or formed together, verse. 21. That is, these
materials are joined or glewed together into a house or body, (...). In quo
totum aedisicium congruenter coagmentatum: (Beza) you are congruously and
rightly laid into the building, and so become an excellent and comely fabric
or house of God. 2. They are said to be builded for a Habitation, viz. (...).
3. You have an account of the Former and builder, or the Agent employed in the
work of building a holy Temple or Church of God; and that is the Holy Ghost,
verse. 21. Now this he does, 1. By fitting and preparing materials: It is not
the work of men or Angels to make men fit matter for a Church or Temple of God,
but it is the work of the omnipotent Spirit. It is his work, and in the power
of his hand only to quicken the dead, to enlighten the blind; to translate men
out of the kingdom of Satan, and bring them into Christ's. 2. He does it, by
showing them their duty, and the way to it; by making their hearts willing, and
leading them in the way wherein they should go. 3. By giving them Laws and
Rules to walk by. 4. By stirring up his Ministers hearts and tongues to move
and persuade them to it. 4thly. We have here one of the great ends of the
Spirit his building of Churches, and that is for a habitation for God to dwell
in: As God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them. 2 Cor. 6.16.
Psalm. 132.14. Rev. 2.1.

And as these things are here expressed, so there are many things employed and
included, which are not expressed: as, the Laws, orders and ordinances of a house
of God: the duty of all Believers to join themselves to some Church of Christ,
as they have opportunity; and their duties there: as likewise, the profit and
advantage that will accrue to them in that state; and the privilege and honor
of it, and the glory and honor of Christ; and several things that I shall
discourse on in my proceedures. God does not set up Churches to stand empty and
Idle, only to have a name and to be gazed on; but he has instituted, appointed
and erected them for his Name, Honor and Glory in the world, and for the
Soul-profit and benefit of his people: that they should walk with him, and He
with them: that they should obey and honor him, and he supply and enrich them
with his grace; and for other glorious ends and purposes which shall be
discoursed of, the Lord assisting.

CHAP. I.
Of an Instituted Gospel Church, and the Extent thereof.
MY purpose and design is to discourse only of a particular instituted
Gospel Church: and in my proceedures, I shall not concern my self with any Men's
conceptions of a Church in any other sense; but keep closs to the subject or
Church under consideration, without meddling with the controversies that are
amongst learned men in their different apprehensions of Churches and their
concernments. For as I desire (and hope I may without offending any) to have
liberty to declare and practice my own light, faith and persuasion in these
things; so, I think it most reasonable to leave others to their own
persuasions, expressions and practice in these matters, without any Reflections.

It is the profit of such as I am concerned withal that I aim at; and I judge
my self obliged in duty to make known the whole will of God to those I have the
oversight of, according to my Light, Abilities, and Opportunities, and that by
all the regular ways and means I can find out and obtain the knowledge of: And
it is for them that I chiefly intend these Lines, although they may probably
fall into other men's hands.

Therefore, waving the thoughts of men, I shall proceed to acquaint you (who
shall read this discourse) with the will of God in this matter, so far as I
know and believe, and as may be profitable for you; which I shall do by way of
Question and Answer.

1. Quest. What is a true Instituted Gospel Church?

Answ. A true Instituted Gospel Church is, a Society or Congregation of persons
called out of the world, or their state of death, blindness and unbelief, by
the Word and Spirit of Christ; to the knowledge of Christ and his will, and
unto the Obedience of faith: or, A company of Believers united together in a
holy Band, by special and voluntary agreement; who by the grace and power of
Christ in their hearts under the conviction of their duty, do give up
themselves to the Lord, and to one another by the will of God; to live and walk
together as Saints, in love, peace, and in the constant celebration and
practice of all the Laws and worship of Christ; and in the observation of all
his Gospel Ordinances, in Obedience to his Holy Will, for his Glory and their
own Spiritual profit, Romans 1.5, 6. 2 Cor. 8.5. Heb. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 2.21,
22. 2 Cor. 4.6. 1 Pet. 2.9. Ephesians. 2.1.5. Col. 2.6. 2 These. 1.5.

This Church, so united and built, is called a Church, a House, a Temple,
Habitation of God and Jesus Christ; and they own it as their own, call it by
their own Names, and confirm it with their Presence in it. And as such a
Church, it is the proper seat and subject of all the Gospel Worship and
ordinances of Christ in the world, as will appear in the other Chapters; and
therefore I shall not insist on it here. Only take these sew hints of this
Church, along with you.

1. It is an Instituted Church of Jesus Christ; namely a Church of his own
appointment and erection; of his own making, and forming, according to his own
will and pleasure, by his own Authority and Approbation.

2. The materials or persons constituting this Church are said to be holy
persons, called out of their old worldly state of death, blindness and
unbelief, unto the knowledge (that is, the saving knowledge) of Christ and his
will, and unto the Obedience of Faith.

3. The Instruments that call them and work them for this state; and that is
the Word and Spirit of Christ.

4. The form of this Church; namely their own free, special and voluntary
agreement among themselves, giving themselves to the Lord (before each other)
and then to one another by the will of God: entering into a holy band or
Engagement, to live and walk together, (through divine assistance) in Love,
peace, and in the celebration and practice of all the Laws, worship and
ordinances of Christ in the Church; in obedience to his holy Will.

5. The ends of their so doing, namely, the Glory of Christ and their own
spiritual profit. These are some of the chiefest things to be observed in this
definition of an Instituted Gospel Church: All which I shall (through God's
help) prove and demonstrate hereafter, under several heads.

2. Quest. Of what Extent should an Instituted Gospel Church be; or, how many
persons should it consist of?

Answ. It should be formed of so many persons as may capacitate them to perform
all necessary-Church Acts, in pursuance of Christ's Laws and Rules, by which
the Society ought to walk: Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. and of no more than may
conveniently meet together in one place, for the celebration of all
Gospel Ordinances, and the Edification of the whole Church. Now, How many
persons (precisely) are requisite to make and constitute such a formal Church,
I cannot determine: but undoubtedly, there ought to be such a number, as may
orderly and regularly deal with and proceed against a delinquent-member,
according to that Rule in Mat. 18. And as the Church should consist of so many,
so it should have no more persons in it, then (as was said) may comfortably and
conveniently meet or assemble together for the worship of God, and profit of
the whole Church, in one place: and that (1.) because they are one congregation
by their own consent and agreement, and so ought not to devide and separate
themselves one from another in the worship and ordinances of God, but there (at
the same times) with one heart and one mouth, glorify God, Romans 15.6. (2)
Because the whole Church is bound at all times (excepting extraordinary cases)
to wait and attend on the administration of their own Officers, by virtue of
Christ's Law, Heb. 13.17. enjoining them so to do, and also by virtue of their
own engagement and relation they stand in to them. (3) For their own comfort
and edification, in the Church and ordinances of God. This is one of the great
ends of Churches, and the worship and ordinances of God there, namely, the
profit and edification of all, 1 Cor. 14.3, 31. But how can it be, unless they
can all hear, and join one with another, in the ordinances? (4) Because a
Church ought to observe ordinances, and worship God as a Church, and not as, or
under the notion of single and individual Believers; but, as an united Body and
society they must all at once, and in the same numerical duties and ordinances,
in one place, join together as with one Heart, Mouth, Mind and Judgment;
designing, aiming at, and carrying on the same holy Ends in all the worship of
God. Therefore a Church of Christ may not exceed such a number of members, as
may conveniently meet altogether in one place, 1 Cor. 5.4. But I shall not
enlarge on this head.

CHAP. II.
Showing that a particular Church of Believers is of divine Institution.
3. QUestion. Whether particular Churches of Believers be of divine
Institution; or whether they be of God.

Answ. They are appointed and Instituted of God, by Jesus Christ: which will
appear in or by these particulars.

First, The Scripture tells us, that the Spirit is the former and builder of
them. The Text is clear for it, in whom you also are builded together, for an
habitation of God, through the Spirit, verse. 22. These are the words of Christ
(by Paul) unto the particular congregational Church of the believing Ephesians,
as is clear in the 20 Chapter of the Acts, 27, 28. Rev. 2.1. Where the Lord
Jesus calls them a distinct Household, Church or Body of Saints, gathered or
joined together in his name, for his glory, the celebration of his worship,
ordinances and appointments: I say, Christ styles them a Church, and speaks to
them as a Church and distinct Body or house of Saints, from all other persons
or Churches whatsoever: and this Church was not formed and built by man, but by
the will, power, light and direction of the holy Ghost; and therefore the
particular congregational Church of Ephesus, is called the House of God, 1 Timothy
3.15. and the Church of the living God in the same verse. and the distinct
particular Churches, are called the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11.16. 2 These. 1.4.
2 Cor. 1.1. and the Churches of Christ, Romans 16.16. Act. 20.28. And the Lord
added to the particular Church at Jerusalem, such as should be saved: Act. 2.
vlt. The holy Spirit by the appointment and with the consent and Authority of
God the Father and Christ his Son, who is also God blessed for ever, Romans 9.5.
prepares materials for a Church, and then he joins them together, and makes
them a holy and glorious Temple or Church of God, Ephesians. 2.21, 22. and Chap.
5.27. So that we have enough to confirm this Truth, (viz.) that particular
Churches of Believers are of God, in this one particular, namely, Because God
himself is the former and builder of them, Mat. 16.18. Isa. 43.21.

Secondly, It further appears by the Lord's owning of them, promising and
vouchsafing his presence with them: which he would never do if they were not of
his Institution and appointment. But now the Lord declares his owning of, and
promises his presence and abode with them, as his Churches. Jesus Christ does
not only (by his Spirit) prepare and fit men for this state, build them up and
stamp his own and his Father's name upon them; but also he dwells in them, and
makes them his walks, palaces and places of his delight: Here (says he) will I
dwell, for I have desired it; Psalm. 135.14. yea these Churches are his chosen
and most pleasant habitations, Psalm. 132.13. where he rests, and reposes
himself, v, 14. and that for ever: not, to look on or visit them now and then,
but to rest himself, and dwell there for ever: not for a few days, but for
ever. And in Rev. 2.1. the Lord Jesus tells the Church at Ephesus, that he
walked in the midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks; which were the seven
distinct, particular, and congregational Churches, Rev. 1.20. and in the 2 Cor.
9.16. (says he) I will dwell in them and walk in them: that is, in the
particular Church at Corinth. Now, particular congregational Churches are of
God, or Men, but they cannot be of men's devising and setting up, because God
owns them and confirms them with his presence; desires, and chooses them for his
Rest, and dwells in them continually with delight and complacency; and
therefore they must be of God: for, the great and holy God will not own the
devices of men in and about his name and worship, but abhorrs and loathes them,
condemns and rejects them as filthy and abominable things, Lev. 10.2 Sam. 6.
and much less will he delight and rest in them.

Thirdly, That particular congregational-Churches of Believers are of divine
Institution, is further evinced and confirmed, by the constant and universal
practice of Believers in the Apostles days: for, no sooner were any Jews or
Gentiles converted to Christ, but as soon as they had opportunity, they joined
to, or congregated into, Churches. So Acts 2.41, 42. it is said, that they were
daily added to the Church, verse, 47. and Acts 5.14. This is evident in the
places where the Apostles preached amongst the Jews and Gentiles, and the
Gospel was received, that as soon as a number were converted, they congregated,
as being the first work they were to do after they had received Christ Jesus
the Lord. Col. 2.6. and ever after they were called Churches of Christ and
Temples of God; a multitude of them you read of in the Acts, Epistles of Paul,
and in the Revelation. And what they did therein, was by the doctrine and
advice of the Apostles, and according to what they taught them, from and in the
name of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.23. 2 Pet. 1. ult. Now, what they did and practiced
by Apostolical direction, and with the approbation of Jesus Christ, has the
binding force and power of a divine precept, 1 Cor. 11.1. Heb. 6.12. It was the
universal practice of the primitive Saints, to join themselves to some Church
of Christ; insomuch, that we can hardly find any one of them continuing out of
a Church State any time, after their conversion. We seldom read (in divine
histories) of any believers, but what had relation to one Church or other,
planted and watered by the Apostles or Evangelists, 1 Cor. 3.6. By which said
universal practice we may conclude, that particular Churches of Believers are
of Gods own Institution. For the Saints of God durst not do then, as many dare
do now, namely, to live in the willful neglect of so great a Duty and
privilege; the love and fear of God, and the will of Christ, easily persuaded
them to give up themselves unto Christ in universal obedience unto his whole
revealed will. And they could not congregate and join into Churches, nor abide
and worship God in them in faith and obedience unless they had known that what
they did therein, was the will of Christ, and their duty.

Fourthly, This Truth is further confirmed, by the Laws, Rules, and Orders,
that Jesus Christ has given to his Churches, as Churches, and not as to
individual and single Believers. Almost all the Epistles of Paul are written
for, and directed to Believers as inchurched and incorporated into bodies and
distinct congregations: and he directs his Epistles to them under the style and
Title of Churches, To the Church of God which is at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.2. and To
the Church of the Thessalonians, 1 These. 1.1. In which Epistles, are all the
Laws, Rules and Orders, for all the members of the Churches walking and
practice, contained: (which shall be afterward opened, when I come to speak of
the duties of Churches) and the Epistles of Paul to Timothy are written and
sent to him, to direct him how to behave himself in the House of God, and to
show him what his work and duty was in the Church: 1 Timothy 3, 14, 15. So other
Epistles are given to the Churches, that they might know how to behave
themselves in that state and Relation. There are Rules and Laws for their faith
and Love, and orders for their walkings and practices. There they are
Instructed and taught how to carry themselves toward God the Father, and Jesus
Christ their Head and Ruler, toward their Pastors and Teachers, and toward
one another as Fellow Members. There they have laid down their particular works
and duties toward God and Men, and showed how they should perform them; as
also, motives and encouragements to move and quicken them to diligence and
faithfulness in the practice of them. And although all sorts of duties are
there laid down and commanded, namely, such as respect other Relations and
Capacities, as of husband and wife, parents and children, etc. yet the chief
and great end, matter and scope of them, are intended for them as Believers in
a Church State and Relation, as will further appear when I come to speak of the
special and particular duties of Church Members, as such.

Now then, if God has given his Laws, Rules and Orders unto Churches, or to
Believers as in a Church state and condition, for their holy and regular
walking toward God and one another, as in that relation; then undoubtedly,
particular congregated Churches of Believers are of God, and of divine
Institution: For surely the holy and jealous God would never so far own and
privilege the devices and Institutions of men in matters that so nearly
concern his worship and Glory, as to dignify them with his holy Laws and
Ordinances; as he has done to his own Churches, that are of his own
Institution and appointment.

Fifthly, This Truth is further ratifyed and confirmed, by the Officers he has
given to them, for their well-being, ordering and managing of Church Affairs
and concernments, in his name, for his glory and their profit. These Officers
are specified and enumerated in Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.28. Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.1.
Tim. 5.17. and elsewhere; as in Acts 20.17, etc. And they are not given by men,
but, God: authorized and empowered by him to act and officiate as such in the
Church, 1 Cor. 12.28. God has set them in his Church. And Acts 20.28. (says
Paul to the Elders of the Church at Ephesus;) Take heed to your selves and to
the Church over which the holy Ghost has made you Overseers, or (...), ad
pascendam Ecclesiam Dei, to feed the Church of God: And in Ephesians. 4.11. he (that
is, Christ, verse. 10.) gave Pastors and Teachers, for the work of the Ministry,
verse. 11. And as they are given, authorized and sent of God, or set by him in
the Churches; so he has allotted and appointed them their several distinct
works and businesses there, and charged them to take heed and see they do it,
as he appoints: Acts 20.17, 18. Romans 12.7, 8. Heb. 13.17. 1 Timothy 5.17. and
takes special care about their qualifications for their work, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1.
yea, he gives and bestows Gifts and abilities, himself, on them, for the
Churches sakes, that they may be able ministers of the New Testament; not of
the letter only, but of the Spirit; and promises to be with them, himself, in
all their endeavors, to discharge their Trust, and perform their works, Ephesians.
4. Romans 12. Mat. 28. vlt. and will bless and prosper their labors to his Glory
and the Churches benefit.

Now assuredly, God would never have made such provisions, for Churches of
humane Invention, and setting up: he would never so far own the works of men's
hands, without his mind, Authority and appointment; and therefore seeing God
has provided and set Officers in them, appointed them their works, qualified
and fitted them by his Spirit; and promised to be with them; particular
Churches of Believers, must be of divine Institution: of God, and not of men.

Sixthly, This further appears, by the order and discipline Christ has
appointed, and required to be observed and practiced in his Churches. He has
appointed and given Officers unto them (as before-said), and to them has he
committed the use, exercise and power of the Keys, to open and shut his door;
to execute his Laws, and to manage his concernments and houshold-affairs
therein: namely, in his Name, and by the Authority he has given them for that
end and purpose; and he has charged the Churches to Obey and submit themselves
to them in the Lord, in the exercising of their power and Authority in his
name, to his Glory and the Churches profit, according to his direction, Heb.
13.7, 17. 1 These. 5.12. These Officers or Elders, have the power and Authority
of Christ in their hands, to correct offenders, to instruct, admonish and
reprove; and, in case of obstinacy, to cast them out, or remove them from their
membership in the Churches, (which the Church's suffrage) and upon Repentance
to receive them in again, Mat. 16.18, 19. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5.7, 12, 13. 2 Cor. 2.
The neglect of which, Christ reproves the Churches of Asia for, Rev. 2.14, 20.
And as the Churches have, by their Elders, the orders and discipline of Christ,
with power and Authority to use and exercise the same; so, each particular
Church has power to choose and appoint Officers for themselves, namely, such as
they judge the Lord Jesus has appointed and fitted for them: such as he offers
and presents to them and gives a place and interest in their hearts, Acts
14.23. Acts. 6.3. (...), Quumque ipis per susfragia creassent per singulas
Ecclesias (Beza); a Church may Authoritatively do that which Believers cannot
so do in a single and individual capacity, as Believers; but they may as a
congregated Body, and as an incorporated society, who have voluntarily given up
themselves, and engaged to one another, and to Jesus Christ by the Will of God,
to submit to, and walk together by the same Laws and Rules of the Society or
Corporation: These have not singly, but jointly as a Corporation, the power and
exercise of discipline. When ye are come together, deliver such a one to Satan,
in the Name of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.4. and if he will not hear thee, tell
it to the Church, etc. Mat. 16. So then if Christ has given Rules, laws and
power of order and discipline to particular congregated Churches of Believers,
then they are of divine Institution. And indeed spiritual discipline cannot
elsewhere be rightly exercised.

Seventhly, This Truth is further confirmed, by their names and honorable
Titles. God the Father, and Jesus Christ his Son, calls them by their own
names, and so owns them for their own Churches, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. Know ye not
that ye are the Temple of God; If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall
God destroy: for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are. So 2 Cor.
6.16. And as Jesus Christ honors them with the high style and Title of his
holy Temple, so also his Habitation, Ephesians. 2.22. and his Household, Ephesians. 2.19. as
also the Household of Faith, Gal. 6.10. And further he intitles them his
Churches, or the Churches of God, and Christ, and golden Candlesticks: Rev.
1.20. Romans 16.16. 1 Cor. 11.16. 2 These. 1.4. And that in allusion to the old
Temple, and Candlesticks thereof, which were of his own appointment. Moreover a
particular congregated Church of Believers, is called the House of God, 1 Timothy
3.5.15. Heb. 3.5, 6. and Christ his Walks, Rev. 2.1.

These were particular Congregational Churches that he thus owns, and honors
with such Titles; (viz) the particular Churches of Ephesus, Corinthians,
Thessalonians.

Eighthly, Believers as inchurched or incorporoted Bodies, are spoken to by
name, the great dis overies made of Gods purposes and intended works in the
latter days, are directed and given to them by the Spirit. Hence it is often
said in the Revelations; he that has an Ear let him hear, what the Spirit
says unto the Churches; which were distinct incorporated Bodies and Societies
of Believers, Rev 2.7, 17, 29. Rev. 3.6, 13, 22.

The Holy Ghost reveals to them, the rice, name, nature, and works of
Antichrist; what he should be, and what he should do; from whence he should
come, what he should do to the Churches, Temple and beloved City of God, and
what his end should be. There he describes the New Jerusalem, and Church State
of Gods People, and what he would do with and for them. There they are showed
largely and abundantly, the care and Love of Christ to his People, of the war
and conflicts that shall be between the Dragon, Beasts, Whore, false Prophet;
and Jesus Christ and his followers; as also the Issue of all: as you may find
in that book of the Revelations. All which shows, that particular Churches of
Believers are of God. For the Holy Spirit would never own the Inventions of men
so far as to make known to them such great things, as he there declares unto
the Churches.

Ninthly, If particular congregational Churches had not been of divine
Institution, but of men's devising; then surely Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit
would have sharply reproved them for their setting up their posts by God posts,
as he did the Jews, Ezekiel. 43.8. and as he reproved them for their miscarriages
in their Church State, Rev. 2.3. and the Corinthians and Galatians, etc. But we
never find them reproved or found fault withal for their being inchurched and
incorporated into distinct congregations, but they are often Commended for it,
Act. 2. Col. 2.5. For men to set up Churches, Temples and Houses, to be the
seats and subjects of Gods Ordinances and Worship, and then to entile the name
and Authority of Jesus Christ to them, had been a most high and presumptuous
wickedness indeed, and such as he would never have wincked at, but abhorred and
rejected them, as men's works. Therefore particular congregated Churches of
Believers are of God; for if they had not, he would undoubted have severely
reproved them for their so walking.

Tenthly, These congregational Churches must needs be of God; because without
such, the worship and ordinances of God cannot regularly and orderly be
observed and performed by men, in a solemn, fixed and public stated way and
manner; neither can the pastors and overseers of them rightly and comfortably
perform their work, and administer the ordinances of Christ to men. For all
that are privileged with Christ his Institutes, and profess to own him for
their Lord and Savior, ought to live under his Government and discipline, and
to subject themselves to all the orders and Appointments of Christ, and to own
and give up themselves to the guidance and Rule of such as he has set over
them; and their Teachers and Elders are to take care of, watch over and duly
administer to such as Christ has committed to their care, inspection and
charge: Now how can they do it unless they are fixed, formed and known Churches
or Congregations: unless they have mutually chosen each either to walk together
in their several places and capacities as a stated Church or Family of God? How
can they be overseers of Churches, and take care of them as such, as Christ
commands them, Act. 20.17, 28. unless they are first Churches, and declare
themselves to be such unto their Guides, that they may take the care and charge
of, and administer to them as Churches of Christ? If their officers are stated,
fixed officers to them, then they must be stated, fixed Churches to their
officers. How else shall they know who are their flocks, their care and charge,
and who are not? who they are bound to over-see and minister too, as their own
peculiar flocks? what they are to do, give or receive, to or from them? or how
to discharge their ministerial work unto them, and give an account of them unto
their Lord and Master; unless they are incorporated Societys, who have engaged
to walk together as Churches, in all Christs-Ordinances, and chosen them to
administer to them in the name of Christ, and by his Authority? And how can
they administer Church-Ordinances unto them as Church Officers unless they are,
and they own and approve of them as the Churches of Christ; and believe that
they are set there by Christ, as Church Officers, to officiate for him as such,
to his Churches as Churches? what Authority can they claim over them, unless
with their own mutual consent they acknowledge and own each other as Churches
and Officers of Christ, to and in them? How can they administer the Lords
Supper to them, authoritatively, require their attendance on their
administrations, and reprove their neglects: and how can their Teachers preach
to them with all Authority: How can they watch over and feed them and expect
their Love, Duty, and Subjection, and how can they exercise the power of the
Keys, and administer censures, to and amongst them, unless they are related to
one another as Officers and Churches? Ministers are charged to take care of
their own flocks, Act. 20.17, 28. and to behave themselves so and so in the
House of God committed to their Trust, 1 Timothy 3.5, 15. and such are pronounced
Blessed, Mat. 24, 25, 26, 27. Who then (says Christ) is a Faithful and Wise
Steward, or Servant, whom his Lord has made Ruler over his Household, to give
them meat in due Season? Blessed is that Servant, etc. These are some of the
many Reasons and demonstrations, that might be given, to show that particular
congregated Churches of Believers are of God and not of men. I might have added
as many more to evince and confirm it; but these may be sufficient to satisfy
the Faith and Consciences of, and encourage Believers in their walking in
Church fellowship, or congregating into distinct Churches and particular
Societies.

CHAP. III.
Of the matter of a Gospel Church, or the materials of Gods Holy Temple.
4. QUestion, What are the Materials of a House of God: or how should persons
be qualified for Church Fellowship: or who ought to be Church Members?

Ans. Only regenerate and converted Persons; such as are married to, and have
put on Christ: such as are savingly and powerfully enlightened and enlivened,
quickened and convinced of Sin, Righteousness and Judgment, Joh. 16.8, 9. 2
Cor. 5.5. Ephesians. 2.1, 5. Such as have choven Christ for their Lord and Savior,
and resigned and made over themselves to Christ, and received him upon his own
Terms, Col. 2.6. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Such only as are reconciled unto, and are in
favor with God; as are justified by Faith, sanctified by the Spirit, and set a
part for Holiness, and unto Living to God, and no more unto themselves. Such as
are the beloved of God, called (effectually) to be Saints, and have really and
sincerely taken upon them the Yoke of Christ Jesus. I say such persons, and
only such, does Jesus Christ account meet to be partakers of this privilege
and dignity, Col. 1.12. and to make Heavenly Places, Ephesians. 1.3. although men do
not certainly know them to be such, and by reason of their darkness and
fallable Judgments, they may receive and admit others into Churches, and unto
their privileges and immunities; yet in truth they have no right unto them,
and ought not to be there. For these Spiritual-Holy things are for, and only
for Spiritual and Holy Men; Heavenly places are for Heavenly Persons, and
Spiritual works for Spiritual Men. Now the Churches of Christ are the only
Holy, Spiritual and Heavenly places, and the Seats and Subjects of Holy and
Heavenly things. Christ prepares men by his Grace, Word and Spirit, to make
them fit and meet materials, and then he calls them to join together and become
a Spiritual House, for his Delight, Service and Glory, 1 Pet. 2.5. And
therefore such, and only such persons ought to be Members of a Church of
Christ; as will appear by these following particulars.

1. Because God threatens, and often declares his detestation and abhorrence of
others being there, and manifests his Indignation against them. As to the man
that came to the supper without the Wedding Garment, Matthew. 22.11, 12, 13. Then
said the King to his Servants, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into outer
Darkness, Isa. 33.14. The Sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has
surprised the Hypocrites; who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire; who
amongst us shall dwell with everlasting Burnings? And the five foolish Virgins,
Mat. 25. and the dreadful end of the Tares, Matthew. 13.38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43.
which were the Hypocrites that by the Devils instigation crept into the
Churches, as in the 2. to the Galatians 4. c. Matthew. 13.38, 39. It is true,
that such were and will be in the best Churches, let their Guides do all they
can to prevent it, because they cannot make an infallible Judgment of persons
states (as was said); and it is as certain, that they are Usurpers, and ought
not to be there* For although they are by Gods providence permitted to creep
in, yet be sure they are not there with his approbation and allowance: they are
not all Israel that are of Israel, Romans 9.6. for says God to all the
uncircumcized, What have you to do to take my Covenant into your mouth, seeing
you hate Instruction and cast my words behind your Back, (as all Hypocrites do)
Psalm. 50.16, 17. and Christ says, that such as will not have him to reign over
them (and Hypocrites be sure will not) shall be destroyed, Luke 19.27. Now
either the Churches of God should consist of Saints and sincere hearted
Believers, or of formal hypocritical professors, (as all are that are not
profane men, or real Saints) for all sober men will confess, that open
profane and debauched persons ought not to be accounted Church Members, while
they continue such: not of Hypocrites, because they are the most loathsome and
abominable persons in the sight of God, as may be seen at large-in the 23
chapt. of Matthew. from the 13. verse. to the 35. and Christ tells us, that
publicans and harlots should go into the Kingdom of God before them, Matthew.
21.31. And therefore they should and ought to be sincere-hearted Believers, and
none else. I do not say that Churches should account such for Hypocrites, and
reject them as such, because they do not certainly know them to be sincere
Saints who offer to join in fellowship with them: but I only say, that
Hypocrites have no right unto, neither ought they to press into the Holy
Churches of Christ: for all the New Testament Churches should consist only of
New Creatures, and real Members of Jesus Christ.

2. That all Church Members ought to be sincere hearted Believers, appears, by
the high Titles that the Lord Jesus gives unto the Members of his Churches in
the Scripture. He calls them not his Copper, but his Golden Candlesticks, Rev.
1.20. So David describes the Spouse of Christ, Psalm. 45.13. The Kings Daughter
is all glorious within: her clothing is of wrought Gold. So they are called
Saints; holy Brethren and Beloved; elect and called; dear Children of God, and
called into the fellowship of his Son, Romans 1.7. Col. 3.12. 2 These. 2.13. Ephesians.
5.1. Heb. 3.1. And the Apostle Paul tells the Church of the Thessalonians that
they were such to whom the Gospel came, not in word only, but also in power,
and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance: and hence he concludes, that they
were the Elect of God, 1 These. 1.4, 5. and he tells the Philippians, that God
had begun a good work in them, and would perfect it, and that not in a few, but
in all of them, chap. 1.5, 6. And the Church at Corinth, is called the Spouse
of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. and the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. 2 Cor. 6.16. as
also the Holy Churches of God, and of Christ, (as you heard before), and that
the Church of Ephesus was formed into a Holy Temple of God, and made his
Habitation by the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.21, 22. And the Church at Rome were the
Children of God, and joint heirs with Christ, Romans 8. And Peter says, that they
were lively stones, built up a Spiritual House, and a Holy Priesthood, 1 Pet.
2.5. and Paul tells the Ephesians, that they were the Lords Sealed ones, that
they had the Spirit of God, which had Sealed them up unto the Day of
Redemption, Ephesians. 1.13.4.30. Now these glorious things that are spoken of the
Cities or Churches of God, Psalm. 87.3. such honorable Titles belong not unto
mere formal professors, but only unto the real members of Christ; not unto
those that have a name only, but to such as are so indeed and in Truth.

3. A third Reason is taken from the ends of Churches, or the ends of God in
Instituting and appointing them: I Will name a few. 1. They are said to be built
by the Spirit for God, Ephesians. 2.21, 22. that is, for God to dwell in them and
walk in them: to rest and repose himself in them as in his holy Walks,
Gardens, houses and Temples, 2 Cor. 6.16. Rev 2.1. Psalm. 132.13, 14. For the
Lord has chisen Zion, he has desired it for his Habitation: this is my rest
for ever; here will I dwell, for I have desired it: (Oh! that all
Church Members would seriously mind this) and in Zeph. 3.16, 17. it is said: In
that day (speaking of Gospel Times) it shall be said to Jerusalem, fear thou
not: and unto Zion, let not thine hands be slack. The Lord thy God in the midst
of thee is mighty: he will save, he will rejoice over thee with Joy; he will
rest in his Love, he will Joy over thee with Singing. As men refresh
themselves, and delight to be in the House of their dear and hearty Friends and
Relations, so does God in his Churches, and as the Bridegroom rejoices over
his Bride, so does God over and in his own Churches, Isa. 62.5. Now then if
this be one of the holy ends of God, then surely they must be Churches of holy
persons not of Hypocrites, for God hates and abhors their presence and
services, Isa. 1.13. -- 16. Isa. 66.3. Prove. 15.8.

2. They are intended and erected by his Spirit and Authority for his Glory in
the World. When great Men build stetely Houses, it is for their honor and
Glory, and to distinguish themselves from others: so when God builds himself a
Spiritual House, it is for his Honor and Glory, to distinguish his People from
others. Solomon tells God, that he had built God a House to dwell in; and also
for his name, 1 Kings 8, 13, 19. (which he did by the Lords appointment and
direction) so God appoints and sets up particular Holy Temples by his Spirit,
for his name and Glory: that they should be to the praise of his glorious
Grace; and be the living Witnesses to his Name, Truths and Ways: that they
should be the Habitations of beauty and Glory: of fame and renown in the World,
and be the lights therefore; and that with one heart and mouth they should
glorify God, Romans 15.6. Golden Candlesticks in Princes Courts are set up for
their glory, as suitable to their state and dignity: so does God erect and set
up his Golden Candlesticks (the Churches of Believers) for his glory, as having
a resemblance of his state and dignity: and it is Gospel- holiness that
becomes his House fore ver, Psalm. 93.5. The Messengers of the Churches are said
to be the Glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8.23. God calls the Church of the Jews his
Glory, Isa. 46.13. and that because they were a Church of his own planting, and
a Covenant people, and for Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the little Remnant
sake of Believers that were amongst them, and who glorify him indeeed and in
Truth. God bestows his Grace, stamps his Image and infuses his Holiness into
men, to meeten them for his Temple and Temple-work; and then forms and sets
them up in his own beauty and Glory, in a Church State; that there, as a Body
compact, they may shine forth to his Glory and praise in the World. As many
glittering daimonds in a gold Ring, do shine more gloriously upon a man's hand,
than a hundred times so many more scattered up and down here and there, would
do: so a company of men which are made precious stones, fitted for a House of
God, being well and orderly set in a Church State or in a House of God, do
shine more gloriously there, than many more can do in a single and individual
capacity and standing alone, to the honor and glory of God.

3. God Institutes and builds Believers into Spiritual Houses, for his peoples
Spiritual profit and advantage: that God may there Impart his Loves, Cant.
7.12. and communicate his grace Truths and Counsels unto them, as to his avowed
and public household and family, Ephesians. 2.19. Christ Walks, and God the Father
Dwells there, and the Holy Spirit Speaks to them in an especial and frequent
manner, Rev. 2.1. 2 Cor. 6.16. Rev. 2.7.11, etc. And assuredly Jesus Christ
does not walk, nor God the Father dwell there empty handed, but distributes
plentifully of their Love and fullness. As great princes where they go and
lodge, they will give like themselves unto the household Servants: and much more
will God, as some can (and more may) experience. The Church-enjoyments of
serious holy men are the fairest, fullest, clearest and strongest of all they
have at any times; and that because God dwells there as in his holy and
delightful Temple, and walks there as in his pleasant Gardens and Walks: and
where God mostly Dwells and Walks, and takes most pleasure, there he imparts
most of his Love and Grace. It is said in 1 Kings 8.10, 11. That the Glory of
the Lord filled the House of the Lord, so that the Priest could not stand to
Minister, because the glorious presence of God was so exceeding great there;
and his distributions of Love and Grace to Solomon and other Saints, so many
and great, as that the people went home joyful and glad of Heart, verse. 66.
and in the 2 Chronicles. 7.16. says God (speaking of the Temple) mine Eyes and mine
Heart shall be there perpetually. Now if God did so now that material Temple
made of Wood and Stone, as to manifest his Glory so much there, impart so
richly of his Love and Grace to his people, and promised to dwell there
continually: how much more will he do so unto his New Testament Churches of
Believers. They shall find that prophetical promise made good to them, in Psalm.
102.16. When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his Glory.
Besides, a Church State, is a safe, as well as a thriving comfortable state:
for a Church of Christ rightly and duly formed and made up, is a Garden
enclosed, Cant. 4.12. a Spring shut up, a Fountain sealed (or barred): Whilst
Wood and Stones lie scattered abroad they may be stolen and carried away from
the owner, so while Believers walk apart, and lie up and down scatteringly,
they are in great danger of being seduced and lead away from Christ, with some
of the errors of the wicked, and so in measure full from the Truth of Christ, 2
Pet. 3.17. but now in a Church State, or formal House of God, they are safer
and more secure, because there they are hedged in with the discipline of
Christ: there they are watched over by their fellowmembers and by the Officers
of Christ, who are their overseers and watchmen: there they are as in the
orderly Instituted Family or household of Christ, in the way and walks of
Christ, and under the Eye and with the special presence of Christ. Whilst an
Army of Soldiers walk as single and individual Persons, scattered abroad, they
lie open to destruction by their Enemies; but when they are formed up, and walk
together under officers and military discipline, every one knowing his place
and keeping it, knowing the commands of their General, and observing them, they
are safe, and ready to defend themselves, and offend their Enemies. Particular
and rightly constituted Churches of Believers, are like an Army with Banners,
Cant. 6.4, 10. marching under the constant conduct of Jesus Christ their
Captain General, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Heb. 2.10.

4. They are formed and set up by Jesus Christ, to be the only Seats and
Subjects (as of his glorious presence) so of his Laws, Ordinances, Power and
Authority: that they might receive, observe and obey his Laws, declare before
all men their owning of him for their Lord, by their open and public
profession of, and subjection unto him as such, and that by their distinct and
singular following of him in incorporated Bodies, they might manifest to all
men that they are his Subjects and disciples; that they have chosen him for
their Lord and King, and his Law for their Rule and Obedience; that they are
not their own, but his, and that they have taken up in him as in their
happiness and eternal Blessedness, Col. 2.6. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. 2 Cor. 5.15. That
they are called out of the World, Joh. 15.19. and set apart by his Grace, for
himself, to live unto him; and that they have taken upon themselves his holy
Yoke, and the observation of all his Laws. So likewise, that his subjects might
with one mind and mouth together, present their service and homage unto him, as
their only Lord, Head and King. For Churches as Churches, or Believers walking
according to his appointment and direction in Churches, are capable of his holy
Supper, that glorious Pledge and Seal of his Love and Grace to them: it is
called the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16. and says
the Apostle to the particular congregated Church at Corinth, we being many, are
one Bread and one Body, verse. 17. That great ordinance of the Lords Supper is
not given to Believers as such only, but unto Believers as in a Church State,
or incorporated into a Body or Communion together: having the name, form and
order of a Church of Christ, and House of God.

The Israelites were not to permit any to Eat the passover until they became
members of their Church, Exodus 12.47, 48. Neither will Christ Jesus have any to
Eat his Supper out of a Church State, where and when they may have it in a
Church State. And (as was noted before) it is observable, that almost all the
principal Doctrines and Laws of the New Testament are given and directed unto
the Churches, or to Believers as inchurched; as also Teachers and Ruling Elders
are provided for, and given to the Churches: and there the Lord Jesus comes,
and observes how they are received and obeyed, Rev. 2.23.

5. God has Instituted and formed up Believers into Churches, that he may feed
and nourish them there, as his flocks: that he may water them as his Gardens,
support them as his Houses, order and govern them as his Familys and Households,
and that by his Spirit and Ministers. They are appointed to water them, 1 Cor.
3.6, 7. to feed and nourish them, Act. 20.17, 23. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. and to
rule, govern and take the oversight of them: Heb 13.7, 17. 1 These. 5.12. They
are to teach and instruct them, to warnand caution them: to reprove and exhort
them: to comfort them and build them up with the milk and strong meat of
Spiritual sound Doctrine, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. Heb. 5.12, 13, 14. and that by their
speaking unto them (as to their own flocks and peculiar Churches and charges,
from and under Christ) the Truths of Christ in Love, they may grow up into him
in all things, Ephesians. 4.15. So also for Believers regular and orderly walking,
Col. 2.5. God is a God of Order, and he loves to see his People walking orderly
and regularly, conforming themselves to his Laws and Government. And if earthly
Governors (by the Light of Nature) are careful to set up, and give unto their
Subjects, Laws and Orders for their regular and orderly walking, and love
greatly to see them so to walk under their Laws and Government, in their Cities
and politic Bodies; how much more careful is Jesus Christ to set his People in
order and method, and how pleasing and delightful must it needs be to Jesus
Christ, to see his Subjects walk orderly and regularly in his Cities, and
Spiritual Bodies, that are of his own appointment. These are some of the ends
of God, in instituting and erecting of Churches. Many other might be named and
insisted on, but that I may not exceed my Intentions.

Fourthly, The Churches of Jesus Christ must consist of new-Creatures and
sincerehearted Believers, Because they can and will answer and prosecute these
aforesaid and such like holy ends of God in and by his Churches. I say these
can and will because they are fitted and qualified (in measure) by the grace
and Spirit of Christ to aim at and effectually to prosecute these holy ends of
God; but so cannot others, neither would they, if they could, because they have
not the saving Knowledge, nor practical Wisdom of Christ in them: they are
strangers in Heart to Jesus Christ and the Power of Godlyness. All others at
the best have but a name to live, but are dead at the Root, Rev. 3.1. Matthew.
8.22. neither are they made a willing People, to join Issues and comply with
the holy ends of God. Psalm. 110.3. because God has not (by reason of their
wickedness and obstinacy) wrought in them, to will and to do, as he has in
his peculiar people; they are not yet wrought by God for this self same thing,
as real Saints are, Phil. 2.13. 2 Cor. 5.5. they are not renewed in the Spirit
of their minds, after the Image of Him that Created them, as Saints are, Col.
3.10. But now real and peculiar Believers are fitted and framed, molded and
pollished by the Holy Ghost, for their growing up into a holy Temple in the
Lord, Ephesians. 2.21. and so by the constant and promised guidance and conduct of
their living head, Jesus Christ, with their Spiritual qualifications, they are
enabled to answer and perform the great ends of God in erecting and building
them up in Churches. When a wise man builds a House, he will propound some ends
to himself in his so doing, and accordingly he will make use of, and lay in
such materials, and so form and build it, as that it may effectually answer his
ends, if he be able: Now if he build it with hay and stubble, or with rotten
wood, althought it may stand a while, yet be sure it will not stand long, nor
answer his ends. So the great master builder who is the Alsufficient and only
wise God, propounded great and holy ends to himself, in Instituting and
building of Churches and Temples: and these such, as should irrefrustrably be
obtained, notwithstanding all possible contingencies and Interveniencies
whatsoever for says God, my purpose shall stand and I will do all my pleasure,
Isa. 46.10. I will build Churches and Temples, for my Glory, to dwell in them,
and walk in them; to have peculiar Love, homage and service from them; to have
their free hearty and cheerful obedience and Respects: that I might enrich them
with my Grace, build them up in Faith and Godlyness, delight in an refresh my
self with them; make them a praise in the Earth, and Glorify the Houses of my
Glory: Isa. 60.7. That there I may set my ministry. and Officers, and that
among them I may set my Laws Rules and Ordinances. But hypocrites and
formalists will never answer nor prosecute these ends, as I found by experience
among the Old-Church-Members of the Jews: I cannot look for it, nor expect it
from them; for they are a people of an other Spirit; they slight my Grace and
reject my easy yoke: and therefore they shall not be honored with membership
in my Churches; in my particular Gosspel Churches; but if they creep in (as
many will do) I will loath and abhor their presence, I will root them up, cast
them out, and that into everlasting fire: for whatever they profess to be, yet
I know that they are not for my Turn and will stand me in no stead there, but
to provoke me to wrath with their Hypocrisy, and make fuel for the fire of my
Jealousy. Therefore my New-Testament-Churches shall be built only of Holy and
Spiritual materials, not of dead, but living Stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 2.1.5.
such as my Word and Spirit shall pollish and prepare for that work and Service,
that so by them I may obtain my Holy ends and carry on my great designs. I
know that my peculiar People will receive, submit unto, and obey my Laws; that
they will Love and honor me, that they will shine as lights in the World, and
that they will give me kind and cordial entertainment, and that will cleave to
and not forsake me. Therefore they shall be my Churches.

Fifthly, Because all the Laws, Ordinances and Works of Church Members are
holy, Spiritual and Heavenly. They are such as the natural Man understands not,
cannot discern what they are, and that because they are such, and they that are
not taught of God savingly and powerfully, to understand and make a Judgment of
them, do think and Judge of them carnally and vainly, 1 Cor. 2.9. -- end. But
Believers have them written in their Minds and Hearts beforehand; they have
them not without Book; I mean they have the same Laws of Christ written in the
books of their hearts, which they find in the Bible, Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10, 11.
Heb. 10.16. by which they are capacitated and (in some measure) enabled to
understand, receive, love and rightly obey, the Laws and Ordinances of Christ
without. The Laws, says Paul, is Spiritual, Romans 7. and a real sound Believer
is called a Spiritual Man, 1 Cor. 2. Their Laws are Holy and Spiritual: their
works and businesses in a Church are so likewise, John 4.23, 24 Ephesians. 5, 19.
Col. 3.16. and a particular congregated Church is called a Holy-Temple, and
Spiritual House, Ephesians. 2.21. 1 Pet. 2.5. They have a Holy God, (who is a Spirit)
to Serve and Worship, a Spiritual head to believe in and obey, and Holy and
Spiritual Work to do in their Churchstate; and therefore they had need be Holy
and Spiritual Persons, not without in profession only, but within in Truth.
Almost all the Laws and Ordinances of Christ are committed to them, and God
expects his principal and choicest Worship from his Churches, and they are all
above and beyond the reach of carnal Men. God first makes Spiritual Men, and
then with them he forms Spiritual Houses, and then as such, he gives them Holy
Laws and Ordinances, and spiritual work to do; and requires them to do it as
spiritual Persons and Churches. Christ does not form them into Churches as
reasonable men, but as good, Holy and Spiritual men, and suits his Laws to
their Capacities and States; as at first he framed and suited them to his Laws.
Christ calls his People into Churches, and incorporated congregated Bodies,
that they may as such receive and practice his spiritual and Holy Church Laws
and Ordinances, for his Glory and their good; and they are spiritual Laws and
Ordinances for spiritual men; and therefore only such should be Members of
Christ's Churches. For what shall Hypocrites do in the Holy spiritual Temples
and Churches of God, and what use will they make of Christ's Laws and Holy
Ordinances, but to defile and polute them, and eat and drink their own
Damnation? 1 Cor. 11.

Sixthly, Because the separation between Saints and Sinners begun here in this
Life, by the Lords calling men out of the World and forming them up into Holy
Temples for himself, is the beginning of that everlasting separation that shall
be in the great day of Christ his appearing, between the Sheep and the Goats;
Matthew. 25.31, 32, 41. or at least a shadow and resemblance of it; for the
comfort of the Saints and terror of the wicked. Says Christ hereafter I will
come in Glory, set upon my Throne, before me shall be gathered all nations, and
then will I separate them on from another, as a Shepherd divides this Sheep
from the Goats. 31, 32. and then I will say to the Sheep, come ye Blessed of my
Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you; and to the other, go ye Cursed
into everlasting sire: 34.41. Now because you will not believe me, nor what I
say in this matter, see what I have begun already in it; you see a few
separated from you in this world before your eyes, and formed up into
Holy-Temples for me: and this is not their own Work, or done of themselves, or
of their own minds and carnal apprehensions, or singular proud notions and
Opinions (as you falsely charge them) no, but this thing is done of me: I will
own it as my own Work; for I have commanded them to separate, and have called
them out from amongst you, who continue still in your Infidelity and
unregenerate States, John 15.19. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. 2 Timothy 3.5. and bid
them congregate together as my peculiar People, and become my Spiritual Houses
and Churches; and I have by my Spirit made them willing and moved their hearts
to do so, as you see them do: I own them, and will stand by them in it, for it
is not so much they that have separated themselves, as it is I my self that
have done it: and what they have done therein is in obedience unto me, and that
to convince you of the Truth of my Word for as certainly as you see these my
People now separated from you, so I will at the last day make an eternal
separation between them and you, unless you repent and become my People in
Season. And as it is intended for the conviction and terror of the wicked, so
also for the comfort and confirmation of Believers; for by the Lords separating
them from the World and building them up into Holy-Temples, he gives them a
notable pledge, and earnest of the assured and promised difference, of that
great and everlasting discrimination and separation, that shall be between them
and the wicked. Now good men are apt to think that (because all things seems to
happen alike to all as Solomon speaks) that there is no difference, or very
little between the wicked and them (although there is indeed a vast difference,
(upon many accounts) between them now) and so are apt to be discouraged in
their duties and walkings; but to cheer them up, and support their Spirits;
here says God is a very great distinguishing difference, and a pledge of a
greater between you and the World. I have called you out of the World, and
brought you near unto my Self: I have separated you already from the Lions and
Goats and made you my formal and public habitations and Holy-Temples; which
is your honor, privilege and dignity. I do not say that all, that are not of
such or such particular Churches, are Goats, or unbelievers, no, I cannot
entertain such a thought in my Heart; for as I think and fear, that there are
many hypocrites crept into Churches, so I believe that there are many gracious
Persons, which to their own loss, and Gods dishonor, do live out of
Church Fellowship: so their are others that would join with them, but cannot,
and others can, but will not. But I say, that Jesus Christ will have his
Churches made up of Saints only, and not of such as shall be everlastingly
separated, but of such as shall live and reign with Jesus Christ for evermore,
in the Church triumphant; and that for this reason (among others) because it
may comfort, and confirm the Saints in their hope and walking with God, and
convince and terrify the wicked.

Seventhly, The Churches ought to be built of Believers and regenerate persons,
because they may continue and stand fast in all Storms and Tempests, and hold
out unto the end, as being built upon the Rock Jesus Christ. For whatever
Church is builded upon the Sand and not upon the Lord Jesus, and by the
Authority and help of his Word and Spirit, will not stand long; because it
wants a bottom to bear up its weight. They must all be built upon the Rock and
chief Cornerstone; the foundation that God has laid, Matthew. 7.24, 25. 1 Cor.
3.11. Matthew. 16.18. the Lord Jesus tells us, that upon this Rock (that was
himself and the Truths that Peter had confessed) will I build my Church, and
the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.

Now Hypocrites are not built upon Christ, for if they were, that great promise
of perseverance would belong to them, and then the stony Ground would be in as
good and safe a condition. as the good Ground; but the contrary is apparent,
Matthew. 13. and Matthew. 7. But it is certain that they are not built on Christ by
faith, but are vocted in themselves, and build their vain hopes on a sandy
Foundation, Job. 8. Matthew. 7. and in many other Scriptures is manifest.
Therefore, if there persons are not built on Christ, their Church State is not,
but upon the Sand. Hence then it follows, that only sound Believers are built
on Christ and so they are the persons only that Christ will have built up into
Holy-Temples: because the Churches that Christ builds, (he himself says,) he
will build upon himself, that they may stand inpregnably in all weathers, and
that is only of such as are united unto him by Faith, and have chosen him for
their only Rock and Foundation, by a lively Faith, and not of such as do
secretly reject him.

Obj. If it be said, that, the Text in Matthew. 16. speaks of the invisible
Catholic Church.

I Answer, And I am speaking too of the Members of the Catholic Church; and
say, that all particular congregated Churches of Believers, are, or ought (to
be such as are united unto and built upon Christ by Faith; and that these
ought) to congregate and become Churches of God and none else; and that
according unto the directions of the Gospel of Christ: and then, if they be
indeed such, that promise in Matthew. belongs to them, and they shall be secured
by it, as well as the Catholic Church, although they be formed up (according
to Christ's his Institution) into particular congregational Churches. And
although (after they are thus formed) they may be broken (in a Sense) and
scattered, as the Church at Jerusalem was, Act. 8.1. yet they are still secured
by that promise, and have communion with each other in Faith. Love, tears and
Prayers: in Judgment and affection.

The Lord Jesus suffers in name and Glory by the fall of his Churches, or such
as pretend to be so: as he that built his house on the sand is called a foolish
man, by Spectators, Matthew. 7. and if Churches should be so built, either for
want of a good Foundation, or good matter, or wise and careful cementing and
forming up the materials; how greatly will the Wisdom and care of Christ
suffer, by the Tongues of his Enemies, because such Churches took upon
themselves the name of Christ and pretended to be his people and to walk by his
Laws. And as the fall of them will be a Reproach to Christ, so it will be
matter of grief and scandal to the weak Members of Christ also whether they
were in, or out of those Churches, thus fallen; and it will greatly harden the
hearts of Sinners against the good ways of God, and cause them to think that
there is no reality in his Gospel Religion; and therefore Christ cannot endure,
to see his houses fall to the ground, but takes care, that all that he builds
by his Word and Spirit, be so built and secured, as that the Gates of Hell
shall not overthrow them, nor by any means prevail against them, to destroy
them and that because they are founded, secured and supported by his promise
and Spirit.

I might produce many other Reasons for the proof and confirmation of this
Truth, that none but real Believers ought to be formed up into a Church of
Christ. As concerning the privileges and promises that belong to a Church of
Christ. There are many of them (which may be spoken of, on an other head) which
are two high and glorious for the Inglorious professing Hypocrities; and
therefore they must be entayled only on the true heirs of them, (viz.) the
living Members of Christ and Children of God. Hypocrites who refuse to have
Christ on his own Terms, and who prefer their Lusts before him, and their own
Righteousness, before Christ's, and daily make him a Liar, 1 John 5. have
nothing to do with them. There is a little Remnant called out of the World, to
whom they do only belong, and they, and only they, may claim them as their
own. Again, because only Believers are Christ's willing subjects, such as have
freely put their necks under his Yoke, and given up themselves in universal
obedience to him, and that have heartily chosen him for their Lord and
Governor, and his Laws for their Rule and practice But it is well known, that
all other men do reject him, and yield obedience unto the Devil and their
Lusts. They will have the Lord Jesus bow down to their Terms, but they will not
come up to his. They say as those in Joh. 6.60. this is a hard Yoke, who can
bear it: and therefore although we will profess him, that we will not have him
rule over us. And therefore he does not call them to partake of the Children of
the Kingdoms Bread, or to his true Subjects privileges and Blessings, whilst
they continue such. Moreover, only true Believers are Clean, and Pure, all
others are unclean: They are strangers to him and his People) unwashed and
uncircumcized in Ears and Hearts. They are not Justified nor Sanctified, nor
purged from their uncleanness by the blood of the Lamb: and therefore they may
not come near to, or touch the holy things of his Church, which are holy, pure
things, and sanctified unto the holy use of his enchurched-members. I would not
be tedious, and therefore shall wave all further consideration of this matter,
although I could multiply Reasons to prove, that only real true Believers
should be Church Members. But I shall speak a few words for the removing of an
objection advanced against this Truth, which is this. But we read of Tares in
the field, amongst the good wheat, good and bad fishes, caught in the neet of
the Gospel, and brought into the Kingdom, which is the Church of God; as also
many evil members in several of the Congregational Churches, mentioned in the
Scripture, and therefore Churches may consist of good and bad men.

All this may be true, and yet the Truth insisted on, not at all touched or
weakened thereby. It is true, if there were evil members in those Gospel
Churches, and they proved evil Members indeed, and great afflictions to blessed
Paul, and the good Members of them. But what then? ought they to have been
there, or were they known to be such indeed to the Apostles and other good men,
when they admitted them? were they there by Christ's call, and with his
approbation and allowance, although he permitted them to creep in among his
People? Now unless it can be proved that they ought to be there, that they
were admitted when known to be such, as afterward they appeared to be, that it
was their duty and privilege, while such, and that Christ approved there being
there: I say until that be proved by the word of God, we must conclude that
they were Usurpers and had nothing to do in the Churches of Christ, I do not
discourse of who were in the Churches, but who ought to be there: Not who
thought themselves worthy and crept in of their own accord, but who Christ
called there, and came in, in obedience to him. I am sure they were not welcome
to Christ or his People: the Apostles wishes such were Cut off: Gal. 5.12. and
exhorts Believers, to withdraw from them that walked disorderly: 2 These. 3.6.
and to turn away from them, 2 Timothy 3.5. to mark and avoid them, Romans 16.17. and
the Lord Jesus gives in charge to his Churches, that they prosecute his Laws
against disorderly Church Members, even to the casting of them out of the
Church, in case they repent not, Mat. 18.17. and threatens the evil Members of
the Churches of Sardis and Laodicea, severely, Rev. 3. and therefore surely, if
they were Hypocrites, he would not have found them there, to dishonor his name
and grieve his People, as they did.

And as for the instances of the Tares, and bad fishes brought into the
Kingdom of Heaven, no more can be said for the justifing them, in what they
did, than of the other, before minded and answered, and the same Answer will
refell these two likewise. But if you mind it, you will find that the Tares
there, if meant of Persons and not of doctrines (which is a question) are said
to be the Children of the wicked one, and he that sowed them was the Devil,
verse. 38, 39. So that these Tares, or Members, were not of Jesus Christ his
bringing there, but of the Devils; and who will say then that they ought to be
there? Will Jesus Christ have the Devils hand and help to enlarge his Church,
or will he accept and approve of such persons for his Church Members, to help
forward the building of his holy Temple, for the habitation of God, that are
chosen and sent by the Devil? As for others it is expressly said verse. 37. that
he that sows the good Seed, is the Son of Man: and in opposition thereunto,
it is said, his Enemy the Devil sowed Tares in the same field, which was
hurtful unto the good seed. Therefore (as I said before) that Hypocrites are
not called nor sent by Jesus Christ into Churches, but by the Devil: which is a
good Reason against their being there. And to what purpose are they there, but
to grattify the Devil and their own Lusts, to afflict and grieve (if not
corrupt) the good Seed, to dishonor Christ and increase their own misery.

As to the good and bad Fishes, there need no more be said concerning them,
then that Hypocrites and rotten hearted men will crowd into the Churches of
Christ, amongst his good People, but they ought not so to do, for they are not
called to come, because they are of Satan's Kingdom of darkness, and have no
part or portion with the true Children of God and heirs of his Kingdom. So
that I think there has been enough said as to that, namely, that none ought to
be Members of Christ's particular Churches, but real Believers. And now I should
proceed to speak of the form of a particular congregated Church of Christ, but
that I think it necessary to speak a little unto two Questions first.

5. Quest. What fitness or qualifications should Believers find in themselves
for their own satisfaction, before they enter into fellowship, and become
Church Members, or join themselves as members to some Church of Christ.

Answ. First they should have a well grounded hope of their Regeneration, or
new state in Christ, that they have seen their need of Christ; singled him out
(by grace) and chosen him upon his own Terms: that they have received a measure
of his anointings, Grace, Spirit, light and Life, and that they are accepted in
the Lord Jesus: that they have put off the Old Man, and put on the New, and are
renewed in measure, by the word and Spirit, after the Image of Christ. I say,
they should have at least, a well grounded hope. For many gracious hearts have
such a hope, that have no assurance; who hold their Title and claim to Christ
and Heaven, but had never the seal of it on their hearts; or if they ever had
it, they have by their own carelessness lost it; and so have only hope left. And
this indeed will hold their Souls in Life (by the Spirit) though not in comfort
and satisfaction: Heb. 6.19. and the Apostle tells such that they are saved by
hope, Romans 8.24. and that they are the Children of hope, which puts them upon
that great and Noble Work, of purifying themselves, as he is pure: 1 John 3.3.
and stirs them up, to perfect holiness in the fear of God: 2 Cor. 7.1. As
faith that precedes it, does, Act. 15.9.

This Hope is not a dead, but a lively hope: it is not idle but operative and
working; it is active and laborious in purging out of Lusts, and getting in of
Holiness and Grace, 1 Pet. 1.3. 1 John 3.3. as a sound special Faith is, Jam.
2.18. And the Apostle tells us; that it is an Anchor of the Soul, both sure and
steadfast, Heb. 6.19. so when God promises mercies unto his People, he tells
them, that he will give them a door of hope, Hos. 2.15. which hope is Christ in
them, Phil. 1.27. And therefore if you have this Hope, you are in a happy
State, and ought to join your selves unto some Church of Christ, give up your
selves in universal obedience to Christ, and wait in a house of God for his
Seal, and the full assurance of his love to your Souls. But more particularly
and briefly; I desire you to examine your selves, and see how you can answer
these few Interrogatories: try your selves effectually and thoroughly by them.

1. Can you say indeed, that you do seriously and heartily desire, choose and
endeavor, to see and be more deeply and powerfully convinced of your own
vileness, and sinfulness: of your own weakness and wretchedness, and of your
wants and nothingnesse? and that in order to your deep and Spiritual
humiliation and self debasing: that you may be more vile in your own eyes, and
Jesus Christ, and free grace more precious, high and honorable, more sweet and
desirable? that your hearts may be melted into Godly sorrow, and that you may
be moved thereby to abhor your selves, and repent in Dust and Ashes? Job.
42.5, 6.

2. Can you say that you do seriously and heartily desire, choose and endeavor
to believe in Christ, and to receive and accept him upon his own Terms? such as
you find in Mark. 8.34. Luke 14.26, 27, 28. and elsewhere. Do you so desire,
choose and endeavor to have him with his Yoke and Cross, Matthew. 11.28, 29. and
do you so Deny your selves of your sinful self, and righteous self, and worldly
self, and supposed able and powerful self; and all other carnal and Spiritual
selfs, that Christ may only be exalted; that you may be nothing in your
lustification and Salvation, but that Jesus Christ and free Grace, may be all,
and in all things? Col. 3.11. Phil. 3.7, 8. do you desire, choose and endeavor,
the having of Christ upon the hardest Terms, and do you desire, etc. that all
may go for Christ his Person, his Blood and Righteousness: his Grace, Love,
Life and Spirit: for the pardon of your sins and Justification of your Persons:
that you may be found in him, not having your own Righteousness, but the
Righteousness of Christ, by Faith? Phil. 3.9. and do you go and present your
selves naked, and as condemned Sinners to him, and to God the Father in and by
him, that you may be clothed with the Righteousness of Christ, and that God
may pardon, justify and accept you for his sake, only?

3. Do you seriously and heartily desire, choose and endeavor, to have Christ
Jesus for your Lord and Ruler too, Col. 2.6. that he may Rule in you and over
you, and that your Lusts and your selves, your Interests and your all may be
subject unto him, and be all at his command and disposal continually? Is Christ
the Lord as acceptable unto you, as Christ Jesus the Savior, and are you
willing to obey him, and subject to his Authority and Lordship, as well as to
be saved by him? Would you have him destroy your Lusts, make an end of Sin, and
bring all under his Obedience?

4. Do you seriously and heartily desire, choose and endeavor, never to sin
more, but to walk with God unto all well pleasing continually, Col. 1.10. and
do you pray earnestly, that God would work in you that which is wellpleasing in
his sight, Heb. 13.21. that you may in all your ways, honor and glorify him,
as the end of your living in this World, 2 Cor. 5.15. Would you indeed live to
the praise of his glorious Grace, and be an Ornament unto his Name and Gospel,
and would you be fruitful in every good Word and Work? Are these things the
Scope, aim and intendment of your hearts and Souls (in some good measure and
degree) daily, in duties and Ordinances, and at other times?

5. Do you seriously and heartily choose and desire communion with Christ, and
do you indeed and in truth, endeavor so as to obtain it, and keep it? do you
so seek for it in the way of Gospel obedience, and in observing your duty and
keeping Christ's commands, and do you prefer it before and above earthly, carnal
things? do your hearts breathe and pant after it, and are you willing to deny
self and carnal Interests to get it? Are you glad when you find it, and sad,
when by your own carelessness you lose it? does it (when obtained) quicken your
love to, and zeal for Christ; does it warm your hearts and cause them (for a
time) to run your race in Gospel obedience, cheerfully? does it lead you unto,
and lodge your hearts in Christ, and does it oblige and bind them faster unto
him, and does it stir you up to thankfulness?

6. Do you seriously, and heartily desire, choose and endeavor, to be filled
with Gospel sincerity toward God and men, and had you rather be sincere and
real hearted toward God, than seem to be so toward Men? had you much rather
have the Praise of God, than of men, and to be approved of by him, than
extolled by men? Is it your care, aim and endeavor, to carry your selves
sincerely before him, and to approve your selves unto him, under the fear and
conviction of his all seeing Eye? Is it the great thing you mind and aim at, in
your profession and practice; namely, sincerity and uprightness of Heart: do
you make conscience of drawing near to God with it, and to season every duty
with this divine Salt? do you indeed desire, choose and endeavor to be after
Gods own Heart (as David was) and Nathaniels indeed, in whom is no Guile,
although you cannot get clear, nor rid your selves of all Hypocrisy, as you
should? Is Integrity and uprightness of Heart in your Eye, resolutions and
Intentions, and is all Hypocrisy hateful and abominable unto you? and do you
love sincerity and labor after it indeed? Are you afraid of Hypocrisy, and do
you watch and strive against it, as against an Enemy to God and your own Souls,
and are you grieved indeed, when you find it in you?

7. Do you desire and choose Jesus Christ for the great object of your Love,
Delight and Joy; and do you find him to be so, in some Measure? do you desire
and endeavor to make him the object of your strongest and warmest affections,
and to love him Sincerely, Heartily, Spiritually, fervently and constantly; and
do you express your Love to him, by keeping his commandments, and doing the
things that are welpleasing in his sight? Joh. 14.15. 1 John 3.22. Are you
grieved and afflicted in Spirit, because you can love him no more, and do you
earnestly pray unto him to Circumcise your hearts to love him, Deuteronomy. 30.6. and
to Shed abroad his love into your hearts, by the Holy Ghost; that you may love
him as you should, Romans 5.5. Are you glad and do you rejoice when you find your
hearts Knit to him in love, and is it your trouble when it is otherwise with
you? does his Love and Lovelyness attract and draw your hearts to him, and does
the Love of Christ in your hearts, move and draw you to obey his commands? Is
it so indeed, do you find it so sometimes with you?

8. Is it the desire, choice and endeavor of your Hearts and Souls, to have
all sin purged out of your Hearts, and to have them filled with Christ, Grace,
Truth, and Holiness, and do you hate your sin, watch and arm against it and
endeavor to keep it under? do you indeed aim at, desire, labor and strive to
be holy in Heart and Life, and conformable unto Jesus Christ in all things? Are
your Lusts your heaviest Burdens and your greatest afflictions; and do you
intend and endeavor their utter ruin and destructions? will no degree or
measure of Grace satisfy you, but you must and will be perfect, to the utmost,
as Christ is? Are you so much concerned with Christ's honor and your Souls
holiness and happiness, as that you dare not knowingly sin against them for a
World, or do in word or deed, directly or indirectly by omision or commission,
that which may dishonor, grieve or wound them? Are these things so indeed?

9. Have you a measure of Spiritual knowledge, and discerning of Spiritual
things? do you a little understand the nature and concernments of a house of
God, and the work and duties, the privileges and enjoyments thereof, and what
you have to do there? have you studied and learnt these matters, and do you in
measure understand them, and can you make a right and competent Judgment of the
ends of God, in Instituting and erecting of Holy Temples, and Spiritual
Churches?

10. Do you intend, purpose and resolve in the light, Life and power of Christ,
to seek for and endeavor unfainedly to obtain and prosecute the ends of Church
fellowship, when you shall be accepted among them; and do you desire and aim at
the holy ends of God in desiring Communion with them? As (1) To enjoy God, and
hold communion with him in all his ordinances and appointments. (2) To worship
God there in Spirit and Truth, and give him your homage and service in his
house. (3) To show and declare your subjection and obedience unto him, and to
make a public and open profession of him before men. (4) To receive of his
Grace, to enrich your Souls with his fullness, and to be sealed by his Spirit
unto the day of your Redemption. (5) That you may walk orderly and beautifully,
and shine as Lights in the Churches, and in the world before Saints and
Sinners. (6) That you may be established in the Truth, live under the watch and
care of Christ's Ministers, and of fellow Members; that by their inspection and
faithful dealings with you, you may be kept from, and brought back from sin to
God, by their wise Reproofs and holy Instructions. (7) That you may yield up
your selves in Universal obedience unto Christ, and do all things whatsoever he
commands you; that you may have the right use and enjoyment of all your
purchased privileges, and be secured against the Gates of Hell? Are these, and
such like ends, in your minds and hearts, in your walking in Church Fellowship;
and can you find the forementioned mark or signs of Grace in you, in measure,
though not so clearly and fully as you would? Why then I may boldly and humbly
tell you, that you are fitted and qualified for Church membership, that you are
called and invited into the house and Temple of God, and that you are
indispensibly bound to answer to the call of God, and say, behold Lord, we come
unto thee, and will freely without delay; thankfully without grudying; humbly
without pride, with mourning and rejoicing, enter into thy Courts; join with
thy Churches, and grow into a holy Temple to thy Praise and Honor. We will no
longer slight our great privileges, neglect our great and indispensible
Duties, or walk disorderly, as we have done: but we do now willingly come and
offer our selves unto thee, and to enter into a solemn engagement, to be thine,
to walk in all thy ways, and do the things that please thee.

I say, that Church privileges are yours; the doors of Gods house stand open
for you; Christ stands at the door and waits for you: he invites you to come
in, sit down at his Table, and you shall be most freely and heartily welcome to
your Lord, and his people. And know, that it is your unavoidable and
indispensible duty to enter into his house.

5. Quest. Ought a Church of Christ, especially the Guides thereof, to let in
any that profess the name and ways of Jesus Christ; (and offer themselves
unto them) or ought they not to try and prove them first, whether they are
rightly qualified by the grace of Christ, for full membership with his people:
if so, then what are the qualifications they should look for, and find in them,
for their own satisfaction, which they admit into the holy Temple of God?

Answ. 1. It is certain, that all that profess the name of Christ and his
ways, ought not, may not be admitted into the Lords holy Temples; because
many, if not the most of them, are very Ignorant of Christ and his ways, and
notorious scandalous in their Lives: as sad and woeful experience shows.

2. It has been (I think) sufficiently proved before, that not any but
real-hearted sound Believers, are fit materials for a house and holy Temple of
God; and if so, then a Church, or the Guides thereof, may not admit any into
it, but such only as they judge by the word of God, and their own charitable
discretion, are such indeed; although it is possible they may be Hypocrites: but
they may not admit them if they groundedly know, or think them to be such. For
if they should admit such against their knowledge, they betray their Trusts,
and defile Christ's holy Temple, by taking in such persons as they know, or
ought to know, Christ would not have there. And that they ought to try and
prove persons, that they may know their worthiness and fitness before they
admit them in, is clear, in Acts 9.26. and because Christ has committed the
keys of his Temple unto them, to take in, and put out, according to his will
and Appointment. Moreover he blames Some for suffering Tares (if meant of
persons) to be sown in his Kingdom, and not endeavoring to prevent and keep
them out, Matthew. 13.25. says he, while men Slept, the Enemy came and sowed
Tares: that is, while such as should have kept the Temple Gates shut against
them, to have kept them out, were negligent and careless of their duty: for
they should have done all they could to have kept out the Devils seed; for what
agreement has the Seed of the Serpent with the Seed of the Woman, and the
Rebels with the true Subjects of Christ? or as Paul says, what concord has
Christ with Belial? 2 Cor. 6.14.

3. As to satisfying qualifications in persons desiring admission into
Churches: I say, that when they have been well tried and are found (in the
Judgment of Charity) such as Christ has received and competently qualifyed for
Church membership, they ought to receive them in the Lord, Romans 14.1. Romans 15.7.

1. If they can make forth, and declare unto the Church, their (at least
seemingly) Regeneration, Conversion, Repentance and Faith in Christ: their
knowledge of Christ and his ways, Laws and Ordinances; of their lost and
perishing state in Sin, and by reason of it, and their sincere desires and
Resolutions to become the Lords, and to walk with him unto all well-pleasing in
all his ways.

2. If they are sound in the Faith of the Gospel, I mean in the chief and
principal Doctrines and Truths thereof; although they may be ignorant of, or
err in lesser matters. If they have some distinct knowledge, and Faith
concerning these, and other such Truths and matters contained in the word of
God. As of the state and condition wherein man was first created. How he lost
that holy and blessed State, and the misery he brought himself, and all his
posterity into thereby. Concerning themselves, that they are by nature Children
of wrath, dead in Sins and Trespasses, and condemned to eternal Death. That
they are Enemies to, and at enmity with God. That they have neither will nor
power by nature, either to will or do that which they ought, and is pleasing to
God. That they have forsaken God, and are under the Curse of the Law, and that
they are the Children, Subjects and Servants of the Devil, World and their own
Lusts. That God left not all men in this State and condition, but provided an
all-sufficient Remedy, namely, Jesus Christ, and that by an Everlasting
Covenant, entered into with Christ, in the behalf of men, before the Foundation
of the World, Tit. 1.2. 2 Timothy 1.9, Prove. 8. and that in pursuance thereof, he
elected and gave some to Christ, that he might save them, and that of his mere
Grace and Love, Joh. 6.37, 40. Joh. 10. Joh. 17. Ephesians. 2.4. That God the Father
gave and set his Son, the second person in the Trinity, to mediate peace
between God and Men, and to reconcile men to God, by his active and passive
Obedience. That Jesus Christ gave himself, and became a propitiation for their
Sins. That he assumed our nature, and took it up into a personal Union with
himself, whereby there are two natures in one Person, by which he was made
capable of his Mediatorship. That he being God-man in one Person, took upon
himself our guilt and punishment: obeyed the whole Law of God, that men had
broken, and did always do the things that pleased God. That when he had
finished his active obedience, he became obedient unto the death of the Cross,
to the wrath of God, and curse of the Law, Gal. 3.12. Phil. 2. That he really
dyed and was buried, lay in the Grave, and rose again the third day, and after
forty days, he went up into Heaven, and sat down on the right Hand of God, and
that he will come again to Judge the Quick and Dead. That he is King, Priest,
and Prophet. A King to give Laws unto men, and command their obedience to them:
to rule and Govern his Subjects, and to reward the obedient and punish the
disobedient. That all power in Heaven and Earth, is committed unto him, and
that he is coequally and coeternally God with the Father and holy Spirit. As a
high priest he dyed and made Atonement for the Sins of his People, and sits in
Heaven to make Intercession, and appear in the presence of God for them, Heb.
7.25.9.24. That there are three persons in the Godhead, but one God. That the
Holy Ghost is eternal God, was sent into the World, and came from the Father
and Son, for the elect sake, that it is he that regenerates Persons, works
effectually in their Hearts, applies Jesus Christ and all his benefits to men,
and savingly Convinces his Elect of Sin, Right, ousness and Judgment, Joh,
3.5. Joh. 16.1, 8.13, 14, 15. That all that rightly Believe in Christ shall be
saved, but those that believe not shall be damned, and that all that believe in
Christ, must be careful to do good Works. That Believers are made righteous
with the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, and that they have none of their own to
commend them unto God. That God has made Jesus Christ unto his chosen,
Righteousness, wisdom, sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. and that
they are made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. ult. That God imputed
their sins to Christ, and imputes the blood and Righteousness of Christ to
them; and that they are justified thereby, and not by inherent holiness and
Righteousness. That God Loves, Pardons, Justifyes and Saves men Freely,
without any respect to their good Works, as any cause thereof, but all the
moving cause (without himself) is Jesus Christ and his mediation. That the
Ground and reason of their obedience and doing Good works, is the revealed will
and pleasure of Christ commanding them, and the ends of them are to express
their thankfulness to God, for his Grace and Love: to please and honor Him: to
meet with God and enjoy communion with him: to receive of his Grace and the
good of many promises; To shine as lights in the World and be useful unto men:
to declare whose and what they are, and to lie up for a reward in another
World: to keep their Lusts under and their graces in use and exercise; and to
manifest their Respect and Subjection to Jesus Christ, his Authority and Law.
That the Law for the matter of it, as qualified by Christ, is the Rule and Law
of all obedience; and that all are bound to yield obedience and subjection to
it. That there shall be a Resurrection of the just and unjust. That
Regeneration is absolutely necessary to Salvation, and that without it none can
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Joh. 2.3, 5, 7. That the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament contain and hold forth unto men the whole revealed will
of God, and are sufficient to make the man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished
to every good Work, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. and that whatsoever you are to believe and
do, is contained therein, and that it is the ground of their Faith, Hope and
Practice. That Jesus Christ has instituted and appointed many Ordinances of
Worship, for his own Glory and his Peoples profit, and that all are bound to
observe, and wait on God in them. That all persons are indispensibly bound to
mind and carefully to observe the principal manner and end of all their duties,
and to see that they be right, holy and Spiritual indeed, and not please
themselves with the matter of duty without them. That no men can serve God, or
do any acceptable work unto him, until they are regenerate and put into a state
of Grace. These are some of the matters of Faith, that they should rightly (in
measure) understand and believe, that are admitted into full membership in the
Churches of Christ. And these and other Truths, must not be notionally, lightly
and in the general known and believed, but heartily, powerfully and
particularly, not for others, but themselves, or else their faith and knowledge
will no way profit their Souls to Salvation.

3. They must be qualified also with blameless conversations. Their
Conversations must become the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. or else they are not meet for
membership with Gospel-Churches. Carnal walkings will not suit spiritual
Temples. For they will greatly pollute and defile them; stain and darken their
beauty and Glory. Therefore they must not be brawlers or contentious Persons:
they must not be coveteous and worldly minded; vain and frothy Persons. They
must not be froward and peevish Persons; neither must, or may they be
Defrauders, or such as detain others dues carelessy from them: nor such as
slight the worship of God in their Families, or are careless of Governing, and
educating them in good manners, and the things of God. They may not be such, as
are known to neglect duties and ordinances in their times and seasons, or to
have vicious families through their neglects: nor any other such kind of
persons, whose stinking Spirits and conversations, are odious to God and his
People. And therefore whatever their profession be, they may not be accepted or
received into the holy Temples of God, until they have repented, of these or
any other hateful and scandalous evil, in their carriages and walkings.

4. If they are such as have chosen the Lord Jesus Christ for their King and
head; given up and made over themselves, to Jesus Christ, to live in him and to
him: have singled him out and set him apart (as it were) to be the object of
their trust; Love and delight, of their service and obedience. If they have
chosen and closed up with him upon his own Terms (as they hope), renounceing
and rejecting all their own Righteousness, worthynesse, Interests, and
sufficiency, and chosen and appropriated him to themselves, for their
Righteousness, worthynesse, portion and sufficiency; upon the sight and
conviction of the nothingness, emptiness and insufficiency of their own; and
with a heart satisfied with persuasion of the lovelynesse, fulness, and
sufficiency of Christ's.

5. And if all this be seriously, humbly, self-debasingly and heartily done, so
far as Men may Judge? Is it done, or do they make known the dealings of God
with their Souls, and their faith in Christ, in such a manner, and (at least
seemingly) with such a Spirit, and with the sense and feeling of what they
declare? you may also be much helped in making a right Judgment of them,
whether they are sent of God, as fitted by him for Church membership, by the
ends they propound unto themselves, and declare unto you, in desiring
membership with you. If they do seriously profess that what they do, is in
obedience to the will and (as they judge) the call of Christ, as their
indispensible duty, and that they dare not live any longer in the neglect of
the Church-ordinances of Christ. That they join in fellowship to meet with and
enjoy God; to receive of his fullness, to fit and enable them to the
performance of all duties, and conform their hearts and lives to the will of
God in all things: and other ends before named. To which they do seriously bind
themselves to God to perform and prosecute, as also to walk and carry
themselves in his Church, according to the will of God, through the Grace of
Christ. I say such may undoubtedly be accounted worthy Members, and be received
in as such.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Formal cause of a Congregational Gospel Church.
6. QUest. What is the formalis ratio; or formal cause of a particular Church
of Christ? or how, and by what means should Believers and fit materials be
formed up, and become a beautiful formal House or Temple of God, for him to
dwell in?

Answ. First, it is certain (in experience) that every house consists of matter
and form, and as men cannot have houses to dwell in, without matter and form,
or materials formed up, and laid together in order by the Art of Men, so cannot
God (properly) have a Spiritual house without matter and form. God alludes to
men's houses, and the old Jewish Temple, when he calls and styles his Gospel
Churches, his houses and Temples; so likewise, Cities and Corporations, that
are of men's forming: and we all know, that a great number of materials
scattered abroad, lying here and there, make not a house, although they are
well fitted and framed for a house, but it is the orderly forming them up
together that makes a house. David provided many excellent materials to build
God a house, yet says God, thou shall not build it, but Solomon thy Son shall:
and it was not a house until Solomon's days; he made the house of David's
materials. So a Company, or great number of Believers scattered up and down
here and there, make not a Gospel Church, or holy Temple of God, how holy and
excellent soever they are; no more than the materials for the Temple, made a
Temple in David's days: It is contrary to every man's reason and experience to
imagine it. Neither are a number of Believers meeting occasionally together for
the celebration of some Ordinances (though often) therefore a Church, although
they know and love each other, and are satisfied of the good states of each
other: Neither does their living together within the bounds or limits of a
Parish make them a Church, nor all of them together: because they want the
constitutive cause, or (formalis ratio) of a Church or House of God. Hence says
the Text in allusion unto material houses, and the Jewish Temple, which was
once the place of the special worship and presence of God, Deuteronomy. 12.5, 11. 2 Chronicles. 7.15, 16. Ye are built and fitly framed, for a habitation of God, and
being so framed, and that not by man, but the Spirit, ye grow into a Holy
Temple in the Lord. And the Church of Corinth, was so built into a Holy-Temple,
1 Cor. 3.16, 17. 2 Cor. 6.16. Now if a number of company of Believers dwelling
near together, as in Cities usually they do, and their occasional meeting
together to worship God in some Ordinances, did make them a formal house of
God; what need of building them up into a house? and it is a matter of great
weight and moment to me, what the Apostle says in the Text, (last verse.)
concerning the holy Spirit, namely, that he should be the great Agent and doer
of it; which clearly shows, that it is a matter of very great concernment, with
respect to God and Believers, to have them well and orderly formed together
into a Church, House or Temple of God: for else the holy Spirit would never
thus appropriate it, and the whole of it unto himself, as being only able to do
it, as his own proper work; it being too great for men and Angels to do, but
from and by him. And I think if it were so light and inconsiderable a matter as
some would have it, it would have been a great dishonor, rather than an honor
to the holy Ghost, to have entitled himself to it, and have taken it upon
himself, as the sole cause thereof.

And as the Jewish Temple was so to be built and formed, as that it might
continue in its beauty and glory, so undoubtedly ought the Lords Spiritual
Temples now: not for a few days, but for ever: for otherwise they will be
rather like the Israelites Tents and Tabernacle in the wilderness, transcient
and removing from place to place, while they were Journeying toward their
rest; but when they were settled in their Land, then they were to have a fixed
Temple to meet God in: and so the Apostle speaking to and of the particular
congregated Church of Ephesus, alludes unto the Temple of God at Jerusalem, as
a fixed settled place of Gods worship; when he says, they are a holy Temple and
habitation of God. Now if persons occasionally meeting together for the worship
of God, make a Gospel Church without any more ado, then they may be here to
Day, and gone to Morrow; In such a place was a Church and Temple of God
Yesterday, but none to Day; for they are not fixed, but transcient: they are no
more bound to one another, with whom they sometimes walked, than to others of
Gods People, which they never saw till to Day: And if they have a mind to do
so, they may go to five or ten several places to Morrow, and five take up with
one Minister, and ten with another, etc. for a Week, Month or Year, as they
please; if they be not formed and builded together, and bound fast together, as
a House, Temple or Family under the rule, Inspection, and teaching of fixed
stated Officers. For either they belong to one fixed household and Family, or to
none at all; they have their own Officers or none at all: for if they are as a
Common, without any bounds or property, as they must be, if not fixed and tied
some where, how many absurdities will unavoidably follow? As first, while they
are in this moving and wandering condition, they are not a House or Temple of
God, but scattered Stones and Timber, and so cannot bear the name and honor of
a Holy Temple and Church of God. 2. They cannot whilst in such a condition, be
called, owned or accounted a Holy Church and Temple of God, either by God or
Men. 3. Neither shall they have, neither indeed can they expect or look for
Church-blessings and privileges, or claim the Good of the promises made to
Saints as a formed, fixed Temple or House of God, as that God should dwell and
walk with and amongst them, as he has promised to do in his Churches and
Temples, 2 Cor. 6.16. Rev. 2.1. Ephesians. 2.22. Neither can they orderly participate
of the Lords Supper, for that Ordinance belongs to the fixed households of God,
not to scattered Saints occasionally meeting together, as Saints only, without
any tie or obligation one to another, and to their Ministers, that should
Minister it unto them; these and other privileges they cannot claim while they
walk irregularly and disorderly. 4. They make the ordinance and Institution of
particular Churches null and void, and of no force and virtue at all; and so
Christ has Instituted and appointed them in vain, that they are of no use,
profit or concernment unto Saints. For it will inevitably follow (I think) that
in case their loose walkings, without any fixed order or obligation on each
other, to live together as a distinct household or Family of God, be the
condition wherein they should live and walk; that then they have found out a
better way to live and walk in, for the glory of God, and their own profit,
than Jesus Christ has done, and so they do practically control him, and in
effect say, that they are wiser than Christ, the Wisdom of God; for they have
found out a more pleasing and profitable way for themselves than Christ
appointed and instituted for them; so that Jesus Christ and the holy Ghost,
might have spared their pains in that matter; and so the Institution, and the
Love, Wisdom, care and Authority of Christ in that case, are all thrown down
to the ground. 5. There can be no Discipline, orderly or profitably exercised
amongst Believers, while in an unchurched state and condition. For how can
offended persons after the first and Second Admonition, tell the Church of an
offending person his Sin and obstinacy, and of their dealings with him to bring
him to Repentance, as commanded, Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17. if there be no fixed
Church to which they do belong? and how can the cause be heard, and the
offender dealt withal, according to that charge, by the Church, when there is
none? What power have any Believers one over another but by their mutual
consent, and engagement one to another, to give and take Reproofs and
Admonitions, to and of one another? or how can they call Offenders to an
account, and require their attendance and subjection to their executing the
Laws of Christ upon them, unless they are a formed Body, and by virtue of
their joint Relation, not as Believers only, but as united and engaged
Believers to one another in that Society? The Rulers of a Corporation may not
exercise Authority, or execute their Corporation Laws on such persons as have
no Relation to them, although they are the Kings subjects as well as those that
are incorporated: Neither may a thousand persons in a place exercise
Jurisdiction over each other, because they live and often converse together:
Neither have many Believers such power over each other, while they walk as so
many single and individual persons, without a Church-relation to one another,
as they might have in a Church-relation, as the forementioned Text evinces.
Besides, (6.) The officers or Ministers of Christ will not be able to discharge
their work and duty unto them, while they walk loosely and disorderly.

For how can they watch and feed them as their own particular Flocks and
charge, unless there be a fixed Relation between them, and they know where to
find them? which they cannot do, unless their flocks be tied to them, and have
mutually chosen each other, (as was said before) the officers are to administer
in the name of Christ unto them, in an especial manner; and they are to wait
on, and submit to their regular ministration. Church Officers must officiate in
the Church, and all must know and work within their own bounds, and to their
own charge. So the Elders of the particular congregated Church at Ephesus were
charged to feed and watch over that particular Church, as their own peculiar
flock and charge, Acts 20.17, 28. and so were the several Angels or Officers of
these other Churches, mentioned in the Revelations, all which are called
Churches, which had matter and form. And besides these evil consequences, there
are many other that I could name, if it were needful, and time would permit,
which would sufficiently evince the Truth pleaded for.

Now I shall proceed to show how Believers should (by the Holy Ghost) form up
themselves into a Church State, or Temple of God, for his Glory and their own
profit and Spiritual welfare; or what the form of a Church is, and wherein it
lies. Show them the form of the House, and the fashion of it, and the goings
out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the
Laws thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, Ezekiel. 43.11. First, the persons
intending to join themselves together, and to become a Church or Temple of God,
for his Name and Glory, and the Spiritual good of their own Souls, and for the
orderly celebration of all the Lords appointments and worship in a Church; they
should be satisfied in each others fitness, that they are such as Jesus Christ
has received, Romans 15.16. and Regenerated, Joh. 3.3. wrought and made ready
for it 2 Cor. 5.5. that they are united to Christ by Faith, and sanctified to
his use; Members of Christ, and heirs of the Kingdom. I say, they should be
satisfied in a charitable Judgment, that they are such; that so they may take
each other, and have their hearts kint to one another in Spiritual real Love,
as such; and so have confidence in and of each other, that they will live
together, as such, in their Church State. God would not have an Ox and an Ass
draw together in ore Yoke, neither will he have visible Saints and Sinners join
together and build him a Gospel Church, or holy Temple to dwell in. What have
the uncircumcized to do in the Lords Holy Temple, with the circumcized? If Gods
house must be a holy Temple, yea holiness to God, Isa. 63.15. then it must
consist of, and be formed of holy persons; for unclean and unholy persons
cannot make a holy spiritual house for his glorious presence. Therefore such as
join together into a Church State, ought to know (as well as they can) and be
satisfied of the fitness and meetnesse of each other, as well as each person
of himself, for these and other Reasons that might be named.

Secondly, When a competent number of Believers are well satisfied in and of
each others sitnesse to build a holy Temple for God, they should meet together,
and solemnly present themselves before God; humble themselves and acknowledge
their own weakness, ignorance and unworthiness: for although they may be in a
sense meet and worthy, yet because of their indwelling Lusts and actual
Trangressions, they may see matter enough in and by themselves, to cry out (as
Isaiah did) we are unclean and unworthy, and to ask pardon and forgiveness of
God: so also to tell God what they are about to do, and entreat him to send
forth his Light and Truth into their hearts, and by his holy Spirit to lead,
assist and guide them in the right way, according to this promise, Psalm. 25.12.
Psa. 61.8. Joh. 16.13. For although they may have (as they have) a plain and
perfect Rule before them; to guide them in this weighty matter, yet they may
want light in their hearts, to walk by it clearly and exactly, as they ought to
do; which the holy Spirit (that has made them willing by his power) Psalm.
110.3. will supply with his light, upon importunate asking it. Thus Ezra did,
when concerned in Temple-work, chapt. 8.21. and it is prophefied by David, that
when God should build up his Church, he would do it upon his peoples prayers,
Psalm. 102. And as they should pray for light and counsel in their hearts, from
the holy Ghost, (who is and will be owned and accounted the chief Agent in the
work of building Gospel-Churches; as in preparing Materials, making them
willing, guiding and directing them in the work) so that God would vouchsafe
them his presence, own and bless them in their Church State; ratify and
confirm the labor of their hands, and prosper them to his Glory, and their own
edification and comfort.

3. When this is done, and their hearts are warmed with the presence of God,
and their minds enlightened with the Spirits Beams of Light, shining in upon
them, in answer to their Prayers; and their hearts thereby faster knit to each
other in Love, as to the living Members of Christ; then they should declare to
each other their free, full and cordial acceptance of, and satisfaction in one
another; express to one another their real, hearty and joint Resolutions,
purposes and Intentions (by the help of God) to live and walk together as a
Church of Christ, in the celebration of all the ordinances of Christ in the
Church: and engage, covenant and promise to take upon themselves the practice
and observation of all the Laws of Christ, and duties one to another in that
state and Relation; taking hold of the Covenant of Grace, accepting the Lord
Jesus for their Lord, Head and Savior, resigning up themselves unto him, and
professing their unfeigned subjection to him and all his Rules, Laws and Orders,
and that they will submit themselves one to another in the fear of God, Ephesians.
5.21. as he has commanded them. And which may be confirmed to one another, by
giving each other the right hands of fellowship, Gal. 2 9.

This I take to be the formal constituting cause of a Church, or Temple of God;
and I know no other: but some there must be; and I think to this agree several
Scripture-instances, that (if rightly understood) amounts to as much as
aforesaid. Thus the Israelites became a Church; God propounded to them, what he
would have them observe and do, and accordingly the whole congregation received
what was said, and engaged to do and observe what God required of them, Exodus
24.3. And Moses came and told the people all the words of the Lord; and all the
people answered with one voice, and said, All the words which the Lord has
said, will we do: so Deuteronomy. 5.27. Exodus 20.19. Deuteronomy. 29.9. -- 14. This was
freely and voluntarily done by them, and thereby they became a Church, and were
solemnly admitted unto all the worship and privileges thereof, and God
accepted and approved of what they had done, Deuteronomy. 5.27, 28. Go thou near and
hear all that the Lord our God shall say, etc. and we will hear it, and do it.
And the Lord heard the voice of your words when ye spoke unto me, and the Lord
said unto me, I have heard the voice of the words of this People, which they
have spoken unto thee: They have well said, all that they have spoken. And the
like proceedure we find amongst them after they had corrupted themselves and
their Church State, broken their solemn engagement, and departed from God; and
upon conviction of their so doing, and of their duty to God and one another,
they return to God and renew their Church-engagement, Joshua 24.16, to 27.
verse. So in Asa his days, 2 Chronicles. 15.10, to 16. v. and Ezra. 10. and Neh. 9.
and 10. chapt. And somewhat like to this we find in the New Testament, 2 Cor.
8.5. And this they did, not as we hoped, but first gave their own selves to the
Lord, and unto us by the will of God: And the Apostle minds the Church at
Corinth, of their professed Subjection unto the Gospel of Christ, 2 Cor. 9.13.
which it seems was solemnly done at their congregating and enchurching; for
then is the time of doing it solemnly and publicly, for the satisfaction of
one another, when they openly and avowedly take upon themselves by mutual
consent and agreement, as an incorporated body, the observation of all the Laws
and Ordinances of Christ together. To the same purpose also, is that passage in
Col. 2.6. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in
him. The Apostle writes to them as a particular congregated Church, and tells
them that they had received Jesus Christ the Lord, which was solemnly done, (in
all probability) at their embodying. And this seems to be spoken of in Psalm.
50.5. Gather my Saints together unto me: those that have made a Covenant with
me by Sacrifice. And to the same purpose, in Jer. 50.4, 5. And indeed, it is
clear to me, that the nature of the thing requires it, were there no Scriptures
to countenance it. For they are (as has been said) called and compared to
Houses, Temples, Corporations, Cities, Families, and to voluntary, not mere
natural Relations, they must of necessity, be knit and formed into such a State
and Relation, by their own free choice and engagement, to live and walk
together as such: And this action of Believers is of, and by the Lord, in Act.
2.41. it is said, (...), were added, and in verse. 47. (...), the Lord added,
namely, to the particular congregational Church at Jerusalem. So that upon the
whole I infer, that Believers ought so to join themselves together into
Churches, as has been showed; which I hope I may affirm and assert without
reflection on, or offense to such as are otherwise minded, if any such there be
that fear God.

Believers being thus built and formed together, are now become a holy Temple
of God; and are accordingly owned by him as such; and now they are the seat and
subject of all the Laws, and Ordinances, power and Authority, that Jesus Christ
has given to, and for his Churches use and benefit: I mean they, or this
Church so formed and built, have all these essentially, though not formally,
until Christ set one or more teaching Elders in it, for the orderly using and
managing of that his power and Authority given to the Church. Yet I say, (I
think) that it does essentially reside in them, as the first subject of the
Keys; for I find the keys given unto, them for the use and behoof of the
Church, Matthew. 16.18, 19. which said power of the Keys, cannot be given only to
Peter, nor unto the universal or Catholic Church, that it should use them as
such, for that is impossible; but they were given to particular Churches, as
formed up of Believers, namely, to such as could have matters brought to, and
be received and heard by them, from an offended Brother, Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17.
and such a Church is here meant, as had power to deal with a sinning member, in
case of obstinacy, and therefore the Catholic Church (as such) is nor there
intended.

Now this Church spoken of has power to elect and call such persons (out from
amongst themselves, to use and exert the power and authority of Jesus Christ
already given them, and Ministering to them in the Name of the Lord) as they
judge the Lord Jesus has fitted, qualified for, given to, and sent amongst
them, and invested with Authority and abilities for their Good. I say, they
have power to elect and call such to office power over them, in the Lord, and
that they ought with all convenient speed, after they are built up, to do it,
because till that be done, they cannot orderly and regularly administer or
receive the Seals of the Covenant: for all cannot exert and exercise that power
that does essentially reside in themselves, as a Church; neither can any
private Member, while such; and therefore it must be done by Officers, or one
in Office, that is called, set apart and wholly dedicated to the work of the
Ministry amongst them. Therefore they may and ought, to look out from among
themselves, and call to Office, such as they judge Christ has sent them, Act.
6.3. Act. 14.23.

CHAP. V.
Showing what Officers Christ has appointed for, and given to his
Gospel-Churches; and what are their Offices and works in a Holy Temple of God.
7. QUest. What officers has Jesus Christ given to the Church?

Answ. The Lord Jesus has (by his Sovereign Authority) given to his Church,
Pastors and Teachers, Ruling Elders and Deacons. All which Officers are
invested with different power, and entrusted with different works in the
Church. Now the Teaching-ruling Officers, have several names and appellations
given them, according to the particular parts and branches of their work in the
Church; As Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Bishops, Guides. All these names are
given to the same Persons and Officers in the Church. Sometimes they are called
Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. sometimes Elders, 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Pet. 5.1.
sometimes Bishops or Overseers, Act. 20.28. sometimes Guides, Heb. 13.7, 17.
and they are of the same sort, order and degree; their work, office and power
the same: for although they have different names in sound, yet not of work,
power and Authority in the Church. The persons are the same, their office,
power and authority the same, and their work the same. The Scripture does no
where give one ordinary teaching Officer more power and Authority than another,
or set one sort of Teaching Elders over another sort, nor give them distinct
and different work to do in the Church; but so, as that whatever power or work
a Bishop has in the Church to exercise and do, the same has an Elder or
Pastor also. Has a Bishop power and authority to command and Teach? so has an
Elder too; has a Bishop (I mean one of Christ's making) the ordering of
Church Matters, and managing the discipline thereof? so has an Elder also, 1 Timothy 5.17. for they are the same.

Besides Teaching Elders, the Lord Jesus has given and appointed mere ruling
Elders to his Church also, for the well-being, peace and establishment of the
Church, and to assist and help the Teaching ruling Elders, in looking after and
taking care of the concernments of the Church, called Helps, 1 Cor. 12.28. and
they are expressly called Ruling Elders, distinctly from the Teaching ruling
Elders, 1 Timothy 5.17. and Helps, Governments, in 1 Cor. 12.28. and in Romans 12.8.
it is said, he that rules let him do it with diligence, and distinguishes
them from Treaching, Ministering and exhorting Rulers, (for Teachers have the
power of rule and discipline as well as the mere ruling Elders) in 7, 8.
verses. And the Apostle speaks not there of different Offices in the same
persons (though that is a Truth) but of different persons and Officers; for
says he, let the Teachers wait on their Teaching, Ministering, and exhorting,
that is, as it is their great and principal work, (as indeed it is) and
therefore to ease them a little of the ruling part of their work, and that they
may the more fixedly and cheerfully attend unto, and perform that other part of
their work, namely, to teach and Minister in the Church, the Lord Jesus has
appointed some to attend only (ordinarily) to the work of ruling, to keep all
in order in the Church; and therefore charges them to do it with diligence,
Romans 12.8. Besides these, the Lord has given Deacons to his Church also, Act.
6. 1 Timothy 3.8. to 14. verse. and Phil. 1.1. for another kind of work, namely to
attend Tables, to look after the poor, and provide for them; to dispose of the
Churches distributions and charity, for the profit of the whole, and relief of
the poor of the Church.

8. Quest. How ought Pastors and Teachers to be qualified? or what is required
unto their right constitution and officiating in the Church, as such Officers?

Answ. First, They must be furnished with Ministerial Gifts for their work;
namely, such as Christ promised, and ascended up to Heaven to give unto men for
the work of the Ministry, and which he received of the Father for them, even
then, when he gave all things into his hand, Joh. 3.35. which are absolutely
necessary for all that take upon them the great work of the Ministry, and the
care and charge of Souls, or to oversee and edify the Body of Christ. These
Gifts are spiritual which they receive not from men, but from Christ their
Lord, who sends them as his Stewards into his household, to give them meat in
due season, Matthew. 24. as his servants into his vineyard to dress, prune and
order it, to keep and water it, for his use, that it may bring forth fruit to
his Glory. And intending to employ and make such use of them there, he enriches
all that he sends with his own Ministerial Gifts. Ephesians. 4.8, 10, 11, 12. When he
ascended up on high, he led Captivity Captive, and gave Gifts unto men. He that
descended is the same also that ascended up far above all Heavens, that he
might fill all things. And he gave some Apostles, and some Pastors and
Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ. Here is an account of his Gifts, and the
person receiving them, and also the end for which. To the same purpose the
Apostle speaks in Romans 12.6. and 1 Cor. 12. as you may read there at large,
from the beginning to the end: Where you have an account of the several Gifts
themselves, which are called Spiritual, verse. 1, 2. The Author or immediate
Doner of them, 7. as also the end of the Spirits giving them unto men, and the
place where they should be exercised and laid out, 7, 28. and in other verses
there. These Ministerial Gifts are not given to all Believers, because they are
not intended nor called to the work and Office of the Ministry in the Church,
but they are intended and given to them, whom Jesus Christ sends into his
Church, and enclines the Churches hearts to call and accept them, for their
Officers and Ministers.

Secondly, As they must be gifted with ministerial Spiritual Gifts, so they
must be graced also with special saving Grace, for the spiritual and
evangelical discharge of their Ministerial work in the Church; or else they
will never be able Ministers of the New Testament, although they may be of the
Letter, 2 Cor. 3.6. They must be called out of darkness, into the mavelous
saving light of Christ, 1 Pet. 2.9. and be the Children of Light, Ephesians. 5.8.
before they can hold forth indeed the light of the Gospel and grace of Christ
unto others. They must be first taught of God themselves, before they can
spiritually teach others; and be tutored in Christ's School, before they will be
wise Builders up of the Body of Christ, in the Mysteries of his Kingdom, Mark
4.11. They must first have the Spirit of God in their own hearts, to make them
wise unto Salvation, before they can make others wise unto Salvation. They must
not learn their Lessons without, in men's or Gods Books, but they must also
experience and be able to read the Gospel within, that they preach to others.
They must first learn, and be acquainted themselves with and in the right way
to Heaven, before they can be good Pilots and Guides of others thither. They
must first be quickened and enlivened themselves, by and with the Life of
Jesus, before they can claim a right to the Ministry of Christ in his Church,
or hold forth and rightly communicate the word of Life to others. Many think
that Grace is not necessary in a Minister, or for the Ministry, where are
ministerial Gifts, and (as they say) a blameless conversation; but surely, the
special Grace, and Spirit of Christ are the only necessary and useful things,
(if I may so speak) for the fitting and qualifying a Gospel-Minister, a
Church Officer and Guide. But undoubtedly it is a mistake; for how can they
bring out of their Treasury, things new and old, for the profit of men, if
there be none laid in? A good man out of the good treasure of the heart,
brings forth good things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure, brings
forth evil things, Matthew. 12.35. And men cannot gather Grapes of Thorns, and
figs of Thistles, Matthew. 7.16. And what are Hypocrites, but such? Are they not
in darkness, and does not the Lord Jesus call the Scribes and Pharisees, and
Doctors of the Law, Fools and Blind, notwithstanding their great Gifts? Are not
all unregenerate and graceless persons, ravening Wolves, although covered with
Sheeps-skins? and does not Christ caution his Sheep against them, and charge
them to take heed and beware of them? Mat. 7.15. And when Christ sends forth
laborers into his Vineyard, says he to them, I send you forth, as Sheep in the
midst of Wolves? Matthew. 10.16 Christ does not say, I send forth Wolves in
Sheeps clothing, to convert, nourish and build up my Sheep unto eternal life.
Moreover, Ministers must not only preach to men from the head (the subject of
mere Gifts) but from their hearts also; from strong affections, tender bowels
of compassion, and sincere Love to Souls; which they cannot do, until they are
made new Creatures, holy and gracious men. For how can they love and pity
others Souls, who have no love and pity for their own? and how can they
affectionately persuade men, who know not experimentally the terror of the
Lord? 2 Cor. 5.11. How can such open the Mystery and spirituality of the Gospel
unto men, who were never taught it themselves? and how can they so preach the
Gospel of Life, who are yet dead in Sins themselves, as to enliven others?
Therefore all the Ministers that Jesus Christ impowers and sends into his
Churches, in special love and mercy, he first graceth with his special light
and life, joins and unites them to himself, and puts some of his own Image,
Nature, and qualities upon them, before he sends them, or will be with them,
and bless them. Can or will such take care of the Church of Christ as such, to
water and break the Bread of Life unto them, who take no care about their own
Souls, nor care what becomes of them? And if Jesus Christ will have none but
real hearted Believers, and living Members of his Body, in his Churches, (as
has been showed) then certainly he will not allow or approve of Graceless,
and unregenerate Guides and Overseers in them; and if his Churches are holy
Temples appointed for his presence and residence, his Glory and delight, (as
they are, as has been showed) then assuredly, he will not have carnal and
unbelieving Stewards in them, to manage all the affairs and concernments of
them? And if all his Laws and Ordinances, which he has given to his Churches,
be holy and spiritual, (as they are) and Church Officers, (I mean the Pastors
and Elders) are to be his mouths to them, and the Churches mouths to him, and
to administer his holy and Spiritual matters and things in his Name, to his
Glory and the Churches Spiritual profit; then surely, they ought to be holy and
spiritual Men. For will he own such for his Ministers as have no acquaintance
with him, or Relation to him; who have no peculiar love for him, nor dependence
on him; who have not hearts to obey him, and make him the great end of their
work; and who never received the Truth in the love of it into their own hearts?
Will the holy and loving Head and Husband of his Church, set over them
Christlesse, lifelesse, and graceless men, (as all unregenerate persons are)
who neither fear or love him, or his Church sincerely, to watch over them, and
impart his secrets and counsels to them? surely no. And therefore they must be
fitted and qualifyed with saving Graces, as well as Ministerial Gifts, for
office, power and work in the Church of Christ. I might argue this point very
largely and copiously, did I intend a large discourse, as I do not, but to use
all possible brevity, in all things, I shall mention and present to
consideration, in the whole of the discourse.

3. And therefore, Thirdly, they should not only have, and be qualified with
spiritual Gifts, and special Grace, but with the holy Ghost also. It is not
such Gifts and Grace, that will sufficiently qualify and enable men to
discharge their ministerial work in the Church, without the Spirit. They will
not be willing, ready, nor apt to teach, without the Spirit, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. 1 Timothy 3.2. Neither will they be able to divide the word aright, without the
Spirit, 2 Timothy 2.15. And therefore has Jesus Christ promised to be with them
in an especial manner, in their Ministerial work, (who are his Ministers) Mat.
28.18, 20. Joh. 14.15, and 16. chapters. They must preach and pray by the
Spirit; watch over, feed and water the Church by the Spirit, for their Gifts
and Graces can do nothing in this matter, but by the Spirit. And therefore the
holy Spirit is promised to help them; to teach, warm, strengthen and quicken
them: to comfort, lead and Guide them; and whenever Christ sends any Shepherds
into his Sheepfold, (in love and mercy) he sends them, and they come there with
the holy Ghost in their hearts. Look over Paul's Epistles to Timothy and Titus,
and to the particular Churches, and you may find this Truth confirmed. Thus God
promised his New Testament Churches long before they subsisted, or had a being
in the World, Jer. 3.15. And I will give you Pastors according to mine own
heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding. It is the Spirit
that makes men able Ministers of the New Testament and Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. not
created Grace and Gifts only. The Apostles spoke the word of God, as the Spirit
gave them utterance, Acts 2.4. and as they were moved (or carried forth) by the
holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. A Temple of God, is built by the Spirit for the
habitation of God, Ephesians. 2.21, 22. all the Laws and Ordinances of the Temple are
given forth by the Spirit from Christ, Joh. 16.13, 14, 15. all the Grace and
Gifts bestowed on men, are by the Spirit; their Life, strength and success is
by and from the Spirit: their work and authority in the Church, is given them
by the Spirit; and therefore the holy Spirit will accompany and abide with his
own Ministers there.

Fourthly, They must be qualified and adorned with singular Spirits, with
excellent and choice Spirits and frames of Heart: they should excel others in
such qualities and virtues as these. First, they should be singular and
excelling in knowledge and Spiritual understanding, to discern the difference
of things that differ, and to judge of Spiritual things Spiritually, 1 Cor. 2.
They should abound in heavenly wisdom and prudence, in conformity to their
Lord Christ. Secondly, They should be eminent and singular in Gospel simplicity
and sincerity too, 2 Cor. 1.12. 2 Cor. 2.17. Thirdly, They should be eminent
and singular in Humility; in all meekness, humbleness of mind and conversation,
1 Pet. 5.1. -- 6. Of all men in the world, they must not be proud and lofty in
their hearts and carriages, but meek and lowly, Mat. 11.29. 2 Timothy 2 25.
Fourthly, They must be eminent and singular in Gentleness and peaceablenesse;
they must not brawl nor strive, 2 Timothy 2.24. 1 Timothy 3.3. Fifthly, They must be
eminent in Self-denial and curbing the Flesh; keeping under carnal, worldly
self, and crossing the desires of the Flesh and of the Mind, 1 Cor. 9. ult.
Sixthly, They must be eminent and singular in patience and contentation, they
must not be soon angry, or moved to passion and wrath, 1 Timothy 3. Seventhly,
They must be eminent and singular in a sober, serious, holy cheerfulness and
sweetness, pleasantness and affability; they must not be of vain and frothy
Spirits, nor of froward, sullen, lumpish and sad carriages and deportments: for
these things are hateful in all Christians, much more are they so in such as
are set in the Church, for lights and Examples to them. This is a part of that
good behavior, the Apostle says, they must be endued withal, 1 Timothy 3.2.
Eighthly, They must be eminent and singular in zeal and fervency also. For if
private Christians should abound in it, Romans 12.11. 2 Cor. 7.11. then much more
should the Ministers of Christ, Tit. 2.14. Rev. 3.19. Ninthly, They must be
eminent and singular in Love, pity and bowels of compassion to Souls; they must
not be of hard and insensible Spirits, but full of tender earning bowels
toward their flocks, Col. 3.12. 1 Pet. 3.8. Romans 12.15. So was Jesus Christ,
and so was Paul toward all sorts of men they had to do withal, (excepting
obstinate Sinners, who trampled pearls under their feet) and so must Ministers
be now. Be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, (says Paul) Ephesians. 4. ult.
Tenthly, They must be eminent and singular in Heavenly mindedness; they must
not be covetous nor greedy after worldly things; which the Apostle calls filthy
lucre, 1 Timothy 3.3. Tit. 1.7. 1 Pet. 5.2. They must declare as much as possible,
that in the midst of earthly enjoyments, they are heavenly minded, and live
above them. They are holy men of God, and therefore must flee those things, 1 Timothy 6.11. 2 Pet. 1. ult. and follow after heaverly. Eleventhly, They must be
singular and eminent in gavity and solidity: they must not be vain, light and
frothy talkers, and of foolish jesting Spirits and carriages, but grave and
serious, 1 Timothy 3. Twelfthly, They should be apt to teach, set forward and
entertain holy and profitable discourses, as they have opportunity; which will
not now be easily found, I fear, amongst professors. However, they should be
always ready, apt and willing to do their duty, although others are not to do
theirs, 1 Pet. 5.2. 1 Timothy 3.2. Ephesians. 4.29. Col. 4.6. Thirteenthly, They should
be well armed with Wisdom, Faith and Patience, to endure and stand fast
against all oppositions and Temptations, and to bear up under all the great
discouragements they may meet withal from friends and foes; for they will be
tried by both. Hence the Apostle charges Timothy, to follow after Faith and
Patience, 1 Timothy 6.11. and in 1 Timothy 4.12. says he, be thou an Example to the
Believers, in Faith, etc. Therefore they should come to their work well armed
and fenced with Faith and Patience: for it will be tried to the utmost, as sad
experience shows. Fourteently, They should be eminent and singular in setting
up high and noble ends in their eyes and hearts, in their office and work in
the Church. The great motives, aims and ends of their hearts and Souls, should
be to please and honor Jesus Christ, their Lord and Master, and to edify and
profit his Church, Acts 20. These are some of the necessary qualifications,
that all Pastors of Churches should bring with them, and labor to grow and
increase in them, when they are there.

Fifthly, They must be qualified with holy and blameless conversations and
carriages also: These are in part described in the 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. and
elsewhere in the Epistles of Paul to Timothy and Titus; in the Acts, and other
Scriptures. And it must needs be so, namely, that they be singular in all
manner of holy conversation and Godliness, 1 Timothy 4.7. But exercise thy self
unto Godliness; for they are appointed and set in the Church to be their
Lights and Guides, to be Examples to Believers, and all men, 1 Timothy 4.12. Mat.
5.16. 1 Pet. 5.3, etc. They will by blamable walkings, more dishonor Jesus
Christ and his Gospel; more grieve and afflict the hearts of good Men;
scandalize and harden the hearts of evil men, than a hundred times as many
private Christians, and pull great reproach and comtempt upon the Ministry of
Christ in his Churches. They are more eyed and observed, and are nearer Jesus
Christ than others are, and greater things are expected from them than from
others. Therefore they should shine forth in all Grace, and be found (though
not without their failings) in the practice of every good Work, as men,
Christians and Ministers of Christ. It is not enough for them that they be not
such and such negative professors, but they must be such, and so in practical
holiness. They must not only abstain from that which is evil and forbidden,
but they must do that which is good and commended; otherwise they cannot be
blameless. But if they are indeed of such Spirits (as aforesaid) they will be
of holy and blameless conversations, and walk as Gospel, real, true Lights and
Guides before all: but if they want these heart and internal qualifications,
they will not long (if at all) be blameless walkers. If they are of proud,
peevish, cross and fretful; of sour, angry and wrathful Tempers and carriages,
they are not blameless. If they are of hot, testy, fiery, rash and quarrelsome
Tempers and Carriages, they are not blameless. If they are Back biters and
Defamers of men, or Hearers and Receivers of evil reports against good men,
they are not blameless. If they are coveteous worldly persons in their words
and deeds, they are not blameless. If they are excessive in their clothes,
houses, eating or drinking, they are not blameless. If they are censorious and
rash Judges of others, they are not blameless. If they are cheaters or
detainers of others dues from them, they are not blameless. If they are vain
and light persons, and given much to frothy idle talk and jestings, or to
Idleness, they are not blameless. If they are careless of, and negligent in
relative duties, and the worship of God in their families, they are not
blameless. If they are not diligent in their callings, and works, but are
addicted to walk abroad, sleep, or otherways spend away their precious time,
vainly, and unprofitably, they are not blameless. I might instance in many
more, but that I study brevity, as well as Truth. The Ministers of Christ must
not only be free from the practice of such and such Sins, but they must be
eminent and singular in the practice of all duties incumbent on them, toward
God and men also, (unavoidably infirmities excepted.)

Sixthly, They must also have, and be endued with natural Gifts, as ability of
body, and the Gift of utterance. For although a man may have a great stock of
Graces, Gifts, and Truths laid up in his head and Heart, yet if he want
abilities of Body or speech to utter, and plainly declare them unto others, how
can he profit the Church, or minister to their edification? (which is the great
end of those Gifts, etc. and the Ministry.) Therefore they must not be only
qualified within, but without also; they must be able to speak as they ought,
Ephesians. 6.20. as well as to judge as they ought to judge of, and understand divine
matters.

Sevently, They must be sound in the Faith too, For if they be leavened with
corrupt Doctrine, and their Faith and Judgments tainted with it, they may
easily corrupt and leaven the Church of Christ, by sowing such Tares and
stinking Weeds, as all the men in the world will never be able to pull out
again. A little leaven, (of corrupt Doctrine) leavens the whole Lump, Gal. 5.9.
And when once false doctrines are got into the Head, they will quickly defile
and corrupt the whole heart and conversation. And therefore to prevent such
evils in the Churches, the Apostles labored exceedingly with the Churches, and
as soon as they perceived any Tares of corrupt doctrine sown in the Churches,
they presently endeavored the pulling of them up, and weeding of them out,
either by preaching or writing. And Paul charged Titus to see that Teachers
were sound in the Faith and Doctrines of the Gospel, Tit. 1.9.13. and that they
speak sound Doctrines, chap. 2.1, 2. that they were of sound Minds, 2 Timothy 1.7.
and also, that they hold fast the form of sound Words, verse. 13. and also
wishes all corrupt and unsound Teachers cut off, Gal. 5.12. Therefore they must
not be erroneous in their Faith and Judgments, but sound in the Faith of the
Gospel, that are (together with the aforesaid particulars) rightly qualified
Ministers of Christ. And you may be sure, that Jesus Christ has more care of,
and respect unto his Name, Gospel, and Churches, which he has purchased with
his Blood, than to set over them erroneous and corrupt Teachers.

Eighthly, Humane learning is not to be slighted and desp sed in a Minister,
(as it is too much by some, who know not the good of it) for although the Word
and Spirit of God can sufficiently prepare and qualify a man for the Ministry
without it, yet experience shows, that it is singularly useful to holy men, in
their Ministerial Work. It helps to make them more able men, though not
Christians: it is useful to their heads (who know how to use it) if not to
their Hearts: it is a good servant to wait on Divinity, though a bad master
when it is exalted above it, (as to many shamefully and sinfully do.) It is
well know, that we come to the knowledge of the Spirit and mystery of divine
Truths, by the letter wherein it is held forth; and we come to understand the
mind and intention of a Superior, by the words he speaks to us: so that if we
understand not his words, we cannot know his mind and will, or what he would
have us believe, do, or receive. And is it not the same with respect to the
Word of God? how can we know his mind and will concerning us, but by his Word?
and how by his Word or Words, except we understand their sense, meaning and
signification, what they do import and hold forth to us? and can any deny but
that humane learning is useful toward the helping of our understandings to
find out the sense, meaning and intended design of them? It is in vain to say,
that the holy Spirit will do that well enough without humane learning: for did
the holy Spirit ever teach an English man to understand Hebrew or Greek, (the
Tongues wherein the Scriptures of God were written) without humane help? or can
an English man because he understands English, therefore understand the
Scriptures in these Tongues? what if the most of men that are learned do abuse
it? shall it therefore be despised? will any wise man despise wine, that good
creature of God, because men abuse it? and shall we despise humane learning,
that good Creature of God, because it is abused? It is given to help and
perfect men, and may be exceedingly useful to them in public service for God
and his Church, as well as for a State or Commonwealth; and such as are
greatned and lifted up in their own conceit, slight and despise others who are
not as learned as themselves, (as they suppose) do thereby divert it from its
real use and end, turn it into sin and shame, and abuse it as much as drunkards
do good wine, and they shall at last rue for it. But what then? shall learning
be slighted and despised? God forbid. How should we have known the Scriptures,
had there not been learned men to translate them into our native Language?
surely you that despise humane learning, should-rather bless God all your
days, that he was pleased to give it unto men for your good, and for the
propagation of his Gospel. And I say further, that if humane learning be
desirable and useful unto men, then it cannot be prejudicial, but very helpful
unto the Ministers of the Gospel: for I think, that they will and may make as
blessed and holy improvements of it, as other men can do. I find (indeed) no
small error on both hands; the unlearned in contemning and despising it, as a
vain useless thing, especially in a Minister of the Gospel; and the learned in
magnifying it above the skies, setting it on the Throne, and the holy Spirit,
and grace at the footstool; disdaining and contemning the unlearned, and
making it one of the most absolutely necessary qualifications of a Minister of
the Gospel, when indeed, the Scripture does not: Which with other abuses of it,
by some, has brought it under Reproach. But yet I say still, the fault is not
in humane learning, but in the men that abuse it: And therefore let it be
loved, used and respected in its place. Let those that have it see they use it
well, and carry themselves more humbly with it, toward others; and those that
have it not, forbear speaking evilly and reproachfully of that which they
understand not.

Ninthly, They must be qualified with satisfaction in their own hearts and
consciences, that they are moved by, and called of God to take upon them the
work of the Ministry, and that in such a place; that they may go forth and
enter upon it in Faith, hope and obedience, as they ought to do. Without this,
all the rest of the aforesaid qualifications will not serve the turn; except
they can probably conclude upon sufficient Grounds that they hear their Lord
saying (as it were) unto them, Go you into such a vineyard and work; lay out
and improve my Talents there, in such a place, with such a People. Which said
satisfaction, will be the result of many sighs, tears and cries; for so great a
mercy will not be gotten (ordinarily) upon easier Terms, Act. 13.2, 3. For it
is certain, that men may run before they are sent of God, Jer. 23.21. and it
may be with a good intention too, as Saul seemed to have in offering Sacrifice,
1 Samuel 14. and Vzzah in meddling with the Ark, as he did, 2 Samuel 6. and men may
judge them meet and ready for the work; yea call and give them importunate
invitations to it, and yet God may not send them, nor bid them go. I think,
that they may have the loud, strong calls of men, to minister to them, when God
is not in it. Now it is probable, that there are some men, who are endowed with
excellent Ministerial Gifts; who mind and concern themselves mostly, if not
altogether with their external call from men, and do not once seriously
consider, nor ask the question, if God say so too, or no; but away they go,
without the internal call or motion of the Spirit. And truly these are likely
to succeed accordingly. I fear that God will sav to them as in Jer. 23.32. They
shall not profit this People. They are gone before and without the Lord, and
follow the voice of men and their own natural Genius, being drawn by some
worldly allurements, but they shall not prosper, unless they repent of their
disorderly walking. David would not go and possess the Kingdom of Israel, until
he had asked it, and received answer from God, that he should, 2 Samuel 2. and
when God bid him go, he would first know where he should go, before he durst
adventure to go to Hebron; although he was long before anointed King, and he
had a great multitude of the Israelites with him, that doubtless had strongly
invited him to the Government; yet he could not go and take it upon him, until
God sent him, and bid him go. (2) There are others, who do wait for a call from
God, to go forth to the work, but hang in doubt whether they should go, or
whether God has answered them, and these go forth uncomfortably and in part
unwillingly. They are loath to tarry Gods time for a clear and satisfactory
answer, and so go on with many doubts, fears and scruples of conscience: there
being a war and contest in their hearts, between shall I, or shall I not:
Whereas if they would pray importunately, and wait patiently the Lords time to
answer, and satisfy them, they might go forth in peace with the blessings and
presence of God. (3) There are some, who fast, pray, and cry, wait and watch
for Answers, and will not stir until they have an Answer of peace and
satisfaction from God; (as Paul and David) and then they set forward with all
possible chearfullness, hope and confidence: and these are the persons that
shall finish the course of their Ministry with Joy, and prosper in their work;
Act. 20.24. that will do it with Joy and not with Grief, Heb. 13.17. certainly,
this qualification is absolutely necessary, namely, that they have a good
measure of assurance, that God has called and sent them into his Vineyard, to
work there, as his Stewards and Ministers. For how can they preach as his
Ministers, except they know that they are sent by him, and have his Authority
impowring them? Romans 10, 15. the servants stood and waited for a mission from
their Lord, and would not go, until they had it, Matthew. 20. And there are many
Reasons for it; I will but name a few. (1) Because the work they have to do, is
the Lords, not their own: and what have they to do to meddle with it, until
their Lord calls and sends them? otherwise he may say unto them, friends, what
do you here in my Vineyard about my work and concernments? did I call or send
you hither, or rather did you not come upon your own will and pleasure? (2)
Because the Churches in which they work, are the Lords: and he will have his
own appointed and designed servants in his own families and households, and none
else, he alots and appoints the several works of his servants and the places
where they shall work, and leaves it not to their own wills and choice, but as
directed and guided, moved and carried forth by him. As God sent Paul to the
Gentiles, and Peter to the Jews, so does God now send such a man to such a
Church, and another to another Church, to administer there, and if the great
Lord and Master should find such a Servant here, as he did intend for an other
place, how will he answer his being out of his own place? (3) Because their
going forth and laboring in the Vineyard, must be obediential Acts. They must
do it, not because it is their own will and choice, but the Lords, and that in
obedience unto him. And how can they do that, except they have some good
assurance that the Lord has sent and called them? How can they obey the voice
of the Lord, when they are not well satisfied, that they have heard and felt
the Lord speaking to their hearts, in answer unto prayers? (4) Because they
must go forth and labor, in dependence on, and expectation of him; to be with
them: to help and assist them; to bless and prosper them, to crown and succeed
their endeavors, and to provide for them. Now, how can they do so, unless
they know that God has sent and employed them in his work? (5) They must go
forth and labor, in hope and expectation of divine acceptance, also. For God
has promised to accept the commanded work and service of his people, in
obedience to his holy will. Therefore they must know that they are doing of, or
about to do their Lords work, when, and where he would have them. (6) Because
they are promised a reward; and they ought to believe and look for it, only in
the way of their duty, and no where else. And how can any expect a reward for
doing that, which for ought they know, is not their duty, at such a time, in
such a place, in such a way? (7) Because they ought to bless, thank and praise
God for employing them in his so great work and service, 1 Timothy 1.12. which
they cannot do unless they are sufficiently satisfied, of the Lords calling
them to it.

Tenthly. As they should be satisfied in their own Souls, of the Lords calling
and sending them into his Vineyard, so the Church to which they are sent should
be satisfied of the same likewise; and they should find great and real
acceptance in each others hearts. The Church should own and receive them, as
sent by, and from Jesus Christ unto them, to do his work, and administer his
holy Laws and Ordinances to them; and that as great and promised mercies and
blessings for their good. Their union, communion and Spiritual Relation, must
be founded in Love and strong affections one to another, and grounded upon real
satisfaction in, and cordial acceptance one of an another, as married together
by Jesus Christ; and so make one entire body, and Temple. These are no light
and insignificant matters, but very great and weighty (matters) indeed: They
put themselves into each others hands, and become one another in the Lord; in
which state and condition they must abide, and live together, until the Lord
shall separate them by some extraordinary providence. For till then, they
cannot part one from another, nor leave each other, no not with mutual
consents, at their own will and pleasure; because they were joined together by
the will of God, as the chief and principal doer of it; and therefore no lower
will and power can dissolve the knot, then that which at first did knit it.
These Ministers must go and take up with the Church, as sent to them by Jesus
Christ, and the Church must own and receive them as Christ's choice and gracious
gift unto them. And therefore they should be fully satisfied in each other, and
find deep real Love. cordial acceptance and room in one another hearts:
resolving to live, walk and continue together, in Love and Faithfulness, and in
the constant practice of all duties to God and one another, before they do
unite and engage together in a Church-Relation. For if they do not become one
Holy Church and Communion, upon the account of Jesus Christ his joining them,
or calling them to own, accept and choose one another in that Relation: If they
be not congregated and united together, by, and upon the principle of
Gospel-Love and Affection; and if they enter not into, and continue in that
state and Relation, Union and Communion together, in pursuance of the will and
call of Christ, and in obedience to his command, they are never likely to
continue long together in peace and comfort; to have God dwell in, and walk
with them, or to thrive and prosper. They may be able to make a comfortable
Judgment of the Lords calling and joining them together in love and mercy,
thus; or by these things. First, if the Glory of the Lord Jesus and their own
Spiritual profit and edification, lay deep in their hearts, and are their great
and only ends in their uniting and joining together. 2. If they have unfainedly
and importunately asked counsel and conduct of God: committed the whole to his
choice, and disposal, to make up, or hinder the match between them, as he
pleased: and did indeed resign up their wills and concernments, wholly unto his
Wisdom and Sovereign pleasure, to order, and determine them and for them, as
he should think fit, in order to the said ends: and in their Prayers together
and apart, have stood in an even balance, waiting and expecting what the Lord
would say and do in the case, to and for them. 3. And if after they have so
done they find their hearts more and more inclined and knit one to another,
(though still with a free and holy submission to the Will of God) and they find
providence working for them without, by removeing obstructions, and making the
way plain for them: I think they may comfortably conclude that God has sent
and called them to join themselves together, and become a holy Temple in the
Lord. For when all these things do concur and fall in (as it were) together;
undoubtedly it is of God, and by his special ordering and direction. It was
God, that set up those holy ends and designs in their hearts. It was God that
stirred up and moved their hearts so to pray and wait, Psalm. 10.17. Romans
8.26.27. or they could never have so done it. It was God, that enabled them to
lie down and submit their wills and judgments, to his. It was God that inclined
their hearts to one another, and that knit them together in Love, so as to
choose and accept of each other in that holy Relation: and it was God that made
their way plain before them. And now what hinders, why they should not freely
unite and join together in the Lord, and walk together as heirs of the Kingdom?

Eleventhly, All things and matters, in order to their Union and Communion
together, and becoming a house or Church of God; and walking together as
Officers and Members, in that State and Relation, being thus prepared and made
ready for it: They should now appoint and mutually agree to set apart a day to
perfect and complete what is so well begun. And first they should call in the
help and assistance of some other Church or Churches, especially the Elders of
them (if they can), that they may see, and be satisfied of their proceedings,
and give them the right hand of fellowship, Gal. 2.9. and assist them in the
solemn setting apart of their Elders, and help them with their Prayers. 2. They
should seek the Lord by fasting and prayer, and entreat him in an extraordinary
manner, to be with them; guide and direct them; bless and prosper them, in
their proceedures: and in an especial manner for the Elder, or Elders they are
about to choose, and (in the Lord) to set over themselves, to feed them, and
take the oversight of them: That God would give them a double portion of his
Spirit, and furnish them more abundantly with his gifts, and special grace, and
make them able Ministers of the New Testament. That God would knit their hearts
so fast together in the bond of love, as that they may for ever live together
in hearty love and peace; and that they may freely, constantly, and cheerfully
perform their respective duties to one another, according to the will of
Christ. And this being done, they should now proceed to choose and set apart
their Elders. I mean the Church should appoint one of their Brethren, to
express and declare that they have, and now in a more solemn manner, do elect
and choose out such a person or persons from among themselves, Acts 6. to be
their Elders and Teachers, to rule, seed, watch over, and Minister to them in
the name of the Lord, as persons fitted and sent to them by Jesus Christ, for
that end and purpose, (as they humbly judge); and further they may declare,
that they do thankfully and cordially receive and accept them for their Elders,
as the gift of Christ unto them, for those ends and services. And when the said
Elders are thus chosen and set apart, (as also ordained) then they may declare
their hearty acceptance of the choice, and of the Church as their charge. And
for their mutual satisfaction, and strengthening their hope and expectation of,
and confidence in each other, as also for the faster knitting the Church and
Elders together, I think it convenient (if not necessary) that they do mutually
promise and covenant to one another, before God and men, that they will really
and unfeignedly perform their respective works and duties one to another:
Namely, such as Jesus Christ requires of them, according as he requires. And
when these things are done, it may be convenient that the Officers or
Messengers of other Churches, that are present, do declare that they approve of
what is done by them, and own them as a Church of Christ, and their Elders, now
set over them, as the Elders and Officers of Christ. Now, that the Church
Congregated by the will of God, have power to choose and approve of all the
Officers that Jesus Christ has given them, has been showed before, and
therefore I shall say nothing of it here, but proceed.

Quest. What is the work of Pastors, Teachers or Elders, in a Church of Christ;
or for what ends and purposes has Christ set them there?

Answ. First, Their work is, and they are set in the Church by Jesus Christ to
Preach his word, and to open and make known his mind and will unto them; and as
they have opportunity and ability, to reveal the whole Counsel of God, Acts.
20.27, 28. They are to Preach the word of God; not their own or others fancies
and conceits, and that diligently, sincerely, frequently and faithfully, 1 Pet.
2.2. 2 Cor. 2.17. Prove. 27.23. Acts. 18.25. Math. 24.45. This they must do in
season and out of season, 2 Timothy 4.2. They are to feed Babes, with Milk; and
men, or grown Christians, with strong Meat, Heb. 5.12, 13, 14. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2.
That is, to Administer and apply suitable and proper Truths to them, according
to their capacities and conditions. They must earnestly beseech and entreat, as
they see occasion, 2 Cor. 5.20. 2 Cor. 6.1: Reprove and rebuke Transgressors,
with all Authority, 2 Timothy 4.2. Tit. 2. ult. They are to comfort the
feeble-minded, and support the weak, 1 These. 5. They must study the Word, and
their Churches Souls, cases and conditions, that they may rightly divide and
present unto them seasonable food and physic, cordials and corrisives; for
they will need all, 2 Timothy 2.15. and thereby make full proof of their Ministry,
2 Timothy 4.5. This they must do publicly, and privately, as they have
opportunity and ability, and that with all possible patience, wisdom and
meekness, 2 Timothy 2. ult.

Secondly, As they must so attend to their Preaching work in the Church, so
likewise to their ruling work. They have the Office, power of Preaching, and
ruling from Christ, (not from the Church, or any other persons whatsoever; for
they only elect, call, and set them apart to the exercise of that Power and
Authority that Jesus Christ has given them) all which they are to exercise and
make use of in the Church, for their spiritual benefit, and the glory of
Christ. That they have the power of rule, as well as of laboring in the word
and Doctrine, is clear, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well be counted
worthy of double honor: especially, they, (namely, such as have the ruling
power also) who labor in the word and Doctrine. Which said ruling power
consists, in requiring attention; in charging, commanding, appointing,
rebukeing and reproving: in calling together the Church, and dismissing them:
in requiring speech and silence, in ordering and disposing of matters in the
Church; in an authoritative way, examining matters, and calling persons to an
account, and in admitting Members, and executing the Laws of Christ on
offenders in the Church, etc. 1 Timothy 4.11. 2 Timothy 4.2. Titus 1.13. Tit. 2.15.
Math. 24.45. To this part of their work, office, and power they must attend; in
the wise, seasonable exercise of it, as occasion is, or may be offered: without
this authority of ruling (from Christ), they will be but lame Ministers, and
never able to carry on their Ministry, to the glory of Christ, and the profit
of the Church. And if they have not power to, and do not exercise the
Authority, and execute the Laws of Christ; to see too, and require orderly
walking of all the Members, and Authoritatively to deal with Offenders and
Transgressors of his Laws; who has power, or can do it? A Church of Believers,
(as has been showed) is a Family, a Corporation, and household of God; and it
is known to all men, that all Families, and incorporated bodies of men, do, or
ought to live under, and submit unto the Laws, Orders, and Discipline of those
Families, and Corporations whereunto they belong: and in order thereunto, they
have such among them, as have power and Authority to exercise Discipline, and
execute Laws; to Command, Order and Appoint, what, where, when, and how matters
and things shall be done amongst them, for the good of the whole. I think that
the Discipline of a Family, or Church of God, ought most carefully to be
attended too, and practiced; and who shall exercise it, but his Ministers and
Overseers? Act. 20.17, 28. It is true, that Christ has set in his Church also,
another sort of Rulers, which I think are said to be helps, to which
Governments is joined, 1 Cor. 12.28. ((...)) That is, (as I judge), God has
chiefly entrusted the ruling power in the Church, in the hands of his Teaching
Elders, and empowered others, to help and assist them; namely, such as are
called Ruling Elders, in 1 Timothy 5.17. For they have need enough of such helps,
in their well governing a Church of Christ. (Of which more afterward): This is
another part or parcel of Teaching-Elders work.

Thirdly, Their work is to Watch; I say to watch over the Church. They are the
Churches Watchmen, to take the oversight of them, and to make inspection into
them, Acts 20.17, 28, 31. 2 Timothy 4.5. 1 Pet 5.2. They are to watch the Wolves
and Devil, that would come amongst them to sow false Doctrines, and Divisions,
to the breaking of their Peace, and spoiling their Communion, and that would
corrupt their faith and leaven their judgments: and drive them away from the
Sheepfold, Acts. 20.29, 30, 31. Tit. 1.10, 11, 12, 13. They must also watch
their walkings and conversations, and see if they are such, as becomes the
Gospel of Christ, Phil. 1.27. or whether they be reprovable and scandalous: so
also, if they keep to, and practice their several duties to God, and one
another, or neglect them; that they may from Christ encourage the obedient, and
rebuke the negligent, 1 These. 5.14. They must also watch and make inspection
into the state and condition of their Souls, and see how matters go, or stand
with them, that they may know how to administer Remedies to them, as their
cases do require. They should enquire into their growth or decays in grace,
whether the word and Ordinances of Christ do profit or disprofit them; and as
much as possible, they should know what use and improvement they make of their
Gospel-mercies: as also their Trials and Temptations, their faith and
judgments, whether they continue found and sincere. The Elders of a Church of
Christ must not only carry about the names of watchmen, but they must do, and
attend with diligence, the real and full work of watchmen: they are set by him
upon his walls, to watch and inspect his Church: which indeed, is no easy
work, but full of care, trouble, pains and difficulty. And therefore it is no
wonder the Apostle says, who is sufficient for these things? for they are to
take care of all the spiritual and soul-concernments, of the whole Church.

Fourthly, They are to endeavor the preservation of all the Truths and
Ordinances of Jesus Christ amongst them, and to maintain them, in their power
and purity in the Church. When they know any truth, or matter of faith, or
practice, doubted of, or called into question by any in the Church; they must
with all possible care, wisdom, faithfulness and diligence, endeavor the
removal of the doubts and questions, maintain the Truths, and establish all the
Members of the Church in them: for should the errors at any time sown among
them, be let alone, and suffered to take Root in their heads, they will eat
into the heart like a Canker, or ((...)) Cancer, or Gangrene. To prevent which,
the Apostle charges Timothy, and Titus, and all Elders of Churches (in them) to
hold fast the form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13. And to hold fast the faithful
word, Tit. 1.9. That by sound Doctrine they may convince Gainsayers. And this
was always Paul's care and practice; (as was showed) either to prevent the
corrupting of Truth, and men's Souls with errors, or to overthrow and root them
up, where they were entertained: Thus the Ministers of Christ ought to do now,
and that for Christ, his Truths, and Churches sakes.

Fifthly, They must administer all Church-Ordinances, with all possible
diligence, care, zeal and faithfulness. It is their work and place to do it,
and therefore they must not be careless or negligent; but watch, seek for and
observe all opportunities for the doing of it: that the Church suffer no
detriment by their neglects, which they will quickly do, if neglected, as
experience shows. They must not only care to Preach well, but to administer all
other Appointments of Christ also, in their seasons; for all the Ordinances of
Jesus Christ, are the Churches food and provisions, and the means and way
appointed by him, for the Communicating and dispensing of his Grace, Spirit,
yea and himself unto their Souls: and indeed without the Ordinances of the
house, the house or Church cannot subsist; and they are the authorized Stewards
of the house, to give the Lords Household, all their provisions in due season,
that they may be fat and flourishing under his keeping and Donations, 1 Cor.
4.1, 2. Mat. 24.45. Psalm. 92, 12, 13, 14. 1 Timothy 3.5. Every Church Ordinance is
a Golden Pipe to convey light, life and holiness into Believers hearts, and as
Breasts to convey nourishment to the Soul. They are spiritual Ladders to carry
the hearts and graces of Believers up to Heaven, and lodge their minds and
affections there; and they are as the Ark, where God will come and meet his
people, Esa. 64.5. Therefore they must be carefully, frequently, and holily
dispensed and administered by them, who are set there to do it.

Sixthly, They must stand between God and the Church, with holy hearts, hands
and tongues lifted up to Heaven for the Church, or in their behalf, and that
privately and publicly. For their work and office, is not only to Minister to
them from Christ; but they are to present their wants, desires, and gratitude
to God for them also: which is no easy work to do. They must pray and wrestle
with God for them, as for their own Souls, and carry them upon their hearts and
souls in their secret addresses to God, and plead with God importunately for
them, as they do for their own Souls: and that not as Believers only, but as
their Teachers and spiritual Fathers also. Certainly, this is one great part of
their work and business, and therefore they may not neglect it, but are bound
to be diligent in it, in secret: and in public, when present with them, they
must bless them, and the word and seals, ministerially, and that by virtue of
their place, office, and power in the Church, 1 Cor. 10.16. Numb. 6.23, 24, 25,
26. Thus blessed Paul was much in the practice of, namely, in presenting the
Churches cases to God, and wrestling with God for them, Phil. 1.9. Col. 1.9. 2
These. 1.11. Wherefore we pray always for you. So Col. 1.3. 1 These. 3.10.

Seventhly, Resolve doubts and cases, that trouble any of the Members of the
Church, when they are presented to them, if they are matters worthy
consideration. They must study cases of Conscience, and such doubts and
scruples as may arise in the hearts or heads of their people, that they may be
ready to apply some satisfying Medicine unto them. They are to study persons,
and their cases, and maladies, as well as the Scriptures: for they must always
be able to apply, and rightly to use a word in season to weary, troubled, and
burdened Souls, as well as to Preach publicly, and promiscuously to all, from
a studied, composed subject. This work of Teachers in the Church, is no light
ordinary matter: it will show what they are, and try their learning and
abilities for their work, more than any thing else. It is a special gift of
God, and an evidence of an able spiritual Physician indeed, who can find out
spiritual Diseases of men's Souls, and readily apply proper Remedies to them,
that can rightly speak a word in season to him that is weary: Esa. 50.4. and
comfort the feeble-minded, 1 These. 5.14. The Lord Jesus, and Paul, were much
exercised and employed in this work, and so should Teachers now, as occasion is
offered. For the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and the people should
seek the Law at their mouths, Mal. 2.7. They are given to the Churches, to be
their spiritual Nurses and Physicians, for the cure and health of their Souls;
and therefore they must administer Physic and Cordials unto sick and pained
Souls, in private, as well as in public.

Eighthly, That they may discharge their Ministerial work, as becomes the
Ministers of Christ; They must exercise themselves in reading and studying.
They must give themselves to reading, and studying the Scriptures, the works
and providence of God; as also their own experiences: and they must read,
search, and endeavor all they can to know the states, cases, conditions, and
wants of their own particular flocks: that they may make full proof of their
Ministry, 2 Timothy 4.5. Divide the word of Truth aright, 2 Timothy 2.15. Speak words
in season to all sorts, (especially) to weary and burdened Souls, Esa. 50.4.
And that they may both save themselves, and those that hear them, 1 Timothy 4.16.
Ministers of the Gospel must be continually lying in, as well as lying out:
they must furnish themselves with Grace, Truth, and Experiences, that they may
Communicate unto others out of the good Treasure of their hearts. Their hearts,
heads and lips must be filled with varieties of Divine and Heavenly matters,
that they may freely and readily impart of their receivings to every ones
needs, Mal. 2.7. Their Lord and Master charges them to give attendance to
reading, 1 Timothy 4.13. To Meditation, 1 Timothy 4.15. And to study, 2 Timothy 2.15.
They must search the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. Hold fast the form of sound words,
2 Timothy 1.13. And inspect their people, Pro. 27.23. 2 Timothy 4.5. Acts 20.28. They
must not look for immediate Inspirations, nor to be furnished with all needful
supplies from Heaven, for the discharge of their office and Ministerial work in
the Churches of Christ, by the spirit; but in and by their diligent use of Gods
means. God that appoints and promises the end, appoints and directs us to, and
in the use of the means, leading to the obtainment of that end. The end
directed to, in and by the said means, is the supply of Grace, Gifts, and all
necessary and profitable ministerial abilities, for such as Christ puts into
the work, and office, of teaching and ruling in his Churches. Therefore they
may not divert to, or take up with any other Employments, that may any way
impede or hinder them in, or of the aforesaid duties; But in case of necessity.

Ob. But did not Paul work with his hands, and labor in other businesses, and
exercise himself in worldly and secular matters, after he was engaged in the
work of the Ministry? And if so; why may not other men do the same as well as
he?

1. You saw before, what ordinary Elders ought to do, and are bound to attend
unto in their places and offices, namely, to give themselves wholly to the work
of the Ministry, which they had received in the Lord, Col. 4.17. That they
fulfill it: that they attend to Study, Reading, Meditation, Exhortation,
Doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.13, 15. 2 Timothy 2.15. 2 Timothy 4.5. And that they wait on the
Altar, 1 Cor. 9.13.

2. Examples must not be taken and advanced against precepts. Paul was an
extraordinary Officer or Minister; his work and power was every where, where
the Lord called him to Preach: he was not a particular fixed Elder, or Pastor
to one single Church, neither was he bound or necessitated to attend to
reading, studying, etc. as ordinary Ministers are. Moreover, Paul and other
Apostles, had their office, power, their abilities and furnitures for their
work, immediately from Christ in an extraordinary way and manner, which
ordinary officers (now) have not.

3. Paul labored not with his hands, or neglected his Ministerial work, but
when necessitated thereunto: and the Apostles at Jerusalem, Act. 6. tells us,
That it was unreasonable, that they should leave the word of God and serve
Tables.

4. Ordinary Pastors or Elders of Churches, do find that their so attending to
their work (in their Studies) as commanded, absolutely necessary, for the
discharge and well performance of the work their Lord has given them to do;
and experience shows beyond all contradiction, that the most studious holy
Ministers, are the most powerful and profitable in their Ministry.

5. The great and rich provisions that God has made for them, in their
faithful attendance to their work in the Churches, fully proves and declares
what they should do and attend unto. God has commanded their Hearers to
provide carnal things for them; yea to Communicate to them in all good things,
that they may attend on their work, and wait at the Altar without distraction,
Gal. 6.6. 1 Cor. 9.6.15. Romans 15.27.

Ninthly, They must be eminently holy and righteous in all manner of
Conversation. They are Lights, and therefore they must shine as such in the
World. They are the Salt of the Earth, and therefore they must be of savory
Spirits and practices, Matthew. 5.13, 14, 15, 16. Ministers of the Gospel are
given for, and commanded to be examples to their Flocks, 1 Timothy 4.12. 1 Pet.
5.3. They are indispensibly bound to imitate their Master, and to teach, lead
and conduct them in holiness to Heaven, as well by their walkings and
Conversations, as by their Ministry: that they may safely and comfortably
follow them. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. 1
Cor. 4.16. 2 These. 3.7.

Surely, such as Christ has set in his Churches, to feed, nourish, comfort,
strengthen, instruct and build up his people; to conduct, lead and guide them
in the way of Gospel-holiness to everlasting happiness; should be singular in
practical Godliness themselves. They should be singular in knowledge, faith,
patience, self-denial, Goodness, meekness, charity, humility,
tenden-heartedness, faithfulness, and usefulness in the World. They ought to
live out their own Doctrine, and confirm it, by conforming their carriages,
words and actions thereunto. They must be clear of all Vices, and eminent in
all Virtues, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things,
and encourage men to follow their steps. For they are not set in the Churches,
only to teach, and verbally to Minister to them, but to be Patterns of Piety
also, Tit. 2.7. They must carry themselves gravely, soberly, wisely, seriously,
and holily, toward, and before all men; that those who seek occasion against
them, may find none; but on the contrary they may be convinced of, and report
that God, his fear, love, faith and spirit is in them of a Truth, 1 Cor. 14.25.

And as they must seriously mind, and practice the matter of their work and
duty, or what they are to do, and set in the Churches for, so they must
carefully mind the manner of it too. (1) In all their Ministrations and
Walkings, they must regard and have their eye on their Lords will and
appointment. Teaching them to observe what ever I command you, Math. 28. ult.
They must not impose their own Wills and Dictates, and thereby make themselves
Lords over God's Heritage, 1 Pet. 5.3. They are the Servants and Stewards of
Christ, not to make Laws for, and impose them on his Household; but to acquaint
them with their Master's Laws, exhort and persuade them to keep and observe
them, as he commands, and to execute them on Offenders. (2) They must be
diligent and constant in their Work. They must not be Loyterers, but Laborers,
and be examples to their Flocks, by showing all diligence and faithfulness in
their work, Act. 18.25. 1 Timothy 5.17. Prove. 27.23. (3) They should attend too,
and perform their work readily, willingly, and cheerfully, not grudgingly, 1
Pet. 5.1, 2. 1 Cor. 9.17. They must be apt to Teach, ^ Tim. 3.2. and willing to
Communicate. If all Believers should so perform all their works, much more
should Ministers; They should account their Ministerial work their privilege,
not their burden, and carry themselves accordingly in it. (4) They must always
have in their eye the ends of their work and office, and prosecute, intend, and
design them with all Gospel sincerity. They must not take their office on them,
nor do their work for filthy Lucre, 1 Timothy 3.8. 1 Pet. 5.2. nor to honor and
exalt themselves, but to honor, please and serve Christ their Lord, and to
profit and edify his people, and that with all possible integrity and
uprightness of heart, 2 Cor. 2. ult. For if these ends be not upper-most in
their eyes and hearts; in their desires, choice, aims and intentions in their
Ministrations, it is certain they are not called of Christ, nor qualified for
Church-work, and they shall not prosper in it, be owned and blessed by him, nor
profit his people: Thus briefly of the work, and duty, of teaching Elders or
Pastors to the Churches over which the Holy Ghost makes them Overseers. Now I
shall briefly show you the work and duty of Churches to their Pastors or
Elders, who faithfully and diligently labor in the word and Doctrine among
them.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein the Duties of Church Members to their Pastors, or teaching Elders,
are clearly opened and declared from Scripture.
Q. HOw ought Church Members to behave themselves toward their Pastors, or
teaching Elders? or what are their works and duties toward them?

Answ. It is the will and appointment of the Lord Jesus, the King and head of
his Churches, that they should carry and behave themselves toward them in
heart and practice, as to his Ministers and Ambassadors, who come to them in
his name, by his Mission, Authority, and Commission, with his Gifts and Grace;
upon his Errand and Business, as also for their Souls profit. They bear his
Image, wear his Livery, do his work, and serve his Interests in the Churches.
And therefore he that slighteth or despises them, slights and despises him
and his Father too; Luke 10.16. and he or they, that receive them that love,
honor and carry it well to them, because they are his, sent of him,
Commissioned and qualified by him to serve and honor him in the Churches; they
do thereby receive, honor and love Christ himself, Gal. 4.14. They receive,
honor and love Jesus Christ, in and by receiving, honoring and loving them as
such; and whatever good they do them, or whatever respect they show them (as
such), the Lord Jesus takes it as done to himself, Matthew. 10. ult. Matthew. 25.
Therefore all Church Members ought to carry and behave themselves well toward
them, and amongst other things in these particulars.

1. They ought to love them; I say to love them, and that with all cordial
tender affection. They must not love them as they do other Saints of God, only;
but they must have singular love for, and show special love unto them, as
Christ's Ambassadors, and their Ministers, 1 These. 5.12, 13. And we beseech you
Brethren, to know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord,
and admonish you: And to esteem very highly in love for their works sake. They
must be loved on several accounts. 1. As good men, and living Members of
Christ; and so we are to love them as fellow-Brethren, as we do other private
Members. 2. It is the will and appointment of Christ, that they be loved as his
Ambassadors and Commissioners, as his Stewards and Officers, gifted and sent
forth by him, about his concerns in his Churches, to do his work and business;
and as representing him, by officiating in his Name, by his Authority, and
doing his Message. 3. They ought to be loved as your Ministers, Guides,
Feeders, and Overseers: as sent unto you from Christ, and dispensing the bread
of life, and the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven to you, declaring the
Counsel of God, and administering his holy appointments to you for your present
comfort, establishment and growth in grace, and for your eternal happiness
hereafter, esteem them very highly in love for their works sake. These are some
of the Reasons, why they should be loved more than any other Believers; namely,
because they are sent, Authorized, Graced, Gifted and qualified by Christ, do
his work, represent him, stand in his stead, (2 Cor. 5.20.) and as they are his
Ministers for good to you. Well then, mind your duty, and the will of Christ in
this matter, and love them sincerely and heartily; strongly and fervently,
fruitfully and constantly; for they love you, study, pray and labor to do you
good. And know that if you do not love them, you do not love Christ, whose they
are, whom they represent and serve. And if you hate, slight and despise them,
you do hate, slight and despise Christ himself in them.

Secondly, It is the will and appointment of Christ, your duty to honor and
respect, to reverence and esteem them, in their faithful diligent discharge of
their Trust, and performance of their work amongst you. They are the
Ambassadors and Commissioners of your great Lord and King, and sent by him from
Heaven to you, (as was showed) 2 Cor. 5.20. Ephesians. 4. and that about most high
and honorable work, yea the highest work and service that Creatures are
capable of in this World. They come from, and are sent to you by the King of
Kings, from Heaven, and therefore they must be honored. They are his
Ambassadors and Commissioners, and therefore you must honor them. They are
sent and come to you, as with his Image of Authority, so of Grace, Gifts, and
Holiness; and therefore you must honor them. They are sent by Christ to you,
on, and for the service of your Souls; and therefore you must honor them: and
they represent Christ, and stand in his stead to you, and therefore you must
honor them. They do give up themselves to be your servants, and thereby do
honor you, 2 Cor. 4.5. and they cheerfully serve the interest of your Souls,
as your spiritual servants; and therefore you must honor them. Christ requires
you to esteem them, and that is not all; but to esteem them highly, yea very
highly too; 1 These. 5.13. and therefore you must do it; Christ will not suffer
you to slight or despise them, no more than Kings will endure that any should
slight or despise their Ambassadors. If you have low, base thoughts of them in
your hearts, you slight and despise them. If you slight and despise their
labors and administrations, you despise them. If you villifie and speak
slightingly of them behind their backs, and devulge their supposed or real
weaknesses, you despise them. If you carry your selves saucily, and imperiously
before their face, in words, deeds, or deportments, you slight and despise
them; and if you control them, and disregard their Judgments, Censures,
Admonitions or Reproofs, you slight and despise them; when you turn a deaf ear
to their Counsels, Instructions and Exhortations you slight and despise them;
and when you disregard their power, Authority, and their exercise thereof in
the name of Christ, you slight and despise them. In these and many other ways
and instances, Church Members do not only neglect their indispensible duty of
honoring their Teaching-Elders, but they do slight and despise them also. And
they do not only slight and despise them, but (as was said) the Lord Jesus, his
Laws, Image, work and Authority also. For he that despises you, despises me
(says Christ) Luke 10.16. And by these and such like slighting, and
contemptible words, and carriages toward them, they do greatly provoke and
discourage them: they weaken their hands, and distract their minds, and so
hinder them in their work. They are honored by Christ, and honorable in his
eye; and he strictly charges and commands his Churches to esteem them most, or
very highly, and to give them double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that
rule well, be counted worthy of double honor: especially, they who labor in
the word and Doctrine. Give (says the Apostle) to every man his due, fear to
whom fear, honor to whom honor, Romans 13.7. It is their due by the Law of
Christ, and he expects you should give it to them: not as they are such or such
men, but as his Ambassadors, Ministers, etc.

Thirdly, It is the will and appointment of Christ, that Churches should pray
for their Pastors, or Teaching Elders, and that in a more than ordinary manner
and measure; I mean, more than they do, or are bound to do for others, 1 These.
5.25. Heb. 13.18. Romans 15.30. you must be earnest, and importunate wrestlers
with God (at the Throne of Grace) for them, that God would pour out abundance
of his holy spirit on them, and by his teachings, quicknings and anointings,
make them able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter (only) but of
the spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. That they may open their mouths boldly, have the gift
of utterance, and speak the Truth sincerely, clearly, impartially, and
constantly make known the mystery of the Gospel, Ephesians. 6.18, 19. Col. 4.3. That
they may be kept from Snares and Temptations, or be enabled to encounter them,
and with the Sword of the spirit to overcome and conquer them: and that they
may be eminent shining lights in the world. That they may be able to divide the
word aright, diligent in, and faithful to their Trust. That they may be wise,
zealous and glorious Patterns of Piety and all Godliness, and be kept unspotted
of the world; and that they may abound in all grace, gifts, works of holiness
and righteousness. That they may Preach powerfully and profitably, and in all
their ways, words and carriages adorn the Gospel of Christ, Tit. 2.10. That
they may be found in the faith of the Gospel, and hold fast the profession of
the faith without wavering; Preach sound Doctrine, clearly, plainly, and
closely, Tit. 2.1. and in all things approving themselves the true Ministers of
Christ. That God would give them the spirit of Discipline and Government, for
the order and well being of the Churches, and the orderly management of their
concerns, and that they may in all things walk by their Lords Rules, and aim
at, design and uprightly intend his glory, and the profit of his people, and
all others that hear them. There are many reasons enforcing this duty on them
to your Pastors: I Will name a few, 1. Because it is the will of God that you
should do so, as the aforesaid Scriptures show. 2. Because they stand in need
of your earnest prayers. If the Apostles themselves did stand in need of the
Churches prayers, much more must ordinary Teachers need them. Their work is
hard and difficult, who is sufficient for it, 2 Cor. 2.16. Their
discouragements are many and great, and their Temptations many, strong and
powerful. They have mysteries to unfold continually, and they have stronger
Temptations to grapple with all, than others have; therefore they should have
your strongest and most importunate prayers. Little do Churches know what they
see, feel, and experience in their work, and therefore are apt to imagine, that
their Teachers have an easy and sweet life of it, and stand in little need of
their assistance. But surely they are mistaken; for there is no work in the
world, so full of care and trouble as a conscientious Minister is, nor any that
requires more diligence, circumspection, watchfulness and faithfulness than
his. They work and labor in Divine Mysteries; and they work for Christ and
Souls. Their matters lie above the reach of carnal and mere rational
understandings; above the reaches of humane Arts and Sciences, and they are
always consulting and conversant about new matters and things. Oh, what need
have they of the Churches prayers! 3. Because the Churches profit and Souls
benefit, is much concerned in their Teachers Administrations. For God
ordinarily speaks to the Churches hearts, through or by their hearts, as well
as by their mouths. The more they have of Christ, Grace, Truth, and the Spirit
of Christ, the more powerful, spiritual and profitable they will be in prayer,
Preaching, and in all other Ministrations unto them, Act. 14.1.

Fourthly, It is the will of Christ, and their indispensible duty to know,
obey, and submit themselves to their Teaching Elders or Pastors Authority,
Teaching, Government, and to all their regular and orderly. Ministrations in
the Lord. The Church owes them subjection and obedience; and that as they are
set over them by Christ, and by him made their Teachers and Rulers, and sent by
him to take the charge and oversight of them, and to Administer his holy
Ordinances to them in his name, for their good, Heb. 13.7, 17. Remember them
that have the Rule over you (or are Guides unto you, as the words also
signify). Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves; for
they watch for your Souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it
with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. Without
Government and Governors; power and Authority; Laws and Orders, and without
subjection and obedience, in and of the Members of all sorts of Corporations
and Societies of men in the world, whether civil or Ecclesiastical, they will
be, but confused Routs and Babels: There will be, can be nothing but confusion
and every evil work, as James speaks, Chap. 3.16. If they are Rulers, and have
Authority from the Lord Jesus to appoint, order and command, as it is clear they
have, (or they are but shadows or ciphers,) 2 These. 3.4, 6. 1 Timothy 4.11. Tit.
2. ult. then they may, yea they ought to appoint, order and command, as they
see occasion, for the profit and well being of the Church, in pursuance of
their work and trust. And if so, then the Church and all the Members thereof,
are indispensibly bound to yield all free, hearty, willing, and cheerful
subjection and obedience to them, without grudging, quarrelling, or irregular
gainsaying, that is, they are to eye the will and authority of Christ in, and
expressed by them: and so to conform to it, as it is Christ's, not theirs. They
must obey them not as gifted men, but as the Ambassadors, Ministers and
Officers of Christ, and it is Christ, and his will and Authority in them, that
must be the object of their obedience and subjection. The neglect whereof is,
when through carelessness or wilfulness, no less than disobedience too, yea
Rebellion against the Lord Christ himself, Luke 10.16, 17. Col. 3.23, 24. Great
was the love and care of Christ, as the head and King of his Churches, in
providing Laws, Rules, and Orders, as also in Authorizing and sending some to
execute them, for their spiritual good, and his glory. And therefore when
Church Members do slight, neglect, disobey, and practically despise them; they
do thereby slight, contemn and despise the love, care and Authority of Christ;
and Christ accounts it so, although those teaching Rulers are not Apostles, but
ordinary Officers, as Luke 10.16, 17. shows when the Lord Jesus went to Heaven,
he gave gifts to men, (viz.) Ministers, and Ministerial abilities to them, for
the work of the Ministry, for the perfecting of the Saints, etc. Ephesians. 4.10, 11,
12. Then he delegated his Ministerial power to men, promised to provide such
for his Saints, and to furnish them with his own gifts, yea to be with them
himself, unto the end of the world, Math. 28.18, 19, 20. Wherefore then, the
Churches of Christ should receive, submit to and obey them (in a sense) even as
Christ himself, as they are Authorized, gifted, granted and sent by him, in and
about his message, work and service, in all their lawful commands and
appointments, and regular Ministrations in and for the Churches. He that
receives you, receives me (says Christ) of the 70. Disciples he sent to
Preach, Luke 10.16. Math. 10.40. And Paul commends the Galatians, for receiving
him, as an Angel of God, even as Christ himself, Gal. 4.14, 15. and the same
Apostle charges Titus, to speak and act in the Church with all Authority,
charging all the Members also, not to despise or slight him, for, or in his so
doing, Tit. 2.15. If not to despise or slight him, then to honor, submit to,
and obey him, as Christ's and their Minister. Well then! do the Elders or
Pastors of Churches carefully mind, and diligently labor in the Word and
Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.17. then all the Members of Churches are bound to obey them:
to submit to, and wait on their Ministry; and not despise them and it, by
deserting and withdrawing from it, in whole, or in part. (But more of this
anon). 2. Do they appoint meetings, or call their Churches to assemble together
for the celebration of any Ordinance of God, or to consult about the matters
and concernments of the Church for their profit and Christ's glory? they are
bound in duty to do so (excepting in extraordinary cases that hinder them) as
they will answer the contrary contempt to Christ, at their peril. They must not
look on their practical conformity to it, as an indifferent matter, and stay at
home, or come at their own will and pleasure, but actually obey such a call or
summons as Christ's: not dispute it, but obey it: not in the pride of their
hearts disdain it, but readily and cheerfully subject to it. Obey them that
have the rule over you, for they watch for your Souls; Heb. 13.17. and be sure
when they appoint such meetings, it is for the Churches advantage. 3. Do they
appoint or require speech or silence in the Church, or any good Orders and
Rules to be observed and kept in the name of Christ, and by his Authority? they
are bound to obey them, without loading them, and obstructing their proceedings
with Jangling disputes and oppositions. And as in these, so in all other
matters, wherein the honor of Christ, the profit of the Church, or any Members
thereof consists.

Rulers must see that they command and appoint, order and rule wisely, and
faithfully, and keep close to their Commission; design and carry on Christ's
holy ends in all: and as they must rule well, so all the Members ruled by them
must obey well too. And when both do their duties in their places, the Lord
Christ is honored and pleased, and all the Church are, or may be profited and
edified, and peace and truth promoted. But on the contrary, all confusion,
disorder, and disturbances will necessarily follow, as sad experience has
abundantly proved in this Land.

It is a clear and certain truth, (obvious to all men) that if some must rule,
others must obey? And if some are appointed and commanded by the Great and
absolute Sovereign to Rule and Govern well; then it must of necessity, be the
indispensible duty of others to submit and obey well. All according and in
obedience to the Authority and Sovereign will of their Great Law giver, the
Lord Jesus. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, is
as indispensible a duty, as any you have to do; which I could abundantly
confirm, by many Scripture Reasons, had I room in this Discourse to enlarge on
it.

Fifthly, It is the will of Christ, and the Churches indispensible duty, to
simpathize with their Teachers, to help and encourage them, to strengthen their
hands, and comfort their hearts; and to do all they can to forward them in
their work: that they may fulfill their Ministry, and do their whole duty with
joy, and not with grief, ^ol. 4.17. Heb. 13.17. For whatever you do, for or
against them, you do it for or against Christ himself, whose Ambassadors and
Officers they are to you, 2 Cor. 5.20. They have his Image of Authority stamped
on them, and are sent to you by himself about, and employed in his work amongst
you. They labor, toil and sweat, to serve and promote the interests and
concernments of your Souls, and they make it their business to do you all the
good they can: yea your happiness and welfare is much wrapped up in theirs. And
therefore when you burden and discourage them, you hinder your selves of
profit, and when you comfort, help and encourage them in their Ministerial
work, you further your own happiness thereby. This is clearly intimated by the
Apostle, in Heb. 13.17. (before mentioned) Obey them that have the Rule over
you: for they watch for your Souls; that they may do it with joy, and not with
grief: Now mark his Reason, why! because that will be unprofitable for you. The
meaning is, the better you carry it toward your Teachers, who watch for your
Souls, and the more profitable you are to them, the more profitable they will
be to you: the more useful and comfortable you are to them, the more useful and
comfortable they will be to you. We say, it is encouragement that makes a good
Orator, and much more does encouragement from Christians, make (in a sense)
good Ministers. There is a great deal of difference between working under
discouragement and encouragement, discouragements from Christians do as it were
unhinge Ministers, and cause them to Travel in pain, like Porters, with
pressing heavy burdens on their backs. Their unkindnesses do greatly cumber and
distract them, trouble and perplex them, discompose and deject them: they
exceedingly weaken their hands, and sadden their hearts, and even make their
lives a burden to them. And that because the true Ministers of Christ do so
entirely and heartily love their people, as that, had they encouragement from
them, they could freely spend, and be spent for them, 2 Cor. 12.15. and they do
expect a great deal of hearty love and kindness from them again, as well they
may; for that Christ requires it of them toward their Ministers, and they
spend their time and strength in their service and concernments; yea, and when
they called them to take the oversight of them, they engaged so to do. But now
being disappointed of their so reasonable expectation, they cannot but lay it
to heart, and cry out of wrong, as Paul and Jeremy did. To prevent which, the
Lord Jesus charges and strictly enjoins all his people, to see they carry
themselves well toward his and their Ministers. 1. By avoiding whatever may
grieve or trouble them. 2. By giving them all possible encouragements. 1. Would
you encourage and strengthen your Teachers in their work, then attend on their
Ministry and Ministrations, seriously, dutifully, conscienciously and
constantly. The neglect of your so doing, does greatly discourage them, sadden
their hearts, and weaken their hands. The liberty some take (which Christ never
gave them) to withdraw as they please, from their Ministers, and rambling up
and down here and there, as they please; either from their prejudice, pride,
ignorance or giddiness of spirit: or from a wanton, lavish, vain spirit; from
their itching cars (as Paul speaks) 2 Timothy 4.3. or from the Devil; is
exceedingly hurtful to them, as well as to the Souls of such Transgressors. So
likewise when they come to their Administrations unseasonably, or untimely, and
do there carry and demean themselves carelessly, indifferently and unreverently;
they cast a stumbling block before them, and cause great offense to them.

Therefore, you must attend on their Ministry, as on Christ's and your own
Ministry, seriously, timely, conscientiously, diligently, freely, dutifully and
constantly when they Preach and Administer: for that is your duty, and the
contrary is your sin; which in time will find you out. For you by your so
doing, walk disorderly, scandalously, irregularly, and contrary to the charge
given you, Heb. 10.24.25. not forsaking the Assembling of your selves together,
as the manner of some is. You walk out of your folds, and prodigally run out of
the place where the providence of God has set you, and commanded you to abide
and worship him in, until he do by some extraordinary dispensation call you
off, you expose your selves to great danger, and tempt the holy Spirit to
withdraw his Divine influences from you: and I dare peremptorily affirm, that
while any do so, they are backsliding from God, and God is going off from
them; that they shall never thrive nor prosper in Grace, nor have any
Ordinances blessed to them; and though their wanton disorderly ways seem right
unto them, yet they lead to death, Prove. 14.12. Moreover, such neglects in
Church Members tends directly to the breaking of the Churches of Christ, and
all good Order, Peace and prosperity in them; and to the bringing in of all
irregularities and confusion, to the great scandal of the Gospel; dishonor of
Christ, offense of the faithful, and to the breaking of their Ministers hearts.
Which certainly will have bitterness in the end; although it may be pleasing to
the offenders a while. Oh! how grievous must such courses of Church Members
needs be unto their Pastors? who have prayed, studied, and labored to make
good provision for them, to comfort and build up their souls in Christ, and
that in hopes of finding them there in a readiness to receive it, when they
come to hand it out to them; and then shall either find them gone, or else
there in an irreverent and careless manner* This pierces their hearts, and
deeply wounds their poor Souls. But on the contrary, when they see their flocks
seriously, reverently, seasonably, and constantly keep their places, and
worship God together, conscienciously and dutifully: this lightens, gladens and
comforts their hearts; strengthens their hands, and puts (as it were) a new
life into them. It oils the Wheels; and helps to make them run on easily,
sweetly and comfortably. If it be the duty of Ministers to wait on their
Office, to Preach the word in season, and out of season; to attend to the
Ministry of the word, and to feed their flocks and watch over them; as indeed
it is. Then undoubtedly, it is the indispensible duty of such to attend and
wait on their Ministry. For the work is relative. And the same Authority that
binds the one, binds also the other. The one must Preach and Administer, and
the other must freely, dutifully, and constantly wait on their Administrations.
And let me tell you and assure you, that by your deserting your Ministers in
whole or in part, you despise them and their Ministry; you expose your selves
to inevitable Reproach (for it is a scandalous sin) and your Ministers and
their Ministry to great derision and contempt, and this will cost you dear one
day.

Obj. But we cannot profit by them; their Ministrations are dead to us.

Answ. It may be so, but whose fault is that, theirs or yours? will you lay the
blame on them, when indeed it is your own? is that justice, or horrible
injustice? Prove. 17.15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns
the just: even they both are abomination to the Lord. You did once value and
esteem them, and found life and refreshing in their Ministry? else why did you
join with them, call and choose them for your Ministers? They did not force
themselves on you, you were at your free choice, to refuse them, and sit down
under others Ministry. Besides, while you pretend that the cause of your
deserting such as you have chosen and once found good by, others of the same
Congregation find their Ministry very profitable to them still, and continue to
wait on it, and bless God for it; and abhor all thoughts of deserting it: If
so, then it is evident that God is with your Ministers, and blesses their
Ministry; and then what follows? but that the fault is in you, not in your
Ministry. For why should not you profit by it as well as others? but that the
obstruction is at home? And it would better become you, and argue a better
spirit in you, to search out the plagues of your own hearts, and lay the blame
where it is, than where it is not. If you find no good by their Ministry, is it
not because you (1) have left God in secret? God and you are become strangers
at home? If it be so, as most likely it is, then wonder not if the Ordinances
of God profit you not. For what can you expect to find in Divine Ordinances,
when God is departed from you, because you are departed from God? There is a
woe pronounced to such, Hosea. 9.12. (2.) Do you not live in some known sin
without Repentance? It is more than probable you do: and if so, then be sure
you will find no good in any of Gods Ordinances, until that Idol be removed by
Repentance, out of your hearts and hands, Ezekiel. 14.2, 3, 7. Joshua. 7. says God
to such, I will answer you according to your Idols; who presume to come before
me with Idols in your hearts, as every known sin is. (3.) Have you not
conceived a displeasure, and taken up prejudice against your Ministers persons,
or their Ministry. If so, no marvel if you profit not by them? But then I say,
that is your fault, not theirs: you have laid a stumbling block in your own way,
and obstruct your profitting, by the works of your own hands. So some of the
Corinthians were prejudiced against Paul, and they could by no means profit by
his Ministry; and therefore away they go to Apollo. Why, what is the matter?
why! he had not such excellent speech and language as Apolle had, 1 Cor. 2.1.
and his bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible, 2 Cor. 10.10.
Alas! Paul is an inconsiderable fellow; We did love, affect and wait, on his
Ministry, and time was, we received profit by it. But now the case is altered;
Paul is no man for us, no, but Apollo, a man of more Eloquence shall be our man
now, a Rush for Paul. Well, to Apollo they go, and leave poor Paul to Preach to
their seats, or shift for himself. But it is not long that Apollo shall please
them and be their man, no, but to Cephas they go, and where then, God knows.
But was this their virtue, and a proof of their spiritual growth and
seize? no, but on the contrary, the Holy Ghost tells them once and again,
that they did wickedly by their shiftings from one Teacher to another, and
proved themselves but poor, low, carnal professors, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3. This is
ordinarily (if not always) one cause of men's leaving their own Ministers. And
you that are guilty of it now, will find this evil humor at the bottom of your
shifting, and withdrawing from your Teachers; would you suffer your Consciences
to speak out, and search them to the bottom; but that you are not willing to
see your own spots in a clear Glass. (4.) Do you not profit by the Ministry of
your own Ministers? why! is it not your Pride? do you not conceit that you are
wiser than they, and so they are unmeet and unworthy to teach you, and you are
too high and good to learn or be taught of them? half an eye may see that this
is also in the bottom of your desertions: you are not poor and hungry hearers,
nor little in your own eyes, but are too full of conceits of your own
abilities, and base conceits of your Teachers; and therefore you are not
profitted by their Ministry. This also was the Corinthians Disease, which made
them slight Paul's Ministry as unprofitable and unworthy of them, 1 Cor. 4.2,
11. (5.) And as in these causes at home you will, or may find, why you do not
profit by the Ministry of your own Teachers; so likewise because the world, and
the deceitful pleasures and profits thereof do lie deep in your hearts, and
swallow up, yea drown your minds and affections. In a word, you want love to
Christ, his word, Ordinances and Ministers, and therefore you do not profit,
you do not pray heartily and fervently for them, that God would make them able
Ministers of the New Testament, and bless their Ministry to your Souls profit:
and therefore they profit you not. Again, you trouble, distract and grieve
their hearts, contrary to the will of God: and therefore they cannot profit
you. And by these and many other sinful ways, you grieve the holy Spirit so,
as that he will not concur with, nor bless and prosper their sincere endeavors
to do you good. But then I say still, the fault is in you, not in them; they
would, but cannot mend these things in you, but so may you if you will. And
know for certain, that if you are really willing to know these and other causes
in your selves; and shall deal truly with your own hearts, and consciences in
the case, you will find what I have said to be a great truth. And whether or
no, you will know and own it, yet be sure that God (the great heart-searcher)
does know it is so. And let me advise and counsel you, in the fear of God, to
hasten to find out these plagues of your own hearts, and ways, and get deep
convictions of them; humble your selves before God unfeignedly for them:
confess your Errors and sins, and take the blame and shame to your selves, for
harboring such Vipers in your bosoms; falsely blaming and charging your
Teachers, with your own evils, justifying the guilty (your selves) and
condemning the just (your Ministers) which the Lord abhors. Sue out pardons in
the blood of Christ, and do all you can toward the removal of all the
hindrances of your profitting by your own Ministry, out of the way, and get a
meek, humble, hungering and thirsting Spirit, a heavenly and spiritual frame of
heart, love to Christ, his Word and Ordinances, to your own Teachers, and their
Administrations; and see if the case do not alter. Prove, if their Ministry do
not profit you, and if God do not indeed bless and prosper their labors to
you. If you shall in good earnest do these things, and come in obedience to
hear them, as to an Ordinance of Christ for your good; look unto, and depend on
him for his presence and blessing on your attendance on their Ministry: set
your selves in sincerity of heart before the face of God to receive his word,
and the blessed power and efficacy of it on your Souls, and give diligent
attention to what you hear, and resolve unfeignedly, and endeavor with all
your abilities (as you are bound to do) to practice, and rightly improve all
you hear to your own and others profit, and the glory of God in all. I dare
boldly assure you, that you shall find the blessing of all Ordinances
Administered by them to your Souls. Therefore try and prove it so (as you ought,
and may do, and your own experiences will fully and clearly answer the
objection, and remove all difficulties out of the way.

Obj. But we find the Ministry of others more profitable to us.

Answ. That Is strange, and no less than a gross delusion; for can you indeed
believe on a Scripture foundation and evidence, that God has commanded you to
obey him to your loss and detriment? God has charged his Churches, to assemble
themselves together, namely, with their own Teachers, Heb. 10.25. and to obey
them that have the Rule, or oversight over them; Heb. 13.17. and to know them
which labor among them, and are over them in the Lord, and to esteem very
highly in love, for their works sake, 1 These. 5.12.13. here is your duty. And
if so, then be sure God intended all he commanded you, for your profit and
advantage, and in no case to your disprofit; he that has with your own free
consent, set you in such a Church, given you such a Ministry, inclined your
hearts to make choice of it, and them for your Ministry and Ministers, sealed
their Ministry to others, if not to you (for the abovesaid Reasons) commanded
them to feed you, and watch over you, and given them hearts to do it, from time
to time; did undoubtedly know what was best for you, and design your profit,
and the good of the whole. And if he had, had an intention to have made use of
others, rather than of those you have to your greater advantage, he would in
season have directed you to them, or else they to you; and not have settled you
where you are, and have bound you there to abide in love and peace, and in a
dependence on him for his presence and blessing; to your wrong and prejudice,
as the objection intimates. This objection sets the Precepts and Orders of God,
at discord and variance with his promises of his presence and blessings with
his people. For if he has enjoined you to assemble together, and keep to your
own fold, under the Teaching and oversight of your own Ministers, as he has
done; and yet as you say, he blesses another Ministry in an other place, that
has no such Relation to you, as your own has. Then I say, if that were true
(as it is not) that God does so bless that strange Ministry, only in pursuance
of his promises so to do. And if so, then his promises calls you out of your
place to enjoy the good of them elsewhere, when his Rules and Precepts direct
and engage you, to wait on, and worship God in your own Church. But who, that
are not under strong prejudices and delusion can believe it, that God should
deal so with his people? or who durst affirm in cold blood, that the only wise
and righteous God, is contrary to himself? or that his Laws should thus
contradict his promises, or that his peoples duty and work lies in one place,
and the good of the promises in another, or that they must do their duty in one
place, and yet expect the blessings of the promises in another, at the same
time; yet this, and much more is employed and included in the Objection. Is not
this a charging God with folly? can any men in their sober moods believe
indeed, the matter of their own Objection, or the reason of their pretense, for
leaving their own Ministers and Ministry, and the Congregation to which they
are with, and by their own free consent united? I think not, neither dare they
say in the presence and fear of God; that they do so. But in truth, it is but a
pretense to blind others eyes, and stop their mouths against their just
reproofs, for want of better Arguments, which such Transgressors are wholly
destitute of; yet something they will, and think they must say for themselves,
and the justifying of their disorderly and scandalous practices, in deserting
their own chosen Teachers and Congregations; although it be never so absurd and
base. But sad experience shows, what they profit by such as they pretend to be
more profitable to them, than their own Teachers are. Their words and carriages
are loud proofs of it: or rather, that the Devils transforming themselves into
Angels of light to them, do, together with their own pride, prejudice, etc.
persuade and entice them to such evil manners, and Churchdestroying practices:
and to put a fair face on a foul matter, he helps them to defend themselves
against checks of Conscience, and Reproofs of their Brethren, by such
ridiculous reasons, or rather pretenses, as these.

They care not how they charge God: wrong their own Souls; stumble and offend
their Brethren, grieve and sadden their own Ministers, and cast contempt on the
Church and the Ministry thereof, so they may thereby, but gratify their own
lusts, their pride and prejudice; their humors and passions, and do what they
please.

2. Be tender of your Ministers good Names, and endeavor to preserve them in
Credit and Reputation, to the utmost of your power, as you have opportunity.
For this is the will of Christ, and your duty. If you are charged to honor
them, and highly to esteem them for their works sake? 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 These.
5.12, 13. (as aforesaid) then you are bound by the same Laws, to keep up and
maintain their honor, credit and reputation among your own selves, and with
others; and not hear them villified, slighted and contemned by Back biters,
behind their backs, while you are lookers on, and hearers of it, and hold your
Tongues, and speak not for their vindication; as too many do. But rather join
with them, and justify such wretches by their silence, and connivence (if not
positively fall in with them) then show their indignation against them, respect
to, honor of, and zeal for their Ministers and their Ministry. It is well
known, that when their good Names suffer, the Ministry of Christ in their hands
suffers with them, and proves a great hindrance to the Gospel: and we cannot be
ignorant of Satan's devices, and his industry and design to obstruct the Gospel,
and the profit of Souls, by stirring up evil Tongues, to blast their
Reputation, who labor in the Gospel. And the more faithful, diligent, sincere
and successful they are, the more industriously will Satan, by his evil
Instruments, pursue them with Reproaches; That so their labors may be rendered
useless. Witness Jeremy, Paul, yea Christ himself, who were exceeding faithful,
diligent, and useful in the World to men Yet how were they bespattered with
evil Tongues? and rendered unworthy Inhabitants of the World. And the same
Spirit is still working, and like Instruments ready to do the same work against
your Ministers now. Therefore you must do as Peter did, Acts 2.12, 13. when he
heard the mouths of men open against them, namely, stand up stoutly for their
vindication, and sharply reprove their Back-biters, and wicked slanderers, and
by no means give them any encouragement by your harkning to, or silence at
them. Christ vindicated Joshua against the Devils accusation and Reproaches,
Zach. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. so do you your Ministers. But especially, do not you, who
are Church Members, receive or entertain an accusation against your Teachers at
all, behind their backs, nor under two or three credible witnesses, before
their faces; nor be Whisperers against, or Back-biters of them your selves, one
to another. For that is such horrible wickedness, as God, and their Lord and
Master will most certainly revenge, and arise in due time to plead their cause
against you, although he may seem to wink at it for a time. And know, that if
your Ministers know not your doings, yet God takes special notice of them, and
will declare his abhorrence of them to your shame and sorrow at last. Blessed
Ezekiel, had his Whisperers and Back-biters by the Walls, unknown to him, but
God detected them, Ezekiel. 33.30, 31, 32, 33. (read the words at large) They were
a Generation that carried it smoothly and fairly to his face, but cruelly
snarled at him behind his back, and set their venomous Teeth in his flesh, as
too many Professors do now deal with their Teachers. Many Church Members do
greatly please themselves now, with talking to one another against their
Teachers, behind their backs, and blame them for this and that, and so wipe
their mouths and say they have done no evil. They can with delight hear them
villified; receive and entertain false accusations against them, from their
bitter Enemies; yea, and report what they have heard to others also; and bless
themselves in their so doing. But let such know, that they have done very
abominably and unrighteously, and their sin will assuredly find them out in
Gods time. The Lord Jesus charges you, that you receive not an accusation
against an Elder, under two or three witnesses, 1 Timothy 5.19. and yet they dare
do it upon the backbiting accusation of one malicious Accuser. God charges you
to honor your Ministers, and to uphold and maintain their Credit and
Reputation in the Church and World, for his name and Gospels sake, and the good
of Souls. But you dare stand by, and by your silence countenance their
backbiting Reproachers, while you hear them discredit and dishonor them, and
that which is yet worser, you give your positive consent to their wickedness,
and join Issues with them by receiving, crediting and entertaining of what they
say. God peremptorily charges you not to Whisper against back-biters, nor speak
evil of any man, nor be a Talebearer, Levit. 19.16. Tit. 3.2. Jam. 4.11. Ephesians.
4.31. 2 Cor. 12.20. and particularly of Teaching-Rulers, Exodus 22.28. Act.
23.5. But you dare to do it (as it were) in spite of God and your own
Consciences, of, and against your Elders. Oh! let your Ministers good Names, be
of great esteem with you, and near and dear unto you. Be you very cheary and
tender of them, and do not in any way, by any means, either by Omission or
Commission, dishonor or discredit them. For by your so doing, you disobey the
will of God, and dishonor him, and declare that you hate your Ministers,
although you pretend to love and honor them; that you contemn them, although
you pretend the contrary never so much. Yea, you are guilty of real Murder, as
I have abundantly proved from Scripture; in a book, entitled, The evil Tongue
tried and found guilty, etc.

3. Visit your Ministers often, and be not strange, or strangers to them; for
that will much discourage them in their work. There is a near Relation between
Pastors and their Churches, which calls for frequent visits; and your frequent
visits, if free and voluntary, and the fruits of your love to them, and esteem
of them, especially if well improved, will be very refreshing, comforting and
encouraging to them. If they are freely willing to give you loving and
profitable visits; then so should you to them; your Elders love your Company,
and glad to see you free and open hearted in your converses with them, about
your concernments, when seriously and meekly managed; and the contrary is very
grievous and offensive to their Souls. For how can they think you love and
esteem them, when you will not vouchsafe (it may be) to give them a visit, in a
whole year together? or how can they believe you profit by, and value their
labors, when you are so exceeding shy of their Company, and strange in your
carriages toward them; your voluntary visits might be improved to great profit
to both: and I am persuaded, that the neglect of this is sinful, and not a
little detrimental, or injurious to their Souls. As their work will not permit
it, so it is unreasonable, that your Teachers should always go to you, if they
will speak with you. Therefore you should come to them, as well as they go to
you. Well then! encourage them, by your so doing, and you will reap the profit
of it, as well as they. Let your love to them and esteem of them; be seen in
this, as well as in other expressions of them. For it is your duty so to do, as
it is your duty to forbear whatever may discourage them, and do all you can to
encourage and forward them in their work. But be sure, that your visits be not
in vain, but to spiritual profit; And that they are indeed, the fruits of your
cordial love to, and esteem of them, or else they are no better than painted
Images, and whited Sepulchers; and you will appear to be no better than
Ezekiels hearers were to him; who with their mouths did show much love, but
their hearts were of another mould, Ezekiel. 33.30. ult.

4. Stand by them, and help to bear their burdens, when you know them, and they
require your assistance. Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of
Christ, Gal. 6.2. If you know them fall into, or under any Sin or Temptation,
set your hand to lift them up again; If they fall under afflictions, help to
bear them for them. Be like the good Samaritan in this matter, Luke 10. and not
like the cruel Priest and Levite, who saw the wounded man lay weltring in his
blood, and crying out of his wounds, and left him to shift for himself, 31.32.
verses, no, but show your selves good Samaritans, who simpathized with, and
actually helped him in his distress, according to his need. If your Ministers
must simpathize with you, and help you in your needs, then you must do the same
to them. Show bowels of love and pity to them, and set your hands and shoulders
too, to help them under their Sins, Temptations, and other Trials and
Afflictions; and if possible to lift them out of them. Are they reproached?
help to bear their burdens. Are they persecuted by men? help to bear their
burdens. And do the like in all other weighty cases for them. Oh! how many are
there, who pretend highly for Heaven? but care not what becomes of their
painful Ministers. Who can hear of their troubles and sorrows, and Galio like,
care for none of these things, nor seriously mind, whether they sink or swim;
but like Paul's pretended friends, who when they saw him in deadly danger,
forsook him, 2 Timothy 4.16. and left him to stand or fall by himself.

5. Blame not their Ministry to one another, especially behind their backs,
neither slight and undervalue their gifts, graces, or any of their endeavors
and labors, in and for the Church, although they may not in all things suit or
please your humors, thoughts or opinions. For they are bound in their
Administrations, to please Christ, and follow their own light and judgments,
their persuasions and consciences in all things, for the Churches edification;
and not to walk according to the judgments, will and pleasure of their
Church Members, either in their Doctrine or Discipline. And those Churches that
will impose their own apprehensions and opinions on their Pastors or Elders,
and load them with burdens of work and duty, which the Lord Jesus never
commanded them, are in their so doing, no less than Tyrannical-Usurpers over
them. For if Elders may not impose any thing or matter on the Churches, but the
yoke and will of Christ, much less may the Churches impose their own opinions
on their Elders. We say, that it is too hard a matter for any man to please all
men, and experience shows, that it is as hard a matter for any Elders of
Churches to please all their Members; but that one or other will be offended at
this, another at that; and then divulge their dislike of this or that in them
unto others, and endeavor to bring them into dislike of it also: And then to
make it their business to tattle and talk of it one to another, until they have
run themselves into further mischiefs. Therefore Ministers, may no further seek
to please their Churches, then in and by their so doing, they may please Christ
their Lord. And what that is, I should think, that their Elders should
understand as well, if not better than they. Paul sought not to please men, but
God in his Ministry, Gal. 1.10. Some Professors do delight themselves in this
evil work, namely, in seeking matters, and making faults against their Elders,
and then possess others with their own inventions; and if they do not gratify
and please them in all things, they shall (be sure) to please them in nothing.
All their works are blameworthy, in their account. But as this shows that they
are acted by a Spirit of Pride and prejudice against their Elders, so they do
thereby declare their own folly, and lay open their own nakedness, with a
witness: yea, they dishonor Christ, hinder the profit of their own and others
Souls, by their so contemning his and their Ministry; and greatly grieve and
stumble their Teachers, and cause them to walk up and down with sad hearts.
Therefore do you take heed and beware of this evil, for the Devil will tempt
you to it, that he may hurt your Souls, afflict your Teachers, and hinder the
Gospel; you should commend and esteem whatever is their virtue, whatever you
may see lovely in them; and if you see any defects, or unavoidable weaknesses
in them, to cast a mantle of love over them; and by all means endeavor to keep
up in each others hearts, a due esteem of, and respect unto them, and their
Ministry, that the Gospel be not hindered, but furthred and encouraged by your
means.

6. Join with your Teachers, and that by affording them your Concurrence and
utmost assistance, in their endeavors to promote good things in, for the good
of the Church; and do not hinder, or load such overtures, designs and
endeavors of your Ministers, by your absence, groundless disputes, or by your
sullen silence there. When they propound any matter to you for your profit, and
the welfare of your Souls, the peace and prosperity of the Church, or the
benefit of others: then weigh and ponder well the reasons which they give, for
what they do, or desire should be done, or omitted, by themselves or the
Church, or altogether; and if you cannot null and answer them, or bring better
for the contrary; then you should quietly, thankfully, and peaceably accept of
theirs, acquiesce in them, and encourage them in their design, and not put
difficulties in the way, by some singular notions of your own. Do as Nathan
did, when David propounded a case to him, and told him, that it was meet God
should have a house built for his Name and Worship, and gives him some reason
for his proposition. Nathan replies, Go, do all that is in thy heart, 2 Samuel 7.
He saw it a most reasonable and useful an undertaking, and freely complied with
David, and encouraged him to go on and proceed. WHy should not you comply with
your Teachers? when they design and propound some good work, to be carried on,
for the glory of Christ, and benefit of his Church, or other men? and why
should not their reasons be soberly and humbly considred of by you, and oblige
you to practice, unless you can null them, and with peace and meekness propound
better to them for their satisfaction. It is sad when Members of Churches shall
be so highly conceited of themselves, and their own Notions, as that they shall
despise and turn (as it were) a deaf ear to all the reasons of their Elders,
and delight in being singular from them and their fellow-Brethren, in
Church Matters: and in contending for Victory, rather than for Truth. This
ought not to be. For it makes Church-work tedious, spoils the beauty and
loveliness of it; yea it marrs the Harmony of Church order. And this is
dishonorable to Christ, and the Church; and exceedingly grievous to your
Teachers: who do unfeignedly seek and aim at your good in all; and dare not do
otherwise for fear of offending Christ their Lord.

7. Encourage them with your Purses also. For it is the will of Christ that you
should do so. They labor for your Souls, and spend their time and strength to
do you all possible service, in their places and capacities; and therefore it
is most reasonable that you should labor and provide for their bodies. They
spend for you, and therefore you should spend for them. They are Shepherds; do
watch over and wait on you, their Flocks. And I appeal to any indifferent
Judgment, if it be not a most reasonable thing, that they should live by the
milk of their Flocks? surely! Paul, yea the Holy Ghost thought so, 1 Cor. 9.7,
8. and therefore have declared it, for our Learning and practice. It was Gods
Ordinance under the old Testament, and it is ratified and confirmed to men,
under and by the new Testament also; namely, that Ministers should be
honorably and comfortably maintained, by their Congregations. The Great God
took special care about it, and made provisions for their maintenance, as soon
as he had ordained and set them up, and appointed and set them out their work.
And God strictly-charged his people, to see that they did not at any time
forget or neglect the Levite, but pay them all that he had set out and
appointed for them, and that then, when by reason of Age, or other impediments,
they could not Minister to them, and for them, as well as when they did, Numb.
3.6. to the 14. verse. Numb. 16.9, 10. Deuteronomy. 26.2.15. verse. Deuteronomy. 10.8, 9. Numb.
7.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 12.19. Deuteronomy. 14.26, 27, 28, 29. Deuteronomy. 18.1, 9. Now Gods
care of, and goodness to his Ambassadors, did not dye with the Ceremonial Law,
but he has continued it under the Gospel, and therein straightly charged his
people to provide for them, according to their abilities. God commands his
people to communicate to their Teachers in all good things, Gal. 6.6. Let him
that is taught in the word, communicate to him that Teaches, in all good
things. And in 1 Cor. 9.14. The Apostle assures us, that it is not of men, but
a real and unchangeable Ordinance of God, now, by, and under the Gospel. For
(says he) so has God ordained, that they that Preach the Gospel should live of
the Gospel. (Mark), it is ordained; God has made it a Statute. Law, that
cannot be altered, neither may it be transgressed under pain of Gods high
displeasure. And the Apostle argues (by the Spirit) the justness, and the
undoubted reasonableness and righteousness of men's so doing, and that the
evidence of mere Reason, and the Dictates of natural Conscience, without either
written Law or Gospel, will abundantly prove, and undeniably conclude this
Truth, against all opposition whatsoever, 7.10. verses. And proves, that it is
not matter of gift or charity, (as it is to give to men in distress, to whom we
are not endebted nor related) but that it is debt and justice; or a due debt in
strict Justice: and that by a threefold Law, (viz.) The Law of Nature, the
written Law of God, in the old Testament; and the new Law or Gospel, as in
this, 1 Cor. 9. from the 5. to the 15. verse. he evinces, so in Gal. 6.6. and
Romans 15.27. And says the Apostle in 1 Cor. 9.11. v. If we have sown to you
spiritual things, is it a great thing, if we shall reap your carnal things. As
if he had said, alas! These are but light, small and low matters that you give
us, for our pains and labors, in comparison of what we do for and dispense to
you. Your carnal things, that you impart to us for our bodies, are not
comparable to our labor, pains and care to impart spiritual Riches to your
Souls. And therefore if you grudge at your parting with yours to us, know, that
you grudge us small and very inconsiderable things, in comparison of what we
distribute to you. This is another of your works and duties to your Teachers.
You must therefore do it, and that 1. Cheerfully and willingly, not grudgingly;
heartily, not hypocritically and indifferently: dutifully, and in obedience to
the will of Christ, not as an arbitrary thing, that you may, or may not do, at
your own will and pleasure; Constantly and perseveringly, not for some time
only. And see that your ends be right in it, namely, to encourage your
Ministers, propagate the Gospel; to profit Souls, to serve, please and honor
the Lord Jesus; and that in the right performance of your duty to Christ and
his Ministers, you may enjoy the good of the promises, and the blessings of all
Christ's Ordinances administered by them.

But that I may a little more enforce this on your Consciences, be pleased to
consider, First, That your Ministers are appointed, commanded, and they do
wholly attend on Christ, and the service of your Souls. They are said to wait
at the Altar, 1 Cor. 9.13. and commanded to give themselves wholly to their
work of Teaching, Ruling, Reading, Meditation, Study, and Exhortation, that
their profiting may appear to all: that they may rightly divide the word of
Truth, and that by so doing, they may both save themselves, and them that hear
them, 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15, 16. 2 Timothy 2.15. They must Preach the word in
season, and out of season, etc. 2 Timothy 1.2. Feed their Flocks, and take the
care and oversight of them, Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. And therefore you must
take care of their bodies, on whom they attend. For you see that they may not,
cannot follow other Employments to get Bread, because they are commanded to do
other work for you, and the greatness and difficulty of their own proper work,
necessitates them to wait on, and attend to it with all diligence. Therefore
you ought to provide for them, all suitable supplies, because they cannot, may
not do it themselves. (2.) Consider, that you are plainly and peremptorily
commanded, and charged to Communicate to them, in, and of all your carnal
things, as you heard before. And therefore you are by Christ's Authority, and
revealed will, indispensibly bound to do it, and that without grudging or
gainsaying. For a plainer, and a more Indispensible dury is not imposed upon
you (who are able) in the Gospel: and therefore you cannot plead ignorance, for
the breach or neglect of it. And if you do not obey your God and King in this,
as well as in other things; how can you be called, obedient Children, 1 Pet.
1.14. and how shall Christ commend you, as he did Zachary and Elizabeth, for
walking in all his Commandments and Ordinances, blamelesly? Luke 1.6. Or how
can you expect that Christ should say unto you, well done good and faithful
servants? You have done that which was your duty to do: when you know, that you
lived in the wilful neglect of a known and easy duty? (3.) Consider, that God
takes special notice of your doings and carriages toward his Ambassadors, and
your Teachers. He is privy to all your ways; and will abundantly reward all
your kindnesses and unkindnesses to them, and that because they are his and
yours. Therefore, be careful to demean and carry your selves toward them so,
as that the Lord Jesus may say to you, well done good and faithful Servants,
you have been kind and good, respectful and dutiful to my Ministers, and to me
in them. And therefore I will recompense all your work of faith and labor of
love to them. For what you did to them, as they were my Ministers, you did to
me; I take all, as done to my self, enter into the joy of your Lord. These are
some, and but some of the Churches duties toward their Pastors, or
Teaching-Elders. For although I have been larger on this head than I intended,
yet I forbear speaking any more, lest some should think, I say too much.

CHAP. VI.
Of mere Ruling-Elders, and Deacons of their Office, Work and Power in the
Church. How they ought to do their Work, and for what ends they are set in the
Church. As also the Churches duty to them; with the necessary qualifications of
such Officers.
Quest. WHat other Officers has Christ appointed for, and set in his Church or
Churches, in the New Testament, besides Teaching-Elders.

Answ. The Lord Jesus has set in his New Testament-Churches, Ruling-Elders and
Deacons. Ruling-Elders, or Elders, whose chief, if not only work is to rule in
the Church, and to help to Manage the Discipline thereof, with the
Teaching-Elders; seems to be warranted in the Gospel. The Texts that speak most
clearly in the case, are in the 1 Timothy 5.17. Romans 12.8. 1 Cor. 12.28. In
Timothy, they seem to be expressly distinguished from Teaching Ruling-Elders:
Let the Elders that Rule well, be counted worthy of double honor; especially,
they who labor in the Word and Doctrine. This especially, refers to such
Ruling-Elders, whose work and main business is to Teach, and who are especially
therefore, worthy of double honor, for that they have a double work and
Office, namely, Teaching and Ruling. But the first part of the words speaks of
mere Ruling-Elders, who in the faithful, diligent, and conscientious discharge
of their Office and Trust in the Church, are counted worthy of double honor,
and ought to be honored and respected as such, by the Church; not as they are
Elders, but Elders who mind their business, and perform their work well and
faithfully, as becomes Stewards of the house of God. In the Romans, the words
are these: He that Rules with diligence. In the 6. and 7. verses, we have the
Apostle speaking to another sort of Officers, namely, Teachers; whose greatest
work is to Prophecy, Minister and Teach. And therefore (says he) let such wait
on that part of their work. Then he comes to another sort of Officers, and
these says he, are to Rule with diligence: Not to attend to Teaching, as the
others were to do, but to Ruling, and that with diligence; whereby he
distinguishes the one from the other, and shows that they are distinct persons
and Officers from the Teachers, before mentioned. In like manner, the Apostle
seems to me, to point out this sort of Office and Officers, in the 1 Cor.
12.28. God (says he) has set some in the Church, first Apostles, Secondarily
Prophets, Thirdly Teachers; then Helps, Governments. Now what should these
helps, Governments be, as here and elsewhere distinguished from teaching
Ruling-Elders, but this sort of Ruling-Elders, I am speaking of? For as every
Church of Christ needs Teaching, so also Government and Discipline for their
order and well being. But because the Teaching Elders cannot attend continually
to their Ruling work (because their Teaching and Ministering other Ordinances
diverts them from it) so often as need requires; therefore has God set in his
Churches mere Ruling Elders, that they, (as Moses his 70. Elders) may help to
bear the burden, and assist the Teaching-Elders in the Discipline and
Government of the Church. And therefore they are in the Corinths, joined to the
Teaching Ruling-Elders, (and also in the Romans) and they are expressly called
Helps, Governments, for that they are given of God, to help their Teachers or
Pastors in the Government of the Church. And truly it has its weight with me,
namely, the necessity of such Officers in the Churches, to help their Pastors
in the Government thereof. For as Satan is more busy and vigilant in the
Churches, to cause disorders therein, than in any other Societies of men; So
there is the more need of diligent and careful Government and Inspection, to
keep all in order. And as was said before, the Teaching-Elders cannot so
constantly attend to the work of Discipline, because of their other work, as
need requires; therefore there is a kind of nenessity of mere Ruling-Elders, to
help and assist them, in the well Ordering and Governing the Church. Thus we
see, that there are such Officers, and such an Office in the word of God.

Quest. For what ends has God set Ruling-Elders in his Church, and what is
their Office, Work, and Power there?

Answ. Although the Scripture seems to speak but little of thi^ matter, namely,
of their work, use and ends for which they are set in the Church, particularly;
yet if it be clear, that such an Office, and Officer distinct from the
Teachers, are given to, and set in the Church, by the Lords appointment; and
that they are Authorized and Empowred by Christ, to Act and Officiate there, in
his Name, then (I say) it is certain, they have their special work to do there;
for they are not set there to have a Name, and signify nothing else, but they
have their work there, as such, which they are diligently to attend unto, for
the benefit of the Church, and the glory of Christ their Lord. Now what their
work and business is, I shall search out, and discover, as well as I can, and
that with all possible brevity.

First then, they are expressly called Ruling-Elders, or Elders that Rule, in
the Scripture. 1 Timothy 5.17. Now what does their Name and Office signify and
imply, but that they are to assist their Teachers in the orderly Government of
the Church, (as was said before). And I think their work lies chiefly in these
Ten things.

1. In looking after the Conversations of such, as propound themselves to join
with the Church, that the Church admit not any scandalous persons amongst them
That if they are such, they may be debarred and kept out; if otherwise
(together with other qualifications) they may be received in. This I judge to
be one part of their work. For certainly, it is one part and end of
Church Power, to keep the Church clear from scandal and offense. And they may
and ought to do it Authoritatively, and not as private Members may do it, only.

2. In the absence, or upon the desire of the Pastor, they may admit or take
Members into the Church, or rather take them into Church Membership, by giving
them the right hand of fellowship, and showing them their duty and privilege
in a Church State. And herein they represent the Church, and act
Authoritatively therein for them. This is another part of their Office, Work
and Power. And it requires good abilities, to do it well, and to purpose.

3. They may when need requires, command speech and silence in Church-meetings,
for the preventing of Disorders and disorderly Members, in their words and
carriages, and they may authoritatively and publicly admonish and reprove such
in the face of the Church, which private Brethren may not do.

4. They may in some cases, with the consent of their Pastor or Teacher, (if at
home) call and assemble the Church together, for the preventing of some
apparent evil, or promoting of some good thing or work in the Church. Or in
case the Pastor shall knowingly neglect to do his duty in the case, or cases
aforesaid, doubtless, the Ruling-Elders may and ought to do it; and the Church
ought to obey their call. For they do it by the Authority they have from
Christ, for the good and benefit of the Church. But this may not be done by any
Member, that is not an Elder, but in the want of an Elder. And when they are
assembled together, they may authoritatively propound the causes and ends for
which they called them there, and require their assistance.

5. Their work is to inspect, and carefully, diligently, wisely and faithfully
to look after the walkings and conversations of all the Members of the Church.
This is the chief part of their work. They are not only to take cognizance of
what is brought to them, by others Reports, but to enquire after them. They are
bound by virtue of their Place and Office, to see if the Members keep close to
Church-meetings, and reverently attend them, and if they do not, to Reprove,
Admonish and Exhort them, to Teach and Instruct them. That they may know their
duty; be convinced of their sinful neglects, repent of and amend them, and that
by their good Counsels and Exhortations, they may be provoked and encouraged
to, and in their work. Ruling-Elders, should in this matter, as also in
comforting the afflicted, and speaking words in season to him that is weary, be
able, and also ((...)) apt to Teach, 1 Timothy 3.2. as well as the Pastors. The
one more privately and particularly, and the other more publicly. For as the
Deacons work is to look after the wants and corporal concernments of the
Church, and provide for the poor, and the Teachers to mind and look after the
concernments of their Souls, and make provisions for them according to their
needs; So Ruling-Elders have their work, namely, to look after the manners of
all the Members of the Church. To encourage and strengthen the hands of the
Tractable and Obedient, and to reprove, convince, and persuade the Disobedient;
that they may do what they ought.

6. And therefore, they should often visit them, and see how they do, and how
they walk; what they want, and wherein they need their assistance, and helping
hand; and when they know it, to hold it out unto them, freely and readily.
Certainly Elders should be intimately acquainted with their Congregations, and
with their walkings also. For if any miscarry through their default or neglect,
the guilt will lie at their Doors, and the Lord Jesus will require it at their
hands. Oh! that Elders would serioufly consider it, and lay this matter near
their hearts, and suffer it to penetrate and pierce their Consciences; and that
they would consider in good earnest, wherefore they are set in the Church, and
for what ends they have Rule and Discipline put into their hands: That under
deep Convictions, they may be induced to discharge their work, and perform
their Trusts, mind their Duty, and prosecute the ends of their appointment;
that God may be well pleased with, and bless them, own and delight to use them,
for his glory in the Church; and that they receiving benefit by their wisdom,
diligence and faithfulness, may rejoice in, and bless God for them.

7. They must take up Controversies, and endeavor to end strifes and debates
in the Church, when such evils happen; which are found too frequent, through
the Pride and prejudice of our hearts, and the Temptations of the Devil; who is
a great Adversary to the Peace, Beauty, Order and Prosperity of Churches.
Ruling-Elders must not suffer any quarrels, or contentions, either in public
or private, either between a few or many, but presently interpose their Wisdom
and Authority to decide and reconcile the causes and persons, and set all in
joint again. For such evils if let alone, will prove like Cancers in the body,
and increase to more ungodliness, as the Apostle speaks. Therefore the Elders
should enquire into them, and search out such as did the wrong, began the
strife, and such as they find are adicted to take up prejudices against, and
foment debates with their Brethren; and correct the offenders, and relieve the
wronged and oppressed, as they see cause. There must be no Hammer, no knocking
heard in the Temple of God. And we to them who give occasion for strife and
debate, and to such as do improve occasions in such a manner, also; so
likewise, to negligent and careless Elders, who do, or may know these evils,
and yet let them alone, or seek to heal them in a slight manner, as if they had
nothing to do with them, or were not indeed much concerned in them. But surely,
this is one of your great works, as you have the power of Rule and Government
in your hands, for the good of the Church. And you may authoritatively take up
Controversies, and require the Members of the Church to hearken to you. And you
may do Christ and the Church great service, in this matter. Therefore mind it
in good earnest.

8. Their work is to assist and encourage the Teaching-Elders, and to promote
and set forward the Gospel in their hands. They must stand by, and stand up for
their Teachers, and not suffer them to be wronged, obstructed, or discouraged
by any, so far as they can prevent it, by their power and wisdom. Do any
back-bite them? Rprove them. Do any slight or contemn their Ministry? Reprove
them, and show them the evil of it, and whence it is. And they should assist
and help them with their company, Advice and Counsel, when desired, and need
requires it. Moreover, they ought to do all they can to make the Ministry of
their Teachers acceptable unto the Church, and to see that all do their Duties
to them. That they defraud not their Teachers of convenient and due
maintenance, nor carry themselves rudely and disrespectfully unto them, or
toward their Ministry: and that they warn and exhort them to do their Duty to
them, as Christ has commanded. That they constantly, seasonably and reverently
attend to, and wait on their Ministry, and to make holy earnings and
improvements of it.

9. They ought to project and prepare good orders and matters for the profit of
the Church, to help forward and promote any good things presented to them by
their Teachers, and help to carry them on, unto perfection. But in an especial
manner they should concur with them, in promoting Holiness and the power of
godliness in the Church: and that by Counsel, Instruction and Exhortation. For
that is the Churches Ornament, Beauty and Glory, Psalm. 93. ult. They should
labor to promote, Gospel Light, life, zeal, humility, meekness and good works.
They should labor to promote Godliness in the Churches Families, in their
hearts, and conversations among t men, and in their Meetings and Assemblies, to
the utmost of their power, and not leave all to their Pastors to do. They are
indeed indispensibly bound to promote it all they can, by their Preaching and
walking; and that publicly and privately; and Ruling-Elders are to do it
privately, and particularly. And because the frequent Meetings of Christians
for Prayer and Discourse, is a Duty exceeding profitable and beneficial unto
their Souls, when rightly improved, wisely and spiritually managed; the Elders
should encourage it, set it forward, and endeavor to maintain and uphold such
good Works and Duties amongst all the Members of the Church. For such
Meetings, will greatly promote Godliness, and keep a Savor of Christ on the
heart. Now who should promote and further this good work, so much as the
Elders; who may and ought authoritatively to do it? This is another of their
works and businesses in the Church. Therefore see you do it in good earnest,
who are Elders.

10. Lastly: Ruling-Elders (as well as Teaching) have another great work to do
in and for the Church: and that is to be singularly exemplary in their words,
deeds and carriages. Be thou an example (says the Apostle to Timothy; 1
Epistle, 4.12.) to the Believers, in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in
Spirit, in Faith, in Purity: for without these things all the rest is worth
nothing at all. Elders and their Wives and Children (as well as the Deacons)
should be examples and encourageing Patterns of Meekness and humility to
others, in their Garbs or cloathings. Elders should be singular in wisdom,
zeal, seriousness and gravity; in love, sweetness, diligence, faithfulness,
spirituallity, Heavenly mindedness, and in all good works. Show thy self (says
Paul) a Pattern of good works in all things, Tit. 2.7. They must so walk, as
that others may safely follow their steps, and be excited and encouraged so to
do, by their examples. They are indispensibly bound to be good examples out of,
and in the Congregation or Church, when assembled together to worship God. Then
should the Elders show good examples to the whole Church, by their timely
coming there, and by their holy, serious and reverent carriages and deportments
in the worship of God. For when they neglect their place and duty there, or
come unseasonably, carry themselves carelessly and unreverently; they tempt
others to do so too. For as they are Elders over the Church, and have a Name
among them; so they eye them much, and expect great things of and from them.
Therefore, Elders must take heed to their ways, and see that they walk
circumspectly, (or exactly) Ephesians. 5.15. For if they do not, believe it, they
will do more hurt than good in the Church.

Thus we see, that Ruling Elders have work enough to do in the Church, and that
there is need and use enough of them. And surely, they might be of great use in
the Church, and prove a great blessing indeed to her, would they but know,
mind, attend to and do their own proper work and business, and really concern
themselves with Christ's, and the Churches concernments, with all their hearts
and souls; as they ought to do. And oh! that such as are called to that Office
and Dignity, would seriously consider and lay to heart their ways and doings,
wherefore they are set in the Church, and invested with Power and Authority,
and whether they do indeed intend, and in good earnest set to their work, and
unfeignedly design and prosecute those ends?

Quest. How should Ruling-Elders perform their work in the Church?

Answ. First, with wisdom, or wisely. They should wisely observe the matters
they have, to concern themselves about, and to manage in the Church. 2. The
times and scasons for the doing of them; to whom, and when. 3. The manner how
they should or ought to do them. Much light, knowledge, and spiritual wisdom is
required in Church Government, and Governors. And therefore, they have great
need to pray, read and study much, for Divine wisdom, and Spiritual
understanding in these things. That they may discern the will of Christ their
Lord and Lawgiver, and not mistake their way and work; nor the times, seasons
and occasions thereof, nor stumble at any stumbling-stone, or walk in the dark,
in so great and importunate matters.

2. The revealed will of Christ in his New Testament, is to be their great and
only Rule and Guide in Church Matters No other voice must be heard there, but
his; nor any other Authority, Law, or Rule to be observed, followed, and
obeyed, but his. It is given to him, to be the Head over all things to his
Church, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. And therefore, they ought to observe all things,
whatsoever he has commanded them, (and nothing else) Math. 28.20. in the
exercise of their Authority, in or for the Church. This they must carefully and
continually mind, and have in their eye, that they do not their own wills, and
walk by their own Rules, but Christ's. For in so doing he will bless and prosper
them, help and assist them: and in the end he will reward all their conformity
and obedience to his holy will. But otherwise he will say, who required these
things of you. Therefore, when any cases or works are offered to you; you must
consider them, and the Laws or Rules by which you ought to proceed, in what you
are called to do: and then proceed and manage your work accordingly. Be you
sure to steer your course aright by Divine light and Laws; look up to, and own
Christ and his Authority in all your proceedures. For you act not as civil
Magistrates in a state, but as the Spiritual Magistrates of Christ in his
Church. And therefore (I say) it is his Will and Authority only, that you must
observe and walk by.

3. Diligently: you must exercise your power with all possible diligence, Romans
12.8. He that Rules with diligence. That is, he must frequently attend to his
Ruling-work, and what he does therein, he must do with all his abilities. He
must be earnest and fervent in it, and set himself to it, as to his work and
business. He must not be slothful, negligent, or careless in it, as if it were
an indifferent thing; no, but he ought to be diligent, and fervent in Spirit,
serving the Lord, in what he does, Romans 12.11. The negligent servant shall be
beaten with many stripes, Luke 12 47. They should be diligent to know the state
of their Flocks, Prove. 27.23. For although, they (I mean the Church) are not
the Ruling Elders Flock, as they are the Teaching Ruling Elders, yet they are
in a sense, their Flock and charge, to watch over them, and inspect their
manners and walkings.

4. Readily; willingly, and cheerfully. They should be like the Teaching-Elders
in this also, 1 Pet. 5.2. Taking the oversight of the Flock, not by constraint,
but willingly; not as Lords over Gods Heritage, but examples to the Flock. It
is sad indeed, when they look not after them, nor mind their work and Office in
the Church, but when they are constrained, and as it were forced to it, by
their Teachers, and cannot for shame but do something then, but somewhat
unwillingly, coldly and indifferently; as if it were a small thing, or a matter
by the by: and which they would not trouble themselves about, could they
handsomely evade and pass it by. They grudge at it, and account it their
burden, not their delight. But surely, it should be their delight to serve
Christ and his Church; and they should most readily, willingly and cheerfully
do it.

5. Conscientiously and Dutifully. The will of Christ and their duty: their
work and opportunity to do good, should lie deep in their hearts, and powerful
on their Consciences; and what they do in the Church, in pursuance of their
Trust and Office-power, for the Lord Jesus and his Church; they are bound to do
it upon Choice, conscientiously and dutifully: and that, because it is their
place, work and duty, by virtue of Christ's Authority, who has for these ends
set them in the Church; appointed and enjoined them such work and service
there: for his glory and their good. They must not only bear Rule, but they
must Rule well too, for those ends; or else they are of no use and service
there. Now how can they be said to Rule well, as commanded; unless they use and
exercise their Office-power so; namely, wisely, diligently, readily and
willingly; cheerfully, conscientiously and dutifully, according to the Laws and
Rules of Christ their Lord?

6. They ought to exercise their Authority, and use their power in the Church,
with much love, tenderness, meekness, impartiality; and sometimes (as need
requires) with severity too. They must not exalt themselves, and carry it in a
Lordly manner toward their Brethren, because they have Authority over, and may
command them But they must see that they temper their power, and the exercise
and use of it with love, tenderness, humility and meekness. They should so
carry themselves in all things, as that on the one hand they be not slighted
and despised, and on the other hand, envied for their haughtiness. They should
so behave themselves in the house of God, as that they may give occasion to
all, to think that they love them, and respect their good, in all they do. So
likewise they ought to be just and impartial in their proceedures toward all,
and not respect persons in Judgment, but the merit of the cause. And in case of
necessity, when they have to do with stubborn and obstinate persons; they may
and ought to be severe, in dealing with them, when they cannot otherwise
prevail on them, to convince, humble and reform them, Jude 22.23.

7. And in all their endeavors, ways and practices in the Church, they should
intend, design and aim at the union, peace, holiness, comfort and prosperity
of the Church; the honor of Religion, encouragement of the Gospel and the
Glory of Christ. All which blessed ends they should wisely, zealously,
sincerely, seriously, industrously and faithfully prosecute, and with all their
might strive and labor to obtain; and by all means, and that with much
patience and perseverance, in the use of them, hope and pray, seek and wait to
accomplish; in the Lords time. They must not make one or two attempts to
reconcile differences, rectify disorders, dissuade from Sin, persuade to Duty;
to heal wounds and encourage to Repentance, and so leave it, without looking
after the Issue and the success of their labors, but they must follow on their
work until the ends be obtained. They, (as well as their teaching Elders) must
look well to their herds, Prove. 27.23. They must see, that they rule well, and
with diligence; 1 Timothy 5.17. Romans 12.8. and that they approve themselves
faithful Stewards to Christ and his Church, in all their proceedings; and make
full proof thereof.

Quest, What are the qualifications of ruling Elders, or how should they be
qualifyed, for so high and honorable work and office in the Church.

Ans. I shall briefly name some of their necessary qualifications; and but some
of them, and such as are indeed necessary for them; without which, they cannot,
will not rule well, nor be profitable to the Church. First, They must be
qualified with Spiritual Gifts and special Graces: with a considerable measure
of divine Wisdom and Spiritual understanding. They should be, not only real
Saints, but eminent Saints too. They must not only have peculiar Grace, but be
strong in Grace also. Surely! they ought to be well furnished with the Gifts
and Graces of the Spirit, that they may go in and out; and walk in the Church
as shining Lights; be able to judge and discern cases and persons, and make a
sound and true Judgment of the things and matters they may be called to judge
and determine. They must not be Novices in the knowledge of Christ, his Law and
Gospel (the Rules by which they must walk); but they must have the Word of
Christ, to dwell in them richly, in all Wisdom; Col. 3.16. to help them in
their work. They cannot rule well, unless they do understand and can speak
well; nor unless they are well acquainted with their Office, Work, and the
Rules thereof. They ought to be sober, grave and serious Persons, and not of
vain, light and frothy behavior, in their spirits and carriages. They should
be of prompt ready minds and spirits for their work, and not of dull, lumpish
and heavy Tempers. For if they are such, they will not act upon choice freely,
but by constraint, and that will render them unprofitable and undesirable to
the Church. They should be men of blameless lives, and spotless
conversations; and they should be men of warm and lively affections, abounding
in Love, zeal and fervor of Spirit. They ought to be men of Courage, fearing
God, (like Moses his 70 Elders) Exodus 18.21. and be free from notorious and
apparent Coveteousness and worldly mindedness. They should be eminent in
humility and meekness, and in other Graces of the Spirit; and they should be
men of pity, compassion, of bowels and mercies, as the Apostle speaks. They
must not be angry passionate persons, or men of sower, froward and peevish
Spirits and carriages: for these abominations will very much blemish them, and
cause prejudices in the minds of Observers. They must not be Tattlers, Medlers,
nor Busy-bodies in other men's matters; neither should they be slothful,
negligent or careless of their own. These are some of their necessary
qualifications.

Quest. What are the Duties of Church Members, and how ought they to demean and
carry themselves toward their Ruling Elders?

Ans. When they do rule well, and use their office, power, diligently,
faithfully and profitably, for the peace, welfare and prosperity of the
Church, the encouragement of the Ministry, propagation of the Gospel, and the
honor and Glory of Christ, as they are indispensibly bound to do: they are
worthy of double Honor, Love and respect from the Church: and they ought to
give it to them, heartily and sincerely; in obedience to Christ, who injoyns
and requires it, 1 Timothy 5.17. as also for their work and office sake, and for
the Lord Christ his Sake, whose Officers they are; whose Image they bear, and
whose work and service they do, and are employing themselves in. They must
have, not only simple honor, love and respect from you; but double. They must
have much more then any private brethren have, when they rule well, and that
upon a twofold account. 1. As they are Christ's and your Elders and Officers;
and in a sense, do represent the Lord Jesus Christ to you in and by their work
and office-power in the Church. 2. As, or because they rule well, and use their
office-power for your profit and benefit. Do they carefully, diligently and
industrously attend to, and follow their work, and seek your good? then
remember, that you owe them double honor, love and respect; and see you give
it to them. Moreover, Church Members should yield them their cheerful
subjection and obedience, to all their Lawful commands and appointments for
their good, and give them all possible encouragement in their work, and not
weaken their hands and make their work heavy, and burdensome to them; but do
all they can to make it easy and sweet to them; that so they may do it with Joy
and not with Grief. You should also pray importunately for them, that God would
make them able, willing and faithful to and in their work, and bless and
prosper their labors with success. Do they mind their work, and labor for
your good? why then it is most reasonable, that you should mind them, and give
them their dues, that they may be encouraged in their work and diligence, by
your duty to them. In a word, you should carry your selves toward them in all
things, as to Spiritual Magistrates, and Christ's Officers to you, for your
Good. As Paul speaks of civil Magistrates, Romans 13.4. for (says he) they are
God's Ministers to thee for good; so your ruling Elders are the Ministers of
Christ to you for good: Therefore behave your selves toward them, and do for
them as such. Not as they are Elders among you, but as they are good Elders to
you, and such as rule well for your profit. Do they rule well, mind and attend
to their work and duty? Why, then love, honor and respect them as such. Do
they labor with, and take pains among you; and are they diligent, serious and
faithful in their office? then pray much for them; bless and thank God for
them; acknowledge, accept and esteem of them; carry your selves submissively
and obediently to them; strengthen their hands and encourage their hearts, to
and in their work; and do all you can and ought to do for them. Do they walk
holyly, humbly, wisely, zealously and fruitfully? do you follow their examples;
imitate their steps, and as much as possible, write after their Copy; and by so
doing you will honor Christ, and comfort them.

Quest. What other Officers has Jesus Christ set in his Church?

Ans. Deacons. The Lord Jesus has in his great love to, and care of his
Church, appointed and given to them this sort of officers also, for their
comfort, profit and well being: and they need them likewise: For as the
Teaching Elders may not attend mostly to their ruling work, but to Study,
Reading, Doctrine and Exhortation; (and then not to serve Tables, Act 6.) so
the Ruling Elders leave their work to attend two, which is not to serve Tables
neither, but to look after other Church Matters and concernments as you heard
before. And therefore I say, that Deacons are necessary and useful Officers in
the Church; and are distinguished from other Officers, by their name and work
there. The Institution of this sort of Officers in the Church, as also their
work, use and qualifications, we have an account of in Acts 6.3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Timothy 3.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Phil. 1.1. so that we see there is such an Office,
and such Officers are appointed for and set in the Church.

Quest. What manner of persons should deacons be, or what are their
qualifications, by divine Appointment?

Ans. They must be men of honest Report, full of the holy Ghost, and wisdom,
Acts 6.3. They must be grave, not double-tongued; not given to much wine, not
greedy of filthy Lucre, holding the Mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience. Even
so must their Wives be grave, not slanderers; Sober, Faithful in all things.
Ruling their Children and their own houses well, 1 Timothy 3.8, 9, 11, 12. These
are some of the necessary qualifications of Deacons in the Church. You that are
Deacons, mind these things, and consider seriously if you are so qualified for
that Office in the Church of God. If you are not so qualified, humble your
selves before the Lord, entreat him to qualify you with his holy Spirit, and
labor in the use of all good means to obtain what is yet wanting in you, for
the well and profitable performance of your work, as becomes such Officers in a
holy Church of Christ's.

Quest. What are the Deacons works in the Church?

Ans. In general, their work is to serve Tables, Acts 6. But more particularly,
1. They are to provide for and distribute to the poor of the Church according
to their necessities; Act. 6. and not to suffer any of them to want through
their negligence. And therefore they ought to enquire what poor there are in
the Church, and what their wants are, and accordingly to supply them. In order
to which they should receive the Church's contributions, and wisely consider
if what they do receive from them, will supply the wants of the poor, and
satisfy other emergencies in the Church. And in case they do not, to acquaint
one of the Elders, that he may speak to the Church to augment their stock; that
so they may have enough to supply all occasions, as need requires. 2. They
should not only look after the poor to get money for them, from the Church: but
to ease the Church, they should see that such as can work, and so help to
maintain themselves, do so: and such as can work but will not (if any such be)
to reprove and admonish them; and until they do set to work, and endeavor to
live and provide for themselves as well as they can, to detain all supplies
from them; that their wants may provoke them to labor. But in case there are
any poor in the Church, that would labor, and not be chargeable to the Church,
but cannot get employment; the Deacons ought to do their utmost from time to
time, to get them work, and to give them all the encouragement they can
therein. And by their so doing, they may be servicable to the Church, and to
the poor, who would live by the labor of their own hands, if they could find
employment: and who are as loath to be burdensome unto the Church, as they are,
that they should be so. 3. They should often visit the poor and see how it is
with them, encourage and comfort them, and do all they can to strengthen their
hands, and refresh their hearts, under their poverty, and the Temptations that
attend it. Doubtless poverty has many great and strong Temptations; and
therefore the poor have need of their supports, kindnesses and encouragement,
to bear up their hearts from sinking despondencies. Surely! Deacons have more
to do for the Church, and the poor thereof, then to receive contributions and
send it by others now and then to such as want, when they are required so to
do. What need is there of such qualifications as the Gospel requires in them,
for their doing of that? If they have but eyes and common reason, they may do
their work, if that be all, without any of the aforesaid qualifications. But
their requisite qualifications do declare sufficiently that they have other
work to do in the Church, for which they must be so qualified. But when men
have once gotten the name of an Office, they take up with that, but seldom or
never mind, endeavor to know and do the work of their office. They must be
even driven to mind it, and angry if any tell them of their neglects. Surely!
such officers have a sad account to make, and contract much blame, shame and
guilt on their names and Souls; and they must repent in Dust and Ashes, and
even shed Tears of blood for their Sin, if ever they be Saved. Yea, the
straits, wants and Temptations of the poor, which are occasioned by the Deacons
neglects, will cry out against them, and condemn them. Oh! Sirs; remember whose
Officers and Stewards you are, and for what ends you are set in the Church;
consider your ways, what you ought to do; what you do, and what you leave
undone. 4. They should provide conveniences for the Church to worship God
withal, and see that the Church suffer no detriment by any of their neglects.
5. Their work also is, to see that the Church perform that part of their duty
to their Teacher or Pastor; namely, to give him his due of subsistence,
according to that charge, in Gal. 6.6. 1 Cor. 9. Romans 15.27. and to collect it
for him. To provoke the negligent, and exhort such as are backward to their
duty. Their work being (as was said) to serve Tables, this must needs be a part
of it. And it is well known, that this work of the Church and Deacons, is
necessary for the upholding and encourageing of the Ministry. These are some of
the Deacons works in the Church, to which they should attend with all possible
wisdom, diligence and faithfulness, as their work and business. For God will
require an account of them, how they have carried themselves in the Church, and
performed their work there.

Quest. What is the duty of Church Members toward their Deacons, in the
Faithful and conscientious discharge of their duty and trust?

Ans. They should love and honor them, as Christ's and their Officers, and
give them all encouragement in their work. They must not load and burden their
work, by discountenancing, blaming or penuriousness toward them: or by
distrusting them, and speaking contemptibly of them. But they should cheerfully
confide in them, and pray importunately to God for them: that they may be
enabled to do their work, and faithfully serve Christ, and his Church in their
place, as they are bound to do. Surely, brethren, Christ cannot endure to see
any of his Church Officers, who act and serve the Church faithfully, from from
and under him, and by his Authority and appointment, to be slighted undervalued
and discouraged. But it is his Will that they should be loved, honored and
respected, for his own, and their work and Office sake; and that they should
find, all possible encouragement from you. The neglect of which is Sin, and
disobedience against Christ's Laws and Authority, and your shame and loss.

CHAP. VII.
Of the great and indispensible duties of Church Members amongst themselves, or
to one another in a Church Relation.
Quest. WHat are the duties of Church Members to one another?

Ans. There are two great ends Christ Jesus had in his Eye, in appointing and
ordaining such a near Relation, union and communion for, and among his people,
as a Church State and relation is. First, To capacitate and enable them to
perform their respective dutys and works, 1. to God, 2. To men, or to one
another. Secondly, to encourage them so to do, and that with greater ease,
freedom, order and satisfaction, than otherwise they could do. By virtue of
their near Relation to, and intimate acquaintance with one another persons,
faith, principles, and conversations, they can worship or glorify God together,
with one mind and mouth, as commanded, Romans 15.6. and walk together with God in
all his ways, in the same mind and Judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10. which else they
could not so well do. So likewise, to perform their respective Duties to their
Officers, and mutual duties to one another as brethren united together in a
holy Band, for those ends and purposes. Their duties to one another, as
Brethren and Sisters enchurched, and knit together in one single and individual
Corporation, under the Laws and Lordship, Rule and Government of their only
Head and Lawgiver the Lord Jesus, are all laid down in his Gospel for them,
and made their Duties only by his appointing and commanding them to be observed
and practiced by all Church Members; and in all their observations of them,
they must have a choice and singular respect to his holy Will, and Sovereign
Authority in them; without which, their doing of them are not acts of Obedience
to him, but the products of their own Wills and Pleasures. Now then, we will
enquire into them, endeavor briefly to bring them to light, and present some
of them to you, who desire to know and obey them in Truth.

First, The first and greatest, is love, love and spiritual Affections are the
holy Cords that tie the hearts, souls and judgments of Believers one to
another. This is that, which (together with the fear of God) makes them avoid
all things whatever may give just offense, or Administer grief to one another,
and that which provokes them to follow after the things that make for Peace,
and the things that tend to Edification. Love is the Bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4.2,
3. It Is that which (together with Divine light and truth) causes Church Members
to draw together, as in one yoke, and unanimously, as with one heart and soul,
to design, aim at and carry on mutual and common good in the Church, Phil. 2.1,
2. 1 Cor. 13.5. Without this love one to another, they cannot, will not Cement,
nor long abide and live together, as a Church in Peace and Unity, nor promote
any good work among themselves; without heart knitting-love one to another in
the fear of God, they will receive and entertain Jealousies and Suspicions one
of another, and put the worst construction on whatever is said or done; and
they cannot walk together comfortably and profitably to and with one another,
where and when they are entertained. Therefore it is absolutely needful and
necessary for all Church Members, to be firmly United, and constantly joined
together in cordial love and charity; which is the Bond of Perfectness to and
in all other Duties, Col. 3.14. God highly commends, and strictly commands this
love one to another, and puts it into the hearts of his peculiar People, that
they may do what he commands.

1. God highly commends it wherever he finds it, in Act and Exercise, 1 These.
4.10. And indeed (says he) ye do it toward all the Brethren; Col. 1.4, 8. 2
Cor. 8.7. 1 These. 1.3. to which Duty, (and to manifest his high approbation of
it) God has promised a great Reward, Heb. 6.10.

2. God commands it, and vehemently exhorts to, and urges it on them, almost
every where in the Gospel. Oh! how importunately did the Lord Jesus enjoin it,
and frequently press it on his Disciples, when he was on Earth? Joh. 13.34. A
new Commandment give I unto you: what is that new Commandment? why, that ye
love one another, as I have loved you; that ye also love one another. And in
Joh. 15.12, 17. This is my Commandment, that ye love one another, as I have
loved you. That is, take the Pattern of my Love to you for your love to, or in
loving one another. I have, and do love you (1) with great love; Joh. 15.13. so
do you likewise. (2) My love to you is free, without any desert in you: let
yours be free love, without carnal Respects, one to another also. (3) My love
to you is real, hearty and unfeigned: So let yours be to one another also, Romans
12.9. 1 Pet. 1.22. (4) My love toward you, is an exceeding fruitful love. I
loved you so, as to labor, toil, sweat and dye for you. I loved you so, as to
humble and debase my self for you, and all to do you good: so must you love one
another with a fruitful profiting love. For as I have loved you, so you must
love each other. (5) My love to you, is a pitying, sparing, and forgiving love;
a forbearing and tender hearted love: so must yours be to one another, likewise
Col. 3.12, 13. (6) I love you with a warm and fervent love: so do you, love one
another with pure hearts, fervently, 1 Pet. 1.22. (7) I love you with a holy
spiritual love; not as you are Men, and have reasonable Souls; but as new Men,
who have my Image stamped on, and my holy Nature in you, and as you are made
perfect by the comeliness and beauty that I have put upon you, Ezekiel. 16.14. 2
Pet. 1.4. So do you love one another, with a holy spiritual love, namely,
because you are a lovely and a holy People unto me. (8) I love you with a
constant and unchangable love, and that with a notwithstanding all your
weaknesses, yea unkindnesses to, and unworthy walkings before me. Whom I once
love with a special and peculiar love, I continue to love for ever, Joh. 13.1.
And I have engaged, that not any thing shall separate you from me and my love,
Romans 8. ult. Thus you are bound to love one another, even as I have loved, and
shall always love you. And as the Lord Jesus commanded and enjoined this by
the word of his own mouth; So likewise by his Apostles. They do frequently and
vehemently urge and press this Duty on Church Members every where, and back all
their Commands (from Christ) with most strong and cogent Arguments, Romans 12.9.
Romans 13.8.9, 10. Ephesians. 4.2, 15, 16. Ephesians. 5.2. 1 These. 5.8. 1 Pet. 1.22. 1 Pet.
3.8. 1 John 3.23. Chap. 4.7. These are a few of the many places, where you may
find this great Duty enjoined on Believers and Church Members; which they are
indispensibly bound to observe and obey. And therefore God sheds this love into
their hearts, and Teaches them to improve and use it, in loving one another, 1
These. 4.9. Romans 5.5. For he gives his People, and enables them to do that which
he commands and requires of them: and therefore, the business of such Stewards,
is to use their Trust well; and all lies on their diligence and faithfulness in
Stewarding of it, as good Stewards of Gods Grace.

Oh! That Church Members, and all other Christians would seriously, sincerely,
diligently and constantly mind and practice this great and indispensible Duty
to one another, in all their ways and doings; and not lay it aside as a
little, useless or indifferent matter, which they may neglect, and dispense
with the omission of, at their own will and pleasure.

Secondly, As we are indispensibly bound to love one another, as you have
heard; so we are as peremptorily, absolutely and indispensibly bound to walk
lovely, and encouragingly toward one another: that by our unlovely and
unworthy walkings, we lay not stumbling blocks in the way of love, or
discourage such from loving us by our unlovely carriages, as do conscientiously
aim at and endeavor so to love us, as Christ commands them to do. But that our
Behaviors be such in all things, as to invite all to love us, as holy, humble
and blameless Saints and Brethren in Christ. Very many Professors expect much
love from their carnal and spiritual Relations, and are greatly displeased at
them, if they fancy they are denied it, and cast the blame on them; whilst
they mind not, care not how unlovely and discouragingly they walk and carry
themselves toward them. But believe it; the Lord Jesus expects, and he has
made it their Duty, to walk lovely toward one another, as well as to love one
another. Church Members are bound to love one another, as holy, spiritual and
lovely Objects; which they cannot do, unless they see, or have good grounds to
believe them to be such indeed. When they walk carnally, how can they love them
as spiritual Heavenly persons? and when they walk and carry themselves proudly,
in their Words and Deportments; how can they love them as the meek and humble
Members of Jesus Christ? If their love must be holy and spiritual, then
undoubtedly the Persons or Objects of it must be such also. For is it possible,
or does God require me to love a Proud, Churlish, Touchy, Peevish and
Cross-grained Professor, as much, and with that complacency, I can or may love
an humble, sweet, meek and patient one? Can I, or is it my Duty so to love a
sour, crabbed, contentious and quarrelling Relation, as a peaceable, quiet,
affable and courteous one? Is it possible for me to love a vain, frothy,
worldly Professor, and one who cares not how unlovely, undesirable, yea, and in
many things, how contrary he walks to me and my love; as I do, or may do
another Professor, who is Spiritual, Grave, Serious and Heavenly? surely! we
cannot love persons as holy, spiritual, humble, useful and Heavenly persons are
to be loved; unless they appear to be so in their words, deeds and carriages
toward us; neither does God require us so to do.

Therefore we ought to be as careful of, and see that we walk lovely toward
one another, as to love one another; that so we may as much as possible,
provoke and encourage each other to love one another; Heb. 10.24. and remove
out of the way of love, all such stumbling blocks, as may any way Impede or
Obstruct it; that so we may encourage all to love us, really, strongly,
sincerely, fervently, holily, spiritually and constantly: freely, easily, and
that with delight and complacency For otherwise, as it will be most absurd and
irrational for us to expect it from them, so it will be impossible for them so
to love us. And by our own contrary walkings and carriages, we wrong our selves
of their love to us, and tempt them to sin against God, and injure their own
Souls. We shall grieve their hearts, and tempt them to withdraw their love and
kindness from us, and thereby offend God, grieve and vex his holy Spirit, and
by little and little to withdraw his loving Countenance from us.

Thirdly: Christ has charged and strictly commanded all Church Members, to
live in Peace: to be at Peace among themselves, and to follow Peace with all
men, and as much as in them is, to live peaceably with all men. Oh! how often,
and with what vehemence, does the Lord Jesus and the Holy Ghost, by the
Apostles, press and enjoin this Duty, especially, among Church Members, every
where in the Gospel? see some Texts, Psalm. 34.14. 1 Pet 3.11. Romans 14.19. 2
Cor. 13.11. 1 These. 5.13. Heb. 12.14. Ephesians. 5.3. And the Apostle tells us, that
God has called us to Peace; not only to the Peace of God in our own Souls, and
amity with him; but with one another, 1 Cor. 7.15. such walkings and carriages
one to another, when in love and Obedience to God, are pleasing to him; but
strife, discord and contention, and such like practices, are most hateful and
abominable to him, Pro. 6.16, 17, 18, 19. These Six things does the Lord hate,
yea Seven are an abomination to him. And what is the Seventh? why, sowing
discord among Brethren. This wickedness is so hateful to God, as the words
cannot sufficiently declare his abhorrency of it. Hence we often find the Holy
Ghost by Paul earnestly dehorting Church Members from all debates, strifes, and
contentions one with, or against another; especially in their Church-meetings,
Phil. 2.3. Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory, and verse. 14. Do
all things without murmurings and disputings, Romans 13.13. And the word of God
does every where condemn it as a most accursed Weed, and venomous Plant; a
Cockatrice egg, and devilish Serpent. Pride is that Womb that bears it, Pro.
13.10. and the lusts of the heart, Gal. 5.20. and the Devil is the Father and
Author of this accursed strife and contention, Jam. 3.14, 15. Blessed Paul was
much afflicted to see any of it in the Churches of Christ, as knowing from
whence it sprang, and what the fruit and end of it would be? what wrong it
would do their Souls and what Reproach it would lay them under? How it would
reflect on Christ and his ways, and render them all contemptible? How it would
hinder their profit, and produce many vile Monsters among them. As Envy, Wrath,
Railing, evil surmisings, Hatred, Back-bitings, Swellings, and Divisions. And
therefore labors to prevent the growth of them, and to pull up by the Roots,
these pernicious Weeds: and that by Counsels, Reproofs, Cautions, Instructions,
and Dehortations from them; and presses them (and us) by all cogent Arguments,
to avoid contention and strife, and follow after Peace to the utmost of their
power.

David tells us, that it is a most pleasant and lovely thing, for Brethren to
dwell together in unity, Psalm. 133.1, 2. Then how much more pleasant and lovely
is it, for spiritual Brethren to live and worship God so together. Christ came
into the World, and lived here a Peacemaker, and charged all his followers to
follow his steps; pronounces them blessed that do so, Math. 5.9. and accursed
who do the contrary. He is a lover of Peace and Concord, especially in his holy
Temples; where he will not have a Hammer heard: but he is an implacable hater
of Strife and Discord, and will not endure it in them; much less will he winck
at such, as are the first sowers of these Seeds. The truth is, strivers and
contenders in the Churches, are the Devils Agents, and notorious
Mischief-makers. They do a world of mischief to a Church where they are, and
are real Plagues to, or in it. They greatly hinder Edification, and spoil the
Order, Beauty and Harmony there. Contenders and Disputers in a Church, are the
proud self-conceited men, who are vainly puffed up with high thoughts of
themselves, and their own abilities, and that because they have gotten some
light and notions into their heads, with a volubility of speech, but without
spiritual wisdom and humility in their hearts: and therefore they conceit that
they are wiser than the Church, and more able to Manage and Order Church
Affairs, than their Elders. Their Pride and self-conceit makes them slight and
contemn their Teachers, and to raise up in a Rebellious contention with, and
opposition against them: As the Prophet complains, Hosea. 4.4. For this people
are as they that strive with the Priest. They think nothing can be well done,
unless they have the doing of it; and therefore when any good work is upon the
Wheel, they will do all they can to hinder it, as some Churches can sadly
experience. Well then, take heed of strife and contention, and follow Peace and
Concord one with another, especially in your assembling together about
Church-work. Get humble hearts, and then you will not be contentious, but
peaceable.

Fourthly: Sympathize with, and help to bear each others burdens, as need
requires. You are not to live to and for your selves, in a Church State only;
but to and for one another too. You are commanded to remember them that are in
Bonds, as being bound with them, Heb. 13.3. and them that suffer Adversity, as
being your selves in the body. You are strictly commanded and charged by the
Great God, to rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep: and
be of the same mind one toward another, Romans 12.15, 16. And look not every man
at his own things, but every man also on the things of others, Phil 2.4. And
let no man seek his own, but every man another Wealth, 1 Cor. 10.24. Bear ye
one another burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ. You must make, and
account your Brethrens Crosses, Losses, Temptations and Afflictions, your own;
and when they want and call for your helping hand, to support or lift them up,
being fallen, you must give it them freely, readily and cheerfully, and not
turn a deaf ear to, or hide your eyes from them and their cries* For this was
one of Gods holy and Gracious ends in appointing Churches, and bringing you
into Church Fellowship, and so into acquaintance one with another, namely, that
you might be fellow-mutual-helpers and comforters one of another, For if you
are cruel to, or careless of one another in Affliction; the Lord Jesus will
require it at your hands, and take it as done to himself.

Therefore, seeing it is the will of Christ, and our indispensible Duty to one
another; let us put on Bowels of Mercies and kindnesses, Col. 3.12. and be
tender hearted, Ephesians. 4. ult. And as Peter speaks, be pitiful and courteous to
each other, 1 Pet. 3.8. Let the same mind be in us, and let us show the same
affection to one another (in measure) that Christ Jesus has showed, and still
does express to us. We know that he is full of loving kindnesses, pity,
simpathy and bowels of mercy and compassion to us; Psalm. 103.13, 14. Phil. 2.1,
2. to show his Members, how they should be, and carry themselves toward one an
other; and to oblige and provoke them to do so too. Oh! my Brethren: we should
much abound in this grace also.

Fifthly: Exhort, and comfort one another. For so is the will of God concerning
you. This is not only your Teachers Duty and Work, but yours also, to each
other, Heb. 10.24, 25. And let us consider one another, to provoke unto love,
and to good works; but exhorting one another. This Work and Duty must be
diligently and frequently done, Heb. 3.13. But exhort one another daily, while
it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin, 1 These. 5.11. Wherefore comfort your selves together, and edify one
another, even as also ye do, verse. 14. Now we beseech you Brethren, warn them
that are unruly; comfort the feeble minded, support the weak. My Brothren you
stand in continual need of one another Exhortations and Consolations; and if
you mind and manage this work well, you may be very useful and profitable one
to another, greatly oblige and knit your hearts to each other, and occasion
many thanksgivings unto God thereby. We are exceeding apt and prone to fall
backward, and therefore need each others hand to draw us forward. To grow cold
and dead hearted; and therefore need each others help to warm and quicken us.
We are apt and ready to stand still, and lie down a Napping; and therefore do
greatly need one another awakenings and holy provocations. When this duty was
frequently and conscientiously practiced by the Saints, they did thrive and
prosper: but since it has been so woefully neglected, the contrary is apparent
in the lives and carriages of the Saints. Well then; do you revive this work
all you can. Set it forward with all your might, and improve all your
opportunities to the profit of each others Souls: for you see that it is your
indispensible Duty.

Sixthly: It is the will of your Head, the Lord Jesus, that you should be each
others Keepers. That you should watch one over another; Admonish and Reprove
one another, as need requires. I do not mean, that you should prye into one
another secrets, or be busybodies in other men's matters. No, for that is
hateful and abominable; and God has forbidden you to do so, 1 These. 3.11. 1
Pet. 4.15. 1 Timothy 5.13. But my meaning is this, namely, that you watch over one
another Walkings and Conversations. That if they do well, you may encourage
them. If ill, you may by Counsel, Reproofs, Admonitions, Instructions, and
Exhortations, labor to mend them: and do all you can, to convince and bring
them to the real sight and sense of their miscarriages, as also to unfeigned
Repentance. By which good work, you will do them, the Church, yea Christ
himself, good and acceptable service. You should carefully mind and observe, if
all do keep close to their Duty in the Church, or are remiss and negligent. If
they carry themselves holily, righteously and soberly in their Conversations:
or on the contrary, they are frothy, vain, proud, extravagant, loose, unjust,
idle, careless, or any way scandalous. You should strictly mind and observe, if
there be any Tatlers, Back-biters, or sowers of Discord, or such as speak
contemptibly and slightingly of their Brethren, especially of their Elders, and
their Administrations. As also, such as combine together, and make parties or
factions in the Church; or endeavor to load or obstruct any good work, which
their Elders are promoting of, for the Glory of Christ and the good of the
Church; and deal with them accordingly. You must mind and carefully observe, if
any be fallen under Sin or Temptation, in any case, and not let them alone, but
presently set your hand to help them, to succor and restore them; Gal. 6.1.
Brethren; if any man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore
such a one with the Spirit of meekness; considering thy self, lest thou also be
Tempted. Take heed of that Cain like Spirit; who when God asked him where his
Brother Abel was? Replies, am I my Brothers keeper, Genesis 4. You will be Tempted
to this evil toward your Brethren, namely, to imagine that you are little or
nothing concerned with them, and that if they do otherwise than they should,
the guilt will only lie at their doors; but you shall be blameless. But my
Brethren, it is not so. You are not to be indifferent in this matter. For
assuredly, you are appointed to be keepers of one another. You are bound to
prevent and put a stop to sin in one another: or else your Brethrens sins,
which you do, or may know if you will, and the wrong they do to themselves
thereby; yea and the Reproach and scandal that may come to the Church thereby,
will lie at your Doors, and be cast on your Souls, because you neglected your
Duty, and did not in season prevent it, as you might have done; if you would.

Look not every man on his own things, but on the things of others also, Phil.
2.4. And seek not your own, but every one another Wealth, 1 Cor. 10.24. Now we
exhort you Brethren; warn the unruly, 1 These. 5.14. and Admonish the
disorderly, 2 These. 3.15. For this good work, and their wise and conscientious
doing of it, the Holy Ghost commends the Church at Rome, Chap. 15.14. And says
God in Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart: thou shall
in any wise rebuke him, and not suffer sin upon him. And the Apostle in 1 Timothy
5.22. Admonishes us to take heed, that we be not partakers of other men's sins,
but to keep our selves pure in Math. 18.15, 16, 17. The Lord presses this Duty
and Work on you, and shows you how you should perform it. Therefore, you must
mind and carefully do it, in Obedience to his will, and according to your
directions there, and not otherwise. You must watch, and endeavor to gain a
Sinner, or sinning Member; by your first, private Admonition, in case the evil
be private: and if that will not do, take one or two more with thee, and see
what that will do. But if that will not do the work, nor obtain the end on thy
Brothers Soul, then you are bound to bring it to the Church; that by their
Teachers or Elders, they may be informed of it, in order to their dealing with,
and proceedings against him, as commanded. This is another of your great and
indispensible Works and Duties in the Church. It is true, that this is
especially the Elders Work and Duty, but it is not theirs only, but yours
also, who are private Members. Oh! therefore, be you persuaded to mind;
carefully, faithfully and diligently to practice this Work and Duty; for
unless you do so, it will be impossible to keep the Church in Peace, Honor and
Purity. You will do Christ and them singular service.

Seventhly: You must forbear and forgive one another: for this is another of
your commanded Duties, Ephesians. 4.2. forbearing one another in love, verse. 32. Be
ye kind one to another, tender hearted: forgiving one another, even as God for
Christ sake has forgiven you. And in Col. 3.13. Forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another: if any man have a quarrel against any, even as Christ
forgave you, so also do ye. Does thy Brother sin against thee, or do thee any
injury? thou should tell him of it, examine the matter and search out the
circumstances of it; and see if he did it unadvisedly, through weakness or
ignorance, and without any design to wrong thee, or whether he did it
wittingly, and knowingly? And until thou art sure that he did it knowingly and
wittingly, or wilfully, thou must forbear censuring him, as having so done it.
For else thou will prove a Usurper, and a false Judge; which Christ forbids,
Math. 7.1, 2. Romans 14. But if upon an impartial search, thou finds him to have
wronged thee through ignorance or weakness, thou must Judge charitably of him,
and carry thy self toward him, as God does toward thee under thy weaknesses
and ignorances. Thou must not be rash and severe toward him, either in thy
carriages or censures. But if it clearly appear upon impartial enquiry, that he
did knowingly and wilfully do thee wrong; then thou must carry thy self
toward, and deal with him, as with a wilful Transgressor. Thou must lay his
sin before him, and show him what Laws he has Transgressed; what evil he has
done thee, what wrong to his own Soul, and what offense he has done to Christ,
by breaking his holy Laws. Admonish him again and again of his sin, and censure
him not too severely, until you find him obstinate and stubborn. For until
then, you must forbear him; whilst you are waiting on him, and on God for him,
to convince him of his sin, and give him Repentance unto life. But if your
endeavors be blessed to those ends, you must readily forgive him. And if he be
once truly, and savingly convinced of and humbled for his sin: be sure, that he
will most freely own and confess it to thee, as well as to God, and endeavor
to make thee amends, and give thee all possible satisfaction for the wrong he
has done thee. And this he will do, not by constraint, but freely, willingly,
and of his own accord, without thy seeking to him. For it is a certain sign
that a person is not powerfully and savingly convinced of, and humbled for his
sin, while he hangs off, and must be sought after to make satisfafaction to
such as he has wronged. For were his heart really melted into the will of God,
he durst not, yea could not be quiet, until he has given all possible
satisfaction to the wronged, Luke 19.8. But now in case he remain obstinate,
and will not hearken to Reproof: what are you to do then? why, then he should
take one or two more, and deal with him; and if that will not do, to bring it
to the Church; that they, by their Elders, may see what they can do with him.
But if they cannot prevail on him to repent and make satisfaction: then I think
the offended may prosecute the Law against him. For the Law is made for the
lawless and disobedient, 1 Timothy 1.9, 10. But yet he should be still in a
readiness to forgive him whenever he shall repent; pray and hope that he may
repent, and when he does so (although it be long first) Actually and Cordially
forgive him, and renew his kindness and Brotherly love to him, as if he had
never sinned.

Eighthly, It is your Indispensible duty, to hearken too, and receive
Instruction, Admonition and Reproofs one from another also. For if some are
Indispensibly bound, at some times, to give them: Surely; others who need them,
are as much bound to receive them. Prove. 8.33. hear Instruction and be wise.
For he that despises Reproof, sins, but he that keeps Instruction,
walks in the way of Life, Prove. 10.17. And the Scripture tells us in Prove.
12.1. Whosoever loves Instruction, loves knowledge: but he that hates Reproof is
brutish, such as turn a deaf Ear to Reproofs, are marked out for Scorners in
Prove. 9.8. and he that is often reproved, and yet hardens his neck, shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy, Prove. 29.1. such as turn a deaf
Ear to Reproofs and admonitions, or slight and refuse them, do thereby rebel
against, trample upon, and contemn an ordinance of God, and a means of his
appointing, for their happiness, and so they murder their own Souls, with the
means that are given to save them. You are bound to hearken to, and receive,
your brethrens Reproofs, Counsels and Admonitions; withal Humility Patience
and freedom of Spirit: with all love, Meekness and Thanfulnesse to God, and
the givers of them. For they are great mercies to you, and they are your real
and profitable friends; such as seek your good, and endeavor to prevent your
destruction. And therefore, I wonder not at the Scriptures saying, that such as
refuse Instruction and Reproof, shall suddenly be destroyed; and that without
remedy: for (...) do despise the means (as in their present case) of their
Salvation, and which are handled out to them, to prevent their destruction. And
certainly they shall have Judgment without mercy, (as James speaks) who do
slight the means given them, for such great Ends, and by hardening their hearts
against them, do render them useless to their Souls, and thereby oppose and
cross Gods ends.

Oh! then, do not you so wickedly. When a Brother or Sister, see or hear you
sin, and they come to you with the Lords healing plaster, to cure you, receive
it; thank them, and bless God for it; apply and improve it, as David did
Abigals and Nathans Counsels and Reproofs, 1 Samuel 25. 2 Samuel 12. and see that
you repent and humble your selves in Dust and Ashes. For if the contrary heart
and carriage be found in you, under just Reproofs, Instruction and Admonitions,
toward God or men: know for a certainty, that you are in a very evil and
dangerous case; yea you are in the high way to ruin and perdition. Oh!
Friends, let it never be said justly, of any of you, that you were reproved and
admonished of any known Sins, by any Brother or Sister; and that you refused,
and slighted it; justified your selves in your Sins and apparent
Transgressions, and were displeased with, or angry at such as admonished you,
and did their Indispensible duty to you, under your Sin, for your Salvation.

Ninthly. Pray one for another, and that with a real Love, fervency, and
Importunity, as you do, or should do for your selves, Jam. 5.16. Confess your
faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. Oh!
with what serious minds and strong Affections, should all Church Members, pray
one for another. They must be much in building up one another, and praying in
the holy Ghost, one for another, Jude 20. They should carry one another on
their hearts, at the Throne of Grace, especially such as are under Affliction:
the whole Church in General, and the Teachers in particular, Heb. 13.18. and
wrestle with God for them. For (as was showed) one Churchmember must make
another case his own, and be of a public Spirit toward, and for the good of
all: and as in other things so in this of Prayer. For they have the Spirit of
Prayer given them, Audience and Interest in Heaven for others, as well as for
themselves. This is another duty to one another.

Tenthly, You should often meet together for holy discourse and Prayer. Two or
three, or more; Brethren by themselves, and Sisters by themselves, in and for
those God glorifying, and Soul-profiting exercises. This was wont to be the
Commendable practice of our forefathers, and of some that are now alive, when
Christ, Duty, Heaven and Religion lay warmer on their hearts, than now they do.
And they made happy earnings of their holy endeavors. Now if it was a much
commended Practice in them as it was; why then is not the same found in and
among you, in this day? was it good in them, and will it not be so in you too?
has not God promised his Glorious Teaching, warming, strengthening,
sanctifying, and comforting presence with such as do so? Matthew. 18.20. would
not your meeting together, and so exercising your selves, turn to a better
account, than your present practice does? do you not find time enough, to visit
one another, and meet together, to discourse and talk of things which you
should not? Do you not visit to tell some idle stories, to tattle of other men's
matters, which do not concern you; and it may be, to do that which is worser;
namely, to Back-bite some persons, and to prejudice hearts against your
Teachers and their Work, if they do not please you? And will not such meetings
have bitterness in the end? Yea, do you not thereby, exceedingly deaden and
carnalize each others Souls, by these things? So that instead of bettering one
another Souls, and furthering them toward Heaven in your meetings, you hinder
them, and make them much worser. Oh! consider, and lay this matter to heart, I
do beseech you: now while you have time to mend what is amiss. Consider my
friends both how you do, and how you may and ought to improve and exercise your
selves, in your occasional and designed visits and meetings; and what account
you will be able to give of them at the last day. Is it not your great Iniquity
to tempt one another to Sin, and wrong your Souls, misspend your precious times
and seasons of service for God, and one another spiritual profit? when you
might if you would, have improved them to those ends. We read in Acts 16.13.
That Women meet together to pray: but now it is accounted almost a false
Doctrine. Men and Women were wont to discourse and speak often of the things of
God, and their own experiences, one to another, Mal. 3.16. But where are now
any such (almost) to be found? persons can find time enough for every thing,
but their greatest Works and Duties. But to speak plainly; it is not our want
of time, but of hearts. We are strangers to God in secret, loose our hearts in
the World, and cloy our selves with carnal cares and earthly matters: and
therefore cannot, will not attend with any delight or freedom of Spirit unto
our Duties. This will be found at the bottom of all our neglects, and excuses
for them. But remember, that your Souls need this practice, and the use of
these means, that it is your Duty, and will be (if well used) very profitable
to you.

Eleventhly: Encourage one another by your examples, to keep close to, and be
constant in your public work. When ever the Church meets, or are by their
Teacher Summoned to meet together, for the Celebration of the worship of God:
they are bound so to do (excepting in extraordinary cases) that may hinder any.
For else there can be nothing done, nor any good order kept, for the glory of
God, and the edification of the Church. Now then, when the Church ought to meet
together, you ought to be present, and not by your wilful or careless absence
give an evil example to others, and tempt them to do the like. For thereby you
will cast a stumbling block in their way of Duty, and encourage, strengthen and
embolden them in their neglects also. If it be our Duty to provoke one another
to good works, by our Exhortations, then also by our Examples and practices
too. Examples are powerful encouragements to Sin or Duty, to good or evil; to
Omissions or Commissions, 2 Cor. 9.2. Heb. 10.24. 2 Chronicles. 12.1. 1 Chronicles. 29.3,
9. If they are good examples, then they provoke others to good, but if evil,
then they are powerful to provoke others to do the same. When a Member is in
the Congregation, and sees such a Member wanting there, then he is tempted to
take the same sinful liberty too: and so in all other cases. All Church Members
are indispensibly bound, ordinarily to attend on the Ordinances of God in that
Church to which they are joined. For as they are there called and set, so their
work and Duty lies there. Not forsaking the Assembling of your selves together,
Heb. 10.25. and because some are not to neglect so to do; therefore (says the
Apostle) do you provoke each other, to your Duty.

Twelfthly: You must be charitable to the poor, that are among you, and freely
contribute to them, according to your Ability, and their Necessity. You are
indispensibly bound to impart your help and assistance to them, and give them a
little of your Estates. As you are Stewards for your selves, so also for them.
It is a Debt you owe to God, and a Duty to them: you will comfort them thereby,
but you will much more profit your selves, than you can possibly profit them.
It is a more blessed thing to give, than to receive, Acts 20.35. It is your
honor and happiness, that God enables you to give to them, but it is their
Affliction, that they are necessitated to receive from you. You stand on the
Advantage ground by them, both as to work and wages. And therefore, thou has
little reason to despise them, or grudge at thy distributions to them. Thou art
their Steward, and a part of what God has given thee, was designed and
intended for them, 1 Pet. 4.10. And therefore (says God) Deuteronomy. 15.7, 12. I
command thee to open thy hand wide unto thy Brother, that is waxen poor by
thee. (Read the words at large) observe likewise these Scriptures, and
diligently mark and consider them, 2 Cor. 8. and 9. Chapters. Gal. 6.9, 10.
Heb. 13.16. Prove. 19.17. Psalm. 37.26. Psalm. 41.1, 2, 3. You must not only give,
to keep them alive in misery, but make comfortable provisions for them; that
they may have enough to keep them from the Temptations of Poverty, (...)
pressing wants, and to enable and encourage them for, and in their work and
Duty, to God and men.

Thirteenthly: You must carefully, watchfully, diligently, and conscientiously
beware of, and avoid whatever may give any just offense or scandal to one
another. For we are charged, to give none offense, either to Jew or Gentile, or
to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. And says the Apostle, take heed, lest by
any means this liberty of yours become a stumbling block, 1 Cor. 8.9. And our
Savior tells us, that woe to them by whom the offense comes, Math. 18.7. and
charges his Disciples, to take heed and beware of giving any offense to his
little ones, verse. 6.

You must not only mind that which you ought to do, but that which you must
also leave undone. For although you should strive to do never so much good, yet
if that while you are not careful of eschewing evil, you will do a great deal
of hurt, and pull down with the one hand, that which you seem to build up with
the other. And you must also see, that you do one Duty as well as another. For
although you may be frequent attenders on the Ordinances of God in the Church,
yet if you come not timely to them, or carry your selves unreverently in them,
you will give just offense. So if you should be charitable to the poor, and yet
be negligent in public worship, you will give offense.

But to be brief: know, that you must take heed and beware of such evils as
these, and avoid them. For they do all of them carry a Brand in their
foreheads, and scandalous mischiefs in their hands, both to your own and
others Souls. And therefore you should mind them, endeavor to know and avoid
them, that they be not found in you.

1. As 1. Proud, lofty swelling, disdainful and haughty words, carriages,
walkings and deportments: For they are grievous and provoking evils, and such
as will justly offend all the observers of them.

2. You must avoid all sullen, sour and churlish Language and Behavior
toward all sorts of persons, or else you will offend them: For it is an evil
that is altogether unbecoming the Lambs of Jesus Christ.

3. You must beware of a cross, captious, and contradicting Spirit, and
carriage: There are too to many such Members in Churches; whose peculiar
Excellency, or rather vileness lies in this; and who delight in a singular
perverseness of mind and discourse against the work, sense, proposals and
judgment of the Church, and the Elders thereof. That so they may be heard, and
may hear themselves talk, and from the Pride and haughtiness of their Spirits,
they may seem some bodies in the Church, or in other Company. But this is very
scandalous to their Brethren, (excepting such as they have made of their
Faction to join with them in their unfruitful works of darkness) and very
reproachful to themselves; as they will find at long run; But I must hasten.

4. You must beware of, and avoid, peevish, froward and touchy carriages, words
and deportments, in private and public. For they are very scandalous and
offensive.

5. You must not withdraw your selves from your place, work, and Duty in the
Church, nor absent from the Worship and Ordinances of God there, in their
times and seasons. For that is a most scandalous and pernicious evil, as you
heard before. It has an innumerable Company of evils in the Womb of it, and
that do attend it: which I have now no room to mention. And it is a direct
Transgression of Gods Laws, Rules and Orders in his Churches, besides the
scandal and evil consequences of it.

6. Take heed of that filthy sin, of speaking evil of one another behind their
backs; you must not be Whisperers or Back-biters, nor speak of the real or
supposed evils of one another, but to their faces, or before them; until you
have done your duty to them in secret. For if you should, you will greatly
provoke them, and greatly stumble, offend and scandalize such, as you so speak
evil of.

7. You must beware of speaking slightingly and contemptibly of one another,
either to their faces, or behind their backs. For men, yea the best of men,
will not, cannot patiently bear contemptuous words, and undeserved slighting
carriages from their Brethren.

8. You must beware of and avoid vain, foolish and frothy discourses; for they
are very scandalous and offensive to gracious hearts.

9. Take heed of Earthly-mindedness, and greedy pursuits after worldly things;
for as they are offensive to God and pernicious to your own Souls: so they are
scandalous and grievous to beholders.

10. Take heed and beware of strife and contention amongst your selves; for
that will do a world of mischief, and produce many evil and wicked fruits.

11. Take heed of grudging at, or envying one another prosperity; for thereby
you control God himself, and give occasion of great offense to your Brethren;
when they shall see, that they cannot receive mercies from God, without your
envyings and grudgings.

12. Be sure to deal justly with all men, and give to every one his due:
defrauding is a very reproachful and scandalous sin. Contract not Debts, and
delay, or deny to pay them; For if you do, you will scandalize your Brethren,
and cause the name of God to be evil spoken of.

13. Be sure to make good, and perform all your peremptory promises to men, and
take heed and beware of breaking them, or failing and disappointing men of
their just expectations from you; for that also will be scandalous and
offensive.

14. Take heed of taking into a marriagebond, such as are apparently in an
unbelieving and carnal state and condition; For that also is very offensive to
holy serious men: although some make light of it.

15. Take heed of idleness and slothfulness in your Callings; For that will
prove a pernicious and scandalous sin to others, and your own souls too.

16. Take not up a Report against one another, that is scandalous, nor give an
ear unto Tatlers and busybodies, nor be you busybodies in other men's
matters your selves; For if you do, you will give great offense.

These are some, and but some of the scandalous evils that you must carefully
avoid, as a duty that you owe to God, to your Brethren and to your own souls. I
could have named many more, but I find these the most common amongst Professors.

Now as you must avoid these and other evils; mind and practice the said
Duties, as Church Members one to another: so you must seriously mind the
manner, reasons and ends of doing them also. The reason of your so doing, must
be the will of Christ your Head and King, because he has so commanded you. And
the principle of all you do, must be love to him, and to the souls of your
Brethren. The ends must be to please, honor and exalt the Lord Jesus, and to
profit and benefit your Brethrens souls, and maintain the Credit and Reputation
of the Church, and the Worship and Ordinances of God therein; and to preserve
Peace and Purity among your selves. The manner must be thus; namely, wisely,
dutifully, cheerfully, obediently, freely, willingly, humbly, holily,
seriously, diligently, sincerely, and perseveringly. For you should be as
careful of doing your Duties to men in a right manner, as you are of performing
your Duties immediately to God so. I can but mention these things, because I
have exceeded my intentions in others. The Lord God bless them to you all.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Ordinances and Worship of God, in a Gospel Church.
Quest. WHat Ordinances of Divine Worship, has God given to, and appointed for
a Gospel Church, to be observed by them?

Answ. First, walking together in constant, Cordial Communion, and Gospel Order
in a Church State, in Brotherly love, peace and oneness of spirit, in the
frequent and joint Celebration of all the worship and appointments of Christ,
is certainly an Ordinance of Christ and their Indispens^ble Duty, as has been
already showed. Believers may not enter their names among Christ's Disciples,
and then take liberty to do what they please; omit or neglect their place and
duty there, when, and how they will, and content themselves with having their
names enrolled in a Church; come among them, and go from them at their own will
and pleasure. No, but it is the will and Ordinance of our Lord Jesus, that they
should constantly, and conscientiously in obedience to his holy will, abide and
continue there, holding Communion or Fellowship together, as a united and
entire body, or spiritual Corporation, and jointly with one mind, heart and
soul, observe and celebrate his Ordinances and Worship, Heb. 10.24, 25. Acts
2.42, 44, 46, 47. Romans 15.6. 1 Cor. 1.10.

Secondly: Preaching and hearing the Gospel. It is true, that this is not a
special Church-Ordinance, or an Ordinance appointed for and given to Churches,
or to Believers, exclusive of all others. For it is the great Ordinance of God
for the converting, quickening, and bringing sinners to Christ, Rom 1.16. 1
These. 1.5. By this Ordinance God conveys his special Grace, and the spirit of
Grace into sinners hearts. By it he opens blind eyes, unstops deaf cars,
enlivens dead Souls, and convinces carnal men of sin, Righteousness and
Judgments; Acts 26.18. Joh. 5.25. Joh. 16.7, 8. And by it he turns them from
the power of Satan unto God, and works them to, and for his own use; makes them
Vessels of Honor, and translates them out of the Kingdom of darkness and the
Devil into his own Kingdom, Col. 1.13. The great Ordinance of Preaching and
hearing the Law and Gospel, is given and appointed to make, fit and prepare
sinful men for Membership with Christ, and his holy Gospel-Churches. For until
they are molded and qualified by the word and spirit, they are no way capable
of either, considering what condition all men are in by sinful nature; namely,
dead, blind, filthy, vile, hateful, enemies to God, Children of Satan, under
the Law, the curse and wrath of God, strangers to and ignorant of God, Christ,
Grace, Duty and Gospel-holiness. But although hearing and preaching the word of
God, be an Ordinance of God to others, namely, such as are not en-Churched, to
prepare them for that State, and the Duties and Privileges thereof; yet I
think it may be called a Church-Ordinance also. For the Lord Jesus has by his
sovereign Authority set this Ordinance in his Gospel-Churches, and committed
the Preaching of it unto men there, namely, to such as he is said to empower
and send, to give unto, and set among them for the work of the Ministry, 1 Cor.
12.28. Acts 20.28. Ephesians. 4.10, 18. Act. 14.23. 1 Timothy 5.17. The Ministry of
their Pastors and Teachers is their own Ministry; and these Officers being
given to them by Christ, and set in his Churches for their sakes, they may call
the Ordinance their Ordinance, such Officers theirs, and their Ministry theirs,
as having a peculiar Relation to them; which is one of the Churches peculiar
privileges, and which they ought highly to prize, and bless God for. Now as
some men are gifted, empowered and sent out by Christ, to convert and turn men
to Christ, who may not have any Relation to Churches, as their Pastors or
Teachers, so there is the special and peculiar Ministry of Pastors and Teachers
given to, and set in the Churches; whose work and business lies there, and but
occasionally elsewhere to other men. Take heed (says the Apostle) to the
Flock, over which the holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of
God, Act. 20.28. The ends of these Officers, and their Ministry in the Church,
is not intended for the calling and regenerating of Church Members; for (as was
showed) they must be effectually called and regenerated, before they can be
meet Members of a Holy Temple of God: but to build up and carry on the work of
Grace in their hearts, holiness and fruitfulness in their lives and walkings
toward God and men; To confirm and establish them in the Truth and Faith of
Christ, which they have received, and to instruct and enlighten them further in
all Christ's and their own souls concernments. This Ordinance of God is
intended and designed by the Lord Jesus, and it should be so used and managed
by all Teachers and Hearers continually, to carry on the work of Grace, to
convey and receive more of the Grace that is in Christ Jesus for them, to
convince them of, and show them more clearly the evil of sin, the deceits of
their hearts, the power of in-dwelling lusts, the Wiles and Methods of Satan,
the necessity of Christ and his blood, and of his Ordinances and Institutions;
To show and convince them of the Excellency, Beauty and Loveliness of Christ,
and the love and grace of God to them in him; To Preach and hear their hearts
and souls into clearer knowledge of the three persons and one eternal living
God, and into more acquaintance with them; so likewise into more cordial and
unfeigned, more strong and fervent, pure and constant love to him; To acquaint
themselves with the nature, usefulness and proper life of faith, persuade and
work their hearts to it, practically and dutifully to love it in all things,
works, duties and conditions; To arm and sense them against Satan's fiery Darts,
and Temptations, and the worlds snares and allurements; To discover and detect
self lusts, and whatever wars against our souls, and to mortify and destroy
them; and in order thereunto, to know and be able, expert and accurate in the
use of our spiritual Weapons and Armor of proof, which Christ has sanctified
and given unto us; in Ephesians. 6. and elsewhere in the Gospel; To sanctify them
throughout in soul, body and spirit, keep them from deadness, coldness,
lukewarmness, and indifferency of spirit, and to prevent sleepiness and
backsliding from God, neglect of duties, and careless performance of them.
This Ordinance is intended for the further informing them of the holy will and
mind of Christ, and their duties to God and men, to sweeten and dispose the
heart to love and practice them, and to enable them to persist in so doing
without weariness and fainting, grudging or disputing, and with joy and
delight; To call back persons from their wanderings, and to give them
Repentance unto life. These are some of Gods holy and blessed ends in setting
up this Ordinance in the Church: which all are indispensibly bound to aim at,
intend and endeavor in all their use of it. See Ephesians. 4.10, 11, 12, 17. Esa.
30.20, 21. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Ephesians. 3.18, 19. Micah. 2.7. 1 These. 4.10. Heb.
10.38. Romans 1.16, 17. 2 Pet. 3.18. 1 These. 5.23. Phil. 3.13, 18. Joh. 17.17, 19.

Thirdly, Prayer, Prayer to God is a Church-Ordinance. It is true, that all men
are bound to pray to God both publicly and privately: the neglect whereof is
severely threatened; Jer. 10. ult. It is a part of natural or moral Worship,
which all men ought to practice continually. For as God is their Creator, and
they his reasonable Creatures, he their Sovereign, and they his Subjects, and
as such Creatures, are to live, and always to have their dependency on him for
their subsistence in this world: so they are to express and manifest their so
doing, by their asking such things as they want of him. For it is a Duty and
Homage they owe him, as him in whom they live, move and have their being, Acts
17.28. and profess him to be their God, Protector and maintainer, and expect
all things from him. They ought in all their ways to acknowledge him, Prove.
3.6. although they know him not in the face of Christ by any Gospel-Revelation.
But notwithstanding this is a Church-Ordinance also, that is, they are
appointed to pray publicly in their meetings, as a Church, and that not as it
is a moral Duty, and agreeable to reason, and men's natural principle, but as it
is a Gospel-Ordinance of Christ appointed for them, and they commanded by him
to observe it among themselves. This the Church of Jerusalem was commended for,
Act. 2.42. And they continued in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, and
breaking of bread, and in prayers. and in Acts 12.5. it is said, that prayer was
made without ceasing of the Church unto God. Now this Ordinance in the Churches
of Christ must be observed and practiced, as an Ordinance of his appointing,
who is Lord and Head of them, and because it is his Sovereign will they should
so do, without which they cannot in the doing of it, approve themselves unto
him, as his obedient Children and Subjects in his house. For whatever work they
do, and whatever Ordinance they observe in the Church, they are indispensibly
bound to respect his will, and have their eye on his Authority therein, as the
ground and reason of what they do; and because he has so commanded and
appointed, therefore they do it. Moreover to the well performance of this Duty,
and right observance of this Ordinance in the Church, there is required a
peculiar Ministerial gift in the Teachers or Overseers of the Church. For they
cannot rightly perform this part of their work in and for the Church, by their
natural and common acquired gifts and parts, but in and by the spirit and his
Ministerial gifts and grace conferred on them, for their profitable and right
performance of their Works and Duties in the Church, Romans 8.26, 27. 1 Cor.
12.6, 7, 12.

Fourthly, Baptism, Water Baptism is another Church-Ordinance, to be holily,
reverendly, dutifully and spiritually observed. The power of administering this
holy Ordinance of Christ is given to Pastors and Teachers, and only to such as
are authorized and called to administer other Ordinances, and perform other
parts of the work of the Ministry, Authoritatively, by virtue of their
Commission from Christ received: Any Disciple of Christ may not administer it,
but such as are set (...) part for, and appointed to the work. For they must do
it, and it must always be done by men in office-power, Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20.
And Paul tells us, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. That Christ gave some Pastors and Teachers
for the work of the Ministry, and edifying of the body of Christ: And we never
read in Scripture of any other, than such as were called to the work of the
Ministry, that did Baptize any. This Ordinance is instituted and appointed in
Matthew. 28.18, 19. and it was confirmed by the constant practice of the Apostles
and Teachers afterward, Act. 9.18. Act. 10.47, 48. 1 Cor. 15. Baptism is a
Sign, Token and Seal of the Gospel Covenant, (as Circumcision was Romans 4.11.)
for the assuring and confirming Believers of the reality of the Covenant, and
the gracious purposes of God to perform it, and convey unto them all the Grace
and blessings of it in his time. To raise and strengthen their hope in Christ
and God the Father by him, that God is and will be their God, and also the God
of their Seed, according to that glorious grant and engagement of God, in Genesis
17.7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee
in their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God to thee, and to
thy Seed after thee. To which Covenant, God set his Seal, verse. 10. This
general sum or head of the Covenant given to Abraham; and his Seed in their
Generations, we have produced and brought in by the Apostle Peter in his first
Sermon after the coming of the Holy Ghost on him and other of the Apostles, in
Act. 2.39. when he was about the setting up of Churches and Church Order, Laws
and Ordinances among them (says he) Repent ye and be Baptized; why? for the
promise is unto you, and to your Children, and to all that are a far off, even
as many as the Lord our God shall call: which is the same for substance given
before to Abraham. And Paul told the Galatians Chapt. 3.14. That the blessing
of Abraham is come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ. This Ordinance of
Baptism, is of mere Institution, and made known to us in and by the Gospel. The
Light and Law of nature knows nothing of it; neither are we bound to observe
it, but upon the command and appointment of Christ, which is sufficient for us,
and we need no further warrant for our observation of it.

Fifthly, The Lords Supper is clearly another Church-Ordinance. And indeed it
cannot be rightly and orderly administered and received, but in a regular
Church State; we never read of any Believers that received it, or any Officers
that administered it, after Christ's ascension, but as they were congregated,
en-Churched, em-bodied and formed into a holy Temple: but we read of Churches
celebrating it; as at Jerusalem, Acts 2. Corinthians. 1 Epistle 11. and elsewhere.
We find the Institution of this Ordinance in Matthew. 26.26, 27, 28. Mark 14.22,
23, 24. Luke 22.17, 18, 19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.23. to the end. In this last
Scripture we have many weighty things of and concerning this great Ordinance
(1) The Institution its self. (2) The time when, the same night in the which he
was betrayed. (3) The Institutor, namely, the Lord Jesus. (4) The manner of it:
1. The Lord Jesus's own practice, He took, blessed, brake and gave the Bread,
and said, take, eat, this is my Body. 2. By commandment, this do ye in
remembrance of me. (5) Who should received it, and how persons should be
qualified and prepared for the reception of it. 1. With light and faith: They
must be able to discern the Lords body, the ends and use of the Ordinance, and
to make suitable and pertinent application of all to themselves. 2. They must
be able to examine themselves, and actually to do it, and be in a state and
practical fitness and readiness to meet Christ in it, to thank and praise him,
and to show forth his death until he come. (6) The danger and peril they are in
who eat, and drink, and use this holy Ordinance unworthily. 1. They are guilty
of his Body and Blood. 2. Of their own damnation. (7) We are informed of some
of the sad effects their unworthy receiving of this holy Ordinance had on some
of them: for this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.

Sixthly, Singing of Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs, is another
Church-Ordinance or Institution of Christ, Ephesians. 5.18, 19, 20. Col. 3.16. Mat.
26.30. Mark. 14.26. This is a spiritual Ordinance and Duty; yea it is a
heart-warming, Soul-refreshing, Spirit-raising, and grace-quickning. Ordinance.
To the well performance of it, much special grace and diligent exercise of it,
as also the spirit of grace is necessary. Much wisdom and spiritual
understanding, life and vigor, care and watchfulness is requisite; sincerity
and faithfulness, spirituality and heavenly-mindedness is needful for our
acceptable observance of it to God, through Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 14.15. Col.
3.16. Ephesians. 5.18, 19, 20. It is true, that all men ought to sing praises and
thanksgivings unto God, for it is a natural and moral duty: and it is as true,
that none can rightly, holily and acceptably do it, but such as are partakers
of the grace and spirit of Christ; and that the Lord Jesus has instituted it,
and made it a Church-Ordinance. And as, or because he has instituted, and made
it one of his Gospel Ordinances for his Churches, that therefore they ought so
to observe it.

Sevently: Holy discourses and heavenly conferences among the members of the
Church, is another Church Ordinance, which all are bound to mind and practice,
as they have ability and opportunity: for the observation and celebrating of
which, they should seek for occasions and seasons to meet together, and
endeavor to promote it: and when they have them in their hands, to use and
improve them to the glory of God, and their own mutual profit; and that because
it is their Lords Ordinance for their good: The neglect of which is (doubtless)
one of the procuring causes of those witherings, languishings, and most
dreadful decays in grace, and woeful backslidings, which are so notoriously
evident among Church Members. This useful profitable Ordinance, was once in
esteem and much accounted of by Believers; but it is now almost laid aside and
forgotten by them; it was their delight, but now their burden. They made happy
earnings of it to their Souls, but now they fancy that they have no need of it,
that there is neither duty nor privilege in it. But however, it is and shall
ever be an Ordinance of God, and their observation of it, their privilege and
duty, Jude 20. Building up your selves in your most holy faith, 1 These. 5.11.
Wherefore comfort your selves together, and edify one another, even as also ye
do. See also, verse. 14. and Heb. 3.13. Heb. 10.24, 25. Mal. 3.16, 17.
Church Members must take heed that they meet together for the better, and not
for the worser, as the Apostle told the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.17. that they so
improve their occasional and determined meetings, as to profit and better one
another. This holy Ordinance of Jesus Christ should be seriously, frequently,
diligently, spiritually and sincerely observed of all Church Members: And if
they shall so observe and practice it, in obedience to his will, and with holy
designs and aims, namely, to please and honor God, and to profit and better
their own and each others Souls; they will find it an exceeding profitable
Ordinance to them, for the promoting and carrying on the grace and interest of
Christ in their hearts: and it will be an effectual means to increase love one
to another, unite their hearts and endear affections. God will bless and
empower it, in your dependence on Christ and his free grace; to keep your
Consciences awake, your Affections warm, and your hearts ready to every good
work.

Eighthly: Church Discipline. This Ordinance is instituted and appointed for the
Churches regular and orderly walking: for the preventing and curing disorders
in them; and there is as much need of this Ordinance and Institution as of any
other, as experience shows. And it should be seriously minded and considered;
wisely, and diligently observed and practiced in the Church, as much as any
other Ordinance of God therein. There is no Church in the world but is subject
to disorders, and too many irregularities, because the Lusts, Temptations, and
carnal Interests of some of the Member, are strong and impetuous; which causes
many distempers and disturbances in the body, as may be seen in the primitive
Churches. Now Discipline is appointed by Christ to heal and cure them, and
without it the body cannot be healthful and continue in a good condition; but
botches and plague-sores will break forth, 2 Cor. 10.8. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17, 18,
19. Romans 12.6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5, 7, 13. Gal. 6.1, 2.

These are some of the principal Institutions, or Ordinances of Christ in his
Gospel-Churches; which they should seriously mind, diligently and faithfully
observe continually, to the glory of Christ and their Souls profit.

CHAP. IX.
Of the privileges of a Gospel Church, or the singular privileges and
spiritual advantages Believers have, or may enjoy in a Church State and
Relation.
Quest. WHat are Believers privileges and spiritual advantages in a
Church State, or as enchurched and embodied together?

Answ. There are many and great privileges and Soul-advantages for Believers
in a Church State, which they may enjoy and improve to the promoting of their
present and eternal happiness. Solomon tells us, That two are better than one,
Eccles. 4.9, 10, 11, 12. So many knit together in a holy Band for mutual
profit, are in a far better condition than when they walk singly, and alone. In
Genesis 2.18. (it is said) that it is not good for man to be alone; I will (says
God) make him a help meet for him. So God knowing our frame, Psalm. 103.14. and
what need we have of spiritual Union and Communion one with another, he has in
love and mercy, in his great pity, tenderness, and compassion to us, appointed
and ordained a Church State and Relation for us; that we might walk together in
holy Brotherly love, and oneness of heart; serve him with one consent, Ephesians.
3.9. and carry on a common mutual interest together in his fear.

First: Believers in a Church State shall have much more of the presence of
Christ with them, than while they walk in a single capacity, as so many
individual persons, without a near Church Union and Communion, without their
holy Band, and perfect joining together in the same mind, heart and affection,
1 Cor. 1.10. How often does the word of God inform us of this? (pray read and
mind, consider and lay to heart these Texts,) Rev. 2.1. unto the Angel of the
Church of Ephesus write; these things says he, that holds the Seven Stars in
his right hand, who walks in the midst of the Seven. Golden Candlesticks.
(Mark it) he does not say, that he calls and looks into them, no^ but he
walks in his Churches, in their walking with him. And Paul tells us in 2.
Cor. 6.16. That God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; namely,
in the particular Gospel Church at Corinth, formed of Saints, and Sanctified in
Christ Jesus; 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Cor. 1.1. which is undoubtedly the privilege of
all other Gospel-Churches of the Saints, Psalm. 9.11. Sing praises to the Lord
which dwells in Sion. And in Psalm. 132.13, 14. (says David) for the Lord has
chosen Sion: he has desired it for his Habitation. This is my rest for ever:
here will I dwell, for I have desired it. To which last recited Texts, with
many other of like import, the Apostle alludes Ephesians. 2. ult. In whom you also
are builded for a Habitation of God. For what end are they built up together?
why, it is for God to dwell in. These are a few of the many Texts that speak
of, and plainly declare this to be one of the great privileges of
Gospel-Churches. And it is no small one, but very great and full of inviting
and encouraging force and efficacy to draw and persuade all true hearted
Nathaniels to join themselves to them, and walk in and with them; and to
provoke and stir up all Church Members to walk and carry themselves so toward
God, Christ their head, and toward one another, as to enjoy and experience the
good and sweetness of it; and cause not to obstruct and hinder God, and by
unworthy carriages to God to withdraw himself from them, and deprive themselves
of so great and glorious a privilege, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. It is not enough that you
are in a true Gospel Church, to possess you of this privilege, but you must
walk and demean your selves in that state according to his will: you must walk
therein as becomes the Gospel of Christ; and in heart and practice Conform unto
his Laws and appointments: that your Father, head and King may delight to dwell
with and walk among you as in his holy Temple. For he is in his holy Temple,
Psalm. 11.4. Ephesians. 2.21. Oh! remember, that God is great, and greatly to be
feared in the Assembly of his Saints, and to be had in reverence of all that
are about him: Psalm. 89.7. and consider how great a privilege this is.

Secondly, A true Gospel Church, or Believers inchurched, are and shall be
privileged with more of Christ his Graces, Spirit and benefits, than others.
Christ will impart and distribute more fully and richly to them of his riches
of love and grace, when they carry themselves obediently to him in a
Church State, than when they walk as individual and single persons. His hand
and heart shall be opened wider to them, and he will abundantly bless them,
when orderly walking in his holy Temples. They may hope, expect and wait for
great things from him in his holy walks, Gardens and Galleries.

And that First, because he dwells there. There he dwells and walks (as you
heard before) and be sure where the King of glory keeps his Court and place of
residence; where he makes his abode, and that with greatest delight and
complacency, as he does in his Gospel-Churches, there he will communicate and
impart most of his riches and choicest loves and favors. The consideration of
which, made David so earnest and importunate in his desires and prayers to be
in the house of God, which he preferred much above and beyond all other good in
the world, Psalm. 63.1, 2, 3, 5. Psalm. 84.1, 11. Psalm. 27.4. There he knew that
God would meet him, and he should meet God. There he expected to find the
fullest, clearest, comfortablest, and the most constant presence of God, and
there he expected to obtain and enjoy his love and favors also: for God is
great in Zion, Psalm. 99.2. namely, great in glory, praise, renown, and in the
distributions of his favors.

2. Because, they ly in the way of them, and wait at wisdoms gate, and at
Bethefda's-Pool. Believers in a Church State are waiting on and for their Lord
and King, and for his favors and blessings, in the way and ways he has
commanded them, and appointed to bless them in. And therefore their receivings
must needs be more abundant from him, Psalm. 133. ult. As the dew of Hermon, and
as the dew that descended upon the Mountains of Zion; for there the Lord
commanded the blessing; even life for evermore. Every Ordinance of Christ is as
a full Breast, golden Pipe, and Honeycomb, which conveys and yields abundance
of Milk and Honey, of Cordials and water of life, to nourish, strengthen and
refresh the City of God, by which they are, or may be made fat and fruitful.
The Springs, Treasures and Fountain of love and grace is opened in and to the
Churches, and there Christ Jesus causes the Horn of his David's to flourish,
Psalm. 132.17. In a Church State, Believers live in the streams of all
Gospel Ordinances, and therefore they may grow there, as Willows by the
Watercourse; Esa. 44.4. for there they may with joy, draw water out of these
Wells of Salvation, Esa. 12.3. The more obedient Believers are to the will of
their King, the more he will bless them, and communicate of himself and his
Grace to them, Joh 14.13, 14, 15, 16, 21, 23. Joh. 15.7, 10. Now in a
Church State they do give up themselves in Universal, professed and avowed
obedience, to the whole will of Christ, and put themselves under all the
Ordinances of Christ, and so under all the blessings of the Covenant of Grace,
which are to be communicated to their Souls by them

3. God has promised to impart his loves and favors to his people, in their
walking with him in a Church State and Relation, in a especial manner, Cant.
7.12. Let us get up early to the Vineyards (the Churches and Ordinances of God
in them): there will I give thee my loves Psalm. 92.12, 13, 14. The righteous
shall flourish like the Palm Tree; he shall grow like a Cedar (...) Lebanon.
But where shall they thus grow and flourish? see the 13.14. verses. Those that
be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God.
They shall still bring forth fruit in old age: they shall be fat and
flourishing. Well might David say, Blessed are they that dwell in thy house,
Psalm. 84.4. For great and glorious are their provisions, privileges and
advantages, to help and encourage them in their journey toward Heaven, God
has also promised to bless, yea abundantly to bless his Churches provisions,
and to satisfy their poor with Bread; that is, to fill and empower his
Ordinances and their Ministry, with his Presence, Grace and Spirit, that they
may greatly profit their Souls, and nourish them up to eternal life, Psalm
132.15, 16.

4. God loves and delights most in his Churches or in Believers walking
together in the faith and order of the Gospel, in an inchurched state, Psalm.
87.2, 3. The Lord loves the Gates of Zion, more than all the dwellings of
Jacob. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God, Selah, Ephesians. 3.17. The
Lord thy God in the midst of thee (viz Zion, verse. 16.) ^is mighty: he will
save, he will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his love, he will
rejoice over thee with singing. Where men love and delight most, there they are
most free and liberal, to such they are most bountiful and open handed, so is
God to his Churches, because they are in their holy walking the greatest
objects of his love and delight, of his joy and rejoicing: therefore I say,
they are the subjects of his abundant grace and favors.

5. Churches or Believers in a Church State, do Christ more service than when
they walk singly, and out of that Gospel-way and order. They are now his living
public witnesses: his Candlesticks that hold up his burning Candles, and they
are his shining lights in the World. They are the seats and subjects of all his
Gospel Ordinances, and the ground and pillars of truth. They do publicly and
openly own and profess him to be their Lord and King, and to be subject to his
Laws and Authority, and declare themselves his true and loyal friends and
subjects, and that before all men. They manifest in the face of the Sun, that
they are not ashamed of his yoke, nor his so much despised word and ways, but
own them, cleave to them and walk in them, as the only good, holy and safe
ways. Many spiritual Diamonds orderly set in one gold Ring, Church form, do
cast their luster and reflect their glittering light and beauty on each other,
and so make a more lovely and glorious sight to Beholders. There they do, or
may wait on God their Father, and Christ their Head and King, with their
praises and melodious Harps, and that with one heart and soul, Psalm. 65.1.
Their harmonious consent in breathing forth their oneness, love, faith, hope
and delight into one another hearts, does greatly raise heat, and animate one
another, in pouring out their joint love, affections and praises into the ears
and heart of Christ, which is most lovely and pleasant unto him, Cant. 2.14.

6. They expose themselves to greater trouble from the World, in a
Church State, than in walking singly. A Church is as a Beacon set on a Hill
which is visible to all beholders, and by their public, practical and avowed
separation from the World, and walking by themselves, they lay themselves open
thereby to their adversaries wrath and vengeance. They are the Buts of their
invenomed Arrows of Reproach, Scorn, and Contempt of their Malice, Hatred and
Persecution. The World takes more notice of a hundred Saints walking in close
and intimate communion in a Church State, than of five thousands of others who
walk singly. This is so obvious to all, as that it needs no further proof to
confirm it. Now then, the more Believers expose themselves to sufferings in the
Lords ways, and for his sake, the more of his presence and blessings they shall
have, Esa. 43.1, 2. Esa. 41.10. Joh. 14.15, 16. chapters. 1 Pet. 3.14. 1 Pet.
4.12, 13, 14.

Thirdly, As Believers inchurched are privileged with more of the presence of
God, and the Communications of his love and favors, so likewise with mutual
help and assistance from one another. Their nearness in Union, Fellowship and
Communion, their knowledge of and acquaintance with each other, together with
the Laws of Christ among them enjoining them thereunto, and brotherly love
resulting from all capacitates, enables, quickens and encourages them to more
and constant usefulness to one another, than otherwise they could or would be.
Their holy and spiritual Intimacy and Communion, begets and preserves warm,
hearty and strong love and affection one to another, which inclines their
hearts to mind and do their external duties to each other. It prompts and puts
them upon sympathising one with another, on watching over one another, on
exhorting, comforting and provoking one another to love and to good works, Heb.
10.24, 25. to reprove, admonish, and endeavor to heal each other, when need
requires, Gal. 6.1, 2. to edify one another, warn the unruly, and support the
weak, 1 These. 5.11, 14. And is not this a great privilege and advantage to our
Souls, to have such seasonable assistance one from another? Is it not a great
privilege, when I am tempted and burdened, to have my Brethrens hands under
me, to support and strengthen me? when by my heedlesness I have fallen and
broken my bones, wounded and weakened my Soul to have such a spiritual Physician
to give me Physic? such a good Samaritan at hand, to pour in Wine and Oil into
my wounds? Luke 10.33, 34. Surely, none who are indeed concerned in their own
Souls concernments, but will easily acknowledge it is. There is or ought to be a
spiritually natural care in sound-hearted Church Members to one another, 1 Cor.
12.25. They rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep, Romans
12.15. and remember them that are in bonds, as being bound with them, Heb.
13.3. You may expect it, yea require it of one another; for you who are joined
together in Churchfellowship and relation, are as much concerned in each others
Soul concerns, as the Members of the natural body, are with one another. And
one of Gods holy ends in uniting and joining them together in one body and
spiritual society, is, that they might help, succor, admonish, reprove,
exhort, edify, comfort, watch over, serve and heal one another; To further
each other in all duties, and in the love and practice of Gospel-holiness and
Righteousness; as also to preserve each other from sin and affliction.

Fourthly, The Churches of Christ are privileged and benefited with a Ministry
and Ministers of their own: so that they need not go to strangers to fetch
bread, but to such as they have a special interest in and relation to* They
have Ministers, or Pastors and Elders sent by Christ, and set among them by
his grace and Authority; to feed and nourish them; to teach and establish them;
to admonish and reprove them; to exhort and comfort them; to watch and take the
oversight of them; to Minister all the Ordinances of Christ to them; and to
attend on the service of their Souls: and they are such as he has promised to
be with all, in all their work and labor of love, Math. 28.20. They are such
as he has promised to bless to them, to furnish them with his Spirit and
grace, and to succeed their Ministry, and prosper their endeavors to the
spiritual profit of their Souls, Psalm 132.15, 16. Jer. 3.15. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13,
14, 15. Other Saints who walk not in the order of the Gospel, have not Pastors
and Teachers of their own, between whom there is so near a Relation, Union and
Communion. For their Teachers cannot call their Auditors their own flocks, as
the Churches Pastors and Teachers may call their Churches their own. For the
Churches and their Pastors and Teachers, are each others by free, hearty and
mutual choice, and by cordial and mutual engagement. Their Pastors and Teachers
are the fruit of their prayers and tears, and of Christ his Death and
Ascension, Ephesians. 4.9, 10, 11, 12. Churches may claim their Pastors Gifts,
Authority, and ministerial Abilities, as theirs, and make use of them as their
own right and property, given to them by Christ, for their good to edification.
They may repair to, and make use of them in any material Soul-case or cases.
However some look on, and account of this matter; yet I have ever valued it as
a great Church-priviledge, namely, that they have a special and peculiar
Ministry of their own, whose work and business is to wait on the service and
concernments of their Souls; and they being sent to them, and settled among them
by Christ in love and mercy, and the fruit of their own prayers, choice and
desires, they shall be, and are undoubtedly blessed in their labors, to the
profit of all sincere hearts amongst them.

Fifthly: Gospel-Churches are the proper seats and subjects of all the
spiritual Ordinances of Christ; which is one part of their honor, glory and
renown. What is said of the Ministers and Ministry of Christ, is in this matter
true of all other Ordinances and Institutions of Christ, 1 Cor 12.28. And God
has set in his Church Apostles, Prophets and Teachers; so Ephesians. 4. that is he
has appointed Teachers and all other Ordinances for, and placed them in his
Churches. The Churches are his Temples, Houses, Habitations, Vineyards, Walks,
his resting and dwelling places (as was showed): now where does God set and six
his Ordinances of Divine worship, but in them? To whom are Pastors and Teachers
given? to whom is the Lords Supper and Discipline given, but to the Churches?
They are the seats and subjects of them, and none else, that we can find in the
Scriptures. The Lord Jesus has given to and set among them his Gospel Worship
and Ordinances: among them he dwells, and of them he expects the honor and
worship due unto his name, Psalm. 29.2. God keeps house in his Gospel Churches,
and there he has his Household about him, waiting on, and doing honor to him:
and that they might do all according to his holy will, he has given them his
Ordinances and Gospel-Institutions, to express and manifest their dependence on
and obedience to him in, as to their head and King: God made the Church of
Israel under the Old Testament the seat and subject of all his then instituted
worship and Ordinances, and under the Gospel Dispensation he has made new
Testament particular Churches, the seat and subjects of all his
Gospel Ordinances. The Catholic Church as such, cannot be the seat and subject
of them, for that cannot assemble, or meet together in one place to celebrate
and observe them: the World, or visible unbelievers cannot be the seat and
subject of them; for they are no where said to be given to them, neither are
they capable (while in their state of enmity against Christ) of them: Therefore
they must be the Churches dowry's, rights and privileges, and none other
persons, or societies whatsoever. Whilst Believers neglect to walk in a
Church State and relation, they deprive themselves of this and many other
privileges, and Soul-advantages: and it is no small wrong they do their Souls
thereby. It may be said of all Gospel-Churches, as Moses told the Church of
Israel, Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8. for what people is there so great, who has God so nigh
unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things we call upon him for? And what
people is there so great that has Statutes and Judgments so righteous, as all
this Law which I set before you this day?

Sixthly: Gospel-Churches, or Believers inchurched are privileged with safety
and security. They are Gardens enclosed, Cant. 4.12. A Garden enclosed is my
Sister, my Spouse, a Spring shut up, a Fountain sealed. A wall or hedge in our
Gardens to secure them from Beasts and evil Men, and we are more careful of,
and at greater cost and pains in and about them, than about our Fields. So the
Lord Jesus lays out, and expends more care, cost and charge, in and about his
Gospel-Gardens, than about others. Men are most watchful and careful of and
about their Houses and places of residence and abode, where they live, expect
and take most delight. Now where does God make his abode, and Christ the Lord,
keep his Court? Is it not in his Churches (as was before proved)? They are his
Temples, Houses, Vineyards, Gardens, Habitations, Walks and Palaces; his
delights and resting places: and will he not be most careful and mindful of
them, for his own honor and glory; and their good? Believers in living on and
walking with God in a Churchstate, are of all persons, in the best and safest
condition. They are under the greatest security from Seductions and Satanical
Delusions from backsliding, and Apostacies, from the Spirit of Error and
Heresies, from spiritual decays and witherings, from hardness of heart, or from
being hardened and stupefied through the deceitfulness, and ensnaring
allurements of this world, Heb. 3.13. For they have greater and more constant
means and provisions for their preservation and security, than others have.
They have more promises of being secured by their Lord and King, Esa. 27.2, 3.
Sing ye unto her a Vineyard of red Wine. I the Lord do keep it; I will water it
every moment: lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day. They have the
Lords presence and glory, his love, grace and benefits frequently before their
eyes, to warn, quicken and keep them awake and watchful, diligent and faithful,
and they have fresh springs often flowing in upon their hearts. They are much
in the eye of Christ, and he is much in their eye, which keeps an awe on them;
and the frequent views of his glorious person, love, grace, Laws and Ordinances
are of great use toward their safety. So also is the watchfulness, help and
assistance they have from one another in a Church State. Believers walking
irregularly and disorderly, as they do, when not joined to some true Church of
Christ, they are as common fields that lie open to all sorts of Beasts, and as
Soldiers walking and straggling without the Camp, ready to become a prey unto
their Enemies: But in a Church State, and walking with God therein, they are as
a Garden walled in, as a Castle and City, with ^ates and Bars, and as a
Household of persons shut in, with doors and locks. They are hedged in with
Christ his Discipline, and secured with his watchful eye and protection, so as
that the Gates of Hell cannot so easily prevail against them, as they may
against others.

Seventhly: Gospel-Churches are very honorable Societies and Corporations.
They are exalted and dignified so by Christ, and that they are the most high,
excellent, as honorable Houses and Cities in the World. They are the Houses
and Households of the great King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6.15. Psalm.
48.1, 2, 3. Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21, 22. A House built up, fitly framed and
artificially formed of hewn stones and Timber, is much more honorable and
glorious, than the materials whereof it was builded were, before they were so
formed up. One holy Temple fitly framed, consisting of a hundred meet and well
qualified persons, has more beauty, glory, excellency, honor and renown on
it, than ten thousand such materials have, whilst they lie scattred up and down
among the Rubbish of the World. And as they do more (as it were) adorn and
beautify Christ in the World, so he does more adorn and beautify them. They
are said to be beautiful for Situation: Psalm. 48.2. and Gods holy Temples, Ephesians.
2.21. They are honored with more of his honorable and glorious presence, with
more of his holy and sweet Laws and Ordinances, and with more of his promises,
power, gifts and graces* Their honor, fame, and renown is far above my reach,
and far beyond what I can declare. They are made the keepers and upholders of
his Truths, Name and Interests. Churches in their orderly and holy walkings,
are terrible as an Army with Banners, Cant. 6.4, 10. and glorious things are
spoken of this City of God, Psalm. 87.3. As God said of Job, namely, that there
were none like him in the earth, Job. 8 1. So he says of his New Testament
Churches, that there are not any Societies like them in the earth. For what
other Corporations and Societies of men are so qualified, that have God with
them, as they have? that have such a head and King, such Ordinances, Laws and
Lawgiver, as such Churches have? where are those Societies to be found, that
God speaks so honorably of, and gives such honorable Titles to, as he does to
them? They are (or ought to be) all stones of Gold, and precious Jewels: they
are Kings and Priests, and made up of Royal Diadems, Esa. 62.3. Rev. 2.1. Mal.
3.17. They have the Lords name written on them, and they are called by his
name. They are called the Churches of God and of Christ. What other Societies
of men are there governed by such Laws, ruled by such Rulers, animated by such
a Spirit, and fed with such Heavenly bread and spiritual provisions, as they
are? They are the lights and glories of, or in the World, and by their joint
prayers and interest in Heaven, they are the supporters of the world. These are
a few of the special privileges of inchurched Saints, which have been dearly
purchased for them with the blood of Christ, and conferred upon them by the
holy Ghost; which they are bound to take special notice of, affect their hearts
with them, rejoice greatly with them, and in the Author of them, be very
thankful for, and faithfully improve them to the glory of Christ, and to their
own peace, comfort, encouragement in holiness, and to their growth in grace.

You that are Churches, and Church Members, are bound to consider and lay to
heart your great, singular and invaluable privileges; your unworthiness of
them; the price they have cost your head and King; the ends for which they are
given you; to walk worthy of them in your Church State and Relation, and see
that you walk and carry your selves honorably in all your ways toward God and
men. And remember, that God gives you all these and other privileges and
enjoyments, that you should be rich in good works, yea that you might abound in
the work of the Lord, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. 1 Cor. 15. ult. Your privileges are
singular and glorious: Oh! so let your words, carriages, deeds and performances
be also. God has dignified you; do you see that you exalt him. God has done
great things for you; do you do great things for him; you shall reap the
benefit, and he the glory.

CHAP. X.
That it is the indispensible duty of all Believers to join themselves unto
some rightly constituted Church of Christ, (if they can) together with the
Reasons and ends of their so doing.
Quest. Ought not all true Believers to join themselves unto, and walk in
fellow^ ship with some holy and well-constituted Church of Jesus Christ, where
they may enjoy and partake of his Gospel-Ordinance?

Ans. It is their undoubted and indispensible duty so to do, if they have the
convenience and opportunity of doing it. They may not wilfully or carelessly
neglect to do it one day, after they have opportunities offered them: they are
not, cannot be dispensed withal in their Omissions; for their wilful or
careless neglects are their sins. They are by such neglects guilty of
disobedience and contempt. They disobey the Royal will and pleasure of their
Sovereign King and Lawgiver the Lord Christ; and they do by such neglects,
slight and despise his Love and Grace, his Care and Kindness. He has provided
holy Temples and spiritual Houses for them to dwell in, and Heavenly provisions
are made ready in them for their entertainment. The doors are set open to let
in such Guests, and the Servants of the great King are gone forth to bid them
come away, and invite them to enter in. There stands also the Master of the
Feast, even at the door, waiting for them; the King of glory attends there to
welcome them, when they come, Luke 14.16, 17. Rev. 3.20. He gets there before
them, and abides there in expectation of the presence and company of all his
Saints, Psalm. 11.4. Isa. 30.18. He declares that it is his good pleasure, they
should come there and eat of his dainties, that he has bought and prepared for
them, Cant. 5.1. Prove. 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Now that they ought to join themselves
to, and become holy, living and spiritual Members of some particular
Congregational Church of Christ (if possibly they can) will further appear by
these following Reasons and Considerations.

First: The Lord Christ has erected, instituted and appointed Churches for
this end (among others) namely, that his called and sanctified people might be
the matter of them, that they might join and walk together in them, and that
they might be the materials of them. This state and condition is not ordained
and appointed for other persons, but only for the Holy Seed; for God will not
keep House with unregenerate and unholy persons, but with his chosen Generation
and Royal Priesthood he will. That particular Congregational Churches are of
divine Institution, has been already proved: and if so, then it will follow
that God's people should join to, and walk with them; or else to what purpose
are they appointed, instituted, and ordained by Jesus Christ, If none are bound
in duty, yea, if all God's people (that can) are not bound in duty and
compliance with the Lords ends, to become Churches, join to, and walk in and
with them? then this Order and Institution of Christ is in vain; he has
appointed and instituted that which none are, or will be advantaged by; which
surely was far from the gracious thoughts and intentions of the Lord Jesus, the
Wisdom and Power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. For the Lord has made all things for
himself, and ordained them for his own Glory and the profit of his people. He
has made nothing in vain. It is far below him to do it, and below reasonable
Creatures to imagine it. And 2. It will follow, that whoever join themselves to
such Churches, they do it not as duty to God and their own souls, but as an act
of their own will and pleasure, without any respect to, or regard had of the
Will of God, and their own spiritual good, so are guilty of Superstition and
Willworship, which God loathes and abhors. The very Institution proves it
sufficiently to be our duty to join with, and become Members of some particular
Churches of Christ.

Secondly: The unanimous and universal Votes of all the Primitive Saints do
prove this Truth. Those good men that were converted to Christ by the Apostles
Preaching, with, and amongst whom they lived and conversed, and such as they
planted, fed and watered, 1 Cor. 3. and these both Jews and Gentiles; they do
all of them by their constant practice witness to, and confirm what I say. Look
where you will in the Stories of the Acts, where you read of the Apostles
Preaching, and Men Converted; there, or in Paul's Epistles, and the Revelation,
you shall find the young Converts giving up themselves to the Lord, and to one
another by the Will of God, 2 Cor. 8.5. We find them by and by inchurched, and
walking in a Church State and relation. So in Acts 2.41, 42. ult. Acts 5.14.
And were not all Paul's Epistles (that to Philemon only excepted, which was
written upon a particular occasion) wrote and sent to the Churches, or to, and
for Believers, as inchurched and imbodied together, that they might know how to
behave themselves in the House or Houses of God, toward God, their Elders, and
one another? They are expressly called Churches, the Churches of God, and of
Christ, as was showed before. Now all Believers are charged and exhorted to
follow their examples and practice, Heb. 6.12. That ye be not slothful, but
followers of them; who through Faith and Patience Inherit the Promises, that
is, see and mark them in their walkings; observe how they lived and practiced,
and do you so likewise. Paul indeed could not abide with the Church at
Jerusalem, to which he was joined as a Member, Acts 9.26, 27, 28. because he
was sent to Preach the Gospel to the Gentiles. But as often as he could, he
joined and walked with the Churches, as you may often find in reading the Acts
of the Apostles. Now says he to the Church at Philippi, chap. 3.17. Brethren,
be followers together of me, and mark them who walk so, as ye have us for an
ensample. This Commandment is for you who are in Christ, that you walk as Paul
and other Primitive Saints walked. If it was their duty and practice, as you
see it was, (for they gave themselves to the Lord, and to one another by the
Will of God that is, they Congregated and inchurched themselves, not by, or
according to their own wills, but by, and according to the Will of God) then I
say, it is the duty of all other Saints, and it ought to be their practice
likewise. For, whatsoever was written aforetime, (namely, of the Saints duty
and approved practice) was written for our Learning, that we, who succeed them
in their Faith and Privileges, in their Hope and Profession, might follow them
in practice also. If we look for, and expect the same Covenant-mercies and
blessings that they had, we must practice the same duties, and walk as they
did. The Primitive Saints were commended and renowned for their orderly walking
in a Church State, Rev. 2, and 3. Chapters, and often elsewhere, Luke 1.6. 1
Cor. 11.1, 2.

Thirdly, All Believers ought to walk in Church Fellowship, by virtue of their
Marriage-Covenant. When by the power of Grace, and the Spirits operations in
their hearts, they were persuaded to make Christ their choice, and took,
received and embraced him on his own terms, they solemnly engaged themselves to
be his, chose his Laws and Ordinances for theirs, and bound themselves to him,
to walk with him, and be obedient unto him in all things, to keep and observe,
to love and practice all his Laws, and to conform in heart and practice unto
all his Ordinances and Institutions; as David, Zachary, Elizabeth, and other
Saints of God had done before them. Thus in effect do all truly-convinced, and
sincere-hearted Believers do, when contracted or married unto Christ by Faith,
Psalm. 119.106. Hos. 3.3. Jer. 30.21. 2 Cor. 8.5. Col. 2.6. Now then, being thus
bound, or having thus bound and obliged themselves to Christ, they ought for
ever to do and perform, to walk and practice accordingly; which they do not
until they give up themselves to one another, and walk together in Gospel
fellowship, in the conscientious Observation of all the Ordinances and
Appointments of Jesus Christ. For until they do so, they walk not in universal
Obedience to all the Laws and Orders of their Head and King. For besides their
disorderly walking, they live in the careless, if not wilful neglect of several
Duties and Ordinances given to, and incumbent on the Churches, as the Lords
Supper, and many brotherly Duties one to another. You have heard before, that a
true Church of Christ is the seat and subject of all Gospel Ordinances; and if
so, then it will follow, that thither Believers should repair for, and seek to
find them; there they should walk and observe them, and no where else,
excepting occasionally. For out of a Church State they do not orderly observe
the Ordinances and Appointments of Christ in what they do. Many think that they
do well, and discharge their duties to Christ and their own souls, if they
observe and wait on some Ordinances, if their hearts be upright with God in
their so doing; but consider not the order and method, the places and ways
they ought to observe and practice them in: But herein they are mistaken, and
walk disorderly. It was the Will of God, that the Ark of his Covenant should be
brought to Jerusalem; and David and the Priests did well in attempting to do
it; but they failed in the external manner of doing it, and therefore God made
a breach on them 1 Chronicles. 15.13. The Sons of Aaron did well in offering
Sacrifice to God; but they failed in offering their Sacrifice with strange
fire, Lev. 10. And are not these things written for our Admonition? 1 Cor.
13.11. undoubtedly they are. God has Instituted Churches, and appointed them
to be the seats and subjects of all his Gospel Ordinances and Institutions;
invited and called his people to, or into them to celebrate them there. Now
when any content themselves with the enjoyment and observation of some
Ordinances and Gospel-Institutions, and attend on them out of a Church State,
as if they found them where they ought to seek them: they walk irregularly, and
break their Marriage-Covenant by their careless or wilful neglects. For how are
they universally obedient to all his Laws and Ordinances, when they take up
with, and only respect some of them, and such as they do observe, they observe
not in due order, or in a right manner? Oh! think on this, you who live so, and
what the end will be. Oh! consider what promises you have made to Christ, and
what Obligations you lay under to him; and examine (seriously) your selves, if
you live not in the wilful or careless breach of them, and so lay your selves
open to the wrath and displeasure of your Lord and King, and by your neglects
provoke him to make a breach on you. O remember, what obligations you live
under, To give Him the Honor due unto his Name, in and by universal Obedience
unto his holy Will in all things. 1. You have his Will and your duty revealed
and opened to you in his Gospel, and further explained by his Ministers. 2. You
are greatly obliged and enjoined by his mercies and promises. 3. You are firmly
bound by your own act and deed, by your own free and voluntary Covenants and
Engagements: and therefore you may not live any longer in the neglect of any of
Christ's Ordinances and Appointments, And consider further, that while you live
in such neglects, you Rob God of his Dues; you detain his Right of Homage and
Service, from him, which will assuredly have bitterness in the end; and instead
of being called and entitled Obedient Children, 1 Pet. 1.14. you will incur the
odious Name and Title of Disobedient, if not Stubborn and Rebellious Children.

Fourthly, Believers ought to join themselves to, and walk in Church Fellowship
for their own Souls sakes, for their own profit and spiritual benefit. They
stand in need of all God's means to help them on in their journey and spiritual
warfare, through the Wilderness of this world, as experience shows. It is well
known that all Believers have their Entanglements, Trials, Temptations,
Oppositions, Weights, Burdens, and Weaknesses: The best of Saints have them,
and are not a little encumbered and pressed by them. Now God the Father, and our
Lord Jesus Christ have in their great Love and Kindness to Believers made and
provided, offered and given to them suitable and proper means for their support,
strengthening, comfort and encouragement; to feed and nourish, to edify and
build up their Souls and Graces, and that by imparting and communicating of his
Spirit, Truth, Love and Grace unto their Souls, in and by those means. They are
appointed and given to them for their own profit and the glory of God. Such is
the Love of Jesus Christ unto his peculiar people, as that he has conjoined
and made their present and eternal happiness one and the same end with his own
Honor and Glory in all the dispensations of his Graces, and in all his
Promises and Gospel-Laws; so that they are not two, but one End and Interest,
wherein his free Love and Grace shines forth most gloriously. Now as God told a
Remnant among the Jews, That he sent them into Captivity for their good, Jer.
24.5. So he has made and appointed Churches, and set his Gospel Ordinances in
them for his peoples good, that they may come there and reap the fruits and
profits of them. Therefore they ought to do it, and not upon any Pretense
whatsoever to neglect it; for if they refuse to come and take them, as they in
Luke 14.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. may not the great God reprove and condemn them
for their wilful neglects and careful refusals, as he did them? He made a great
Supper, a feast of fat things, Isa. 25. bid and invited men to come eat of his
Supper; but they made excuses for their neglects: so he has made a Heavenly
Feast for Believers, invited them to come, to eat and drink freely and
abundantly for the supply of their wants, and making them fat and flourishing:
But they will not come into his House or Houses, nor accept of his dainties,
although they stand in need of it, are lovingly and importunately invited by
their God and King, their Head and Husband, to come freely, dwell in his House,
feed on his Banquets, lie in his Bosom, and refresh themselves with his
Delights; but they will not do it. They stand off, as if they were not
concerned in those matters, had no need of them, or not enjoined to come.

They frequently complain and cry out of their wants, weaknesses, barrenness,
cold and dead-heartedness; of the strength and prevalency of their Lusts and
Temptations, of their ignorance, sadness, and carnality. And although they have
provisions made in their Fathers Houses, and in their Kings Palaces, to help
and relieve them, to warm and teach them, to melt and soften them, to arm and
strengthen them, to comfort and cheer them, to water and make them fruitful;
yet how sinfully and shamefully do many of them neglect to come and take, to
accept and make use of their love and goodness to them? but they will rather
stand in the streets complaining, than come into their Fathers Temples, where
they may have supplies of wholesome food for their souls. The Lord Jesus Christ
keeps House in his Churches, where he is very liberal in his distributions. In
them are his Magazins, his Treasures of Grace and Love opened. There He gives
forth his Loves, and causes the Fountain to flow, for the enriching of the
Poor, filling the Hungry, and satisfying the Thirsty. There Souls shall find
Food for the Belly, and Clothing for the Back. There the weary soul shall
rest, and the troubled soul shall find peace. There the fainting shall find
Cordials, and the diseased Soul shall find Physic, to heal him. There the
pained Soul shall find case, and the weak shall find strength. There broken
bones shall be set in joint; and doubting souls resolved. There they may find
the good things they want and desire, and there they may obtain satisfaction to
their Souls. Would they see Zions King and their beloved Lord and Husband in
his beauty and glory? There they may obtain their desires. Would they grow in
Grace, and increase with the increase of God? why there they may obtain it.
Would they be sealed up to the day of their Redemption, and have a clear
Earnest of their eternal Inheritance? why, in a Church State they may have it.
In a word, there good men may find all good to their souls; For God will
withold no good thing from them who walk uprightly in a Church State, and in
all the Commandments and Ordinances of God therein blamelesly. Well then, if it
be your duty to look after, to mind and industriously to seek the welfare of
your own souls, (as all will readily acknowledge it is) then it will undeniably
follow, that you ought to seek it in all the ways and means God has appointed
and given to you for that end and purpose. Now what other spiritual means have
you to expect and seek for such mercies and soul-blessings in? where can you
expect and hope to find them, but in the Temples, Houses, Walks, Palaces and
Households of your God and King? That you need them, you know, and that there
you may find and experience them, you may believe. Oh! that you would be
persuaded to come and see, come and taste, to come and prove the Truth of what I
say. If you will not, but continue and abide as you are, practically slight and
neglect the rich provisions that your God and Father has made for you in his
Churches; you are never like to thrive and prosper, but to continue in, and
under your Wants, Barrenness, Ignorance, Weakness, Doubts and Fears; under your
Faintings, Sadnesses, Witherings and Troubles of spirit. If you will still
refuse the means, and neglect to come and take the mercies of the New Covenant;
you will grieve the holy Spirit, and provoke him to depart from you, and carry
away his blessings with him. It is your present and eternal good that I seek
and intend in what I say, and the same end had your Lord God in appointing this
condition and making such provisions for you. I wonder how Believers can, and
that they dare live one day out of a Church State, and in the wilful neglect of
so many precious and soul-enriching Ordinances and Duties: how they can
satisfy themselves in their ways and walkings, and with what confidence they
can draw near to God, whilst under so much guilt. I wonder how they can call
God Father, apply the Promises, and appropriate to themselves the good of them,
while they walk so irregularly and disobediently as they do. Surely they little
mind their own souls concernments, or the Name and Honor of Jesus Christ,
whilst htey neglect to observe so many of his good Laws and Ordinances, and to
make use of their own purchased Privileges, and that, whilst their Souls stand
in great need of them.

Object. But we are afraid that we are not fitted and qualified for
Church Membership, and that we have no right to the Childrens Bread there, and
therefore we dare not join our selves unto the holy Churches of Christ.

Answ. This may be (indeed) a great case with some, and it may be a stumbling
block in their way of walking as they ought to do. They love Christ and his
People, his ways and Ordinances, but dare not walk in the nearest Fellowship
and Communion with them, because they think themselves unworthy of their
Society and the Ordinances of God among them. Now where it is so indeed, they
sin not as others do, who neglect not their duties and privileges on this
account, but on other. All that I shall say to this sort of Neglecters, is (1.)
That this pretense will not wholly excuse them either before God or Men. For 1.
They are no where dispensed with their neglect of duty upon that account; or
they have no dispensation to neglect to do their duty, and wait on God for his
grace to better them in his ways and means on that account. For if they might
on that account be dispensed withal in the omission of their duty, and using
God's means to better them; by the same rule they may neglect and claim a
dispensation for the omission of Prayer, and other Duties and Ordinances under
this pretense, that they cannot worship God in Spirit and Truth as God requires
all to worship him, Joh. 4.23, 24. Heb. 10.22, and therefore they may not, will
not worship him at all. 2. It is probable that their fears and scruples arise
from the Devils temptations and wiles, and from their own guilty Consciences.
They know that they do not walk with God, subdue their Lusts, deny themselves,
and endeavor to know their own states and conditions. They carry about
accusing and condemning Consciences, which the Devil sets in with, and works
them to his will and design, and so they are afraid of God, of their duties and
privileges; for they might prevent these evils, and know in some degrees their
states, if they would. 3. One use and end of Church Fellowship, and the
Ordinances of Christ therein, is to convey into Believers hearts the assurance
of their good states and conditions. They are appointed and ordained for them,
to wait for it in them, and for the holy Spirit to give and impart it to their
Souls there. And therefore, until they seek for it there, they may not expect
to find it; for if we use not the means, how can we hope to obtain the ends of
them. 4. If their scruples and objections arise from real darkness of mind, and
tenderness of Conscience, without guilt, then I advise them to consider and
examine what are indeed the necessary qualifications of Church Members, and
enquire if they are not in them in some good measure. And for your satisfaction
therein, I refer you unto the third Chapter of this Book, beginning at page the
47th. and ending at page the 55. where you will find ten qualifications
requisite for Church Membership, and helps to make a judgment of your selves,
if they be in you. Therefore read them, and try your selves by them; and know,
that if you are so qualified, or if you can find these signs of grace in you,
that then you are in a meet condition for Church membership, and to partake of
all the Ordinances of God's House, what ever else you may want.

2. But there is another sort of Neglecters of Church Fellowship, and they are
such whose neglects arise from their carelessness, indifferency,
cold-heartedness, stupidity, and woeful insensibility and not from scruples of
Conscience, or fears of their unworthiness. They see not, feel not their need
of God's means and spiritual provisions; they know not the worth, neither do
they see any transcendent excellency in them, wherefore they should desire
them: And hence it is that they regard and desire them not; they have
back-slidden from God, and He is departed from them, shines not on their souls
to keep them soft and tender, nor waters them with Divine dews, to make them
compliant with his Will: So that when they are called upon to consider their
ways, put themselves under all the Ordinances of Gods House, and join in the
nearest band of Communion with his People, they turn a deaf ear to all that is
said unto them; and yet these will pretend strange things for their neglects
also. They will have their scruples and objections too, and they cannot do so,
because of such and such things in the Churches. They have their weaknesses,
miscarriages and defects, and therefore they cannot join with them. They have
the sight of Beams, or they see great Faults among such Congregations, as
otherwise they would congregate withal; but they see none at home, or at best,
but some little Motes in themselves. They are too good for such Churches, and
the Churches are too bad for their Communion. They see all the faults abroad,
none, or very few at home in themselves; and they think that this will excuse
their Neglects; but they are mistaken; for if themselves are so good and
faultless, and the Churches faulty in this or that, they should the rather join
with them, and by their goodness and abilities, endeavor to better and mend
them by their wise Counsels and holy Conversations, as knowing that all
Churches, as Churches, have their Buts, as well as particular Believers their
own personal Buts. This is the careless Generation of Men, who have lost their
God and hearts in Earthly things, and buried themselves and graces under the
clods of worldly cares, profits, and pleasures, and so are regardless of their
own souls, and indifferent what becomes of them. This, together with carnal
self-love and sond affections to the good things of this world, eager desires
after the getting and keeping them, and indulged fears of losing them, lays at
the bottom of all their neglects; although other pretenses there are, or other
obstructions are pretended for them, to set a fair face on a foul matter. This
Conscience will tell them, if they will hearken to it, and give it leave to
speak out all it has to say in the cases against them.

Let me then exhort you in the Prophet's words, Hag. 1.5.7. Lam. 3.40. Consider
your ways, and search and try your ways. Ask the question in good earnest, and
put it home to your own Consciences, and desire them to speak out plainly, and
tell you clearly, what obstructions or matters they are, that keep you from
helping to build the Lord's House or Houses, that hinder you from going up to
the Mountain of the Lord's House, from appearing before God in Zion, and paying
your Vows in the Mountain of his Holiness. And see if that does not hinder you,
which did hinder the Jews in Haggai's days; (what their hindrances were, you
may read in that Book at large) And are they not the evils that hinder you from
joining your selves to the Churches of Christ, and celebrating his worship, and
partaking of his holy Ordinances there? Are not the greatest lets and
impediments within you, and some from a worldly concern without you? Do you not
consult flesh and blood, and the will of the flesh in the case, and not the
will of God? and do you not find a contest sometimes in you between Conscience
and Self, Conscience and the World? Does not Conscience sometimes bid you go and
join your selves to the People and Ordinances of God, and then you think of
doing so, and then appears Self and the World and forbids you, calls you back
again, and puts you into another mood, because you hearken to their voice, and
not to Conscience, which spoke to you from God, for God and your own Souls.
Well then, do not stand any longer in your Neglects on vain and groundless
objections, and pretended scruples, but stick to your duty; Give your selves to
the Lord; and to his People by the will of God, 2 Cor. 8.5. Acts 2.41, 42, 43.
ult.

Fifthly: You ought to join your selves to God's People, and walk in the
fellowship of the Gospel with them, in the celebration of divine Ordinances of
worship, for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake, for his Name, Authority, Interest,
and Glory's sake; for that his Honor and Glory is concerned in your so doing
as well as your own good. You heard before, that Gospel-Churches are his
Temples, Walks, Palaces, Delights, and Habitations; that they are his Golden
Candlesticks, the Seats and Subjects of his Gospel-Institutions, the Beauties
of his Holiness, and that they are his great and living Witnesses in the World.
Now as a stately and well built House affords much more honor and renown to a
great man, than ten thousand times as many materials, whereof the said House is
built, whilst they lay scattered up and down in the world; so a company of holy
persons formed up into a holy Temple by the Word and Spirit, do more honor and
glorify the Lord Christ, than ten thousands of Saints can do, whilst they walk
up and down as scattered stones among others. Christ accounts himself much
exalted by his People, when they do it together with one hear and mouth, Romans
15.6. We ought to cause our light to shine as clearly as possible before the
World, that they may see our good works, ad^ glorify God, Matthew. 5.16. The
world knows not what to make of Professors, whilst they wall promiscuously and
confusedly in, and with the world. They cannot so well discern them from other
men, neither know they what to think of them, and conclude them to be; what
they are, who they are for, and what they intend, when they are as so many
individuals, as when they are knit together in fixed Congregations, and walk,
live, and converse, worship God, and serve one another together as a Family and
Household of God, As Brethren dwelling together in Unity, Psalm. 133.1, 2. and
united in a holy Band. I have spoken somewhat of this elsewhere under another
head. And therefore shall only at present say, that if it be so, that Believers
may more honor Christ by walking together in Gospel or Church Fellowship than
otherwise, that then they are bound in duty so to walk. For if it be their duty
to exalt and honor Christ all they can, as certainly it is, then they are
bound to use the means whereby they may be enabled to do it. Now Christ has
given to, and set in his Churches many Ordinances of worship, and out of every
one of them he expects a Revenue of Glory by his people; therefore the more of
his Ordinances you have in your hand, and spiritually observe, the more is
Christ glorified by you. Besides this, you are in a better capacity to provoke
one another to love and to good works, Heb. 10.24.25. and to inflame one
another love to Christ, to preserve each other from sinning against him, and
reproaching his holy Name and ways by sin in a Church State, than out of it.
You will likewise be capacitated to honor the Lord Jesus more in a
Church State than otherwise, by growing in grace, and getting more Talents into
your hands to Trade withal and employ for him in the Church and world, (as you
heard before). Therefore do you no longer stand off, but join your selves to
some Gospel Church for the Lord Jesus sake.

Sixthly: You that are true Believers, ought to join your selves to some true
Church of Christ. for your Fellow Members and Brethren's sakes too. You know
that we are bound to do all the good we can to one another, Gal. 6.10. to
further each other in the way of holiness to eternal happiness. We need each
others helping hand, and are set in this World to be useful and helpful one to
another. Now by joining our selves one to another, and walking together in
mutual love, peace and concord, and in the same judgment (though not so in all
things) way and order, in the same Communion, Ordinances and Worship, we do
greatly strengthen the hands, cheer and quicken the hearts of one another in
our duties, under our burdens and Temptations, and help to make our yoke ^asie.
We animate and stir up one another, and put as it were new courage, life and
spirit into each other. But by our neglect to join in fellowship with our
Brethren, by being strange to, and keeping at a distance from them, we do very
much weaken their hands, sadden, grieve and discourage their hearts, and lay
them under many Temptations, troubles and disquietments, as experience shows;
We ought to bear each others burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ; Gal. 6
2. But we may not burden one another either by Omission or Commission. We are
debtors to one another by virtue of Christ's Command, and our spiritual
Relation to each other; we live not from or by our selves, and therefore must
not live for and to our selves. I am my Brother's, and he is mine, as to help,
comfort, service and usefulness one to another. Such as carelessly or wilfully
abide out of Church Fellowship, do in a sense condemn those who walk in it. We
ought to know and be acquainted with one another, that we may be thereby the
more serviceable to each other. I am my Brother's Keeper, Teacher, Comforter,
Reprover and Admonisher, and he is mine. I cannot well live, nor ordinarily
live well without his help and assistance; nor he without mine. We have our
work and business to do for one another, as well as for our selves. The nearer
and faster Brethren are linked and knit together, the warmer and stronger their
love will be to, and the more care and tenderness they will have for, and
toward one another. Now though Church Fellowship be not the ground of
Brethrens love and service one to another, but their oneness with Christ, and
fellow-membership in him their head, as also his revealed will; yet it is
certain in experience, that their near and close Communion together in
Church Fellowship does greatly provoke, irritate, strengthen and draw forth
their love one to another. Distance and strangeness weakens love, but nearness
and intimacy strengthens it. Church Communion is a spiritual bond, that ties
spiritual men together, and greatly knits them into one; when otherwise in
their walkings they are divided and like bones out of joint. Therefore let all
true-hearted Brethren join in Church Fellowship with their Brethren, and
declare their oneness in Christ, in spirit, faith and love, by their so doing.
Let them strengthen each others hands, and encourage one another heart in
their work and duty, in their privileges and mercies: and know that you are
indispensibly bound so to do. You have Christ himself and his spirit calling
you: you have your own and your Brethrens Souls calling you: you have the
practice of the Apostles and Primitive Saints calling you, and (in a sense) you
have the World calling you into Church Fellowship. Why then do it, and make no
longer delay; for while you neglect to do it, you neglect your duties to God,
to your Brethren, and to your own Souls: yea, you do practically slight your
purchased privileges and dear-bought mercies; do it speedily for Christ's
sake, and for your own peace, comfort, growth and security.

Seventhly: You that are true Believers, ought to walk in Church Fellowship,
that you may be, and live under Church promises. You heard before, that there
are many promises made and given to Churches, or to Believers in that capacity;
which they cannot claim to themselves, while they walk alone, as individuals
and strangers to one another. God told Solomon, that his eyes and heart should
be perpetually in his Temple, 2 Chronicles. 7.16. But David's Gold, Silver, Brass
and other Materials, that he had provided to build it, had not such a promise,
until they were formed up into a house for God. So it is now with living or
lively materials, that are hewn and pollished for to build him Gospel-Temples.
They may not expect the good of all the promises, but in the ways of God's
Appointments, and their own duties. Although their being in Christ, united and
married to him by faith, be the ground and foundation of their right to the
promises, and all the good of them; yet the Great God gives out and imparts the
Juice and fatness of them unto their Souls, in the ways of his Gospel
precepts, and appointments, that such as expect to be partakers of them, may
seek all in those ways. I have in the last chapter instanced in several
promises, that belong unto Churches, or unto Believers walking with God in that
state and capacity. As that in Rev. 2.1. 2 Cor. 6.16. Psalm. 92.12, 13. Psalm.
132.12, 13, 14. Ephesians. 2. the three last verses, with several others of like
import. Now then, if you will partake of the good of Church-promises, you must
become holy and orderly Church Members. Surely, it is your duty to look after,
and earnestly to seek for them, and that where God has promised, and you may
find them. There you may obtain the milk and honey of the promises of Christ's
presence; of making you fat and flourishing; of a blessed Ministry, and the
blessings of it; of Divine loves and sweet provisions, and of peace and
security. I could have persuaded you to join unto, and walk in the Churches of
Christ, by other Reasons; but I think these may suffice such as are of willing
hearts, and of meek and humble, soft and holy spirits.

Quest. What ends should all men aim at, and have in their eye, in joining with
and walking in Church Fellowship, or to what ends and purposes should they
become Church Members?

Answ. 1. To please and honor the Lord Jesus Christ their Lord and King in his
Churches, and to show their Respect unto him, Obedience to his Commands, and
declare their dependence on him for all things, and their subjection to him in
all things. Christ the Lord has done many good works to pleasure them, exalt
and honor them; and therefore they ought to do his will and their duty, to
please, exalt and honor him, Esa. 56.4. Col. 1.10. This glorious end every
Churchmember must have in his eye and heart in walking in Churches.

2. To express their high Resentment of his savours to them, and their cordial
thank fullness for them. They are greatly privileged, and highly dignified in
the Churches by their membership there, and they can no otherwise express their
gratitude to their head and King, but by accepting them, dutiful and faithful
improvement of them to the ends for which they were given. Good men do show how
they value them by their accepting and using them. Churches and their
privileges are not small matters in their accounts, or light matters in their
esteem, but they are high and honorable in their hearts; and so are their
works and duties there likewise, Psalm. 27.4. Psalm. 63.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 84.

3. They should aim at, and design to have and hold Communion with God, and
Jesus Christ the Lord. God is known in these Palaces, Psalm. 48.3. and to be
seen in these Galleries. There he opens himself, and breaks opens the Treasures
of his love and grace unto his people, and there he stands holding out his
Golden Scepter. There he waits to meet his Spouses, to kiss and embrace them,
to entertain and speak friendly to them. He meets them that rejoice and work
Righteousness, and remember him in his ways, Esa. 64.5. The ways and walks of
the Lord God are in his Churches: there he dwells, keeps house, manifests
himself unto his Household, and rests himself, takes his delight, and shows
forth his glory to them, and thither they should go to meet him, 2 Cor. 6.16.
Rev. 2.1. Joh. 14.21, 23.

4. Believers should enter into, and walk with God in Church Fellowship, to
increase and augment their grace, and to better their hearts, to grow in grace
and in the knowledge of Christ, 2 Pet. 3.18. and that they may perfect holiness
in the fear of God; that they may receive of his fullness grace for grace, Joh.
1.16. and be filled with all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19. that they may eat
of their Fathers Bread and drink of his Wine, be made fat and flourishing, and
fruitful in every good work, Psalm. 92. Psalm. 132. Col. 1.10.

5 To keep their hearts warm, strong and lively for God, his work and service,
and that they may obtain and enjoy all encouragements for, and in their works,
trials and difficulties. To fence and arm themselves against all their Enemies
assaults on them, and be enabled to fight against and conquer them in the Lord
Jesus. That they may be enabled to run their holy Race cheerfully and
courageously, and finish their course with joy, Act. 20.24. 1 Cor. 9.24. Romans
8. The Son of Righteousness shines warmest on Believers Souls in the Churches
of Christ, and there are more springs of joy and harvests of profit, than are
or can be found elsewhere. There is a River, the streams whereof make glad the
City of God: the holy place of the Tabernacles of the most high, Psalm. 46.4.
There are no springs like the Churches springs, nor any harvests like the
Churches harvests. The fullest, clearest and most fatning streams of living
waters flow from the fountain Christ on the Churches, and the most comely and
fruitful branches are, or may be found in them. They may be the warmest,
sweetest, strongest, liveliest, chearfullest, fruitfullest, and the most
spiritual men in the World. And that they may be such, they should join
themselves to, and walk in the Churches of Christ.

6. That they may adorn the Gospel, convince the World, encourage their
Brethren, and witness to the Truths, Ways, Authority and Headship of Christ.
This is no small thing, but they are all matters of the highest moments, and of
greatest concernment; and therefore, and for these ends they should walk in
Church Fellowship.

7. To augment and increase your experiences, to obtain more acquaintance with
your selves, the operations of the holy Ghost for you, and in you; and that you
may be more clearly and firmly sealed up to the day of Redemption.

8. To pay your vows and make good your promises: to Perform your Covenant, and
discharge your work to God the Father and Christ your head. You owe them
personal and Church-homage and service: you are bound and engaged to observe
and do all things, whatsoever your God commands and appoints you to observe and
do, according to your opportunities and abilities: Matthew. 28. ult. Joh. 14.15.
which you do not, cannot do, unless you walk in some Church of Christ, and put
your selves under all his Laws, Ordinances and Institutions. But that you may
so do, you put, or ought to put your selves under them, by joining your selves
to, and walking with God and his people in Church Fellowship. These are some of
the holy ends, all believers should have in their eyes and hearts, in their
aims and designs. They must take heed and beware of carnal self ends in this
and all other matters of Religion, which will certainly crowd in, and carry a
great stroke in this matter. For the Lord Jesus abhors them, and cannot endure
to have his holy and spiritual matters and concernments subjected and made to
serve men's carnal Interests* He will have no other aims and ends in
Church Members hearts, but his own, whereby he may be glorified, and our Souls
profited, and others encouraged to do their duty to him. We have no
dispensation or allowance given us, to aim at and design to augment and
increase our Trades and worldly profits, or to be maintained by the Churches
Benevolence, in and by our walking with them; or to greaten our names, and
increase our friendship and acquaintance among men: unless it be to capacitate
us to do the more good to men, to have larger opportunities to serve Christ,
our Brethren and our own Souls. But our aims, ends and designs must be the
Lord's, namely, to please and honor God, to express our thankfulness to him
for his love and grace to us, to hold and enjoy Communion with him, to grow in
grace, and to be filled with all the fullness of God, to be warm, lively and
strong in our duties and performances, and for such holy ends, as God requires.
Thus you see that all Gods people are bound in duty to join themselves to, and
walk in spiritual fellowship with the Churches of Christ: as also for what
ends, and to what purpose they should do so.

CHAP. XI.
Showing how Church Members ought to walk, and what Sins and Temptations they
are obnoxious to in their Church State; with Rules and cautions against them;
Arguments and motives to persuade to practice the one, and avoid the other.
Quest. HOw ought Believers to walk in Church Fellowship?

Answ. I have showed already what their duties are, and how they should carry
themselves toward their Officers, and toward one another in a Church State,
and therefore shall not mention them here: but shall answer the question in
these following particulars.

First, Church Members must walk exemplarily: they should be like so many Stars
in the Firmament of the Church. They of all persons in the world ought to be
burning and shining lights. Their graces, gifts, words, deeds, and carriages
should shine so clear and bright, so gloriously and conspicuously, as that they
should have the force and prevalency of Laws on the minds of beholders, so as
that they may safely and securely imitate and follow them. The Churches of
Christ in the world, are as so many Sea-marks, Pilots, and Guides, to Men; they
live more in the glory of Heaven (as the Church is called in Rev. 13.6.) and in
the beams of the glorious Son of Righteousness than others do, and therefore
they should give better and clearer light, than others can.

They are much more eyed, minded, and observed than others are, and men expect,
and look for more good in, and choice fruits from them, than they do from other
men: They do, or may converse more with Christ, and Christ with them, than
other men do, and they are partakers of greater things from him than other men
are; and therefore they must be a singular People in all manner of holy
Conversation and Godliness. Church Members are highly dignified, and greatly
privileged; their holy Profession gives out, and bespeaks them to be a
peculiar Treasure unto God; and therefore they must declare before all men,
that they are such indeed, and not in pretense only. Their frames of heart,
words, deeds, and deportments, must speak for them, and manifest them to be the
same in Truth which they pretend to be. Church Members words, works, and
carriages, must praise them in the Gate.

1. They should be shining lights in Humility and Meekness, Col. 3.12. Put on
therefore as the Elect of God, humbleness of mind, meekness, 1 Pet. 5.5. and be
Clothed with Humility, Phil. 2.3. But in lowliness of mind let each esteem
other better than themselves, Matthew. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek and
lowly in heart. Church Members must not be high, proud, and lofty; they may not
think highly of themselves, Romans 12.3. nor cloth and deck themselves as others
do; They may not carry themselves strangely or disdainfully toward men; but be
meek and humble toward their Brethren, and all men in their Apparel, Words,
Deeds, and Carriages; for if this part of Christ's Image do not appear in some
good measure on them, they cannot have any at all. A meek spirit, carriage, and
deportment is one of their Ornaments, It is in the sight of God of great price,
1 Pet. 3.

2. They must shine in Zeal and Fervency of spirit; this holy fire should burn
among them. They must not be of dull, stupid, heavy, and lumpish spirits;
worship God, appear before him, and hold Communion one with another,
indifferently, coldly, dully, regardlesly and heavily, as if they were rather
driven to their work and duty against their wills, than with their choice,
love, and desire; but they must be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Romans
12.11. for which some of the Corinthians were commended, 2 Cor. 7.11 and
Phinchas, Numb. 25.11.13. and David, Psalm. 69.9. To this they are redeemed, and
for it they are purchased, Tit. 2.14. not only to do good works, but to be
Zealous in and for them. The Lord Jesus charges his Churches to be Zealous
Churches, Rev. 3.19. in imitation of himself, whose Zeal to God did eat him up,
Joh. 2.17. Much holy Zeal governed and guided by much spiritual Wisdom makes a
man an excellent, shining, useful, acceptable, and desirable man indeed. This
should be another of the Churches beauties and comely Ornaments, wherewith they
should still be clothed, decked, and adorned in this world. If this Diamond do
not shine; if they are not adorned with this rare Jewel; what are they worth?
and what are they good for? They will be like fire without heat and light, as
to their duty, work, and usefulness: They will be like Drones, or like Bees
without stings, namely, of no considerable use in the world. All, that they do
for God, Men, and their own Souls, will be of little or no esteem and account.

3. They must shine in Love and Charity too. Love is the bond of perfectness,
Col. 3.14. the ligament and sinew, the cord and instrument that ties us fast to
God, and to one another. See that ye love one another with pure hearts,
fervently, 1 Pet. 122. and let Love be without dissimulation, Romans 12.9. Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, soul, and strength, Matthew.
22.37. The internal motive, or moving cause of all obedience and service to
God, must be love to him and our duty. Joh. 14.15. 1 John 5.3. It is true that
men cannot certainly discern this Love to God in one another, but God and our
own Consciences may, and must: Churches of Christ must be Churches of Love;
they should be acted and animated, drawn and constrained to every good work by
Love, 2 Cor. 5.14. All the ways and workings of Jesus Christ to us, all that he
does to, or for us, is Love. Does he instruct us? or does he correct us? it is
all in, and from love. Love to us is the bottom, spring, and cause of all his
dispensations toward us. His anger is provoked Love. Love should knit our
hearts fast to our God and Head, to our duties and services, and to one another
in Church Fellowship. But of this already elsewhere.

4. Churches must shine in that great work and duty of Self-denial, when need
requires. He that will be my Disciple (says Christ) must deny himself, Mark.
8.34. Matthew. 16.24. Luke 9.26. They should be eminent and singular in
Self-denial, or in denying themselves of many things for Christ, for their
Brethren, and for their own souls sakes. Their Lord Jesus is the great copy,
pattern, and examplar of Self-denial, and that for them, to serve them, and
promote their happiness, Phil. 2.5, 6, 7, 8. Acts 20.28. and without this we
cannot be his Disciples. If we will not deny our selves for him and his people,
he will not own us for his true Friends and Subjects. Churches must deny
themselves of (1.) Their worldly Businesses and Interests, that they may wait
on God, and celebrate his Ordinances of divine worship together. They must not
be in their Shops, in the Fields, or about their worldly Businesses and
Recreations, when the Church meets to worship God. They may not, must not be
about, and doing other things, when providence calls them to worship God:
Neither may they stay at home to get the world, and serve themselves, when they
should be in the Ordinances of God with their Brethren, serving God, and
enriching their souls with his Spirit, Grace, and Truth. But then God calls
them to Self-denial. (2.) They must deny themselves to reprove and admonish
Offenders, and adventure on their displeasure in doing it. There are many
difficulties in the way of this work within and without, and it will require
Self-denial to do it as we ought. Our hearts are averse to it, our worldly
interests are against it; for we may lose a Friend as often as we do it to
purpose. (3.) They must sometimes deny themselves to help and relieve their poor
Brethren, Ephesians. 4.28. The Rich to talk and hold friendly, and intimate converse
and communion with their Inferiors in gifts and worldly things* Romans 12.16. and
others to supply the wants of the Poor and Needy, which they are bound to
provide for. (4.) They must deny themselves of the Garbs and Fashions of the
times and places wherein they live, when they may prove stumbling blocks unto
the weak, Romans 14.1. Cor. 8. They must not please themselves only, but their
Brethren, (with the denial of themselves) for their good to edification, Romans
15.1, 2, 3. They must sometimes deny themselves of their own liberty, lest the
use of it prove a snare to others. (5.) They must deny themselves sometimes of
living up to the height and top of their Estates, especially when they have
risen up from a low mean condition, to a high and rich condition; for their
doing so is usually very offensive. (6.) They must sometimes deny their own
natural tempers and dispositions also. There are some persons very much
disposed to talk much in Company; they will have most, if not all the talk;
they must (as they think) talk, and others must hear them; because they have a
greater volubility, and fancy that they can express themselves better, and talk
to better purpose than others can. But in this they ought to deny themselves,
and to be (as James speaks, chap. 1. v. 19.) swift to hear, and slow to speak,
especially young Men and young Converts. 2. Women, especially with and before
men. 3. Inferiors with and before their Superiors; for their much speaking to
and before them, gives great offense. And here let me caution Wives to take
heed and beware of that too much practiced evil, namely, their too liberal and
shameful talking before, or in the presence of their Husbands: For although
they think they do thereby lay open their Wisdom, yet their Auditors are
satisfied, that they do too imperiously lay open their shame; and the like do
other inferiors toward their Superiors. So there are some Church Members who
are naturally addicted to much Jesting, and take much pleasure therein: But
they are called to, and commanded self-denial in this also, Ephesians. 4.29. Ephesians.
5.4. Col. 4.6. They ought to be very sober and serious, and to curb and
restrain their natural bent, inclination and disposition in this and other
matters. (7.) They must deny themselves sometimes of their own just rights and
dues, to avoid scandal and reproach to the Gospel, Jew, Gentile, and Church of
God, 1 Cor. 10.32. They must not be too severe on such as do them wrong, either
by detaining from them their dues of money, or other things, especially if they
be poor, or much decayed in their Estates, Matthew. 5.39, 40, 41. They must
suffer wrong sometimes, yea, and that in many things, rather than strive,
contend, or dispute; they must put up Injuries, and sit down with loss for the
preventing of greater evils, to show the excellency of their spirits, and
manifest before all men, what their special grace can do.

5. Churches must shine in Patience and Contentation; they must learn in every
state, therewith to be content, Phil. 4.11. and run their race with patience,
Heb. 12.1. Church Members may not show a murmuring disquiet spirit, or a
contentious quarrelling spirit any way, under any providence whatsoever, Phil
2.14. but take all things well that God does, either by his own, or the
Creatures hands; thus did Job, Eli, Aaron, David, Paul, for which they are
renowned. Let your Conversation be without Covetousness, and be content with
such things as you have, Heb. 13.5. and with patience possess ye your souls; a
meek and a quiet spirit is in the sight of God of great price, 1 Pet. 3. An
impatient, discontented, murmuring, quarrelsome spirit, is very hateful and
abominable to God and Men. They are great scandals to men, and make the guilty
persons loathsome and undesirable. Certainly this should be another of the
Churches Ornaments and Jewels, wherewith they should be clothed, and wherein
they should shine in the world, and adorn their holy profession.

6. Church Members should shine in Peace and Concord; they must be
Peacemakers, not Peace-breakers, where, and with whom they live and converse.
They must not be Brawlers, or sowers of discord, but be lovers of Peace, and
followers of Peace, and that with all men: Stirs and strifes are most
pernicious and hateful evils among Church Members; they are the Devils
Seeds-men, and his Servants, to sow his Seed for him, Prove. 6.16, 19.
Peace-breakers are common Plagues, and very scandalous and offensive to all
sorts of men. Oh! how often does the God of Peace, and Prince of Peace command
and charge us to do the things that make for peace, to follow peace with all
men, to be at peace among themselves, and as much as in them is, to live
peaceably with all men? They must be men of peaceable spirits, carriages,
words, and deeds, that they may be blessed, Matthew. 5.9. and because God has so
commanded, 2 Cor. 13.11. Romans 14.19. Heb. 12.14. 1 These. 5.13. Romans 12.18. I
have mentioned this before among the duties of Church Members to one another.
But now I have a further aim, namely, to show what spirits and practices should
be found in Church Members toward all men, but especially toward their
Fellow Members and their Relations with whom they live.

7. Church Members must shine in Usefulness to men, or in Fruit-bearing. They
should all of them bear Twins, and there ought not to be a barren Member among
them, Cant. 4.2. They are not set in this world as reasonable Creatures, and
maintained in it, to live unto themselves; much less are they Created again in
Christ Jesus, called to, and set in a Church State, enriched and dignified with
all the privileges and advantages thereof, to live for, and unto themselves.
No, but they are united to Christ, and one to another in a Church-relation,
that they might live to God, and be useful to men, 2 Cor. 5.15. Gal. 6.10. Do
good to all men, especially to the Household of Faith. Barren Church Members are
Encumbrances in the world, and are dead while they live; they live undesired,
and dye unlamented; they are like withered Trees in an Orchard, good for
nothing, but to be out down, and cast into the fire, Joh. 15.6. Heb. 6.7, 8.
They must follow every good work, 1 Timothy 5.10. in the Churches, Families, and
places where they live, They must not s^ck their own things, but every one
another wealth, 1 Cor. 10.24. Phil. 2.4. Theya re indispensibly bound to
promote the welfare, holiness, and happiness of their Churches, Families,
Relations, and all other Persons so far as they can, and that zealously,
diligently, faithfully, and constantly. They are Created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, Ephesians. 2.10, and they are set in the Church for the same.

8. Churches should shine in, and with courteous and affable spirits, words,
and carriages too. For they should be like their Head, and Husband in this
excellency also. Church Members must not be of harsh, sour, crabbed, and
churlish spirits and behavior toward men, for that will render them odious and
contemptible; but they must imitate and conform to the Lord Jesus in a holy
sweetness, kindness, courteousness, and affability toward Saints and Sinners,
that they may adorn the Gospel of Christ in all things, Tit. 2.10. 1 Pet. 3.8.
A kind, courteous, and affable carriage and behavior is a very comely and
beautiful Garment for all such to wear about them; for it commends their
Persons and Religion unto men, and makes them exceeding lovely, desirable and
acceptable in all Societies; as also the good ways of God which they do profess
to love, and in which they walk.

9. They should shine with sympathizing and forgiving spirits and practices.
Their fallen Brethren, or Neighbors, who have sinned by wrenging them, may
stand in need of their Pity, Pardon, and Sympathy; and then they should
vouchsafe it to them, and not be rash and severe unto them. They must not lay
on another load on their backs, and pursue them with rash Censures, shows of
Cruelty and Vengeance in words or deeds, in wrath and displeasure; but pity
them, pray for them, and give them the hand to raise them up again, and bring
them to Conviction and Repentance, until they appear obstinate and stubborn in
their sin. The Servant that took his fellow Servant by the throat, saying unto
him, pay me my dues, is branded for a wicked man, Math. 18.28.35. It is such a
kind of cruelty as God abhors, and all holy men hate, and the world are
stumbled at. Persons, as soon as they sin against us, or any way wrong us, are
not presently to be the objects of our Contempt and Cruelty, or of our Wrath
and Fury; no, but they ought to be the objects of our Pity and Compassion, of
our Sympathy and Assistance; and when they do seriously repent of any wrong
they have done us, although they cannot make any other restitution or
satisfaction, we ought to forgive them, help, and comfort them, Ephesians. 4. ult.
Col. 3.13. Math. 18 ult. 2 Cor. 2.7.10.

10. Churches should shine in their orderly and dutiful Walkings in the
Churches, as also in the Families where they live, and in, and toward their
several Relations. Next to that mysterious and glorious Union and Relation,
that is between the Lord Jesus and his people, that which is between his People
in Church Fellowship and Relation, is the nearest and greatest; because (1.) It
is a spiritual Relation and Union. 2. Because it is a Union and Relation on
Christ's account, and with respect to him as their Head and King. 3. Because it
is an everlasting Union and Relation. Therefore in this Communion and Relation
we should be most precise and exact in our walkings, and performing all the
duties of it. They must keep their places in the Church, and constantly attend
unto all the duties therein. They should never neglect their Church-meetings,
excepting in extraordinary cases, but be present at the Celebration of all
divine Worship and observation of all the Ordinances of Christ in the Church,
and demean themselves before God and Men as becomes the Gospel of Christ. They
must endeavor so to walk in the Church, in their Families, among, and toward
their Relations, as that they may be blameless, giving no offense, Phil. 2.15,
16. Col. 2.5. 2 Cor. 6.3.

11. Church Members must shine in Diligence and Faithfulness. Slothfulness and
Unfaithfulness are scandalous sins; but Diligence and Faithfulness in our
trusts and businesses, are Ornaments to our persons and professions, and to the
Gospel and Holy Name of Christ, which we do profess to love and believe. Church
members are eyed and much observed, and therefore they had need walk
circumspectly, Ephesians. 5.15. and beg of God to lead them in plain paths, (as David
did) because of their Enemies; as (or it is in the Margin) those which observe
me, Psalm. 27.11. They should be diligent in their work and business, and what
their hands find to do, to do it with all their might, Eccle. 9.10. 2 Pet.
3.14. Heb. 6.12. And as they should be diligent, so likewise faithful and
trusty to all that are concerned with them, so as to answer every ones
reasonable expectation from them; they must be faithful and true to one another
in buying and selling, in borrowing and lending, in work and business, and in
counsel and friendship. Whatever Trusts they commit to one another, or is by
any committed to them, they are indispensibly bound to be as faithful and true
to such as to themselves. They must render to all their Dues, Romans 13.7, 8. and
not in any thing purloyn, Tit. 2.10. Are they Buyers or Sellers, Lenders or
Borrowers, or such as are entrusted by any men in any thing? they must be
faithful to their Trusts, or they will reproach the Lord Jesus, scandalize men,
and greatly dishonor their Profession. These are some of the many good things,
wherein they should be as so many burning and shining Lights in the world, and
in the Churches.

Secondly: They must design, aim at, and prosecute all the ends of God in
appointing such a state and condition for them, their cleaving to, joining
with, and walking therein. God and they must join Issues and carry on the same
ends and interests. I have showed you what ends persons should have in their
eye, in joining themselves to the Churches of Christ; or in walking in
Church Fellowship; and now I say, that in this State they must practically
pursue them, and that with all possible diligence, seriousness, and
faithfulness. The Honor and Glory of God the Father, and Jesus Christ their
Head and King, the happiness and salvation of their own souls, are the two, or
rather (as free grace has laid it) the one great end of their so doing; for
these ends are no more two, but one, and so to be believed and respected by us.
This General includes many particular and subordinate ends, which in pursuance
and obtaining of the General, we must have in our eyes and hearts in our
walking in this state and relation. I shall not mention them here, but refer
you to the next foregoing Chapter, where you may find several of them. Only I
shall add, that you must sincerely and unfainedly keep these and all other,
Gods holy Ends, in your eyes and hearts, and pursue them with all your might,
until you have obtained them to the highest degree you may. You must hold
Communion together for these ends, and you must discourse one with another,
hear the Word Preached, Pray, Sing, and receive the Lords Supper together for
these ends. You must wrestle with God in secret, quicken, and provoke one
another, and prepare your hearts that you may so enjoy Ordinances, and worship
God together, as to obtain them in the House of God,

Thirdly: Church Members must walk humbly with God, Micah 6.8. They must have a
watchful eye against Heart-pride, and being great in their own eyes, because of
their greatr Piviledges and high Dignities, their nearness to God, and the
distinguishing Character that is upon them. All your glorying must be in God,
not in your selves or Privileges, 1 Cor. 1. ult. for all you have is but lent
you. A humble heart, and lowly spirit, is a Jewel of great account in Heaven.
To such a person God looks with delight and complacency, Isa. 66.2. To him he
gives more grace, and fills his soul with good things, 1 Pet. 5.5. Luke 1.53.
The meek and humble-hearted he will teach, Psalm. 25.9. The lower any are in
their own eyes, the higher is God there: The more humble-hearted any man is,
the more excellent and glorious he is; the more like the most renowned Worthies
in Scripture; yea, the more like Christ himself, Matthew. 11.29. The more humble
and lowly any man is, the more capable he is of Communion with God, and of
being enriched with his Grace and Truth. If you indulge the Pride of your
hearts, or countenance Self-conceitedness in your selves, you will grieve the
holy Spirit, and cause him to forsake you. For as a humble heart gives God his
due, so a proud heart robs him of it, and takes it. to himself. A humble heart
is a growing, thriving, and profiting heart; it will make happy earnings of all
Gods Dispensations. He that is of a meek and humble spirit, is a gainer by all
Providence, and is bettered by all Occurrences: He gains by the Rod, and also
by the Word; he gains by Losses, Crosses, Trials, Temptations, Poverty,
Reproaches; so likewise by Prosperity, Honor, Riches, and all other smiling
Providence. If he loose without, he gains within; therefore you ought to put
on, as the Elect of God, holy and beloved, humbleness of mind toward God, 1
Col. 3.12. as well as humble carriages toward men, (as you heard before). For
God loves to keep company with humble persons.

Fourthly: Live by Faith on your God and Father, on your Head and King; and
expect (in the way of your duty and obedience to his Commands) all the fullness
of Christ, and blessings of the Covenant. Do not give place to distrusts,
doubts, and fears, or imagine that God will forget you, or deny you that which
he has promised, because of your personal unworthiness. Consider, that he has
called you into fellowship, and formed you into holy Corporations, put you
under his Ordinances, and made you his Households, brought you into Order, and
set you near unto himself, that he might visit you and walk with you, that he
might impart his Counsels to you, distribute his Covenant-favours to your
souls, perform his Promises, and fill you with all the fullness of himself:
Therefore do you hang about him, and cleave to him, for he is faithful that
has promised, Heb. 10.23. and is able to perform all his Promises, Romans 4.21.
yea, and he is most freely willing to do it also, Micah 7. ult. Remember that
God has not brought you into his House to famish you, or deal severely with
you: No, but to nourish and feed you, to strengthen and sanctify you, to
comfort and refresh you, to teach you, build you up, care for you, and prepare
you for eternal life. God is ever mindful of his Covenant; therefore do you
remember to make him your stay and trust, live upon him, and expect all
promised good from him; He would have you do so, he has commanded it, and
therefore do it in obedience to his will, Psalm. 37.3.5.7. Romans 1.17. Heb.
11.38. 1 Pet. 5.7. His hand and heart will be open to you, and from his
Fountain of Love and Graces shall flow Rivers of living waters into your souls,
Zach. 13.1. He will always care for, and watch over you for good; he will water
you every moment; he will keep you night and day, Isa. 27. 3. Oh! then trust in
him at all times, and in all your ways acknowledge him, and he will not fail to
direct your steps, Prove. 3.6. cast all your care on him, for he cares for you,
and the peace of God shall keep you, Phil. 4. Expect, and look for your
purchased and promised portions in your Fathers House, in walking in his
Family-order, and under the Government thereof, under the Laws and inspection
of the great and gracious Lord thereof. In all your waitings on him in every
Ordinance of his, be sure to believe, hope, and wait for his Presence and
Blessings. Whenever you ascend the Mountain of the Lords House, to meet the
God of Jacob, and to present your King with a Thank-offering, be sure to carry
Faith with you, go with much Faith and Hope unto him, and do as Children do,
whilst in their Fathers House; they live on their Father for Food, Raiment, and
all other bodily supplys. So do you in your Fathers spiritual House, live on
him for all provisions, mind your duty, and trust him with your promised all.

Fifthly: Let your Praise wait for your God and King in Zion, Psalm. 65.1. and
do not neglect to go up to his Temples with your Sacrifices, when the Tribes
go, or are called up thither; then, I say, do you be sure to go up with them;
stay not behind, nor tarry at home, when others go up; go with your Brethren
when they go, that it may be said, as in Psalm. 84.7. Every one (namely, of the
Church) appears before God in Zion; and be sure that when you go, you go not
empty-handed, Exodus 23.15. Exodus 34.20. If you cannot present your King with a
Lamb for a Thank-offering, carry him two Turtle Doves with you; if not able to
carry two Doves, then carry with thee two Mites, as the Widow, the poor Widow
did, Mark. 12.42, 43, 44. But if thou have not two Mites to carry with thee, to
present to thy God for a Free Will or Thank-offering, then go abegging to him
for one; but in any wise go to your Church-meetings with your Brethren, tarry
not behind them: For if you do neglect to do so, you rob God, break your
Covenant, offend your Brethren, and wrong your own souls. You must go up,
because you are called to go, and that you may meet God in Zion, and receive
his blessings, for there he commands them, Psalm. 133. ult. Oh! it is sad
indeed, when persons shall pretend to enter into Churches, take upon them the
observation of all the Laws and Ordinances of Christ there, solemnly and
publicly promise and engage to walk in all the Commandments and Ordinances of
God with his people, and yet shall dare wilfully to neglect their place and
duty therein, and to pay their Vows to their God and King, Psalm. 65.1. Psalm.
61.5.8. Such as are good Governors of Families and Corporations will carefully
mind if all within them do answer to their calls, and perform their duties,
when called so to do. So does the Lord Jesus Christ in his Churches, He summons
them by his Ministers to appear before him, wait on, and worship him together,
and bring him a Church-offering and service, and narrowly observes who comes,
and who neglects it; how thy come, and with what frames of hearts, and to what
ends, as the 2. and 3. Chap of Rev. show. And if he find any wanting that might
come, or see them come carelessly and superficially, he accounts himself
slighted and disobeyed, and his Love and Grace contemned and undervalued. God
expects that you should be constant in Church-meetings, and not decline them at
any time, but when his hand obstructs and impedes you; but that there you
should come with your Free Will offerings, and do your Duty and Homage to him,
as he commanded you. Believe it, this is a matter of great moment, and not to
be slighted or disregarded by you.

Sixthly: You must walk with God in Church Fellowship, in Sincerity, and with
Vprightness of heart to. Without this, all your performances are in vain. The
Lord Jesus is very curious and critical in searching your hearts in your
Churchstate, Rev. 2.23. And all the Churches shall know that I search the reins
and the heart. And in Jer. 17.10. says God to the inchurched Jews, I the Lord
search the heart, I try the reins. Then surely it must very much concern you to
see, that you draw night to God (continually) with true hearts, Heb. 10.22. and
that without all allowed Guile and Hypocrisy. A little of this Leaven will
quickly leaven the whole lump of duties, Gal. 5.9. It will so corrupt and sour
them, as that they will be all stark naught, and good for nothing, but to
kindle and increase the flames of God's Wrath and Vengeance against you.
Therefore take heed and beware of Hypocrisy, and do not connive or wink at the
least grain of it in your hearts or duties, but be sure to walk with God in the
performance of all duties, in Integrity and Uprightness: Be sure, that your God
expects it from you, and requires it of you, Joshua 24.14. Genesis 17.1. The Eyes
of the Lord run to and fro through-out the Churches, to see whose heart is
perfect with him, and whose is hypocritical, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. He requires Truth
in the inward parts, Psalm. 51.6. and that all Church Members should walk before
him in Truth, and with perfect hearts, 2 King. 20.3. You must worship God, and
serve him with your all, for your little all is but too little for him, Prove.
23.26. Math. 22.37. Psalm. 119.10. You must not leave one hoof behind, when you
do any thing for God, nor put God off with a part of your abilities for the
whole; for if you do, you will lose the acceptance and reward of all: Bless the
Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy Name (says David)
Psalm. 103.1.

Seventhly: See that you worship God, and observe all his Ordinances in the
Church, in spirit or spiritually. Remember that you are his holy spiritual
Temples, the Temples of the Holy Ghost, Ephesians. 2.21. 1 Cor. 3.16. that all the
Ordinances of worship in them are holy and spiritual Ordinances stamped with the
Image of God's Holiness and Authority; and that he will be worshipped in
spirit, or spiritually, Joh. 4.23, 24. You must be very careful that you take
not up with the external part and outside of your duties and privileges, that
you settle not your selves and stay (as it were) in, and upon Ordinances, and
your enjoying and observing them; but get within the Vail, seek and look for
God and Christ, for Heaven and glorious things in them. Let your Faith conduct
you by the hand of the Spirit into the bosom and heart of Christ, that there
you may read his Love, Grace, and glorious Excellencies, have intimate and
close Communion with him, and be ravished and refreshed with his Person and
Love. Get into his Galleries, and see the King of Glory in his beautys and
transcendant sweetnesses, and get into the Sanctum Sanctorum, into the most
holy place; for the way is opened, and the vail drawn off and removed by your
Head, for you to come and meet him there, Heb. 10.19, 20* Therefore do not
stand and worship in the outer Court of the Temple, but go and pass through
Ordinances to Christ into the holiest of all; and whenever you go and enter
in, be you sure that you carry all Graces and the Spirit with you, to meet your
Lord, and honor him with them. Endeavor all you can to see and feel him, to
get your hearts ravished with his Person and Love, that thereby they may be
raised up to great delight, joy, cheerfulness, adoration, admiration and
praise, that they may be filled with his Savours, warmed with his Love, drawn
by his Beauty, be (by all) knit and united, tied and bound fast to him. Then we
worship him in spirit, or spiritually, when we worship him, and go to meet him
with all our Graces in the Holy of Holies, and when our Hearts and Graces do
close up with, and hold Communion with him in these Beauties of Holiness, Psalm.
110.3. I am afraid that very few Church Members are experimentally acquainted
with this matter; for if they were so acquainted with it indeed, they could not
do as they do. They could not neglect the worship and Ordinances of Christ, nor
cry up a Cephas, and cry down a Paul, as they do, 1 Cor. 3. They could not be
so careless and formal in them as they are, nor carry about such dead, lumpish,
and heavy hearts and minds as they do. Well, but however it has been with you,
let it be so no more: Do you for time to come learn so to worship God, as you
have heard, that so you may please and honor him, and he may delight to meet
with, and bless you.

Eighthly: You must walk in Church Fellowship, cheerfully, comfortably, and
joyfully. You must not be Whiners and Complainers; you must not be sad,
lumpish, and melancholy in your Father's House: No, for that will greatly
reflect on your Father, and on your Head and Husband. You will raise suspicions
in the minds of men on the good ways of God, and in a sense you will contradict
his Gospel, his Truth, and Faithfulness, his Love and Care to and over his
Churches. For God has promised to make his People joyful in his House of
Prayer, Isa. 56.7. and to satisfy them with Bread, Psalm. 132.15. But by the
sad and heavy walkings of his People in his House, they declare that they are
not satisfied, nor find such Provisions in his House as he promised, and they
expected. Such sad, lumpish, and melancholy Church Members do greatly
dishonor Christ and his good ways, offend their Brethren and scandalize the
World. For when they see them walk so, what will they think and say of the
ways and Ordinances of God? will they not falsely accuse and condemn them,
despise and loath them, yea and harden their hearts against Religion it self?
or else they will judge and censure such for Hypocrites and Dissemblers. We
ought to commend Religion and the good ways of God, wherein we walk, to the
Conviction and Acceptance of all that behold us: and that in one thing or way,
as well as another. We should walk with a holy, serious, cheerfulness, and
pleasantness, and be joyful, cheerful and pleasant before and toward all men;
and that for Christ's, Religion's, our own and others sakes; that by this
carriage we may honor God, commend his Gospel-Religion, and holy ways, his
easy, sweet and pleasant yoke and ways: Matthew. 11. ult. Prove. 3.17. encourage
and strengthen the hearts and hands of our Brethren; and convince the world of
the Goodness; Pleasantness and Profit of them, and persuade them to fall in
love with and embrace them. You must so walk also, because God has inchurched
you, and put you under his Ordinances, and promised to make you joyful,
pleasant and cheerful: yea he charges and commands you to be and do so, Phil
3.1. Phil. 4.4. Psalm. 32. ult. Remember, and lay to heart, how many Causes and
Objects you have to make you cheerful, pleasant and joyful. Therefore make use
of them, for the enabling you to walk joyfully.

Quest. What are the Evils, Sins and Temptations, that Church Members are
Subject to? pray show us them, that we may know and avoid them.

Answ. Church Members are subject or liable to many Evils, Sins and Temptations
in their Church State. For Believers being formed up together in one body,
profess to be one, and to be entirely concerned and included with and in one
another, and so are said to be one Lump; Gal. 5.9. and one House or Temple. The
Devil does set on them the more furiously, and with greater strength and
diligence, that so he may wound and mischief many with his fiery Darts
together, and kill a whole Church by stabbing one or two Members thereof. For
he knows that if he can tempt one to sin openly and scandalously, he may
thereby reproach the whole body, and put them to grief and shame. For a little
Leaven, leavens the whole Lump, 1 Cor. 5.6. Gal. 5.9. Therefore, I say, he will
be more busy with Church Members, than with others in this matter: which should
greatly provoke them to arm the more carefully, watch the more diligently, and
fight the more manfully, that they be not deluded and conquered by him, to the
grief and shame of their Fellow Members. It is true, that Church Members have
more helps and advantages against Sin and Temptation, than others have, as I
have elsewhere showed; and it is as true, that they shall be mostly assaulted
and tried; and yet (if they will) they are and will be on the advantage ground
against all these Evils: as they will find by experience, if they will mind
their duty; I will name a few of the Evils they will be tempted to.

1. To take up and entertain evil Surmisals of one another, 2 Cor. 12. 1 Timothy
6.4. They will be greatly tempted to keep groundless Jealousies and Suspicions
one of another, which tends and leads to

2. Harsh and severe Censurings, and uncharitable Judgings one of another,
which is a most hateful sin in the sight of God, and which is expressly
forbidden and condemned, Matthew. 7.1, 2. Romans 14.10, 13.

3. They will be tempted to Envy one another, which is one of the devilish sins
so often mentioned and condemned in the Scripture, and frequently forbidden,
Gal. 5. ult. 2 Cor. 12.20. 1 Pet. 1.1. They will be tempted to be envious at
that in their Brethren, for which they ought to thank God and rejoice, Romans
12.15. They must not envy the prosperity of the wicked, much less that of their
Brethren, Psalm. 37.1. Enviers eyes are evil, because God is good, Matthew. 20.15.
Luke 15.25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. here you have the Pourtraiture and express
Image of Envy, and of an envious Person, what draws it forth, or what is the
Object of their Envy.

4. They will be tempted to be proud and lifted up with their Church State,
with the Privileges and Dignity thereof: to think highly of themselves, and
vilely of others, Romans 12.3. Phil. 2.3. They are very subject to be lifted up
with their Gifts and Seize, and to affect vainglory, as Paul speaks; Gal.
5. ult. and to be too great in their own eyes: which is a most hateful, and
pernicious Evil.

5. They will be tempted to Wrath, Strife, and Schisms; to cause and raise
Divisions, Debates, Contentions and Disputings: which is a real fruit of Pride,
Prove. 13.10. 1 Timothy 6.4, 5. and very pernicious to the glory, welfare and
comfort of the Church. And although this Evil be expressly forbidden and greatly
condemned, yet many Church Members can too boldly and confidently practice it,
and pretend that they have reason or cause so to do: yea, and that they do well
in it. But take heed and beware of it: and let such know, that it is a most
hateful and devilish Sin, and a most infectious Plaguefore, that will destroy
the Authors and Practisers of it, if not timely repented of.

6. They will be tempted to Formality, and taking up with the form of Godliness
without the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5. To take up with, and settle themselves
on the Lees of Ordinances and external Duties and Enjoyments, with the neglect
of the Heart, Soul, Life and Power of them; and heart-warming,
heart-sanctifying, and heart-teaching Communion with God. Oh! how many
Church Members are there, who do indulge themselves, comply with the natural
Genius of their own hearts, and join issues with Satan in this matter? who eye
not, nor look mostly unto the Spirit, Christ, Grace and good of the means they
use, nor bring their hearts and graces to God in them; but rest and satisfy
themselves with a cold, sapless, and lifeless form, or outside of Religion;
and therefore they do not, cannot thrive and prosper: but they wither and decay
within, while they are in the Courts of God.

7. They will be tempted to the great sin and evil, of Reproaching and
Backbiting one another: to vilify, defame and speak evil one of another, and
blast each others good Names and Reputations. This is another mischievous and
abominable Sin, which is found too rife and rampant amongst them. It is a most
pernicious Evil and prejudicial to Christ himself, his Gospel, People, Ways
and Interests; and therefore Satan will strive the more industriously to
provoke them to do it; and therefore we should be the more watchful against it,
2 Cor. 12.20. Jam. 4.11. Tit. 3.2. Ephesians. 4.31. 1 Pet. 2.1. God abhors this
Tongue-sin, this poisonous Sword, and good-name-Murthering Abomination: he
cannot bear to hear his Church Members to be biting and devouring one another,
Gal. 5.15. yet are they prone and often tempted to it.

8. They will be tempted to slight, undervalue; yea, and to despise one
another; especially, such as are poor and weak; they will be tempted to slight
and disesteem such as are high and honorable in God's account, and such as he
greatly values and esteems. But take heed and beware of it; for it is a most
God-provoking sin. They are glorious in Gods thoughts, let them not be base in
yours. Their names are precious in Heaven, and let them be precious to you.

9. They will be tempted to slight and undervalue their privileges, and to
disregard their works and duties in the Church. At first they are much taken
and affected with them, but after a while they do as much slight and disesteem
them; neglect and disregard them: and then they fall to omitting and neglecting
them. These are dear-bought privileges and duties, and therefore ought to be
highly accounted of and esteemed.

10. And then it follows, that they will quarrel with their Teachers, or be
much offended at them; slight and disesteem them, and be full of objections
against them and their works. But you must take heed and beware of this evil
likewise; for when you have forsaken God, and he has left you, then you are
tempted to dislike your Teachers, but never till then. They are Christ's
Ambassadors, Jewels and Instruments of his glory, in the Churches and in the
World, and they are near and dear to him: and therefore your sin will be very
great in slighting and disesteeming them.

12. They will be tempted to leave communion with the Church, and ramble about
from place to place, which is a dangerous and pernicious evil, and tends
directly to the breaking of the Churches, and destruction of all Church Order.
Many love to change their Place, Works and Company; and seem to be better
every, or any where, than in their own Place and Work.

13. They will be tempted to neglect their Church-duties one to another, and
live as persons alone, without having regard of, or respect unto one another as
Brethren and Members of the same household. And when they have entertained the
Temptation into their minds, they will easily dispense with total Omissions,
and not be troubled at it, nor care what becomes of one another.

14. They will be tempted to draw nigh to God in Church-Ordinances, with
worldly, vain and unprepared hearts. The Commoness of them, and their frequent
use of them, together with the untunedness of their hearts, make them common
things and matters to them: so as that they dare adventure on them with common
frames of heart, which once they durst not do: But now they can dispense with
it, as with some light matter.

15. They will be tempted to receive pernicious Doctrines, and to entertain
evil Opinions, in, and about Religion. Many Church Members have been caught in
these Nets, and taken in these Snares: not because they were such, but because
they walked not warily and circumspectly in that state and relation. For by
being Church Members, they have had great advantages against them, and means to
prevent their being ensnared, but that they improved them not, as they might
have done, for their own security. They were not aware of him, who goes up and
down in the Kingdom to sow his Tares.

16. They will be tempted, when they have sucked in any poisonous Doctrines, and
entertained erroneous Opinions, to help the Devil in sowing them in the minds
of others, and endeavor to leaven them with their new Leaven also. For being
deluded and seduced themselves, it is almost natural to them to seduce others
likewise; as experience testifies.

17. They will be tempted to prejudice and injure each others Souls, in their
occasional Visits, by entertaining one another with vain, frothy and
heart-deadning Discourses, instead of heart bettering Discourses. They will be
tempted to tempt one another to give and receive such matter, as tends to the
subverting and corrupting of each others Souls, drawing them away from God, and
indisposing them for their duties, rather than to edification and profit. And
this is a most pernicious Evil, though little minded and considered: and it is
an Evil that is much practiced and countenanced amongst Church Members. For
they that have such opportunities, which they ought to improve for the better
and not for the worse, are found improving them by their Tongues and Ears for
the worse and not for the better, which will cost them very dear hereafter.
Such carnal and vain Communications, as are frequently found among them,
corrupt good Hearts, and Manners also.

18. They will be tempted to be ungrateful to God for his mercies to them, and
to account their duty and privileges, their heavy Yoke and Burdens, as the
Israelites did their Deliverance from their Bondage in Egypt. They were
displeased with God and Moses for bringing them out of their house of Bondage,
and it is to be feared that some Church Members now are displeased, because
they are brought into the House of God: and they say in their hearts would God
we had been wiser, than to have joined our selves to the Churches; as the
Israelites said, would God that we had dyed in Egypt. Take heed of this evil.
We are so encumbred with Meetings, and Disbursements, and with one thing and
another, as that our condition is burdensome unto us, is the language of some,
as I have ground to think.

19. They will be tempted to stacken their zeal, care and diligence, to grow in
grace and perfect holiness, and to look after their gettings in the Churches
and Ordinances of Christ. So that they will grow lukewarm, careless and
indifferent, what becomes of their Souls: whether they thrive and prosper, or
whether they do wither and decay: whether they partake of the fatness of God's
house or no.

20. They will be tempted to make carnal Advantages to themselves, of their
Church State, and to aim at, and prosecute worldly Ends therein, more than
spiritual, and to subordinate and make use of their work and duty there, to
promote and serve a base worldly Interest.

21. They will be tempted to desert their duty, and relinquish their Station
and Privileges in a trying time; and to conform to the world, for filthy
Lucre's sake, and to enjoy their outward Peace and Liberty. Many seem to be
strong and well settled in their faith, principles and practice before the
Tempest blows in their faces; but when the Wind and Waves beat against them,
they appear other kind of men. Therefore, let him that stands in a calm day,
take heed that he fall not in a stormy night. These are some of the Evils and
Sins, that you will be tempted to in your Church State. Therefore consider
them, and make sufficient and seasonable provisions against them: lest they
take you unawares, and overthrow you.

Obj. But some may say, if all these Evils and Dangers uttend Church Members,
then it is better for us to keep out of it, and not be Church Members, that we
may avoid them, and not expose our selves to Sin and Temptation therein.

Answ. That such Temptations will attend Church Members, is certain; but that
therefore Believers should keep out of a Church State, that I deny. For 1. It
is your indispensible duty, (as you have heard) to walk in Church Fellowship;
and therefore you must do so: and it being your duty, you may be sure it is the
safest and the most secure way for you, to keep you from Sin and prevalent
Temptations to it. For the way of our duty, is ever the surest and safest way,
as we all know.

2. What I have said in this matter, is cautionary; not to affright any from
their duty and privileges; but to quicken and provoke Church Members to the
more wise, watchful and exact walkings; to more Diligence and Faithfulness, in
making provisions against them, that they may be ready armed and fenced against
them, to resist and conquer them.

3. Although you may be more tempted to sin in a Church State, yet you may sin
less therein than out of it. For you have heard already, that a true Church of
Christ is invested with many privileges and advantages against Sin, and
Temptations to it: which if well used and improved by you, they will
sufficiently defend you, and balance all the weights that may be put into the
balance of Temptations, and abundantly store you with provisions against them,
were they a thousand times as many more. For you have heard, that in a Church
there is more of Christ, and of his Spirit and Grace for Believers, than out of
such a State and Relation. And therefore it is much better and safer being
there, and walking with God therein, than to be elsewhere. Wherefore let all
Church Members see that they walk circumspectly, or ((...)) exactly, cautiously
and accurately, Ephesians. 5.15. in their Church State and Relation. Mind and
practice what you see (before) you are bound to do; and take heed that you so
walk and demean your selves toward God, Men and your own Souls; that you
carefully watch against and avoid all the aforesaid Evils, and the Temptations
that lead you to them. And to move and quicken you so to do, be pleased to
consider and lay to heart these few Considerations,

1. That in a Church State you have many observers. There are many eyes on you,
and many that watch for your halting. The world knows that you have separated
from them upon the account of holiness, and that by grace you are made better
than they. They know that you pretend to singular things, and that you profess
to be called out of the World, and from sin to holiness and singular
Righteousness, and that you left Communion with them on a Religious account.
They understand that you pretend to more light and knowledge, to more communion
with God, and to greater seize and enjoyments than they do: and therefore
expect to see better things from you, than from themselves, and such as they
are. They will tell you, that to whom much is given, of them much is required,
and that you are in your profession, some of them. They will tell you, that
they can no otherwise judge of you, than by your fruits, and if they be not
suitable to your profession and pretenses, they will think you are but
Hypocrites and painted Sepulchers. Be sure that you have many, that mind and
strictly observe all your steps.

2. Your Lord and King expects singular and peculiar frames of hearts, words
and deeds from you. He narrowly marks your steps, and observes your walkings,
how you carry your selves toward one another, how you walk toward and before
all men, and what your frames and Deportments are toward himself. For his eyes
behold, and his eyelids try the Children of men. Psalm. 11.4. You know, and he
tells you, that he has done great and special things for you; that he has
been at great expense of blood and treasure on you; and all to make you a
peculiar People unto himself. Tit. 2.14. He has honored and exalted you, and
brought you nigh unto himself, and entrusted you with great Talents. He has
set you on high, and magnified you exceedingly in the sight of all sorts of
men, and has made you his golden Candlesticks, Rev. 2.1. and his living
Witnesses; and therefore he may well expect and require special carriages, and
singular fruits from you. Oh! then do not disappoint him of his so reasonable
expectations; but let the Lord Jesus see in you the fruits of his labor and
toil, of his cost and charge, and of his blood and travel. Let him find you
good Stewards of his house, and houshold-affairs, and meet to be trusted with
more of his Treasures.

3. Consider, that your Brethren and Fellow Members, and especially, your
Teachers and Overseers, do expect such walkings, fruits and carriages from you.
Your Teachers expect it, earnestly desire it, pray for it, and labor to make
you such. Your Fellow Members they also look for it, pray for it, and earnestly
desire it: I mean such of them as are holy spiritual persons They, especially
your Teachers, do long, and are in travail for it; and they greatly rejoice
(indeed) to see you a holy, humble, wise, zealous, meek, diligent, faithful,
loving, and a fruit-bearing people. They are exceedingly troubled to see their
labor to be in vain with, and to you: Your non-proficiency, cold, worldly, and
carnal walkings; your barrenness and unprofitableness; your want of love to
God, your own souls, and to one another are great, very great, and
heartbreaking afflictions to them. They mourn for, and are grieved at you, and
your ways; because you are not so serious, holy, exact, spiritual, zealous,
loving, sweet, meek humble, useful, wise, diligent and heavenly, as you might
be, and your Church State, privileges, enjoyments, and high professions call
for, and greatly oblige you to.

4. Consider, that your own souls are greatly concerned in these things: If you
walk in these ways, practice the aforesaid duties, to observe these said
Ordinances of divine worship, and carefully watch against, and avoid the said
evils and temptations to sin, that your souls and bodies will reap the benefit
and profit of all. You will have the peace, joy, satisfaction, sweetness, and
consolation of your so doing. But if on the contrary, you be found negligent
and careless of the holy will of God, and your duties, and disobedient unto his
holy Laws: If you slight and undervalue your great and invaluable privileges
and enjoyments, and make not spiritual earnings of them, but remain dead, cold,
barren, and unfruitful under them; connive at, and indulge any of the said
Sins, or others like them, and dally with Temptations; you will certainly rue
for it, and pull on your heads and hearts many evils, troubles, sorrows, and
disquietments; many fears and distresses, incumberances and confusions. You
will drive God from you, cause him to shut up his loving Countenance from you
in displeasure, and to write bitter things against you. Your own souls are very
much concerned in your exact, holy, diligent, faithful, and circumspect walking
with God in all his ways and Gospel-precepts in your Church State. Therefore do
you aim at, and seek their good, and do you so walk and carry your selves
toward God and one another as to promote their happiness.

5. Consider, call to mind, and lay to heart the ends for which you joined your
selves to the Churches of Christ, as also the solemn profession and engagement
you then made to, and before God, Angels and Men. Remember, that they are all
Witnesses for you, to what you did, when you entered in among them, and took on
you the serious, diligent, faithful, and constant observation of all the Laws
and Ordinances of Jesus Christ in them, when you took hold of his Covenant,
owned the Lord Christ for your Head, King, and Lawgiver, and promised to yield
him all faithful subjection and obedience. For if you forget these things,
neglect your duties, or walk contrary unto God; know for certain that he will
remember all, and will testify against you; yea, he will make your own
Consciences Witnesses against you. Oh consider! did you not join in
Church Fellowship, that you might be enriched with Grace, be filled with the
Spirit, built up in Gospel-holiness, and that you might perfect holiness in the
fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. Ask your Hearts and Consciences, did we not join our
selves together in a holy band, and bind our selves to walk with God unto all
well-pleasing, in our Church State and Gospel-relation one to another? surely
we did. Well then, do we now (indeed) keep these things warm on our hearts, aim
at, and prosecute them in good earnest, or do we not? Did we not aim at,
intend, and engage to get more Acquaintance and Communion with Christ, and more
Acquaintance with our selves, and with the Laws, Ways and Promises of Jesus
Christ? and did we not intend and promise to obey him, wait on him, honor and
glorify him in and by our so doing? Did we not intend and aim at the profit of
our own souls, the good of one another, and of all men, and that we might be
made fruitful in every good work? Col. 1.10. Heb. 13.21. That Lusts might be
mortified, Sin subdued, Grace magnified, and our Hearts cleansed and purified?

6. Consider and lay to heart the many and great encouragements you have to
further you, to strengthen your hands and animate your hearts to your duty, and
so walking in your Church Fellowship. You have very many helps and inducement
to encourage and quicken you so to do. Some are past, some are present in your
hands, and some are yet to come. O remember, how great things the Lord has
done for you, that you might be his People, and walk as you have heard. When
you were accursed and condemned to everlasting Destruction, 2 These. 1. He
redeemed you, He gave himself a Ransom for you, took on him your sins and
punishment, your work and shame; your wrath and reproach, to take off the
Sentence that was past on you, remove the Curse from you, and bring you out of
Prison from the bondages in which you were, Isa. 5.3. 2 Cor. 5. ult. Zach.
9.11. He became your Surety, took on him your Debts, was arrested and cast into
Prison, Isa. 53. and paid the utmost farthing for you, and thereby obtained a
general Release for you. He found you in your blood, and then he washed you,
Ezekiel. 16. and he found you miserable, and pittyed you; He found you naked, and
clothed you; dead, and quickened you; sick, and he healed you. He found you
blind, and he enlightened you; fallen, and he lifted you up. You were weak, and
he strengthened you; in pain, and he eased you; sorrowful, and he comforted you:
When you were wandering out of the way of peace and happiness, he sought you
out, and brought you back unto himself; he set your feet in the right way, and
spoke peace unto you. Ever since you were newborn, he has succored,
supported, supplied, and cared for you. He has entrusted and enriched you with
Gospel mercies for your maintenance and comfortable subsistence. You have had,
and still have many of his choice Talents in your hand, and he never denied you
any good thing. But this is not all that you have to encourage you in the
practice of holiness; but you have many of his Bonds in your hands for your
security, of what he will further be to you, and do for you. You have many
Earnests, Pawns, and Pledges of greater things that he will yet do for you. He
has engaged to you, that he will abide with you, and that he will never wholly
leave or forsake you, Joh. 14.21.23. Heb. 13.5. That he will care for, and
water you, protect, exalt, and honor you, Isa. 27.3. Psalm. 37.34. and make you
perfectly holy. That he will supply all your wants, Phil. 4.19. guide you by
his Spirit, fill you full of joy and peace by believing; perfect the
Marriage-Union, come again and receive you to himself, and instate you in
eternal Glory.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Lords Supper, wherein several questions are answered concerning the
nature, use, and end of it, and the necessary qualifications and preparations
of all worthy Receivers of it; with several other things relating to the Lords
Supper.
I Shall now give you a brief account of the Lords Supper, commonly called the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, by Learned Men; but I shall call it as the
Gospel does, the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.20. and breaking of Bread Luke 24.35.
Acts 2 42. Acts 20.7. This holy and spiritual Ordinance, this great Seal of the
Covenant, the Lord Jesus has appoi ted for, and given to his Gospel Churches
for their souls profit, and the manifestation of the glory of his Love and
Grace to them.

Quest. What is the Lords Supper?

Answ. (...) is a Heavenly Feast, or a spiritual Gospel Ordinance, instituted
and appointed by Jesus Christ for, and given to his inchurched Saints, to be to
them a constant Memorial, Sign, and Seal of his death and sufferings for them.
(1.) It is a Feast, yea, it is a Feast of fat things, Isa. 25.6. and a Heavenly
Banquet, Cant. 2.4. It is the Spiritual Wedding-Supper, made and appointed by
Jesus Christ for his Spouses; where he comes, furnishes the Table, sits down
and eats with them; invites them to sit down with him, and bids them welcome;
bids them eat and drink abundantly, Rev. 3.20. Cant. 5.1. (2) It is a Spiritual
Gospel-Ordinance, not a Civil, or a Carnal and Legal Ordinance such as were
ordained for the Jewish Church of old; but it is a Spiritual Gospel-Ordinance,
for, and respecting spiritual things. (3.) The Institutor of it, and that is
Jesus Christ, him to whom the Father had committed all power. and Authority,
and into whose hand he had given all things, Joh. 3.35. Matthew 11.27. Matthew.
28.18. I say, it is an Ordinance instituted by Jesus Christ himself, Matthew.
26.26, 27. 1 Cor. 11.23. For I received of the Lord that, which also I
delivered unto you; that the Lord Jesus, the same Night in which he was
betrayed, took bread; and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said,
Take, eat, this is my body, which is broken for you; this do ye in remembrance
of me. And mark it, it is an instituted and a positive Ordinance and duty, not
a natural or moral one. It is not founded on, or put in, and among the moral
precepts, or natural Laws of God; but it is merely an Institution of Christ,
appointed for, and given to his inchurched members, and none else. And
therefore, it is not an Ordinance for, and the use of it, a duty incumbent on
Unbelievers, and persons dead in sins, while they remain in that condition; but
it is only appointed and intended for Believers in their orderly walkings with
God. All men, as they are reasonable Creatures, are bound to pray to God, and
to hear his Word preached, because they are (though not merely and only so)
Ordinances and duties of moral worship, and not merely of divine Institution,
as Baptism and the Lords Supper are; but all men are not so bound to
participate of the Lords Supper and water Baptism. (4.) It is said, that this
Ordinance is appointed for, and given to inchurched Saints, that is, that
persons in Christ, may, and they only can partake of it in the way and order of
the Gospel. For although their relation to Christ, and interest in the Covenant
of Grace, gives them a fundamental right unto it, yet it is their orderly
walking together in Church Fellowship under the discipline of Christ, the care,
inspection, and government of his Church-Ministers, that gives them an
immediate and orderly right unto it. For we never read of any of the Apostles,
or other Ministers in their days, that did, or were allowed to receive it, but
such as were inchurched. That it was by the Apostles direction administered and
received in the Churches we often find, but never that it was so elsewhere, or
by Believers out of a Church State, Acts 2.42. ult. Acts 20.6, 7. 1 Cor. 11.23,
24. compared with 1 Cor. 1, 2. And Paul tell, the Church at Corinth, That the
Cup of Blessing, which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of
Christ? the Bread, that we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of
Christ? For we being many are one Bread and one Body; for we are all partakers
of that one Bread, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. (5.) The Matter of this Ordinance is Bread
and Wine, Luke 22.19. Matthew. 26.26. 1 Cor. 11.23.24. Mark. 14.25. Matthew. 26.29.
It is true that it is but carnal matter, and that which is common food among
men; but it is more than Bread and Wine by Christ's Authority and Appointment,
when they are set apart by the word of Prayer, and by Faith dedicated and
sanctified to this use and service, in the name, and by the Authority of Jesus
Christ.

Quest. Why is this Ordinance called the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 10.20?

Ans. 1. It is called a Supper, because it was instituted and celebrated at, or
about Suppertime. The Lord Jesus chose that time rather than another, as of his
Sovereign Authority, will and pleasure, who may make, appoint, and change times
and seasons as he will; so likewise with respect to the Paschal Lamb, or the
Passover, and the time of the Israelites eating thereof, which was done in the
Night, Exodus 12.8. and also that he might abolish and put an end to that
Ordinance at that time of its observation, by setting this up in the place and
room thereof.

2. It is called the Lords Supper, 1. Because he did personally and immediately
institute it, administer and eat it himself, Matthew. 26.26.27.29. (2.) Because
it is appointed and ordained by him, to be a constant memorial and pledge of
his Death and Sufferings, Luke 22.20. But more of this anon. (3.) Because it is
to be received and celebrated in his Name, and to his Glory, 1 Cor. 11.2^. We
read of several things called by his Name; as his Day, or the Christian
Sabbath, Rev. 1.10. The Laws and Commands of Christ are so called, Joh. 15.10.
So likewise we read of the Table and Cup of the Lord, 1 Cor. 10.21. So are the
Churches and the Teachers of them called by his Name for the reasons before
mentioned.

Quest. What is the nature, use, and end of the Lords Supper, or wherefore is
it instituted and given to inchurched Saints, as it appears it is?

Ans. I shall answer this question in many particulars, only in the general I
may say, that it is instituted, ordained, and given to the Churches for Christ's
glory and their spiritual profit.

1. But more particularly: 1. To be to them a constant sign and memorial of
Christ's Death and Sufferings for them. We are exceeding prone and very apt to
forget the Love of Christ, and what he has done and suffered for us, which
should be matter of shame and sorrow to us. But the Lord Jesus in his great
love and care to, and of his Churches, has provided proper Remedies for these
Maladies, and has appointed his Gospel, and the Preaching thereof, and also
Baptism and the Supper, to keep alive in their minds and hearts his Death and
Sufferings, and to be continual signs, tokens, and memorials of them unto their
Souls, Romans 4.11. Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. And as God told Noah, Genesis
9.11. -- 17. This is the Token of the Covenant which I have made between me and
you. I do set my Bow in the Cloud, and it shall be for a Token of the Covenant.
So says Jesus Christ, I have entered into Covenant with God in your behalf, and
in your names, to dye and suffer the shameful Death of the Cross for you, to
redeem you from all Iniquity, Tit. 2.14. to wash and cleanse you from the guilt
and filth of sin, to reconcile you unto God, and make you acceptable to him,
Ephesians. 5.25, 26. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. Ephesians. 1. This I have done for you; I took your
sins and guilt, your death and punishment on my self, by assuming your Nature,
and substituting my self in your stead; and I have paid your Debts, made you
Righteousness, 2 Cor. 5. ult. and have brought you nigh to God by the Sacrifice
of my Life: And you may not forget it, but have it still in your eyes and
hearts. Behold, I have given you this sign, token, and memorial thereof. Here
you shall see by Faith your great high Priest sacrificing and offering up
himself, to atone divine Justice, to appease the wrath of God; and here you
may see how I was handled by God and Men for you. Here you may see how I was
Tortured, Reproached, Buffetted, Scourged, Crowned with Thorns, Spit upon,
Hanged, Nailed and Crucified. Here you may see by Faith, my Blood gushing out,
my Groans, Sighs, and Tears, my Agonies and bloody Sweats, and my soul made an
Offering for your Sins. Here you may see what a horrible and an exceeding great
evil, Sin is; how infinitely God hates it: And here you may see my Travels and
Torments, my Griefs and unexpressible Sorrows for you. I Dyed that you might
Live: I was made a Curse, that you might be for ever blessed; and I was put to
Shame, that you might be honored. I was made a Man of Sorrows, that you might
rejoice; and I was punished that you might be released. I was debased that you
might be exalted; and I was scourged that you might be crowned. I was condemned
that you might be justified; and I was slain that you might be saved. In this
Ordinance you may see a Righteous Man dying, and yet under more guilt and
punishment than ever man was; and here you may see a holy man dying as a great,
yea, the greatest of Sinners. Here you may, as in a glass, behold one put to
the worst of Deaths for Sin, and yet never sinned; and here you may see the
Lord of Glory murdered by the hands of wicked men. In this Ordinance you may
see by Faith, as in a glass, amazing and astonishing wonders; the offended
Person the Sufferer, and the Offender set free. The Innocent Surety taken and
cast into Prison, and the Necent released and set at liberty. In a word, here
you may see the Prison doers s^t open for Prisoners to come forth freely, Isa.
61.1, 2. and here you may see all Debts discharged. Here you may see Divine
Justice satisfied, and God reconciled, Isa. 53. And here you may see sins
pardoned, and the Book crossed: Here you may see the fountain of eternal Love
opened to Sinners, and God well pleased; and here you may hear God saying,
Deliver them, for I have found a Ransom. Here you may see Truth and Mercy,
Justice and free Grace meet in that one Glorious Mediator; and here you may
see God and Men in perfect peace and friendship. Here you may see the
everlasting Love of God streaming forth to you, and here you may see the Grace
of Christ flowing out to you. Here you have a Token, Sign, and Memorial of it
before your eyes, that you may look on these things with great delight, with
joy and rejoicing, and with admiration and thanksgiving. Here you will read
heart-ravishing matters, and here you may see adorable objects. This Ordinance
sets forth the Love of God, the Misery of Man, the Grace of Christ, and a
Crucified Jesus to the life. In it you may be even swallowed and lost, for it
holds out to you heights, depths, breadths and lengths of infinite, free, and
adorable Love and Grace.

2. The Lords Supper is a seal and pledge to inchurched Believers also. It is
not appointed for, and given to them, to be a sign, token, and memorial of
God's Love, and of the Grace and Death of Christ only; but to be a seal and
pledge to them too. So the Apostle Paul tells us, that the Ordinance of
Circumcision was a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, that is of Christ, the
great object of Faith, Romans 4.11. Circumcision and the Passoever were the
Isralites Seals; and Baptism and the Lords Supper are the believing Gentiles
Seals. Seals are appointed and made use of among men to ratify and confirm
their Contracts, Covenants and Promises to men, whereby they are made firm and
irreversible. Now the great God, in allusion to the practices of men, is
pleased in his abundant Grace and Mercy, not only to covenant and promise his
greatest mercies to men, but for their satisfaction and encouragement, to seal
them, and thereby to ratify and confirm them. He need not to have done so upon
his own account, but he does it only for our sakes. Now I judge the Lords
Supper Seals thus. (1.) First to the truth and reality of the Covenant, and to
the Blood of it, namely, Christ's, which is called the Blood of the everlasting
Covenant, Heb. 13.20. and (2.) To the Faith and Consciences of particular
Saints. That is, it seals to them their right unto, and interest in the
Covenant of Grace, the Blood of Christ, and to all the benefits of his
mediation and mercies of the Covenant. But the first thing or matter it seals
to, is the truth and reality of the Covenant on God's part, if I may so express
it. It pleased God to determinate and choose to save men by Covenant, or in a
Covenant-way. And this good pleasure of his took place in the bosom of his
eternal Counsels before all time; which Covenant of Grace was made with Jesus
Christ in Eternity, Tit. 1.2. 2 Timothy 1.9. Prove. 8. Ephesians. 1.4. but was made
manifest in time unto men, 2 Timothy 1.10. To them he gave Copies and Transcripts
of it; at first to Adam in Paradise, Genesis 3.17. and afterward to Noah,
Abraham, and others, until the promised Seed came, when the whole of it was
opened and unfolded. In this Covenant God promised to give his Son Jesus Christ
to and for men, Isa. 42.1.6. to make his Soul an offering for sin, that he
should see his Seed, and of the travail of his Soul, and that the pleasure of
the Lord should prosper in his hand, Isa. 53.10, 11. And the Lord Jesus he
engaged to come and fulfill all the will of his Father for them that were given
to him. For so David and Paul bring him in speaking of himself in Psalm. 40.6.7,
8. Heb. 10.6, 7, 8, 9. In Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices for sin thou had no
pleasure; then said I, Lo, I come to do thy Will, O God; and a Body have thou
prepared me, etc. David spoke of him as to come, but Paul as already come, and
all in pursuance of the old Contract and Agreement in Heaven; but I cannot
enlarge on this. But I say that Christ came, and did the Will of his Father by
virtue of the eternal Covenant between the Father and Him, as I could show at
large, had I room and time to do it. Hence he tells us by Solomon, in Prove. 8.
that his delights were with the Sons of men from the beginning: That he came
down from Heaven to do the Will of him that sent him: Joh. 6.38. That he kept
his Fathers Commandments: Joh. 15.10. That He finished the work the Father gave
him to do, Joh. 17.4. And appeals to his Father in the case, yea, to his
Righteousness, and demands of him his promised Reward, Joh. 17.4, 5, 24. God
the Father promises to be well pleased with him and his Offerings, and in him
with those he mediated for: That they should be pardoned, healed, justified,
washed and sanctified; and that they should be accepted: Ephesians. 1.6. That if
Christ would be made sin for them, they should be made Righteousness of God in
him, 2 Cor. 5. ult. Now that God and the Mediator have so Covenanted,
promised, and engaged for, and in the behalf of Believers; that Christ came and
finished all the work that the Father gave him to do; that Christ has obeyed
and suffered, the Father satisfied and well pleased; and that Peace,
Friendship, and Reconciliation for men is obtained; and that God is faithful,
who has promised; Heb. 10.23. and that he will not fail to perform the Truth
to Jacob, and Mercy to Abraham, Micah 7. ult, is continued and ratified unto
Believers, in and by the Lord's Supper. For there is held forth a clear proof
and confirmation of it. This is my body that is broken, and my blood that is
shed or given, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. These are the first objects and matters
our faith eyes and fixes on in the Lord's Supper; and these are the first
things that it seals unto (...) us, namely, that God has covenanted and
promised these mercies upon Christ's dying; that Christ has dyed, done the
Fathers whole will, and finished his work; and that God the Father has
accepted his Mediation in our behalf, justified his Son Jesus, and is
well-pleased with him, and with us in him; that God is faithful who has
promised, and that he is able, and will perform his promises, made to Christ
for, and given down to us. On these things our faith must fix; and then this
Ordinance of the Supper will confirm them us.

2. As the Lord's Supper seals, or ratifies and confirms to our faith the
truth, and reality of the Covenant and promises, the death of Christ, the
faithfulness of God, and his being satisfied and well pleased with Christ's
mediation for us, and that he will perform his Covenant and Promises unto the
Heirs of promise: so it seals, ratifies and confirms Believers interest and
propriety in them. It ratifies and confirms to their own Consciences, that they
are interested in Christ: that they are Christ's, and Christ is theirs: that
they are regenerated and redeemed: that their sins are pardoned, and their
persons accepted in the Beloved, Ephesians. 1.6, 7. This Ordinance seals to them the
fruits of Christ's death, and to the truth, sincerity and peculiarity of his
grace in them: that they are united to him, and that he is their head, and they
are his Members. That he loves them, and they love him, with special and
peculiar love. This Ordinance seals to them their Adoption, and their right
unto the eternal Inheritance: and it assures them (as a means of Christ's
appointing for that end) that God is their Father, and they are his Children:
that Christ is their Husband, and they are his Spouses; and that they shall
live and reign with him in glory.

But yet know, that though there be a kind of a natural aptness in this holy
Ordinance, thus to seal the love of God to you, as it is Christ's Ordinance, and
instituted by him for this end: yet it cannot, does not do it of, or by its
self, or its own power; but it seals as an Ordinance in the hand of the spirit,
or as a fit medium and means, whereby and wherewith the holy spirit seals the
Souls of Believers. It is the proper work of the holy Ghost to seal, ratify
and confirm his own work in Believers hearts, Ephesians. 1.13. Ephesians. 4.30. And this
great work he does, especially, in and by the Lord's Supper on the hearts of
good men. For as the matters he seals to, are his own works in their hearts; so
he only can confirm them to their Faith and Consciences. The love of God is
said to be shed abroad into our hearts by him, Romans 5.5. and to this he sets
his seal, and gives in his Testimony, Romans 8.16. namely, that he has shed
abroad the love of God in our hearts: that God loves us, and we love him with
special love; and that he has begotten us again unto a lively hope by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, 1 Pet. 1.2. He first writes his
Laws, and creates his grace in our hearts, puts the Lord Jesus into the
possession of them, forms says, Repentance and all other graces of Christ in
them; and then he seals, ratifies and confirms all to us, Cant. 8.6, 2. Cor.
1.22. Job. 33.16. So that now we know, that we are passed from death to life,
Joh. 3.14. and are sure that we are of God; that the Lord Jesus is ours, and we
are his, Cant. 2.16. And can say with Thomas, my Lord and my God; and with
David, I am thine; and with Paul and others; if our earthly house be dissolved,
we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. Thus you see how this Ordinance seals up the love of God,
and the work of his grace in our Souls: And therefore, when ever you receive
it, be sure to look for, and expect it; and make use of it for, though not only
for this end and purpose: And in order thereunto, be careful and diligent, in
preparing and fitting your selves for the reception of this seal on your
hearts; and then you need not doubt of your obtainment of it.

3. This Ordinance is instituted and given to inchurched Saints, to bring the
Lord Jesus and them together, into the nearest, clearest, and closest
fellowship and communion, that can be in this lower state. The Lord Jesus and
they do greatly love one another, and delight in communion with each other,
Cant. 4. ult. Cant. 5.1. Believers in their holy, obediential and orderly
walking are Christ's dearly beloved Spouses, and he is their dearly beloved
Husband, Cant. 2.16. Jer. 12.7. They do greatly love, and rejoice in one
another company and Society* their speeches are pleasant, and their
countenances sweet and lovely to each other, Zeph. 3.17. Cant. 1.4. Cant. 2.7,
10, 13. Cant. 2.14. There is a holy fondness, and a heart-ravishing
friendliness between Christ and his Beloved: they lie deep in each others
hearts and are so knit to one another in warm affections, as that they cannot
patiently bear each others absence Hence we find the Lord Jesus and his people
inviting one another, and importunately soliciting each other to come to them:
yea, and proffering themselves, and (as it were) inviting or pressing
themselves upon, or into one another company, Cant. 2.^0, 13, 14, 7. Cant.
4.8. ult. Cant. 5.1. Cant. 6. ult. Cant. 7.11, 12. Rev. 3.20. Joh. 14.21, 23.

Therefore has glorious Jesus instituted Churches, and gathered up his people
into spiritual households; formed them into holy Societies, and made them his
walled Gardens. Therefore has he brought them into a holy Band, knit them
together into bodies, and given to them this Feast of fat things, this Pledge
and Token of his distinguishing love, and this holy sign and seal; that he may
invite and bring them together, to take, and eat; and that himself may come and
be with them there. He is the matter, and the great master of the Feast, and he
is the King that comes in, to see his Guests, and that bids them be merry, yea,
and to eat and drink abundantly, (with an) O Beloved! Cant. 5.1. In the last
verse of the 4th chapter, the Church importunatly invites and sollicites the
Lord Jesus to come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant fruits; namely, when
they were congregated together, and waiting on and for him. The Lord Jesus
comes, and tells them so, Chap. 5.1. I am come into my Garden my Sister, my
Spouse, I have gathered my myrrh with my Spice: then he chears them up, and
bids them welcome, be merry, and eat and drink, not sparingly, but freely and
abundantly, O Beloved. His holy Temples, and this heavenly Feast, are appointed
and ordained for his Reception and Entertainments with his Beloved, Rev. 2.1. 2
Cor. 6.16. There are the^ most joyful meetings; and there do they hold and
enjoy the most comfortable and heart-satisfying communion together, as holy
hearts can and do often experience. For this end has he instituted, and for
this end should all Church Members receive this Ordinance.

4. As it is appointed for Communion between Christ and his inchurched-members,
so likewise for their Communion among themselves, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. Good men
have heart-dividing, and love-separating lusts, self-Interests, world and
Devil: and therefore they need all proper means to unite and knit their hearts
together in Brotherly Love and Communion, Col. 2.2. The Lord Jesus has
commanded, and strictly charged his people to love one another, as he has
loved them, Joh. 13.34. Joh. 15.12, 15. and that they love one another with
pure hearts fervently, 1 Pet. 1.22. That they walk in love, and endeavor to
keep the unity of the Spirit in the Bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3. Ephesians. 5.1, 2.
Now in order to the obtainment of it, and that Believers may be encouraged to
mind and do his will herein, the Lord Jesus has by his own Laws and Authority
formed them up into holy Temples, and united them into spiritual Societies, and
given them occasion and opportunity to meet together and feast themselves at
his Table, at his cost and charges; and that as Guests of his own bidding.
There they may often meet, sit down and feed together of his dainties. There
they see and taste, feel and smell, and there they may speak of, and hear him,
and of his grace and love. There they may see, that they are all bought with
the same price and redeemed with the same blood. There they may see, that they
are members together of the same head and body; that they are all Plants of his
planting; Trees of his watering; Subjects of the same Grace and Spirit, and the
same objects of his care and protection.

There they may see, that they are all bone of his bones, and flesh of his
flesh; and that he has fellowship and communion with them all: That they are
heirs together of the grace of life, 1 Pet. 3.7. and that they are all entitled
to an eternal inheritance. There they may see, that they are all partakers of
the same life, and that the Lord Jesus has made the same provisions for the
everlasting happiness of all their Souls. There they may see, that they have
the same faith and hope, and that the covenant and promises belong to them all:
That there is a mutual Interest amongst them, and that they are concerned in,
and with each other: That they are engaged in one common cause with Christ, and
that they are not their own, but one another.

All which things and considerations, are of great use toward the knitting and
endearing of their hearts one to another in spiritual love, holy peace, and
Brotherly affection. For by their sitting down altogether as one body, at one
Table of the Lord: eating and drinking the same Bread and Wine, and by faith,
the same body and blood of the Lord: by beholding and believing their mutual
interest in Christ, and in all the benefits of his death; and that they are all
alike invited to the feast, and all alike welcomb'd and entertained by their
Lord and King: they are much induced thereby to love one another: to seek,
desire and rejoice in the good of each other, and to walk together as Heirs of
the Kingdom of Glory; keeping the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. And
likewise, in joining hearts and hands together, as one body, in celebrating the
worship, and in magnifying the name and glory of Christ.

5. An other great use and end of this Ordinance, is, to knit and endear the
heart to Christ himself. And it is a powerful means to effect it. He is a most
full and glorious Object of Love; a most lovely Object indeed. He is the
fairest of Ten thousands, and altogether lovely, or altogether loves, Cant.
5.10. ult. He has all glorious excellencies in him, and is the perfection of
beauty, Psalm. 50.2. All ye glories of the Heavens and the Earth, of Angels and
men, are but dark shadows unto this Son of Righteousness. The Lord Jesus is
most lovely, glorious and beautiful, in his love and grace to us, in his
obedience and death for us, and in all his Laws and Promises to us. But
especially, his Person is most beautiful, glorious and lovely, Psalm. 45. 1 Cor.
2.8. his most transcendant and glorious excellencies, will be the eternal
wonderment of Saints and Angels, and they shall be for ever employed in adoring
and praising him. He is an Object too high for us (now) to reach, and a Sun too
bright and glorious for our dim eyes to behold, only some Rays and Beams of
his Glory, he causes to shine on us, and enables us to take them in, in some
degree, Psalm. 63.1, 2. But of all means, the Lord's Supper is the most full and
proper for the opening and representing unto us, unto our faith, the beauty,
glory and loveliness of Christ, in his love and grace: in his death and
sufferings.

There we may read wonderful Stories, and see glorious Mysteries indeed. There
we may read and see his love and grace to us, streaming forth by his heart
blood, and there we may see the greatness, freeness, profitableness, purity,
sweetness, and the transcendant excellency of his love and loveliness. There we
may see the eternal Fountain of love, and the inexhaustible-Treasures of his
heart, of his grace and kindness opened and running down to us; and there we
may see a bottomless Sea of mercies and affections discovered. There we may
read Christ loving us, and giving himself for us, unto an accursed death, Gal.
2.20. Gal. 3.13. And Oh! my Brethren, what an attracting, Soul drawing,
heart-knitting object of love, is the Lord Jesus represented to be to us, in
that Ordinance? It is a Glass that represents and shows us nothing else, but
love and Christ's loveliness. It is an Ordinance that Preaches and Seals love to
Believers; and thereby provokes, enflames and draws out their love to him.
Love will be drawn and not driven; and what draws it into warm and strong
Acts, but lovely persons, things and actions? love and lovely objects
irritates, and draws forth love to them: and the more lovely, beautiful and
glorious they are, the more forceably and powerfuly they draw; as experiences
shows, and we all know.

But then are such objects and things, most attractive and powerful, when they
are our own, or when we know that we have a right unto, and an interest in
them. Now in the Lord's Supper, you have these glorious objects and things
handed out to you, and sealed to you in particular. Take, cat, this is my body
that was broken, and this is my blood that was shed for you, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24,
25. It speaks to sound-hearted Believers thus. Here is your glorious Head and
King; your Redeemer and Savior. Here is the body that was broken, and the
blood that was shed for you. Here is your Covenant, and here are your promises
sealed, ratified and confirmed, and here is free, eternal and distinguishing
love and grace, showed and given to you. Oh! how strongly must this draw their
love, and how powerfully, must this inflame their affections to Jesus Christ?
For this end it is appointed, and this it does in measure effect in holy hearts.

6. It is instituted and appointed, to strengthen and nourish inchurched
Believers, and to make them fat and flourishing in the house of God, Psalm.
92.13, 14. Psalm. 132.13, 14, 15. Psalm. 84.4, 7.

Believers have many grace-weakning, and heart-wasting-lusts, Snares and
Temptations; and therefore they have need of such strengthening, heart-chearing,
and grace-nourishing means; that they languish not, but thrive and prosper, in
the inner man. I have spoken somewhat of this before; when I showed you the
privileges of the Churches, and the end for which all Believers should walk in
Church fellowship: and therefore shall not insist on it here. Only let me add,
that you may find in this Ordinance, both Food and Physic. Here is (as in the
hand of an Ordinance) food for your Souls, and nourishment for your Graces; and
here is Physic for them also. Here is the bread of Life, and here is the water
and wine of Life to; feed and comfort you, to fatten and nourish you, to build
you up and establish you; and to make you strong men in Christ: to encourage
and help you, and to make you fruitful in every good work, Joh. 6. Col. 1.10.
And here is not only food, but Heavenly and spiritual Physic too. Here you may
have Purging and cleansing-Physick, and here you may have comforting and
refreshing Physic also. And you do, and still you will need both. You need
Lusts-purging, and Heart-purifying Physic: and behold here it is for you.
Christ gave himself, and shed his blood, that it might purge, cleanse and heal
us, and that it might in, and by his own means, be conveyed to us; I mean the
virtue and efficacy of it, for that end, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Tit. 2.14. 1 John
1.7, 9. Now in this Ordinance, the purging, cleansing, and heart-purifying
virtue of this blood is handed out, and conveyed to the Faith of Believers, and
which the Spirit in Christ's behalf applys, and which we for our selves are to
apply also. The Spirit does it powerfully and efficasiously, and we by Faith
are to do it dutifully, and so it obtains its Ends on us: And as it is purging,
cleansing, and heart-purifying Physic to our Souls, so it is Cordial Physic
also, to refresh and comfort, to revive and cheer our drooping, sad, and
disconsolate Souls. Of this Blood, and for this End, we may drink freely and
constantly! Here we may have our fill, and drink abundantly, according to our
needs. Here you may Augment your Light, Faith, Peace, Hope, Joy, Courage, Zeal,
Meekness, Love, and Patience; and here you may obtain a measure of all
spiritual good. Here you may enrich your Souls with Christ, Grace, Assurance,
Experiences and Consolations; and here you may obtain the destruction of your
Lusts. Here you will have the Spirit to feed you with the Bread of Life, and
here you may grow like a Cedar in Lebanon, Psalm. 92.12, 13. Therefore make use
of this Ordinance for this blessed End also.

7. It is appointed to show and represent unto us the evil of sin also. The
great God represents sin to us in many glasses, and shows it in and by several
means. He assures us that it is the Evil of Evils, the Plague of Plagues, and
that it is the root and fountain, the sink and sum of all Mischiefs; that it is
unexpressibly and transcendantly evil, Romans 7.13. That it is the object of his
loathing, abhorrence and hatred, as being that which has turned glorious
Angels into hateful Devils, and thrown them out of Heaven into Hell; as that
which has defaced and marred his Image in men, and made them Enemies unto, and
Rebels against God. This he declares to us in, and by his Word, his Law and
Gospel; as also by the Judgments he executes in the Earth on Sinners; yea, the
whole Creation here below do loudly proclaim it. But the clearest glass wherein
God opens and manifests the odiousness, and exceeding sinfulness of sin, is
Christ's Death and Sufferings, which the Lords Supper plainly declares unto us,
and where we may see it displayed in all its most hateful and abominable
colors. Here you may by Faith, see the exceeding great Evil of it, and be
provoked and stirred up to Hate, and abhor it, to eschew and avoid it. For by
beholding the Curse and Wrath of God, poured out on the Soul and Body of his
dear Son, Gal. 3.13. and by seeing him Reproached, Buffetted, Contemned,
Despised, Crucified, Hanged, Nailed to the Cross, Cruelly handled, Tortured,
Tormented, Pierced, Murdered, and above all, the weight of divine Vengance
pressing his precious Soul, and wringing out Bloody Sweats, and he pouring out
his Soul to Death, and all for, and under the weight of our Sins and Guilt.
Surely the sight of this, by Faith, will greatly raise our hatred of all sin,
and dissuade us from it.

8. It is appointed and given to increase and strengthen our Gospel-Repentance
too. Here we may look on Him, whom we by sin have pierced, and mourn, and be in
bitterness of Soul, Zach. 12.10. for here is the Blood of the Escape Goat, that
is able to break the most stony hearts in the world. And we stand in daily need
of it, for we are in danger every day of being hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin, and the world, Heb. 3.13. But the Lord's Supper presents
to us a heart-melting Object, yea, many such Objects. There we may see
heart-melting Love, and there we may behold heartbreaking Grace. There we may
perceive the Lamb of God making Atonement for our sins; and there we may
understand that the Lord of Glory has taken off from us our Sins, Guilt, and
Punishment. There we may discern him standing in our stead, and between the
living God and us Condemned dead men, with the Censor of the Sanctuary full of
his precious Blood, making satisfaction for us to divine Justice. There we may
know (in measure) how dearly He loved us, and how dear we have cost. There we
may see our sins Pardoned, persons Accepted, God Reconciled and Well-pleased;
and there we may hear him saying, Deliver them out of Prison, for I have found
and accepted a Ransom. Surely, there is not a more powerful means in the World
to produce and provoke to Repentance; yea, pure Gospel-Repentance in Believers,
than the Lord's Supper is. For here are presented to us all the greatest and
strongest Gospel-motives to unfeigned, Spiritual and Gospel-Repentance, to melt
and soften the heart. It is Love and Grace, the hopes of Pardon and Acceptance,
and of being sanctified and saved, that provokes and produces Repentance unto
Life, not Fear and Dread of Divine Wrath and Vengeance: Not the bare sight and
Conviction of Sin, and the Apprehension of future punishment; no, but it is the
sense or hope (at least) of our persons being loved and accepted into favor
with God, and of our being acquitted and justified through the blood of the
Covenant that does it.

9. To stir us up to Admire, Adore, and Praise the great and free Love and
Grace of God, and Jesus Christ our Lord. They do in and by this Ordinance, set
off and commend their free, eternal, and distinguishing Love and Grace unto
Believers; and thereby give them occasion of Praising, Admiring, and Adoring
it. These are some of God's Holy and Gracious Ends in appointing this Ordinance
for, and giving it unto them; and these, and whatever other uses and ends
there are of it, should be diligently sought out and understood by all
Believers. And being sound out, they should be carefully, diligently, and
faithfully aimed at and pursued by them.

Well then, do you join Issues with God, aim at, and carry on the holy Ends of
Jesus Christ in this Gospel Ordinance; and by your so doing, you will please
and honor him, and greatly profit your own Souls.

Quest. What are the necessary qualifications and preparations of all worthy
Receivers of the Lords Supper; or what is required of, and ought to be found in
them?

Ans. There qualifications and preparations are twofold. 1. A State
qualification or worthiness. 2. A habitual and practical, or actual fitness.

1. A State-worthiness or qualification, which in brief is this, or consists of
these two things. 1. Regeneration. 2. Union with Christ by Faith. (1.)
Regeneration, or a New Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. This is absolutely necessary as
to Salvation, Joh. 3.3, 5. so to fit and qualify men to, and for every good
work. Without Regeneration, or being Born again, we cannot Believe, Repent, or
Obey the Gospel in a right and acceptable manner. Without this change of
Nature, we cannot love God, nor fear God; we cannot know him rightly, nor
worship him Spiritually, Joh. 4.23, 24. Phil. 3.3. for we cannot Worship him
with Reverence and Godly fear, until we are partakers of the Divine Nature, and
of his special Grace to do it withal, 2 Pet. 1.4. Heb. 12 28. In our
Unregenerate States, we are blind and dark, Ephesians. 5.8. Dead in sins, Ephesians. 2.1.5.
Enemies to God, and Strangers to the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5.10. Ephesians. 2.12.
We are Carnal and Vain, Hard-hearted and Impenitent Sinners, and are shut up in
Unbelief: Yea, we are Haters of God, and the power of Godliness, and excessive
Lovers of Sin and the World, and altogether void of the Love of God, and of
real love and pity to our own Souls. Now then, it is absolutely necessary that
we be Regenerated and Created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, Ephesians. 2.10. for
till then we are utterly incapable of doing them according to the Will of God.
How then can we receive and partake of the Lords Supper worthily, until we are
Regenerated and made New Creatures? How can we discern the Lords Body, 1 Cor.
11.29. and how can we understand the mystery, and take in the profit of Christ,
his Death to our Souls, until we are taught of God? How can we receive it in
Faith, and in Obedience to his Will, until the Grace of Faith be formed in our
hearts, and until our hearts are bowed and melted by Grace into the Holy Will
of God? How can we Worship God, and Celebrate this Ordinance with lively
hearts, whilst we are dead in sins? And how can we apply the Seal to that Grace
which we have not? Therefore I say it is absolutely necessary that all that
receive this holy Seal, be Regenerated and made New Creatures. For how can that
Ordinance feed and nourish that which is not in Being, namely, the New Creature?

2. They must be United to Jesus Christ by Faith also. They must be in him, and
have relation to him, as living Members to their Head, 2 Cor. 5.17. Col. 2.6.
Christ must be theirs, and they must be his by Faith, or they cannot claim him
as theirs, nor receive any benefit by his Death; for else, how can they join
with Christ in his saying, Take eat, this is my Body which is broken for you, 1
Cor. 11.23, 24. But I must hasten.

2. They must have an habitual worthiness or meetness for the right Receiving,
and due Celebration of this Ordinance likewise: I mean a holy and spiritual,
ready and accurate frame and disposition of heart to, and for it; they must
have their Sight, Faith, and Love ready in act and exercise, or they are not,
cannot be meet partakers of the Lord's Table. It is not only necessary that
they be in a State of Justification and Regeneration, but they must be also in,
or qualified with a habitual frame, posture, and disposition of heart, to
receive and celebrate it to the Glory of Christ, and profit of their own Souls,
Tit. 3.1. Their Hearts and Graces must be ready fixed and tuned for the work,
that they be not to seek of them, or at a loss concerning them, when they
should honor Christ with, and get the Seal of the Spirit to them, Psalm. 57.7.
Psalm. 108.1. Psalm. 112.7. This habitual meetness or worthiness, qualification,
or preparation, (call it which you will) is a matter of great weight and
moment, especially in this matter, and therefore you must labor all you can to
obtain it.

2. There is a practical and actual meetness and preparedness for the worthy
and acceptable receiving of the Lords Supper also. That is, there is something
(more than ordinary) to be done by them in order to their worthy participating
of it. This practical preparation I shall briefly present to you in some
particulars.

1. You must examine your selves, 1 Cor. 11.28. But let a man examine himself,
and so let him eat of the Bread, and drink of the Cup. And here 1. You must
examine your States, and try if you be in the Faith or no: If you are indeed,
(at least in a well grounded hope and persuasion in a justified and regenerate
state and condition, 2 Cor. 13.5. 2 Pet. 1.10. and to know whether the Lord
Jesus and his special Grace be formed in your hearts, Gal. 4.19. This must be
effectually done by you, or you may be undone, For he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks his own Damnation, 1 Cor. 11.29. And if you
should eat and drink this holy Supper, in an unregenerate and unjustified
state; be you sure, that you will eat and drink damnation to your selves; for
the Lord has spoken it. This is not a matter to be dallied with.

2. Examine your selves, if you allow not of some sin, and if there be not one
lust, carnal-self, or some one or more Idols indulged, and connived in at, and
by you. For should you carelessly overlook this matter, and sit down at the
Kings Table with any of them in you, and wink at it: be you assured, that the
Lord Jesus will not accept and bless you: visit you and smile on your Souls;
but he will loath your offering, and hide his face from your Souls. Therefore
search and see what you can find of any of them in your hearts or hands; within
or without you. For your great Lord searches and tryes you, Rev. 2.23. Make an
impartial, and diligent enquiry into this matter, and that with all possible
integrity of heart, that God may see, that you are willing to know the worst of
your selves. And do as David and others have done, in this weighty matter,
Psalm. 77.6. make diligent search, and entreat the Lord to help you, Psalm. 139.
ult. Ask your selves, and try to purpose; do I not wink at and practically
allow of Anger, Passion, Wrath; yea, of Hastiness, Rashness, Peevishness and
Frowardness? Do not I wink at my Pride, worldly-mindedness, vanity of mind, and
frothy discourses? Do not I hearken to Tatlers, and take up Reproaches against
the Righteous, and do not I Reproach them also, by telling to others what I
hear? Do not I worship God carnally, and in a formal and Hypocritical manner;
and do not I live in the careless neglect of many Religious and Relative
duties; day after day? Am not I a Peacebreaker among my Relations and others,
by a peevish and quarrelsome Spirit, instead of a Peacemaker? Am I not guilty
of very much luke-warmness and indifferency of spirit in all Duties, as also of
much idleness and mispending of precious time? Do I not live as a stranger to
God, and his holy will; and in an unacquaintedness with my self; and do not I
slight my Gospel-mercies, and undervalue the good things that God gives me? Do
I not leave my eternal concerns in doubt and at a great uncertainty, and live
year after year in the dark, about my spiritual state? although I have
sufficient means to enable me to make a right judgment of them; and am enjoined
so to do, 2 Pet. 1.10. 2 Cor. 13.5.

3. Examine your selves, and try if you do act and move in duties by the Spirit
of God; with, and from Divine and Gospel principles? Does the life of Christ
animate and quicken you, the love of Christ constrain and draw you; the light
of Christ lead and conduct you; and the faith of Christ strengthen and
encourage your hearts in them? Do you act and worship God with your own Spirit,
or the holy Spirit of God? And do you worship him with special light, love,
faith, and sincerity, or with common? For it is possible you may be mistaken,
and take the one for the other. So likewise you should examine your Aims and
Ends; what you Intend and Design in receiving of the Lords Supper? And you must
also enquire what Earnings and Improvements you make of it, and what your
Spiritual profit is? what you meet withal in it, and what good you receive
from it?

2. Whatever Evil you find in your Hearts or Hands; you must throw out, and
Repent of it. You must not think it enough, and that your Work is done, when
you have found out the Plagues of your own Hearts, 1 Kings 8.38. But you must
endeavor the speedy removal of them, and thoroughly amend your Ways, Jer. 7.3,
5. You must confess them to God unfeignedly, humble your selves; and Repent in
Dust and Ashes, Job. 42.6. 2 Chro. 7.14. yea, you must also Hate and Abhor
them, forsake and Mortify them; and resolve to have no more to do with them.

3 You must also prepare your selves, by emptying the Heart of Carnal-self, and
the World: for else these things will greatly Obstruct your Holy and Profitable
receiving of this Ordinance. The more the Heart is emptied, the more it will
Hunger and Thirst after it, and the good and profit of it: the stronger your
Desires will be after Christ, and the benefits of his Death, the clearer you
will see them, and the Sweeter they will be unto your Taste. The emptier you
are of these Heart suffocating Evils, the more Desirable, Beautiful, Acceptable
and Pleasant they will be unto your Souls; and the greater and more apparent,
will your Earnings and Advantages be to your Souls. As you will abundantly
Experience, if you make proof of it.

4. Prepare for the Worthy and Profitable receiving of this Holy and Soul
enriching Ordinance; by possessing your Hearts with the Excellency and
Goodness, the Privilege and Profit of it. Get as clear Apprehensions and
Conceptions as you can, of the Person, the Love, Grace and Benefits, it holds
forth unto you, and who it is you go to meet withal there. For the clearer
your sight is of these things, and the more the Heart is possessed and affected
with them, the more they will stir up and provoke your Faith, inflame your
Love, and draw your Hearts to them. The clearer they lie in your Heads, (your
Minds) and the warmer they lie on your Hearts, the more Influential and
forceable they will be on all your Affections and Graces, to quicken, raise and
draw them forth into act and Exercise.

5. Prepare, by getting a due sight and sense of your own Wants and Weakness:
your own personal Vileness and Unworthiness, and of your own Sins and
Iniquities. That the due sight and sense of these Evils, may make you Vile in
your own Eyes, debase and humble your Hearts. That you may be truly Base and
Vile in your own Eyes, and draw nigh to him with a Holy fear and Trembling,
Esa. 66.2. Psalm. 2.11. That you may go to him, and make use of this Ordinance,
for the supply of your Wants, and strengthening your Weaknesses, and that you
may be sensible of the worth and necessity of Christ's Death for you.

6. Get high and great Expectations, raised in your Hearts, of seeing, enjoying
and receiving a measure of all the fullness of Christ, and his benefits, or the
fruits of his Death. The Lord Jesus will be most free and open handed there, to
all worthy Receivers: and therefore, you must not go to it, and him, with
dejected, fearful and low Spirits and Hopes. But you must go to them with high
and great Hopes and Expectations, of finding him and receiving high and great
things from him. Be sure, that he would have you do so, that it is your Duty,
and that you shall find him a liberal and noble Benefactor to you. Yea, that he
will far exceed your highest regular Expectations from him, in his Princely
favors, and glorious distributions to your Souls.

CHAP. XIII.
Where are several Questions Answered and Resolved.
Quest. WHether a Churchmember may withdraw or absent himself from the Lord's
Supper, upon any Sin, or Offense given him, by one or more of his
Fellow Members in the Church?

Answ. The offended Member may not withdraw, nor by any means absent himself on
that Account. Too many indeed are apt to think, (and they Act accordingly) that
they have a Dispensation to neglect their Duty, and practically to slight their
Privilege, because others are not so good as they should be, and have given
them Offense. But that which gives them such a Dispensation, is their own
Pride, Ignorance, Prejudice and wilfulness, not Jesus Christ their Head. But I
say, you may not absent your selves, or neglect that great Ordinance upon such
Accounts. (1) Because it is your Duty to receive it, and wait on Christ in it,
(as has been showed) and it is not another Sin, that can discharge you of
your Duty. (2) If thy Brother has sinned, and thereby incapacitated himself
for a worthy receiving and celebrating of this holy Ordinance; thou have the
greater Reason offered thee, to come and receive it worthily to the honor of
Christ. For it is most unreasonable, that he should be deprived of the Glory of
his Grace, and thy Duty, because thy Brother has sinned against him, and
dishonored him already. (3) Have thou rebuked thy sinning Brother, and
labored to bring him to Repentance? and art thou mourning, and praying for
him, and waiting on God for his Recovery, as thou art bound to do? 1 Cor. 5.2.
Why! then his Sin shall not be laid to thy Charge; neither may it impede or
hinder thy Reception of this Ordinance. (4) It is thy Prejudice and Wrath
against, if not thy Loathing and Hating of the offending Person, that causes
thy Neglect, or the Guilt thou have contracted to thy own Soul and Conscience,
that makes thee forbear coming to the Lord's Table, and not a dutiful and
conscientious Forbearance, because God would have it so. For it is contrary to
his holy Will. (5) Allow of this, and you will never want occasions, but the
Devil and your own Lusts will still supply you with enough, to provoke and
persuade you to a total neglect of this Duty.

Quest. Suppose I find my self unfit and indisposed to receive the Lord's
Supper, may not I neglect it?

Answ. No: for thy waiting on Christ at his Table is thy Duty, as has been
proved. And therefore thou may not think of neglecting it; but the more unfit
and indisposed thou find thy self to be, the more seriously, diligently and
vigorously thou should labor to prepare thy self, and get the removal of thy
Indispositions: To obtain and put on the Wedding Garment, that thou may
worthily partake of this Ordinance. If the Iron be blunt; the harder you must
strike, Eccl. 10 10. The more unprepared you are, the more and greater
diligence you must use to prepare. I know that Church Members are subject to
this Temptation, which if yielded to, will bring on many Mischiefs upon their
Souls, as some have sadly experienced. But what hinders, that you endeavor not
the removal of these Evils presently? you may not always live so, but one time
or other you must get rid of them, unless you will perish. And when will you
find a fitter time for the doing of it, than now? Therefore know, that you have
two great and indispensible Duties lying before you. 1. To use all means for
the removing all Obstructions, and to get your Hearts in a ready meet posture
for God and your Duties, Amos, 4.12. (2) To wait on Christ at his Table on the
next opportunity, 1 Cor. 1^.28. and not to add Sin to Sin by neglecting either
of them.

Quest. What do you think of those Members, who do wilfully neglect to come to
the Lord's Table very often, and for a long time together? or of such as will
ride out of Town such days, as they are called to partake of it?

Answ. First, either they are dead rotten Members, such as are mentioned in
Matthew. 13.20, 21. Joh. 15.2, 6. Heb. 6. and Heb. 10. or else they have foully
back sliden from God, and contracted much guilt and hardness of Heart. You may
be sure that matters go very ill with them at home, and that they are in a
withering and dying condition: that they have wickedly forsaken God, and God
has forsaken them, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. They have most horribly sinned against
Knowledge and Conscience, grieved the holy Spirit, and alienated their Hearts
from God. They have lost the savor of Christ, that was on their Hearts, the
Conscience of, and love to their Duties, all care of, and respect to their own
and their Brethren's Souls; and have with Ephraim, cast off the thing that is
good; and therefore Evil pursues them, Hosea. 8.3. and they are under the
Temptations of the Devil. For were it not thus with them, they could not, durst
not do as they do in this great and weighty matter. The sight of their Duty,
the sense of their own wants, and their love to Christ, their Brethren and
their own Souls, would in no wise permit, or dispense with such wilful neglects
of so great a Duty and Privilege, and to keep at a distance from their God.
And if you mind them, and have close discourse with them about spiritual
things, you may find them neglecters and slighters of other Duties; of Carnal,
Vain, Sottish and Stupid Spirits; and that their Hearts and Souls are in a sad
and miserable condition. They desire not, care not for your Company, nor to
hear you talk with them about their Soul's concernments. And if they pretend
any excuse, or offer to defend their ^^glects; be sure they will cast all, or
most of the blame or cause off from themselves on others; which argues a vile
wicked Spirit. They neglect the Lord's Table, not because their own Hearts and
Ways are very evil and abominable, (if any will believe them) no; but because
their Ministry, the Church, or some particular Members of it are not good
enough for their Communion. And herein they blaspheme or scandalize them, and
offer violence to their own Consciences, for the clearing of themselves, and in
belying their Teacher or Brethren.

Quest. Is not Excommunication an Ordinance of Christ in his Church?

Answ. Yea, it is a great and useful Ordinance, which may not be neglected,
when need requires, on any pretense whatsoever; because the Lord Jesus, the
King and Head of his Churches has instituted and commanded it to be done; and
has thereby made it their indispensible Duty, Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17. 1 Cor.
5.4, 5, 11, 12, 13. 2 These. 3.6, 14.

Quest. For what ends must the Church use this Ordinance? and why has Christ
appointed it, and commanded the Administration of it?

Answ. For these Six ends, 1. To remove Offense from the Church. For a
scandalous Member continuing in his Impenitency is a Stumbling Block to them.
2. The healing of the Offender, by bringing him to deep Conviction of his Sin,
and Repentance for it: to humble him, to cause him to own and acknowledge his
Sin, and amend his Ways, 2 Cor. 2.5, 6, 7. 3. To clear the Church of the guilt
of his Sin. For if they neglect their Duty, and so practically wink at his Sin,
they involve themselves in the guilt of it, 1 Timothy 5.22. 4. To caution others,
and cause them to hear and fear, and do not so wickedly, Deuteronomy. 21.21. Deuteronomy.
17.12, 13. 5. To free the Church from Reproach and Scandal from without; for
their Enemies will undoubtedly defame them, if they hear that they suffer
visible Transgressors among them. 6. To purge out the Leaven, that the Church
may be a pure Lump; 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. and a holy Habitation of God, Ephesians. 2.

Quest. When must this Ordinance be used in the Church?

Answ. Only in case of necessity, when other means will not convince and bring
Offenders to serious and hearty Repentance, prevent or remove the other Evils,
or obtain the Ends before mentioned, Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17.

Quest. What is Excommunication?

Answ. It is the cutting off a Churchmember from his Membership with the
Church, putting him out of their Communion and Society, and shutting him out
from the enjoyment of all Church Priviledges, and putting him into the Devils
Kingdom: or to deliver him to Satan, in the name of Christ, for the destruction
of the flesh, that his Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord, 1 Cor. 5.4,
5. It is variously expressed in Scripture in the fore-quoted Texts, Matthew. 18.
2 These. 3.1 Cor. 5.

Quest. But is not Excommunication an high Act of Cruelty, and too great
Severity for a Church to use toward their Follow-members?

Answ. No. For it is one of Christ's healing Medicines, wherewith he cures
Souls, and one of his sovereign Means whereby he sets broken bones in joint.
The loving, kind and compassionate Head and Father of his People has not such
a heart toward them, neither has he showed any Cruelty or undue Severity
toward them in his appointing this Ordinance for his Churches, and requiring
the Execution of it on obstinate Transgressors for their Health and Cure. 2.
The executing of this healing Ordinance on such, is so far from being an Act of
Cruelty, as that it is one of the highest Acts of our Love, Favor and Kindness
to their Souls; and the wilful neglect of it, is one of the highest Acts of
Cruelty, that we can show them. For to let a Brother alone in his Sin and known
Wickedness, see him in the Ditch and leave him there: knowing him dropping into
Hell, and not use the means the Lord has given us, for the helping of him out,
and preventing of his eternal Ruin, is such a piece of Cruelty and horrible
Injustice, as that there can hardly be greater found among men. If it be
Cruelty in me to use the Lords means for saving of my Brother's Soul, then let
it be so called and accounted, not else. And great is their simple Ignorance,
or wilful Blindness, who think and talk after this rate; and too many of them,
are found in the Churches of Christ.

Quest. But for what sins should this Ordinance be administered to, or executed
on Church Members?

A. For any sins that are not unavoydable Infirmities, if persisted in, and the
Offenders reject or neglect to hear, receive, and improve Reproofs, to their
Conviction, Sorrow, and Amendment; to their deep Humiliation, Confession and
voluntary Acknowledgment. The Lord Jesus has not told us in particular, for
what sins Offenders should be Excommunicated out of the Church; but tells us in
Ma^th 18.15. that if thy Brother sin against thee: He names not the particular
sin or sins; but that expression implys any sin, that is not an unavoydable
infirmity in him: And mark it, It is not the matter of the sin that is so much
to be minded, as the manner of sinning, and the Circumstances wherewith it is
attended. As 1. If a sin that is generally known among Professors of the
Gospel, and owned to be a sin, and which the Sinner cannot be ignorant of,
especially when it is laid before him, and opened to him by the Reprover. (2.)
VVilfully or carelessly committed. (3.) If it be a scandalous sin, and
pernicious to God or Men. (4.) If committed upon deliberation. (5.) With heat
and fervor of spirit. (6.) If committed after Conviction of the Evil of it,
and Repentance for it. (7.) If it be persisted in after Admonition, or the
Offender shall slight or neglect Brotherly Reproof under it, and shall contemn
the first and second Admonition turning a deaf ear to it; or shall not repent
and give satisfaction for the wrong he has done by his sin; I say, let the
matter of the sin be what it will, if attended with some, or all these
Circumstances and Aggravations; the Church may by Christ's Authority proceed
against him, and cut him off. To name some few of the many sins, which if not
repented of, but persisted in, which they may be judged to do, until they
manifest open Repentance. (1) Strong and violent Passions. (2.) Apparent Wrath,
Envy, Bitterness, and Anger showed without great provocation. (3.) Apparent
Frowardness, Peevishness, Clamor, and Strife. (4.) Jangling, Disputing, and
Peace-breakings, and all things that directly tend to hinder the Edification
and Peace of the Church. (5.) Back-bitings, and speaking evil against, or of
one another. (6.) Constant or frequent neglects of Family and Church-duties,
and the Ordinances of God in them. (7.) Needless Associating and holding
Communion with profane and scandalous persons. (8.) Defrauding any persons of
their just dues any way, on any account whatsoever, when it might have been
prevented. (9.) Disobedience to the Lawful Commands and Rules of Parents,
Masters, Magistrates, Elders, or any other that have Authority over them. (10.)
Publishing false Doctrines against the Fundamentals of the Gospel, Faith, and
Worship. (11.) False Accusing any Persons, especially any of the Church. (12.)
Railing at, or reviling others to their face, or behind their backs. (13.)
Idleness, Tatling, and being Busybodies in other men's matters that concern
them not. These, and many more of like import, are such apparent sins, as that
Church Members cannot be supposed to be ignorant of them, and they are very
offensive Evils to God and men* So likewise is wilful deserting and causeless
leaving of a Church at their own will and pleasure, and thereby have broken the
Covenant of God. I have not room to enlarge on these brief hints of this
matter; but I could otherwise say much more for the clearing and confirming of
it.

Quest. May Churches keep out such persons as offer themselves to join with
them, at their own will and pleasure, without apparent cause?

Ans. No, they may not; for 1. We have no dispensation to do so, but are bid to
receive them, Romans 14.1. Romans 15.7. (2.) The Primitive Churches did receive
persons, as soon as they proffered to join with them, unless they had any just
cause to deny them; and what they did therein, was by Apostolical direction.
(3.) By refusing to accept them into Communion speedily (without just cause)
they do greatly wrong and injure them, and grieve such as the Lord would not
have grieved. (1.) They keep them out of their Right, and detain from them
their just dues; they deprive them of their Privileges which Christ has
bought for them. And (2,) Lay them under many and great Temptations to sin and
despond. (4.) They rob God of his Honor and Glory, which he might receive from
them in their Church-duties. (5.) They discourage persons from coming to, and
joining with them, and so expose themselves to ruin. For the Churches cannot
long subsist without continual additions of new Members, because death is still
fetching away, and pulling out of the old. (6.) They do expose themselves to
reproach and just censure by such wilful neglects toward them. (7.)
Ordinarily, they may be either received or rejected in one week, as well as in
three months, did all mind and attend to their duty in their place in the
Churches. Take heed that this evil be not found in or among you; for assuredly
it is a foul Iniquity to rob God, wrong Souls, and injure the Church; to grieve
the hearts of the Godly, and tempt them to sin; which Iniquity you are guilty
of, who by your negligence or prejudice do keep them from Church. Ordinances,
who desire to partake of them with you, longer than of necessity.

Quest. May not Pastors leave their Churches upon any account whatsoever?

Ans. Doubtless God may, and sometimes he does providentially call them off, and
they ought to follow it. For (1.) There is not any Precept of Christ enjoining
them to stay with them all their days. (2.) Christ tells them, that if they be
persecuted in one City, they may fly to another, Matthew. 10.23. But they may not
leave them, no, not with the Churches consent and approbation, but upon some
extraordinary Providence and Calls of God. For as Christ their Master sent
them there, and they were settled there by him, as the great Agent and Doer of
it, to do his work, and minister in his Name, and by his Authority, with his
Gifts and Blessing; so the Churches have nothing to do to dismiss and give them
liberty to depart without the good leave and consent of Christ himself, who
sent and set them in and among them. And therefore their leaving of the
Churches, and the Church; dismissing of them, is not their own act, but in and
by the order and commission of Christ. What they do therein, must be only in,
from, and by the Will and Pleasure of their Head and King, and not from their
own. For without Warrant from him, the Churches have no power to leave their
Pastors, nor their Pastors them.

Quest. When, or upon what accounts may Pastors leave their Churches?

A s. First, when they are severely persecuted, and their Enemies level their
fiery Darts, and shoot their Arrows of malice against their Persons and
Families, and persist in their so doing, so as that there is no probable way to
escape them, but in all probability they shall be devoured by them. In this
case, the Lord Jesus, the Apostles, and the Elders at Jerusalem fled and went
their way; and hereby the Lord does often call off Pastors now. (2.) In case
the Churches leave them, and will not stand by them. (3.) In case their
Churches fall into Rents and Schisms, and they grow so headstrong and unruly,
as that they can do no good upon them, as sometimes it falls out. (4.) In case
they cannot live and subsist with and by them, but in a miserable and
distressed condition. For if the Churches provide not for them, and they have
not otherwise a subsistence, they are not bound to provide for their Churches.
For God has ordained, that they, that preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14. and they must live by Bread, and provide for their
Families, or they deny the Faith, and are worse than Infidels, 1 Timothy 5.8. (5.)
In case the Lord does open a door for their Ministry elsewhere, which is
always to be observed in this matter. If Providence invite them elsewhere to
minister to a People that they knew not of, and sought not after, but the hand
of Providence presented it to them (as it were) accidentally, and are by that
strange people (as to them) desired to preach to, and take the care of them;
and so they lay not down their work, but follow it in those other places, where
in all probability they may do Christ and Souls greater Service, and not expose
themselves thereby to those Straits and Temptations to sin, they were in
before: I say, take in this case with any of the other, and I am satisfied
their Call is clear to leave their Churches.

Quest. May Church Members leave their Churches at their own will and pleasure,
and go elsewhere when they please?

Ans. No, they may not: They must not leave them, unless by some extraordinary
hand of Providence the Lord calls them off, to walk with another people. If by
Persecution or by Poverty, or by the command of their Parents, Husbands, or
Masters, or other Superiors, they are called off, they may go with the
Churches consent, as likewise in other weighty cases. But they may not go from
them at their own will and pleasure, to gratify their Pride, Prejudice, and to
please their own fickle minds and itching ears, or upon any ordinary account
whatsoever; and that for these reasons, (1.) The Lord charges them not to
forsake their Churches, nor holding Communion and Fellowship with them in the
Ordinances and Worship of God, Heb. 10.24, 25. (2.) He brands them, and sets a
black mark of Ignonimy on all wilful and causeless Deserters of Churches, 1 John 2.19. Heb. 10.25, 26. as the manner of some is, which is a contemptuous
expression of them, who forsake their Church Membership, and their places, work
and duty there. (3.) Deserters of their Church Membership at their own will and
pleasure do make the Churches thereby to be like Inns or Alehouses, where
persons go in and out at their own will and pleasure. Such as do so in Families
and civil Societies, are accounted vile, lawless and extravagant persons,
because they live not under good Laws, nor walk by the good Rules and Orders of
the Society. How much more vile and lawless are Church Members, who have given
up themselves in a professed subjection to Christ, 2 Cor. 9.13. and engaged to
walk as Church Members, and yet shall walk, act, and go in and out, as lawless
persons, who owe no subjection to Christ, nor to his Laws and Authority in the
Church? (4.) Wilful Deserters of Churches, are notorious Covenant-breakers
also. When they gave the right hand of Fellowship, and were received into the
Church, they solemnly promised to walk with God in the Church, hold Communion
with it, subject unto, and live under the Government and according to the Laws
thereof, until God should by some extraordinary Providence call them off: Yet
notwithstanding they call off themselves, and they do thereby practically
contemn and trample on their solemn Engagement, as well as on the Laws, Orders
and Government of Christ. (5) Their causeless and wilful departure from and
leaving of a Church, to which they were joined, is very reproachful and
scandalous to the Church. For by their so forsaking of it, they declare that
they are too good, and the Church is too bad for their Communion. They cast
dirt on the Church and the Ministry of Christ therein with a witness and
manifest that either themselves, or the Church and the Ministry there, are very
vile and wicked: Or else why did they leave and forsake them? It was either for
their Goodness or Wickedness. Not for their Goodness in their account, for
should they pretend to leave them for their Goodness, they will thereby lay
open their own Hypocrysie and Profaness to all men, and be sure that they will
not do in words at least. Why then, what follows, but that the cause of their
departure is the Churches and their Ministers Wickedness or Unworthiness? Thus
they will do, and care not what mischief they do unto the Church, so they may
but save stakes and gratify their own Lusts. (6) Such Deserters of Churches
are Church-destroyers: they fight against God, and pull down that which he
builds up. God puts in and fastens stones, and they pull them out. He sets up
and forms holy Temples for himself to dwell in, 2 Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 2. ult. and
they break them down, or deface and mar them at least. What Churches can stand
in order, from and beauty, if the Members of them may do what they please, and
go in and out when they will? (7) By such departures from their Churches they
cut off and cast out themselves from the People of God, his Worship and
Ordinances, and put themselves into the Devils Kingdom again. For they may not,
ought not to be accepted or received into any of the Churches of Christ
elsewhere, because they are disorderly walkers, and are under the blot of
scanda ous persons, of lawless and disobedient Members. (8) They may not
depart, because of the just occasion of Offense, Grief and Trouble, that they
will give the Church thereby; excepting in extraordinary cases, or are
necessitated by staying and holding Communion with the Church to partake with
them in Sin. And it is remarkable, how God has declared his abhorrence of such
departures by the Judgments, that have followed such as have been guilty of it.

Finally my Brethren; let us all mind and follow the things that make for
peace, and things wherewith one may edify another, Romans 14.19. Let us in all
our doings and procedures, consult and endeavor to know the will of God, walk
by his Laws, conform to, be ruled by, and practice the holy and perfect will of
our glorious Head, and sovereign Lord and King, Joh. 14.15. Joh. 15.10. Romans
12.1, 2. Ephesians. 6.6. Joh. 14.21, 23. 1 John 5.2, 3. Let us never adventure on any
actions or things, until we have a Divine Warrant for it, and when we have that
in our eye, let us proceed with all our might, doing that which is the Will of
God, and that because it is his Will. For then we may, and shall be able to do
our works comfortably. Then we shall do them as the holy Will of God in
obedience to his Command and Authority. Then shall we please and honor our
Head and King, and by Faith and Hope look for, and expect his free and gracious
Acceptance, and his promised Assistance; as also a great Reward in this life
and that which is to come. Then you may confidently expect, and cheerfully look
for Fellowship and Communion with God in all your ways and Duties, when in your
places and stations, you are really observing and doing the holy and perfect
Will of God, and not your own.

FINIS.

