A Vindication of William Penn, Proprietary of Pennsilvania, from the late
Aspersions spread abroad on purpose to Defame him.
WIlliam Penn having been of late Traduced as being a Papist, and Dead, I
thought meet to give a short Relation of the rise and ground of that slanderous
Report, and Detect it with an Abstract of his own Letters received since, to
show that he is alive.

One of the first and most furious Fomentors and Authors of that late Lying
Report of W. Penn's being a Papist (after diligent Enquiry made) appears to be
Thomas Hicks, a Baptist Teacher, the envious false Dialogue-Maker, who has been
openly proved a notorious Forger, Slanderer and Defamer of the People called
Quakers, wickedly and maliciously rendering them no Christians, but Deceivers
and Impostors, etc. and defaming them in their sufferings, which are for
Conscience toward God, insinuating, that The satisfaction of their wills and
lusts, and promoting their carnal Interest, to be the chief motive and
Inducement thereto, and the great thing in their Eye, (as in his Dialog. 1. p.
75. As also his lies and slanders, That he had it under W. P' s Hand to
manifest him the falsest Villain upon the Earth; and that several of his
Friends had been with him to see it, and were satisfied it was so; and desired
him not to look upon the rest of Friends as upon W. P. And further, That the
Books his Name was too, were not of his own Writing, but that he kept a Jesuit
for that purpose.

Now I having Information of this false Report and Slander, and being chiefly
concerned in the Affairs of W. Penn in his Absence, looked upon my self obliged
in Conscience to vindicate his Innocence and Christian Reputation: Whereupon I
took with me R. Davis and R. M. with several others upon the Exchange, and
asked Tho. Hicks, If he had it under W. Penn's Hand to manifest him as
aforesaid? To which he Answered, Yes, he had. Then I desired him to name one of
the Friends that was so satisfied; his shuffling Answer was, There was a great
many of them, but could remember the Names of none of them, it being four or
five years ago. I then desired to see his Letter? He Answered, He had none. I
Queried, What he had under his own Hand then? He Replied, He had it in Print. I
demanded the Title? he answered, The sandy Foundation, for which he was put in
the Tower. Note, That an Explication was sincerely given forth by W. Penn,
concerning the said Book, Entitled, Innocence appearing with open Face, which
gave such satisfaction that he was thereupon set at Liberty.

So this was the substance of his Answer, by which you may perceive the
feebleness of his false suggestion, and the baseness of his Spirit: then as to
his gross Lie of W. P's keeping a Jesuit to write his Books, when I charged him
with it, to that he was Mute, and would give me no Answer, but shuffled to
another thing.

Hereby you may see that the said Tho. Hicks appears to be a busy Slanderer as
well as a manifest, Forger of notorious falsehoods, as before charged.

The false suggestion of Tho. Hicks taking Air, did encourage others to add
hereto, and amongst the several Stories this was one, That W. Penn perverted
one Mr. Edsaw, a Sussex Gentleman, to the Romish Religion, who lived and died
near his House. The first that I could find who was so bold to affirm this, was
F. F. who quoted the Duke of Somerset's Steward for his Author, to whom I
applied my self, and he affirmed, he Reported it not, neither knew any thing of
it: That being detected, F. F. charged it upon Captain Gratwick of Sussex,
Brother-in-law to the said Captain Edsaw, to whom Messengers were sent by W.
Penn's Wife to know the Truth thereof, and he also denied it, and said, He
would spit in the face of any man that would charge it upon him. This he
declared before several Witnesses, and said, If she were not satisfied with
what he had there declared, he would wait upon her, and give her what
satisfaction she pleased under his hand, for he scorned to abuse so Civil a
Gentleman behind his back: so the rise of that Story lodges as yet at F. F's
door. And for the pretended perverted Person Captain Edsaw (for so he was
called) they who are desirous to be further satisfied may enquire of the Warden
of the Fleet, where, by the Book it does appear the said Robert Edsaw was
committed Prisoner to the Fleet for Debt the 27th of November 1678. and not
known to go abroad after Commitment to his dying day, which was the 30th of
September 1681. where he died and not in Sussex; and for what he professed as
to Religion, he had it not to seek many years before he was Prisoner: Job 13.
4. But ye are Forgers of Lies, ye are all Physicians of no value. Psalm. 58. 3.
The wicked are estranged from the womb, they go astray as soon as they be born,
speaking lies. Psalm. 109. 2. For the Mouth of the wicked, and the mouth of the
deceitful are opened against me: they have spoken against me with a lying
Tongue. Jer. 7. 8. Behold, ye trust in lying words that cannot profit. Jonah 2.
8. They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own Mercy.

Next follows the Abstract of several Letters from William Penn Proprietary of
Pennsilvania, to P. F. etc. Dated at Upland, Nov. 1. and from West-River,
December. 16, Maryland, 1682.
THat of November, 1. 1682. signifying his safe Arrival, and that day six weeks
they lost sight of Land in England, they saw it in America: and being about
twelve Leagues off from the Coast, the Air smelled as sweet as a Garden new
blown. As they Sailed up the River they received Visits and Invitations from
the Inhabitants, the People being Joyful to see him, both Dutch, Swedes and
English coming up to New Castle, they received and entertained him with great
expressions of Joy after their sort.

Next day after his Arrival, he had the People summoned together to the
Courthouse at New Castle, where possession was legally given him; and after
that he made a Speech to the old Magistrates, and the People, signifying to
them the End of his coming, the Nature and End of Government, and that
especially he came to Establish, assuring them of their Spiritual and Temporal
Rights, Liberty of Conscience and Civil Freedoms: All he prayed, expected or
required, was Sobriety and loving Neighborhood; then he renewed their
Commissions and so left them. He went from thence to a place called Vpland,
where he called an Assembly, and gave them as ample satisfaction as at
New Castle, so they Signed an Acknowledgment, and were very Joyful: The Swedes
sent one Captain Lacy Cook to acquaint him, They would Serve, Love and Obey him
with all they had, and that it was the best Day they ever saw.

The City of Philadelphia is laid out and begun, and many pretty Houses are run
up of late upon the River and backwards, that do very well. An House for W.
Penn is a Building, whose Family, that went with him, are all come safe; and
Entertainment for all beyond expectation, and to their content. The Air is
exceeding clear and sweet, the Food good and plentiful, and as pleasing as one
can eat. There is also good Malt Drink: In fine, the Country is without
Exception. At New Castle the Dutch have their Food much as in Holland, and have
curious Sallating, etc. Excellent Bread, both of Wheat and Maslin, English
Grain.

The Indians they saw; the men were strong and Tall, the Women comely, as some
Gypsies are in England; the Children very pretty; they all wear some Clothes,
and some of them wear Broggs.

From West-River, Maryland, December. 16. 1682. he writes, That an Assembly was
held at Chester alias Vpland, where New Castle was annexed to Pennsilvania: The
Foraigners were Naturalized, and all the Laws past that were agreed upon in
England, and more fully worded. The Assembly-men were there to their great
satisfaction, and such an Assembly for Love, Unity and Concord, scarcely ever
was known in and about outward things in those Parts.

This done, they Adjourned; and W. Penn took his Journey for Maryland, where
he was kindly received by the Lord Baltemore, and the Chief in his Province:
They Treated at one Col. Tailors, about settling the bounds between their
Provinces: And a solid Conference they had, preparatory to a future Conclusion,
the season permitting no long Essays or Treaties. They Civilly parted after two
Days Conference.

The day following the Lord Baltemore Accompanied him to W. Richardsons, which
was 3 miles, and then returned: They went two miles farther, to one Tho.
Hookers, to a Meeting, where the presence of the great God was enjoyed with
them.

The First day following he intended to be at Choptank on the Eastern Shore,
where the Colonels, Magistrates and People of several Ranks and Qualities
purposed to be.

There are several other Reports I have been Inquisitive to find out the
Authors of, and I find them all arise from the same ground with the before
mentioned.

I hope therefore this short Scrutiny and Abstracts, will satisfy those, who
are not willing to believe Lies, that William Penn is not a dead Jesuit, and in
time I doubt not but their folly will Correct them that Imagine him a live one,
and also Caution others to be careful how they Report things upon Hearsay, to
the Defamation of the Innocent. Published in sincerity by him who is a Lover of
Truth but a hater of Falsehood, and an abhorrer of those that say, Report, and
we will Report it.

London, 12th. 12th. Month, 1682/3. Philip Ford.

London, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in Lombard Street, 1683.


