A DECLARATION Of the Bountiful Loving Kindness OF THE LORD, Manifested to His
Handmaid Mary Harris, who stood idle in the Marketplace, till the Eleventh
hour, yet then received her Penny. This is that none might Despair.

ALSO, A Discovery of her Sufferings through her Disobedience and Rebellion
against God's precious Truth, that none might presume, or harden their hearts
in the day of God's Visitation.

As Also, A few Words of Encouragement from Experience, to any who knows the
Name of the Lord in the least measure, to fear the Lord, and trust in his
Mercies.

Printed in the Year, 1669.

A Declaration of the bountiful Loving Kindness of the Lord, manifested to one
who stood idle in the Marketplace till the eleventh hour, yet then received
her Penny. This is that none might despair.
Also, a discovery of her Sufferings, throrow her disobedience and rebellion
against Gods precious Truth; that none might presume or harden their hearts in
the day of Gods Visitation.
A Maid, young and beautiful, that often went with her Relations to the
Meetings of the People of God, called Quakers; and had a love raised in her
heart to the most precious Truth, and also to them who indeed held it in a pure
Conscience; yet did not give up to the obedience of faith, but still lived in
the Customs and Fashions of this Evil World, to the wounding and stifling of
the precious Life of Jesus Christ in her, but the same Love of the Lord that
had begotten a tenderness in her, and raised up a love to Truth, followed her,
and would not suffer her to sit down in the World without trouble; for although
she was much taken notice of by them who loved vanity, and delighted in beauty
more then virtue, and she by this became further off from faithfulness yet here
she must not take up her rest, for the Lord visited her with great weakness,
and she grew ill, and declined, and fell into a consumption, and lived in a
consuming state about three years, outward means and medicines were used for
her recovery; yet from first to last, not any thing that was done to her, or
for her, did her any good, as she often declared, but she still grew weaker and
weaker, and besides this, she had such a soreness all over her poor bones, as
has not been known in such weakness, which being taken notice of by a Friend
which was nearly related to her, she said; surely, this is more then ordinary,
this is more immediately the hand of the Lord upon thee, then is usual, this is
the Judgment of the Lord upon thee for thy disobedience; and she being in a low
condition, considered the matter, and the Lord set it upon her heart, and she
cried unto the Lord for mercy, (as she said, mightily) and it was showed her
one night, that if she did not speedily repent, and submit to Gods precious
Truth, she should be smitten with lameness from head to foot; then did she
apply her heart unto the Lord, and his faithful Messengers, (whose feet are
beautiful upon the Mountain of holiness, bringing the glad tidings of
Salvation, unto the weary and heavy laden) saying, I have hardened my heart at
many a precious Metting when the Lord has smitten me, and I have seen plainly
the Lord would have gathered me; but I said in my heart, if I receive this, if
I give up to it, I must be a Quaker, and I cannot be a Quaker; then (said she)
would I take my heart from attending upon the ministration of Truth, and then
my heart became more hard; What shall I do (said she) that now I may receive
the faithful sayings of the Servants of the Lord? Ah that my heart were open,
but it is shut and hard; when shall I find mercy in this state! She remained
for some time, and grew weaker and weaker in body; and on the first day she
took her bed, she was much under the righteous Judgments of the Lord, and felt
his Word in her heart as a fire; but the Lord in Judgment remembered Mercy, and
having brought her very low, he showed her the child's state, which she with
great delight desired; and indeed she became as a little child, fit for the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Then did the Lord rend the vail, and showed her his Glory, and the
preciousness of his pure everlasting Truth, and the Light shined out of
Darkness, and in it she saw Light, and received the Knowledge of God (whom to
know is Life Eternal) and her heart was filled with Joy, and her mouth with
Praises, and she lay for many hours without the sense of pain or weakness,
sounding forth the Praises of the Lord, resusing to take any Cordials, or ought
else to support the natural spirits; saying, I am well, I feel no pain, I am
full, my Cup runs over; I am filled us with marrow and fatness, I have seen his
Glory, and tasted of his most precious Truth, and it is sweet unto my taste;
Ah, how precious, how pure, is Gods everlasting Truth, nothing so pure, and
they who indeed recelve it, are made pure by it, praised be the Lord who has
made me partaker of it, and placed me amongst his poople: Ah, Blessed God, who
has given me cause to sing aloud of thy praise; then some about her, seeing
her very week, thought it might wear her too much, told her, she might praise
the Lord in her heart, and bid her try if she could sleep; but she said, she
was well, and needed no sleep, neither is my mouth dry, said she, not I faint;
but she was persuaded to take something, and so lay still; but after some time,
she said, Surely, I should not have been stopped, but I will now try if I can
sleep, which she did sweetly; and in the morning said, Although I have slept,
yet my heart has been exercised in the praises of the Lord; and that day lay
very preciously, speaking to several persons as came to visit her, to their
several conditions, showing to some, who lived in pleasure, her hands, saying,
See here, the Lord has made these bones bare for my rebellion, because I would
not submit to his most precious Truth; he has brought me to the dust, and I
must lay down this body as a Sacrifice; Oh, do not you stand out, it will cost
you dear, it ever you find mercy, (and such like) then would she sing praises
to the Lord, and declare much concerning the purity of Truth, exhorting all,
who were not made partakers of it, speedily to embrace it; and much more she
said which will be to much to relate.

On the next day, being very weak, and it was thought she might have departed,
she called for some young persons that were related to her, and set before them
their conditions, clearly, in the Light of our Lord Jesus Christ, warning and
exhorting them, praying for them, blessed them in the Spirit of discerning,
which the Lord gave her in the day of his Power; and when some Friends came to
her that was in the fashion of the World, she would say, What, Friends who know
Gods precious Truth, put on their Hoods so, that is like me in my other life;
Friends, who have received Gods precious Truth need no other adorning; and
having spoken long in this wise, she laid her self in silence, waiting for her
dissolution, having said, I shall shut mine eyes and sleep; but she lay several
weeks in great weakness after this, having her heart exercised on this wise.

And if she had spoken an unadvised word, then would she cry to the Lord, to
wash her throughout, and say, Judge me, Lord, judge me, with thy great
Judgments; let nothing remain in me, or be spoken by me, but what is pure;
search me thoroughly: Ah, cursed be that nature, and that disposition; this at
first kept me from receiving Gods pure Truth, cursed be that disposition; and
lying longer then one would have thought one so weak could have layn, taking
very little of any outward sustenance; some would say to her, it may be thou
may recover; No, no, would she say, I must lay down this body for my
rebellion; in my other life, if any had said, I should recover, it would for a
little time seem to refresh me; and if they had said, surely, I could not live
long, (or so) it would cast me down; but now I long for death, I must lay down
this body; for, said she, when I received Gods precious Truth, I received the
sentence of death; And this she was very positive in all along, and when she
was persuaded to be passive in this matter; she said, I have indeed cause
enough to desire life now, for the Lord has made me partaker of his blessed
Truth, and if I live I know I shall, bear a Testimony, a faithful Testimony
for the Lord, and he has placed me amongst his People; and I shall have their
company, this is desirable; but I must lay down this body: great was her love
to the Lord and his People; and when the Servants of the Lord came to her, it
was such a reviving, that she had not the sense of her weakness, her heart
being overcome with the Love of the Lord, in his Servants, she lay a rejoicing.
Often was she assaulted by the Enemy, sometimes to desire life, sometimes with
worldly things, but she would say (even in Gods Authority) Away, Satan, away, I
defy thee in the Name of the Lord, touch not that which is pure: and one time,
when she was under this temptation, a precious Servant of the Lord coming to
visit her; Ah, (said she to him) now the Tempter flees, he cannot stand before
thee; then after she had been thus ^^yed, she was usually filled with joy in
God, through whom she had obtained victory; then would she sound forth the
praises of the Lord. And grew still more weak, and sometimes would say, I am
weak, and full of pain, but it is below me to complain; and with much patience,
and comely behavior she lay; and in the morning before her departure, she
called for several things to drink, and gasped for breath, but said, I shall
not go so. And afterward did, as it were, lay her self forth in silence,
waiting for her dissolution; but at the coming in of a good Friend she revived,
and lived till Evening, and about half an hour before her departure she was
taken with a very great trembling, and seemed to be somewhat troubled, It was
said by one near her; what is the matter, what ailest thou? I fear, said she,
whether it be a true Spirit, or a Temptation; it was said to her, what meanest
thou? art thou in any doubt as concerning the Truth of which thou art made
partaker? No, no, said the, that is Gods pure and Everlasting Truth, the Truth
which the People of God, called Quakers, are made partakers of, and for which
they suffer that is everlasting, that is the true Spirit, and their God is my
God; and although I see it not now as I have seen it, yet I bring in my
testimony that is the Truth that shall abide for ever; that is pure, and nothing
that is desiled must be sheltred under it; that is the Truth which enlightens
every man that comes into the World: The little Seed in me is become great,
great, great; Blessed be God who has placed me among his People, and I possess
what they possess; and when the Faithful lie as I lie, my Portion well be
their Portion; and my Cup is full, it runs over, over, over: Then she breathed
a little thicker about the space of one quarter of an hour, and without groan
of sigh, or the least motion, she shut her eyes and slept. Glory be to God for
ever.

A few Words of Encouragement from Experience, to any who know the Name of the
Lord, in the least measure, to Fear the Lord and Trust in his Mercies.
Friends,
IN the Living sense of Gods Love and manifold Mercies wherewith he has
compassed me, as one every side, it has been often (yea, very often) upon, and
in my heart, what shall I render, or wherewith shall I appear before the Lord?
And the Answer was, and is, Keep low in his Fear, and do thy Duty, declare his
Goodness, spread forth his Praises, that they who have not such experience of
his Mercy, may by thy Declaration, speak good of his Name, and be encouraged to
fear him for ever, and trust in his Mercies.

Then first, whosoever thou art that shall read these lines, and have any
hungrings and thirstings begotten in thee after Righteousness, fear the Lord
and trust in his Mercies, and thou shall be satisfied; let the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth be thy fear, and let him be thy dread; yea, keep in the fear
of the Lord all the day long, and that will purify thy heart, and make it a
fit receptacle for the manifestation of Gods Love and Power.

Or art thou in any doubt concerning the Truth, or the Way or Manifestation of
it as it now appears; wait thou in God's Fear, and trust in his Mercy, and
assuredly the Light will shine forth, it will arise and expel the Darkness, and
discover to thee the Path of Life, in which the wafaring man, although at Fool,
shall not err.

Again, Art thou in Gods Eternal Truth, poor, low and little, seeing and
knowing little of the mystery of Godliness, having little faith, love or zeal
for God, his Truth and People; yet say thou in thy heart, this little is of
the right kind, and I would not part with it for all the World? Well, Friend,
be contend with thy Portion, and keep in the pure fear of the Lord, wait on
him, and trust in his Mercies, and he will arise in thee, and increase thy
store; yea, when he has by his righteous Judgments, as with a rod of small
cords, whipped out the Buyers and Sellers out of his Temple, and the House is
clean, and thou fit for it, the time of refreshment being come, he will
assuredly open the well-springs of Life in thee, and fill full thy Cup with the
overflowings of his virtue, and thou shall praise his Name even so long as thou
abidest in his fear; for the Lord is not a hard Master, but he answers the
desire of every living one; and this my Soul knows right well, let him be
glorified for ever, who has given me the desires of my heart, so that I must
praise his Name whilst I have a being.

But art thou now increased in Divine Substance, so that thou can say, now
the eyes of my understanding is enlightened, and those things which before were
hard and dark as to me, are now become plain and easy, and now I see, (not men
like Trees) but in the Light of the Lord I see light, not as in a glass darkly,
but now I see face to face, the shadows are over and gone, and now I can say my
Redeemer lives, and the eye which the Lord has opened sees him; yea, and he
stands last upon my Earth; the Lord my God having cast out the strong man
that did keep the house, now he lives and reigns in me, and opens even the
Floodgates of his everlasting Loving Kindness in me; yea, he feeds me with
the Bread that comes down from Heaven that shall never perish, and I drink and
am refreshed, yea, I drink abundantly of the River of Pleasure that is at the
right hand of the Father; I drink of the wine that is well refined new in the
Kingdom of Heaven; may I not now sit down, being perfected in that Love which
casts out fear? may I not now keep holy day in God, being in a state above
the fear, so much exhorted to? Ah, Friend, whosoever thou art, that shall thus
say in thy heart, be not high-minded, but fear, and remember thou keep holy the
Sabbath day: Art thou at rest in God, oh, sanctify the Sabbath day, and keep
it holy, for this the Lord requires; and stand upon thy watch continually, and
fear to the end, lest after all this thou grow careless, and the exalted spirit
get up, and thou fall from thy stedfastness, and so lose thy Crown: Blessed is
he who fears always.

Further, art thou in a low estate as to things of the World, having many
depending on thee, and knows not which way to turn thee, as to an outward
livelihood? Ah, fear the Lord, and trust him over all, and he that feeds the
Ravens, and clothes the Lillies, that can neither sow nor spin, cast thy care
upon him, and assuredly thee and thine shall be fed, For the Earth is the Lords
and the fullness thereof; its the Lions that shall want, and suffer hunger, But
they who fear the Lord shall want nothing that is good; this have I seen and
known, and this is writ for the encouragement, comfort and strengthening of them
who are of a fearful heart; keep in Gods fear, be faithful to his requirings,
be not careful, but do thy duty, and Heaven and Earth shall sooner pass away,
then the Lord fail to supply thy necessities; yea, He shall bless thee in thy
Basket, and thy Store; he shall be with thee in thy going out, and in thy
coming in, he will cause all to prosper thou set thy hand unto: yea, he
shall bless thy Children within thee, and he shall Crown thee with his peace,
which passes all understanding, even in thy daily labor, as thou art found
waiting upon him; and he shall also replenish thy heart, and as thou keep
thy eye and heart to him, thou shall be fresh and green, bringing forth trust
in thy old age, and thy last days shall be thy best days; and thus shall it
be with them who fear the Lord, and faithfully wait upon him in a cheerful
diligence, expecting each day their daily bread from the hand of the Lord, who
gives liberally, and upbraideth not: Oh, my Soul praise thou the Lord, (in the
sense of his Love, and enjoyment of his Mercies) and let all that is within
praise his holy Name, for his Mercies are manifold, and his compassion never
fails; this day is the Scripture fulfilled, and God is known indeed to be the
Father to the fatherless, and the Husband to the widow; yea, the Master of that
Family which calls upon his Name has provided all things needful, so that
it may well be said, What lacked ye? and he has, yea, God himself has
recompensed, into the Bosom, even an hundred fold, whatsoever has been given
up, or lost for his sake and the Gospels; surely, surely he has given good
measure pressed down, and running over, of this I and mine are living
witnesses, and we have no cause to complain, but great cause to praise and
magnify his Name, and to live to him for ever and ever; Let all thy Works
praise thee, O Lord; So, even so says my Soul.

Mary Forster.

THE END.

