AN ALARM TO THE PRIESTS; OR, A Message from Heaven, To forewarn them of the
dreadful day of the Lord which will suddenly overtake them, unless by speedy
and unfeigned repentance they return to the Lord. With a Call to all people to
come out of Babylon least they be made partakers of her plagues.
By a follower of the Lamb, one whose eye sees the downfall of Babylon, and
waits for the exaltation of Sion, Tho. Ellwood.
The Preface.
MAny, yea very many have been the warnings and admonitions which the Lord has
given unto the Priests of this generation, yet have they not repented and
turned unto him, but have hardened their hearts against his reproof, and have
gone on in their disobedience and rebellion against him; even provoking him to
pour down his Judgments upon them, and utterly to cut them off from being a
people any more for ever. Long has he waited upon them, to be gracious unto
them; and long has he born with them, that at length (if it were possible)
they might see and be made sensible of their great unkindness, and monstrous
ingratitude wherewith they have continually repaid his great goodness and
loving kindness unto them; and yet how loath has he been to stir up all his
anger against them! how unwilling to destroy them!

And now once more has he stretched out his golden Scepter unto them, and has
raised up his Spirit in the meanest of his servants (uttering his mighty voice
through an earthen vessel, that all the glory may be unto himself) to warn
them yet once more of the eminent peril which hangs over their heads, and will
suddenly drop upon them, except they repent and return unto him. O that they
would hear that their souls might live: for nothing but speedy and unfeigned
repentance, can divert the wrath of God from falling on their heads.

The Lord has in tender mercy unto them, given them a day to work in, but alas
they have wrought the works of darkness; he expected they should bring forth
fruit unto him, but they have been fruitful in nothing but in doing evil. He
visited them in his tender love, and would have gathered them under bis wing,
as a hen does her chickens, but they would not. Hitherto they have slighted the
many offers of his love unto them, and have not regarded the day of their
visitation, but now their day flitteth away apace, and the short Span of time
which yet remains to them, passes away as a shadow, and will soon be gone over
their heads; and then will they feel the Lord to be as just in punishing, as
merciful in so long sparing them: for he will arise in his might and visit
them in his fury, and their place shall be found no more.

The persecuting Spirit is a notable badge of Antichrist. This Spirit has all
along accompanied them. They have run out of one form into an other, and out of
that into a third, and still this Spirit has gone along with them. It appeared
in the Bishops against the Non-conformists, it appeared in the Presbyters
against the Lord's people here in England, and it appeared in the Independents
against God's faithful servants in New England.

Antichrist has long sat (and still does sit) as God in the Temple of God (I
do not mean in the outward Temples, although he sits there also) but now is the
day coming, and the hour is even at hand, of the manifestation of the righteous
judgments of God, upon all the wicked, and upon all the disobedient; and then
shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit
of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming. He that
testifies these things, says surely I come quickly, Amen, even so, come Lord
Jesus.

The Word of the Lord, which came unto me, even unto me his servant (as I lay
in my bed, waiting upon him in his pure peaceable Spirit) saying, thus shall
thou say to the Priests of this nation.

HOul, houl you Merchants of Babylon, for the time is coming wherein none shall
buy your merchandise. Houl and roar you children of Babylon, for your mother
the false woman, the great harlot, the scarlet Whore shall shortly be stripped
out of all her false coverings, out of all her harlots attire, and shall be
discovered to the eyes of all people; nakedness and shame shall be upon her,
and horror and torments upon all her children. Lament and mourn you sons of
Belial, shriek and cry you Priest of Baal, for sudden destruction is coming
upon you, and utter desolation shall speedily overtake you, except you speedily
and unfeignedly repent, and turn to the Lord with all your hearts, from whom
you have gone a whoring even from the least to the greatest: I say except you
speedily repent, and turn from the wickedness of your hearts and hands, you
shall utterly be cut off, and that right soon; for the Lord is arisen to fight
for Sion, and has stretched out his mighty arm, to deliver his people from the
cruelty, rage, and oppression of all their enemies and persecutors. Yet a
little while and the cry shall be, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, the
fall thereof shall make a great noise, the sound thereof shall go through the
earth, and shall strike terror to all those who admire and love her beauty:
fear, amazement astonishment of Spirit shall seize on all those that traffic
with her; fire shall consume her inward parts, howlings and roarings shall be
heard in all her quarters: the Priests (her Merchants) shall wring their hands
for grief, and gnaw their tongues for pain and anguish; for now shall their
trade be utterly lost, now shall their merchandise utterly fail them, the great
Whore, (their mother) shall be stripped, and her nakedness shall appear to
their shame and torment. Houl, houl you Idol-shepherds, for utter desolation is
coming upon ye, yes, sudden destruction shall overtake ye, even as an armed man
shall it come upon ye, and as travail upon a woman with child, and there shall
be none to deliver ye. For thus says the Lord God of power, I, even I will
take vengeance upon ye, and will recompense upon your heads the reward of your
doings, for you have erred from my pure fear, and have daily grieved my pure
spirit, you have crucified the Just in your selves and in others, and have
hardened your hearts against my reproof, refusing to let my people go, to
worship me according as I have commanded them. How often, says the Lord, have
I warned ye by my Prophets, rising up early and sending them unto ye! yet have
you rejected my counsel, and would have none of my reproof; but have dealt
despitefully with my messengers, beating and stoning some, imprisoning some,
dismembring some, and slaying others. Yea, you have often rebelled against me
says the Lord, and have even kicked the heel against me; you have sold your
selves to act wickedness, and to commit fornication with the Whore of Babylon*
you have run with delight into her bed of Whoredems, and have gredily drunk
down her cup of Fornications. How often says the Lord, have you endeavored to
violate my peoples consciences! How often have you exalted your selves against
me, presumtuously attempting to thrust me out of my seat, and to make your
selves Lords of mine heritage, by imposing laws upon my peoples consciences,
which is my prerogative alone to do! You have ravened from my spirit in your
selves says the Lord, and those that will not run to the same excess of riot
with you, are even devoured by you. Lo, thus says the Lord, you have blinded
the peoples eyes, you have taken away the key of knowledge, you will not enter
in your selves, and those that would enter in you forbid: you have set up
Idolatry inwardly in your hearts, and outwardly also in your Idol-Temples: you
have worshipped the Beast; and embraced the Whore, and are crept into a dead
loathsome form and way of worship which she has provided for you. And like
Israel of old you offer unto me the lame, the blind, the imperfect Sacrifices,
instead of sound, unspotted, perfect, pure sacrifices, but away with your
sacrifices says the Lord, and put away your vain Oblations from before me; for
your Sacrifice of praise is abominable in my sight, the stink of your incense
is loathsome in my nostrils, your offerings are unsavory and irksome unto me,
and all your praying and preaching, your pretended duties and ordinances are a
weight and a burden upon my soul, and my spirit is grieved with them says the
Lord: therefore I will cast you off says the Lord, even because of the
wickedness that is found within your gates, and the blood of the Innocent which
is found upon your skirts, and because you hate to be reproved, and strengthen
your selves against me says the Lord.

Consider this well says the Lord, did I not cast off my chosen people the
Jews for the same iniquities which are found to abound amongst you? and shall I
now spare you, O you rebellious and stiffnecked generation! what are you better
then Israel of old, that I should pass by that in you, for which I cast them
off? You have prophesied lies in my name, says the Lord, you have run but I
never sent you, you have spoken a divination of your own brains, you have
stolen the Word from your neighbor, and therewith have you traded O you
Merchants of Babylon You have devoured my people says the Lord, and with
feigned words have made merchandise of souls; you have drawn away my people
from my statutes and ordinances, which by the finger of my spirit are written
in their hearts and you have brought them again under a yoke of bondage, which
neither they nor their fathers were able to bear. You have carried my people
captive into Sodom and Egypt, and have hindered their passage into the
spiritual Canaan. You have defiled my living Temples says the Lord, and
joined them unto harlots, and are crept into houses which the Beast set up for
the Babilonish Whore to sit in.

Ah foolish people! think you that the living eternal God will be worshipped in
houses made of stones, or will be found there? has he not said that he
dwells not in Temples made with hands but the Temple which he dwells in is
a living Temple, and the worship which he accepts is in the Spirit and in the
Truth? but this Temple you have defiled, this worship you have apostatized
from, you are gotten into the Whores Temple, and are worshipping the beast
instead of the living God. O what shall I say unto you, you disobedient people!
What could the Lord have done for you that he has not done? Did he not about
100 years ago rend the thick vail of darkness (wherein the mystery of iniquity
did then work) from off the eyes of many of your forefathers, and gave them a
little glimmering of his light to walk in? And did he not (as it were) take
them by the hand, and lead them out of the City Babylon, the mother of harlots;
and gave them his Spirit to be their leader? but alas, they rebelled against
their leader; and having once despised and contemned the light in their own
consciences, how suddenly did darkness (thick darkness) overshadow them again!
and then how quickly were they run back into the Subburbs of Babylon again!
yea, and pressed hard to have entered the city again, and doubtless they had
prevailed, had not the Lord in love and pity to them, overthrown them.

And after that the Bishops had had their day, and that the curtains of the
night began to be drawn upon them: Oh how clearly did the Lord manifest himself
unto many of you! how did he open your eyes, and let you see the grosseness,
deadness and emptiness of that form wherein the Bishops had long held you? O
how did he raise up in many of you a Spirit of Prayer and of supplication, to
groan and cry mightily for deliverance, and that the seed might be redeemed out
of bondage, and from under the yoke of the oppressor! And was there not in many
of you a living, fresh desire and panting after God and the enjoyment of his
presence begotten, and for some time preserved? Oh why did you swerve from it?
did he not draw you (for then you were willing to follow him) out of
Episcopacy, and give you his pure fear to walk in? and did you not Vow to him
in your hearts and before men, that you would walk in his fear and be guided by
his Spirit? O that you had so done) and did you not make a solemn Covenant both
with God and men, that you would utterly abolish and extirpate Episcopacy? and
did you not confirm that Covenant with reitterated Engagements, Protestations
and Oaths? and will you now in the revolution of 20 years, wheel round about
again, and take up a false rest in that dead, empty, loathsome form? Ah, who
has bewitched you that ye should not obey the Truth? what, do you not plainly
see that it bends to its mother Babylon from whence it came? and will you run
again into Babylon? were not your stomachs once burdened with Episcopacy, and
did you not spew it up? and will you now turn back again and lick up your old
vomit? Oh, do not so; do not so, do not run wilfully into destruction.

Oh the exceeding weight and guilt which lies upon the Priests of this Nation!
for of them has this people learned to break their Vows, to break their
Protestations, to break their Engagements and to violate their Oaths; none so
forward now to plead for Babylon, to fight for Babylon as they: they have drawn
the people from serving the living God, and have caused them to serve strange
Gods, even graven Images, fashioned with the graving tools of their own wicked
inventions, and framed in the mould of their vain imaginations, one while they
set up Episcopacy, another while Presbytery; and he that will not fall down
and worship the Image which they have set up, is he not forthwith cast into the
fiery furnace of their cruelty and persecution? but for these things is the
Lord coming upon them, and will pour out the vialls of his wrath upon them;
verily a day of sad calamity shall suddenly overtake them, and there shall be
none to help or pity them.

Oh, the exceeding unutterable love which the Lord has extended to this
Nation! how often O you Priests has the Lord warned you, both by his Spirit in
your consciences, and also by his servants whom he has daily raised up, and
sent unto you to reprove your deadness and barrennss: but alas you have still
gone on in your rebellion, and quarrelled with the messengers which the Lord
has sent unto you: they have either seemed too mean and contemptible in your
sight to be taken notice of, or their message has seemed too harsh for you to
bear: and thus have you despised the messengers which he has sent, and
slighted the many offers of his love unto you. Oh how ready has he always been
to shower down his mercies upon you! and how unworthily have you requited so
great love! how gently did he at first shake the Bishops, and after that more
roughly, before he quite over threw them! yet would they not take warning. How
many mild reproofs and gentle warnings has he given to this people! yet are
their hearts hardened. But now their day passes away apace, and the night
approaches wherein none can work. Oh therefore while you have time prize it:
prize the love of the Lord God: let his goodness overcome you. O return unto
the Lord with all your hearts: Lie low before him, embrace the rod: and submit
your selves willingly to his gentle corrections and fatherly chasetizements:
that the Spirit of the Lord you may feel in you as a fire, burning and
consuming all the works of da^kness and as an hammer to knock down and as a
sword to cut off whatsoever is contrary to his pure will. O I say, speedily
repent you of your wickedness, Cease to do evil, and learn to do good, for your
moment of time will suddenly pass away, the Bridegroom will come, and the door
shall be shut; and then though you knock and cry aloud, yet shall you not be
suffered to enter; but your answer shall be, Depart from me you workers of
iniquity, I know you not. And it will not avail you then to say, Lord we have
prophesied in thy Name; for hitherto you have prophesied lies, and have spoken
a divination of your own brains, you have preached for hire and filthy lucre,
and like a troop of Robbers have you murdered by consent; and in Babylon have
you made merchandise of souls. And because of these things is the Lord arisen
in Night and Power, to plead with you; therefore humble your selves speedily
before the Lord, and return unto him with broken hearts, and contrite spirits.
O turn in, turn in unto Christ the Light, who lights every man that comes
into the world; obey his Light in your own consciences, which Light is
sufficient to lead you unto God: Follow the leadings and motions of his holy
Spirit in your selves, and leave every one free to do the like; oppress not the
consciences of any, but let all weights and burdens be taken off, and leave the
people free to worship God, where, when, and how himself shall command them.
And cease any longer to deceive souls, or to traffic any longer with the Whore
of Babylon: for verily for these things the Lord God will visit, and if you
wilfully persist in your rebellion against him, you shall not escape the stroke
of his Justice, but his indignation and fury shall break out upon you, and shall
utterly consume you from off the earth. O you Priests, consider this thing, and
be not stout-hearted against the Lord, neither reject the Message which he has
sent you: For behold, I call both Heaven and Earth, both Men and Angels to
witness against you, that I have delivered unto you the Message of the Lord,
which if you reject, his Plagues shall be your portion.

Babylon the great is falling, is falling, the Whore, the great Whore (with
whom the Kings of the earth have committed Fornication, who has bewitched the
Nations with the cup of her Sorceries) shall be destroyed, and that ere it be
long; her Scarlet coverings shall be torn off, and her flesh shall be burnt
with fire; her Merchandise shall decay, her Traffic shall fail her, her
children shall howl and roar, for grief and anguish of spirit shall come upon
them; all her Officers and Attendants shall lament and mourn bitterly for her;
her Priests and her Prophets, her Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deacons
and Deans; her Parsons, Rectors, Chaplains, Vicars and Curates, shall sit down
and bewail for the destruction of their Mother, and shall sigh and lament for
the misery that is coming upon them. For this shall be the judgment of
Babylon, (says the Lord) in one day shall her Plagues come upon her, death,
and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire; for great
is the Lord God who judges her. Her Merchants shall weep and lament over her,
for no man buyeth her Merchandise any more, even her Merchandise of souls,
wherein she greatly traded. As a Millstone shall the be thrown with violence
into the sea, and shall be found no more at all.

And all those who refuse to be divorced from her, who creep into her bed of
Whoredoms, and drink her Cup of Fornications, who reject the mercy of the Lord
in this day of the manifestation of his tender love, who hate to be reproved,
who reject his counsel, and will have none of his advice, whose hearts are hard
as an iron sinew, and whose brows are become as brass; who continue in their
stout-heartedness, rebel^ion, and witchcraft against the Lord and his Anointed,
and will not have him to reign over them, nor willingly suffer him to reign
peaceably in others: I say, these who cling so close to Babylon, shall be made
partakers with her of her judgments. They shall fall as she falls, they shall
perish as she perishes even from the highest pinacles of her temples shall
they precipitately tumble down, and be buried in her ruin. Instead of her soft
perfumed beds, shall a bed of torment be prepared for them; and instead of her
sweet delicious potions, which out of her golden Cup they drank, shall the pure
wrath of the Lord be given them (without any mixture of mercy or pity) in the
Cup of his burning fury; the Vials of his Wrath shall be poured out upon them,
rottenness shall enter into their bones, their memory shall rot, stink, and be
loathsome unto the Nations round about them, and they shall be tormented with
fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of
the Lamb for ever and for ever; and the day hastens wherein this shall be
accomplished: the Lord has said it and it shall assuredly come to pass.

Wherefore thus says the Lord, Come out of her, come out of her my people,
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues:
For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities.
Make haste out of her, O people, and escape for your lives, stay not in all the
plain, but escape to the Mountain, least you be consumed; run no longer from
hill to mountain, and from mountain to hill, wandering about like sheep without
a shepherd; but escape quickly unto that Mountain which shall be established in
the top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills. And take heed
that you look not back; Remember Lot's Wife. Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out
from thence, touch no unclean thing; go ye out from the midst of her, cast away
from you all your transgressions whereby ye have transgressed, and make ye a
new heart, and a new spirit; for why will ye dye, O house of Israel?

O ye Priests of England, hear the Word of the Lord concerning ye: Woe unto ye,
Woe unto ye from the Lord God, for you have gone in the way of Cain, and ran
greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and are like to perish in your
gainsaying as did Core. You drink of the best, and feed of the fat, but this
know assuredly, that the fatted beast is for the slaughter: you clothe of the
finest of the Fleece, and like greedy wolves ye devour the Flock; you cause the
people to err, you lead the simple out of the way, and the blind into the
ditch: you have blasphemed my Name, and defiled my Temples, joining your selves
unto Idols, yet you are not ashamed to lean upon the Lord, saying, is not the
Lord amongst us, none evil shall come upon us? What! shall not the Lord visit
for these things? yea verily, for these things will the Lord God visit, he will
bring you down into the Valley of Jehosaphat, and will plead with you in the
valley of decision, and the slain of the Lord shall be many.

But peace shall be to Sion, and to the whole Israel of God, and there shall be
nothing to make them afraid, for this is the Word of the Lord concerning them,
Say unto the Righteous, that it shall be well with him; for they shall eat the
fruit of their doings.

THE END
LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Black-spread-Eagle and Windmill in
Martins l'Grand, 1660.


