THE Present State OF CAROLINA WITH Advice to the Setlers.

By R. F.

LONDON, Printed by John Bringhurst, at the Sign of the Book in
Grace Church Street, 1682.

THE Present State OF CAROLINA, etc.
CAROLINA is part of the Main in America, and so much celebrated by Mounsier
Laudonere, that he entitles it Florida, because of her florid, and fragrant
fields, imbellish't with flowers, that perfume the air: whose sweet
scituations, by reason of most delicious and pleasant meadows (and flourishing
savana's) adorns the Continent; and whose benevolent breast sends daily supplies
to the planter, and hourly relief to the poor and necessitous native: whose
spacious arms (^s if circulating the Ocean) proclaims her shores sanctuary to
distressed Mariners; and a generous protection to deplorable Seamen, that
solicit refreshment from her replenish't Harbors, which extend themselves
southward to the River St. Matheo, in twenty nine degrees, odd minutes; so
dilates to Luck Island, near Roanoak on the promontories of Virginia, in thirty
six degrees north latitude (now called Albemarle) a large and spacious
settlement, consisting of some two or three thousand inhabitants; upon a fertile
Soil, and a rapid River, whose Bar by reason its so straight and shallow, a
Vessel of considerable port and burden is denied admittance into the bowel of
the Collony.

But the late and flourishing settlement lies yet more southerly, in and about
thirty two degrees, odd minutes; parallel with Jerusalem in Palestine: and
equals the height of Bermudos, upon the na^igable Rivers of Cooper, and Ashly,
formerly known by the names of Wando, and Kiawah^. And there is a Bar also, tho
undeservedly calumniated by prejudicate persons, who would if possible unhinge
the settlement when because to emulate and envy their Neighbors prosperity.
But to clear that Objection, this Bar has several Channels, and the deepest at
low water is eighteen foot; and the shallowest about eleaven, and twelve foot;
which is depth enough for any navigating Vessel of three or four hundred tun;
since at high water the tide swells to six and eight foot perpendicular.

This is that famous CAROLINA, which his Majesty the King of Great Britain has
united to his Emperial Crown; and by his Royal Grant established it a Province;
and has dignified it a Principality: which by consent amongst the Lords i^
transferred to the eldest Proprie^or. But the Proprietors are eight in number,
and their Names and Titles as follows. Lord Chancellor Clarendon, Lord Duke
Albemarle, Earl of Craven, Lord Anthony Ashley Cooper Earl of Shaftsbury, Lord
John Berkly, Sr George Carteret, Sr William Berkly, and Sr John Colleton Knight
and Baronet. These are the Lords Proprietors, whose Laws and Government
(because to proceed in my description) is suspended till farther Opportunity
presents to usher them in.

So that now to describe the present strength of the southern settlement of the
flourishing Carolina (by modest computation) we calculate their Artillery to
fourteen, or fifteen hundred resolute, and gallant fighting men; under
excellent conduct, and discipline; as well armed as most men, and as well as
any Colony provided with Ammunition. Their Women also are healthful, and
fruitful; and their Children generally beautiful, and strong. Nor have we
hitherto considered the Negro Slaves, whose labor proclaims the Setlers
plenty; and whose service doubles their security, if provided a Foreigner
should attempt to invade them. Moreover it enervates the feminine Native, if at
any time he conspires against the Inhabitant, who can never be insensible of
the natural antipathy the Native, and the Negro has one against another; which
the rather confirms the Setlers security.

Moreover, the Heavens shine upon this famous Country the sovereign Ray of
health; and has blessed it with a serene Air, and a lofty Sky, that defends it
from noxious Infection; nor is there any known Distemper incident to the
inhabitant whereby to terrify, and affright him; who for the most part lives by
the law of plenty, extended to the utmost limits of sanity: This blessing one
would think was encouragement enough; when if barely to contemplate the
consideration of health. But Heaven, that always attends our mortal felicity,
directs to stars more propicious; pointing out to us the beaten path of the
Patriarchs, and led on by a glorious view of the Apostles, makes shine the
blazing torch of the Gospel; whereby to promote the unity and harmony of piety
in Religion, that Virtue may grow up into divine practice, and the purity of
every pious profession blossom, and flourish to the utmost ends of the
settlement in Carolina.

Now for as much as the motives of health and riches are inducements strong
enough to summons people from the ends of the earth; who so ridiculous to
repute them vain and unprofitable Arguments to encourage the people of Europe,
since from diverse Inland Towns (and various Ports of England) several Natives,
and Foreigners have directed their course by prosperous Stars to the florid,
and flourishing Fields in Carolina.

So in America (to my own observation) several Families have transported
themselves from the ports of Barbados; but what from the rest of the Caribes, I
know not: yet am credibly informed (and from very good hands) that diverse are
gone, and going from thence: as also from New-Providence, Bermudos, New York,
New Jersey, New England, Long Island, De-la-ware, Maryland, and Virginia; but
great numbers from Scotland, and several from the borders of Ireland: besides
diverse good Ships, with some eminent Families that are lately gone off from the
Kingdom of England; of whom we have an account of their safe arrival in
Carolina, blessed with a prosperous Passage. But the hopeful progress of this
flourishing Country invights some Northern Americans to emulate such sacred
sanctuary as without sacrilidge is tolerated to people of tender Conscience.
Moreover, its a salubrous Air to the sick, and diseased; and a generous
retrivement to necessitous, and abject Families; as also the assurance of such
as study to be rich. Engines strong enough one would think to induce mankind to
hope the prosperity of this famous Settlement.

But the settlement of Albemarle (otherwise called Roanoak) presents first to
our view; and is the oldest, and remotest northern County in the fair Province
of Carolina; situated about thirty five degrees, and odd minutes north
latitude: from whose replenished Meadows (as also from the more southern
inhabitants) as good Beef, and Pork is saved, and sent off to Barbados, and
other the Caribe Islands; as art and industry can husband.

Now Ashley County is yet more southward, and lies situated thirty two
degrees, forty five minutes; where the Setlers and Inhabitants toil not in
summer to accommodate themselves with winter's provision: because hitherto they
have considered it useless, and altogether unnecessary for the Planter to
employ his hands, and strength, where Nature so liberally stocks them with
Herbage: and the winter, because so softened with a moderate Air, represents it
much of the cast and temperament with our March in England; and that is as much
as to consider it the relic only of a mild, and short winter; or rather the
surprizal of an approaching spring, that breathes forth to iniciate the summer:
which if barely to contemplate, reanimates the vital senses; and solidly to
possess, refreshes both Native and Inhabitant. And here it is that their Ships
are built, and dressed up by Bermudian hands, the most approved Mariners; and a
general error if not the best navigating Ships in America.

And now by way of Advice; the first thing requisite and necessary for the
setler to embrace, is to fall Timber, and to clear the Ground (which is
reasonably undertaken, as by an Advertisement in the last Paragraph) as some
already have done, and planted Potatos, the Cassaida Root, Yams, Eddies,
Carrots, Cabbidges, Onyons, Turnips, Parsnips, Shelots, (but they grow
naturally there) Colleflowers, Artichokes, Musk-Melons, and Water-Melons;
besides Wormwood, Nep, Scurvy Grass, Rue, Meadsweet, Trefoil, Cinquefoil,
Elecampane (Annis, Cububs, and Cardamome Seeds) Radishes, and Horse-Radishes;
Mellelot, Angellica, Archangel, Rosemary, Thime, Lettice, Spinach,
Sweetmarjarum, Summer and Wintersavory, Endive, Succory, Hopps, Water Cresses,
Cena, and China Root, with other Druggs, and Saxafrage, Sassafras, and
Sassaperrilla: besides diverse other Vegetables without number: and Licoris
beyond dispute must of necessity thrive admirably well there; for in many
places its a moist bottom, and an open ground, because lying so near the
Springs, and in a gravelly soil, little or nothing differing from Worshop in
Nottinghamshire; where they dig up the best Licoris in England.

Moreover, all sorts of English Grane, as Wheat, Rye, Barley, Peace, Beans,
Oats, Lentills, Fitches, and Indian Corn, with other European and American
Roots, and Plants; which Carolina beyond dispute with small industry will
produce as large, and as good as the World has. For you are to consider, what
by Art, and the Law of Necessity we compel to grow in a cold climate; nature of
her self protrudes, and thrusts forth there; because of the sovereign warmth
from this generous latitude. Nor is the heat at any time so predominant whereby
to suffocate the air with intemperance, because destinated under the temperate
Zone, which partakes neither of the Extremes of the one, or the other; and
which also invights every thing to vegetate with admirable success.

The next thing worthy our consideration, is their plentiful Eating; because
having their accommodation very cheap within themselves; where Beef two years
since was sold at twelve shillings a hundred, and Pork at the rate of sixteen:
so that Cattle (you may read) begins to be plentiful, and Hoggs of a prodigious
increase. There is a Gentleman, one Mr. Andrew Percival, the now present Agent
to the Earl of Shaftsbury (I know the Gentleman very well) who by his own
industry (Providence guiding) has raised and advanced from One Hundred Head of
Cattle, to more than One Thousand, in less than seven years; and most of those
Cattle very fair, and large-headed Beasts, now grazing up and down in beautiful
Savana's; little or nothing inferior to our English Meadows. Yet besides Mr.
Percival, there are several other industrous Setlers, and Planters, that
prosper very well; though not having by much so large, and so considerable a
stock to begin with.

Moreover, there are Barrows (which by reason of the superabundant plenty of
Mast, and Roots in those parts) that some have weighed three, and four hundred
weight apiece; and such had the Lady Yeomans, as I am credibly informed who had
Four Hundred Hoggs in a Herd, and Five Hundred Turkies in a drove; besides
Dunghill Fouls too numerous to relate without suspicion. And which Plantation of
hers, consisting of one thousand five hundred Acres, was by the industry of one
Mr. James Moore (an English Gentleman) cleared from Charge in some three years
time; and with the natural produce of the Country only: which amplifies the
great fertility of the soil, that together with the increase of Beef, and Pork,
which if well saved, and sent off to other Parts (as some has already been sent
to Barbados) must of necessity bring in considerable Profit.

So that now since the arrival of Captain Dunbar (dispatched from England with
Passengers in the Richmond Frigot) the Vineroons and Inhabitants there busy
themselves very much about planting of Vineyards, to make Wine; and dressing of
Oliveyards, to get Oil. But some go upon Cotton, and other some propound to go
upon Silk, because having the Mulberry Tree in every angle of the Province: and
upon Tobacco, some already have made their attempts, with admirable success;
for upon due examination, its little or nothing inferior to Virina. Hempseed,
and Flax also has been sowed, and yields admirable produce; which greatly
encourages the Manufacture for Linen, as also for Sailcloth and Cordidge.

Upon Honey some have strong inclinations, when because having such variety of
Flowers (and Blossoms) that invights to accommodate the Laborous Be; where, as
by experience, they become so prolifick, as frequently to swarm four times in a
year; and such was the increase from one single Hive, brought over from
Bermudos (tho Half of them were lost at Sea) that within less than two full
years, Captain Morris Matthews ( an industrous Gentleman, who mannages
Lieutenant Colonel James Colleton 's Plantation) had a produce of more than
Ten Hives; besides a Presentation made to the Governor and others.

Now some are thinking to entangle themselves with the consideration of Rape,
and Linseed for Oil: but the Indian-Natives get a sweet Oil out of the Hickery
Nutt, which is much of the nature of our English Walnutt; but not so racy, nor
the Kernel so plump, and pleasant; and this Oil they sell for Beads and Trifles
of little or no value: which Oil may be much more improved, and substituted in
lieu of Oil Olives. So that staple Commodities of Carolina will be Wine, Oil,
Silk, Hides, Wool, Tallow, Honey, Beeswax, Tobacco, Hemp, Flax, Linning and
Wolling Cloth; Pitch, Tar, Cordidge, and Masts for Shipping: besides an
additional Manufacture is that of the Camlet Got, intended thither by the
Right Honorable the Earl of SHAFTSBVRY, as a new Encouragement to animate the
people to Industry.

Here are very tall, large, and strait Timber Trees (the World has not better)
and such is the Ash; the White, the Red, and the Live Oak: but the Cyprus Tree
grows to an amazing bigness; as also the Walnutt, and Hickery or American
Walnutt, already expressed. Here also are stately and tall Cedars, both White,
and Red, that cover the Earth. And the Pine, with the Asp, and Poplar, that
grow to an incredible magnitude: besides several other Timber Trees, that I
cannot at present remember. There is also the Birch, the Beech, the Willow, the
Sallow, the Alder, the Elm, the Sicamore, the Mulberry, and the Figg Tree; but
they grow every where: and the Maligatoon, and Peach is common, without
Cultivation; yet no better Stone Fruit is observed in Europe, than what
naturally grows wild in America. Vines also spread themselves to inamour the
Trees in every Wood: and Strawberries strew themselves in every Field. But
Violets, I had almost forgot them, because the Inhabitants depress them, by
treading them under foot; yet they, with various other Flowers, perfume the
Air. And Roses, they sprout up so plentifully in every Plantation, that the
Planters themselves are thinking therewith to make Fences. And where all other
Roots and Fruit Trees thrive to a Miracle; as the Orange Tree, Lemon Trees, and
China Orange Trees, Quince Trees, Cherry Trees, Apple Trees, Pear Trees, and
Prickle Pears, that bear twice a year. Then there is the Almond, lately sent
over to plant; and Tamerinds, Eldern, Goosberries, Curran Trees, Rassberries,
Pome-Citrons, Pome-Granats; and some say Plantins, and Bonano's. Certainly this
Climate is destinated to solace the Native American, and with the Blessings of
Heaven to refresh the solicitous European.

But it may be some will expect a Collection or Breviary of those Indian Kings
on the Main of America; meaning such Nations as are most Considerable (and
border upon the English Settlements) which I shall readily impart unto them, as
far as my Observation and Information directs to: but the Extent of the
Province of Carolina, from Luck Island northward, to St. Matheo southward, is
Seven or Eight Degrees: and in that space there are many small Nations remote
from the Settlements, of which no account hitherto has reached us. However,
I Will first begin with Albemarle River, that lies in Roanoak, and is the extreme
Northern Settlement in Carolina; upon which head of the River the Tuscarories
dwell; and he is a Sagamore, or great Emperor of many Kings. But toward May
River (and St Matheo) were the Westoe's, a potent and warlike people, whose
Kings are called Paracousa's, and Warawanses: but the Native Indians inhabiting
in and near to the present Settlements have only Cockawases, and are an
effeminate people, and inconsiderable as to number. A Person of Honor that has
traveled amongst them, musters them up but to seven, or eight Nations; and of
several and different Languages; supine, and of a soft Nature; yet of good
natural Parts, when to consider their salvage Education, and the little
advantages they have of Conversation: a broken uncultired, and unpolish't
People in Government; and such as formerly were chased from the Mountains, and
compelled to seek sanctuary in solitary Places; nor does any Nation amongst
them exceed Fifty Bowmen, as by the following Account.

The Santeahs, which inhabit northward upon the rapid River Santee; they muster
but thirty Bowmen. And the Itawans upon Cooper River, formerly known by the
Name of Wando; they consist but of twenty Bowmen. Next to them are the Kiawahs,
that dwell upon the skirts of Ashley River; they reckon themselves but forty
Bowmen. More southward to them are the Stonoes, upon the River Stonoh,
adjoining to Edisto; which muster but sixteen Bowmen. And those upon Edisto to
southward, they seldom or never exceed ten Bowmen. But the Cusso's to the
southward of them, and planted upon Ishepoo (now called Colleton River) are the
greatest Nation hereabout: yet they report of themselves to be, but not to
exceed fifty Bowmen. Then there is the Helena's, and they are a Nation yet more
southerly, that border upon the Banks of the Navigable River, St Helena; under
conduct of a Warrawansaw. And these Warriers by computation are but thirty
Bowmen, and no more. (In all) Two Hundred and Fourteen Bowmen; and peradventure
to live One Hundred Miles distant from North, to South; nor do they converse,
nor well understand the Language of one another. Nor dwell they in Towns, but
in straggling Plantations; often removing for the better convenience of
Hunting, for that is their general Exercise, and a great part of their
Maintenance; and which also so propagates their Health, that some of them live
to see their Third, and Fourth; nay their Fifth Generation.

Yet it is improbable they should ever grow numerous, because the Women destoy
their Bellies with the decoction of a certain Bituminous Root, that naturally
and plentifully grows every where amongst them; which Root occasions Stirility.
And this ancient Custom, because practiced from Generation to Generation, is so
rivited into the faith of their Females; that neither Art, nor Argument can
prevail upon them to relinquish this Barbarity of destroying their Bellies,
till arriving at the Age of twenty seven (or thereabouts) and then they fancy
to themselves that their Children (at such years) will grow most active,
vigorous, and valient; when their best Advance is but preferment to Bowmen. So
that to me this seems an odd Practice; but who shall reclame it, except
otherwise heaven it self reduce them. Yet I Am convinced this Relation is true
from the certainty of a worthy and honorable Person, that assured me such are
their Principles (and their Native Discipline) and because conveyed from the
Loins of Posterity, its received as an Oracle amongst them; by which you may
guess they are somewhat Superstitious, without Idolatry: but that is remitted to
the Reader to contemplate at leisure.

The Winter here in this southern Latitude is moderate, and short, and never
exceeds one fifth of the year; and much of the temperature with our March in
England; but never burdned with those Distracting Blustering Easterly Winds,
that beat back the Spring, and disappoint the Laborious Husbandman. For the
Setlers in South Carolina, viz. upon Ashley, and Cooper Rivers. etc they keep
forth their Cattle all the year about, without occupying any hands to store up
Winter's Provision, as those in New England, and New York do: but New Jersey,
and Pennsilvania must expose themselves to Expense, Trouble, and Labor under a
Chargeable Toil to get in their Winter's Fodder; which if to neglect by timely
industry, their Stock, and Cattle must of necessity starve. By which you may
collect from the sweet, and temperate Scituations of Carolina, that her
Inhabitants (as its certainly true) usually feed upon good and wholesome Fat
Beef, in the months of November, December, and January. etc Nor do they
slaughter it from the Crib, or Stall; because when only to drive it from the
flourishing Savana's, where the Ox, and the Cow are all the year grazing.

This I should think (with other Advantages) were enough to compensate the
modest Care, and Industry of the Setlers; besides the natural propensity of
Love the Natives have, as if their Souls lived only in the bosom of the English
by natural instinct, because when to prostrate both themselves and services to
fish, and hunt their Game for a Trifle; to fall Timber, to plant Corn, and to
gather in their Crop: as also to pilot, and conveigh them from one Settlement
to another. So that in many respects, the simple poverty of these indigent
Natives ought by the Law of Kind (and Humanity) to be sweetened, and
encouraged; if because when to consider their moral Civility, and innate
Simplicity; which I hope the English Inhabitants in this fortunate southern
Latitude will consider, and mingle with so much Discretion, and Moderation of
Piety, as not to contrive them Hypocrites; fatal to the Practice of
New England, because when designing to convert them to Christianity.

Here in these parts you may expect to meet with abundance of Navigable Rivers;
but of their Soundings I shall particularize more in my next: as also of their
Rivulets, whose christaline streams are clear, and transparent. But their
imbellished Meadows, sertil, and flourishing Savana's, are guarded with
pleasant and solitary Woods: besides delicious Fields, and Pastures that direct
to Admiration. Which to numerate, as also to frame a Catalogue of the various
Families of Fish, and their store; whose prodigious increase here to insert, I
cannot. However, some of them are Shad, Sturgeon, and Salmon; omitting Whale,
which are numerous in these Seas; so is the Seel or Selk, the Bottle-Nose, and
the Porpus; besides many other unctous Fish: but the Shark to Admiration, wants
Courage here, as indeed all other Ravenous Creatures do; for if they see but
the Face of an Infant, they immediately fly. Another Classis are Drum, Porgee,
Bass, Boneto, Dolphin, Albechore, Sheepsheads, Oldwives, Catfish, Cavalle,
Herin, and Mullets the largest in AMERICA. Trout also they have of two foot
long, besides the Pike, the Eel, and the Perch; with several other fresh water
Fish omitted (without consent) in this Catalogue. And their Shellfish are
Crabs, better than those in England; but Lobsters they have none that I hear
of. However, Cokles, and Mussles they have; and Banks, nay Mountains of Oysters
(and some with Pearl) that seem to barocade the Cricks. Besides prodigious
Prawns, and Shrimps in the brackish, and salt Waters, but Crawfish in the
freshes; which are various Entertainments, both to the Native, and fortunate
Planter. But their Amphibions are Turtle, Bever, Otters, Manitee, Alegators,
etc.

And their Fleshes are Beeves, Veals, Porks, Stagg, and Fallo Deer, Raccoons,
Apossoms, Muttons, Lamb, Kid, Hare, Rabitt, etc. But Ravenous Creatures are
Wolves, Foxes, Bears, Panthers, Tygres: And their Venomous Creature is the
Rattlesnake. Then there is Wild Fowl to Admiration; as Signets, Swants, and Wild
Turkies of incredible weight; besides teems of Geese, and of several sorts.
There is Pheasant also, Cranes, and Heronshaws; the Woodcock, and Teal, with
Snite, Jud, Poot, Morefowl, Curlue, and Covies of Partridges; besides Plover
great store, green, and gray: There also are Turtle Doves, Feldivers, Sea
Larks, Sand Levericks, Widgins, and Pigeons numberless; besides the Mockbird,
with diversity and variety of Singing Birds, and other feathered Fowl, that I
cannot account for. Moreover, they have plenty of Dunghill Fowl, as the Cock,
and Hen; the Goose, the Turkey, the Muscovy and English Duck, and Drake. Where
also the Savana's are crowded with Deer, and large and stately Herds of Cattle
patrole the Meadows, as Sheep the pleasant Pastures; and where every Field is
replenish't with Corn, as are the Gardens in Asia, and Europe enriched with
choice Stone Fruits; but Almonds, Nectarines, Aprecot-Trees, Malagatoons, and
the Musslin Plumb (the richest Stone Fruit in England) With diverse other Trees,
as the Bone Critton gone, and the Burgamy Pear; besides Pippin Trees, Pearmains,
Golden Russitins, Harvey, Lady-finger, and Red-streak, with various other Fruit
Trees, now sent over by the Honorable Sr Peter Colleton Bar. one of the Lords
Proprietors. And several Fruit Trees, Flowers, and Roots, by diverse other able
Gentlemen, and Merchants, that have already laid a Foundation in this southern
latitude of CAROLINA. Which I persuade my self will in a very few years, for
Agriculture, and Tillidge, vye with the Glory of the whole World.

Moreover, this beautiful Aurora, or the Rising Sun of America (known only by
the Name of Carolina) is already courted by almost every Country: where note,
it begins to depopulate some American Settlements, by reason of those
Encouridgments propounded to all such as studiously solicit frequenting her
florid Fields. For in the first place, there is no Imposition of an Oath. Then
in the next place, there is Toleration, and Liberty for people of Tender
Conscience; besides Fifty Acres (but it formerly was One Hundred Acres) of Free
Land, pointed at by the Constitutions; but that Inconveniency is taken away,
because it hindered Community, and Society; and made the Setlers swell with
great Plantations, when Unity and Popularity are the Nerve that combines
preservation. And Naturalization also is confirmed to every Individual and
single Person of any Kingdom, or Nation whatsoever (Male or Female) that
transports him or her self from any part of Europe; whereby they stand in an
equal Capacity with the King of England's Subjects, and enjoy the English
Privileges in the aforesaid Province of Carolina; paying only the yearly
acknowledgment of One Penny an Acre, as a Quit-Rent to the Lords Proprietors;
commencing in the year One Thousand Six Hundred and Ninety; and not before.

Now to such other necessitous persons, as stand in no capacity capable to
discharge their own Passage; yet is there Fifty Acres allotted unto them,
notwithstanding they come over as Servants; and their Provision and
Accommodation the Disposition and Charge of another: which proportion of Fifty
Acres is ratified unto them after the expiration of the time contracted, and
covenanted for by Indenture, or otherwise. But in case there be no Indenture,
nor any visible Contract; then in such case that Servant usually serves Four
years, according to a Law of that Country, made practicable in all his
Majesty's remote Governments, and Settlements in America.

And this Encouredgement ensues; that during the Service of such Servant, be it
Male, or Female; he or she shall also be accommodated as the rest of the free
people are, with decent, and convenient Clothing; and with all other things
requisite, and necessary. And further to strengthen the Obligation, when their
Contract expires; the Master, or the Mistress to whom such Servant has served
his time honestly (and Conscientiously) is by the Custom of the Country to have
Twelve Bushels of Indian Corn, and a Firelock to enable him whereby to live,
and defend himself, and the Country; as also to lay a Foundation for his future
Maintenance: the like accommodation has every Woman-servant; save only the Fire
Arms excepted.

Moreover, in their time of servitude; here is no hard Imposition put upon
them, when Satturdy in the Afternoon is allowed them for Recreation (for
Decency) and Repair of Apparel. And the Negro Slaves also have a share of
Liberty to keep themselves, their Houses, and their Plantations sweet, and
clean; because the Lord's Day ought not to be profaned, nor is any Person
whatever privilidged to violate the Sabbath. These are sovereign Rules, and
wholesome Presidents, that direct toward a Religious Reformation; and if I
mistake not, becomes the Duty of every Christian; whose good Example of Piety
and Virtue, will put a Spurr to others more remiss; and encouridge all such as
seek their own future Welfare, in propagating the present Well-being of the
Settlement and Setlers in Carolina.

But Europe nor the World has better Beeves, nor Sheep than what feed and graze
in the Province of Carolina. Nor has any part on the Main of America greater
variety of Fish, and Fowl (besides Fruits, Plants, Roots, and Druggs) so that
nothing is wanting to complete it happy. But lest peradventure this Relation
seem tedious to any, as its possible it may to some, more especially to
praevaricating Judgments (envious in Opinion) that would even subvert if
possible the Fundamentals themselves, and asperse the Country, by insinuating
their Malice into the Mouths of Opposers; which would inevitably render the
Colonies there but mean, and contemptible; and the truth of my Relation that
also would they bring into suspicion, whereby the Reader might suspect the
whole: for that end I thought requisite to remonstrate the particulars as above
expressed, to avoid all subtle Tricks, and Evasions of such as might otherwise
insence the plane; and ignorant Countryman, by telling him, That to relinquish
his Native Climate, would expose him to more Misery abroad, than Poverty and
Penury would have made him Comfortless at home.

And now I proceed to tell you, that the most useful people adapted and fitted
to carry on the Settlement, are Mechanics, and Artificers of all sorts; as
Gunsmiths, Locksmiths, Blacksmiths, Whitesmiths, Farriers, Sadlers, Sailers,
Tanners, Felmongers, Glovers, Shoemakers, Tailors, Nailors, Joyners, Coopers,
Carpenters, Sawyers (but no Lawyers) Brickmakers, Bricklayers, Potters,
Hempdressers, Husbandmen; and all such as are skilful in Cattle, and
Agriculture: besides Florests, Simplers, Druggists, Distillers, Bever, Castor,
and Feltmakers. Of another rank are Vineroons; Gardners, Silkmakers, Throsters,
Darymaids, Weavers, Spinsters, Knitters, Sempsters, good Houswives, etc. These
are the People that may enrich themselves, and build up Estates in a short
time, whereby to make their Lives, and Posterity happy; and by God's
Permission, for ought I know; live long enough to enjoy them.

For the Lords Proprietors (of whose Laws and Government I Will only touch upon)
have thought it so much their own Interest, and Preservation to make the people
of Carolina as easy as possible can be consistant with any Government; and
have parted with so much of their Rites, and Powers (which his Majesty by his
Patent Royal has conferred upon them) that should it so happen they could
forget their own Interest; yet is it out of their Power (meanning the
Proprietors) to do the meanest Setler any wrong. For the principal Power is
lodged in an Assembly; and this Assembly is called the Grand Council, and
Parliament; in which the Power of the Proprietor is so cautiously balanced by
the Nobility, and Commons elected into the same (by themselves) that it would
be more than difficult even in the executive part of the Government for the
People thereby to receive any Detriment.

Nor is there any Court of Justice in Carolina but what has its proper Judges
by themselves elected, and sitting there to dispense them Justice; in which
every state and condition of the people finds redress. So that other Nations
may seem to envy such Blessings, as not only to be tried by their Peers, in
point of Fact; but also in point of Law: though not entirely, yet in a
sufficient number to engage the Court to a Tendemess of the state, and
condition so tried. And where as formerly by the Concessions, the major part of
the Jury had the proper right of bringing in their Verdict; its now agreed
upon, that all Juries chosen shall be grounded upon the same Basis with our
English Laws; and are the same vertually in point of Justice, save only the
Juries in England are empannell'd by the County Sheriff, his Deputy, or the
Clerk of the Court: but those in Carolina are chosen by Lot out of the
Freholders, which beyond dispute is the most equal, and impartial way that wise
men could have thought of.

All these, and other Rites (which are many more) guarded by the primitive
unalterable Constitutions of the Country, to which every new Setler subscribes
at his first arrival, if provided he approve thereof; and which by direction of
one of the Fundamentals is publicly, and solemnly to be read at the opening of
every Parliament; to fix them steadfastly in the Hearts, and Minds of all the
Members, that they may do nothing in dimunition; nor contrive any Alteration of
those Fundamentals, which before they approved of: to which purpose they are
also numbered, that at least there may be none added, nor any embezled.

So that the Parliament consisting of the Proprietors; and Nobility; who are
either Landgraves, or Casica's, made by collation of a certain number of
privilidg'd Lands under Grant from the Lords Proprietors; having an Heriditary
Right of Cession in Parliament, as also the Representatives of the Commons
elected have, that are sent to sit in Parliament. These therefore have it fully
and amply in their own Breasts (or any one state thereof) to hinder and prevent
any thing new, or unsafe, which shall be offered to be put upon them.

And the Parliament thus qualified, and constituted out of the precedent
Dignities, and Commons aforesaid; have Power to enervate bad Practices, and
encouridge good Laws; to study and contemplate the Promotion and growth of the
Manufacture of the Country; to reform Ill manners, to stifle Vice, and suppress
the Barbarity of ill Customs: to prohibit practice of Pleading for Reward; that
neither directly, nor indirectly any Council shall be retained by Fee, nor
flattered by the hope of a Gratuity; lest peradventure Law Suits be made
chargeable, and vexatious; or a false Gloss imposed upon the Text, whereby to
pervert a good Cause by privious and foreign Interpretation; or insinuate a bad
one, by prepostrous and delatory Interrogations.

These are some of the sovereign Privilidges of Carolina, whose Grandees to
illustrate, I shall only superscribe the Lords Proprietors first; then the
successive Dignities, those of the Land-Graves; after them the Casica's, or
Baronies; which with the praecedent Dignities are the Hereditary Nobility of
Carolina, and are of the Council, and Parliaments; and are Delegates,
Majestrates, and public Ministers of State.

These are the peculiar Dignities that stand in the prospect of CAROLINA, whose
Estates are all entailed upon Hiers Male; but for want of such, upon Hiers
Female; and when to consider they are destitute of both; then in such case its
established upon Heirs general. But presupposing there be no general Hier, then
such Estate devolves to the Lords Proprietors; and the reason is, because these
Dignities from the greater to the lesser are in a Capacity to be made
Proprietors themselves: for when a Lord Proprietor dies without Issue, or as it
may happen without a general Hier; then in such case out of the inferior
Dignities, a Lord Proprietor (by the Fundamental Constitutions) is always
elected.

But Fortune (some will object) made not all men of one pitch' nor has she
rank't every man in one station; nor prescribes she to every man a Co-equality
in degree answerable to the praecedent Qualifications; what then, because we
are not all Lords, must we therefore be denied the benefit of the Concessions.
No surely, any man may better inform himself, if when to consult the KINGS
Royal Grant to the Lords Proprietors; which explains to every Subject an
inherent Propriety, and Birthright entailed upon him; to which the Fundamental
Constitutions agree: and where its well enough explained without Fraud, and
Ambiguity; that the Electors, and Setlers in Carolina, are by virtue of his
Majesty's Royal Grant made capable according to the Tenor, and Soccage of
East-Greenwich in Kent; which enables them thereby to give, bequeath, alien,
entitle, or dispose of all, or any part of Lands, Goods, Chattels, and
Heriditaments; when, and where, and to whom they please.

Another Branch of the Government is, that a general Liberty for people of
tender Conscience be always tolerated without exception, or limitation. And
the rather to strengthen the nerve of this Toleration, the Lords Proprietors
have confirmed it in their Fundamentals: and where further Provision is also
made, That no man Compel another to his Worship: nor gives it encouragement
that any man double his own Faith whereby to digest the Formalities of a
foreign Profession.

Where note, all Civil and Religious Rites are granted without prohibition to
all People, Nations, and Languages whatever professing Piety, Virtue, and the
Christian Religion; to own One God (or Supreme Being) the Maker of Heaven, and
Earth; and that Jesus Christ, the ever-living Son of God, is the divine Savior
of Mankind, and the World. So that as the Fundamentals have cautiously provided
for a Pious, and Christian Profession; they have also made provision that no
Professor give another Interruption; so that they have balanced their Clemency
as equally as they could, whereby to dispense to all alike.

And where the Form (out of an implicit Faith) it zealously adorated,
presupposing it Life; whereby the Venerator consolates himself by the
Contemplation of so dark a Vision; yet so great is the Charity, and Law of the
Concessions in such case, that the Peaceable Professor of this different
Persuasion, may use it as an Argument to defend his Confession; so that when to
satisfy himself with his own Approbation, it matters not though probably
indispencible with another man's Opinion.

And to these Privilidges of a pious Profession, the Concessions themselves are
Arguments, and Inducements strong enough to encourage the modest, and sober
Professor, whose Faith if it stand firm on the Basis of Scripture; or if framed
by the Principles of moral Precepts; the good presidents of such as practice
Self-denial; the Oracles and Inspiration of the holy men of God; as the
Apostles, the Patriarchs, and the Prophets, whose sublime Speculation
surmounted the glittering Orbs, to the beautiful seraphick society of Angels,
where the Divinest dwells; who also dwells in the Hearts of Believers, to
dismember and break down the Monarchy of Sin: which glorious Victory gives us
Triumph over Death, and leads Captivity captive. These are sacred Privilidges,
and the Warfare of the Saints; and ought to be the Contest of every pious
Professor, who has freedom to profess as granted by the Concessions; but
withal, that he interrupt not another at the time of Devotion, as he himself
would not be interrupted; which if any does, he lies liable to Reproof, and the
Penalties already laid down in the Concessions.

And this I admonish by way of Advice; that whosoever premeditates
transportation to Carolina: that he or she if in the City (or the Suburbs)
address him or her self to the Carolina Coffe-house, in Birchin-lane, London;
there they may be entertained, or advised by some worthy and intelligeable
Gentlemen, that will point out to them the illustrous Path to this salubrious
Settlement: where the Rivers, and Rivulets, together with pleasant Pastures,
and shady Savana's, most generously refresh the Setlers. And besides the
comfortable issues of Health, they may also expect from thence Prolongation of
Life (as by observation upon the Native) because when to consider the florid
temperament of this southern latitude, destinated to sanity, by reason of an
equality of Heart, and Cold so contempered together; that neither predominates.

And what if it be objected I have published a Description of a Country whereof
hitherto I have only inspected by Relation, without occular Proof. Yet so great
is my Credit, and Reputation for those worthy Gentlemen that ushred it to me,
as my faith confirms me that Jerusalem's in Palestine. Where note, I recommend
this Relation as the lively Emblem (and Character) as well as I can draw it of
the now inhabited, and flourishing Carolina, the most hopeful Settlment the
King of England has in America: which short Prospect may somewhat lessen the
Glory of so famous a Country, that may write it self inferior to none on the
Continent; if when to consider her minority, and the small contingent Charge
wherewith to lay a Foundation.

Advice to Carolina.
Gentlemen;
THE fundamental Being, and Well-being of all good and wholesome Government,
depends merely upon the Providence of God; to which when subjoyned the Piety of
the Magistrate, it admits of a double Duty; to God first, then to the
Magistrate, under whose Government we propound, and expect peaceably to live,
and enjoy the Blessing of Liberty; which Liberty consists in the propriety of
what God in his Wisdom intails upon Posterity, and intitles the inherent
Birthright of every man born into the World; which hereafter I shall endeavor
to explain, and the rather because none amongst you shall pretend to that
implicit Plea of Ignorance.

Give me leave therefore to advice you to consider the Footsteps of Age, that
invades our prestine flourishing Youth, whereby we cannot with vigor (and
agillity of Body) perform that in act, and power; which in Youth we
accomplished almost as soon as projected. But those Defects are supplied by
sober, and moderate advice of Council; and the Scriptures tell us, that in the
multitude of Counsel there is safety; yet not that I think my self worthy to
advice you, though peradventure the Characters of Age have superscribed a
legible date; and time if I mistake not has superanuated this mortal Fabric,
whereby what I intended to have told you by word of Mouth, constrains me now to
commit that to paper; lest retention of the one part, deprive you the
opportunity of the other.

Inasmuch therefore as every single Subject is, or ought to be a Ruler, or
Governor over his own Domestics; more properly such is he that stands in a
public Capacity; and such is the Majestrate, who by the Law of Religion, and
Justice is bound in principles of Honor, and Conscience to sacrifice his
Estate, and if need require his Life too, for the good of his Country: for that
end, we ought to consider those proper and adequate mediums that entitle us to
these supereminent Privilidges, which as English men we claim: and then to
ruminate and contemplate such pious Means, and Endeavors by the Law of Virtue,
and Christianity, as are most requisite, whereby to accomplish them. On the
other hand, omitting to challenge them, they by little and little will dwindle
away, so in process of time seem less; and at last become totally obliterated,
that the future Generations will not know them to be.

No man therefore in my Opinion is born only to gratify himself, but is made
in one capacity or other instrumental to serve the Country wherein he inhabits.
The Piety whereof if seriously to consider, as a gnomen directs the Patient to
its proper Agent. And since Ends, and Beginnings have a like fate, and period.
The appropriated ends therefore and the beginings of our Blessings spring
properly and spontaneously from pious indications; which assigns it a Duty to
our divine Creator. Then to express our Loyalty without Hypocrisy to our
Sovereign Lord the KING, as also our Fidelity to the Lords Proprietors; when
because to intail upon us (and Posterity) the flourishing Fruits of an
Inheritance in Carolina; which we may as naturally and properly expect, as the
ends of the Creation predestinates Life the glorious Prospect, and surveigh of
the Creature.

And Gentlemen, since so great and sacred are the Ends of Government, and the
Privileges of Parliaments as sacred, wherein every Member, and Delegate
thereof is permitted to speak, and freely to speak without hesitancy what he in
himself shall hononrably think in reference to the good, and well fare of his
Country whereof he himself is a Member. I exhort you therefore as English men
to challenge to your selves this Native Privilidge, and the rather because when
to consider your loyal Qualifications to such inherent Rites, which all English
men in Carolina naturally have, and are freely born there to; or if otherwise,
they arive from foreign Ports, and not those of Great Britain, yet they
equally stand in the prospect of this Blessing, though modestly to think
themselves in the remotest capacity.

And this royal Privilidge naturally springs from a Prerogative Grant of our
gracious Prince, as in the Patent; and not only to the English-born in England,
but such others also as fall in with the Concessions of Carolina. For you are
to consider that in his Majesty's Charter or Royal Grant to the Lords
Proprietors, the King there makes no distinction betwixt those his native
Subjects born in England; and those others implanted and born in America. And
as there can be no inter Regnum in Kingship, so the Lords Proprietors have
provided in the Fundamentals, and upon serious consideration the Council and
Parliament have resolved, That no man be disinherited his Birthright, except
his Offense exceed the limit of a Pardon. And because this Privilidge shines
from the Prince himself, the more it confirms and ^^rengthens the Obligation;
except to disloyal, and superlative ingrates and others, whose perfidy detects
their fidelity, and would nourish themselves with Infamy; were not such
deprived the natural encouridgment of the Country.

Now peradventure some such Antichristian Runagado's of Religion and Loyalty,
tacitly recide concealed amongst you; meaning Pretenders to Sanctity who
shelter, and hide themselves under the Government, till opportunity presents to
display their more infamous Lives. Such Loyalty hangs merely on the Slit of a
Pen, and the best of their Religion stands on the Tip of their Tongues. These
men therefore when discovered, its not amiss I think that all such Heretics of
the Weal Public be expunged all virtuous Society. So that if when
discountenanced by the Majestrate, and the well-meaning Planter; their
Hypocrisy will make but a slender progress, and get as small growth in the
Colonys of Carolina, as the boasting Roman thought to gain Honor from the
Senators of Rome, when to magnify his own illustrous Extraction; and decry
Cicero's, because to spring from the shrubs of a Cottage. Now its true, every
thing must have a beginning; and Carolina though but now in the blossom, yet she
may live to bring forth more Cicero's, than boasting Thraso's; and in time grow
up to such complete maturity, that her Prosperity will be emulated by those on
the Continent.

Where note Gentlemen, you are to consider, that as the King's Royal Grant gave
Birth to Carolina; so it gives Power to the Lords Proprietors to make what
suitable provision they themselves think fit whereby to conduct, and improve the
Province. Which rightly to interpret; the Lords Proprietors have already given
demonstration of the^^ good endeavors in settling the Colonys there; which
appropriates a double obligation, if the people wise enough to improve it; and
I hope they will, otherwise they forfeit their Gratitude to their Prince; and
their Reputation if any to the generous intention of the Lords Proprietors.

And Gentlemen, as the Lords Proprietors have unanimously corresponded to
settle this Province of Carolina; so by the Constitutions they do promise the
Planters to establish such good, and wholesome Laws amongst them; whereby the
Government, as the People, may be blessed. Which if answered by the Careful
Industry of the Planter; the issue may alike prove profitable: and the rather
if they propose to proceed upon Wines, Oils, Smyrna Cotton, Rice, and Indego;
as already begun upon. And as Silk, Almonds, Dates, Currants, Rasins, Sena,
Jessemy, and Rubarb are intended. But the Province naturally produces the China
Root, Sassafras, Sassaperilla, Snakeweed, and that famous Vegetable called
Calubria (in whose seedy Pod the Coochenial Fly germinates) is already
transported, and thrives beyond Report. Besides which, there are many and
various other profitable Plants, Druggs, and Roots designed the ensuing
progress of some of the principal Projectors; which in due time may fall in
with the reason of the people in general, to make them more Rich, and Happy;
than otherwise their present Prospect directs to: which to inspect, its
necessary they consult the natural propensity of the Soil, whereby to enable
the Planter, if solicitous after the Profits.

But Gentlemen, whereas one material circumstance was omitted in the Present
State of Carolina; I thought requisite and necessary to insert it in the Advice;
and that is, whereas the present Lords Proprietors of Corolina out of a
singular tenderness to encourage the people coming on, as also the Planter
already settled there, have ratified, and confirmed fifty Acres of Land to be
estated for ever upon every individual Setler, or Setlers; he or they paying
only one penny an Acre as a Quit Rent to the Lords Proprietors after two years
time, So out of a serious and judicial consideration, and respect to the
Setler, and others intending to settle there; the said Lords Proprietors have
agreed among themselves, that whosoever sets dowm as a setler in Carolina may
contract with them here to become purchasers, at the rate of five Pounds
Sterling for one hundred Acres; and so to take up as much as they please, and
stand acquitted forever of any Quit Rent, by the bare acknowledgment only of a
Pepper Corn ( or one Grane of Indian Corn) once a year, if when thereto
required.

So that Gentlemen, if you stand obleiged in more than a single capacity, in a
double acknowledgement you ought to answer it; and the Expedient will hardly
prove grevious; for if when to consider that the Lords Proprietors acquire only
the reading the Fundamental Constitutions at the general Cession, or opening of
every Parliament; the reason you are to consider is, That the Laws being read,
and made public; the Interpretation thereof will appear the more easy. And
often to imprint them in the minds of the people, their frequent and constant
use will insinuate into the Ignorant. Otherwise, how can he be said to sin,
that never transgrest: nor can that People be manifest Transgressors, where
there is no known Law to offend.

The Fundamental Constitutions therefore being to be read at the opening of
every Parliament, its my Advice Gentlemen that you observe this Decorum, That
his Majesty's Royal Grant be also praecedently read before the Constitutions;
and the rather, because to furnish every Majestrate, and other inferior
Officer with Arguments to enervate the Prejudicate (if any) and such Emulators
of Ve^oue as study to arrest, and would if possible subvert the Fundamentals
themselves. Moreover, it will strengthen the Nerve of Unity, and Friendship of
such as labor to promote the Prosperity of Carolina; and suppress the
Endeavors of malicious Agents, that would stifle if possible the Welfair of
the Settlement. So that as the tenor of this Formality nothing in it self
degenerates from Loyalty; the Clemency, and Benignity of your Prince were a Sin
to suspect: consequently an Evil unpardonable to dought the Honorable
Intention of the Lords Proprietors.

The residue Gentlemen are only some indigested Particulars that point to the
Growth, Convenience, and Manufacture of the Country; the Regularity of Living,
and Reformation of Life: the Medium for Manners, and the good and happy issues
of Prosperity to the Settlement, and its long Duration. The Incorporating of
Towns, and enabling them with such sovereign and whosome Laws, and Privilidges
as may neither hurt the Planter, nor terrify the Country man; nor raise
ambitious hopes in Artizan or Cirizen to swell Corporations with unbounded
Charters, that may bring an inconeniency upon the bordering Colonies.

The introducing of Studds (from a good strain of Horses) are of absolute
Necessity; where note, every man of Abibility ought to endeavor it. And such
also as cultivate, and labor the Ground for increase of English Grain, deserve
a signal Encouragment. The building of Ships, and other Vessels for
Transportation: and erecting Bridges for Horses, Carts, and Carridges; are also
worthy your serious consideration. So to lay out large, and regular High Ways,
and to raise formidable, and durable Fortifications; with many other requisite
Circumstances, and Conveniences merit a respect. But these will fall in course;
and are more properly transmitted to the mature Gravity, and deliberate
Consideration both of Council, and Parliament; so draw on to a Conclusion.

But I hope Gentlemen, you will excuse my Brevity (and my Errors too, when you
meet them) its true, I present you but with a short prospect of so glorious a
Country, that beyond dispute is inferior to none on the Continent. And truly
such were my Cautions, as cautiously kept me close to the truth of discovery;
which has been handed to me by several good, and worthy Gentlemen; but
principally from a Person of Honor, and Quality (a Setler amongst them) whose
generous nature, and freedom to discourse the Country (and furnish me with all
or most of his Discoveries) deserves a Recompense beyond my Acknowledgements:
which with Gratitude I would readily publish to the World, but his Commands
obleidge me tacitly to conceal him.

Now Gentlemen, I shall leave you but one Caution more, (the rest I Will huddle
in silence) and that is, to be cautious of your selves, whereby to think no
dishonorable Thought; for I reckon it a Maxim in Philosophy, and I Am sure its
within the Rules of Christianity: That every man study the Principles of
Honesty. For to be dishonest within our selves, is to doubt the Faith of
others; so at last our Scruples redounding too often upon us, honesty it self
will be brought into suspicion; and the Prudence and Justice of men in
Government, but Toys, and Trifles of the times to play with. This contagion let
every man labor to suppress, because its a Child of Ingratitude; and
Ingratitude's a Sin of that nature, that Heaven can hardly pardon. Wherefore
Carolina beware of Ingratitude, and think no thought dishonorable; nor doubt
the Faith of those that streneously labor to do you good. Reverence your
Creator with a holy Fear; and with a natural Love be charitable to your
Country: with an awful respect give your Services to the Proprietors; and with
a Loyal Duty your Obedience to your Sovereign, whom (...) preserve to enlarge
his Empire, and strengthen the hands of the present Undertakers.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere is one Mr. Nathan Sumers Engineer for Carolina, that has undertaken [by
a new Engine of his own] with the Lords Proprietors, and others, to unburden,
and clear the Ground to fit it for Cultivation at 12 d. a Tree, if not
exceeding 6. foot diameter; and for 6 d. a Tree from one foot to more than 5
inches diameter. And that the said Proprieters have contracted with the said
Sumers, to secure to him and his Hiers the sole use, and benefit of the said
Invention for 14 years, as certify'd.

Omissions and Errata's.
Page 7 line 3 for salubrous read salubrious. p 13 l 10 f Cockawases r
Cockarouses. l. 17 f uncultired r uncultivated. p 22 l 7 r Powers as to decline
their Negative Voice. l 26. Concessiors, but those Concessions were falsely
printed.


