A LETTER TO A GENTLEMAN CONCERNING Alkali and Acid. Being an ANSWER to a late
Piece, Entitled, A Letter to a Physician concerning ACID and ALKALI.

To which is added A Specimen of a new Hypothesis, for the sake of the Lovers
of Medicine.

By THOMAS EMES, Author of the Dialogue between Alkali and Acid.

(...)
(...).
Bonis nocet (...) malis.
LONDON* Printed for Tho. Speed, over ^^^inst Jonath^^'s Coffee-House in
Exchange-Ally in Cornhill, Price 6 d.

At which Place the Dialogue is told, 8vo. Price 1 s.

A LETTER TO A GENTLEMAN CONCERNING ALKALI and ACID.
SIR,
WE have a small Champion lately come forth for the Acid Cause; he conceals his
Name, but he says he is a Gentleman, hoping, I suppose, to find the better
Quarter: But he professes his Aversion to such an Undertaking, but that he is
at length, and at last overcome by Zeal for the Service of his Acid Physician.
And he says that at his first reading my Dialogue, he discovered so much
unbecoming Language, that had not Requests, as forcible as Commands, changed
his Resolution, he had never been condemned to a second reading, much less to
the Task of writing Remarks upon it.

Well, the Gentleman is to be excused, because he did it unwillingly; and I
readily confess, there is indeed much unbecoming Language even within in the
first eighteen Pages; and truly had it not been too nauseous, the Reader might
have had a great deal more on it; but what he has, was but just enough to show a
Specimen of the immodest Self-applause, shameful Contempt, and abuse of all
Physicians, wherewith the Pretender to a new Acid Hypothesis abounds, and what
sort of Answer such Language deserves. At which the Gentleman was so uneasy,
that he leaped over two Pages more where there is none; but the ground of Mr.
Acid's Hypothesis examined.

He tells us, page 4. That undecent personal Reflections are no marks of
Probity and Virtue, but are below the cognizance of a generous Mind; and tells
us in Greek too, that it is Blasphemy.

I answer, if it be Blasphemy to reflect upon the Follies and Confidence of a
raw Empirick, boasting himself the only Doctor in the World; I think it is but
just to be such a Blasphemer. And since there is nothing so foolishly said by
such men, but catches Patients nowadays, when so few understand Nature or
good Sense, and they are so often caught to the damage of their Lives and
Healths; I think it is not only the part of a good and generous Mind, and a
Virtue, but a Duty to expose them, and that sometimes in the way Solomon
advises, Pro. 26. 5. But I think no body has exposed Mr. Colebatch so much as
he has exposed himself, to the thinking part of those that read him.

The Gent. is amazed, he says, to see the ingenious Author of the Hypothesis of
Acids treated with the utmost Contempt and Scorn. But I am as much amazed to
see any Gentleman admire the Wit in his Writings, or Physician take him for the
Author of any thing but the abuse of Acids; and that his Friend should say,
that not one Author has examined his Hypothesis by Reason and Experience,
(...)th read my Dialogue more than once, and confesses it becomes Men of
Letters, Gentlemen and Philosophers, (as Physicians are) to weigh and consider
the force of every Man's reasoning. I think it will be confessed by those that
are Judges, I have weighed Mr. Colebatch's Reasoning, and found it very light;
and I am now resolved to put that of the Gentleman, his Champion, also into the
Scale, and see how much it comes to. I am glad the Gent. acknowledges
Physicians to be Gentlemen and Philosophers; but I begin to doubt whether he be
a Philosopher and a Physician; because he altogether blames Jesting, when it is
well known to such Men, that some Diseases are cured thereby, and that Satyr is
often prescribed against some Maladies endangering the Life and Health of Men,
that have their root in the Mind; such as Pride, Ignorance, Confidence,
Covetousness, etc. in a Practioner, which the Dialogue was composed as a
Medicine to cure Mr. Acid of, if not incurable.

The Gent. says farther, that Poetry is a very pretty thing; but agrees with
his Doctor, that the Character of a Satyrist and a Physician are vastly
different. I am of the same Mind; but I find the Gent. does not love a Satyr,
the Panegyric to the unknown Doctor Colebatch would relish well enough with
him; but he is not a thorough Proselyte to Acids yet; for a Sarcastical Couplet
is too sharp for his Stomach, and he thinks it should not be pressed against
its will to affront a Professor of Physic. And I think it was not, in the case
he means, but came only against a Professor and Abuser of Acids. But Sarcasms
I Will maintain are Acids, or they are not Sarcasms; and Acid with Acid methinks
should well agree: But perhaps these are Acids out of his Practice. But I Will
say one thing more for them, they need not be pressed, but are apt enough to
come Volunteers, and muster freely upon any proper Occasion.

But the Gentlemen that value themselves upon their Wit, he esteems the more
genteel Mountebanks. It Is well they are the more genteel sort; and I should
choose, I confess, if we must all be Mountebanks, to be of that number. He
allows they show more Wit and fine Language, in their sarcastical Bills
distributed by the Booksellers, than what breaks forth from beneath merry
Andrew' s Charcoal Whiskers, or wraps up John Saffold's Pills and Powder; but
the Nature, Design, and Effect of the Farce is the same. He Is a Conjurer! he
can tell they all aim at Money with common success, and so does Mr. Colebatch.
But he that is bubbled on it, I think, had as good be bubbled by a witty Conceit
as a foolish one; and if he has nothing else, have some Wit for his Money.

But the Gent, says, he will never trust his Life in the hands of a Physician,
who takes so much pains to convince the World he is a rare Poet. I confess a
Man may be a rare Poet and not a Physician, and a Physician and not a Poet: But
I think a Man that has Wit enough to be a Poet, may have enough to be a
Physician, if he apply himself to that Study: But he that has not enough, I
think is never the rather to be trusted with ones Life, till by a Demonstration
he proves, that though a correct Canto will not cure a Disease, as the Gent.
says, yet A dull Assertion that he can do more,
Than all the Doctors that have gone before,
will do the business. But for my part, I Will never trust my Life in a Man's
hands that has nothing sharp but Medicines.

But what has Poetry to do with the pretended new Hypothesis of Acids, or the
Dialogue between Alkali and Acid? What unlucky Wag has thrown a Distich at Mr.
Colebatch, and hit a Gentleman also? And why must I answer for it?

But the Gent. comes to talk of Experiments, page 5. He follows Mr. Acid's
method, first he plays a little, and then he comes to work. And he says, I have
not given one Experiment, or laid down the process of any one Medicine I would
recommend to the World for the good of Mankind, or that might overthrow the
Hypothesis of Acids. I answer, as for Experiments to overthrow the Hypothesis
of Acids, I leave it to the Judgment of the intelligent Reader, whether there
are not enough to do it in my Dialogue; though some of them I find the
Hypothetick knows not how to make, which is a shame, whilst he professes
himself a Philosopher and a Chemist: But he may have more before we have done.
But as for commending my Medicines or self to the World, in the manner some do,
I count it but Quacking, and like it not, nor have any necessity so to do.

The People are fond of Recipe's, and the Doctor knows it is not against his
Interest to let them have some, his Books will sell the better; and if he does
not tell them they are to be had at reasonable rates of the Author, and
prescribe the making them a more chargeable way than he himself makes them, the
indiscreet administration some Dablers make of them, does but breed business
for the Doctor; but the rich and cautious will have Advice, and who so sit to
advise with, as that honest Gentleman who is so kind as to let them know with
what Instruments he does their business. I do not esteem it impolitick in
Physicians to publish some Medicines to the World, or to permit Horse-Doctors,
or license other ignorant Fellows, since they so frequently make work for one
another. And I believe Mr Colebatch did not offer his unreasonable method of
pr^^^ (...) point of Honor, that the Learned might (...) observe it, with any
hopes they would do so, but that he might get Money (of the ignorant,) which he
has professed is the only thing he cares for. Neither do I think the Learned
will spend their time in his trivial Books; nor should I, had not Philanthropy,
and my Duty to Mankind (not commanding Requests) engaged me to oppose what I
saw was likely to be dangerous to those who should have so little Judgment as
to admire it.

The Gent. says, page 5. He has confirmed his Arguments for Mr. Colebatch' s
Doctrine with variety of Experiments, but he reserves a far greater number for
his Service, if I, or any for me, think fit to answer. It Is well he has a
Reserve, for his variety is small, and not much to his purpose, as we shall see
by and by. But let us have them that are ready, and I Will promise him I Will never
request any Gentleman to answer for me, being old enough to speak for my self.

Well, but the Gent. comes first, page 6. to consider my Arguments, whereby, he
says, I endeavor to defend Alkali as not being the Cause of Diseases, for the
other Causes that are not Alkalies may be assigned. But I must tell the Gent.
there is no such Argument in my Dialogue; and had there been such, I should
have been ashamed of it, as he ought to be of saying so. It would be but a poor
Argument, that Alkali cannot be the cause of Diseases, because other Causes may
be assigned: But that Alkali cannot be the cause of all Diseases, when other
Causes must be assigned, is that which I think I have demonstrated.

The Gent. says, my Definition of the (...), though granted, no way militates
against the Hypothesis of Acids. For when we speak of the Cause of a Disease,
which Physicians are said to discover and remove, we always suppose the
proximate Cause, which the (...) can never be. But the Gent. almost persuades
me here that he is more like to be a Gentleman than a Physician, because he
says, we always suppose the proximate Cause; that is, we Gentlemen, when as
Physicians know well that the Proximate Cause is not the only Cause to be
discovered and removed: Of which I need not give many instances. The various
Aporrhea of the Body, of themselves innoxious by undue retention, are often
altered and become hostile, which ill qualities are the Proximate Causes of
diverse Diseases; the alterations of which ill Qualities are far from being the
only things to be done, nor is it enough for a Physician to endeavor even the
Ejection of the peccant Matter, but the faults of the Instruments of Secretion
are to be amended, as the prime Causes of the Diseases; so that if Alkali it
self unduly retained or abounding, were supposed the Proximate Cause of some
Disease, yet there would be the Cause of that Retention or Abounding, as the
chief Cause to be known and taken away by the Physician. But I fancy the Gent.
if not a Physician, is so much a Friend to the Practice, he would willingly
have the proximate Causes only meddled with; have the Pump plied, rather than
the Leak stopped, lest the Crew should want Employment. The Gent. lets the (...)
rest here, so that if we will see what he has farther to say that it cannot be
the Proximate Cause of a Disease, and so dispatch the Subject all together, we
must go to the 10th. page, where he falls on him again for contending to have a
share with Alkali in the Cause of Diseases. He says, I should have told them
what these exorbitant Desires of the Will of Man were, whether Desire of Money,
Women, Revenge, or popular Applause: If I mean these, Tyburn gives proofs that
by them the Blood comes to be retarded, as well as the subtle Liquors
disordered. And I am of the opinion, that if the Desire of these would produce
or retain such malign Particles, as he believes Alkalies to be, Mr. Acid had
been mortally sick of them e're now* and if simple Man-slaying were Death by
the Law, some Acid Practitioners might e're now have been unable to secret
their own mortal Alkali, by reason of the astringency of their Collars,
notwithstanding the sourness of the Crab-tree.

But the Gent. says, page 11. he will not affirm the production of Alkali by
the Operation of the Mind; but a disappointment of the Mind he knows will of a
sudden cause a Relaxation of the whole Systema Nervosum, whereby Perspiration
and all Secretions are obstructed, etc. which often happens to Women: And by
such Relaxation of the Nerves, and Constipation of the Pores, there are
frequently induced Convulsions, etc. and the Disappointment is but an
antecedent Cause, which Medicine meddles not with; but the Materia ex qua is
Alkali's malign Particles, whose Secretion is thereby prevented, which retained
is sufficient to produce the most dismal Symptoms.

Here the Gent. is profound! But I would know of him, whether a Relaxation of
the whole Systema Nervosum, which he says is caused by a sudden Passion, be not
a Disease. But that a Relaxation of the Nerves should cause such universal
Obstructions, yea Constipations and Convulsions, must be found out by some new
light in Philosophy, that can demonstrate, that loosing is binding and plucking
together: But if he had considered that some sudden Passions of the Mind have
not only let go into the Breeches that which should have been deposited in some
more convenient Receptacle, but produced universal Sweats, he would hardly have
been of that Opinion.

But the Gent. defies me to prove that Nature ever secrets any thing in a
state of Health, that will come under the denomination of an Acid. A Morbid
Body, says he, when the Nerves are relaxed, will sometimes eject the most
benign Juices, etc. as in Scrophulous, Cancerous, Venereal, and Cachectical
Bodies. Here the Gent. has caught himself, as I will prove by Argumentum ad
hominem. Nature secrets common Salt in the Urine plentifully, and Saliva in a
state of Health, both which he has asserted to be Acids ever since he has been
a Proselyte to the Doctrine; therefore Nature in a state of Health, according
to his own Opinion, secrets things that will come under the denomination of
Acids. What Is become of his Defiance? But if he recants, and says these things
are not Acids, then he loses as much another way, and I Will ask him what he
thinks of the Succus Pancreaticus, which is secreted into the same place the
wicked Bile is unloaden. But he stumbles as bad in what follows. The Relaxation
of the Nerves before caused Obstructions, and retained the malign Alkali; but
now it ejects the most benign Juices, and that in Scrophulous, Cancerous,
Venereal, and Cachectical Bodies, whose Recrements, according to the Gentleman,
are the most benign Juices: But I believe these Patients, and such as have been
too familiar with some of them, sometimes have not found them so friendly. But
the Gent. takes no notice that the too rapid motion of the Blood was assigned
as another morbous effect of sudden Passion of the Mind.

Now we must go back to the 7th. Page, where the Gent. gives his Opinion, That
the undue Conformation of the solid parts is no Disease; but to make his
Opinion good, he will suppose that they retain their due Texture, and duly
perform their Offices; he is a cunning Man! he instances the Organs of Hearing,
Seeing, Smelling, and Tasting, being disproportionate as to size and shape, are
not called Diseases. But if he had considered a little, or asked some Physician,
methinks he might have understood, or been informed, that an Eye, for instance,
being unduely formed, too flat or too protuberant, the Humors too much or too
little, too thick or too thin, are the Causes of diverse Defects of Sight, a
great Tongue a hindrance to the Speech, etc. He enquires whether a
cartilaginous Aorta, which, he says, is what Physicians call the Bone of a
Stag's Heart, did ever cause a Distemper? He might as well have asked
Physicians, whether ever they heard the Stag complain of it. But he is ill
informed by those that tell him that a gristly Artery is a bone in the Heart.
And now I am speaking of the great Artery, it brings into my Mind an
Observation I have read, of diverse Persons that died with very odd Symptoms,
whose Disease could not be found out or remedied, 'till by dissecting one,
there was sound a large Worm in the great Artery near the Heart; which I think
was very unlikely to be produced by Alkali or Acid either. This case was very
uncommon, but Worms in some parts of the Body are very frequent, producing bad
Effects, and very unlikely to be caused by Acid or Alkali, both of which given
are very effectual to destroy them. He says, I cannot assert that ever any Man
was diseased, or died, because of narrow Veins or small Lungs. I answer, narrow
Veins must needs contain less Blood, and if disproportionate to the Body,
(otherwise I don't call them narrow) little Blood must needs give little Heat
and Vigor, and small Lungs must needs receive but little Air, and drive on the
Circulation of the Blood more slowly, which enclines to diverse Diseases.

The Gent. says farther, he has often observed in dissecting Bodies who have
had one Kidney obstructed by Stones, Gravels, etc. that the sound Kidney has
been enlarged considerably, and has performed the Office peculiar to both; and
to prove the distempered Kidney caused by an Alkali in such cases, he would
have the Stones, Gravel, etc. examined, which will give the Phoenomena of the
most fixed Alkali. Here the Gent. asserts himself an Anatomist, and to have
often made Dissections, where one of the Kidneys has been useless; whereby he
would seem something besides a Gentleman. It Is no very common thing to find one
Kidney useless: not one Dissection perhaps in a hundred gives such a Case, yet
he has often observed it: I confess I never dissected such a Body but once, and
the other Kidney was no larger than ordinary, but that affected was nothing but
a Bag of Stones, and Matter, of which Stones would have been generated, which
was white and soft like a Pap or thin Mortar, full of Stones and Grit, not
Alkali Salt. But how one Kidney should perform the Office peculiar to both, I
don't understand; or how an Alkali should be the Cause of a Kidney: I rather
guess it peculiar to the Gentleman to talk so. I am sure the examination of the
Stones will no more prove an Alkali the Efficient either of the Kidney, or
Stones in it, than the Pyrotechnical Analysis of Bones will demonstrate that
any one of the Products made them. The Calculus will not give the Phoenomena of
the most sixth Alkalies, as he says, but yielding a volatile Salt and Oil,
leaves a Caput Mort. insipid, having no signs of a fixed saline Body in it. Nor
have we such a thing as a sixth Alkali in Animal or Vegetable Substances, but it
is produced by burning those things that contain the Materials of it, nor are
Alkalies coagulable into Stones, without meeting with larger quantities of
other Matter, which with more reason may be said to be the Cause of the unhappy
Concrete.

Our Gent. tells us, page 8. That a large Liver is no more a Disease than a
large Nose, but of excellent use to secret the Bile, that most pernicious
Excrement of the Body; and the larger the Liver, the more Bile it will secret,
and so much the more we are benefitted. But a large morbid Liver he would have
granted to be caused by a superabundance of Gall. The Gent. is resolved the
Gall shall be an Excrement, and the most pernicious one, forgetting Alkali it
self, while the Gall is but a compound. But methinks, whoever considers the
place into which it is discharged, must be of another Opinion, or believe the
Animal Economy very ill contrived. If this Liquor had no use, but were to be
rejected as a mere and pernicious Excrement, one would have thought it in vain
separated out of the Blood, to be poured into the nutritious Juice before it
enters the lacteal Veins; and the more on it the better would be very strange.
One would have thought a Gentleman's Nose might have been large enough to smell
out some use for the Bile, better than to make a large Liver; and for a large
Liver, better than to make a great deal of Bile.

But page 9. he shows admirable Sense, for he tells us, It is from Particles of
Matter admitted into the Blood, that is both the Cause of the Disease, and of
the thickness or thinness of the Blood; and the reason he gives is, If there
were not a retention of some Particles which ought to be carried off, or
admission of others that should be prevented, the Blood would be neither too
thick nor too thin, but always the same. The thickness and thinness of the
Blood then are both from Particles admitted into it, because it would be
neither too thick nor too thin, were there not a Retention of some that should
be carried off, or an Admission of some that should be prevented. But what is
this to prove Alkali the Cause of all Diseases, any more than to good sense?
But what comes after is profound, that in Physic it may pass for a
Demonstration, that if you find the Blood of one that has the Rheumatism,
Scurvey, or Gout, to abound with Alkali, and be viscous, and when he is cured
by the use of Acids, you find it yield less Alkali, and be florid, and of a
good Consistence, it is to him a Demonstration, the Diseases came not from
Acids but from Alkalies. That is, if the Blood have indeed too much Alkali, and
thence be viscous, and the Person be cured by Acids driving out and diminishing
the Alkali, and reducing the Blood to its due Consistence, the Disease was
caused by Alkali, and cured by Acids. That is, If the Disease was caused by
Alkalies and cured by Acids, it was caused by Alkalies and cured by Acids; a
Wit! But there is an If in the case, which makes the Argument worth nothing: For
if this cannot be found (as I am sure it has not yet by any certain Experiments
the Acidists have given us) we are never the better for the Supposition. But he
says, it will appear that this is matter of Fact to any that will make the
Experiments. And he dares affirm, that I cannot produce one instance of a Person
cured of those Distempers by Alkalies. But I say he should not be so confident
that it will appear so to any Man, unless it had appeared to some one that has
tried it. And as for his daring Affirmation, I dare affirm the contrary.

The Gent. says again, page 12. That I suppose there should be 10 or 20 parts
of Alkali to one of Acid, and from either of these exceeding their Proportion,
the Acid or the Alkali may be said to abound, but while they keep to that
Standard, neither can be supposed the Cause of a Disease. I say still, that
whatever the Proportions are, either may exceed and cause a Disease, the one as
well as the other, if there be any such thing as their exceeding; but when in
due proportion, neither can be thought so to do while duly mixed, but if
separated and lodged apart in some place, though there is no more than there was
in the whole Body, yet the Part where the separated Acid or Alkali is lodged,
may soon suffer their bad Effects. But if there may be supposed 20 parts of
Alkali to one of Acid in a Man in a state of Health, (though I believe there is a
greater difference) yet it may well be thought that the Proportion differs in
diverse Persons, though all in Health, yea in the same Person at diverse times,
though he be well; wherefore his Inferences that these Proportions are
constantly to be found is not natural, nor does he imagine how hard it will
prove to find them, if he should attempt it. But he says, he has been in Health
for some Years, and so his Blood must, on this Supposition, have abounded with
such like Proportions of Acid and Alkali. That is, suppose in a state of Health
a Man's Blood should have 20 parts of Alkali to one of Acid, the Gentleman
being in a state of Health must have his Blood abound with Acid and Alkali; he
abounds in Acid Discourse! and supposes they are in due proportion, yet he says
it follows they abound, yea and both at the same time. He ought, he says,
therefore to have a care that what he eats and drinks should have but one part
of Acid, to 10 or 20 of Alkali, but he has taken other Measures, for he has
drank within this Year one quart of Crab Verjuice in 24 hours, which was
sufficient to impregnate his Blood with six times the quantity. He Is a crabbed
Gentleman, I believe; but I suppose he would not be thought to drink a quart
every Day for this twelve Months, but in some one Day within the time; however
we don't know, but that he may have a very large Liver, from whence he may
abound with the pernicious Alkalous Excrement Gall, and that must meet with his
Verjuice before it get into the Blood, unless it has discovered a way through
the undiscovered passages at the bottom of the Stomach; or his Blood may abound
with Alkali, and so he may bear more sharp Doses than some Folks can. Besides,
if he will believe what Dr. John his Master has taught him, viz. That the
Blood cannot ever abound with Acids, either in a morbid or healthy State; for
the Stomach will reject whatever is too much, but is often defective in
conveying in enough, and that there is never any Acid in the Blood but in a
state of perfect Health. I say, if he believes this as he ought to do, all the
store at the Verjuice Coffee-House will neither hurt him, nor help him. But on
the contrary to what he asserts, I my self, and many others are as healthy as
he, as vegete and sprightly, and yet eat mostly things abounding with Alkalies,
as fresh Meat, Fowls, Fish, Milk, etc. And neither love nor want sour Sauces to
help the Appetite, and find nothing so hurtful as Acids. But the Gentleman I am
persuaded commends Acids rather for the Wealth they bring the Doctor, than the
Health they bring the Patient; for the Doctor seldom takes Physic. But he
says, he could give a multitude of Instances, where Gentlemen have complained
of their Diseases being exasperated by taking Medicines, Phisicians call
Alkalies, but soon wonderfully relieved by Acids, the truth of which a
multitude of Apothecaries in this City will inform you.

The Gentleman I find is a fellow Citizen with his Physician, and needs not
much Epistolary conversation with him. And we cannot but think he would now be
thought some man of great Practice, though he was shy at first, and called
himself a Gentleman, when a multitude of Gentlemen make their complaints to
him. But he would, I suppose, have Gentlemen-Patients, to whom there is little
odds whether he speak sense or no; if he be but confident, and so professes
himself a Gentleman. But those Medicines, he says, they complain of, though
Physicians call them Alkalies, possibly Gentlemen may call Acids, and sometimes
do Cures with them, and relieve the Patients: For I believe, I shall find the
Gentleman but an ill judge before I have done. But we are to be informed of the
truth of the Gentleman's Assertion, by a multitude of Apothecaries. I confess,
I never thought it worth while to enquire, but I never heard any one such story
related by an Apothecary, or his Boy, though I have been in Town ever since the
wonders of Acids have been talked of; but I have been told of diverse mortal
Cures soon done by the Acid method, even in Diseases that seldom use to kill,
and in such Patients as have often been recovered by Alkalies.

The Gent. says, page 13. That I assert there may be Acid enough in the Blood
to cause a Disease, though it will not turn the Syrup of Violets green, but have
not proved it. No truly, I have not proved it, nor ever was such a Fool as to
assert that Acid would turn the Syrup of Violets green. But if he will try,
I Will warrant him he may inject Acid enough into the Blood to cause a Disease,
and kill, and yet he shall not find the Serum of the diseased Blood turn Syrup
of Violets red.

The Gent. says, page 14. That from the 24 page of my Dialogue to the 29,
there is nothing but scurrility, and quotations out of Etmuller, Hossman,
Helmont and Hypocrates, so that the strength of my Arguments depend altogether
upon an ipse dixit. As for what he calls Scurrility, I shall not excuse it, the
recitation of John's panegyrical abuse of the College, and dull praise of his
own admired self, must needs bring some ill Language into the pages; nor did I,
without the advice of the wisest Man, answer a Fool according to his folly,
lest he be wise in his own Eyes. But the Gent. seeing something he did not
like, or care any more to stir in, makes too much have over the 5 pages, or
else he might have seen some notable Quotations out of Colbatch de Assheadis,
viz. That the Blood has never any Acid in it, but in a state of perfect Health.
That all Persons have some degree of Sickness. That overmuch fatness, if it may
be called a Disease, is caused by Acids. Yet that Acids (though never in the
Blood, but in perfect Health) mortify and expel the Luxuriant Alkalous
Particles, make the thick Blood thin, and the thin Blood thick: But that he
that can show how this is done, must be as wise as the wisest Man that ever
was, or shall be; but yet he tells us how Acids do these things, by being
differently specified with other things. Therefore the Gentleman has not done
genteely by me, in saying, there was nothing in the 5 pages but scurrility, and
quotations out of Helmont, Hoffman, Hypocrates, and Etmuller, whose ipse
dixit's I hope are yet as good Arguments with the Physical World, as
Colbatch's, or any small Author's of greater Confidence, and little time, and
Practice. He says also that I have falaciously taught a wrong way of
experimenting, whether Acids will thicken and coagulate the Blood; for he
understands that I made my Experiments on Blood that had stood, when the
grumous part was coagulated, which is a very irrational way. I answer, his
understanding is too short, I did not make a few Experiments on Blood, or a few
ways; I have not only tried Blood when cold, or in a Porringer, but let it run
out of the Vein unto Acid, and other Liquors, and that diluted, and with warm
Water. If the Acid be much it will make a great alteration; if little,
proportionally; but though it be so little as to make no alteration sensible to
the Eye, yet the Acid particles may pin together some of the Globules of the
Blood, so as to make a Figure, and size, that will not pass some small Vessel
or other, and that stop more, and that stagnated Blood may corrupt, and get a
peregrine ferment, and either produce some topical Malady, or excite some
disorderly fermentation in the Blood that presses upon it. But as to the
Gentleman's question, whether Acids diluted and taken inwardly will coagulate
the Blood when its warm, fluid, and perpetually circulating through it is
Channels, and a due commixture made of all its parts with whatever is ingested?
I answer, This Question amounts to this, whether the Blood will be coagulated
by Acids while it retains its due Motion and Consistence; that is, in short,
whether the Blood will be coagulated while it is uncoagulated? A wise Question!

But he tells us, to convince us, that Acids will not coagulate the Blood when
judiciously used, (judiciously, that is I suppose by the prescription of an
Acid, Dr. or else they may.) We may take 4 or 5 drops of Oil of Vitriol, or Sp.
of Niter in 3 or 4 spoonfuls of Water; etc. Such a proportion of Acid is as
much, or more than can be admitted into the Blood at any time, when taken
inwardly. But how does the Gentleman know that no more can be admitted? Why he
says so, and he would have us believe him. Well we will for once; but then say I, I
doubt Acids will do no wonders in casting out the Devil Alkali: For suppose a
Man should have 12 Ounces of Alkali in him (which is a small quantity to what
may well be supposed,) but by some error in Diet, or by some other means he has
13 or 14 Ounces; 4 or 5 drops of Oil of Vitriol, or Sp. of Niter will do very
little toward expelling, or mortifying an Ounce or 2 of Alkali, as any one may
see by mixing such Quantities; nor can the Gentleman ensure that small Cargo of
Acid to arrive safe into the designed port, but ten to one some part of it may
be lost by the way, splitting on some Alkalous Rock in the Stomach, or be
pyrated by the Gall, and so carried another way out of the body. But though there
is great doubt what may become of it if given inwardly, yet it is certain it
may be mixed in what quantity one pleases in a Porringer; but then whether the
Porringer would not borrow a little of it, or lend it some Matter to make
Sacch. Saturni of, I suppose the Gent. never enquired, or whether the Goose
Quill he stirs it with, and the Water does not do more to hinder its
Coagulation, than the Acids did to hinder or promote it. But we come to the
Gentleman's Experiments.

He tells us, the way to make Experiments on Blood is, having opened a Vein,
begin to drop your Acid mixture into the Porringer, and agitate it with a Goose
Quill till the Blood is cold. And by this method, be says, he has with Oil of
Vitriol, and Sp. of Niter, etc. preserved Blood fluid, and also free from
Putrefaction, the last of which, is what neither Volatile, nor sixth Alkalies
will do, as may be seen by the following Experiments.

EXPERIMENT 1.
He mixed with 5 or 6 Ounces of Blood, 6 Drops of {oil} of vitriol diluted in 2
Ounces of Water, and it preserved the Blood fluid, gave it a better color and
consistency than some of the same he mixed nothing with, he kept it in a Viol
18 Days, and it was equally free from any smell, or signs of Putrefaction, as
when it streamed from the Vein.

In Answer to which I say, he is not sure that the 2 Ounces of Water would not
do more toward keeping the Blood fluid, thin, and of a bright color, than the
6 Drops of {oil} of vitriol could do one way or other.

But to do the Gent. all right, and to Answer fairly to his Experiments, I
tried them more nicely than he did: For I took the same Proportion of {oil} of
vitriol and Water that he did, and having made it just blood-warm in the Viol,
I let the Blood of a healthy young Man run from the Vein into it, till I had
that just quantity by weight in proportion to the {oil} of vitriol and Water,
and shaking them well together, and stoping the Viol with a Cork, I set it by:
It soon looked of a muddy black Color, and being opened at 14 Days it began to
stink.

EXPERIMENT 2.
The like proportion of Blood, he says, he mixed with 30 Drops of Oil of
Tartar, in 2 Ounces of Water, it seemed to remain fluid in the Porringer; but
having let it stand close stopped in a Viol 3 or 4 days, the grumous part was
precipitated, and it stunk most intollerably, and the smell was like that
proceeding from a dead Body, whose Lungs or other Vicera have been Vlcerated.

The Gentleman has (...) in this Experiment, (...) Blood was like that of (...)
have been exulce^^^ (...) doubtless, that can dis^^^ (...) parts from that of
all (...) flesh corrup^^ (...) wonder if he don't conclude the exulceration of
the Lungs proceeds from Oil of Tartar!

But I tried this Experiment also, after the same manner I did the former; I
opened it at 4 Days, and it had no more ill smell than when it came from the
Vein; at 8 Days I opened it again, it was likewise free from any ill smell; so
again at 12 Days, at 14, and at 18, and at 23, and at 28 Days, it looked well,
and had no ill smell, when some Blood that had nothing but the proportion of
Water stunk in half the time.

EXPERIMENT 3.
He mixed, he says, with the like quantity of Blood, 20 Drops of Sp. of
vitriol, dulc. in 2 Ounces of Water, and it preserved the Blood fluid, gave it
a better color, hindering its parts from subsiding, nor did it stink in the
least while he kept it, which was 20 or 30 Days.

In this Experiment the 20 drops of Sp. of vitriol dulc. must have at least 10
of Sp. of Wine, which we know will preserve Blood. But I tried this also as I
did the foregoing, and having kept it 14 Days it stunk much, and looked no
better than that in which was nothing but Water. But in his

4 EXPERIMENT
He says he mixed 30 Drops of Sp of vitriol, with 4 Ounces of Blood, and it
preserved it fluid; but after 7 or 8 Days he opened the Viol, and it sent forth
a very offensive Stink.

I also tried this Experiment, as I did the others, and opened the Viol at 8
Days, at 12 Days, at 16 Days, and at 20 Days, and it had no ill smell at all,
lastly at 28 Days was thin, and of better color and consistence than the Blood
in any of the other Experiments, and had no ill smell; but that with the {oil}
of vitriol looked worst of all.

The Gent. adds, If these four Experiments are not enough to convince the Dr.
of the falsehood of my Assertion, he has variety of others at his Service. I
answer, he whose commanding Requests obliged the Gentleman to write, needs no
more to convince him. But I think if they will serve him no better than these
have done, he will do better to keep his service to himself.

The Gent. says, page 17. that whereas I argue a juvantibus and ledentibus, and
say that Acids are seen often to hurt in Hypochondriack, Hysteric and
Scor^utical Cases, and in Ulcers, Issues, etc. which on the contrary are
relieved by Alkalies, but he has (...) my bare word for it. I say my Word is as
good as another; but I could give Observations not only of my own, but of
diverse famous Physicians: But no Authorities, but those of Acid Doctors, are
any thing to the Acid Gentleman; who farther says, should he undertake
effectually to prove that Acids are the only Medicines which cure those
Diseases I have named, it must be by enumerating observations of Cures
performed by them, which would make his Epistle too long. Here the Gentleman
speaks well; for if he should prove that Acids, are the only Medicines that
cure these Diseases, he must not only enumerate all the Acid Doctors Cures,
(who I am well informed often Cure sine recidiva) but he must enumerate all the
Cures that have been done in the World of these Diseases, and ascertain us that
all of them were done by Acids, which would indeed be too long for a Letter to
a Man of business. But I believe he would in his own Practice hardly be able to
give us many instances of Ulcers cured with nothing but Acids, or be willing to
be dressed with nothing else himself. But to save the vast labor, he gives us
a Catalogue of some of the most celebrated Medicines used in curing those
distempers, as steel in its best Preparations, all the Acid Spirits and
Elixirs, Crem. Tart. Tart. Vitriolat. Sal. Succini, etc. and refers to Dr.
Colbatch his Authority. But I must tell the Gentleman, Dr. Colbatch his
Authority, and his reasoning, are no better one than the other. Steel, Acid
Spirits, etc. he says are the most celebrated Medicines in use, in the cure of
the forementioned Diseases. Ergo, those Diseases are cured by nothing else: And
would that be good Logic, yet the Medicines enumerated are not all Acids, or
cure as such, as we may have occasion to show before we have done.

But our Gent. says, page 18. He will not believe me that an Acid can be got from
Blood or Urine, of either healthy, or diseased Persons, because I have not told
him the process. Answer, I thought I had told it plain enough to any one that
understands a little Chemistry: And I can make him believe it very easily, but
that I don't write to teach Gentlemen Chemistry, but to show them the
Ignorance, and groundless Confidence and danger of Acid Quacks. But he
complains farther, that I will not teach him the Legerdemain of mixing Alk. and
Acid, so that no Acid, but an Alka^ous Liquor shall be distilled from it. An
Alk. and Acid; so that neither Alk. nor Acid, shall be obtained, but a Salsum.
Again an Alk. and Acid, so that neither Alk. Acid, nor Salsum shall be
obtained, but an Oleum. I must confess, these tricks are Legerdemain, and till
he understands a little Chemical Legerdemain, he will never comprehend them,
and I beg his excuse for not teaching them, there is something more than
ordinary in them, and they must not be profaned. (...).

But I will demonstrate the truth of any of these Operations, when ever I shall
have a sufficient Reason for so doing.

The Gentleman also says, The natural or artificial Conjunction of an Acid and
an Alkali, which I say will make a Salsum, he calls an Acid, because the Acid
is most predominant, and does operate as such; for Tartar Vitriolat. which I
call a Salsum, dissolved in Water, will work upon Steel as manifestly as Sp. of
vitriol, which is allowed to be an Acid. I answer, he may call it an Ass-head,
if he will; but I say, where the Ass-head is predominant, there is not the true
Salt savor; and Tartar Vitriolat. if it be a Salsum as it should, be has
neither the Ac. nor Al. predominate; nor does its working on Steel prove it to
be an Acid, or to Operate as such; as the Gentleman himself, being better
informed, and forgetting what he had said, asserts, page 43. Iron, says he,
will be dissolved by Acid, Alkali, or Sal nutrum, and instances in Sp. of Vrin,
Sp of vitriol, Crem. Tartar, Tartar Vitriolat. and Com. Salt.

The Gent. asserts farther, page 19. That common Salt, by often dissolving and
crystalizing, will be so deprived of its Bittern, as to act as an Acid by
dissolving Steel, etc. But if you would do it at once, you must put an Ounce of
Sp of vitriol into 2 Quarts of solution of Salt, and then evaporate, etc. and
you will have the Salt much more wholesome, and useful in all Cases; and page
20. having thus proved Sea Salt to be an Acid, he cannot imagine how it should
be the cause of the Scurvy, when there is scarce a better Medicine known for its
Cure than Sp. of vitriol. I answer, the Gentleman having quitted his Opinion,
(as before said) page 43. that the solution of Steel is an Argument of the
dissolvents being an Acid, I hope he will alter his Opinion in other things
where he is mistaken, or at least see he has contradicted himself, as his
Master Acid used to do. But if he adds Sp. of vitriol to his Com. vitriol, I
confess that may work as an Acid in it, and do what the Salt would not do, but
it will not be more wholesome or better in all Cases; for Bittern it self is
good for something, though the Gentleman's Master Colbatch has Damned it.

So if Sp. of Salt were a Medicine, good for the Scurvy, it does not follow
that common Salt too much eaten may not cause it. And as to the Gentleman's
Assertion, that there is scarce a better Medicine known for the Scurvy than Sp.
of Salt, I say he talks as old Wives use to do; whatever they have heard
commended, they will say is the best thing in the World. But let it be good;
yet, if I thought he would not be angry, because I don't tell what, I would
affirm, I know 2 or 3 better Medicines for the Scurvy. But he adds, The Scurvy
being the Symptom of a Putrefaction of the Juices of our Bodies, it will still
look more like a Paradox, that Salt which is the known preservative of dead
Flesh, should be the cause of Putrefaction in that which is alive. I answer, a
Putrefaction in the Juices of living Bodies, except in Sores and Ulcers, has
not I think been shown: But it is certain, that which will preserve dead
Bodies, would kill living ones; as drying* for instance: and I believe even an
Acid Doctor, if he were Sous'd, or hanged up in a Chimney a little while with
Bacon, (though he were very well salted first) would soon be of this Opinion. So
Sp. of Wine, though it preserves Flesh, being drunk in too large a quantity will
make corrupt Work, in the vital economy; yea, I don't question but {oil} of
vitriol Crab Verjuice, or Lemons, and Oranges themselves, may be taken in
quantities large enough to kill a Man, as I believe some Persons have
experimented. Nor is the Gentleman's reasoning more sharp, in saying, Nor will
the want of the spiritual Parts of Flesh, and Fish, appear to be the cause of
any Disease, when Physicians prescribe to venerial Patients, Flesh roasted or
boiled to dryness, and such other food as yields the least of spirituous, and
volatile Alkalous Parts; as Water Gruel, Biscuit, etc. Physicians (whether they
do wisely or no it is no matter) prescribe things that yield the least volatile
alkalous, and spiritual Parts in the Pox, Ergo the want of spirituous and
volatile parts in our Meat, cannot be the cause of any Disease. But I believe
the Gentleman's Physician never prescribed him Flesh boiled to dryness. But he
rejoyns as sharply, that if he did not design brevity, he could bring instances
to prove that Acids are not the cause of the Scurvy, but the only salubrious
Medicines in use against that Distemper. I answer, it is good to be brief; but
I don't know that I ever said Acids are the cause of the Scurvy, and therefore
he says nothing against me. But to prove they are the only salubrious Medicines
in use for this Disease, he must know all the Medicines that are in use, and
their success. But instead of this, he gives us only a Story that another
worthy Gentleman told him, that having been long troubled with the Scurvy, by
reading Doctor Colbatch' s Tracts, he was prevailed upon to eat Lemons stoutly,
by which method he recovered, after the ineffectual use of the Prescripts of
the Physicians of the best repute.

This is what the Gent. has to say, to persuade us that Acids are not the
Cause, but the only Medicines in the Cure of the Scurvy. One Gentleman told
another; but were Gentlemen infallible in connecting Causes, and Effects (as
Physicians are not) yet the single matter of Fact comes to us but upon the word
of an unknown Gentleman, who it is said was so lucky as to meet with Mr.
Colbatch his Tracts, whereby (not to omit the best of the Story) he became such
a prodigious Lemon Eater, as that he soon arrived to the perfection of eating
30 in a Day, this was a perfection the Quaker never attained, it is pity he
conceals his Name, I believe he might make himself as famous as Will. Joy, or
the great Cock-eater.

The Gent. shows, page 21. that he has misapprehended me, for I never said as
he would make me; That we lose more in weight, sitting still in a frosty
Morning, than if we were in the Bagnio, or that the coldness and moisture of
the Air opens the Pores to promote Perspiration. But I say still, there is
certainly more matter carried off by insensible Perspiration, than by sweating,
taking one time with another; and that a fresh air promotes Perspiration, is
not only proved by Seamens eating more, and voiding less other Excrements than
those at Land, but is reasonably concluded from the consideration of the
dissolving Power of the Air, whereby any tenacious Matter in the surface of the
Body stopping the Pores is removed; and perhaps this is a chief Reason that a
clear Air is so beneficial to diverse sick Persons; and though the Air at Sea may
be supposed more moist than the Air at Land, yet the Sea certainly sends up
fewer clammy Effluvia than the Land, that abounds with so many sulphurous
Matters.

Again he says, page 22. That I confess I cannot see how an Acid can be
separated from Sea Salt when in the Blood, and yet I affirm in the next page,
that Acids are found separated in farther recesses than the Stomach and Guts. I
answer, I did not then only confess, but do profess still, I don't see how an
Acid can be distilled from Sea Salt in the Blood, etc. Yet I affirm that Acids
have been found in farther recesses than the Stomach and Guts; as the Gent.
also does, page 33. instancing the Pancreatick Juice. But I did not say from
Sea Salt; for there are diverse other things eaten and drank, that are indeed
Acid, or capable of being made so, without the help of a strong Fire. And I
affirm (as all Physicians that consider will acknowledge) contrary to the
inconsiderate Assertion of the Gentleman, that there are other separations to
be made of our Food, (though not of Sea Salt, which is ejected as it went in)
requisite besides a dissolution of their Texture, or else the various Juices of
our Bodies could not be maintained and repaired.

The Gentleman, page 23. talks of the relation I gave of Mr. Smith's Death, by
tasting an Acid Liquor in a Cistus of a cancerous Breast, more like a Gentleman
than a Physician. For he says, a Man that is poisoned is commonly delirious on
his deathbed, and it is not unusual to hear such accuse the most proper
Medicine as the cause of their Death. If he had been a little informed of the
nature of Poison, he would have learnt that Poison is a general name common to
many different and opposite things, that kill in small quantity with various
and opposite Symptoms, and does not always make Men delirious, neither can he
suppose this Cancerous Liquor was given Mr. Smith as a Medicine. But supposing
Mr. Smith was poisoned, (adds he) it will follow according to my Assertion, it
was not done by an Acid, because I could not see how an Acid Spirit can be
separated from any thing while in the Blood. I answer, I don't know where I
said an Acid could not be separated from any thing in the Blood, but that Sp.
of Salt could not be distilled there; but had I said so, it will not follow
that Mr. Smith was not poisoned by that Liquor, or that it was not an Acid; for
that Liquor doubtless was produced in the part by a preternatural Fermentation,
after whatever was the matter of it was separated from the Blood. But he adds,
granting it a strong Acid, how will you account for its not making way throw
the Breast before amputation? I answer, very easily; no dissolvent though ever so
strong acts in an instant, but must have time; that had not time enough to do
it. I will hold Aq. Fortis, or a stronger Liquor in my Hand without dissolving
it. But he says farther, if it had been an Acid it could not fail of raising an
Escar on Mr. Smith' s Tongue, and that would have filled his Mouth with a
stink, far surpassing that of any Acid Liquor. Here the Gent. forgets himself,
and contradicts what he endeavored before to prove, viz. That Acids preserve
from Corruption and Stink; but he shows himself but a Small Surgeon, and little
acquainted with Chemical Liquors. For an Escar does not stink so soon, though
made with Acids, nor do the strongest Acids make them so hastily: I will taste
Aq. Fortis, or any common Acid at any time without hurting my Tongue, but I can
show him an Acid Liquor that stinks, worse than any mortified Flesh he ever
saw. But he presumes that the Physician who told me this Story had the care of
Mr. Smith, and failed not in giving the most celebrated Alkalies, which, it
appears did him no Service, wherefore he believes the Liquor be tasted did not
kill him, without other help. But to show that all this is indeed presumption,
I will bring the Gentleman to the Physician, if he pleases, before whom I am
persuaded he will not so presume.

But the Gent. says, page 24. That my supposition, that if the Blood in the
small Pox, Scurvy, and Gout, yields more Alkali, it is hence that the Acid is
precipitated and fixed in the extremities by meeting Alkalies, is overthrown by
analyzing the Chalkey substance in the Gout, which exhibits the Phenomena of
Alkalies. I rejoyn, I hope the Gent. will not any more urge that the Chalkey
substance in the Gout, yielding the Phenomena of Alkalies, overthrows what I
said in the small Pox, and Scurvy; nor does it, say I, necessarily disprove my
Assertion even in the Gout; for I have told him that an Acid and an Alkali
joined, will sometimes yield no Acid in distillation, but an Alkali, as I can
demonstrate at any time, though I have not yet thought sit to teach proud
Empyricks, or all sorts of Gentlemen the Art of Chemical Legerdemain, whereby I
can demonstrate that all the Experiments the Gentleman builds upon are
fallacious. He says also that he knows it is difficult to give judgment to a
grain in the distillation of Blood, yet the difference is so manifest between
morbid and sound Blood, that 60 or more grains may be allowed for Perspiration,
deficiency of fire, or waste in large Glasses, etc. But I tell him, neither he
nor his Doctor have made Experiments enough, or nice enough, to find a certain
Difference. But if we should suppose that the Blood does in some Diseases yield
by distillation more Alkali than in Health, it will not follow that the Disease
was caused by Alkali, but the Alkali may rather be supposed the effect of the
Disease; for it is well known, that even Bodies that will yield large
quantities of Acid in Distillation and no Alkali, will by a fermentative Heat
be so altered, as to yield a great deal of Alkali and no Acid; and in like
manner the preternatural Ferment in some Diseases may so alter the Liquors of
our Bodies, as that they may yield more Alkali, and less or no Acid.

But the Gentleman says, pap. 25. My Experiment of the Saliva's turning the
Syrup of Violets green, does not prove that it is not impregnated with a
manifest Acid, which is what Dr. Colebatch asserts; for there are a multitude
of other Bodies which will turn the Syrup green, yet have in them a manifest
Acid, as Oils and vinous Spirits, which though they have a manifest Acid, yet its
so sheathed in the other parts of the fluid, that it cannot be unlocked or set
at liberty, to exert it self by so dammy a Body as Sir. of Violets, yet they
operate on other Bodies by virtue of their Acid, as Oil of Turpentine will
dissolve Copper, the Acid in Sulphur, Turpentine, Spittle makes Quicksilver
easily embody with them; and because I say, its from the Turpentine's
consisting of ramous and flexible parts, he thinks it is the same with saying,
they consist of nothing at all; for 'till I show him those ramous and flexible
parts, he must belive it is from the Acid that they embody with Mercury.

What the Gentleman says now is much to the purpose, I hope he will help to
bring the Acidists to sense. For if the Saliva's turning the Syrup green, does
not prove that it is not impregnated with, and does not act as a manifest Acid,
then the Serum of Blood's turning Syrup of Violets green, does not prove that
to abound with an Alkali, and not to be an Acid; and so what Mr. Colebatch
asserts is a Mistake, and his Criterion fallible, and so the ground of his
Hypothesis is gone, and the Gentleman must take his Doctrine merely upon his
Word. And if there are a multitude of other Bodies which turn Sir. of Violets
green, that are to be denominated Acids from their quality, of which if they
were divested, they would fail of their Intension which they perform with it,
as he says, page 26. Then Gentlemen can be no more Judges of his Master
Colebatch's Hypothesis. But how the Gentleman should assert that vinous Spirits
and Oil of Turpentine, etc. have manifest Acids, I cannot tell, unless the
constant use of Crab Verjuce makes all things relish so with him, for I am sure
he never made it manifest to any that was not an Acidist; and that Oil of
Turpentine's Acid cannot be unlockt by the clammy Body of Sir. of Violets, and
yet that it works upon the much more tough body of Copper, is very strange if
true; but it is stranger that things consisting of ramous parts should be
consisting of nothing, or that whatever is not done by Particles a Gentleman
can see must be done by Acid; but the Gentleman must believe it, and who can
help it? But he professes he will not believe me, that insipid Calxes will kill
Quicsiklver, till I tell him more of it, for he knows none that will hold it so
long as Saline or Acid Bodies. Well, because he is now a Gentleman, I will tell
him more of it than I did before. I did not say that Calxes indifferently will
hold Quicksilver so long as any saline or Acid Bodies, what the Calxes of Gold
and Silver may do, I will leave to them that have made all the enquiry into the
nature of Metals Human Industry is capable of. I know it will amalgam with
Metals that destroy Acids, but if you take almost any Calx, or Earth not too
dry, you may rub Mercury in it so as to lose sight of it, and so as you shall
not be able to separate it but by Fire: Yea Mercury is so ready to be concerned
with things that are no Acids, that it will become invisibly embodied with
common Water, and the Parts and Humors of a Man's Body, notwithstanding all
his Alkalies in Sickness and in Health.

The Gentleman says, the Trials I made on Saliva being of that taken from sound
Persons often eating and drinking Acids, he understands Acids did not impair
their Health. I answer, he does understand no such thing, for Acid did often so
much toward impairing, that had they not used alkalous things to over balance
them, they would not have been sound long. And though in the distillation, as he
minds me, I found a Salsum in the Cap. Mort. from which an Acid might be got,
yet that Salsum I take to be nothing but Sea Salt, which would not be turned
into an Acid otherwise than by a strong Fire.

Our Gentleman remarks also, that I say, Saliva when evaporated yielded a
grateful Smell: But his Dr. knows that Nutmegs, Cinnamon, etc. and all
odoriferous Vegetables abound with Acid and Sulphur, from whence proceed their
grateful Smells; It is not then reasonable to conclude, that that pleasant
Smell in the Saliva came from Acid and Sulphur? I reply, the Dr. knows no such
thing, he never saw Sulphur in, or got from aromatic or odoriferous Plants,
nor does their Smell proceed from Sulphur and Acid, but from pure Oils; the
smell of Sulphur every body knows is not pleasant, but mixed with Oils both
become abominable Stinkers. But he gives a reason, such as it is, for all
animal Substances when tending to Corruption, emitting a noxious Smell, and
from them in that state he cannot find a Salsum as I did from Saliva. But I
say, That from Animal Substances in a state of Corruption I can find a Salsum,
as from Blood, Urine, etc. though he cannot.

The Gentleman in Answer to what I said of the Stomach, that there is no need of
an Acid there, and that my Stomach is best when there is not so much as to
curdle Milk; replies, that there may be an Acid in the Stomach, though not so
much as to curdle Milk; for a small quantity of Wine, nay Vinegar diluted in
Water, poured slowly into Milk will not curdle it, and Wines have in them a
manifest Acid; and Vegetables, in whom Acid abounds, decocted in Milk will not
coagulate it. I answer, A small quantity of Acid, though not enough to coagulate
Milk poured into it slowly, will yet do it if digested in a heat like that of
the Stomach; but Wines are not manifestly Acid, unless they taste four; and the
Vegetables he talks of are nameless.

He says farther, page 27. to convince me that the Saliva acts as an Acid, he
will enquire what Juices are brought into the Stomach to cause Hunger, and he
can find none but the Saliva; therefore he concludes Hunger is caused by the
Juice strained from the salival glands, and in Fevers, when that Moisture is
deficient, there is no desire of Food; and also that Lemons and Oranges cause
Hunger; and if Hunger is caused only by Acids, he would have me prove what
Juice is brought into the Stomach from any other Part that yields more Acid.
The Gentleman is so profound at Reasoning, one must sometimes have a long Line
to fish for his Arguments. Come on then, let us try to catch this. The Saliva
acts as an Acid; and why? because he can find no other Juice brought into the
Stomach to cause Hunger; and if Hunger is caused only by Acids, I must prove
some other Juice brought in from some other Part that yields more. Well, but if
Hunger is not caus^d by Acids, or by Juices, and he has proved neither, then
the Argument is gone. Yes, but Lemons and Oranges cause Hunger; then, I say,
the Saliva may be excused from that Office, since Acid Doctors are so ready to
convey them in. I wish they don't breed a Famine. But in Fevers, when the
Saliva is wanting, there is no Appetite. But it is no matter, since Lemons and
Oranges are more sharp than the Saliva it self, for the very thoughts of them,
will put a Man's Mouth in disorder. But if one may speak freely to a Gentle
man, I must tell him, a Clown would have given a better Reason of Hunger, that
it is caused most commonly by want of Victuals, and not by swallowing ones
Spittle, or eating Lemons and Oranges; for if one do neither, yet Fasting will
bring that sense; and if one can get neither Lemons nor Oranges, the want of a
Breakfast or two, will make one have a Stomach to ones Dinner.

But the Gentleman comes to prove Mr. Colebatch's Opinion, that there are some
Vessels passing from the bottom of the Stomach to the Kidneys; and he confesses
he could never find them in all the Bodies he has dissected. I believe so.
Gentlemen don't use to dissect Bodies very often; but yet to prove these
undiscovered Canula's, he gives us the Authority of several Stories; one of a
Man that voided by Urine great quantities of Herbs, and two Pills. Of another
that voided a leaden Bullet the same way. And of a third, that pissed the
Stones of Raisins. Of others that pissed Needles, Alkekengi, and Melon-Seeds,
etc. besides he has observed the Urine has been perfumed in 10 or 12 Minutes,
by eating Asparagus, or taking Oil of Turpentine. Now, say I, if we admit these
Stories to be true as to matter of fact, it does not prove these undiscovered
Passages, unless the Gentleman could prove that these things could pass no
other way; but as for those things that may be supposed to pass through very
small Passages, there are such discovered, through which they are more like to
pass, than through these that are so very small, if any, that no Body could ever
see them. But perhaps there is some Law in Nature, that those Passengers that
are permitted to go the short way to the Kidneys, must shut the Door after them.

The Gent. is not pleased, page 30, and 31. that I assign a considerable use to
the Gall; but he has either not considerately read, or misrepresented what I
said of it. He says, that the Dung affording a fixed Salt (as I told him) like
that obtained from the Bile, and the Chyle not appearing tinged with Greenness,
nor Milk yielding any such fixed Salt, are indications that the Gall is carried
down with the rest of the Excrements, but not mixed with the Chyle; neither,
thinks he, will the narrowness of the Venae Lacteae admit so thick a Liquor as
the Gall. I answer, I did not say that the Gall was carried into the Venae
Lecteae, and mixed with the Chyle there, though it must be thought to receive its
supply that way; as all the rest of Juices of the Body do. But any one will
confess (except he that thinks himself bound to say any thing to defend a
senseless Error) that the Gall cannot issue forth into the Duodenum, without
being mixed with the Chyle, where it may very profitably seize the inimical
Acid, and carry it out at the Backdoor of the Body.

But the Gent. goes on to defame this notable Part in the vital Machine, and if
what he says of it were true, one might think the Body might have been
contrived better, than that such an Enemy should be placed in so inward a
Recess, at liberty to disgorge its Venom into the nutritious Juice. And he
possitively affirms, that the Gall^s presence in the Guts can be of no use, but
to be in a way of being ejected by Stool. If it can be of no use we can^t help
it. But the Gent. has not proved it usless. But he says, If it be detained in
the Guts, the consequences are dismal, yet if any quantities pass downwards, a*
Diarrhea ensues, etc. It Is dismal indeed, that whether it stay or go its
morbous effects are inevitable. I thought he said 'twas all to be ejected by
Stool, yet if it go that way we must have a Flux. When the Bile is brought into
the Stomach, I agree with the Gentleman, it causes Disorders; but Viscera, as
he calls it, I think is a new name for the Stomach. But he says, it may be
known that the Colic, Iliaca Passio, Diarrhea, are Symptoms produced from that
Juice by the Excrements being tinged therewith. But I say that is not a
sufficient Argument, but these Symptoms may be caused by too much Acid,
wherewith it is loaded, and he should have used another Sense beside Seeing, to
know whether the Gall were too much in the mixture; I believe he would hardly
taste it bitter.

But the Gentleman goes on to accuse the wickedness of the Gall, page 32. in
two instances, One of a Gentleman he helped to dissect, having many defects in
him, but particularly that the Gallbladder was empty. Another of a Child, who
had the same Defects. But there is nothing in the Relations, if true, that will
prove that those Defects found in the Bodies were caused by too much Gall,
rather than that they were occasioned by too little; so I shall pass it, only
taking notice of two things remarkable. 1. That Gentlemen may dissect one
another. 2. That if it be true as he says, that those Bodies stink soonest, in
whom the Gall Bladder is found empty, then the Gall must needs be allowed to be
at least a preservative against Corruption.

But he comes to Arguments, to convince us that Acids are admitted into the
Blood; and that he does, by putting us in mind of the Pancreatick Juice, which,
he says, is manifestly acid to the taste. And the Chyle taken from the Venae
Lactae of a Dog he tasted manifestly Acid, when it has been kept some time; and
from Milk's turning sour. But he had no need to prove that against me, for I
never said the Gall kept out all the Acid, but only hindered that so much, as
otherwise would, goes not in. But as for discerning the acidity of the
Pancreatick Juice, or of the Dog's Chyle, that, as he says, had stood, (and
turned sour) by his Taste; it is no good evidence, because he takes so many
Acid Draughts in a day, that his Mouth, I doubt, can hardly ever be free from a
sour relish; and if we had not better reason than his Evidence, we should doubt
of the Pancreatick Juices Acidity.

The Gent. has a farther attempt, page 35. to take off what I said, as to Acids
coagulating and corrupting Blood, Flesh, Skin, Tendons, etc. and he tells us
again, my Experiments were tried a fallacious way, for the Oil of Vitriol alone
will coagulate Blood when it is cold, and a separation made of its grumous Parts
from the Serum, yet if it be diluted in a proper quantity of an aqueous
Vehicle, which is the method of giving such Acids, it will preserve the Blood
fluid, and free from Putrefaction. I answer, the Oil of Vitriol will coagulate
the Blood, and alter its due Texture, before there is a separation made of the
Serum, yea, while in the Veins, if injected; and in all reason that which will
coagulate much in such or such a quantity, will do it a little in a small
quantity. But Water will certainly dilute and make thin the Blood; and perhaps
two ounces of Water will do more to thin the Blood, than two or three drops of
oil of Vitriol to thicken it, if they always accompany one another; and I do
not think it possible to give so much Oil of Vitriol in at the Mouth as is
enough to coagulate the mass of Blood in the Veins, without killing by
something it will do before it comes there; but Oil of Vitriol, and such like
things, being not subject to the ferments of our Bodies, and not so easily
carried off by our Heat as Water, if they come into the Blood, must have their
Being some where or other, and if they six and adhere to any particular Part,
may cause a small Coagulation there, or by thickning the Blood retard its
motion, or by retarding its motion thicken it, and so give occasion to some
stoppage in some small Veins; and wherever the Blood stagnates it will be
coagulated and corrupted, though the thing that caused the Stagnation were not
the immediate cause of the Coagulation and Corruption. But if Oil of Vitriol
and such Acids be so excellent to thin the Blood, and consequently accellerate
its Motions, I would know what Gentlemen give it for in Fevers, and such like
Distempers, rather than Sp. of Sal. Armon. which will do so; if it cools, I
should think it is by retarding the rapid Motion of the Blood, and if the Blood
run slow it is more apt to Coagulate. But perhaps Gentlemen Acidists give it
not, because it retards, or accelerates the Blood, thickens it, or thins it,
cools it or heats it, but merely because it is an Acid, and will do every
thing, and that because Mr. Colebatch says, Acids are the only Medicines that
cure all Diseases, he is sure of it, (though he does no more Cures, except deadly
ones, than others) and his little Satelites must say so, though neither he nor
they can tell how it Operates, or why they give it.

But the Gent. urges farther, that 2 Ounces of Sp. of Niter in a convenient
quantity of Water, (what that is he wont tell us) preserved an Embrio. And it is
the Acid of Salt preserves Flesh and Fish from Putrefaction: For if you divest
the Salt of its Acid, what remains will never do the business. Vinegar and Salt
preserve Cucumbers, Capers, etc. I answer, 2 Ounces of Sp. of Sal. Armon or of
a ^ixivium, yea or Bittern, that wicked thing, in a convenient quantity of
Water, will do as much, or more; but why? Not because they are called Acid or
Alkali, but because they are saline Bodies, which in such quantities hinder
Fermentation. So Sea Salt, not because it is called an Acid, or an Alkali, or a
S^^sum, but because it hinders that inward motion of the particles of Flesh,
etc. that would bring it to Corruption. But whether what remains, will do the
like, when Sea Salt is divested of its Acid, Mr. Acid, nor his Gentleman ever
tried: For I must tell them what I find they are ignorant of, that Sea Salt
will be distilled all into Spirit, and be reduced all into Sea Salt again, it
is so homogeneous a Body. But perhaps he means the Earth, with which it is
distilled, will not do. It is from the same reason that Salt and Vinegar
preserve Cucumbers, etc. But yet I believe, if the Gentleman or his Physician
either, were kept a little while in such pickle, he would find it not very
friendly to the vital Frame, though it might keep them from stinking.

Our Gentleman, page 36. tells us, that I said, that Animals that yield half
their weight of Acid Liquor, will putrefie sooner than others, that abound with
more Alkali. But he cannot conceive what Animals these should be. No wonder a
Gentlemen is unacquainted with the Materia Medica, that cannot recite what I
said: For I did not say sooner than others, but as soon, or sooner than some
others; not that abound with more Alkali, but that abound with Alkali; for
those Animals don't abound with Alkali, but with Acid. But though he grants what
I said, it will not follow says he, That their Putrefaction is caused by the great
quantity of Acids; true, I never argued so, for Acid is their proper Nature;
but notwithstanding they are such sour Fellows, they will corrupt, contrary to
Mr. Colebatch his Assertion, that it were impossible that Bodies full of Acid
should putrify. But he thinks the Animals putrified, because of the deprivation
of their Acid, it going off in Effluvia. But he is mistaken, for they were
crose stopped in a Glass, and perspire much more when alive.

The Gentleman goes on to make the same mistakes, asserting that I said
Vegetabl^s that yield most Acid, and Oil, will rot sooner than others; when I
said as soon, or sooner than some others; and that Crabs, Oranges and Lemons
will rot sooner than Apples, that are not so sour; when I said sooner than some
Apples that are not sour* But he says, Experience informs us how false this
Assertion is; for Lemons are preserved longer than Apples, and will not
putrify but when bruised; and Lemon-pill will be preserved many Years by
drying. I answer, Lemons are preserved longer than some Apples, but not than
others; and thanks to their Peel, which according to the Acid Doctors should
rot first, being less Acid. He adds, that he has kept a Vegetable 2 Years in
Water, acidulated with Sp. of Salt, sound and entire. I believe it may be true,
if tried on some sort of Vegetables. But he concludes, with a defiance to show
him an Alkali, Volatile or fixed, that will preserve Animals, or Vegetables from
Putrefaction, though I gave him 2 or 3 in the same Leaf, and I would give him
another, if I thought he would still believe Bittern, that wicked thing, to be
an Alkali.

But he comes, page 37. at length to Alum, and he is not contented, that I said
Alum is not an Acid, nor has the effects of an Acid, because it turns Sir. of
Violets green, and that Alum is used in making Leather, on the account of its
astringency. But the Gentleman is of another Opinion, for he finds it is the
Chalky substance in Alum turns the Sir. green: But his reason is no better than
this, that the Acid Sp. will turn the Sir. red; very good; but I spoke of the
whole compound, that it was not an Acid, because it turns the Sir. green, and
the Gentleman says it is, because one part of the product turns it red. But I
have Master Colebatch on my side, who says, those things that turn the Sir.
green are manifest Alkalies, or abound with Alkalies. But as for the
Leather-dressing, he says, ' it is the Acid part in Alum, makes the Skins
compact, because if the Acid be separated, the remaining part will be of no
such use. I answer, if these parts be separated, neither will be of use, the
Caput Mort. will do nothing, and the Acid will spoil the Skins. I Will appeal to
our Countryman, Mr. Yardly, the Philosophical Glover whether ever he dressed
Leather with Spirit of Alum.

He says, he can easily answer for the rotting of Coffins, when the Bones that
abound with Alkali remain firm; the rottenness is produced by the Alkalous
Flesh, and Juices of the Cadaver, entering the Pores of the Wood, but the
hardness of the Cortex of the Bones, having smaller Pores than Wood, will not
so readily admit the Alkalous Essluvia. But I answer, if Bones had any thing
called a Cortex, and that were so compact, and there were not very large and
numerous Pores in the Bones, yet one would think the Alkali already in their
most intmate recesses, and wherein they are digested from without, should rot
them sooner than the Coffins that have it on one side only, and are guarded
within and without, with the mighty preserver Acid.

The Gentleman replies to what I asserted, that Acids are not the only things
that will quench thirst in Diseases, for Niter will sooner do it. That he knows
by Experience if you take from Niter what is Acid, the remaining substance will
not quench Thirst. I answer, it is true, the Earth with which Niter is distill^d
will not quench Thirst. If you take from Niter, what will by distillation be
made an Acid, you take all away; for it will all come over in Spirit, but Niter
given in a proper Vehicle will quench Thirst much better than the Spirit.

Page 39. The Gentleman has done ungenteelly by me, as well as in several other
places, for he says, that I say, Oil of Vitriol is a noble Medicine in Fevers,
and he agrees with me; when as I said to Mr. Colebatch, that I would grant that
Oil of Vitriol might be, the best Medicine in continual Fevers he knew; but I
knew a better, and that an Alkali.

He makes me agree with him, and then says he agrees with me, Oil of Vitriol is
far from a noble Medicine, so is Com. Oil of Vitriol, from what may be made of
Vitriol. But he will believe that the Medicine, I say I have that is better, is
an Acid; unless I will produce it. But truly I cannot help it if he will believe
so; for I suppose good Medicine, and Acid are Synonymous with him: and whatever
is proved to be good, is to him sufficiently proved to be an Acid. But my
Medicine is already produced, and if he or any other civil Gentleman will come
to me, he shall taste it. The Gentleman says, in the same Page, That the use of
Acids in the small Pox is now so generally believed and practiced, that he
need-not trouble us with Arguments from that Topic. I answer, that it is a
very poor Topic to prove the goodness of a thing, that it is generally used,
(but I suppose he means by the Acid Doctors) and he might have told us Whores
are now generally used for the great Pox, and have added, that it is seldom
cured without them. His story which he subjoyns of the success of Acids in the
small Pox, I shall believe to be as he calls it, a Storys not questioning the
veracity of his Author, or his skill, who never imagined that Acids would cure
a Disease.

In answer to my Assertion, That Alkalies, when in Solution, are not coagulated
alone, but by meeting with Acids; and so that the Chalky Matter in the Gout
will not prove the Disease caused by Alkali, rather than Acid; he replys, page
81. That alkalous Salts, when insolution are coagulated with what I call
Alkalies; for Volatile Alkalies will embody with Copper, and make what is
called Salt of Vitriol, if suffered to stand in the cold for a Month. I answer,
This instance is not a thing whereof he informs us, only I was used to think
Copper dissolved was not Salt of Vitriol, but if he has found Copper enough in
gouty Persons to coagulate the Alkali in their Blood; we will acknowledge he
has discovered a Mine; but I am apt to think he can find nothing in the Body
of Man that is an Alkali, that will coagulate the Spirit of his Blood. But he
says farther, That Sp. of Sal. Armon. being an Alkali in solution, will in
distillation so unite it self with Lime a fixed Alkali, that he shall never be
able to separate any Volatile Alkali Salt from it again. Indeed it may have the
smell of a Volatile Alkali, but no Salt is to be got from it, as may be seen;
for if it be 3 or 4 times distilled from Lime, it shall be so far from what we
call an Alkali, that it shall make no ebullition with a manifest Acid. I answer
the Gentleman, that the Volatile Alkali does not unite it self with Lime; if it
did, it would either become a fixed, or the Lime a Volatile; neither of which is
done, but the Vol. Alkali is so altered by the Lime, that it is better united
with its Phlegm that holds it, so that both rise together. But I will teach the
Gentleman how to separate a dry Salt from them again, when ever he is willing
to practice Chemistry, and thinks it will do him a kindness. But he gives an
odd reason of this his Opinion, that if 3 or 4. times distilled from Lime, it
shall be so far from what we call an Alkali, as not to make an ebullition with
Acids. But I say, though it be so far from what Acid Gentlemen, who don't believe
their Senses call Alkali, yet others will call it Alkali, who know that
ebullition with Acids is not the only thing that shows an Alkali, for that very
Sp. will destroy his Acids, and be destroyed so far as to make a Nuter, but
will not be irrecoverably lost.

He says, page 42. that I grossly mistake what Offa alba is, because I said it
is a precipitation of the urinous Salt, not a Coagulation of the urinous
Spirit, whereas it is as much in a Coagulum at the top, as at the bottom. I
answer, the Gentleman, I believe, takes the notion of Precipitation only from
the sound of the Word. But a thing is said to be insolution when the Particles
are invisible in the Dissolvent, but precipitated when they coalesce so as to
be seen, though being light they may not presently fall to the bottom. But a
Coagulum of a vinous Sp. and urinous Salt into one Body he never saw, or any
such Union but what is separable.

But however, this Offa alba cannot be made in the Veins, to coagulate into
Chalk in gouty Persons, as his Master teaches him. He asks what I Will think of
some he has seen drink high rectified Sp. of Wine? I Will tell him, they are no
strange Fellows, nor more gouty than others; I have often done it, and never
had the Gout. The Blood is not an Alkalous Spirit to coagulate it, nor can it
be carried in through the Stomach, without being weakened too much to do the
feat, if there were such a Spirit within.

But he tells us a great Secret in Chemistry, viz. That if the Alkalous Sp. be
distilled from testaceous Pouders, it will be destroyed. But I tell him he is
mistaken, he never saw the Alkalous Salt destroyed in his Life. But then he
tells us, it will fix it self; but I tell him, if it be fixed it is not
destroyed; if destroyed, it is not fixed; but I tell him he is mistaken in
both, and never saw a volatile Alkali fixed, any more than a fixed one volatilized.

But the Gentleman comes, page 42. to something more weighty, a very grand
point, and that is to do what his Master Colebatch could never do, and yet it
must be done, or the Acidists must knock under board, viz. to prove Iron an
Acid. Iron they professedly use, and nothing can be a good Medicine but an Acid
they say, therefore they are cast by their own Verdict, unless Iron can be made
an Acid; help Neighbors! a Gentleman had need of commanding Requests to put
him on this difficulty. Well let us see what Efforts he makes. Iron, says he,
making an Effervescence with an Acid, is no more an argument that it is an
Alkali, than that Butter of Antimony (which is allowed to be a strong Acid) is
an Alkali, because it makes an Effervescence with Sp. of Nitre or Vitriol,
which are Acids. I fancy the Gentleman has learnt Logic of Mr. Colebatch,
(although he would be thought to converse with him only in an epistolary way) he
argues so like him. Let us feel the strength of this Argument. Butter of
Antimony an allowed Acid, making an Effervescence with Sp. of Niter an Acid,
don't prove it an Alkali, therefore Iron making an Effervescence with an Acid,
don't prove it an Alkali. But I say it don't follow, but the Gentleman is to
prove Iron an Acid, and its not being an Alkali, if it were not, don't prove it
an Acid, unless there were nothing but Alkali and Acid; and if its
Effervescence don't prove it an Alkali, much less does it prove it an Acid; but
I tell him Butter of Antimony does not effervesce with an Acid, because of its
Acidity, but because of the Antimony in it not wholly dissolved; the Butter is
nothing but Sp. of Salt, and the body of the more metalline part of Antimony,
mixed by an imperfect Dissolution; but when the Sp. of Nitre comes and
dissolves it wholly, it makes an Effervescence in dissolving it, but with Sp. of
Salt alone it will not do so.

2. Iron, says he, is not properly an absorber of Acids, but of Salts in
general, for it will be dissolved by Acid, Alkali, or Sal nutrum. But I answer,
this don't prove it an Acid, if it be so. But he says, if you put upon Filings
of Iron a volatile Alkali, there will a gentle Ebullition ensue. I say, it must
be very gentle certainly, for I could never see it, though I tried it on purpose;
but perhaps 'twas an Ebullition caused by the Fire, upon which Acid, Alkali,
vinous, oleous, or watery Liquors, yea or metalline, will boil. But to go a
little farther, in the matter, says he, and do something toward proving that
Steel abounds with Acid and Sulphurous Particles, which, he says, I deny, and
not with alkalous, and so consequently ought to be called an Acid. The
Gentleman here confesses he has done nothing to it yet, but now he is resolved
to prove Iron abounds with Acid, and sulphurous Particles; but, I say, the
consequence will not be that it is an Acid if it do, unless those Acid
Particles are more than the rest. Well, but first he will show that Iron is
very much impregnated with Sulphur; and then prove, contrary to my Assertion,
that there is a burning Brimstome to be obtained from it. Well this is a secret
in Chemistry, I long to be at it; how is it done? Why Filings of Steel flung
through the Flame of a Candle will take fire sooner than Gunpowder, and as soon
as common Sulphur, and the violent motion of a Flint and Steel will do the
same. I answer, the Gentleman has shown his Ignorance sufficiently here; these
Phenomenon are not the firing of any thing combustible in the Steel, but only
the heating small particles of the Metal red hot; the first by the flame of
the Candle, the second by the rapid stroke of the Flint, striking off a
particle of the Metal red hot, and sometimes melted, as it may be seen, if
caught on a piece of white Paper, and viewed in a Microscope; but the Metal
will be found unaltered; which, if it were burnt, would be otherwise. But if
the Steel be softened it will not do, the blow not meeting with so much
resistance, the Flint will strike off too much to take the heat.

But again he is pleased to say, that when the filings of Iron are in
dissolution in Sp. of Salt, the Fumes that arise will take fire; and if done in
a convenient Glass, and a lighted Paper held to the Fumes, it will fulminate as
loud as a Musket; and he hopes I am satisfied by this time, that there is such
a thing as common Brimstone in Iron. Truly Sir, I am not yet satisfied; I could
never see the Fumes of Sp. of Salt take fire, and if they did, it could be
nothing of the Iron, which will not rise in Fumes, as any one may see by
distilling the matter. An Explosion, I know, may be, if the Mouth of the Glass
be too small, or stopped; and so there may be of any rarifiable Liquor. But if
this will not do, he is so kind as to give us a process to make Brimstone out of
ron. Now he comes to something like a Tansie, and I must write it down* Recip.
Sal Martis, dissolve it in common Water, add Oil of Tartar more than will
precipitate the Iron, evaporate all to dryness, flux it with Carcoal, and you
will have a sulphurous Salt, dissolve in Water, and filter, and with distilled
Vinegar, or Sp. of Salt, you may precipitate a Sulphur that will burn and stink
like common Sulphur. I thank the Gentleman, but I must tell him, this Sulphur
comes not at all from the Iron. For first, if his Sal Martis be that made with
Spirit of Wine and Oil of Vitriol, they will yield Sulphur enough without the
Iron; the Oil of Vitriol will coagulate the inflamable part of the Sp. of Wine
into Brimstone. If it comes not hence, the Oil of Tartar has a Sulphur in it,
as all fixed Alkalies have more or less. If this will not do, the Charchoal has
enough; and if he uses Vinegar to precipitate it, that can spare a little. But
let him take Iron, and work on it how he will without any thing that can supply
a combustible Body, I defy him, or a Horse with a bigger Head, to get me a
grain of Sulphur. So in his process of Tartar Vitriolat. and filings of Iron,
if true, the Sulphur comes from the other things, not the Iron. But he says, he
has not mentioned the proportions of his Ingredients, because he is talking to
a Chemist. It seems he takes the Physician he writes to for a Chemist, but he
talks not like one; for proportions of things necessary in order to diverse
resulting Products in Chemistry, that a Man has not tried and observed, are not
hit easily by any Rules in Chemistry, and in many Operations much depends on
proportion. But if these Experiments will not prove a Sulphur in Iron, he says, he
may chance to produce 20 more, but these, he supposes, will satisfy the
reasonable. I answer, I suppose these were not his worst, and if he produces no
better, 40 will not do to satisfy the skilful, whatever the reasonable may think.
But he says, he must conclude Steel to be rather an Acid than an Alkali. That Is
his Misery, that he must conclude it an Acid, though none ever got an Acid from
it. But if he can get a Sulphur from it, he hopes none will doubt but he may
also get an Acid in quantity. I answer, to conclude this mighty point, if the
Sulphur he supposes he gets from it, were indeed from it, it is so little, that
it would not denominate Steel a Sulphur, and that Acid in the Sulphur is much
less, and would much less give Iron the title of an Acid. But let an honest
Country man (Mr. Yardly if you please) taste filings of Steel, not knowing what
it is, or any thing indeed produced from it, and if he says it tastes sour,
I Will be an Assheadist.

I thought I had done with Steel for this bout, because something else comes
next, but I find there is another touch upon Steel afterward, so I Will go to
that, that we may dispatch all the martial Man's business together.

The Gentleman tells us, page 46. I say the Doctor's Preparation of Steel with
Sal Armon* is not made with an Acid, and he thinks it is; and to prove it, says
he, if you make it in a Retort and a strong Fire, nothing but an Alkali will
rise, and the Acid will remain with the Steel; for if you take the Cap. Mort.
and distill, you shall have nothing come over but a pure Acid, of great use in
Physic.

I am at a little loss to know who he means by the Doctor, it must be some body
sure that is a Doctor (...), as Aristotle was known formerly by the name of the
Philosopher; but the Gentleman being one that loves Verjuice well, I guess he
means Mr. Colebatch; but I Would faign know what made him a Doctor, whether
Ignorance, Confidence, or a License to kill, or all together. But now I think
on it, Doctor is a Teacher, and he teaches the abuse of Crabs, Oranges, and
Lemons, therefore he is a Doctor. But the Doctor's Preparation of Steel must be
with an Acid. If it be, I say, it is because the Doctor is an Acid; for Sal
Armon is not, being a compound of com. Salt and Vol Salt of Urin, neither of
which is an Acid; and tho com. Salt may be distilled into an Acid, yet it is not
an Acid before Distillat on, any more than Lead, for instance, is Glass,
because it may be turned into Glass. But when Salt is turned into an Acid
Liquor, it then ceases to be a Salsum, though it may be brought back again very
easily into its old and natural Form; as the Glass of Lead may likewise soon be
reduced into Lead again. And the Doctor's Preparation is made with it before
distilled. But the Gentleman adds, if we dissolve Filings of Steel in Sp. of
Salt, and distill as before, we shall find the Cap. Mort. the same as that made
with Sal Armon. And farther, says he, ' it is not the com. Salt, but the Acid
Spirit of it, that is one part of the compound of Sal Armon. and Vol. Alkali
the other; for a mixture of Sp. of Salt and Vol. Alkali will produce good Sal
Armon. Right, but these Alkalous Bodies change the acidity of the Sp. of Salt
into a body not Acid, but a Salsum, its natural old Form; and in that form it
works, not in that it has not when so changed.

But not to let go what the Gentleman says, page 46. without a Remark; he there
tells us, he is sure a Disease caused by Acids may be cured by Acids. But here
he unwittingly gives away the Cause, by confessing a Disease may be caused by
Acids, which is the very thing I would prove; and there are diverse kinds of
Acids having different Effects, therefore Acids may cause diverse Diseases. But
still he holds fast to one part of the Doctrine, that all Diseases, even those
caused by Acids, may be cured (he should have said must) by Acids. And how
proves he this? Why Acids operate upon, or alter the texture of one another;
and if the texture be altered its qualities must be altered; and it must act
differently from what it did. I answer, whatever change Acids make on one
another, they do not change one another from being Acids; and the Disease being
caused by the Acid, as Acid, the change of the Acid will but change the
Disease, not cure it; that must be done, by taking away its Acidity, or
expelling the Acid; and if Acid could be supposed to expel Acid, 'twould be but
one Devil entering to cast out the other, this being as troublesome a Guest as
that disposs'd; and the Experiment the Gentleman brings to confirm his Opinion,
is nothing pertaining to Medicine or Man's Body: For Sp. of Nitre, or Aq. fort.
says he, dissolves Silver, but Sp. of Salt mixed with them, makes it it shall
never dissolve Silver as it did. But our Bowels are not Silver, to be dissolved
in Sp. of Nitre, that Sp. of Salt should be a Medicine to render ineffectual.

The Gentleman* says, page 47. that I am very angry with Doctor Colebath for
saying Cinnabar is an Acid, but have not proved, or said it is an Alkali. To
which I tell him, I was never angry with Doctor Colebatch in my Life, nor with
his Gentleman, but I think I said enough to prove that Cinnabar is not an Acid,
much less running Mercury 13 sixteenths of it. But the Gentleman refers to all
the World, whether running Mercury will act as Cinnabar does; if not, then
Cinnabar does all by virtue of the Sulphur embodied with it. But I Will refer it
even to the Acidists, by the same Argument, whether common Sulphur will act as
Cinnabar does; if not, then Cinnabar does all by virtue of the Mercury embodied
with it; and if the Argument be good, it is 13 to 3 on my side. But I tell the
Gentleman, to leave these Logical Depths for Experience, Cinnabar acts as
Cinnabar, and not as Mercury, or as Sulphur, otherwise we need not be at the
trouble to compound them. And the Gentleman goes on with his Argument, Sulphur
is an Acid; why? Because I allow it to be compounded of an Acid and an Oil, but
not of an Acid and an Alkali. The Argument runs thus in the whole latitude of
it. Sulpur is an Acid, because it is compounded of a little Acid and an Oil;
and Cinnabar is an Acid, because it has a little of that that has a little Acid
in it. By the same Logic I may prove the Gentleman is a Calf, because he dined
upon Veal, and has a little of a Calf in him. But the Gentleman talks on,
showing more Ignorance, saying, he believes Mercury an absorber of all kind of
Salts, Alkalies or Acids, rather than of Acids. But I must tell him, it is not
an Absorber of Alkalies, for they revive it, and disengage it from Acids which
it has absorbed. But he says, it will dissolve Metals, which is an Argument I
often use to prove the Acidity of a Body. I answer, it will not truly dissolve
Metals, it only pulverises them. But he continues to abuse me, so as a
Gentleman cannot be thought to do; for I never, that I know of, much less often,
made it an Argument to prove the Acidity of a Body, that it will dissolve a
Metal; though he would be contented it should be took for one. I suppose, that
if he should be convinced that Sp. of Sal Armon. is a good Medicine, he would
prove it an Acid by its dissolving Copper. But he says, Mercury will ferment
with Gold if well managed, and make a heat not to be endured by the Hand. But
this is no Argument that Mercury is an Acid; and tho this story he has heard be
true, he knows not what the well managing of the Mercury is, or the cause of
the Heat. He says, he has often met with two Acids that will ferment with one
another; but he has given no instance, but what he is mistaken in.

But the Gentleman, page 48. wishes I had told them how to make the Quintessence
of Wine an Alkali, (which I said I would oppose to all the Acids in the World)
that it might be used, and judged whether it be so noble an Alkali or not. I
answer, this Alkali has been used, and is used, and judged, and found to be a
noble Alkali; and I have cured considerable Diseases with one small Dose of it;
and have had a Patient sick in bed, and fear of Death one day, and up, and
pretty well on the morrow, by the use of this Alkali. But I did not say, I
would oppose it to all the Acids in the World, but to Mr. Colebatch's Acids;
for there are better Acids than he is aware of, useful in some, tho not in all
Cases. But if the Gentleman has a mind to see the effects of this Medicine, I
say still, let there be a number of Patients, sick of such Diseases wherein I
think it useful, divided between Mr. Colebath and I, or any other Acidist, and
I will use the Quintescence, and he shall use what Acid he pleases, and if I
don't recover more than he, I Will be an Acidist.

But the Gentleman can guess what this Quintescence of Wine is; and he supposes
it is the finest rectified Sp. of Wine, talk^d of by some, that is so subtle a
Drop will not fall to the Ground. Such an Essence of Wine he has seen, and can
make at any time; but he affirms it will come under the denomination of an
Acid. I answer, I confess such an Essence of Wine will come under the
denomination of an Acid, if Mr. Colebatch says it is an Acid, (as he must do if
he should use it) or if it be found in the ingenious Mr. Stringer's Catalogue
of Acids; but there is no better Argement for its Acidity. But to satisfy the
Gentleman, I tell him this Alkali is as much an Alkali, as any thing he ever
saw; and it is not his supposed Essence of Wine, or any other Essence, but a
Quintessence, if he knows what that means. But yet to satisfy him
sufficiently, (if he be a Philosopher as well as a Gentleman, as, he says,
Physicians are) I Will tell him why this is called a Quintescence, and what it
is. The Quintessence is the fifth state or being of Wine. The first is in the
Must or Juice of Grapes. The second, in the Wine when fermented and brought to
its perfection, as an inflamable Spirit; (and in this state the Gentleman's
Essence is found.) The third, when this second inflamable Spirit is turned into
an incombustible Salt The fourth, when this Salt is mortified and seemingly
destroyed. The fifth is its change and resurrection into a noble Alkalous and
green Spirit.

The Gent says, page 49. Sp. of Salt diluted in a convenient quantity of an
aqueous Vehicle, is better to preserve Flesh than com Salt; and com Salt, by an
addition of a proper quantity of Sp. of Salt, will be more useful in all
respects. I answer, if he had told us his convenient and proper quantities, the
Trial of the matter might soon have been made. But if you take a piece of Meat
seasoned as the Gentleman prescribes, and another after the ordinary way, I Will
engage, on Trial, the last shall eat best; and Mr. Colebatch himself would say
so, if he knew nothing of their seasoning.

The Gentleman adds, that in Opposition to Mr. Colebatch, I affirm that Bittern
is not an Alkali but an Acid, because Sp. of Salt is to be obtained from it in
Distillation; but I have not told in what quantity, for I knew the proportion
is inconsiderale to what remains after Distillation, there being at least four
parts of Alkali in Bittern to one of Acid, which turns Sir. Viol. green, and
answers the intentions of a strong Alkali; and he has known Soap made of it,
which is not done without a great quantity of Alkali: And though Sp. of Salt may
be obtained from Bittern, yet this will not prove it an Acid, or that the Sp.
is any part of the Bittern, for it is but some remains of the Acid part of the
Salt; for the Bittern, after Distillation, will cause Thirst more than it did
before, and the Spirit will allay Thirst if judiciously used.

I answer, the Gentleman has so often, unbecoming a Gentleman, made me say what
I never said, that I now can hardly believe he is indeed a Gentleman, but
rather some little Medicaster, or very small Surgeon. I never said Bittern was
an Acid, because Spirit of Salt may be distilled from it, but I said Bittern in
its natural form is but a Salsum; and by skill in Chemistry Mr. Colbatch his
damned ^ixt Alkali (as he called it) becomes a blessed Volatile Acid. But the
Gentleman cannot conceive the Chemical Metamorphosis of Bodies, his Pyrotechny
is only separatory. I told the Gentleman's Physician also, that Bittern would
rise in the Fire, and come over (I did not say yield) good Spirit of Salt. And
the Gent. is much mistaken in supposing the Spirit is inconsiderable to what
remains, or that Bittern has 4 parts of Alkali to one of Acid. For, as I said,
it leaves nothing behind but an insipid white Earth, and that is inconsiderable
to what comes over, if it be skilfully distilled; nor will that Earth cause
thirst so much, as Sait in which there is no Bittern. I do not believe he ever
saw Soap made of Bittern, as he says, but I know Soap may be made with a very
little Alkali.

But the Gent. concludes, he is of the Opinion that I cannot produce a
Catalogue of Medicines equaly efficacious in the Cure of Diseases with Mercur.
dule. Turpeth. Min. Red precip. Cinnabar. Sal Succini. Sal Martis En. Veneris.
Oil of Vitriol, Sp. of Nitre, Oil of Sulphur, and Dr. Colebatch' s Elixir
Vitrioli; all which operate by virtue of their Acids: for if they be divested
of their Acid Particles they will never produce those effects. And if the use
of Alkalies cannot be thus demonstrated, he shall remain a Proselyte to the
Doctrine of Acids. And thus, says he, he has given his Thoughts in answer to
those Objections that seem most material in the Dialogue, but has omitted to
take notice of what has not a relation to Acids and Alkalies, being the Cause
or Cure of Diseases, and in so doing, hopes he has answered the Doctor's
Request. I answer, I can produce the same Catalogue, and a better. But the
Medicines named are not the invention of any Acid Doctor, but were common to
all Physicians, before any such sharp Fancy had turned the Brains of any
Pretenders to Physic; nor are they all Acids, nor do any of them, except the
Spirits, operate by virtue of their Acids. But I might say, if I could allow my
self to reason as the Gentleman does, by virtue of their Alkalies; for if you
take away,, and, the Acids now joined with them, will never produce the Effects
alone. But I know better, they operate by virtue of their Texture resulting
from their Conjuction; even as Gunpowder does not operate by virtue of
Sulphur, or either of its Ingredients, but by Nitre, Sulphur, and Charcoal all
together. And if the use of Acids (or Alkalies either) cannot be better
demonstrated than the Gentleman, or his Master Colebatch, have demonstrated
their pretended Hypothesis of Acids, I shall not be a Proselyte to either,

The Gentleman has at last answered his Doctors request, and picked out here,
and there an expression in my Dialogue, which he thought he could say some
thing to, but how well he has answered what was indeed Material, and how much
he has Omitted, I must yet leave to the judicious Reader of my Dialogue,
wherein I think stands unanswered enough to show the groundlessness and danger
of the pretended new Hypothesis of Acid and Alkali; as well as the immodest
self applause, shameful contempt, and abuse of all Physicians, gross mistakes,
and great ignorance of the Pretender: Which want of Learning and Virtue the
Gentleman in his Letter, has not so much as excused; wherefore I hope his
Master is also Conscious thereof, and will amend. And the Gentleman perhaps in
a little time may see, that he is a Proselyte to so very senseless, and mean a
Sect, he may be ashamed on it, or he may be blown with some less biting or
dangerous Maggot, or become fond of some newer Fancy; since Gentlemen are
inclinable it seems, to be as well pleased with their Physicians for imposing
new Fashioned sufferings upon them, as with their Tailors for putting them into
new fashioned Clothes: And for such Gentlemen's sakes I have a good mind, before
I Conclude, to start a yet newer Hypothesis that may serve them, when that of
Acids is out of Fashion, which when it shall be strongly asserted by some Man
of Confidence, I don't question but it will take, please as well, be more
effectual, and le^s dangerous than the practice of Acids.

I have been informed by a Person of Credit, that a certain Doctor in France,
who was fam^d for his Cures, gave nothing to his Patients but Brick-dust. And I
have heard of another of considerable repute in another Place, who, as a
Panacea, gave all that came to him convenient quantities of common Water. These
Doctors wanting a more generous Principle, both disguised their Medicines; they
seem to have acted contrary, but which appeared to have the better success, I
was not well informed; but some of the Patients of both no doubt recovered, and
some of them died, those that lived would swear the Doctor heald them, but
those that packed off were left out of the Catalogue of his Cures. But let it
be how it will, the hint gives me ground enough to build a new Hypothesis upon,
now that of Acids grows old. Brick-dust and Water then shall be two Principals,
into which bodies may be resolved. Distillation and Transmutation reduces all
into them. Whatever is Liquid comes over either in the form of Water, the one
principle required, or in the form of Oil, or of a saline Spirit. The Oyl's
Unctuosity and Inflamableness may soon be changed, and the sapor of the Salts
be destroyed; the Vita Media of both may be soon took away, and the Liquor
reduced into common insipid Water. But whatever is solid may be by the Fire
reduced either to a Liquid, to be wrought on as before said, or by burning will
be reduced to a Caput Mort. which exposed to the action of the Air, will be
rotted and turned into common Earth, which then by art may be made into Brick,
and then easily pulverised (if you will follow the French Man) fine enough for
the Stoma^h of a Lady. How these two Principles are concerned in the Life and
Death of all things in the Macrocosm, I could readily teach, if an exact
Physiology were thought necessary to a Doctor.

Now let these two Principles be taken, instead of Acid and Alkali, for the
Life and Death of things, and for the Cause and Cure of Diseases, (it shall be
all one to me, which is the Killer, and which is the Curer) and I will make out
the Aitiologie of all Deseases, and their Cures from them. But forasmuch as
Gentlemen nowadays are generally great lovers of the Bottle, and will rather
cause a dose from the Glass, than from the Trowel, and a Physicians business is
to humor them, Brick-dust shall be the cause, and Water the cure of all
Diseases. But because we will recommend our selves by talking learnedly as
Physicians ought, that is so as our Grand-mothers may not readily understand
us, we will call them Arid, and Humid, and say Arid is the Cause, and Humid the
Cure of all Diseases.

Let us begin at the Mouth, as Physicians commonly do, at which death is so
often let in, in this our luxurious and Pharmacutick Age. It is apparent that
no Food, if it abound with Arid, can agree well with us; therefore nature has
placed certain Cataracts under the Tongue pouring out their Humid Saliva, which
tempers the Arid and carries it along; without which even deglutition cannot be
performed, without soon terminating our Life by choking. This Humid
accompanying our Food down into the Stomach, there digests our Food, and that
not by its Acid, or Alkali, bitterness or sweetness, or any other affected
relish, but by virtue of its self, as Humid. The truth of which any Man may be
satisfied with, if he but considers how Water is necessary for the macerating
of all things fermentable, in order to a separation of their parts, the Humid
from the Arid, the profitable from the unprofitable. Now when a due quantity of
Humid is administered by the Salivia, which carries our Food down, mixes and
ferments it, and Drink being added in a convenient quantity, (the more watery
the better) farther to dilute it, and to supply Matter for more Saliva, the
mixture passes the Pylorus, and in the small Guts is farther altered; whence
the Humid Chyle, with a little fine Arid to increase or supply the defects of
the solid parts, is separaby the Lacteals; but most of the Arid inviscated by
the Gall and Pancreatick Juice, (which make a tough slimy Matter,) is carried
down as noxious through the Guts, and turned out at the back Door. Now if for
want of a sufficient quantity of Humid in the Stomach, there is not a due
natural Fermentation, so as that the Particles in the compound have not liberty
to move without breaking their Figures against one another, or that they
ad-here and combine, and remain not enough separated, they are not only unfit
to supply the defect of the Vital Juices, but lying heavy in the Ventricle they
don't work up, and pass out of the Pylorus as they ought; whence proceed
lothings, pains in the Stomach, and Spontaneous Vomitings, etc. To remedy
which, some large draughts of Humid being given, the indigested matter is
easily ejected, the Stomach washed clean, and rendered fit for its office
again, till it be again over-charg'd with Arid, or defrauded of its due
quantity of Humid. But if the abounding Arid, be not so much as totally to
hinder the fermentation in the Stomach, but yet the Humid be not such as is
sufficient for the due performance thereof, then a gross Chyle, wherein Arid
does abound, is retained, inseparable from it in the Duodenum: The grosser part
of which being not able to enter the Lacteals, is carried downwards; which
being too tough and clammy adheres to the sides of the Colon, and lies too long
in its Cells, causing the Cholick, dry Gripes, and diverse mischiefs of that
nature, till by the Irritation and Excoriation of the Latera of the Guts,
nature pours forth the Lymphatick Juice, and so there are produced Fluxes, more
or less, according to the greater or less disorder and irritation of the rough
Arid Particles. But that part, which being not so gross, is carried into the
Lacteal Veins, sometimes adheres there, in the small ramifications of those
Vessels, causing Obstructions; whence the nutricious Juice being not
plentifully carried into the Blood, a Tabes or Aridura must needs follow. But
by the due and timely administration of Humid, these Arid Particles are washed
out into the Blood, and separated thence by Urine, and the Chyle again freely
distributed to the recovery and health of the Body.

But if these Arid particles are too abundant in the Blood, and not duly
separated by Urine, they do not only render the Blood too thick, and so retar'd
its due Motion, but after sticking in the capillary Arteries and Veins, hinder
its Motion in diverse particular Places, whence the Blood stagnating there, a
preternatual Ferment is excited, and the Blood put into an intestine Motion,
and thence come Fevers of all sorts, differing according to the different
Circumstances of places obstructed, and of more or less Arid Matter. But by a
proper adhibition of the friendly Humid, these rough Arid particles are made
flow, and carried off by Urine or Sweat, and the heat alay'd, and so the
Patient recovers.

But sometimes when those abounding Arid particles, are not carried off by a
sufficient quantity of the Humid, either by Urine or insensible Perspiration,
then they fix in the Limbs and outward parts from whence there follow Gouts,
Rhumatisms, etc. which by a large administration of Humid, (if the Disease be
not too stubbornly fixed) are carried off, or their rough Acrimony attemper'd,
and so the Patient enjoys Ease and Health. And I challenge all the Acid Doctors
in England, even Alkins himself, could we have him again from the lower World,
with all the Lemons and Oranges in Spain, or Oil of Vitriol, in Europe, to cure
half the Patients I will cure of the Gout, by a regular course of pure Humid.
But if I should go from the Blood to the succus Nervosus, I could abundantly
show what dismal effects the abounding pernicious Arid does, in thickning and
in stoping the animal Spirits, and so causing Apoplexies, Palseys, Megrims,
Deliriums, etc. Yea I could show you how these rough Arid particles fixing in
the membranes, and other parts that are tense, cause Pains; but that this
specimen would swell into a large Book: and I could give so rational an account
of the matter that most Gentleman that love new Discoveries might readily
believe it the very truth, and be fond on it, unless some one or other that
should chance to have a Dropsy, should object against my new Doctrine, and
say, what, will this fellow pretend his Aridum is the cause of that, where it
is Water which apparently abounds? I answer, let the Gent. have a little
Patience, if I make out this Point, I hope he will believe I am able to account
for all the rest that may be explained on the same Hypothesis, and I need not
proceed any farther in this Specimen. The Dropsy it self, say I, is caused by
the Pernicious abounding Arid, and cured by the due administration of the
friendly Humid. For the demonstration of which let it be considered, that even
the Humid's unequal and undue distribution and stagnation is a Disease; even as
in the Body politic the settling or stagnation of the Vital-blood-mony in any
of the members, and chiefly in the Head, is not without very many bad effects.
So when the Humid stagnates in the Legs, Head, Cods, Abdomen, or habit of the
Body, it gives names to diverse sorts of Dropsies; for I will not say of the
blessedest Humid, as Mr. Colebatch does of his Acid, there can never be to much
of it. But nevertheless Arid, with his rough and harsh particles, I affirm is
the cause of the Humids abounding, wherever it is unduely distributed; for if a
Man Perspire well, and Piss well, he will never have a Dropsy. But when the
Arid particles abound, and obstruct the natural Course of the Humid, which is
ordained to dilute, separate, and waft them off, the Humid it self by its
pressure breaks some Vessels, or passes through outlets corroded by the Arid,
and so falls into the cavity of the Abdomen, or is extravasated into some other
part of the Body, which effect we call a Dropsy. But now for the Cure of it, by
Humid you will say it is impossible, this is not adding Oil to the Fire, but as
bad, Water to a deluge. Have a little patience Gent. and I Will warrant you I Will
demonstrate it, better than Mr. Colebatch did the cure of four Stomachs by Oil
of Vitriol.

Let it therefore be considered. That the extravasated Humid cannot be
discharged the way it came, not only because the passages it should have went
are stopped for want of its due Course in the Vessels, but because it has lost
its Motion, and so lying long soaking the more fleshy parts, dissolves somewhat
of them, and so becomes clammy: Now the obstructing Arid must be carried off,
which cannot be done but by a Humid, thinning the blood which is in Motion, and
tho the stagnated Humid may be somewhat increased by the addition of more
Humid, yet it will be rendered more thin, and apt to flow when the obstructing
and corroding, Arid is washed away, and there will be nothing to hinder Nature:
but by the Motion of the Parts, the Humid is pressed out into the Vessels, and
carried off again And now I think I have sufficiently shown how the hardest
part of this new Doctrine may be accounted for; but yet I must needs, as a
Friend to the Faculty, insinuate something of the necessity, or at least,
convenience of the direction of a Physician to order proper Times, Quantities,
Diet, Wine, Exercise, etc. in this easy Course of Physic; for though I don't
question, but by a little discretion a Man may cure or prevent most Diseases by
this new method, chiefly by washing the Pot, viz the Stomach clean when ever it
is foul; yet I must warn my Readers (which let be a caution to Drunkards, who
may think they cannot hurt themselves at all with humid) that some humids, as
sophisticated Wines, and unripe Malt Drinks, have a gross and noxious Arid
swimming in them, which is very apt to Precipitate, and cause diverse ill
effects in the Body: And that any Man may do himself a mischief, even by the
most wholesome and innocent things indiscreetly used, as well as the Physician
by slighting his advice, which he is always ready to give on advantageous
Conditions. I could also confirm this Hypothesis by a large account of Cases in
Practice, but I shall forbear at present, only offering one Consideration, viz.
That all the real benefit received by Drinking the Waters, comes merely by the
large quantities of Water taken, washing the Bowels and diluting the Blood and
other humors of the Body, and not by the nasty Minerals they are impregnated
with, which Nature abhorring rejects with disturbance; and I would advise
Persons hereafter to repair to some pure Spring, and there Drink as at the
usually frequented places, and if they don't receive more than usual benefit, I
will recant and turn an Aridist, and be as ready to assist John, or any other
Hypothetick in the Doctine of Arid, as I am now farther to demonstrate that of
Humid, as that which I think will be the most safe, and likely to do my Friends
a kindness, now the dangerous Doctrine of Acids begins to go out of Fashion.

FINIS.

