APOKPYPTA APOKALYPTA

VELATA Quaedam REVELATA: SOME Certain, hidden, or veiled Spiritual Verities
Revealed. Upon occasion of Various very prying, and critical Queries Concerning
God, The Devil, and Man, as to his Body, Soul, and Spirit. Heaven, Hell,
Judgment, etc. Propounded to George Fox, John Perrott, Samuel Fisher.

And after that (with a complaint for want of, and stricter urgency for an
Answer) re-propounded to Edward Buroughs.

By two persons, choosing to notisie themselves to us no other way then by
these two unwonted (if not self-assumed) Titles, viz. Livinus Theodorus, and
Sabina Neriah. Which Truths (as there inspired by the Spirit of God) are here
exspired in love to the souls of men.

From out of a Hole in the Gate House at Westminster, through an Earthen Vessel
there Imprisoned for the Testimony of Jesus, known among men by the Name of
SAMUEL FISHER.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, 1661.

THese Returns to the Letter, and Replies to the Queries here ensuing, were in
no wise written at first with any purpose of publishing them so generally as at
the Press: But with particular respect to the satisfaction of those two private
Querists only, viz. L. T. and S. N. who have (on their part) so privily all
along managed the matter of their enquiry, that we can truly say
(notwithstanding our express desires to them of such a thing) we cannot learn
to this very day, by any hint to us (as from themselves) distinctly either Who,
or What, or Whence, or Where they are; their Letters bearing no date from any
Sign or Place, whereby we might be put into a capacity to come unto any outward
Cognizance of, or Acquaintance with them; And themselves not willing (for ought
I see) to be known to us either by their faces, or by the places of their
abode, but only by these two (I will not say Hypocritical, but) Aenigmatical
names of Livinus Theodorus, Sabina Neriah. But so it was, that they never
sending at all for our Answer to their Queries to that person nominated by
themselves, with whom it was left for them at their own request Viz. Robert
Wilson, who together with my self, was then, and is still imprisoned in
Westminster Gatehouse; where, and from whence also this present Answer was
written and given forth.
, but about five or six weeks after it was made ready for them, propounding
their Queries all over again verbatim to E. B. together with not only
expressions of greater earnestness, and sharper eagerness after an Answer, but
also a Letter of complaint against us three, G. F. J. P. S. F. as either
nilling or neglecting, and not at all regarding to gratific our friends (as
they style themselves) in a matter of so grand importance; and lastly, they not
yet coming, nor so much as sending to me for it, though in a Letter left for
them, and carried to them by their Messenger, it was long since signified to
them, that it lies by me for them, if they would either call themselves, or
send for it to me by any that might signify to me where any of us (as occasion
is) may speak with either of them; their Messenger also intimating (as I hear)
that their expectation and desire now is of seeing something Printed as in
Answer to them; I held it meet, in no less love to their souls (who e're they
are) and even to the souls of all men, then to my own, to commit and commend
this long since written Reply in Print to their or any other persons, whether
private, or public perusal, in such manner and form as hereafter follows.

S. F.

Some certain, hidden, or veiled spiritual Verities revealed, etc.
FRIENDS,
YOU, who (tam masculine, quam foeminine, and that (as may well seem, at least
to some) mendaciter and fictitie potius, quam veraciter and sincere) subscribe
your selves (respectively) by these two more Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, then
English Names (which are significative of a nature and state which your selves
are short of) of Livinus Theodorus, and Sabina Neriah.

I have seen your thirteen Queries propounded to G. F. J. P. and my self, or
either of us, together with your (seeming sympathetical) Preface to them,
wherein (after an acknowledgement of our Ministry as such, whereby people may
be brought into a posture or frame of spirit, in which they may be capable to
receive the Mystery of Godliness, which ye believe also by the Light within us,
to be in a great measure elucidated unto us) you express your selves in some
other particulars in such wise, as gives me occasion (by way of Preface to my
Answer) to premise something as to them. You intimate of the things exhibited
to us in your Questions, that they are matters of such weight, that the
consideration thereof has often much reflected upon your spirits, so that you
have gone sometimes to our Assemblies in hopes to hear Discourses of such like,
as being of great concernment, and very pertinent for every one to know; but
though ye have heard us promising felicity and consolation in the Creatures
obedience, and threatening judgment and misery in its disobedience; yet we
never explicated (so as to your satisfaction) when, where, and in what manner
they must of necessity participate of the one or the other. Hereupon, and for
other reasons by you alleged, viz. the profitableness of writing above verbal
Discourses, as in which things discussed are more subject to be obliviated,
wrested, perverted, and the intellect more obnubilated, then in the other
(which all are reasons of little cogency (if there were no other) to enforce me
to answer the curiosity of your itching minds in this case, since I well know,
that in the Power and Spirit of God, truth may be unfolded both much more, and
to many more also, that are of open and honest hearts, in one hour by word of
mouth, then it can by the writing of many days, to men, who have (pruritum
cognoscendi) more desire merely to know, then mind to do what good is already
known: I say (as you say also) that (causis superius) you present to us the
following Queries in writing, in order to receiving a satisfactory Answer in
the same way of writing hoping it will not be offensive, sed potius cum
delectatione accepta, (but acceptum ye should have said, had ye heeded what ye
wrote) promising in case ye do receive our Answer in plain, honest, downright
words, ye will be obliged not only to acknowledge your selves to be our
friends, but, us also to be (...), and be ready to acknowledge the truth of our
Principles before, or to any that you shall hear oppose us.

Now truly Friends, here are (not a few) very fair pretenses and seeming shows
of simplicity, but yet (latet anguis in herba) there is an eye (that is not
evil neither, but pure and single) which sees more of the Serpent, then of the
Saint in all this, and in the Queries that follow after it; and more of that
subtilty of the Enemy, then of that simplicity that is in Christ, whose meat
and drink it was to do the will made known, whilst the other feeds, no higher
then on that dust of desiring to know, and discourse of those many truths,
which he never minds, nor means that they shall have so much influence upon his
heart, or dominion over him in his life, as to order him rightly according
thereunto, in either the one, or the other: Whereupon we could very well excuse
our selves (as to the Lord) if we should answer you no otherwise, then by
answering you not a word: And for my own part, though it is not at all
offensive to me (if it never prove so to your selves) yet (as delightful as ye
take it to be to us to be presented with your Queries, wherein ye show your own
delight to be in minding things too high for you, or for any but such whose
dwelling has been long in the deep, before ye are truly come to be well
acquainted with the first Principles of the Oracles of God within your selves)
I take as little delight in, as I do offense at your own, or any ones
presentiments of this kind, it being altogether as endless, as it is easeless,
and well-nigh as useless for us, as it is utterly reasonless for you, or any to
engage us to it, or expect it from us, that we (who, howbeit ye, who come but
sometimes to our Meetings (as ye say) have seldom heard us have so abundantly
opened the truth in those very points concerning God and man, as to his Body,
Soul and Spirit, Heaven, Hell, the holy City, the Day of the Lord, and the
Eternal Judgment; and so long directed people to that true Light which only
gives the knowledge of all these very things ye enquire after; and this not
only by our verbal discourses, but also in our Books, which are extant in all
places to the public view of all persons) should condescend to exercise our
selves still in writing the same over and over again, to gratify every two or
three single persons in private, in order to the feeding of every airy fancy,
which would fain furnish it self for windy discourse thereof, with notions and
comprehensions of those weighty Truths of God, which it is fitter for wise men
to wait in silence on the Lord for the feeling the Truth of, within themselves,
in that Light, out of which they can never be known, then in a flood of words
to stand questioning and replying one to another about them, and which (though
it is very pertinent, and also necessary, yet) it is not more pertinent, nor
necessary for every one to know, then it is necessary for every one, that would
know them in truth, to know them by the manifestation of the Spirit of Truth,
which leads into all Truth, within himself, there being no Dispensation nor
Administration either below or beyond that of the Spirit in man, and the
inspiration of the Almighty, that gives that Wisdom and Understanding, whereby
only they, and all soul saving Truths can be discerned: So that it may be
truly said of Christ (the true Light, who in measure enlightneth every man) as
in order to the knowledge of God, a man's self, and all other matters y^ query
about: Si Christum nescis, nihil est si catera noscis;
Si Christum noscis, nihil est si ^aetera nescis.


Ye have Moses and the Prophets within, viz. this written spoken, manifested in
you, Quod tibi ne vis fieri alteri ne feceris, and (Retro) Whatever ye would
that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them* This (says Christ) is the
Law, or Moses and the Prophets; but if ye will not be admonished nor persuaded
by Moses and the Prophets, neither will ye be persuaded by such of us, who were
once dead in sin with you, but are now risen to life by the power of God, which
is his Light, and in the same sent to speak unto you from the dead.

And as for your owning or disowning of us to any such, as before you shall
oppose us, it is little to us, if ye own us to be of the truth, unless ye come
together with us into union with it; for we know (whether ye confess to, or
deny us) that we are of God, and that the World lies in that wickedness that
cuts off from him; and that we are (...), such as hold forth that infallible
everlasting Truth of God, which has very amply revealed to us of its secrets;
which Truth needs no man at all to plead for it (for it pleads both for it
self, and for its Children) much less such as seem to side with it without in
words, yet indeed resist the power of it in themselves: If ye be so wise as to
submit to the teachings of it, ye shall be wise to yourselves, and to the
salvation of your souls; but if you slight or scorn it, so as to seek or seem
to be above it, ye alone must bear it, in the judgment of it.

To conclude, though as one of this worlds fools may ask much more then many a
wise man in Christ may think fit to answer to; so one that is a fool for
Christ, may answer much more truth then many of the wise men of this world may
think fit to acknowledge to be satisfactory; yet, that ye may not think, I say,
that ye may not think we forbear to Reply upon the account of any such
difficulty or depth in your Questions, as transcends the capacity of those ye
dealwith, whom ye deem (for all your owning them as above others) not a little
inferior to your selves, and that (like the sluggard, who is wiser in his own
eyes then seven men that can render a reason) ye may not grow more prudent,
then pudent, as many are apt to do in their own conceits, so as to judge them
altogether unanswerable, if your Questions lie unanswered altogether, in at
least some more hopes of your conviction and conversion by us, then fear of
your contradiction, or confutation of us, I return to your following Queries,
as hereafter follows.

Query 1. WHat is God really in himself, without any definition? And in what
did he dwell, and manifest himself before the foundation of the Heavens and the
Earth was laid?
Answer 1. God, as he is really in himself, is beyond all definition of ours at
all, being not determined to his Hic and Hunc, as all created beings are, being
(as to time and place) nec definitive, nec circumscriptive in either; but, if
speaking by way of such description as those have made of him, who have seen
and known him, may, de facto (as de jure, it ought to do) amount to the
satisfaction of your prying minds, which would fain be intruding into things
which ye have not seen. I answer, God, (whatever more he is, that is nothing to
us, quae supra nos, nihil ad nos, the secret things of himself, are only to
himself, whose mind in all things absolutely, who has known? But things
revealed only to us, to speak of, and to our Children) is really in himself,
whatever he has at any time, in and by his Son, revealed himself to be, in and
to his holy Prophets, and Children; and whatever they in all ages (as moved by
him so to do) have declared him to be, whether by word of mouth, or Scripture:
And so whatever ye there read, God is, that God is really, indeed, and in
truth, (viz.) a Spirit, Light, Love, that One, Omnipotent, All-sufficient,
Spiritual, Substantial, Living, Everlasting, Infinite Subsistence, which has
his own being of himself, and gives being, life, breath and All things unto
All, in whom we and all mankind, who are his offspring, both live, move, and
have our being.

Howbeit, there is not in every man, no not in all those that read of him
there, and can speak of him; what they there read, the true knowledge of him
so, or so to be; for they only truly know him to be this or that, who witness
him truly to be this or that to, and within themselves; and those know him not,
who ere they are, that prate this and that of him (like Pyes and Parrets, which
may be taught verba nostra conari) yet come not to find and feel him so to be,
as they say of him, by feeling after him in his own Light, by which he draws
nigh to, and is not far from every one of us; by which (in ommbus aliqualiter,
though not aequaliter) in some measure, though not the same measure, he
manifests something of himself in every Conscience, and by which in, and to
such as love him, and keep his Commandments given out in the same, he manifests
himself in such wise as he will not do to the World; yea, in such wise that
they can experimentally say he is so or so, by what they see concerning him,
and are made fully sensible of in themselves; in such wise that they have the
witness of it in themselves, and can set to their seal, That God is, and that
he is true, good, merciful, faithful, just, righteous in taking vengeance; that
he is a Judge, a Protector, a Savior, a Redeemer, and whatever else he is said
to be, even of a truth; yea in such wise as to say with Job, I know that my
Redeemer lives: With Mary, My Spirit rejoiceth in God my Savior: With Paul,
We are saved by his Grace; Christ lives in me, etc. Whenas whoever thinks or
says he knows God, because he can say something of him at second hand, in a
form of words, and the same truth (perhaps) which he reads written of God in
their Scriptures, who declare no more of him, than what their own eyes, ears,
and hands, do see, feel and handle of him (as we do, and they did, who wrote of
old that holy Scripture) and yet know him not nigher hand, in that which is of
himself, within their own hearts, even that by which (...), not only
whatsoever is known of God at all, but also whatever is to be known of him, or
knowable at all, is manifested in him, Romans 1. 19. he deceives and mistakes
himself; and whatever he thinks he knows of God, he knows nothing yet of him,
or of ought else, as he ought to know, therefore says the Wisdom of God, 1
Cor. 1. 21. In the Wisdom of God, The world by Wisdom knew not God. And 1 John
2. 4. He that says, he knows God* and keeps not his Commandments, is a
liar, and the truth is not in him. And to such wise sayers and knowers as these
(and such were the Scribes, who were ever scraping in the Scriptures to find
God, and his life; yet never knew him at any time, nor saw his shape, because
they heard not his Voice, nor heeded his Word in themselves, Joh. 5 37.) God
says, Though ye say, God lives, yet as I live ye swear falsely. And why falsely?
Was not that a truth, that God lives? Yes, but not a truth truly testified unto
by them, (any more then what is testified in foro hominum, in men's Courts, by
such as being not eyewitnesses thereof, have it only by hearsay from others)
because they witnessed to it but in stolen words, which they had, and heard from
such, who knew him to live, while themselves knew him not to live within
themselves. Whereas therefore ye Query, What God really is in himself? As God
says of himself, I am that I am; so say I, Deus est id quod est; God is what
he is: And if ye, who by your asking of u^, profess your selves to be yet
ignorant of him, and so to worship (if yet ye worship him at all) an unknown
God, as the wise Athenians did, would know him in any measure, as he is really
in himself; My Counsel to you is, to stand still in his own Counsel, namely,
his Light in your own Consciences, that in that you may be led forth into his
life and likeness, even into the Image of his Son, the Light of the world, the
righteous, pure, meek, innocent, gentle, loving, peaceable, in offensive,
merciful, compassionate, tender, patient Lamb of God, that takes away the sin
of it, who is the express Image of the Father, in that Light that manifests
him, and all things (for whatever is manifest, is manifested by the Light) wait
for his appearing in his own Spirit and Power to restore his own Image in your
hearts; that as he appears, ye may appear with him in his glory, which is
fullness of Grace and Truth, being transformed into his Image from glory to
glory, by the operation of his holy Spirit, that as he appears, ye may be
like him, and so see him as he is; then shall ye know the Lord, if ye thus
follow on to know him, whose goings forth are prepared as the morning to meet
those that meet him in his Light, by which he shines into our hearts, to give
the Light of the knowledge of his own glory, in the face of Jesus Christ.

Finally, In answer to the latter part of this your first Query, I say, That
Light which God now is (whom no such eye as you look after him with, who ask
counsel of man only concerning him, and not of himself alone, either has seen,
or can see) that same Light he ever was: And in that Light in which he now is,
and dwells, (which is unapproachable by every evil-doer, who hates the Light,
which is come into him to save him, neither comes into it, lest by it his deeds
should be reproved, and which he who does truth comes to, that his deeds may be
made manifest to be wrought in God) in that God was, and did dwell from
everlasting; And as the outward Sun is not seen by any other natural Light,
save that which shines from it self in the outer world: So God neither is, nor
can be seen by any other spiritual Light save that which shines from himself,
into the inner world of men's hearts: And in that Light in which God does now
manifest himself, in the same did he manifest himself (if yet it be proper so
to ask, and so to answer, as concerning him) before Time was, and before there
was any Creature extant, to take cognizance of him by such a manifestation,
even before the Foundation of the Heaven and Earth was laid.

Qu. 2. Whether is there a manifestation of God in every thing that has a
life, motion and being, in this outward Creation? And whether is a Creature to
expect ever to know God under any other Dispensation or Administration, further
then by the manifestation of the Spirit of God in him, which is given to, etc.?
Ans. This second Query stands in two parts, to the first of which I answer,
Yes, as it is said, Deo plena sunt Omnia: Est Deus in nobis, agitante calescimus
ipso: And not only so, but also, Quaelibet aquae guttula, quaelibet terrae
globula, Praesentemque refert, quaelibet herba Deum.


To the second, I answer, Nay; there is no other way, dispensation, or
admininistration, in, or under which a Creature is to expect to know God,
further then by the manifestation of the Spirit of God in him; for it is
written, Rom: 1. 19. (...), (that is) Whatever is to be known of God, is
manifest in men, for God does show it in them.

Qu. 3. Whether are the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Man, and the Spirit of the
Devil, three distinct Spirits?
Ans. Yea, the Spirit of God, the Spirit of the Devil, and the Spirit of Man,
are three distinct Spirits.

Qu. 4. Whether be they essentially impregnated in man? If so, When, and after
what manner were the said Spirits infused into him?
Ans. In this Query there is a fallacy, called, A been divisis ad male
conjuncta; i. e. A question asked of many things together, which (in some sense
at least) may be truly affirmed of some of them, but cannot be affirmed of them
all: I answer therefore, They are not all three (as your Query seems to
intimate) essentially impregnated in man; neither are they all three de esse
homini; for first, as to the Spirit of God, a man may remain a man, i. e A man
of the Earth (as to his Essentials) when the Spirit of God which was once given
him, is (as David prayed it might not be from himself) no less then totally
taken from him; therefore God's Spirit is not essentially impregnated in man.
And as to the Spirit of the Devil, Man was (Quod Esse) truly and formally man,
before the Spirit of the Devil did prevail to enter him, and will be so again,
when that unclean Spirit is again ejected and cast out of him, Quod potest vel
adesse, vel abesse, sine subjecti interitu quoad suum esse, hoc non est de
essentia huic subjecto: That which may be differently, either in, or not in any
subject, without the destruction of that subject, as to its essential being, is
not essential to the being of it: But so may be either God's Spirit, which is
God's gift to man, after he is truly man, or the Devil's Spirit, which may be
cast forth of man, and yet man truly remain man: Therefore neither of these are
essentially impregnated in him.

As to the second part of this fourth Query, wherein you ask, When, and after
what manner the said Spirits were infused into man? It Is of so little
consequence to know, that it is well nigh as frivolous for one wise man to
enquire after it, as it is impertinent and unprofitable for another to resolve
it; and therefore as to the two Spirits of God and the Devil, neither of which
two are essential to man (as his own Spirit (in some kind at least) may be said
to be, of which there is more hereafter spoken) I say only this, namely, as to
that of God, Quaerendum est potius, quomodo in bono illo spirits ambulemus,
quam quomodo in nos d^erit. And as to that of the Devil, thus, Quarendum est
potius, quomodo ex malo isto evadere possimus, quam quomodo in nos invaserit.

Query. 5. What is the Spirit of man in it self? Is it natural, yea or nay? Is
it mortal or immortal? And whether has it a Being distinct from the body (when
expired?) If so, how, and where, clearly demonstrate.
Qu. 6. Whether is there a Soul in man distinct from the said Spirit? If yea,
what is it? and where is its present scitnation in man? (plainly manifest it
distinguishable) And whether (after the decease of a man) it has a being apart
from the body? If yes, Where? and whether in that state it be sensible either
of consolation and happiness, or torment and sorrow? And after what manner
shall it enjoy the one, or have the other inflicted upon it?
Qu. 7. Whether is it possible for the soul of man to live without a body? If
not, Into what body does it betake it self? Or how is it propagated to Eternity.
Qu. 8. What is its properties and operations? And what were them Souls spoken
of in the Revelations, which John said he saw crying under the Altar? And what
is that Altar? And where did he see it to be? And whether had them Souls
bodies? If yea, What bodies were they?
Ans. As to this fifth Query, wherein you are busy, highflown, cl^mbering, and
overcurious in querying, What the Spirit of Man is; and whether natural,
mortal, or immortal? And whether it has a being when the body is expired? If
so, how, and where, etc. With which fifth Query, not only the latter part of
the fourth, but also the whole sixth, seventh and eighth (wherein ye are as
critically inquisitive, running out into various Quirks, Quiddites, and
Quomodities about the soul, as Quae? Quid? Ubi? Qualis? Quando? Quibus
auxilijs? Cur? Under which forms of querying, one Pragmatical Spirit may ask
more questions then many wise men may find either while, or will, or good
ground to reply to) are so far co-incident, that one cannot be well clearly
answered without the rest, I say thus, both unto it, and to the rest, Viz

That Man (as God at first made him) was a creature consistent of these Three,
namely, Body, Soul and Spirit; each of which the Apostle prays on the behalf
of them (as in the Saints) that they might be kept blameless to the coming of
our Lord Jesus *. Each of 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
which, though concurrent with the rest, to the complete making up of that one
compositum, or Creature called Man (as God at first made him) are yet distinct
in themselves, and separable the one from the other.

First, as for the outward earthly body, which was framed of the dust of the
outer earth, into which dust, (as into its first Principle) it must once
return; that is, but the Earthly Tabernacle, in which the Soul, (which is in
truth more the Man, than it is) dwells, and has its place of residence, and
situation for a time.

As for the Soul, of which I say its so distinct from the Body, and from the
aforesaid Spirit also, is that it is possible to have a Being, not only in
conjunction with, but also after its separation from them both, of which you
ask, Where is it is situation in Man? I answer, If ye query (as ye seem to do)
of its local situation, it is plainly situated in the body, which is a
receptacle fitted for it, and is the outward Organ, which it Animates, which,
and in, and by which it Acts, while it is in it; which Soul is That Life of the
body which is truly enough by the very Philosopher defined to be, Actus
corporis Organici, quatenus est Organicum, whose definition of it is answer in
part sufficient to your query concerning its Properties and Operations.

2dly, And if ye ask, Whereabout, or in what part of the body the Soul is
situated? I say, It is Quid Totum in Toto, and Totum in qualibet part, wholly
in the whole, and wholly in every part of the body: But if ye ask after other
then a local situation, I say, the Soul, which is by Christ styled the man's
self, and is so more than the outward Carcass, (compare Matthew. 16. 26. with
Luke 9. 25.) and is a more noble part of the Man than the other is; It is
situated [naturally] between two natural ones, viz. the outward earthly body,
and the inward heavenly spirit of man; as it is [spiritually] between two
spiritual Opposites, viz. the impure corrupt flesh, and the pure incorruptible
spirit; which (as contraries) do lust in fallen man, the one against the other.

And as to its having a being, a part from the body, after the decease of the
body, or of the man, so far as to his outer body, I affirm it has; and though
in your dark minds, ye doubt the possibility of its being without a body, and
therefore feign a certain Transmigration of it of necessity into some other
body, when it comes to pass out of its own; yet I deny, that as a mere
Pythagorean dream: It Is not necessary, that it must betake it self into some
other body, when it departs from its own, in order to its propagation to
eternity; for it is immortal as to any utter annihilation (however it may die
by sin, from God, who is the truest life thereof, and so cease to be such a
living soul, as at first he made it) and because immortal, therefore i^ its
nature eternal, i. e. never ceasing to have same Being or other, either good or
evil to all eternity.

And since ye ask, If so, Where? I answer; If ye mean as to a local
circumscription, it is as improper as impertinent so to ask, since the soul which
is a spiritual body, and so (as Christ the second man, the Lord That Spirit
also is) a spirit as well as a Body is not in loco circumscriptive at all: But
if by Where? ye intend (as by the following words ye seem to do) in what state,
namely, a state of bliss, or a state of torture; that may fall out to it
indifferently, to be either so or so, according to that condition of distance
and alienation, or of nearness and conjunction, that it stood in, to either
God's Spirit, or the Devil's, at the time of its departure from the Body.

And whereas it is queryed, Whether in that state of separation from the Body,
it can be sensible either of consolation and happiness, or torment and sorrow?
I answer, Yes, Why not? (it being a Spirit) as well as other Spirits, viz. the
Devils, who were most afraid of going into their torment, when they saw
themselves ready to be cast forth into the deep, out of the bodies of those two
men whom they once possessed; and the unclean Spirit, which when he is cast out
of man, whom he once acted in, to his own content and pleasure, walks through
dry places, seeking rest, but finding none, unless he can re-enter into his
house, out of which he was ejected: And the souls under the Altar (of which ye
are more Critical in querying, than I shall be careful in answering to that
curious mind that would fain know what it cannot know, or if it could, it must
not; which souls are said to cry for vengeance on their adversaries, and
therefore were sensible of the wrong sustained from them, and yet were souls,
existent in an actual separation from, and without their bodies, being the
souls of such whose bodies had been slain for the Testimony of Jesus.

3dly. As to the spirit of man, which is the best, highest, and most noble of
the three aforesaid, which concurs to the constituting of man in his primitive
perfection, it is That breath of life, which God breathed into his soul after
he had formed him (as to his body) of the dust of the earth, whereby he came to
be a living soul; a soul that did partake of something of God's own life;
whereby it did live in his sight; this is that living Principle of the Divine
Nature, which man did before his degeneration, and shall again after his
regeneration, partake of; in respect of which, he was, and shall be again (as
he takes heed to come into Union with it, and thereby to recover to his first
estate) called the Son of God, as Adam was before he fell; and in respect of
which he is said (principally) to be made after God's own Image, and to be the
very Image and glory of God; this is that incorruptible, immortal seed of God,
which whoever comes to witness himself brought forth into the likeness of, is
said to be born of God, to be of God, to be the child of God, that does
righteousness, and sins not, which who so does is of the Devil: This is that
breath of Gods own immediate breathing into man, that spark of life from him,
who is the eternal Word, which was with God, and was God, in whom was the life,
and his life was the light of men, which shines in the darkness, in the dark
places of their earthly hearts, who by the Fall are gone out from it into the
lust, but the dark soul comprehends it not: This is that heavenly part, or
spirit of man infused into him from above, which lusts against the corrupt
flesh, and against that evil spirit that has entered into him, that lusts to
envy: This is that which mounts upward, and strengthens such souls as stay by it
to mount upward with wings as Eagles, toward him from whom it comes, while the
earthly part both tends and draws the soul downward, so that in respect of that
spirit of man it may be most truly said of God in his first making of Man, Os
homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre.


This is that noble, royal, righteous, holy seed, which while man was at first
born, made, created and planted after the nature and image of, he was said to
be planted a noble Vine; wholly a right seed, till by being alienated,
separated, and estranged from it into his earthly part, he became a Degenerate
plant of a strange Vine unto the Lord, a seed of evildoers, that are never
more to be renowned, unless they come again to be born of this holy seed, which
is (...), from above, of this spiritual part, or spirit in man (which gives him
the heavenly wisdom, which the wisdom of the flesh, that is from beneath, and
but earthly, and animal, and Diabolical, is enmity against) and of this breath
of life, or inspiration of the Almighty, which gives understanding by which he
comes again to be a tree of righteousness, a plant of the Lords renown, the
seed of the Kingdom, the Royal seed, that right seed, that holy seed, which is
the substance of the Oak when the leaves fall off the true man that God made,
who in the doing of his will abides ever, when the spirit of the Lord shall
have blown away all flesh, and all That Mankind that is become the seed of the
serpent, the generation of the Viper, so that it shall wither as the grass, and
come to naught as the flower of the grass, which to day is, and to morrow is
cast into the Oven: Finally, such a living soul as man at first became, when
God first breathed into him this breath of spiritual life, to live and dwell in
his life, light and presence, when the souls that live in sin, and are
alienated from his life through the blindness of their hearts, must die for
ever, and ever perish from the light of his countenance. This spirit of man is
the very principle of spiritual life to his Soul, as the Soul is the principle
of natural life to his body; whereby as that becomes a living body through the
union of it with the soul; So the Soul respectively becomes a living Soul,
through its Union with the said Spirit. These three are the three principles,
after which the man is respectively, and differently denominated, sometimes
after the one, sometimes after the other, prout occasio requirit.

In respect of the earthly body of which he is formed, man is denominated, 1
Cor. 15. (...), earthly, and is said to bear an earthly image, and has his
name ADAM, accordingly, which by interpretation is Red Earth.

In respect of the soul he is denominated Animal, an Animal man, Soully, or but
sensual (as abstract from the aforesaid spirit, Jude 19. These are they who are
sensual, or (as the Greek word is) (...), i. e. Animal, having not the spirit,
1 Cor. 15. there is a natural body, or (as the Greek word is) (...) there is an
Animal body, 1 Cor. 2. The natural man, or as the word is, (...), i e. The
Animal man perceives not the things of the spirit; so also James 3. The wisdom
from beneath, which only the Soul is capable of, without the said Spirit, which
gives that wisdom from above, which is pure, peaceable, etc. is said to be
(...), Earthly, Sensual; i. e. Animal, and Devilish.

In respect of his Spirit, and as he is denominated after that, which is in
conjunction with the Spirit of God, that imparts it to him, he is said to be a
spiritual man, discerning the things of the Spirit, which the Animal man does
not, and discerning others who are but Animal, while himself remains
undiscerned, by them who are below him, 1 Cor. 15. (...), 1 Cor. 2. (...).

And as to your asking concerning the spirit of man, whether it be natural or
no? I answer, That it is natural, i. e. pertaining to the very nature of that
man which God first created, and of the man of God which to that primitive
nature is restored; for howbeit it is of the Divine Nature, and so
supernatural, as in reference to man in the fall, who is of the Devils marring,
yet to the constitution of such a man as God at first made after his own Image,
and Glory, to partake of his own Divine Nature, it is natural: And though it is
as natural to man instatu corrupto, to sin, and break the Law of God, as for a
natural bruit beast to drink in water; yet to that man, who is God's Image and
glory, by participation of the Divine Nature, it is as natural (as it was to
Christ, whose meat and drink it was to do Gods will, as also it is to the mere
natural man to eat and drink outwardly) to observe his Law: And therefore such
as obey the Law, are said by nature to do the things contained in the Law that
is by that nature which man was at first created after, which is the Divine
Nature, which the Saints are again according to Gods Promise partakers of, 2.
Pet. 1. Otherwise, if ye speak of that Nature of the Devil, which by sin man
has to himself contracted since his departure from the other, it is as
contrary to that nature to do good, as it is contrary to the other to do evil;
and this is that nature by which the Saints themselves, till they were saved
by Gods grace, and quickened back again into the other, are said to be (Ephesians. 2.)
The Children of wrath as well as other; and those sinners who have lost the
first nature, are said there upon to be without natural affection, i. e.
Without such bowels of mercy, pity, love, and compassion to their own flesh,
and fellow creatures, as they had while they stood in the first nature. And
whereas ye ask above in the fourth query of this spirit of man, as well as of
God's and of the Devil's; Whether or no it is essentially impregnated in man?

I answer, That it is essential; that is, pertaining to the very being (and
that constitutive) of the Man aforesaid, viz. that man of God, which was of
Gods first creating, or is of Gods renewing back again into his own Nature,
Image and glory; yea, so, as that such a man cannot possibly be without it,
though it is spiritual in it self, and so neither natural (as is said before)
nor essential, either constitutive, or consecutive to the being of that man,
that is in the transgression and alienation from God, and so degenerated from
primitive manhood, into no better state than that of the Beast of the field,
which is his figure.

And whereas ye query, Whether the said spirit of man is mortal or immortal? I
answer, It is immortal, and neither mortal nor corruptible, but that immortal
and incorruptible seed of God, even something of that living Word, which is
said to be made flesh, and to dwell in the Saints, that is said to be ingrafted
or put into man's heart, whereby he being begotten into the Will of God, is
said to be born of God, and the Son of God; which Principle, or innate Word,
being received with meekness, saves that soul from sin, and so from the second
death, as it stands in union and conjunction with it; which Word is called
(James 1.) (...), and is said to be made flesh, and to dwell in the Saints,
John 1. as their life.

And whereas ye ask, Whether this spirit of man has a being distinct from the
body, when expired; and if so, how and where?

I answer, It has a being distinct, not only from the body, when deceased;
but from the soul also when expired; which spirit is quick, powerful, and
quickening; and searching the soul in its secrets, and piercing so unto the
marrow and reins, that all things are naked and bare before it, and nothing hid
from its sight; Whereupon it is said of this spirit of a man, Prove. 20. 27. It
is the Candle of the Lord, searching into the inmost parts of the belly: This
is that Candle whereby the Lord does search Jerusalem it self; this is that
spirit of a man of which it is said, Who knows the things of a man, save the
spirit of man that is in him? as none knows the things of God, but the Spirit
of God, and he to whom the Spirit of God reveals them, which is only to the
spiritual man; who by his union with that Light of God in himself, which flows
from the Life, comes to be God's own Image and glory, which all his begotten
ones do bear, whose glory is seen to be that of the Son of God, which is
fullness of grace and truth.

And howbeit, the body and soul both may perish, as they separate from this
spirit, yet it lives and abides for ever, together with all that does the Will
of God made manifest in it. This is that in respect of which, man regenerated
by it, is man indeed, such a one as in reference to whom, man in the fall is
but the beast of the field, as much falling short in the highest of his mere
Animals of the spiritual man, as the outward beast of the field does of him who
is merely Animal; for man at his best estate, abstract from this, even every
man is altogether vanity, and a lie; yea, man in honor separated from that
understanding which comes from this, is but as the beasts that perish: And men
who separate themselves from it in their sensual or Animal understanding, so as
not to have the Spirit, must (for all their airy notions in the sensual part)
once know themselves to be but beasts, or men by the halves; this is that
spirit of a man which is able to sustain and bear all his infirmities* but if
it be wounded by man's sin, who can bear it? Prove. 18. 14. This is that spirit
of man that goes upwards, and draws the soul upwards toward God, from whom
it is breathed into man; when the spirit of the beast, or brutish man goes
downward to the earth from whence it came, and draws downwards, even to the
Chambers of death, and the depths of Hell. This is that, of which while ye ask
how, and where it has a being (if so at all) distinct from the body? I answer
in the words of Wisdom it self, Eccles. 12. That at the dissolution of the
compositum, or whole man, which consists of the Three aforesaid, each from the
other, then the body returns to the dust from whence it came; and the said
spirit returns up to God that gave it: And that Soul together with it, that
has stood in the counsel of it; while that soul which the body dies from,
while they both lived together in sin dies both from it, and from God that gave
it, for ever; and is left naked, and divested both of its own body, and its own
spirit also, and lies in separation not only from both these, but also from
God, and his good spirit tormented among all evil spirits for ever.

Query 9. What, and where is that Heaven in which it is said God does dwell? Is
it above the Firmament, or must a Creature wait to know it manifest in him, and
not otherwise?
Ans. Heaven, is the highest place in either outward and local, or inward and
spiritual situation, and therefore it is called (...). The Heaven in which its
said God dwells, is neither only above the Firmament, nor only under the
Firmament, but both above it, and below it, and even every where; where he
manifests himself in his love and mercy, goodness, grace and glory: And as he
dwells in no place, so as to be any where (circumscriptively) included, so in
every place; he is so, as to be no where at all excluded. So that if ye ask,
Whether it is above the Firmament only* and not otherwise? I say, No; for it
is also under the Firmament, or else the Son of Man could not have been truly
said to be in Heaven (as he is John 3.) in that self-same juncture of time,
wherein he was standing bodily, and speaking to Nicodemus here on earth;
neither could the Beast be said (as he is, Rev. 13.) to blaspheme the Saints
that dwell in Heaven, if they were not in Heaven whilst here on earth; For even
He and His Worshippers (superstitiously) adore whatever they deem to be above
the Skies, and blaspheme it not. Likewise the Apostles dwelling ((...)) was in
Heaven, Phil. 3. whilst they were bodily here on earth. Therefore Heaven is as
well under, as above the Firmament; yea, it is in very deed in his peoples
hearts, in every humble, broken and contrite spirit.

And whereas ye ask, Whether a Creature must wait to know it in himself only,
and not otherwise? I say, Not so neither; for Heaven shall be manifest, and
known not only inwardly in their hearts, who wait for it; but outwardly also,
to such as wait not for it within themselves (as Lazarus Bosom was to the rich
man's sight afar off) so far only as shall tend to the aggravation of their
anguish, who shall see themselves shut out everlastingly from sharing in it. To
conclude, the Heaven, which is God's Throne, God's House, God's Tabernacle, and
the place of his Rest, where no Lion, nor any Ravenous Beast shall be; where no
Liar, nor unclean one, that works abomination, has any place; where none of
the proud, prying, vulturous eyes can pierce far enough to discern the glory of
it; where no haughty fowls of the air, that are lifted up with the windy wings
of their own lofty notions, no high-climbing Capernaites, nor Thieves and
Robbers, that are flying about aloft above the Door, which is the Light within,
can ever sore high enough to enter, is not only that high place, locally
situated above the Skies, but that high and holy place also, of a low and
humble heart, and a broken and contrite spirit, that trembles at his Word;
there he delights to manifest himself, who is the high and lofty One, who
inhabiteth Eternity, and to make his abode, even in them who are meek and
lowly, who dwell on high with him in the Hill which he has chosen; whose Hill
is the highest above all the Hills, whose Jerusalem is his Throne, when all the
Earth besides it, that are foes to him and it, must be as the footstool; and as
no more then ashes under the soles of their feet; the Mountain of whose House
is now establishing on the top of the Mountains, and exalting it self above all
the Hills; so that all Nations shall go up unto it; while the proud and lofty
dwell down below, in a low place: The way of life is above, where the upright
walk, who are to have Dominion over the wicked in that Morning that is
appearing; who dwell in Hell, which is beneath, and lie in the grave, and in
the dust of the Earth, where Death gnaweth upon their intrals, and feeds upon
them as his Prey.

Query 10. What is Hell? and where is it? Is it a certain local place? or that,
which through the creatures disobedience, is manifested in him; and that there
is no other?
Answ. Hell is the Valley of Jehoshaphat, i. e. of the Lords judgment (as the
word is in English) where with fire, and his sword he pleads with all flesh,
where he eases himself of his Adversaries, and makes his indignation known to
his enemies, whither the Lord comes like a whirlewind, to render his anger with
fury, and his rebukes with flames of fire; where the worm that eats in the
intrals of the wicked never dies, and the fire is never to be quenched; The
place that is ordained of old by the Lord, yea for the King it is prepared i.
e. for the Devil and his Angels, the King of all the devouring crowned Locusts,
which come up in That Smoke that ascends out of the bottomless pit, and darkens
the Sun and the Air, whose Name is Abaddon, and Apollion, i. e. (in English)
the Destroyer.

The Valley which is also called Tophet, or the Valley of the land of Therefore
is Hell called by Christ, Matthew. 5. 29 30. and by James, Iam, 3: 6. in Greek
(...), ex (...) and (...) vallis Hinnom quae alias (...) Topheth dicitu, ter:
7: 31: Isa: 30: 33:
Benhinnom, tipified by that which was of old about Jerusalem; and is its
figure, where men sacrificed their friends through the fire to the Idol Moleck,
which was their God* the Pyle where of is Fire and much Wood, and the Breath of
the Lord, which is his Spirit in men's own evil Consciences, like a River of
Brimstone does feed, and kindle it: This is that Valley of Jehosaphat, to which
(as much a Riddle and Mystery as it may seem to be, to say, Come up to the
Valley) all the Heathen must be awakened and summoned to come up to account out
of the dark Cells of their own deceitful and desperately wicked hearts, even to
that Light, which is the least of Seeds, and lies lowest under the lust of the
world, which is got above it in men's hearts; yet is in truth the greatest and
highest Power, and seat of Judicature, which whoever resist and rebel against,
receive to themselves Damnation: This is as a burning within, kindled under all
men's fleshly glory, of which (mean while not denying it to be also a certain
local place, as ye speak) we affirm that it is within in the Conscience of
every Malefactor, or impenitent Rebel against the Light, where the wrath of God
is manifested against sin, and on the Creature for its disobedience, where
Heathenish People, not liking to retain God in their knowledge, nor glorifying
him according to what knowledge they have of him, but giving themselves over to
vile affections, and to act things that are unseemly, receive (mark) within
themselves (as it is said Romans 1.) the just recompense of reward, that is meet
for their works; where, as every one whose work is found approved by the Light
that proves it, has his rejoicing (with that joy which the stranger
intermeddles not withal) in himself alone, and not in another, Gal. 5. So every
one, whose work is reproved by the same, must bear his own burden, which none
can ease him of, or take off from him, whoever he is: And this is Hell, which
is the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death,
where the fearful, unbelieving, and abominable, have their part, who have no
part, nor portion in Gods holy City: And (in answer to the last clause of your
sixth query) this I say is the manner of the consolation and happiness, or
torment and sorrow, of which ye ask, After what manner shall the soul (if it be
sensible of either, out of the body) enjoy the one, or have the other inflicted
on it.

Query 11. What is it in man that must be made sensible of the joy of the one,
through obedience, or the torment of the other through disobedience, since what
God has loved, he loves to the end, and the Earth must return to the Earth,
and the Spirit to him that gave it.
Ans. The soul of man is that in man, which when once departed from its body,
which it is the Life of, and also from its a foresaid spirit, which is its life,
must be made sensible of the consolation through obedience, or of the
tribulation through disobedience, as it is written Ezekiel 18. The soul that
sins shall dye, though the Seed of God (had it kept its union with it) would
have kept it A living soul. So Romans 2. it is written, Tribulation and anguish,
indignation and wrath, must be upon every soul of man that does evil; but
glory, honor, and peace upon every soul of man that works good, whether they
be Jews or Gentiles. And this with a non obstante to your words of exception at
the end of the query, viz. since what God has once loved, he loves to the end;
which are neither the words of Scripture, nor of the truth; for there it is
said, having loved his own (which are such only, who own him in his love) he
loved them to the end; and this we say is unchangeably so, although this is
also as unchangeable a truth of God, who cannot change; That having from
everlasting hated the foreseen subjects of ungodliness, whom he before
unchangeably ordained to be objects of his wrath and condemnation, he hated
them unto the end, for as immutably as he loves Jacob, which is the righteous
Seed that is ever blessed; he hates Esau or Edom, the Seed of evildoers, which
is never to be renowned; which because it is for ever the border of wickedness,
therefore is it the people against whom God has indignation for ever Mal. 1. 4.
. And this notwithstanding also your other words in the Query, viz. Seeing that
the Earth must return to the Earth, and the Spirit to God that gave it: For, as
I said above, then does the evil Soul stand most nakedly open to its misery,
and sensible of its torment, when it is divested of that body in which it took
its pleasure, and of its spirit which should, could, and would have led it
once (but now it cannot, the gulf being fixed) to those Rivers of pleasure
that are at Gods right hand for evermore. And as for that soul that is found
doing good, its most fully clothed upon with its glorious House from above,
and its joy and rest in God, when it is uncloathed of its house of Clay, or
earthly body, wherein it dwelled in bondage to, and was once groaning under
the bondage of its own corruption.

Query 12. What is that City that has no need of the light of the Sun, nor the
Moon to shine in it, etc.? And where is its s^^tuation? And what is that honor
and glory, which the Kings of the Earth must bring into it? And in what manner
must they perform it? Also, how, and when shall they that are saved, be made
inhabitants of it.
Answ. What need ye Query this of us, if either ye heeded the Light in you,
which manifests all things in their proper seasons, to such as wait in it; or
if ye had well heeded that very Scripture either, out of which your Query seems
to be fetched, and founded? Where ye may as well read what that City is that has
no need of the Sun to shine in it, as that it has at all no need thereof,
where it is evidenced to be those Saints of God that follow the Lamb, who is
their Light, the new Jerusalem which is above, the mother of all the freeborn
Children of God, which is as a Bride adorned for her Husband, with whom the
Tabernacle of the Lord is, and with whom he dwells; and as for the situation of
it, is it not expressly said (as in the Vision it was seen) that it comes down
from God out of heaven? therefore it is a state here on earth, else also the
Kings of the Nations could not be said to bring the glory of their Nations into
it; i. e. to serve it with their glory; for it is to come to pass, that the
Kingdom and nation that will not serve thee (says the Lord, Isa. 60. 12.)
shall perish, yea that nation shall utterly be destroyed) Whose glory that they
are said to bring into it, or to serve it with, or minister to it withal, is
not any of those unlawful, or sinful lusts, pleasures, or licentious liberties,
wherein they glory as in their shame (for as in maxima liberate est minima
licentia, so it is said, That no unclean thing shall in any wise enter
thereinto, neither any thing that desileth, or works abomination, or makes a
lie) but their gain and substance, which the Lord himself says he will
consecrate to the God of the whole earth, and to the service of his truth, as
they before in their blind minds consecrated it to the service of their Lord
God the Pope, and the setting up of his trashy Traditions: For the Lamb, who is
the Light of his holy ones, who are this City, is worthy to receive power, and
riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing, and all
created things; for, for his sake they are, and were created, Rev. 5. and for
those that are with him on mount Syon, who are called, and chosen, and
faithful, who are his Priests and Ministers (non nomine tantum tenus) not in
name only, as the Popes and the Worlds Idol-shepherds are, but (reapse) indeed
and in truth; who, as the Lord says, Isa. 6. 6. shall eat the Riches of the
gentiles, and in their glory boast themselves, improving the excellencies of
the outward Creation in wiser ways, and to much better uses and ends, than such
Drones as the Popes Divines, who have devoured the good of all Lands, under a
mere pretense of serving Christ, in the service of their own lusts and bellies.
And whereas ye ask, When shall those that be saved be made the Inhabitants of
it? I answer, So soon as ever they are saved from the sin, which is that alone
that slayes the soul, and seperates it from its part and portion there; For
blessed are they that do his Commandments, they have right to the Tree of Life,
and to enter in through the gates into the City, without the which are the
Dogs, who draw back from the truth, and lick up their old Vomit; who for all
their dreaming that they eat and drink in the day while the Lord's Visitation
passes over them, shall yet wander to and fro for meat, and grud ge that they
can never be satisfied; and at evening when they awake, and see the Sun is set
upon them, they shall return, and grin like a dog, and go round about the City,
but never enter to have any share in it, being clambered up above the Door,
which is the Light.

Query 13. What are the Chains in which the Angels (who kept not their first
estate) are reserved under darkness unto the Judgment of the great Day? And
where is the place of their confinement? And what is the great Day, and the
Judgment? We pray you plainly demonstrate.
Answ. The Chains which the Angels who kept not their first estate, are
reserved in, are the same under which men, who kept not their first estate, are
also reserved under darkness, unto the Judgment of the great Day, and that is
the darkness it self, into which they are both gone forth from the Light, which
was That habitation they both left, in which they were created to stand, as
it is said, the wicked are captivated in the cords of their own sins, and snared
in the works of their own hands, viz. in the deceitful counsels of their own
hearts, in their own corruptions, under the bondage of which the whole Creation
groans, and travels in pain together to be delivered; out of which Bonds, and
Chains, and Fetters, Snares, and sore Captivity, there is no deliverance for
men, who are all to come to judgment, but in Christ, who opens the
Prison-doors, by that Spirit by which he went and preached to the Spirits which
were in prison in the Dungeon of Egyptian darkness of old in the days of Noah;
wherein they remain reserved unto Wrath and Judgment, which from the Lord must
first come upon them, as assuredly as ever they sinned, and as unavoidably as
travel on a Woman with Child, which she cannot possibly escape; and the place
of their confinement is wherever the said rebellions spirits are; a place not
of an outward, local consideration; for although every spirit is in loco
definitive, and determined to his Hic and nunc (excepting God only, who cannot
be so) yet a spirit cannot be said to be in loco circumscriptive.

And as for the Great Day, and the Judgment thereof, It is the Light of the
Lord, (for the Light he called Day, and the Darkness he called Night) and the
Judgment that the said Light lays to the Line, and to the Plummet, in every
Creature that hates and rebels against the Light, which ministers condemnation
on the Transgressor, and reveals from God nothing but Vengeance, Tribulation,
Wrath, and Anguish, Perplexity and Disappointment, Woe, Cursing, and vexation of
spirit on every evil spirit, and on every soul of man that is found in evil
doing; the Eternal Judgment of which day of the Lord, is over all the Oaks of
Bashan, and Cedars of Lebanon, and pleasant Pictures, and fenced Towers, and
high Walls, and all man's glory and pomp, which Hell now opens her mouth wide to
receive and over every one, and every thing that is high and lifted up; and
there can be no declining the Judgment of it so, but that (to versifie to you
back again in your own way of Latin Rhyme, wherein ye conclude your Queries,
and I my Answer) you must expect and know, That

Quod sibi quisque serit praesentis tempore Vitae,
Hoc sibi messis erit, cum dicitur Ito, Venite.
To all your Queries above answered, you subjoin these two Verses.

Non pudor est quaeri, quae nescis sive doceri:
Qui SCIT Laudatur, qui NESCIT vituperatur.
To which I return, and so conclude as follows.

Non pudor est quaeri, nec quaerere, at usque teneri
Quaerendo, atque queri est pudor, and nescire doceri.
Qui fructu crescit SCIT, quamvis plurima nescit;
Is quod SCIT nescit, qui tantum lumine crescit.
Qui been SCITque alitur, SCIT and ut sit gregibus Altor*
Qui male non aliter, quam ut se SCIRE hoc SCIAT Alter.
Haud qui SITque Satur, facit at qui quod SCIT, amatur*
Is, sibi quod datur, per quemque opus hoc operatur:
Qui SCIT Salvatur, SIT at ut SCIT, and ut SCIT agatur;
Qui SIT laud atur, qui NE SIT vituper atur.
Dixi. D omini ei
S amuel ervus
P iscator. astor.


No shame to Ask, nor be Ask't, but to weary
Free Answerers out with Queryings, and to Query
The same over, over, and over again concerning
Truths, which they are ever taught, yet never learning,
He who knows little, yet bears fruit, knows much,
No knowers know that they do know, save such;
Such Thrive, such know that they may be as Mothers,
Some know but to be known to know by others;
No knower, but the doer of what is known
Is loved, who works what is given him as his own;
Who knows is saved (this I must needs acknowledge)
Yet let him BE, and acted be by's knowledge;
Who Is what is by him known's of worth and praised,
Who Is not so's worth naught, despised, disprais'd.
S. F.
What to themselves All Men
Sow now, (be it Good, or No)
That must each man Reap Then,
When Christ shall say, Come, Go.
FINIS.
Page 9. line 28. for differently, read indifferently.


