At the Court at Whitehall the 25. of June, 1667.
Present The Kings most Excellent Majesty, His Royal Highness the Duke of York
His Highness Prince Rupert Lord Archbishop of Canterbury Lord Chancellor Duke
of Albemarle Lord Chamberlain Earl of Bridgewater Earl of Berkshire Earl of
Anglesey Earl of Craven Earl of Lauderdaill Lord Viscount Fitzharding Lord
Arlington Lord Berkeley Lord Ashley Mr. Comptroller Mr. Vice-Chamberlain Mr.
Secretary Morice Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy Sir William Coventry Sir John
Duncombe.


WHereas it is generally Reported, That many Seamen and Soldiers who have
served His Majesty at Sea, are frequently constrained to give money, or lose
some part of their wages to recover the rest: Which Reports being of great
prejudice to His Majesty's service; And the Treasurer of His Majesty's Navy
having used all possible means to discover and prevent all such Abuses, as
appears by several public Advertisements by him affixed at Westminster Hall
Gate, and other public places; His Majesty thereupon out of His tender Care
of those His Subjects who have so faithfully served Him, and for the more
effectual Redress of any Abuses which are, or have been committed in Exacting
upon the said Seamen and Soldiers, has appointed His Royal Highness the Duke
of York His Highness Prince Rupert Duke of Albemarle Earl of Anglesey Earl of
Lauderdaill Lord Arlington Lord Berkley Lord Ashley Mr. Comptroller Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain Mr. Secretary Morice Sir William Coventry Sir John Duncombe
Whitehall, and there put into the hands of the Clerk of the Council attending,
their Complaint in writing, with a Note upon the same, where the party
complaining inhabits, or may he found; To the end that if the same do appear to
be true, due satisfaction may be given them, and Justice done upon those who
have injured them.

RICHARD BROWN.

In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1667.


