AN ANSWER To The Speech or Decalration Of the Great Turk, Sulton Mahomet.
WHICH He sent to Leopold Emperor of Germany.

AND Is a Defense of the true Christian Religion against the said Turks
Antichristian Speech. AND A Testimony for the Lord Jesus Christ.

This was Written, by George Fox, five Years since, being 1683. And is it not
now a true Prophecy, and fulfilled on the Great Turk Sultan Mahomet? who was
removed and put out of his high Throne the Year 1687.

With Allowance.

Printed, and Sold, by A. Soul, at the Three Keys in Nags Head Court, in
Grace Church Street, over against the Conduit 1688.

The Speech or Declaration of Sultan Mahomet the great Turk.
Which he sent to the Emperor of Germany, Dated March 25th 1683. from
Adrianople, just after the Baron Saphonara the Emperor's Ambassador had his
last Audience of the Prince Viries, wherein the said Ambassador could not
comply to the Extravagant Demands of the Turk; which caused the said Grand
Seignior to transmit the same to his Imperial Majesty, which is faithfully
translated out of High Dutch.

MAHOMET the fourth, Son of Emperors, and of the Famous and Renowned God;
Emperor of the Turks, King of Greece, Macedonia, Moldavia, Samaria, and Hegha;
King of great and lesser Egypt; King of all the Inhabitants of the Earth, and
Prince of the Earthly Paradise; acknowledged Prince and obedient Son of
Mahomet; preserver of the Cities of Hungaria; Possessor of the Sepulcher of
your God; Lord of all the Emperors of the World, from the rising of the Sun, to
the going down thereof: King of all Kings, Lord of the Tree of Life, Conqueror
of the Malonian Hegley, and the City Prokenix; the great Persecutor of the
Christians and all wicked people, joy of the flourishing World, Commander and
Guardian of your Crucified God, Lord of the multitude of the Heathens: We
Command ye to Greet the Emperor Leopold, in case he desire it, and you are a
Friend to our Majesty whose Power and Will we have extended very far.

You have for some time past acted to our prejudice, and violated our
Friendship; tho we have not offended you either by War or otherwise, yet you
have taken secret advice with other Kings, and your Councils, how to shake off
your yoke; in which you have proceeded very indiscreetly; and thereby you have
exposed your people to fear and danger, who have nothing to expect now but
Death, which you have brought upon your selves; for I declare I will make my
self your Master, and pursue you from the East to the West, and extend my
Majesty to the End of the Earth: in the procedure of all which you shall find
my Power exerted to your extreme prejudice, and shall feel the dreadful effects
of my Wrath; and since you have put your hope in the strength of some Towns and
Castles, I have given Command to overthrow them, and trample under my Horses
feet all that is delightful to you, leaving no room hereafter to make
friendship with me, or suffer you any fortified place to remain to put your
trust in; for I have resolved forthwith to destroy you and your people, and to
disploy you of the German Empire after my will, Leaving in the Empire a
remembrance of my dreadful Sword, that it may publicly appear that I will
establish my Religion therein, and pursue your Crucified God: whose Wrath I
fear not, nor his coming to defend, or deliver you out of my hands; but will
condemn your Sacred Priests to the Plough, and suffer the Breasts of your wives
to be sucked by Dogs and Beasts; you will do well to forsake your Religion,
otherwise I will give Order to Consume you with Fire: This is enough to let you
understand my will; if you will be so wise as to know it.

An Answer to the Speech or Declaration or the Great Turk, etc.
Sultan Mahomet,
I Find in a Paper, (which is said to be thy Declaration) directed, to Leopold,
the German Emperor, dated the 25. of March 1683. viz.

First, thou say, Thou art a Possessor of the Sepulcre of your God (to wit,
the Christians) And that thou art a great Persecuter of the Christians.

Secondly, Thou says, Thou art Lord of all the Emperors of the World, from the
Rising of the Sun to the going down thereof.

Thirdly, Thou say, Thou art King of all Kings, and Lord of the Tree of Life.

Fourthly, Thou say, Thou art Commander: and Guardian of your Crucified God
(to wit the Christians) and thou say, Thou will pursue your Crucified God,
whose Wrath I fear not, nor his coming to defend or deliver you out of my hands.

Now, here is Something in answer to the Words of Sultan Mahomet the Emperor of
the Turks, saying, He is a great Persecutor of the Christians; But let him take
heed, for, the Great God that made him, and Heaven, and Earth, and the Sea, and
all things therein, who is Lord, Creator, and Father of all, who is above all,
and through all, and beholds all his Words, Ways, Thoughts, and Actions, and
all Men's and Women's upon the Earth; Neither is there any Creature that is not
manifest in Gods Sight; But all things are naked and open unto the Eyes of him,
with whom we have to do, who are the true Christians in Scorn called Quakers,
who do fear, serve, and worship the Great God that made us, who is a consuming
Fire to the Wicked; and wheresoever Men do turn themselves, there the Face of
God will meet them; his Divinity extends through the whole World; Therefore you
are to fear his Divine Majesty, as you do confess in your Alcoran; for the
Great God, the Creator of all does know all in the Heavens, and in the Earth,
both what is done in Secreet and Openly, and all is naked before him, who will
reward every Man, and Woman, according to their words and works, whether they
be good or evil, for God is a consuming Fire to the Wicked, and who shall dwell
with everlasting burning, but the Just and Holy?

And, Mahomet says in his Alcoran Chap. 3. page 34. That Jesus said, Who shall
sustain the Law of God in my absence; and the Apostles answered him, we will
sustain the Law of God in thy absence, and that Jesus shall be a Witness in the
day of Judgment against such that obey not his Law, etc.

Now see how you Turks do obey the Law or Command of Jesus, for Jesus says,
Love yuor Enemies, Bless them that Curse you, do good to them that hate you,
pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you, that you may be the
Children of your Father which is in Heaven.

Now if the Christians were the Turks Enemies, according to the Command and Law
of Jesus, the Turks, are to Love and Bless them that Curse them, and to do good
to them, that hate them, and pray for them that despitefully use them and
persecute them; so then the Turks are not to be Persecutors, if they do obey
the Command of the Lord Jesus Christ, and if they be the Children of God the
Father which is in Heaven.

But the Emperor of the Turks says, he is a great Persecutor of the
Christians; and you say in your Alcoran, That Jesus shall be a Witness in the
day of Judgment against such that obey not his Law? Are not your own Words in
your Alcoran, and the Lord Jesus, and the Apostles of Jesus, Who should sustain
the Law of God in Jesus absence, witness against you, who are Haters and
Persecutors, instead of loving Enemies, according to the Command or Law of
Jesus? And therefore as Mahomet says, That Jesus, shall be a Witness in the
day of Judgment against such as obey not his Law: So according to your own
Alcoran, you Turks, and all others, that are Persecutors, who disobey the Law
of Jesus, he will be a Witness against you in the day of Judgment; yea, I say
against you Turks, and all other Persecutors upon the Earth.

Secondly, Sultan Mahomet Emperor of the Turks says, he is Lord of all the
Emperors of the World, from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof,
King of all Kingr, and Lord of the Tree of Life. But are there not many
Kingdoms and Kings in this Northen part of the World, and many Emperors and
Heathen Kings in America, and also in the East Indies? Has not the Great Mogul
many Kingdoms under him? besides Prestor John (commonly so called) has not he
many Kingdoms under him? And does not the Emperor of the Turks know, that these
Kingdoms and Empires he is neither King nor Emperor over? Yet he says, he is
Emperor over all the Earth, from the rising of the Sun to the going down
thereof. Which World he knows is but his own Country, and from the rising of
the Sun in it, to the setting of the Sun in it; for the Sun rises and sets in
America, and the East Indies, and all other parts of the World where he has no
Rule nor Power; and how long he may have Rule and Power, Writ five Years since,
and is he not out of his Throne now?
and be Emperor in his own Country God knows. And therefore it is best for the
Emperor of the Terks to be humble, and not conceit himself with an high and
ambitious Mind, that he is King of Kings, and Emperor of the World where he is
not, and where God has given him no Power, least the Almighty God do abase
him, and take away his Power which he has given him: For Daniel said to
Nebuchadnezer the Emperor, That he should eat Grass like an Ox, etc. till he
knew that the most high God rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and gives them to
whom soever he will, and his Kingdom should be sure to him after that he knew
that the Most High did Rule. And therefore the Unchangeable God, Man must Fear,
for Heaven is his Throne, and the Earth is his Footstool, that Earth that the
Turks and all Men stand and walk upon: And so from the Face of the Eternal God
and his Footstool, cannot the Turk, nor any other Man or Woman turn themselves,
but there the Face of God will meet them; for Gods Divinity extends throughout
all the Earth, who inhabits Eternity, and dwells with an humble Heart; who
beholds the Proud and Lofty afar off, and brings down the high Looks, and
abaseth the Pride of Men.

Thirdly, And again, Sultan Mahomet, Emperor of the Turks, thou say, thou
art, Lord of the Tree of Life. But the Turkish Emperor must know he is not Lord
of the Tree of Life, which bears twelve manner of Fruits, and yeildeth her
Fruits every Month, and the Leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the
Nations: We do not believe that the Emperor of the Turks has any such natural
Tree, in all his Land or Garden, that yeildeth twelve manner of Fruits every
Month, the Leaves of which are for the healing of Nations; this Tree of Life
the Turks have no Power over, and John the Apostle of Christ, that kept the Law
or Command of Jesus, Jesus speak to him and said, Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of Life, that they may enter
through the Gates of the City, Namely, Heavenly and Holy Jerusalem, which
descends out of Heaven from God, which is not outward Jerusalem in the Land of
Canaan, as in the Revelations of John the 21 and 22 Chapters -- And Christ said
to John his Apostle, He that overcomes I will give him to eat of the Tree of
Life; Namely, he that overcomes the Devil, Sin and Unrighteousness, whose Name
is written in the Book of Life has right to eat of the Tree of Life -- But if
that the Emperor of the Turks does not overcome, with the Spirit of God and his
Power, the Devil and his Works, Sin and Unrighteousness, etc. he cannot eat of
the Tree of Life; therefore he is not like to Lord, and to have Power over this
Tree of Life, which he cannot eat of, except with the Power and Spirit of God
he overcome the Devil and his Works.

And concerning the Pure Religion and the False, James, who was one of the
APostles of Christ Jesus says, If any Man seems to be Religious and bridles
not his Tongue, but deceives his own Heart, that Man's Religion is vain.
Therefore what Religion so ever the Emperor of the Turks set up or profess, or
any Man or Weman else in the whole World, and bridle not their Tongues with
Gods Power and Spirit, according to the Law or Command of Jesus, which he gave
to the Apostles, their Religion is vain, and they do but deceive their own
Hearts with their vain Religion, from their unbridled Tongues; for pure
Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To Visit the
Fatherless and the Widows in their Affliction, and to keep themselves Unspotted
from the World. And this is the pure Religion that God and Christ Jesus set up,
and his Apostles preached and declared to Men, and all the Believers and
Converted to God and Christ, and that keep their Command, did and do walk in
this pure Religion.

Fourthly, Sultan Mahomet Emperor of the Turks, Thou say, Thou art Commander
of the Christians Crucified God; and say, thou will Pursue their Crucified
God, whose Wrath thou fear not, nor his coming to defend or deliver them out
of thy Hand.

Answer, These high Words are not spoken in the fear of God, for if thou
knew God thou would know his Son Jesus Christ, who was made of the Seed of
Abraham according to the Flesh, and declared to be the Son of God according to
the Spirit of Holiness, by the Resurrection from the Dead; so that thou have
neither Power over his Godhead nor his Flesh. And Mahomet confesses in his
Alcoran, That Jesus the Son of Mary is full of Light (which is according to
Ancient Scriptures) and of the Gospel, to conduct People the right Way; with a
confirmation of the Old Testament, and to guide and instruct the Righteous --
Now Mahomet and the Turks who make this Confession in your Alcoran, then you
must believe the Old Testament, and the Gospel of the New concerning Christ
Jesus the Son of Mary, and of the Seed of David, according to the Flesh; and
that Jesus Christ came according to the promise of God to his Prophets, who was
Born of the Virgin Mary.

And Mahomet in his Alcoran confesses, That Jesus Christ was not begotten by
the will of Man, who was conceived of Mary, and that she should conceive, and
bring forth without the touching of Man. I say, the Angel of God said to Mary,
He was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and so called the Son of God: And Mahomet
says in his Alcoran, Page 30. Chap. 33. That John did affirm Christ to be the
Messiah, and to be the Word of God.

Now if the Turks do believe this which Mahomet says in his Alcoran, then you
must believe what Christ says of himself, and the Angel of God, and what the
Apostle says of him, John says of him, In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, and God was the Word, and all things were made by the Word,
and without him was not any thing made that was made; and in the Word was Life,
and the Life was the Light of Men, and that was the true Light which enlightens
every Man that comes into the World. Now here is the Divine Light which is the
Life in Christ, the Word by which all things were made, which enlightens every
Man that comes into the World, to their Salvation if they believe in the Light,
and to their Condemnation if they hate the Light: And John says, This Word was
made Flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and his Apostles beheld his Glory, as the
Glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth, and of his
fullness they did receive Grace for Grace; and says, The Law came by Moses, but
Grace and Truth by Jesus Christ.

Now whereas the Emperor of the Turks says, That he is Commander and Guardian
of the Christians Crucified God. Now in this he is mistaken, for the Eternal,
Incomprehensible, Invisible, Everlasting God, whose Divinity extends throughout
the whole Earth, who is God in Heaven above, and in the Earth beneath, to whom
all Nations are but as the Drop of a Bucket; this is the true Christians God,
whom they Serve and Worship in his Spirit and Truth, which the Jews did not
Crucify, nor could they Crucify; and it is Blasphemy for the Jews or any to
say, That they did Crucify the true Christians Eternal Invisible God, and
great Ignorance for any to say, That the true Christians God was Crucified, or
that the Eternal, Incomprehensible, Immortal God, the Creator of all, who is
the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, and the Breath of all Mankind is in his
Power, so that poor Mortals or Externals should say, think or imagine, that the
Eternal, Invisible, Everlasting, Immortal, Incomprehensible God was or can be
Crucified, which they cannot comprehend, which is the true Christians God.

But Christ, which was made of the Seed of David, according to the Flesh, who
took not upon him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham; He Suffered
for us in the Flesh. And so as Christ also has once Suffered for Sins in the
Flesh, he the Just for the Unjust, that Christ might bring us to God; so God
was not Crucified, but Christ being put to Death or Crucified in the Flesh, but
quickened again in the Spirit, and rose again, and sits at the right Hand of
God; this Peter (one of the Apostles of Jesus) testifies, and the true
Christians now believe it, and though Christ was Crucified through Weakness,
that is through the Flesh, yet he is alive and lives by the Power of God, 2
Cor. 13. So it is clear that the Eternal and Invisible, Incomprehensible God
was not, nor cannot be Crucified, but Christ the Son of God suffered according
to the Flesh, not in his Godhead: So Christ dyed for our Sins, according to
the Scripture of the Old and New Testament, For as in Adam all dyed, so even in
Christ shall all be made alive, and that Christ by the Grace of God should
taste Death for every Man: So it was not the Invisible, Eternal,
Incomprehensible God that was Crucified and Dyed, and did taste Death for every
Man, but Christ according to the Flesh, who was manifest to take away our Sin,
and in him there was no Sin; so Christ was manifest to destroy the Works of the
Devil, and Christ through his Death destroys Death that Sin brought, and the
Devil the Power of Death; And about the ninth hour (when Jesus Christ hanged
upon the Cross) He cried with a loud Voice, saying, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me. So it is clear, the Eternal God did not Dye, nor was
Crucified, but Christ was put to Death in the Flesh; this testifies Matthew, one
of Christ's Apostles: so he was the one Offering, who made an end of all the
Offerings among the Jews, through the offering up of the Body of Jesus once for
all; so the Man Christ Jesus offered up himself one Sacrifice for Sins; so by
that one Offering he has perfected forever them that are Sanctified; so he is
the Propitiation Offering and Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole World, yea
Jesus Christ which was of the Seed of David; and so according to the Scripture
Christ Dyed for our Sins, and he was buried, and rose again the third Day,
according to the Scriptures; and after he was risen from the Dead he was seen
of the twelve Apostles, and again He was seen of above five hundred Brethren at
once, that were Believers in him, and this was after he was Dead, Buried and
Risen; but none of the Princes of the World knew him, for had they known Christ
they would not have Crucified him, but we know now, that Christ being raised
from the Dead dies no more, and Death has no more Dominion over Christ, in
that he died unto Sin, and for the Sins of the whole World; but now he being
raised from the Dead, he is set at the right Hand of God; and therefore Jesus
of Nazareth, a Man approved of God by Miracles, Wonders and Signs which God did
by him, this Jesus the Son of Mary the Jews with their wicked hands did take,
Crucified and Slay; but it was God who loosed the Pangs of Death, because it
was not possible that he should be holden of it, and though the Jews did
Crucify Jesus and Slew him, and Hanged him on a Tree, yet God has raised him
up the third Day, and God has Exalted him at his right Hand to be a Prince and
a Savior, to give Repentance, etc. and forgiveness of Sins; and so Christ's
Apostles were Witnesses, how God raised him from the Dead; so you may here see,
it was not God that was Crucified and Dyed, for he raised Christ from the Dead
on the third Day, and showed him openly to his Apostles, and they did Eat and
Drink with Jesus Christ after that God had raised him up from the Dead, and he
commanded his Apostles to Preach to the People, and testify, that it was he
which was ordained of God to be Judge of Quick and Dead, and to him give all
the Prophets (and the Apostles) of God witness, That though the Name of Jesus,
whosoever believed in him should receive remission of Sins, neither is there
Salvation in any other, for there is no Name under Heaven given amongst Men
whereby we must be saved, but by the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, whom the Jews
Crucified, whom God has raised from the Dead; for God said to David, That of
the Fruit of his Loins (according to the Flesh) God would raise up Christ to
sit on his Throne. And David, he seeing this before, spoke of the Resurrection
of Christ, That his Soul was not left in Hell, neither did his Flesh see
Corruption: So though the Jews Crucified him, and a Soldier thrust his Speer
into his Side; and though he was Crucified and hanged on a Tree, and Slain,
Dead and Buried, him did God raise up the third Day, and he appeared to his
Apostles and Disciples, and did Eat and Drink with them after he was Risen, who
were the faithful Witnesses, That God raised him up from the Dead, who is
ascended up into Heaven, at the right Hand of God, who being the brightness of
Gods Glory, and the express Image of his Substance, and upholding all things by
the Word of his Power, when he had by himself purged our Sins, sat down at the
right Hand of the Majesty on High, whom the Heavens, must receive until the
times of restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the Mouth of all
his Holy Prophets, since the World began, and he that descended is the same
also that ascended far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things, who
led Captivity Captive, and gave Gifts unto Men, etc. And we have Redemption
from Christ's Blood, even Forgiveness of our Sins, who has delivered us from
the Devil, the Power of Darkness, who is the Seed of the Woman, which bruiseth
the old Serpents Head which deceived Adam and Eve, which God promised to Adam?
That the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents Head; in which Seed, viz,
Christ, all Nations are Blessed, who is the Image of the invisible God, the
first born of every Creature; for by him were all things Created that are in
the Heaven, and that are in the Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be
Thrones, or Dominions, Principalities or Powers; all things were created by
him, and for him, and he was before all things, and by him all things consists,
and Christ said in his prayer to his Father, This is Eternal Life, that they
might know these the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. And
Jesus desired of God his Father saying, That those whom God has given him,
might be with him, where he was, that they might behold his Glory which God
has given him; for he loved him before the foundation of the World, therefore
says Christ; now, O Father, Glorify thou me, with thy own self, with the
Glory which I had with thee before the World was; and Christ said to his
Discples, after he was risen from the Dead, All Power in Heaven and in Earth is
given unto me; and he bid his Disciples, go into all the World, and Preach the
Gospel to every Creature, etc. -- And then after the Lord Jesus Christ, had
spoken to his Disciples, he was received up into Heaven, and set down at the
right Hand of God, -- And now we who are the Believers in Christ Jesus, and
true Christians, we do live unto him, and if we dye, we dye unto the Lord,
whether we live or die, we are the Lords; for this end Christ both died,
revived, and rose, that he might be Lord both of the Dead and of the Living;
and he is Judge both of Quick and Dead, who is the only one Mediator betwixt God
and Man, even the man Christ Jesus, who makes intercession to God for his
people, and is able to save to the utmost all that come to God by him, whoever
lives to make Intercession for them, who is set down at the right Hand of God
in Heaven, who is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, who said to John, I am
the first and the last, I am he that Lives, and was Dead, and behold I am
alive for evermore.

And therefore Sultan Mahomet, Emperor of the Turks, who says, I will pursue
your Crucified God: wherein he is mistaken, it was not the Eternal
Incomprehensible God, but Christ that was Crucified, and Died for his, and all
men's Sins, if the Emperor of the Turks will believe it, if not, he will die in
his Sin: And if he thinks to pursue Christ that was Crucified, he is like unto
the Jews that did crucify him: But Christ is risen from the Dead, and is
alive, and dies no more, Death has no more dominion over him, nor has Mahomet
neither, and so is alive again, and lives for evermore, and is set down in
Heaven at the right Hand of God, out of the Jews and Turks reach to pursue, so
is far above their vain Imaginations and Reach; and he that has all power in
Heaven and Earth given to him, who is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, and
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and rules all Nations with a Rod of Iron, he
is able to daish them to pieces, like a Potters Vessel, and to abase the Pride
of haughty Men, and to save and deliver his People, out of the hands of the
Destroyers, for he gives unto his Believers and Follower Eternal Life; and
Christ who laid down his Life for his Sheep, said to the Jews, He had power to
lay down his Life, and he had power to take it up again -- This Commandment I
have received of my Father, says he, so it was not God his Father that Dyed;
and Jesus said, His Sheep heard his Voice, and followed him, and says he, I
give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any Man
pluck them out of my Hand; and says Christ, my Father that gave them me is
greater then all, and no Man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers Hand.

Here the Emperor of the Turks may see, that neither he nor the Jews, nor no
Man upon the Earth, is able to pluck Christ's Sheep out of his Hands, Jesus
Christ says so, who has all power in Heaven and Earth given to him, and is
the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, and King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. And
your own Alcoran says, that Jesus will be a Witness in the day of Judgment
against them that obey not his Law, and do not believe in him; and here the
Emperor may see, that Christ is able to defend his Sheep and save them; and
none is able to pluck them out of his Hands, who said, All power in Heaven and
Earth is given unto me, who is set down in Heaven at the right Hand of God, and
is revealed by his Spirit in his People, who knows his Heavenly Voice, distinct
from the Voice of the Devil, and all his Angels, and all the natural Men's
Voices upon the Earth, Christ Jesus his Heavenly Voice is known, distinct from
them all, who is above them all; and God and Christ may suffer or permit thee
to destroy Hypocrites, etc. But Jesus Christ says, thou nor no Man is able to
pluck his Sheep out of his Hands, yea out of his Hand that was crucified and is
Risen and Ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right Hand of God, thou have no
power to pluck his Sheep out of his Hand, and therefore thou art not able, nor
no Man: And therefore take heed of striving against him that is too mighty for
thee.

And Sultan Mahomet Emperor of the Turks, thou say, Thou do not fear the
Wrath of their Crucified God, to wit the Christians, as is said before, God
cannot be Crucified, but Christ Jesus was Crucified according to the Flesh, who
is Risen and Ascended, and sits at the right Hand of God; but hear, O Turk,
what his Apostle says of him, When the Lord Jesus Christ shall be Revealed
from Heaven, with his mighty Angels in Flaming Fire, taking Vengance on them
that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
be punished with everlasting Destruction from the presence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his Power, when he shall be glorified in his Saints, and be
admired by all them that believe who shall consume the Wicked with the Spirit
of his Mouth, and destroy them with the brightness of his coming, Hallelujah.
And therefore let every one that names the name of Jesus, depart from Iniquity,
for he has born the Iniquities of us all, and makes an end of Sin, and Redeems
us from Iniquity, and finishes Transgression, who through his Death destroys
Death that Sin brought, and the Devil the power of Death; and so there is no
other name amongst Men, given under the whole Heaven, whereby we must be saved,
but by the name of Jesus, which signifies a Savior; and according to the
Prophet, A Virgin shall be with Child conceived by the Holy Ghost, and shall
bring forth a Son, and they shall call his name Immanual, which by
Interpretation is, God with us, so by his Son Jesus Christ, God is with us,
that God who was Speaker, and Teacher of Adam and Eve in Paradise, and as long
as they kept under his teaching, they were happy, but when they forsook God's
teaching and speaking, and hearkened unto the Serpents speaking and teaching,
and followed it, they came into misery, and his Posterity, but according to the
Promise of God to Adam, The Seed of the Woman is come, to bruise the Serpents
Head, the destroyer, and he, namely Christ the Son of God, is the Savior; and
now in these last Days, God teaches us, and speaks to us by his Son Christ
Jesus, whom God has appointed to be heir of all things, by whom he made the
World, the Heavens, and the Earth, and the Seas and all things therein, and so
all the Children of the Lord are taught of the Lord, and in Righteousness are
they Established.

And there are three which bear Witness or Record in Heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the holy Ghost; and these are one, and there are three which bear
Record in Earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, (viz.) The Blood of
Christ which cleanses from all Sin, and the Water which washes from all
filthiness, and the Spirit to lead into all Truth, and Baptizes to Plung down
Sin and Evil, and to Circumcise to put off the body of Death, and Sins of the
Flesh, which is come into Man and Woman by Transgression; and you must feel
this Spirit in your hearts, which is a Witness for God who gives it you, which
will be a witness for you or a witness against you: And you must feel the Blood
of Christ sprinkle your Consciences, from your dead Works, that you may serve
the living God, which Blood will be a witness for you, or a witness against
you; and you must feel the Water of the Word to wash you and cleanse you, which
will be a Witness for you or a Witness against you; so the Spirit of God, the
blood of Jesus, the Water of the Word, are three that agree in one, that bear
Witness or Record in the Earth, and there are three which bear Witness or
Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are
one, he that has an Ear to hear, let him hear,

By the Offense of one (to wit Adam,) Judgment came upon all Men to
Condemnation, Even so by the Righteousness of one, (to wit Christ Jesus) the
free Gift of God came upon all Men unto Justification of Life.

For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son Jesus Christ,
that whosoever believes in him should not Perish, but have everlasting life.
And they that do believe in him have everlasting Life, John, 3.16. Romans 5.18.
Now concerning Gods Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, he was made of the seed of
David according to the Flesh, and declared to be the Son of God, with power
according to the Spirit of holiness, by the Resurrestion from the Dead, Romans
1.3, 4.

G. F

THE END.

