REASON and JUDGMENT. OR, SPECIAL REMARQUES Of the LIFE Of the Renowned Dr.
SANDERSON, Late Lord Bishop of Lincoln.

Together with his JUDGMENT FOR SETTLING the CHVRCH; In exact RESOLUTIONS Of
sundry grand CASES very seasonable at THIS TIME.

LONDON: Printed by J.C. for H. Marsh, at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane.
1663.

Imprimatur.

Ex AEdib. Sab. Feb. 24. 1662. Geo. Stradling, S.T.P. Rev. in Christo Pat. D.
Gilb. Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.

TESTIMONIES CONCERNING The Renowned Dr. SANDERSON.
Dr. Prideaux.
NOne States a Question more punctually, Resolves it more satisfactorily,
Answers all Objections more fully, then that clear and solid man Mr. Sanderson.

Bishop Usher.
And I Proposed the Case to the Judicious Dr. Sanderson, who Grasped all the
Circumstances of it, and Returned that happy Answer that met with all my
Thoughts, satisfied all my Scruples, and cleared up all my Doubts.

Dr. Hammond.
That staid and well-weighed man Dr. Sanderson, conceives all Things
deliberately, dwells upon them discreetly, discerns Things that differ exactly,
passes his Judgment rationally, and expresses it aptly, clearly and honestly.

Mr. Baxter.
-- I do not intend by this Character such Episcopal Divines as the Reverend
Dr. Sanderson, whom I honor for his Learning, Judgment, Moderation and Piety.

Dr. Fuller.
Amongst the Modern Worthies of this College still surviving, Dr. Robert
Sanderson, late Regius Professor, moves in the highest Sphere, a no less plain
and profitable then able and profound Casuist, (a Learning almost lost amongst
Protestants.)

Bishop Reynolds.
-- There is no mention of it in that Table of the several Opinions drawn up by
a Learned man of our Church, Dr. Sanderson.

Bishop Hall.
Alas, why do I wade further into the deep and large search of Cases of
Conscience, wherein I hear so far a progress is made by the excellent Dr.
Sanderson, the most exact and faithful Casuist living?

REASON and JUDGMENT: OR, SPECIAL REMARQUES Of the LIFE Of the Renowned Dr.
SANDERSON, Late Lord Bishop of Lincoln.

Together with his JUDGMENT FOR SETTLING the CHVRCH; In exact RESOLUTIONS Of
sundry grand CASES very seasonable at THIS TIME.

Oxford: Printed by J. W. for Will. Thorn. 1663.

Bishop Sanderson's second Sermon, (ad Populum) Page 211. E. THere is a Warning
for us, to take consideration of the loss of good or useful men; and to fear,
when they are going from us, that some evil is coming to us. The Prophet
complains of the too great and general neglect hereof in his time: The
righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men are taken
away, none considering that the righteous is taken from the evil to come, Esaias
57.1. When God sends his Angel to pluck out his righteous Lots, what may
Sodom expect but fire and brimstone to be rained down upon them? When he
plucketh up the fairest and choicest flowers in his Garden, and croppeth off
the tops of the goodliest Poppies, who can think other then that he means to
lay his Garden waste, and to turn it into a wild Wilderness? When he
undermineth the main Pillars of the house, takes away the very props and
buttresses of Church and Commonwealth; sweepeth away religious Princes, wise
Senators, zealous Magistrates, painful Ministers, men of eminent ranks, gifts
or example; who shall be secure tha either Church or Commonweal shall stand up
long, and not totter at least, if not fall? God in mercy takes such away from
the evil to come; we in wisdom should look for evil to come, when God takes
such away.

REASON and JUDGMENT: OR, SPECIAL REMARQUFS Of the LIFE Of the Renowned Dr.
SANDERSON, Late Lord Bishop of Lincoln: In a Letter to the Reverend J. W. D. D.
P. L.
SIR,
I Am equally sorry that I cannot satisfy your just desire in the Remarques of
our Renowned Diocesan's Life, as that I must comply with your sad fear in the
too true report of his Death; that I must assure you we have lost the man, and
what was mortal in him, and yet cannot help you to his virtues, and what was
immortal in him: that when I must write you the news that he is dead to the
world, I cannot draw a character wherein he may live with the good and virtuous
for ever. The wise, the holy and the good, live more nobly in their virtues and
graces in the hearts of others, then they did in their own bodies.

His modesty wrapped him in that privacy, and his place kept him at that
distance, that I cannot take his portraicture, nor recount his memorials so
exactly as I could wish, and you may expect: yet though for no other cause then
for this, That Posterity may know we have not loosely through silence permitted
things and persons to pass away as in a dream; there shall be thus much extant
concerning this excellent person, for his own honor, and the honor of the
Church he was bred in, That he was a Bishop, and a man of most sound Judgment,
of most deep Learning, of a vast Apprehension, of an holy and unspotted Life,
of an unsuspected Integrity; a great Friend, a faithful Servant, a valiant
Champion of the Church. More particularly there shall be extant, 1. His
Education: 2. His temper of body and mind: 3. The great instances of his Life:
4. His Person and Aspect: 5. His Works or Writings: 6. His Sufferings: 7. His
Rewards and Preferments: And lastly and chiefly, his Judgment and Resolution
of those Cases of Conscience that concern the Discipline or Worship of our
Church: -- wherein you will observe something admirable, many things imitable,
all things commendable.

Sect. 1. His Education.
When his Parents observed that he was capable of advancing the VVorshipfulness
of his Birth by the excellency of his Parts, his pregnant Wit, his large and
capacious Understanding, his fixed Judgment, his faithful Memory, and his
hopeful Seriousness, they took care that his youth and first years of reason
should not be lost, but (being hardly recovered if neglected) be carefully
improved in all good Learning: of which he was not only capable, but
comprehensive, in a severe and exact Grammar School; where, by an unwearied
diligence, a silent, sedentary, and astonished way of following his Book, a
seriousness beyond his years, (Oh how would he steal away from his Companions
follies, to his severer tasks and privacies!) he made his way through all things
on which he could fix, to an exactness in Greek and Latin, which he retained
to his dying day. And he would observe, That an exactness in School-learning
was a great advantage to our higher studies; as the miscarriages of School are
not easily recovered in the University: -- the errors of the first Concoction
being hardly rectified in the second.

At School he observed, he learned an art of memory. When he was enjoined to
learn what he understood not, (which was then an ordinary miscarriage in
Grammar-Schools) he was compelled to make use of similitudes, etc. and to
remember those things he knew not, to think upon something like them he knew.
As he had many excellent Observations touching Schools, which he would say were
the most considerable places in a Kingdom: so he would usually say, That the
Practical Way is the best; when as Aristotle speaks, We learn that by doing,
which we learn to do.

And now I would willingly enlarge on his minority, and his first appearance in
solid and pious Learning, with which he always abounded; but that it is like
the beginning of Nilus, hardly to be found; and we know no minority of his,
being one that did (...), excel his equals and himself; in a staid worth above
his years and time, always eminent, always excellent. And therefore I follow
him furnished with excellent Rules of Grammar and Rhetoric, with choice pieces
of History, Poetry and Oratory, with an elegancie in Latin, a good judgment
in Greek; serious in his design, prudent in his study, industrious in his way,
clear in his apprehension, searching in his understanding; serene, orderly and
methodical in his thoughts; sober and civil in his carriage: (the School having
added to his great Parts that humility, meekness, modesty, obedience and
civility, as, advantaged by his good disposition, rendered him to his dying day
submissive to Superiors, obliging to his Equals, tender to his Inferiors,
amiable and charitable to all.) I follow him (with as much duty, observance and
affection, though not with so much ability as other men) to the University of
Oxford; where, in Lincoln-Colledge, with a slow, but sure pace, he proceeded in
all rational and solid Learning: his unwearied mind struggling with the
intricacies, perplexities, darkness and confusion of Nature, and aiming at that
clear and genuine apprehension of things we were created in, after the image of
God, in knowledge: not so intent upon the notions, as the nature of things. As
he had attained to so much Grammar as enabled him to speak his mind properly,
and so much Rhetoric as to express it perswasively: so he endeavored to gain
so much Logic as might order, guide and direct his thoughts methodically; in
apprehending things distinctly; in judging of them exactly; in finding out the
truth that lies in them successfully; in discovering the errors, deceits and
fallacies imposed upon us in them evidently; and urging the truths found out
convincingly. His way was, 1. to write the Rules his Tutor suggested, or his
Books afforded: (for he writ most he read or heard, as he said, to stay his
active and young soul upon things, until he had distinctly conceived them.) 2.
To debate those Rules with himself and others, which he had so written. 3. To
practice them upon some Question or other, till they became as his native
Reason, as his own soul. Whereby he afterward attained in all cases a great
happiness to comprehend things fully, to state Controversies exactly, to lay
them before others both clearly and compendiously; to find out the merit of a
Cause, the right joint of a Question exactly; to confirm a Truth pertinently,
properly and acutely: insomuch that as he composed a new Logic, an excellent
way of Reasoning; so he was himself for many years the public Reason of the
Church: looking into Debates deeply, opening them solidly and conspicuously,
determining them impartially, conscientiously and clearly; pressing Truth and
Duty convincingly: his Reasons were strong and demonstrative, his Allegations
close and pertinent, his Observations choice and prudent; his Deductions clear,
his Censure impartial, his Expressions apt, suitable, weighty and accurate; his
Discourse steady, judicious, undistracted, made up of abstract notions of
Reason, Experience and Religion; his Thoughts calm, smoothe, and methodical. He
was a great engrosser of private Systemes and Papers; and he would say, The
united Reason of many industrious and serious searchers after the Truth, make
one complete man. He would gather the acutest Arguments he found among
Philosophers, to quicken, though not to instruct himself: these smart trifles
(he would say) would help us to that acuteness and distinctness of apprehension
that might be useful in greater matters: and it was equally useful and pleasant
to observe the various workings of several Reasons with men's several defects
and excellencies; by the correcting the one whereof, and imitating the other, a
man might raise a frame of soul most knowing, most clear, and almost innocent.
He advised young men to advance toward a clear understanding of any thing by
these steps: 1. To understand the word by which it is expressed, in all its
acceptations. 2. To understand all the words in the learned Languages, by which
that thing is expressed; with the Original of those words, and the reason why
they were made use of to express that thing; with all the words that are near
to it, and their signification. 3. Then to apprehend the nature of the thing,
with what it has common with other things, and what it has special in it
self; what relation it has to other things in the world; whence it proceeded;
for what end it was made: with other things that are like it. Thus to know a
few things exactly, is to be very learned. As to any Question that was to be
debated, the words (he said) must be clearly understood, and the notion of the
things in debate stated; and then, what is granted on all sides concerning the
things rightly understood must be showed; and what is controverted (as there
will be very little, when words and things are well understood) must be clearly
laid down as it is understood on all hands, and convincingly proved by a proper
reason from the nature of the thing, or from authority, pressed and cleared
from all evasions, cavils and subterfuges; which cavils must be proposed
faithfully and honestly, and answered briefly and fully, ingeniously, heartily
and modestly.

His advice about reading of Authors was this: 1. To observe the nature of the
thing handled, and so know what to look for from him, what part of Learning he
may satisfy you in. 2. To observe the Author, and the occasion, time and way
of writing. 3. To observe what is said of the thing handled in direct
Propositions. 4. To note what is said indirectly of it out of other Learning,
as Rhetoric, Philology, History, etc. 5. To take notice what new Explications
the Author uses beyond what we have in the old Learning: his several
Conclusions and Arguments, with the Topics from whence they are taken; with
his answer to Arguments and Objections. He would say, It was no less then a
miracle of knowledge that men might attain to, if they proceeded thus
distinctly in reading Authors, and in pursuing after knowledge. He advised
young men to use Common-place-books; in the beginning whereof, there might be a
common table, containing the general heads of the book: under which generally,
the special heads may be written, with references to the pages where those
heads are handled, with a little blank space after each sort of heads, wherein
more heads if we meet with them may be inserted: for every head let there be
reserved a page, where what notable sentence, notion, rule or particular soever
is suggested to us in reading, meditating, discoursing, may be written and
reserved for future use. His mind thus guided by sure and constant Rules of
Reason, made the more methodical, and so more happier progress in learning
Languages and Intellectual Sciences, Philosophy, History, Poetry, Philology,
and the whole circle of Learning; which he thoroughly studied, and methodically
digested, making each part illustrate and help another, until he became a great
Master of the whole, -- and his Parts voted him Fellow of the House, (an
excellent advantage for young men to improve their first years of prudence and
discretion) and made him an eminent Tutor in the University, where he at once
learned and taught, advancing his own Parts and Reason, while he improved his
Pupils: I learn, said he, much from my Master, more from my Equals, and most of
all from my Disciples. And indeed he allowed himself no other diversion then
what the giving encouragement and instruction to ingenious young Students
yielded him: (a thing he peculiarly delighted in, as wherein he could observe
the several weaknesses of Reason, and their respective remedies.)

Here he was as retired as he could; being able, but not forward to appear, and
very willing to improve himself. His modest thoughts and distrust of himself
made him a while satisfy himself with the conscience of well-doing, having the
highest pleasure of enjoying Worth without noise, and Virtue without applause;
being a great Stream of Learning, without noise, deep and clear.

While he was in the University, Sect 2. His Industry.
he generally spent eleven hours a day in study: which industry of his,
dispatched the whole course of Philosophy, and picked out in a manner all that
was useful in all Classick Authors that are extant; drawing Indexes for his
private use, either in his own Paper-book, or at the beginning and end of each
book: which will testify his indefatigable pains to as many as shall peruse
his excellent and well-chosen Study. This assiduity continued to his dying day,
as if he had resolved to depart studying, and go immediately from his pursuit
of revealed truth, to the view of the eternal. He disposed himself and time to
perpetual industry and diligence; not only avoiding, but perfectly hating
idleness, and hardly recommending any thing more then this; Be always furnished
with somewhat to do, as the best way to innocence and pleasure. There was not a
minute of the day he left vacant from business of necessity, civility or study:
you should hardly see him without his book, or hardly meet him without his
plodding thoughts and meditations. A clear and calm way he had of weighing
duly what he should do, in designing what he had considered, and soberly
performing what he had designed. His mind was wholly inward, where lay his
Scoenes of discreet, prudent and pious undertakings. In sicknesses, if they
were not so violent as to make the recollection of his thoughts impossible, he
never intermitted study, but rather reinforced, as the best ease of his
distemper, and diversion of his pain. His way was to cast into paper his
Observations, and direct them to his great design. I may say of him, as the
reverend Dr. Fell says of his good friend the excellent Dr. Hammond, That
considering his time of prayer and instructing his family, his perusal of the
writings of friends and strangers when inrended to be public, his review of
his own works, his reception of visits, whether for civility or for resolution
of conscience, or information in point of difficulty, which were numerous, and
great devourers of his time, (he being reckoned the ablest and faithfullest
Casuist in the world) his general Correspondencies by Letters, which took up
the proportion of a day in each Week, and more: I say, he that shall consider
these instances of diligence, besides his own vast reading, must be to seek
what point of time remained undisposed of, and learn to redeem the time.

Sect. 3. His Temper.
It pleased God he had a body suited to that pains he was designed for; a
faithful Assistant rather then an impediment to his great Soul; symbolizing
with it in an exact temper, neither failing it through the weakness of organs,
nor burthening it with the redundancy of humors, nor clogging it with sad
melancholy, nor disturbing it with an active unsetledness, nor ruffling it with
angry choler; neither too large for it, nor too narrow, but every way
proportionable. Although he indeed was pleased to write thus of himself in his
Preface to his Book of the Obligation of Conscience: Nimirum, ut ignavus miles
quem sola fortem facit desperatio, tum demum acris fertur ad pugnam, cum nullus
reliquus est effugio locus: ita mihi ingenium est. Des otium, spatium, tempus!
nil sit. Vexantur frustra calami, diffluit men's, vagatur, excurrit, torpet. In
arctum cogas! Subsistit, excitatur, recolligit vires; quasque habet,
quandoquidem exerto est opus, exerit universas: and ut verbo dicam, quod agi
necesse est, hoc agit. Vt solis radii, qui laxo liberoque coelo diffusi sic
modice calefaciunt vix ut sentias, iidem in concavi speculi umbonem, velut in
centrum coacti adductique, acriter urunt. Multo usu a prima lanugine ad hanc
canitiem edoctus didici, quam non sit vanum illud Pythagorae hemistichium, --
(...).

Quod ignavae mentis vitium, etsi nonnullis fortasse videri possit habere
modestiae speciem aliquam, mihi tamen una hac idonea excusatione defendi posse
videtur, quod sit certis quibusdam hominibus, (and ego in hoc censu) (...), ita
congenitum insitumque ab ipsis cunabulis, ut frustra sit, quisquis exillo
numero id ulla speret a se posse, vel art corrigi, vel industria superari:

Yet I am assured that he never considered longer then till he could discern
whether things proposed were fit, or no: when that was determined, he would
without any slow delay (in spending that time to gaze upon a business which
might serve to do it) go about another: when he had perfected one business, he
could not endure his soul should stand still, but he instantly considered what
was next to be undertaken; constant course of business running along with a
constant course of time.

His Carriage grave, comely, and modest; his Garb plain and studious, Sect 4.
His Carriage.
such as became a great Scholar and a solemn Divine, always meditating some
great and good design, retiring within himself, and taken up with his own great
thoughts: equal in all his actions; doing nothing rash, violent, or pecipitant
in his words, gesture, or understanding; even and composed, entire, modestly
endeavoring what he thought his duty: diligently pursuing what was within his
reach, and resolvedly fixed upon what he judged within his capacity, the (...),
the square and solid man, seldom failing, and therefore seldom repenting. his
speech was as calm and even as his soul, so sober, so steady, so apt, so
ordered, so weighty when serious, so pleasant when devoted to an harmless
mirth, which became him no less then smiling and a little laughter does a good
man and a good conscience; for his innocent facetiousness was well tempered
with gravity, mixed with good counsel, allayed with good discourse, and
beautified with excellent example: if he would speak facetiously, no man did it
or could do it more pleasingly: if he listed to dispute solidly, none did it
more satisfactorily: he was choice in his friends, and faithful to them;
friendship when true and sincere, he would say, was the greatest happiness and
relief among the cares and troubles of the world, especially with those who
were of the same inclination, profession, study and designment with himself; an
union of mind is next the union of soul and body in the world; and friendship
is next unto life: and it was this reverend persons business, where ever he
was, to promote those two great things, friendship and love, that (as he used
to say) men might have those that charitably observed, and faithfully
admonished them of the failings, indecencies, and miscarriages Nature is
obnoxious to; which he exactly performed, and expected back again to be
returned to himself: he was constant in his kindness, as long as friends were
true; but as he could easily discern and look through, so he deeply resented
all artifice and cunning: a plain man he was, and a plain temper he loved; if
any mischance happened that might occasion misapprehensions, he suffered them
not to improve by concealment: but presently offered the reasons of the
misunderstanding, and enjoined all friends to return him the like measure back
again, if his own actions seemed at any time doubtful or unseemly.

Sect. 5. His Moderation.
(...) make up Epictetus his Philosophy, sustine and abstine made our Reverend
Diocesans Religion: none understood better how all things are lawful, none
understood better then he how all things are not expedient; he knew temptations
lie in ambush, behind our lawful enjoyments: in his apparel none more plain, in
his diet none more temperate, eating (as he would say) rationally, only for
health and life; one meal a day sufficed him, with some fruit at night: in his
sleep none more sparing, eleven or twelve at night being his usual time of
going to rest, and five, and very rarely six, the hour of his rising:
recreations which his judgment allowed, yet his care and self-denial forbid
him; ab illicitis semper quandoque a licitis, was his rule: he would say,
Things unlawful we must never do; nor ever lawful things, but with due respect
of our calling and other concurrent circumstances. Wine and music, and
gorgeous apparel, and delicate fare, are such things as God in his goodness
has created and given to the children of men for their comfort; and they may
use them lawfully, and take comfort in them as their portion: but he that shall
use any of them intemperately, or unseasonably, or vainly, or wastfully,
abuses both them and himself. And therefore we shall often find both the
things themselves condemned, and those that used them blamed in the Scriptures.
The men of Israel for stretching themselves upon their couches, and eating the
lambs out of the flock, and chaunting to the sound of the Viol, and drinking
Wine in bowls, Amos 6. And the women for their bracelets, and earrings, and
wimples, and crisping pins, and their other bravery, in Esaias 3. And the rich
man for faring deliciously and wearing fine linen, in the Parable, Luke 16.
Yea, our Savior himself pronounces a woe against them that laugh, Luke 6. And
yet none of all these things are or were in themselves unlawful: it was the
excess only, or other disorder in the use of them, that made them obnoxious to
reproof. Though some in their heat have said so, yet who can reasonably say,
that horse-matches, or playing at cards or dice, are in themselves and wholly
unlawful? And yet on the other side, what sober wise man, because the Things
are lawful, would therefore approve of that vain and sinful expense which is
oftentimes bestowed by men of mean estates in the dieting of Horses, and
wagering upon them? or of that excessive abuse of gaming, wherein thousands of
our Gentry spend in a manner their whole time, and consume away their whole
substance, both which ought to be far more precious unto them? I might instance
in many other things in like manner. In all which, we may easily err either in
point of judgment, or practice, or both; if we do not wisely sever the use
from the abuse. Many times because the abuses are common and great, we
peevishly condemn in others the very use of some lawful things. And many times
again, because there is evidently a lawful use of the things, we impudently
justify our selves in the very abuses also. That is foolish preciseness in us;
and this profane partiality: by that we infringe our brethrens liberty; by
this, pollute our own. The best and safest way for us in all indifferent things
is this: to be indulgent to others, but strict to our selves; in allowing them
their liberty with the most, but taking our own liberty ever with the least.

There are many things which in my conscience are not absolutely and in Thesi
necessary to be done; which yet in Hypothesi for some personal respects I think
so fit for me to do, that I should resolve to undergo some inconveniency rather
than omit them; still reserving to others their liberty to do as they should
see cause. There are again many things which in my conscience are not
absolutely and in Thesi unlawful to be done; which yet in Hypothesi, and for
the like personal respects, I think so unfit for me to do, that I should
resolve to undergo some inconvenience rather chan do them: yet still reserving
to others the like liberty as before, to do as they should see cause. It
belongs to every sober Christian advisedly to consider not only what in it
self may lawfully be done or left undone; but also what in godly wisdom and
discretion is fittest for him to do, or not to do upon all occasions, as the
exigence of present Circumstances shall require.

And now you are willing I doubt not to hear how this exact man appeared in the
world. Sect. 6. His removal from the University.
You must know, that when he found his youthful heat abated and fined; his
Parts and Abilities competent; his Understanding furnished with all necessary
knowledge; his Memory made faithful and serviceable by method and deep
apprehension; his Invention upon any subject flowing with proper Notions; his
Judgment in a variety of Learning exact, and discerning things that differ;
his Prudence for affairs mature and well weighed; and his Soul knit to a
resolution able to meet with variety of occasions, with honor, quiet, pleasure
and safety: he was not wedded to ease and speculation, nor wanting (what able
men sometimes do) a public Patrociny and Encouragement, in answer to the
expectation of the University that bred him, of his Generation that looked for
him, and his own inclination, -- who would always say, That Employment was
Improvement. He left the University, having compassed with his knowledge the
whole Circle of the Arts, being exact in propriety and elegancy of Languages,
having read ancient and modern Writers; having studied Philosophy, and made
himself familiar with all politer Classick Authors, being learned in
School Divinity, and a Master in Church-Antiquity, ready in the sense of
Scripture, Fathers, Councils, Ecclesiastical History: Thus full of
Scripture-strength, of Councils weight, of Fathers consent, of Historick light,
of Scholastic acuteness; he, I say, left the University freely, making not the
usual advantage of his place, which was then prudence and good husbandry, but
looked upon by him as the worst Sacrilege in the world, as which at once
betrayed the Church to the unworthy and weak, and the University to the
undeserving, and the Founders Charity to those persons they never designed them
for; to the shame of the present Age, and the undoing of the future; and
betaking himself to his Charge at Boothby-Pagnel in Lincolnshire, where we
have him

Preaching solidly, not allowing himself the easy liberty of doing the work of
the Lord negligently. Sect. 7. His Preaching.
Although he was furnished with that Classick and Authentic Learning, which
readily enabled him to speak upon any occasion and subject properly,
pertinently, copiously and handsomely; yet such was his reverence of that great
work, that he was very elaborate and exact in reading, meditating and composing
his Sermons to rational and just Discourses. His method was to choose his Text
pertinently; to weigh its occasion, coherence, and other circumstances, duly;
to look out the truest reading of it, industriously; to open that Original by
reading out of the choicest Authors, and most proper learning in that kind,
clearly; to drop such pithy and pertinent Observations, learned, moral, divine,
as he went on in Explication, judiciously; to pitch upon great Observations
that were couched in the several parts, usefully: which he deduced from the
Text evidently, (for he could not endure those that wrested the Scripture for a
truth, as men that were under a temptation of wresting them for an error)
bottomed upon their proper Grounds and Reasons orderly, (pressing each truth
with evidence raised from their several places in the body of Divinity)
illustrated and enlarged with general Learning, and improved to the respective
Duties of Christianity that he saw might rationally be inferred from them: and
indeed his general Learning afforded him plenty of Observations, proper,
learned and useful, upon each head. His way, like Dr. Hammond, was after every
Sermon to resolve upon the ensuing subject, and to draw a Scheme of it, and to
take in the course of his study what fell in conducible unto the present
purpose; and he spoke from the heart to the heart.

As he provided strong meat for strong men, so he provided sincere milk for
babes, spending an hour at evening in the Church-Catechism, whereat the Parents
and elder sort were wont to be present, and from whence they reaped more
benefit then from his Sermons; the great Principles of Religion working more
powerfully upon them then his Discourses and Enlargements. Christianity was
most successful, he would say, when proposed naked and in its own evidence, as
the truth was in Jesus. By Catechizing, the Gospel prevailed over Judaism and
Heathenism; by Catechizing, Popery incroached and broke in upon the Gospel; by
Catechizing, the Gospel again recovered itself, and got ground of Popery. He
opened the Church-Catechism distinctly, grounded them in each point steadfastly,
and taught them their duties arising out of each part of Religion profitably;
making it appear as he went along, how the grace of God bringing salvation by
Jesus Christ has appeared, teaching men to deny all ungodliness and wordly
lust, and to live soberly, justly and godly in the present world.

As he taught them, so he and they lived up to a Religion pure and undefiled:
he and they joining together in the holy Offices, 1. Of Common Prayer in all
the days appointed, devoutly and reverently, (where he and his family was the
great Rule and Pattern.) 2. Of the holy Sacrament carefully and preparedly, not
without previous instructions and directions public and private. 3. In an holy
love and charity, which taught them successfully, being exemplary therein, and
being able by his great skill in all Laws to compose all Differences in his
private address and conversation: his Judgment being so esteemed, that there
were few that knew him, but would stand to his prudent and honest Arbitration:
wherein the God of love and peace so blessed him, that as he maintained love
among others, so he had the love of all; there being not any of his function
either more esteemed while alive, or more lamented when dead. Neither did he
think it enough to persuade his people to an obligingness in Conversation,
unless he could work them to a charity and hospitality, whereby they might
endear themselves to each other, and relieve the poor. Among them he would be
the most welcome: for he understood very well how much the Applications of the
Table enforced the Doctrines of the Pulpit; and how subservient the endearing
of his person was to the recommending of his instructions, where his elegant,
apt and facetious way, sweetened his more serious discourse, and weighty
conceptions: so that he was heard at once with the highest pleasure and profit
in the world. As he urged their charity to the Poor earnestly, so he directed
it discreetly, that the Idle partaked not of it: and truly the Needy had a
stock raised for them, to employ and relieve them; I say, to employ and relieve
them: for he had no charity for the Idle and the Vagrant, -- the very scabs,
filth and vermin of a Commonwealth. I mean such as have health, and strength,
and limbs, and are in some measure able to work, and take pains for their
living, yet rather choose to wander abroad the Country, and to spend their days
in a most base and ungodly course of life; and, which is yet more lamentable,
by I know not what connivence, contrary to all Conscience, Equity, and Law, are
suffered. All Christian Commonwealths should be the Isreal's of God; and in his
Israel, God, as he promised there should be some always poor, on whom to
exercise charity; so he ordained there should be no beggar, to make a trade and
profession of begging. Plato, than whom never any laid down a more exact Idea
of an happy Commonwealth, allows not any beggar therein; alleging, that
where such were tolerated, it was impossible but the State must abound with
pilfering and whoring, and all kind of base villainy. The Civil Laws have flat
Constitutions against them, in the Titles de mendicantibus non invalidis. But I
think never kingdom had more wholesome laws in both kinds, I mean both for the
competent relief of the orderly poor, and for sharp restraint of disorderly
vagabonds, then those provisions which in many of our own memories have been
made in this land. But Quid leges sine moribus --? Those Laws are now no Laws,
for want of due execution: but Beggars are Beggars still, for want of due
correction. Et vetabitur semper, and retinebitur; the saying is truer of Rogues
and Gypsies in England, than ever it was of Mathematicians in Rome. You to
whose care the preservation of the Justice, and thereby also of the Peace of
the Land is committed, as you tender the Peace and Justice of the Land, as you
tender your own quiet, and the safety of your neighbors; as you tender the
weal of your Country, and the honor of God: breath fresh life into the
languishing Laws by severe execution; be rather cruel to these Vipers, than to
the State. So shall you free us from the Plague, and your selves from the
guilt, and them from the opportunities, of infinite sinful abominations.

But we are unreasonable to press you thus far, or to seek to you or any others
for Justice in this matter; having power enough in our own hands to do our
selves Justice upon these men, if we would but use it: Even by making a strait
Covenant with our Ears, not to heed them; and with our Eyes, not to pity them;
and with our Hands, not to relieve them. Say I this altogether of my self? or
says not the Apostle even the same? He that will not labor, let him not eat:
relieve him not. But has not Christ required us to feed the hungry, and to
cloth the naked, and to be free and charitable to the poor? Nothing surer: God
forbid any man should preach against Charity and Almsdeeds. But remember, that
as God approves not Alms or any other work, if without Charity; so nor Charity
it self, if without Discretion. Honor Widows, says Saint Paul, But those
that are Widows indeed. So relieve the poor, but relieve those that are poor
indeed. Not every one that asks; not every one that wants; nay more, not
every one that is poor, is poor indeed: and he that in his indiscreet and
mis-guided charity should give to every one that asks, or wants, or is
poor, meat, or clothing, or Alms; would soon make himself more hungry, and
naked, and poor, than he that is most hungry, or naked, or poor. The poor, whom
Christ commends to thee as a fit object for thy charity, the poor indeed, are
those that want, not only the things they ask, but want also means to get
without asking. A man that is blind, or aged, and past his work; a man that is
sick, or weak, or lame, and cannot work; a man that desires it, and seeks it,
and cannot get work; a man that has a greater charge upon him than his honest
pains can maintain; such a man as one of these, he is poor indeed. Let thine
Ears be open, and thine Eyes open, and thy Bowels open, and thy Hands open to
such a one: it is a charitable deed, and a Sacrifice of sweet smelling; with
such sacrifices God is well pleased: Forget not thou to offer such sacrifices
upon every good opportunity, and be well assured God will not forget in due
time to reward thee. But for a lusty able upright man (as they style him in
their own dialect) that had rather beg, or steal, or both, than dig; he is no
more to be relieved as a poor man, than a woman that has poisoned her husband
is to be honored as a Widow. Such a woman is a Widow, for she has no more an
husband than any other Widow has: but such a Woman is not a Widow indeed, as
St. Paul would be understood; not such a Widow as he would have honored: it is
alms to hang up such a Widow, rather than to honor her. And I dare say, he
that helps one of these sturdy Beggars to the stocks, and the whip, and the
house of correction, not only deserves better of the Commonwealth; but does a
work of greater Charity in the sight of God, than he that helps him with
meat, and money, and lodging. For he that does this, corrupts his Charity by
a double error. First, he maintains, and so encourages the other in
idleness; who, if none would relieve him, would be glad to do any work rather
then starve. And Secondly, he disableth his Charity, by mis-placing it; and
unawares robs the poor, whilst he thinks he relieveth them. As he that
gives any honor to an Idol, robs the true God, to whom alone all religious
honor is due: so he that gives any Alms to an idle beggar, robs the truly
poor, to whom properly all the fruits of our Alms are due. And so it comes to
pass oftentimes (as Saint Ambrose sometimes complained) that the maintenance
of the poor is made the spoil of the loyterer.

To maintain that peace and quiet, he endeavored to keep every one within his
own bounds, that none defraud and go beyond another: wishing them to have that
one great Rule in their eye, What ye would have others do unto you, that do ye
unto them: this is the Law and the Prophets. He would tell them, that the
reason why he lived so peaceably with all his Neighbors, was, because he never
received from any of them any more then he would willingly pay: the reason why
he was so civil, he always looked upon his Parishioner as if he were the
Minister, and upon himself the Minister as if he were the Parishioner.

Neither was he less obliging in his Carriage toward the Neighboring Gentry,
who were much taken with his great Reason, useful Observation, excellent
Discourses, Civil, Moral, Philosophical, Historical, Technical: and indeed his
skill in Architecture, Geography, Optics, Geometry, Astronomy, Heraldry, in
which he took great delight, much endeared him to his ingenious Neighbors, who
in his company might communicate and improve their own. And indeed he observed
it very requisite that Ministers should have a competent skill in History,
Mathematics, Law and Physic, to entertain the Ingenious, and to advise the
Ignorant, who expect that the Priests lips should preserve all knowledge, and
that the people should receive it from their mouths. Excellent was that advice
of his: As the times now are, wherein Learning abounds even unto wantonness,
and wherein the World is full of Questions, and Controversies, and Novelties,
and Niceties in Religion; and wherein most of our Gentry, very Women and all,
(by the advantage of long Peace, and the customs of modern Education, together
with the help of a multitude of English books and Translations) are able to
look through the ignorance of a Clergyman, and censure it, if he be tripping in
any point of History, Cosmography, Moral or Natural Philosophy, Divinity, or
the Arts; yea, and to chastise his very method and phrase, if he speak loosely,
or impertinently, or but improperly, and if every thing be not point-vise. I
say, as these times are, I would not have a Clergyman content himself with
every Mediocrity of gifts; but by his prayers, care and industry improve those
he has, so as he may be able upon good occasion to impart spiritual gifts to
the people of God, whereby they may be established, and to speak with such
understanding, and sufficiency, and pertinency, (especially when he has just
warning, and a convenient time to prepare himself) in some good measure of
proportion to the quickness and ripeness of these present times, as they that
love not his Coat, may yet approve his Labors, and not find any thing therein
whereat justly to quarrel: Showing in his Doctrine (as our Apostle writes to
Titus) uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity, sound speech that cannot be
condemned, that he that is of the contrary part may be ashamed, having no evil
to say of him.

He was always so excellent a Neighbor, that he seldom failed in the civility
of Visits and Correspondence; the greatest advantages for good understanding
and love: but especially in time of sickness, when affliction was an excellent
preparative for instruction. Wherefore not only when entreated, (as most of
his dying Neighbors were unwilling to leave the world until he, good man, had
settled their consciences upon Gospel-principles in peace with God) did he make
his visits to all such as wanted his assistance; but before he was thought of,
would he prevent their requests, by early and frequent addresses to them:
attending diligently those mallia tempora, those gentle and most tractable
opportunities of doing good which might be offered him.

As he was publick-spirited himself, so he endeavored that all he had interest
in, might be communicative; there being few Gentlemen of his acquaintance whom
he had not directed to some noble or charitable work for men's improvement or
relief: He, their great Casuist, having their hearts and purses at his devoir,
and using his happy power always to their honor, comfort, and infinite
satisfaction: so, he would say, he rescued the Creature from the bondage of
corruption, to the glorious service of God, and to Primitive innocence, and
their first use.

Although he was thus employed and taken up at his private charge, Sect. 8. His
Public Performances.
and pleased with his beloved privacy and retirement; yet when summoned to the
Public, as to Paul's Cross, to Visitations, to Lectures, to the Court, to the
University, he appeared with much zeal, prudence, and holy abilities, with
elegant and useful performances, full of Dogmatick, Polemick, Practick,
Casuistick and Critic Learning; where he offered the marrow and pith of the
Fathers, the subtilty of the Schoolmen, the solidity of the Neotericks, so
ready, so clear, so percolated from the Authors obscurity or tediousness, that
his Quintessence, or Distillations of them in his Discourse, were more useful,
perspicuous and vigorous, then the Originals or first Mass wherein they were
diffused. At Visitations he offered deep, solid, clear and abstract Notions of
Reason, Experience and Religion, for Order, Peace, Unity and Obedience, and
pointed out those paths equally distant from superstition and licentiousness,
wherein all wise and good Christians should walk in peace, according to the
will of God declared in Laws Natural, Civil, Moral and Ecclesiastical; where
the attentive Hearers admired equally the acute manner, and the weighty matter
of his Discourses; his strong Arguments, his clear Deductions, his impartial
Judgment, his steady, even, and undistracted Thoughts, whereby he rescued poor
souls, whose easiness cast them on obvious errors, rather then they would
search after difficult and retired truths. He persuaded private Reasons,
Pretenses, Interests and Designs, to yield to public Law and common good. He
convinced the world that the things enjoined in our Church, are in their nature
safe and lawful, in their use free; and to be used in obedience to Authority,
for order, decency and edification, as they might be forborne when not enjoined,
or not conducing to order, decency, or a sacred solemnity. He taught men to
bring their consciences to a Rule, and forbear nothing as against conscience
which was not against a Rule, against Gods Word, against Faith, or Manners, or
the nature of the things enjoined. How clearly has he proved, that as all
necessaries were enjoined by express Scriptures; so all the Circumstances of
Worship and Discipline were enjoined in Scripture- intimations, which required
all things orderly and decent? How pathetically would he urge, that Public
Authority knew better what Time, Place, Gesture, Garment, Phrase, Rite or
Ceremony was most expedient and orderly, then any private Spirit; and that if
any man would be contentious, we had no such custom, nor the Churches of God?
How powerfully would he urge a Compliance with Public Authority, to avoid
scandal, to testify our Charity, Humility and Obedience; to show our Reverence
and fear of it; to use our Christian Liberty soberly, charitably and
obediently; that Laws might be observed, the Church might be composed, Charity
might be revived, Dangers might be avoided, the Kingdom might be settled, good
Christians might be edified, God might be obeyed, and our Superiors for Gods
sake? Thus he studied, debated, cleared and composed Differences; thus he
satisfied Scruples; thus he justified the Churches Liberty and Authority: the
care of which so entirely possessed him, that he reduced most of his study to
that design; which he managed with plenty of Matter, with variety of Reading,
with full and pertinent Citations, with clear and copious Expressions,
methodical Proceedings, powerful Demonstrations, Fundamental Reason, Original
Law, Essential Religion, with a prudent discovery of the proportions of order
and policy, of the boundaries of Government, and the great principles of peace.
And all this was the better taken, because taught by a man not only of vast
and great Abilities, of full maturity of Judgment; but of great Integrity in
his Design, of great innocence and unblameableness in his Conversation; of a
good Conscience; of a great calmness and composure in Spirit; of a vast
Comprehension, who strained the Quintessence of Reason, Religion, Laws Grecian,
Roman, Imperial, and Civil, Canon and Ecclesiastical, to his great Platform for
Peace, Unity and Setlement.

Sect. 9. At Court and Lectures.
At Court, and in his Lectures, he pursued the most necessary Duties, and the
most concerning Cases of Conscience: for he observed, That it is one Stratagem
of the Arch-enemy of mankind, (and when we know his wiles, we may the better be
able to defeat him) by busying men of great and useful parts in by-matters, and
things of lesser consequence, to divert them from following that unum
necessarium, that which should be the main in all our endeavors, the beating
down of sin, the planting of Faith, and the reformation of manners.
Controversies, I confess, are necessary, the Tongues necessary, Histories
necessary, Philosophy and The Arts necessary, other Knowledge of all sorts
necessary in the Church; for Truth must be maintained, Scripture-phrases
opened, Heresy confuted, the mouths of Adversaries stopped, Schisms and
Novelties suppressed: But when all is done, positive and Practique Divinity is
it must bring us to Heaven: that is it must poise our judgments, settle our
consciences, direct our lives, mortify our corruptions, increase our graces,
strengthen our comforts, save our souls. Hoc opus, hoc studium: there is no
study to this, none so well worth the labor as this, none that can bring so
much profit to others, nor therefore so much glory to God, nor therefore so
much comfort to our own hearts, as this. This is a faithful saying, and these
things I will that thou affirm constantly (says St. Paul to Titus) that they
which have believed in God might be careful to maintain good works: these
things are good and profitable unto men. You cannot do more good unto the
Church of God, you cannot more profit the people of God, by your gifts; then by
pressing effectually these two great points, Faith, and good works. These are
good and profitable unto men.

Insomuch that the excellent King would say, I bring an ear to hear others; I
bring a conscience to hear Sanderson. And the throng of Auditors in Court and
Country was so fixed and attentive upon the deep, rational, and knowing
Emanations of his soul, as if they expected new Rules of Life from that great
Searcher of Rules and Laws. His great care was, so to direct his Heart, his
Tongue, his Endeavor in the exercise of his Ministry, both public and
private, that by Gods blessing upon his Labors, he might be enabled to advance
Gods glory, to promote his truth, to benefit his Church, to propagate all
Christian Duties, to discharge a good conscience in the mean time; and at the
last, make his account with comfort at the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ.

From the year 1624. to his death, there was no Convocation, Sect. 10. At
Convocations.
or Assembly, or Treaties, but he was called to, as a man of deep Observation
in the public defects of the Church; of great prudence in applying remedies
suitable to those defects, in the fear of God and love of his truth, so as
became a man of Learning, Gravity, and a good Conscience, in so grand
Concernments as imported the peace of the Church, the satisfaction and
salvation of men's souls. For which Meetings he prepared himself by a view of
all Judgments in the Controversies there likely to be debated, which he drew
up into Tables still to be seen, that he might try all things, and hold fast
that which is good. Wherever he appeared, whether in the School, or in
Convocation, or in a Committee, (as at the Dean of Westminster, March 21.
1640.) his moderation was known unto all men:

1. In those five Points controverted so much in England as well as Holland,
of, 1. Predestination; 2. Reprobation; 3. Universal Redemption; 4. Effectual
Grace; and, 5. Perseverance: he pitched upon such a mean as Bishop Usher,
Bishop Davenant, Bishop Overal aimed at, and the excellent Dr. Hammond approved
of, as appears in his Letters of Accord with that incomparable Doctor.

2. As to the Popish Controversies and Adversaries, he had so far pity and
charity for those plain and honest-hearted people of that way, as either their
errors or ignorance in some things not fundamental, did not betray them either
to unbelief or presumption, or to final impenitency, or immorality, or
uncharitableness. He was herein of Bishop Usher's mind, in his Sermon before
King James an Wansted.

3. As to our Reformation: he had a great esteem for the Moderation of it, a
great Veneration for the Instruments employed of God in it, and a great love of
that wholesome way of Doctrine, Life, Devotion and Government then composed: not
that he was such a Formalist, but that he wished an alteration of some Words,
Phrases, and Method and Order, to which change of times, or Language, or the
like, might invite; though he judged all alterations in such grand and
established Concerns of Religion, should be done by the public Spirit, Counsel
and Consent of the Prophets, Prince and People.

4. As to Conformity to the Church, although no man more eminent then he for
Orthodox Divinity, and orderly Conformity, yet if any out of scruple or
tenderness of conscience was less satisfied with some things, no man had a more
tender heart to pity and pray for them; none had a gentler and more powerful
way to win and persuade those that were capable, ingenious and honest. Indeed
he would say as Bishop Brownrig, That nothing was less to be stickled for or
against, then Ceremonies; and yet that nothing was to be stickled for more then
Obedience to Governors enjoining even the smallest Ceremonies: not for the
worth of the Ceremony, but for the Obedience due to Authority for conscience
sake.

5. In the business of Church Government, as he was too knowing to question, so
he was too honest to deny the universal Customs and Practice of the Church of
Christ, in all ages and places for 1500 years for Episcopacie; yet was he
passionately inclined to any fair and fraternal accommodation, that humble,
orderly and worthy Ministers might have all their, and Bishops no more than was
their due by Scripture, primitive Customs, by the Laws of the Land, and by
principles of order and true government among all societies of men. As his
demonstrations for Episcopacie were potent, his persuasions pathetick: so his
designs were upright and just, his deportment so fatherly and friendly, that he
was able to reclaim all rational, sober and honest men.

Sect. 11. His Constancy and Paence.
In all revolutions, as he had espoused principles constant to truth and duty,
so he stood firm to his principles, as a judicious and conscientious man, as a
wise and honest man, where he saw Scripture and Law tied him up: bearing up
with his great abilities against the stream, while Reason could be heard; and
afterward retyring within himself, and wrapping himself in innocence and
patience: more affected with the public sins and miseries, than his own
suffering: Always as cheerful as one that had the continual feast of a good
conscience, and the happiness to learn in what state soever he was,
therewithal to be contented, and to know how patiently to want, and how wisely
and soberly to abound.

Nothing troubled him more, than that he was laid aside and made useless, when
a whole Nation desired to employ him, and many eminent Persons (as the
Honorable Mr. Boil, 1659) endeavored by all means to contrive a way, wherein
he might communicate his excellent notions to the world. He was a man of whom
the world was not worthy: How willing were men to have more of that man, who
had composed so many excellent Sermons as they read? who had written those
judicious pieces De juramento and de obligatione Conscientiae which they
enjoyed? who had penned the Satisfactory Reason and Judgment of the University
of Oxford against the Covenant, which they perused? who attained that exactness
in controversies, which in the Letters of accord to Dr. Hammond they observed?
What reason would have suppressed this worth? What people would have deprived
this man? What Government would have laid aside so much reason, judgment and
most useful Learning?

As he went through all conditions prudently, patiently, faithfully and
honorably: so he fulfilled all relations conscientiously. 1, He was a good,
faithful, tender and loving, discreet husband, as I take it, of one Wife, with
whom he lived some years comfortably, to whom he entrusted his Houshold-affairs
entirely; whom he troubled not with unnecessary business above her capacity. He
was more for an honorable Marriage, then such an affected Coelibacy, as was
less consistent with sanctity, and less able to bear off those houshold-cares
and other intercurrent troubles, which a Ministers condition and charge brings
with it. 2, He was a good father, prudent and indulgent to his children,
exemplary before them: constantly recommending love and amity to them; and
wisely disposing them according to their capacities and tempers, and devoting
them to God: and giving them his blessing, and scattering among them excellent
rules of living and dying. 3, He was a provident, careful, tender and discreet
Master, directing each Servant to his peculiar advantage in his service;
reckoning nothing so much his honor, as Gods blessing upon his thriving
Servants. 4, He was a most excellent friend, punctual, honest, useful, and
communicative. 5, He was a Loyal Subject, by no considerations to be moved from
his dutiful respects of fidelity, gratitude, love and obedience due to his
Sovereign from him, as a Christian, and a Churchman; he denied any capacity in
Christian Subjects to resist those in authority, under any pretense whatsoever,
there being a necessity for obeying, in doing, or suffering for conscience
sake, as he expresses himself honestly and rationally in his preface to Bishop
Ushers Book of Power and Obedience.

He was made Bishop by his Majesty's gracious favor, with the universal vote
of all good men, anno 1660. as who expected, his Prudence, Counsel, Equanimity
and Moderation equal with his other Abilities, might allay Animosities, close
Differences, heal men's Distempers, and work a right Understanding; all men
imagining his Gravity might awe, his Goodness oblige, his Moderation temper,
his Reason persuade, and his approved Sincerity prevail upon all men otherwise
minded: for he was not only (as I told you) a man of much Learning and
Reading, but of a mature Understanding* and a mellow Judgment in all matters
Politic and Prudential, both Ecclesiastical and Civil. Insomuch that it was
thought, if his excellent temper had sooner been added as an allay to some
other men's hottest spirits, possibly we had not seen things run to that
disorder and ruin; his Gravity and Discretion being likely to allay and fix
the Clergy to a due temperament, (guiding some men's well-meaning Zeal by such
Rules of Moderation as might best preserve the Government and Constitution of
this Church and Kingdom.)

In this place he settled himself more to comply with the public good, then his
own inclinations: looking up to him who called him to the Office of a Bishop,
that great and good work, for direction and assistance in all the intricate
Affairs that were before him.

1. He had this advantage of other men, that when he entered upon that
employment which lay open to the envy and malice of so many, that his Life was
so spotless, his Integrity so eminent, that Partiality it self could not accuse
him; he being a man of solid worth, in whom was nothing dubious or dark,
nothing various or inconstant, nothing formal or affected; nothing as to his
public carriage that was suspected, nothing that needed palliation or
apology. I never heard of any thing said or done by him, which a wise and good
man would have wished not said, or undone. As Diogenes confuted him who allowed
not motion, by saying nothing, but walking before his eyes: so this excellent
person neglected the suggestions of people disaffected against his Order, but
walked warily and circumspectly in his Calling, really shaming those Cavils by
his Conversation.

His greatness prejudiced not his humility and diligence: the meanest Minister
had free access to him: the meanest service had some time allotted to it:
Evangelizavit manu and Scriptione; by his instruction, teaching the Clergy to
preach; by his instruction, teaching the Laity to live. Hereby he governed
hearts, ruling the Church as Christ himself by the Word, and making men yield
him a true and willing Obedience, reverencing God in him.

Painful, pious and peaceable Ministers, throughout his Visitation, were his
chief Favorites: he looked them out of their retirements, to bring them to
employment and preferment. He very discreetly bestowed the Encouragements he
had in his Diocese, on persons of most reputed piety, sufficiency and
usefulness.

As he was very careful to prefer good men that he found in Orders, so he was
as careful to admit none but good men to Orders; lest, as he would say, he
should have reason (with him who made a dangerous man Priest) to wish he had
laid his hands rather on the Briers then on such a man's head. For their Parts,
he trusted only his own Judgment; for their Conversation, he trusted such men
of known integrity, as gave their Testimonials not out of courtesy but
conscience: and he would say, That whosoever gives a Certificate, enters into
bonds with God and the Church, under a heavy forfeiture to avouch the honesty
of the party recommended; and, as Judah for Benjamin, they become sureties for
the young man to his father. Nor let them (as one says) think to avoid the
bond, and make it but a blank, with that clause, So far forth as we know; for
what says the Apostle? God is not mocked.

He was careful and happy in suppressing the innovations he met with in
Doctrine and Discipline; mildly winning men, rather then severely punishing
them: such Offenders as were unhappy in deserving, were yet happy in doing
penance in his presence; who aimed not at their suffering, but instruction; who
would not have them undone, but reclaimed and reformed: and when he was
severest to the fault, he made it appear he was kind to the man.

Church Censures of, 1. Admonition, 2. Excommunication, 3. Aggravation, 4.
Penance, 5. Absolution, were by him seriously and solemnly used, with great
reverence, and on great occasions, that they might be restored to the Primitive
esteem and veneration.

He employed his power wholly in Church Affairs, meddling as little as he could
with Affairs of State: not that he was unable to manage them, but that he
thought them unworthy to be managed by him: only he would endeavor a good
understanding between Prince and People: yet he rather admired then condemned
such reverend and able persons, who are strengthened with that which would
distract him; making the concurrence of Civil and Temporal power in themselves,
support one another.

Thus this good man was, in my judgment, the Idaea of an excellent Prelate;
coming up exactly to that excellent character of a Bishop, as one among men the
most sober, among Christians the most religious, among Preachers the most
exact, among Scholars the most useful, among Ministers the most faithful, among
Governors the most moderate, among Martyrs the most patient and constant; who
when he had discharged his conscience honestly, served his Prince successfully,
assisted the Church industriously, gone through all charges renownedly, leaving
nothing behind him justly to be blamed, or sinisterly to be suspected, but all
things deservedly commended by wise and sober Christians, bequeathing to
Posterity Principles of Government clearly stated and rationally expressed,
with the general sorrow of the Church, but his own great satisfaction, was
taken away with an happy Euthanasia, composedly, peaceably and comfortably
departing, giving himself to Prayers, Meditations, and Discourses, which his
own strength could bear, or others kindness could reasonably afford him, full
of the grace and peace of God, and confirmed (as Dr. Reynolds, etc.) by the
Absolution of the Church, (which belongs to all that die in the true Faith, and
blessed hope of penitent sinners) he calmly rendered his holy, devout and
precious soul to God that gave it, in a time when, with Bishop Bancroft, he
could say, Eo temporis occubui quo mallem rationem Episcopatus coram Deo dare,
quam Episcopatum coram hominibus exercere. Quis damnaverit eam qui duabus
potentissimis rebus defenditur jure and mente.

-- Quint.

And thus, Sir, if I have done nothing else, I have made it appear that I am so
much at your devotion, that I choose rather to expose my self, then displease
you; and venture at these few Remarques of this admirable person, rather then
refuse a compliance with you in what would be such satisfaction to you, and
such advantage (as you say) to the Public: especially considering that public
good was the great design of this worthy Bishops both Preaching and Living,
VVriting and Government.

I could wish I were able to pay my reverence to his great Virtues in
publishing them to the world: In the mean time, devoting to your delight this
imperfect, yet affectionate and well-meant Account of that great Learning and
Prudence, Judgment and Zeal, Sincerity and Integrity, Humility and Charity,
Conscience and Exactness, which are worthy of all men's imitation, and shall be
my great pattern by Gods assistance; by whose grace if I may live what I have
writ, I have attained what is the serious and just ambition of

Your most humble Servant D. F.

Bishop Sanderson.
Two things I have always had in my Care, TRUTH and PERSPICUITY: (for whereunto
else serves that (...), wherewith God endued man, but to speak Reason, and be
understood?)

King Charles.
I bring my EAR to hear others, I bring my CONSCIENCE to hear Sanderson.

Bishop Sanderson HIS JUDGMENT IN ONE VIEW FOR THE SETLEMENT OF THE CHURCH.
QUest. How far we may Indulge good and godly men of tender consciences
dissenting from us in liberty of Conscience.

Answ. First, besides that all parties pretend to Godliness; Papists,
Anabaptists, and what not? (even the late-sprung-up generation of Levellers,
whose Principles are so destructive of all that Order and Justice by which
public societies are supported, do yet style themselves, as by a kind of
peculiarity, The Godly;) And that secondly, it is the easyest thing in the
world, and nothing more common then for men to pretend Conscience, when they
are not minded to obey: I do not believe thirdly, (though I am well persuaded
of the godliness of many of them otherwise,) that the refusal of indifferent
Ceremonies enjoined by Lawful Authority, is any part of their Godliness; or any
good fruit, evidence, or sign thereof. But certain it is fourthly, that the
godliest men are men, and know but in part; and by the power of godliness in
their hearts, are no more secured from the possibility of falling into Error
through Ignorance, then from the possibility of falling into Sin through
Infirmity. And as for Tenderness of Conscience fifthly, a most gracious blessed
fruit of the holy Spirit of God, where it is really, and not in pretense only,
nor mistaken, (for sure it is no very tender Conscience, though sometimes
called so, that straineth at a Gnat, and swalloweth a Camel:) it is with it, as
with other tender things; very subject to receive harm, and soon put out of
order. Through the cunning of Satan, it dangerously exposes men to temptations
on the right hand: and through its own aptitude to entertain and to cherish
unnecessary scruples, it strongly disposes them to listen thereunto so long,
till at the last they are overcome thereof. Needful it is therefore, that in
the public teaching the Errors should be sometimes refuted, and the
Temptations discovered: And this ever to be done seasonably, soberly,
discreetly, and convincingly; and when we are to deal with men whose
Consciences are (so far as we can discern) truly tender, with the spirit of
meekness and Compassion. For tender things must be tenderly dealt withal, or
they are lost. I know it is not always so done: nor can we expect it should.
All preachers are neither so charitable, nor so prudent, not so conscientious
as they should be: And they that are such in a good measure, are men still; and
may be transported now and then through passion, and infirmity, beyond the just
bounds of moderation.

Quest. Whether good men should be suspended from the exercise of their
ministry, and deprived of their livelihood, which are on all hands acknowledged
indifferent: and inded in comparison to the work of the ministry are but
trifles, however some men dote on them.

Answ. Let Ceremonies (secondly) be as very Trifles, as any man can imagine
them to be; yet Obedience sure is no Trifle. They mis-state the Question, when
they talk of pressing Ceremonies. It is Obedience (formally) that is required:
Ceremonies not otherwise pressed, then as the matter wherein that Obedience is
to be exercised. If a master appoint his servant to do some small matter that
he thinks fit to have done, though in it self of no great moment; yet he
will expect to be obeyed: and it is great reason he should. If in such case the
servant should resufe to do the thing appointed, because he has no mind
thereunto; and should receive a check or correction for such refusal: could he
either sufficiently excuse his own fault, or reasonably complain of his master
for dealing hardly with him, by saying the thing was but a Trifle? Is it not
evident, that the thing which made the master angry, and the Servant an
offender in that case, was not ( precisely and formally) the leaving of the
thing undone, (which had it not been commanded, might have been left undone
without any fault or blame at all;) but the refusing to do it, when he that had
a right to his service commanded him? Wherefore Thirdly, rhat which is said of
some men's doting so extremely on Ceremonies, might have been well enough
spared. I know no true son of the Church of England, that doteth upon any
Ceremony, whatsoever opinion he may have of the decency or expediency of some
of them. If any do; let him answer for himself. Among wise men, he will hardly
pass for a wise man, that doteth upon any. Nor will he, I doubt, prove a much
wiser man, that runs into the contrary extreme, and abhors all. It is true
Fourthly, that there have been long and unkind quarrels abour these things;
More is the pity! but where is the fault? To whom is the beginning, and to
whom the continuance of a quarrel rather imputable? to him, that demands his
right? or to him that withholds it from him? For this is the plain Case in
short: The Bishops (under the King) require obedience to the Laws
Ecclesiastical; these men refuse to give it. So began the quarrel at first; and
upon the same terms it continued. If the Obedience challenged were indeed due
to these Laws; then did our Brethren both begin the quarrel, and hold it on: if
it were not, then must the whole blame lie upon them that claimed it unjustly,
and not upon them. So that in the winding up of the business, the whole
Controversy will devolve upon this point; Whether to the Laws Ecclesiastical
obedience be due or not? For the right determining whereof, (for so much as it
is confessed on all hands, that Obedience is due to Lawful authority commanding
lawful things) two other points are to be resolved; the one concerning the
authority by which the Constitutions were made; the other concerning the
lawfulness of the things therein required; The Presbyterians of the Kirk flatly
and directly deny both: Ours, less forward to declare their opinion in the
former point, have chosen rather to stand upon the latter only. And so the
point in issue is briefly this; Whether the things commanded (and particularly
the Ceremonies) be lawful, yea, or no.

When for decency, order, or uniformity's sake any constitutions are made
concerning ceremonies, there is the same necessity of obeying such
Constitutions, as there is of obeying other laws made for the good of the
Commonwealth concerning any other indifferent things. That such necessity,
either in the one or the other, arises not properly from the authority of the
immediate Lawgiver; but from the Ordinance of God, who has commanded us to
obey the ordinance of men for his sake. That such necessity of obedience
notwithstanding, the things remain in the same indifferency as before; Every
way in respect of their Nature, and quoad Rem, (it being not in the power of
aecidental relations to change the natures of things:) and even in respect of
their Use, and quoad nos, thus far, that there is a liberty left for men, upon
extraordinary and other just occasions, sometimes to do otherwise then the
Constitution requires, extra casum Scandali and Contemptus:. A liberty, which
we dare not either take our selves, or allow to others, in things properly and
absolutely necessary: Upon which very account (I mean the consideration of the
indifferency of the things in themselves) and upon which account alone it is,
that many of the Episcopal (that is to say, the true English Protestant)
Divines, who sadly resent the voting down of the Liturgy, Festivals, and
Ceremonies of the Church by so many former Laws established, heartily desired
heretofore the continuance, and as heartily still wish the restitution, and are
(by Gods help) ready with their Tongues, Pens and Sufferings to maintain and
justify the Lawful use of the same: do yet so far yield to the sway of the
times, and are persuaded they may with a good Conscience so do, as to forbear
the use thereof in the public worship; till it shall seem good to those that
are in place of authority either to restore them to their former state (as it
is well hoped, when they shall have duly considered the evil consequents of
that Vote, they will,) or at leastwise and in the mean time to leave them
arbitrary, for men, according to their several different judgments, to use or
not to use, which seems but reasonable, the like favor and liberty in other
kinds having been long allowed to almost all other sorts of men, though of
never so distant persuasions one from another. Lastly, That all Laws made
concerning Ceremonies or other indifferent things, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical, are mutable: and as they were at first made by humane
authority, so may they from time to time be by humane authority abrogated and
repealed. And then and thenceforth they lose their obligation: whereby the
necessity of yielding obedience thereunto wholly cease and determines; and
the things thereby commanded or prohibited, return to their primitive and
natural indifferency, even in their Use also, and in respect of us.

But in the Case of our Church now it is far orherwise. Cap, Surplice, Cross,
Ring and other Ceremonies, which are the Matter of our differences, though they
be things indifferent for their nature, and in themselves: yet are not so for
their use, and unto us. If the Church had been silent, if Authority had
prescribed nothing herein, these Ceremonies had then remained for their use, as
they are for their nature, indifferent: Lawful, and such as might be used
without sin; and yet Arbitrary, and such as might be also forborne without sin.
But men mus^ grant (though they be unwilling, if yet they will be reasonable)
that every particular Church hat^ power for decency an orders sake, to ordain
and constitute ceremonies. Which being once ordained and by public authority
enjoined, cease to b^ indifferent for their use, though they remain still so
for their nature: and of indifferent become so necessary, that neither may a
man without sin refuse them, where Authority requires; nor use them, where
Authority restrains the use.

Neither is this accession of Necessity any impeachment to Christian Liberty;
or insnaring of men's consciences as some have objected. For then do we ensnare
men's consciences by humane constitutions, where we thrust them upon men as if
they were divine; and bind men's consciences to them immediately, as if they
were immediate parts of Gods worship, or of absolute necessity unto salvation.
This Tyranny and Usurpation over men's Consciences, the Pharisees of old did,
and the Church of Rome at this day does exercise, and we justly hate in her,
equalling, if not preferring her Constitutions to the Laws of GOD. But our
Church (GOD be thanked) is far from any such impious presumption: and has
sufficiently declared her self by solemn protestation, enough to satisfy any
ingenuous impartial judgment, that by requiring obedience to these ceremonial
constitutions, she has no other purpose, then to reduce all her children to an
orderly confirmity in the outward worship of God; so far is she from seeking to
draw any opinion, either of divine necessity upon the constitution, or of
effectual holiness upon the ceremony. And as for the prejudice which seems to
be hereby given to Christian liberty, it is so slender a conceit, that it
seems to bewray in the objectors a desire, not so much of satisfaction, as
cavil. For first, the liberty of a Christian to all indifferent things, is in
the Mind and Conscience: and is then infringed, when the Conscience is bound
and strained, by imposing upon it an opinion of doctrinal Necessity. But it is
no wrong to the Liberty of a Christian man's conscience, to bind him to outward
observation for Orders sake; and to impose upon him a necessity of Obedience.
Which one distinction of Doctrinal and Obediential Necessity well weighed, and
rightly applied, is of it self sufficient to clear all doubts in this point.
For, to make all restraint of the outward man in matters indifferent an
impeachment of Christian liberty; what were it else, but even to bring flat
Anabaptisme and Anarchy into the Church? and to overthrow all bond to
subjection and obedince to lawful authority? I beseech you consider, wherein
can the immediate power and authority of Fathers, Masters, and other Rulers
over their inferiors consist; or the due obedience of inferiors be shown
toward them: if not in these indifferent and Arbitrary things? For, things
absolutely necessary, as commanded by God, we are bound to do; whether humane
Authority require them, or no: and things absolutely Unlawful, as prohibited by
God, we are bound not to do; whether humane Authority forbid them, or no. There
are none other things left then, wherein to express properly the Obedience due
to superior Authority, then these Indifferent things. And if a Father or
Master have power to prescribe to his Child or Servant in indifferent things;
and such restraint be no way prejudicial to Christian liberty in them: Why
should any man, either deny the like power to Church Governors, to make
Ecclesiastical-constitutionr concerning indifferent things? or interpret that
power to the prejudice of Christian Liberty? And again Secondly, Men must
understand, that it is an error to think Ceremonies and constitutions to be
things merely in different: I mean in the general. For howsoever every
particular Ceremony be indifferent; and every particular constitution arbitrary
and alterable; yet that there should be some Ceremonies, it is necessary
Necessitate absoluta, in as much as no outward work can be performed without
Ceremonial circumstances, some or other: and that there should be some
Cinstitutions concerning them, it is also necessary (though not simply and
absolutely, as the former; yet ex hypothesi, and) necessitate covenientiae.
Otherwise, since some Ceremonies must needs be used; every Parish, nay every
man would have his own fashion by himself, as his humor led him: whereof what
other could be the issue, but infinite distraction, and unorderly confusion in
the Church? And again thirdly, to return their weapon upon themselves; If every
restraint in indifferent things be injurious to Christian liberty: then
themselves are injurious no less by their negative restraint from some
Ceremonies, Wear not, Cross not, Kneel not, etc. then they would have the world
believe our Church is by her positive restraint unto these Ceremonies of
wearing, and crossing, and kneeling, etc. Let indifferent men judge, nay let
themselves that are parties judge, whether is more injurious to Christian
Liberty; public Authority by mature advice commanding, what might be forborne:
or private spirits through humorous dislikes, forbidding what may be used: the
whole Church imposing the use, or a few Brethren requiring the forbearance of
such things, as are otherwise and in themselves equally indifferent for use, or
for forbearance.

But they say, our Church makes greater matters of Ceremonies than thus; and
prefers them even before the most necessary duties of preaching and
administering the Sacraments: in as much as they are imposed upon ministers
under pain of Suspension and Deprevation from their Ministerial Functions and
Charges. First, for actual Deprivation; I take it, unconforming Ministers have
no great cause to complain. Our Church, it is well known, has not always used
that rigor she might have done. Where she has been forced to proceed as far
as deprivation! she has ordinarily by her fair, and slow, and compassionate
proceeding therein, sufficiently manifested her unwillingness thereto: and
declared her self a Mother every way indulgent enough to such ill-nurtured
Children, as will not be ruled by her. Secondly, those that are suspended or
deprived; suffer it but justly for their obstinacy and contempt For howsoever
they would bear the world in hand, that they are the only persecuted ones, and
that they suffer for their consciences: yet in truth, they do but abuse the
credulity of the simple therein; and herein (as in many other things) jump with
the Papists, whom they would seem above all others most abhorrent from. For as
Seminary Priests and Jesuits give it out that they suffer for Religion; when
the very truth is, they are justly executed for their prodigious Treasons, and
felonious or teacherous practices against lawful Princes and Estates: So the
brethren pretend they are persecuted for their consciences; when they are
indeed but justly censured for their obstinate and pertinacious contempt of
lawful authority. For it is not the refusal of these Ceremonies they are
deprived for, otherwise then as the matter wherein they show their contempt: it
is the contempt it self, which formerly and properly subjecteth them to just
Ecclesiastical censure of Suspension or Deprivation. And contempt of authority,
though in the smallest matter deserves no small punishment: all authority
having been ever sollicious (as it has good reason) above all things to
vindicate and preserve it self from contempt; by inflicting sharp punishments
upon contemptuous persons in the smallest matters, above all other sorts of
offenders in any degree whatsoever. Thus have we showed and cleared the first
and main difference betwixt the case of my Text, and the case of our Church, in
regard of the matter: the things whereabout they differed, being every way
indifferent; ours not so.

The determination of Superiors may and ought to restrain us in the outward
exercise of our Christian liberty. We must submit our selves to every Ordinance
of man, says St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.13. and it is necessary we should do so: for
so is the will of God, Ver. 15. Neither is it against Christian liberty if we
do so; for we are still as free as before: rather if we do not so, we abuse our
liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, as it follows there, ver. 16. And St.
Paul tells us we must needs be subject, not only for fear, because the
Magistrate carries not the Sword in vain, but also for Conscience sake,
because the powers that are, are ordained of God. This duty, so fully pressed
and so uniformly by these two grand Apostles, is most apparent in private
societies. In a family, the Master, or Pater familias, who is a kind of petty
Monarch there, has authority to prescribe to his Children and servants in the
use of those indifferent things whereto yet they, as Christians, have as much
liberty as he. The servant, though he be the Lords freeman, yet is limited in
his diet, lodging, livery, and many other things by his master: and he is to
submit himself to his Masters appointment in these things, though perhaps in
his private affection he had rather his Master had appointed otherwise: and
perhaps withal in his private judgment, does verily think it fitter his
Master should appoint otherwise. If any man under color of Christian liberty,
shall teach otherwise, and exempt servants from the obedience of their masters
in such things: St. Paul in a holy indignation inveigheth against such a man,
not without some bitterness, in the last Chapter of this Epistle, as one that
is proud, and knows nothing, as he should do, but doateth about questions and
strife of words, etc. ver. 3.5.

Now look what power the master has over his servants for the ordering of his
family; no doubt the same at the least, if not much more, has the supreme
magistrate over his subjects, for the peace of the Commonwealth: the
Magistrate being Pater Patriae, as the Master is Pater familias. Whosoever then
shall interpret the determinations of magistrates in the use of the Creatures
to be contrary to the liberty of a Christian: or under that color shall exempt
inferiors from their obedience to such determinations, he must blame Saint
Paul; nay he must blame the holy Ghost, and not us; if he hear from us that he
is proud, and knows nothing, and doateth about unprofitable Questions.
Surely, but that experience shows us it has been so, and the Scriptures have
foretold us that it should be so: that there should be differences, and
sidings, and part-takings in the Church: a man would wonder how it should ever
sink into the hearts and heads of sober understanding men, to deny either the
power in Superiors to ordain, or the necessity in Inferiors to obey Laws and
constitutions, so restraining us in the use of the Creatures.

Neither let any man cherish his ignorance herein: by conceiting, as if there
were some difference to be made between Civil and Ecclesiastical Things, and
Laws, and Persons in this behalf. The truth is, our liberty is equal in both:
the power of Superiors fo restraint equal in both, and the necessity of
obedience in Inferiors equal to both. No man has yet been able to show, nor I
think ever shall be, a real and substantial difference indeed, between them to
make an inequality. But that still, as civil magistrates have sometimes, for
just politic respects, prohibited some trades, and manufactures, and
commodities, and enjoined othersome, and done well in both: so
Churnh-Governours may upon good considerations, (say it be but for order and
uniformities sake,) prescribe the times, places, vestments, gestures, and other
Ceremonial circumstances to be used in Ecclesiastical Offices and assemblies.
As the Apostles in the first Council holden at Jerusalem in Acts 15. laid upon
the Churches of the Gentiles for a time, a restraint from the eating of blood,
and things sacrificed to Idols, and strangled.

Thus we see our Christian liberty unto the Creatures, may without prejudice
admit of some restraints in the outward exercise of it: and namely from the
three respects, of Christian Sobriety, of Christian charity, and of Christian
Duty and Obedience. But now in the comparing of these together; when there
seems to be a repugnancy between one and another of them, there may be some
difficulty: and the greatest difficulty, and which has bred most trouble, is
in comparing the cases of scandal and disobedience together, when there seems
to be a repugnancy between charity and Duty. As for example. Suppose in a thing
which simply and in it self we may lawfully according to the Liberty we have in
Christ, either use or forbear; charity seems to lay restraint upon us one
way, our weak brother expecting we should forbear, and Duty a quite contrary
way, Authority requiring the use: in such a case what are we to do? It is
against charity to offend a brother; and it is against Duty, to disobey a
superior. And yet something must be done: either we must use, or not use;
forbear, or not forbear. For the untying of this knot, (which, if we will but
lay things rightly together; has not in it so much hardness as it seems to
have;) let this be our seventh Position. In the use of the creatures, and all
indifferent things we ought to bear a greater regard to our public Governors,
than to our private Brethren; and be more careful to obey them, than to
satisfy these, if the same course will not in some mediocrity satisfy both.
Alas, that our brethren who are contrary minded, would but with the spirit of
sobriety admit common Reason to be umpire in this case: Alas, that they would
but consider, what a world of contradictions would follow upon the contrary
opinion, and what a world of confusions upon the contrary practice. Say what
can be said, in the behalf of a Brother; all the same, and more may be said for
a Governor, For a Governor is a Brother too, and something more: and Duty is
charity too, and something more. If then I may not offend my Brother, then
certainly not my Governor: because he is my brother too, being a man, and a
christian, as well as the other is. And the same charity, that binds me to
satisfy another Brother, equally binds me to satisfy this. So that, if we
go no farther, but even to the common bond of charity, and relation of
Brotherhood; that makes them equal at the least: and therefore no reason, why
I should satisfy one that is but a Private Brother; rather then the public
magistrate, who (that public respect set aside) is my Brother also. When the
Scales hang thus even, shall not the accession of magistracy to common
Brotherhood in him, and of Duty to common charity in me, be enough to cast it
clear for the magistrate? Shall a servant in a Family, rather than offend his
fellow servants, disobey his Master? And is not a double scandal against charity
and Duty both (for Duty implies charity) greater than a single scandal against
charity alone? If private men will be offended at our obedience to public
Govornours; we can but be sorry for it: We may not redeem their offense by our
disobedience. He that takes offense where none is given, sustaineth a double
person; and must answer for it, both as the giver and the taker. If offense be
taken at us, there is no woe to us for it, if it do not come by us; Woe to the
man by whom the offense comes: and it does not come by us, if we do but what
is our duty to do. The Rule is certain and equitable; The respect of private
scandal cease, where lawful authority determines our liberty: and that
restraint which proceeds from special Duty, is of superior reason to that
which proceeds but from common charity.

Quest. Whether the King and Parliament ought to Impose any more upon us, in
matters of Religion than is Imposed in the Scripture: or whether every one
ought not to be left to serve God, according to his best apprehensions out of
the Scripture.

Answ. The Opinion is, that to do any thing at all without direction from the
Scripture is unlawful and sinful. Which if they would understand only of the
substantials of Gods worship, and of the exercises of spiritual and
supernatural graces, the assertion were true and sound: but as they extend it,
to all the actions of common life whatsoever, whether natural or civil, even so
far as to the taking up of a straw: so it is altogether false and
indefensible. I marvel what warrant they that so teach have from the Scripture
for that very doctrine: or where they are commanded so to believe or teach. One
of their chiefest refuges is the Text we now have in hand: but I shall anon
drive them from this shelter. The other places usually alleged speak only,
either of divine and supernatural truths to be believed, or else of works of
grace or worship to be performed, as of necessity unto salvation: which is not
to the point in issue. For it is freely confessed, that in things of such
nature the Holy Scripture is, and so we are to account it, a most absolute
sufficient direction. Upon which ground we heartily reject all humane
traditions, devised and intended as supplements to the doctrine of faith
contained in the Bible, and annexed as codicils to the holy Testament of
Christ, for to supply the defects thereof. The question is wholly about things
in their nature indifferent, such as are the use of our food, raiment, and the
like; about which the common actions of life are chiefly conversant: Whether in
the choice and use of such things, we may not be sometimes sufficiently guided
by the light of reason and the common rules of discretion: but that we must be
able, (and are so bound to do, or else we sin) for every thing we do in such
matters, or deduce our warrant from some place or other of Scripture.

Before the Scripture were written it pleased GOD by visions, and dreams, and
other like revelations, immediately to make known his good pleasure to the
Patriarchs and Prophets, and by them unto the people: which kind of
Revelations served them to all the same intents and purposes, whereto the
sacred Scriptures now do us, viz. to instruct them what they should believe and
do for his better service, and the furtherance of their own salvations. Now as
it were unreasonable for any man to think, that they either had or did expect
an immediate revelation from God every time they eat, or drank, or bought, or
sold, or did any other of the common actions of life, for the warranting of
each of those particular actions to their consciences: no less unreasonable it
is to think, that we should now expect the like warrant from the Scriptures for
the doing of the like actions. Without all doubt the Law of nature, and the
light of reason, was the rule whereby they were guided for the most part in
such matters: which the wisdom of God would never have left in them or us, as
a principal relic of his decayed image in us, if he had not meant, that we
should make use of it, for the direction of our lives and actions thereby.
Certainly God never infused any power into any creature, whereof he intended
not some use. Else, what shall we say of the Indies and other barbarous
nations, to whom God never vouchsafed the lively Oracles of his written word?
Must we think that they were left a lawless people, without any Rule at all
whereby to order their actions? How then come they to be guilty of
transgression? for where there is no Law, there can be no transgession. Or how
comes it about that their consciences should at any time or in any case either
accuse them, or excuse them, if they had no guide nor rule to walk by? But if
we must grant they had a Rule, (and there is no way, you see, but grant it we
must;) then we must also of necessity grant that there is some other Rule for
humane actions besides the written word: for that we presupposed these nations
to have wanted. Which Rule what other could it be, then the Law of the Nation
and of right reason, imprinted in their hearts! Which is as truly the Law and
Word of God, as is that which is printed in our Bibles. So long as our actions
are warranted either by the one or the other, we cannot be said to want the
warrant of Gods Word: Nec differet Scriptura an ratione consistat, says
Tertullian; it mattereth not much from whether of both we have our direction,
so long as we have it from either*

You see then those men are in a great error, who make the holy Scriptures the
sole rule of all humane actions whatsoever. For the maintenance whereof, there
was never yet produced any piece of an argument, either from reason, or from
authority of holy writ, or from the testimony either of the ancient Fathers, or
of other classical Divines of later times; which may not be clearly and
abundantly answered, to the satisfaction of any rational man not extremely
fore-possessed with prejudice. They who think to salve the matter by this
mitigation; that at least wise our actions ought to be framed according to
those general rules of the Law of Nature, which are here and there in the
Scriptures dispersedly contained; (as viz. That we should do, as we would be
done to; That all things be done decently and orderly, and unto edification;
That nothing be done against conscience, and the like:) speak somewhat indeed
to the truth* but little to the purpose. For they consider not, First that
these general Rules are but occasionally and incidentally mentioned in
Scripture; rather to manifest unto us a former, than to lay upon us a new
obligation. Secondly, that those rules had been of force for the ordering of
men's actions, though the Scripture had never expressed them: and were of such
force, before those Scriptures were written, wherein they are now expressed.
For they bind not originally qua scripta, but qua justa; because they are
righteous, not because they are written. Thirdly, that an action conformable to
these general Rules might not be condemned as sinful, although the doer thereof
should look at those rules merely as they are the dictates of the law of
nature; and should not be able to vouch his warrant for it from any place of
Scripture, neither should have at the time of the doing thereof any present
thought or consideration of any such place. The contrary whereunto, I permit to
any man's reasonable judgment, if it be not desperately rash and uncharitable
to affirm. Lastly, that if men's actions done agreeably to those rules are said
to be of faith, precisely for this reason, because those rules are contained in
the word: then it will follow, that before those particular Scriptures were
written wherein any of those rules are first delivered, every action done
according to those rules had been done without faith, (there being as yet no
Scripture for it;) and consequently had been a sin. So that by this doctrine it
had been a sin (before the writing of S. Matthews Gospel) for any man to have
done to others as he would they should do to him; and it had been a sin (before
the writing of the former Epistle to the Corinthians) for any man to have done
any thing decently and orderly; supposing these two Rules to be in those two
places first mentioned: because (this supposed) there could then have been no
warrant brought from the Scriptures for so doing.

Well then, we see the former Opinion will by no means hold, neither in the
rigor of it, nor yet in the mitigation. We are therefore to beware of it; and
that so much the more heedfully, because of the evil consequents and effects
that issue from it: to wit, a world of superstitions, uncharitable censures,
bitter contentions, contempt of superiors, perplexities of conscience. First,
it fills men's heads with many superstitious conceits, making them to cast
impurity upon sundry things, which yet are lawful to as many as use them
lawfully. For the taking away of the indifferency of any thing that is
indifferent, is in truth Superstition: whether either of the two ways it be
done, either by requiring it as necessary, or by forbidding it as unlawful. He
that condemns a thing as utterly unlawful, which yet indeed is indifferent,
and so lawful, is guilty of superstion, as well as he that enjoyneth a thing as
absolutely necessary, which yet indeed is but indifferent, and so arbitrary.
They of the Church of Rome, and some in our Church, as they go upon quite
contrary grounds, yet both false; so they run into quite contrary errors, and
both superstitious. They decline too much on the left hand, denying to holy
Scripture that perfection which of right it ought to have; of containing all
appertaining to that supernatural doctrine of faith and holiness which God has
revealed to his Church for the attainment of everlasting salvation: whereupon
they would impose upon Christian people, and that with an opinion of necessity,
many things with the Scriptures require not: and that is a Superstition. These
wry too much on the right hand, ascribing to the holy Scripture such a kind of
perfection as it cannot have; of being the sole directour of all humane actions
whatsoever: whereupon they forbid unto Christian people, and that under the
name of sin, sundry things which the holy Scripture condemns not: and that
is a superstition too.

From which Superstition proceeds in the second place uncharitable censuring:
as evermore they that are the most superstitious, are the most supercilious. No
such severe censurers of our blessed Saviors person and actions, as the
superstitious Scribes and Pharisees were. In this Chapter the special fault,
which the Apostle blames in the weak ones, (who were somewhat superstitiously
affected,) was their rash and uncharitable judging of their brethren. And
common and daily experience among our selves shows how freely some men spend
their censures upon so many of their brethren, as without scruple do any of
those things, which they upon false grounds have superstitiously condemned as
utterly unlawful.

And then thirdly, as unjust censures are commonly entertained with scorn and
contumely; they that so liberally condemn their brethren of prophanness, are by
them again as freely flouted for their preciseness: and so whiles both parties
please themselves in their own ways, they cease not mutually to provoke and
scandalize and exasperate the one the other, pursuing their private spleens so
far, till they break out into open contentions and oppositions. Thus it stood
in the Roman Church, when this Epistle was written. They judged one another,
and despised one another, to the great disturbance of the Churches peace: which
gave occasion to our Apostles whole discourse in this Chapter. And how far the
like censurings and despisings have embittered the spirits, and whetted both
the tongues and pens of learned men one against another in our own Church; the
stirs that have been long since raised, and are still upheld by the factions
opposers against our Ecclesiastical constitutions, government, and ceremonies,
will not suffer us to be ignorant. Most of which stirs, I verily persuade my
self, had been long ere this either wholly buried in silence, or at leastwise
prettily well quieted, if the weakness and danger of the error whereof we now
speak, had been more timely discovered, and more fully and freqvently made
known to the world than it has been.

Fourthly, let that doctrine be once admitted, and all humane authority will
soon be despised. The commands of Parents, Masters, and Princes, which many
times require both secrecy and expedition, shall be taken into slow
deliberation; and the equity of them sifted by those that are bound to obey,
though they know no cause why, so long as they know no cause to the contrary.
Delicata est obedientia, quae transit in causam deliberat vam. It is a nice
obedience in St. Bernards judgment, yea rather troublesome and odious, that is
over curious in discussing the commands of superiors; boggling at every thing
that is enjoined, requiring a why for every wherefore, and unwilling to stir
until the lawfulness and expediency of the thing commanded shall be
demonstrated by some manifest reason, or undoubted authority from the
Scriptures.

Lastly, the admitting of this doctrine would cast such a snare upon men of
weak judgments, but tender censciences, as they should never be able to unwind
themselves again. Men's daily occasions for themselves or friends, and the
necessities of common life, require the doing of a thousand things within the
compass of a few days; for which it would puzzle the best Textman that lives,
readily to bethink himself of a sentence in the Bible, clear enough to satisfy
a scrupulous conscience of the lawfulness and expediency of what he is about to
do: for which, by hearkening to the rules of reason and discretion, he might
receive easy and speedy resolution. In which cases if he should be bound to
suspend his resolution, and delay to do that which his own reason would tell
him were presently needful to be done, until he could happily call to mind some
precept or example of Scripture for his warrant: what stops would it make in
the course of his whole life? what languishings in the duties of his calling?
how would it fill him with doubts and irresolutions, lead him into a maze of
uncertainties, entangle him in a world of woeful perplexities, and (without the
great mercy of God, and better instruction) plunge him irrecoverably into the
gulf of despair? Since the chief end of the publication of the Gospel, is to
comfort the hearts, and to revive and refresh the spirits of Gods people with
the glad tidings of liberty from the spirt of bondage and fear, and of gracious
acceptance with their GOD; to anoint them with the oil of gladness giving them
beauty for Ashes, and instead of sackcloath girding them with joy: we may well
suspect that doctrine not to be Evangelical, which thus sets the consciences
of men upon the rack, tortureth them with continual fears and perplexities, and
prepares them thereby unto hellish despair.

Quest. What are the dreadful consequences of scrupling some indifferent things?

Answ. Althouugh difference of judgment should not alienate our affections one
from another: yet daily experience shows it does. By reason of that
self-love, and envey, and other corruptions that abound in us; it is rarely
seen that those men are of one heart, that are of two minds. St. Paul found it
so with the Romans in his time: whilst some condemned that as unlawful, which
others practiced as lawful; they judged one another, and disposed one another,
perpetually. And I doubt not, but any of us, that is any-whit-like acquainted
with the wretched deceitfulness of man's heart, may easily conclude how hard a
thing it is, (if at all possible,) not to think somewhat hardly of those men,
that take the liberty to do such things as we judge unlawful. As for example.
If we shall judge all walking into the fields, discoursing occasionally on the
occursences of the times, dressing of meat for dinner or supper, or even
moderate recreations on the Lords day, to be grievous prophanations of the
Sabbath; how can we choose but judge those men that use them to be grievous
prophaners of Gods Sabbath? And if such our judgment concering the things
should after prove to be erroneous: then can it not be avoided, but that such
our judment also concerning the persons must needs be uncharitable.

Secondly, This mis-judging of things fills the would with endless niceties
and disputes; to the great disturbance of the Churches peace, which to every
good man ought to be precious. The multiplying of Books and writings pro and
con, and pursuing of arguments with heat and opposition, does rather lengthen,
then decide controversides; and instead of destroying the old, begets new
ones: whiles they that are in the wrong out of obstinacy will not, and they
that stand for the truth out of conscience dare not, may not yield; and so
still the war goes on.

And as to the public peace of the Church, so is there also thirdly by this
means great prejudice done to the peace and tranquillity of private men's
consciences? when by the peremptory doctrines of some strict and rigid masters,
the souls of many a well-meaning man are miserably disquieted with a thousand
unnecessary scruples. And driven sometimes into very woeful perplexities. Surely
it can-be no light matter, thus to lay heavey burdens upon other men's
shoulders, and to cast asnare upon their consciences, by making the narrow way
to Heaven narrower then ever God meant it.

Fourthly, hereby Christian Governors come to be robbed of a great part of
that honor that is due unto them from their people; both in their Affections
and Subjection. For when they shall see cause to exercise over us that power
that God has left them in indifferent things, by commanding such or such
things to be done; as namely, wearing of a Surplice, kneeling at the communion,
and the like: if now we in our own thoughts have already prejudged any of the
things so commanded to be unlawful; i^ cannot be.

Quest. If these things be so, how comes it to pass that so many godly men
should incline so much to this way?

Answ. But you will say, if these things were so, how should it then come to
pass that so many men pretending, to Goliness, (and thousands of them doubtless
such as they pretend; for it were an uncharitable thing to charge them all with
hypocrisy) should so often and so grievously offend this way? To omit those
two more universal causes; Almighty Gods permission first, whose good pleasure
it is, for sundry wise and gracious ends, to exercise his Church during her
warfare here with heresies and scandals: And then the williness of Satan, who
cunningly observes whither way our hearts incline most, to looseness, or to
strictness; and then frames his temptations thereafter: So he can but put us
out of the way; it is no great matter to him, on whether hand it be: he has
his end howsoever. Nor to insist upon sundry more particular causes: as namely,
a natural proneness in all men to superstition: in many an affectation of
singularity, to go beyond the ordinary sort of people in something or other;
the difficulty of shunning one without running into the contrary extreme; the
great force of education and custom; besides manifold abuses, offenses and
provocations, arising from the carriage of others; and the rest: I shall note
but these two only, as the two great fountains of Error, (to which also most
of the other may be reduced,) Ignorance and Partiality: from neither of which
Gods dearest servants and children are in this life wholly exempted.

Ignorance first is a fruitful mother of Errors. (Ye err not knowing the
Scriptures, Matthew. 22. Yet not so much, Gross Ignorance neither: I mean not
that. For your mere Ignaro's, what they err, they err for company: they judge
not at all; neither according to the appearance, nor yet righteous judgment.
They only run on with the herd, and follow as they are led, be it right or
wrong; and never trouble themselves farther. But by Ignorance I mean weakness
of judgment, which consists in a disproportion between the affections, and
the understanding: when a man is very earnest, but withal very shallow:
reads much, and hears much, and thinks that he knows much, but has not
the judgment to sever truth from falsehood, nor to discern between a sound
argument and a captious fallacy. And so for want of ability to examine the
soundness and strength of those principles, from whence he fetches his
conclusions; he is easily carried away, as our Apostle elewhere speaks, with
vain words, and empty arguments. As St. Augustine said of Donatus, Ratioues
arripuit he catches hold of some reasons, (as wranglers will catch at a small
thing, rather then yield from their opinions,) quae considerantes, verisimiles
esse potius quam veras invenimus: which says he, we found to have more show of
probability at the first appearance, then substance of truth after they were
well considered of.

And I dare say, whosoever shall peruse with a judictious and unpartial eye
most of those Pamplets, that in this daring age have been thrust into the World
against the Ceremonies of the Church, against Episcopal Government; (to pass by
things of lesser regard and usefulness, and more open to acception and abuse,
yet so far as I can understand, unjustly condemned as things utterly unlawful;
such as are lusorious lots, dancing, Stage Plays, and some other things of like
nature;) When he shall have drained out the bitter invectives, unmannerly
jeers, petulant guirding at those that are in authority, impertinent
disgressions, but above all those most bold and perverse wrestings of holy
Scripture, wherewith such books are infinitely stuffels, he shall find that
little poor remainder that is left behind, to contain nothing but vain words
and empty arguments. For when these great undertakers have snatched up the
bucklers, as if they would make it good against all comers, that such and such
things are utterly unlawful; and therefore ought in all reason and conscience,
to bring such proofs as will come up to that conclusion: Quid dignum tanto?
very seldom shall you hear from them any other arguments, then such as will
conclude but an Inexpediency at the most. As, that they are apt to give
scandal; that they carry with them an appearance of evil; that they are often
occasions of sin; that they are not command in the Word; and such like. Which
Objections, even where they are just, are not of force, (no not taken
altogether, much less any of them singly,) to prove a thing to be utterly
unlawful. And yet are they glad many times, rather then sit out, to play very
small Game, and to make use of Arguments yet weaker then these, and such as will
not reach so far as to prove a bare inexpediency. As, that they were invented
by Heathens; that they have been abused in Popery; and other such like. Which
to my understanding is a very strong presumption, that they have taken a very
weak cause in hand, and such as is wholly destitute of sound proof.

Quest. Whether what the King and Parliament have determined may be altered to
satisfy private men,

Answ. While things are in agitation; private men may, if any thing seem to
them inexpedient, modestly tender their thoughts together with the reasons
thereof, to the consideration of those that are in authority: to whose care and
wisdom it belongs, in prescribing any thing concerning indifferent things, to
proceed with all just advisedness and moderation: that so the Subject may be
encouraged to perform that obedience with ^^^^rfulness, which of necessity he
must perform howsoever. It concerns Superiors therefore to look well to the
expediency, and inexpediency of what they enjoin in indifferent things. Wherein
if there be a fault, it must lie upon their account: the necessity of obedience
is to us a sufficient discharge in that behalf. Only it were good we did
remember, that they are to give up that account to God only, and not to us.
But after that things are once concluded and established by public authority,
Acts passed and Constitutions made concerning the same, and the will and
pleasure of the higher powers sufficiently made known therein: then for private
men to put in their vye, and with unseasonable diligence to call in question
the decency or expediency of the things so established, yea with intolerable
pride, to refuse obedience thereunto merely upon this pretension, that they are
undecent or inexpedient; is it self in-the most indecent and inexpedient thing
that can be imagined.

For that the fear of offending a private brother, is a thing not cnnsiderable
in comparison of the duty of obedience to a public Governor; might be shown
so apparently by sundry arguments, if we had time to enlarge and illustrate
them, as might sufficiently convince the judgment of any man not wilfully
obstinate in that point. I shall only crave leave briefly to touch at some of
them. First then, when Governors shall have appointed what seemed to them
expedient; and private men shall refuse to observe the same, pretending it to
be inexpedient: who shall judge thereof? Either they themselves that take the
exceptions must be judges; which is both unreasonable and preposterous: or else
every man must be his own judge, which were to overthrow all Government, and to
bring in a confusion, every man to do what is good in his own eyes: or else the
known gavernours must judge; and then you know what will follow, even to submit
and obey.

Secondly, to allow men under the pretense of inexpediency, and because of some
offense that may. be taken thereat, to disobey laws and constitutions made by
those that are in authority; were the next way to cut the sinews of all
authority, and to bring both Magistrates and Laws into contempt. For what Law
ever was made, or can be made so just and so reasonable, but some man or other
either did, or might take offense thereat? And what man that is disposed to
disobey, but may pretend inexpediency or other, wherewith to countenance out
such his disobedience.

Thirdly, it is agreed by consent of all that handle the matter of Scandal,
that we may not commit any sin whatsoever, be it never so small, for the
avoiding of any scandal, be it never so great. But to disobey lawful authority
in lawful things, is a sin against the fifth Commandment. Therefore we may not
redeem a scandal by such our disobedience; nor refuse to do the thing
commanded by such authority, whosoever should take offense thereat.

Fourthly, though lawfulness and unlawfulness be not, yet expediency and
inexpediency are (as we heard) capable of the degrees of more and less; and
then in all reason, of two inexpedient things we are to do that which is less
inexpedient, for the avoiding of that which is more inexpedient, Say then there
be an inexpediency in doing the thing commanded by authority, when a Brother is
thereby offended; is there not a greater inexpediency in not doing it, when the
Magistrate is thereby disobeyed? It is not more expedient, and conducing to the
common good, that a public Magistrate should be obeyed in a just command, then
that a private person should be gratified in a causeless scruple.

Fifthly, when by refusing obedience to the lawful commands of our Superiors,
we think to shun the offending of one or two weak brethren; we do in truth
incurr thereby a far more grievous scandal, by giving offense to hundreds of
others: whose consciences by our Disobedience will be emboldned to that,
whereto corrupt nature is but too too prone, to affront the Magistrate, and
despise the authority.

Lastly, where we are not able to discharge both, debts of justice are to be
paid, before debts of charity. Now the duty of obedience is debitum justitiae
and a matter of right, my superior may challenge it at my hands as is due; and
I do him wrong if I withold it from him. But the care of not giving offense
is but debitum charitatis, and a matter but of courtesy. I am to perform it to
my brother in love, when I see cause: but he cannot challenge it from me as his
right: nor can justly say I do him wrong, if I neglect it. It is therefore no
more lawful for me, to disobey the lawful command of a Superior, to prevent
thereby the offense of one or a few brethren: then it is lawful for me to do
one man wrong, to do another man a courtesy withal; or then it is lawful for
me to rob the Exchequer, to relieve an Hospital.

I see not yet how any of these six reasons can be fairly avoided: and yet,
(which would be considered,) if but any one of them hold good, it is enough to
carry the cause: And therefore I hope there need be no more said in this
matter. To conclude then, for the point of practice, (which is the main thing I
aimed at in the choiee of this Text, and my whole meditations thereon,) we may
take our direction in these three Rules; easy to be understood and remembered,
and not hard to be observed in our practice, if we will but bring our good wills
thereunto. First, If God command, we must submit without any more ado; and not
trouble our selves about the experiency, or so much as about the unlawfulness
for both Abraham never disputed whether it were expedient for him, not yet
whether it were lawful for him to sacrifice his son or no, when once it
appeared to him. that God would have it so.

Secondly, If our Superiors, endued with lawful authority thereunto, cammand
us any thing; we may and (where we have just cause of doubt) we ought to
enquire into the unlawfulness thereof. Yet notwithstanding such anxious
curiosity, as if we desired to find out some loop-hole whereby to evade; but
with such modest ingenuity, as may witness God and the world the unfeigned
sincerity of our desires both to fear God, and to honor those that he has set
over us- And if having used ordinary moral diligence bona fide to inform our
selves the best we can, there appear no unlawfulness it it; we are then also to
submit and obey without any more ado never troubling our selves farther to
enquire whether it be expedient yea or no. Let them that command us look to
that: for it is they must answer for it, and not we.

But then thirdly, where authority has left us free; no command, either of
God, or of those that are set over us under God, having prescribed any thing to
us in that behalf: there it is at our own liberty and choice, to do as we shall
think good. Yet are we not left so loose, as that we may do what we list, so as
the thing be but lawful; (for that were licentiousness, and not liberty:) but
we must ever do that. which according to the exigence of present circumstances,
(so far as all the wisdom and charity we have will serve us to judge,) shall
seem to us most expedient, and profitable to mutual Edification. This is the
way: God give us all grace to walk in it. So shall we bring glory to him, and
to our selvess comfort: so shall we further his work onward, and our own
account at the last.

Quest. Whether they that have taken the Covenant may Renounce it?

Answ. Thirdly, beware of engaging thy left to sin. It is a fearful thing, when
sin has got a tie upon a man. Then is one properly in the snare of the Devil;
when he has him as it were in a string, and may lead him captive to what
measure of presumption he will. And sundry ways may a man thus entangle
himself: by a Verbal, by a Real, by a Sinful Engagement. He shall do best to
keep himself out of all these snares. But if once he be in; there is no way out
again but one: even this, To loose his pledge, to break in sunder the bonds
wherein he is tied, as Sampson did the green witths, and to cast away those
cords from him.

A man has bound himself rashly by some promise, view, or covenant, to do
something he may not do, or not to do something he ought to do. He is now
engaged in a sin: the Devil has got this tie upon him. And though his
conscience tell him he cannot proceed without sin; yet because of his Vow, or
his Oath, he is wilful, and must on. It was Herod's Case; for taking of the
Baptists head. It was against his conscience to do it: for he knew he had not
diserved it: Ey, and it was against his mind too to do it; for the Text says,
he was exceeding sarry that his neice should put him upon it. But yet, says
the story withal, for his Oath sake, and because the great ones about him
should not say but the King would be as big as the word, he resolved it should
be done, and gave commandment accordingly to have it done. This I call a Verbal
Engagement.

Quest. Whether we Englishmen may think our selves bound by the Solemn League
and Covenant?

Answ. Not without betraying the Liberty, which by our Protestation we are
bound, and in the third Article of this Covenant must swear, with our lives and
fortunes to preserve. To which Liberty the imposition of a new Oath, other then
is established by Act of Parliament, it expressed in the Petition of Right, and
by the Lords and Commons in their Declarations acknowledged to be contrary.

3. Without acknowledgeing in the imposers, a greater power then, for ought
that appears to us, has been in former times challenged; Or can consist with
our former Protestation (if we rightly understand it) in sundry the most
material branches thereof.

Neither, secondly, are we satisfied; although the Covenant should not be
imposed on us at al, but only recommended to us, and then left to our choice.

1. How we should in wisdom and Duty (being Subjects) of our own accord and
free will enter into a Covenant, wherein He, whose Subjects we are, is in any
wise concerned, without His consent, either expressed or reasonably presumed.
It being in his power (as we conceive) by the equity of the Law, Numb. 30. to
annull and make void the same at his pleasure.

2. How we can (now that His Majesty has by His public Interdict
sufficiently made known His pleasure in that behalf) enter into a Covenant,
the taking whereof he has expressly forbidden; without forfeiting that
Obedience, which (as we are persuaded) by our natural Allegiance and former
Oaths we owe unto all such His Majesty's Commands, as are not in our
apprehensions repugnant to the will of God, or the positive laws of this Kingdom.

Quest. What shall a man do that scruples in Conscience what Authority enjoins
as unlawful.

But then thirdly, if the liberty of the agent be determined by the command of
some superior power to whom he owes obedience; so as he is not now sui juris
ad hoc, to do or not to do at his own choice, but to do what he is commanded:
this one circumstance quite alters the whole case, and now he is bound in
conscience to do the thing commanded; his doubtfulnesse of mind whether that
thing be lawful or no, notwithstanding. To do that whereof he doubts, where
he has free liberty to leave it undone, brings upon him (as we have already
shown) the guilt of wilful transgression: but not so where he is not left to
his own liberty. And where lawful authority prescribes in alterutram partem,
there the liberty ad utramque partem contradictionis is taken away, from so
many as are under that authority. If they that are over them have determined it
one way; it is not thenceforth any more at their choice, whether they will take
that way, or the contrary: but they must go the way that is appointed them
without gainsaying or grudging. And if in the deed done at the command of one
that is endued with lawful authority there be a sin, it must go on his score
that requires it wrongfully, not on his that does but his duty in obeying. A
Prince commands his Subjects to serve in his Wars: it may be the quarrel is
unjust, it may be there may appear to the understanding of the Subject great
likelihoods of such injustice; yet may the Subject for all that fight in that
quarrel; yea he is bound in conscience so to do: nay he is deep in disloyalty
and treason if he refuse the service, whatsoever pretensions he may make of
conscience for such refusal. Neither need that fear trouble him lest he should
bring upon himself the guilt of innocent blood; for the blood that is
unrighteously shed in that quarrel, he must answer for that set him on work,
not he that spilt it. And truly it is a great wonder to me, that any man endued
with understanding, and that is able in any measure to weigh the force of those
precepts and reasons which bind inferiors to yield obedience to their
superiors, should be otherwise minded in cases of like nature. Whatsoever is
commanded us by those whom God has set over us, either in Church, Common
wealth, or Family, ( Quod tamen non sit certum displicere Deo, says S. Bern.)
which is not evidently contrary to the Law and will of God, ought to be of us
received and obeyed no otherwise, then as if God himself had commanded it,
because God himself has commanded us to obey the higher powers, and to submit
our selves to their ordinances. Say it be not well don of them to command it!
Sed enim quid hoc refert tua? says he, What is that to thee? Let them look to
that whom it concerns: Toll quod tuum est, and vade. Do thou what is thine
own part faithfully, and never trouble thy self further. Ipsum quem pro Deo
habemus, tanquam Deum in his quae aperte non sunt contra Deum audire debemus;
Bernard still. Gods Vicegerents must be heard and obeyed in all things that are
not manifestly contrary to the revealed will of God.

But the thing required is against my conscience, may some say, and I may not go
against my conscience* for any man's pleasure. Judge I pray you what perverseness
is this, when the blessed Apostle commands thee to obey for conscience sake,
that thou should disobey, and that for conscience sake too: He charge thee
upon thy conscience to be subject; and thou pretendest thy conscience to free
thee from subjection. This by the way; now to the point. Thou say it is
against thy conscience: I say again, that (in the case whereof we now speak,
the case of doubtfullness) it is not against thy conscience. For doubting
properly is motus indifferens in utramque partem contradictionis; when the mind
is held in suspense between two ways, uncertain whether of both to take to.
When the scales hang even (as I said before) and inaequi^libero, without any
notable propension or inclination to the one side more than to the other. And
surely where things hang thus even, if the weight of authority will not cast
the scale either way: we may well suppose, that either the authority is made
very light, or else there is a great fault in the beam. Know (brethren) the
gainsaying conscience is one thing, and the doubting conscience another. That
which is done repugnante conscientia, the conscience of the doer flatly
gainsaying it, that is indeed against a man's conscience, the conscience having
already passed a definitive sentence the one way:) and no respect or
circumstance whatsoever can free it from sin. But that which is done dubitante
conscientia, the conscience of the doer only doubting of it and no more; that
is in truth no more against a man's conscience than with it, (the conscience as
yet not having passed a definitive sentence either way) and such an action may
either be a sin, or no sin; according to those qualifications which it may
receive from other respects and circumstances. If the conscience have already
passed a judgment upon a thing, and condemned it as simply unlawful; in that
case it is true that a man ought not by any means to do that thing, no not at
the command of any Magistrate, no not although his conscience have pronounced a
wrong sentence, and erred in that judgment: for then he should do it
repugnante conscientia, he should go directly against his own conscience, which
he ought not to do whatsoever come of it. In such a case certainly he may not
obey the Magistrate: yet let him know thus much withal, that he sins too in
disobeying the Magistrate; from which sin the following of the judgment of
his own conscience cannot acquit him. And this is that fearful perplexity
whereof I spoke, whereinto many a man casts himself by his own error and
obstinacy, that he can neither go with his conscience, nor against it but he
shall sin. And who can help it, if a man will needs cherish an error, and
persist in it? But now if the conscience be only doubtful whether a thing be
lawful or no, but have not as yet passed a peremptory judgment against it,
(yea although it rather incline to think it unlawful:) in that case if the
Magistrate shall command it to be done, the subject with a good conscience may
do it, nay he cannot with a good conscience refuse to do it, though it be
dubitante conscientia.

But you will yet say, that in doubtful cases the safer part is to be chosen.
So say I too; and am content that rule should decide this question: only let
it be rightly applied. Thou think it safer, where thou doubtest of the
unlawfulness, to forbear then to do: as for example, if thou doubtest whether
it be lawful to kneel at the Communion, it is safest in thy opinion therefore
for thee not to kneel. So should I think too, if thou were left merely to thine
own liberty. But thou do not consider how thou art caught in thine own net,
and how the edge of thine own weapon may be turned upon thee point blank not to
be avoided, thus. If authority command thee to kneel, which whether it be
lawful for thee to do, or not, thou doubtest; it cannot choose but thou must
needs doubt also, whether thou may lawfully disobey, or not. Now then here
apply thine own Rule, In dubiis pars tutior, and see what will come of it.
Judge, since thou can not but doubt in both cases, whether it be not the
safer of the two, to obey doubtingly, than to disobey doubtingly. Tene certum,
demitte incertum, is S. Gregory his rule: where there is a certainty, and an
uncertainty, let the uncertainty go, and hold to that which is certain. Now the
general is certain, that thou art to obey the Magistrate in all things not
contrary to the will of God; but the particular is uncertain, whether the thing
now commanded thee by the Magistrate be contrary to the will of God: (I say
uncertain to thee, because thou doubtest of it) Deal safely therefore, and hold
thee to that which is certain* and obey.

But thou will yet allege, that the Apostle here condemns the doing of any
thing, not only with a gainsaying, but even with a doubting conscience: because
doubting also is contrary to faith; and he that doubts is even for that
condemned, if he eat. Oh beware of mis-applying Scripture! it is a thing easily
done, but not so easily answered. I know not any one gap that has let in more
and more dangerous errors into the Church, than this: that men take the word,
of the sacred Text fitted to particular occasions, and to the condition of the
times wherein they were written; and then apply them to themselves and others as
they find them, without due respect had to the differences that may be between
those times and cases, and the present. Sundry things spoken of in Scripture
agreeably to that infancy of the Church, would sort very ill with the Church in
her fullness of strength and stature: and sundry directions very expedient in
times of persecution, and when believers lived mingled with Infidels, would be
very unseasonably urged where the Church is in a peaceable and flourishing
estate, enjoying the favor and living under the protection of gracious and
religious (...). Thus the Constitutions that the Apostles made concerning
Deacons and Widows in those primitive times, are with much importunity, but
very importunely withal, urged by the Disciplinarians: And sundry other like
things I might instance of this kind, worthy the discovery, but that I fear to
grow tedious. Briefly then, the Apostles whole discourse in this Chapter, and
so wheresoever else he touches upon the point of Scandals, is to be understood
only in that case where men are left to their own liberty in the use of
indifferent things: the Romans, Corinthians, and others to whom S. Paul wrote
about these matters, being not limited any way in the exercise of their liberty
therein by any overruling authority. But where the Magistrates have interposed*
and thought good upon mature advice to impose Laws upon those that are under
them, whereby their liberty is (not infringed, as some unjustly complain, in
the inward judgment, but only) limited in the outward exercise of it: there
the Apostolical directions will not hold in the same absolute manner, as they
were delivered to those whom they then concerned; but only in the equity of
them, so far forth as the cases are alike, and with such meet qualifications
and mitigations, as the difference of the cases otherwise does require. So that
a man ought not out of private fancy, or merely because he would not be
observed for not doing as others do, or for any the like weak respects, to do
that thing of the lawfulness whereof he is not competently persuaded, where it
is free for him to do otherwise: which was the case of these weak ones among
the Romans, for whose sakes principally the Apostle gave these directions. But
the authority of the Magistrates intervening so alters the case, that such a
forbearance as to them was necessary, is to as many of (...) commanded to do
this or that, altogether unlawf(...) regard they were free and we are bound:
for the reasons already shown, which I now rehearse not. But you will yet say,
(for in point of obedience men are very loath to yield so long as they can find
any thing to plead,) those that lay these burdens upon us, at least wise should
do well to satisfy our doubts and to inform our consciences concerning the
lawfulness of what they enjoin that so we might render them obedience with
better cheerfulness. How willing are we sinful men to leave the blame of our
miscarriages any where rather than upon our selves! But how is it not
incongruous the while, that those men should prescribe rules to their
governors, who can scarcely brook their governors should prescribe laws to
them? It were good we should first learn how to obey, ere we take upon us to
teach our betters how to govern. However, what governors are bound to do, or
what is fit for them to do, in the point of information; that is not now the
question. If they fail in any part of their bounden duty, they shall be sure to
reckon for it one day: but their failing cannot in the mean time excuse thy
disobedience. Although I think it would prove a hard task, for whosoever should
undertake it, to show that Superiors are always bound to inform the
consciences of their inferiors concerning the lawfulness of every thing they
shall command. If sometimes they do it, where they see it expedient or needful;
sometimes again (and that perhaps oftener,) it may be thought more expedient for
them, and more conducible for the public peace and safety, only to make known
to the people what their pleasures are, reserving to themselves the reasons
thereof. I am sure, in the point of Ecclesiastical Ceremonies and
Constitutions* (in which case the aforesaid allegations are usually most stood
upon,) this has been abundantly done in our Church, not only in the learned
writings of sundry private men but by the public declaration also of
authority, as is to be seen at large in the preface commonly printed before the
book of Common prayer concerning that argument: enough to satisfy those that
are peaceable, and not disposed to stretch their wits to cavil at things
established. And thus much of the second Question, touching a doubting
conscience: whereon I have insisted the longer, because it is a point both so
proper to the Text, and whereat so many have stumbled.

There remains but one other Question, and that of far smaller difficulty:
What is to be done, when the conscience is scrupulous? I call that a scruple,
when a man is reasonably well persuaded of the lawfullnesse of a thing, yet
has withal some jealousies and fears, lest perhaps it should prove unlawful.
Such scruples are most incident to men of melancholy dispositions, or of
timorous spirits; especially if they be tender-conscienced withal: and they
are much increased by the false suggestions of Satan; by reading the books, or
hearing the Sermons, or frequenting the company of men more strict, precise,
and austere in sundry points, than they need or ought to be; and by sundry
other means which I now mention not. Of which scruples it behooveth every man,
first, to be wary that he does not at all admit them, if he can choose: or, if
he cannot wholly avoid them, that secondly, he endeavor so far as may be to
eject them speedily out of his thoughts, as Satan's snares, and things that may
breed him worser inconveniences: or, if he cannot be so rid of them, that then
thirdly, he resolve to go on according to the more profitable persuasion of his
mind, and despise those scruples. And this he may do with a good conscience,
not only in things commanded him by lawful authority, but even in things
indifferent and arbitrary, and wherein he is left to his own liberty.

FINIS.

