AN EXACT JOURNAL OF THE SIEGE of CONI IN PIEMONT. With an Account of the
manner of raising it, by Prince Eugene of Savoy this present year 1691. which
has so much mortified the French King, and occasioned the Imprisonment of the
Sieur de Bulonde, humbly presented to his Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy: By
Giovanni Renaldo, Engineer. Sent in a Manuscript from Turin to a Person of
Quallity in London.

The Famous Branthome in his Memoirs, and especially in the Life of the Marshal
de Brissac, Tome 11. says. The Marshal de Brissac, after having a considerable
time besieged Coni was at last forced to raise the Siege. It has been twice
besieged be fore by the French, but always unsuccessfully; insomuch that after
the raising of that Siege by the Marshal de Brissac, Coni was looked upon in
France as a place fatal to the French Arms, etc.

Branthome dans la vie du Marshall de Brissac, Tome 11. LONDON: Printed for
Tho. Basset, at the George near St. Dunstans-Church in Fleetstreet. 1691.

TO THE READER.
THE Siege of Coni, tho it has not made that noise in the World, as a Siege of
Turin would have made, in case the Design laid by the French cunningly enough,
had taken its effect, yet it is nevertheless very remarkable in all its
Circumstances. Catinat rendered himself Master of Suze, Nice, and Ville Franche,
with little or no difficulty, and Carmagnole surrendered at sight of the Enemy.
The only place left on this side of the Capital City was Coni, the Conquest of
which seemed to the French to be of an absolute necessity, for besides that
after the taking of it, they might easily draw all manner of Provisions and
Ammunition out of Nice and Ville Franche for the use of their Army, and the
rest of the Conquered Places in Piemont, and that it secured the passage of the
Troops that toward Winter were to enter into Quarters in the County of Nice,
to stop the frequent Incursions of the Vaudois, especially of those of the
Valley of Barcelonette, it would much have hindered the passage of the Germans,
that were a coming to the Dukes Assistance; for which reasons Feuquieres and
Bulonde were sent with a great detachment from the man Army to take the Place
(a haughty way of their speaking when they are going to form a Siege.) Coni is
a Place but of little strength, most of the Fortifications were half ruined,
and it was expected they would surrender at the first Summons. But it seemed
this inconsiderable Place was designed by Providence to stop the furious
Torrent of the French Victories, and to give the first, and the most sensible
Affront to the French King's Arms in Piemont. Brave Julien, a born Subject of
his Majesty, as Prince of Orange, having thrown himself, with his Batallion of
French Refugees in the King's Service, into the Place; defended it with so much
Vigor and Gallantry, that the French were forced, to their everlasting shame,
to raise the Slege. It will be no small Pleasure to those that read this
Journal, to observe with what Insolency Feuquieres (secure of the Conquest)
behaved himself before the Place; what scornful Letters he wrote to the
Besieged; and how on the contrary his Spirits were oppressed, when he was
forced to march off. As to the Journal it self, it is certainly one of the
truest and exactest that ever was writ, in consideration of which, and of the
remoteness of the Place, the Reader will easily pardon that it comes somewhat
late.

A JOURNAL OF THE SIEGE of CONI IN PIEMONT: TOGETHER With the Raising of it;
which has so much Mortified the French King, and occasioned the Imprisonment of
the Sieur de Bulonde.
Sent in a Manuscript, from Turin, to a Person of Quality in London.
THE Town and Citadel of Nisse were no sooner surrendered to the French, but
Count de Rouere Governor of the Province of Salusses and Coni expected a Siege
of the latter. The Friendship he entertained with Lieutenant Colonel de Julien,
a Subject of his Majesty of Great Britain, being born in the Principality of
Orange, who commanded at that time in the Valley of Barcelone, together with
the great esteem he had for his Person, grounded on the great Exploits he has
made in that Country, with one single Battalion of the Troops of his Majesty of
Great Britain, and 200 Men of the Regiment of the French Refugees, were the
motives that persuaded him to communicate his apprehension to him; giving him
withal to understand, that he did not despair of maintaining himself in that
place, his R. H. of Savoy had trusted him with, in case that with the New
Fortifications he had caused to be raised there, he should be assured of the
assistance of his Battalion. Monsieur de Julien, who is of a temper not to let
slip the least occasion of signalizing himself, answered the Governor, that he
should be exceedingly glad of being serviceable to him in what place soever he
would be pleased to call him.

This great readiness of his obliged the Governor to solicit at his R.
Highness's Court for the Lieutenant Colonel's retreat out of the Valley of
Barcelone, and orders being sent accordingly, a great time before the Action of
Meironne, (where he with his single Battalion defeated a Body of between 3 and
4000 of the French, killing 4 or 500 of them upon the spot,) he marched toward
Coni; and after he had made, for two or three days time, several Marches and
Counter-marches round about this place, heat last entered into it, under
pretense of refreshing himself and his Battalion there, after the great
Fatigues they had suffered during the Winter; ten days after it the Garrison
marched out of the place, in order to join the Army, with the two hundred Men
abovementioned, and the Guard of it was committed to the single Battalion of
de Julien. He had scarce been there one Month, but the Governor was informed,
that a detachment of four thousand Men, Horse and Foot, were sent out of
Monsieur Catinat's Army, under the command of Monsieur de Feuquieres, Marshall
de Camp of the French King's Forces, to invest Coni, and it was believed the
main Army would follow them on their Heels to form the Siege of it; the French
flattering themselves to have as cheap a Bargain of this place, as they had of
that of Carmagnole.

Upon this advice the Governor divided the Posts amongst his little Garrison,
it being composed of Monsieur de Julien's Battalion of 500 Men, of 120 new
raised Soldiers, some Militia of the Country, and the Burghers: He gave orders
for the Baking of a great quantity of Bread; and to advance the Fortifications
that were yet unfinished. He formed his Council of War of the Counts of
Prouane, Commendant; and de Vibau, Vice-Commendant; of Lievtenant-Colonel de
Julien; de Guibert, first Engineer of Savoy; Chouet, Captain in the Regiment of
Savoy, and Major of the place; and the Engineer Garroue. In fine, he did all
that could be expected from a wise and experienced Officer, in order to avoid
being either surprised or prevented by the Enemy.

June the 11th. The Sieur de Feuquieres, being pussed up with the Success the
Arms of France had met with at Carmagnole, and flattering himself with the
surrender of Coni without the least resistance, after he had plundered the
Church of St. Renin, sent a Letter by a Peasant of Villefalet to the Syndics of
the Town, who having delivered the latter without opening it, together with the
bearer into the Governor's Hands, he ordered the latter to be secured, and
being retired into a private Room with L. Col. de Julien, Guibert, and Chouet,
he read the Letter which was written in these following terms:

Gentlemen,
I Am informed that you have in your Place a Battalion of French Heretics, and
some Peasants in Arms, that have abandoned their Houses on purpose to follow a
Trade that does not become them. The quick surrender of Carmagnole gives you no
reason to hope for better Terms; and I have sent you this Letter to let you
know that the King's Army draws near to your Place, and that in case you do not
speedily send to me your Deputies, in order to obtain a good Capitulation, I am
resolved, as many Hours there shall pass before their arrival, to burn as many
Villages within ten Leagues round your Place. I take no notice at all of the
French Heretics, I am glad to see them shut up in a Dungeon, and Monsieur de
Julien shall not be able to prevent your Submission. I am, Gentlemen,

Yours Feuquieres
From the Camp of Tarantesque, June the 11th. 1691.

After the reading of this Letter, the three Officers that were then with the
Governor did agree with him, that before they showed it to the Counsel of the
Town, it would be necessary to sound their Inclinations, and the Governor
having at the same time told L. Col. de Julien, that he should be very glad to
know the disposition of the Officers of his Battalion, he did assure him that
it was such as ought to be expected from Men of Honor; and having sent for
them in the great Court of the Palace, acquainted them with the Threatenings the
Sieur de Feuquieres had made them, he told them, That he was resolved to give
them a good Example by his Behavior as he had done formerly, and that he
himself had seen the Succors depart from his Royal Highness's Army, on a
Journey he had made thither in 36 Hours; in a word, he knew so well how to
persuade them, that all his Captains (most of which were much displeased for
not having paid them their Arrears) forgot their displeasure answering their
Commander, That they would follow him wherever he should lead them, according
to their former behavior, that they were unanimously resolved rather to die
upon the spot, than to betray their Trust, or to fail in their Duty. The L.
Colonel being ravished to find them in so resolute a disposition, conducted
them into the Governor's Chamber; telling him, that his whole Battalion was, as
well as himself, resolved to do their Duty, and that every one of them was full
of Zeal for His Royal Highness's Service; he added, that the Council of the
Town, who in several Sieges had convinced their Sovereign of their Faithfulness
and Loyalty, would undoubtedly give yet greater proofs of it on this occasion,
seeing themselves encouraged by the French Refugees, who though they were
altogether Strangers, were nevertheless willing to Sacrifice themselves out of
love to them, The Governor answered, that he was persuaded of the Courage and
Zeal of the French Protestants; and having sent for the whole Body of the
Council of the Town, acquainted them with his and the Garrisons resolution, and
he heard with joy that their inclinations were accordingly: Whereupon he
delivered to them the Sieur de Feuquieres's Letter; which by his consent they
answered in this following manner:

SIR,
WE have received the Letter which your Excellency has done us the Honor to
write to us. The Zeal and Eagerness, which on all occasions you show for the
service of his Most Christian Majesty, sets us so Noble a Pattern, that we
cannot choose but imitate it in this point. Therefore we hope you will not take
it ill, that we are resolved to do our Duty, and to be Faithful to our
Sovereign. As for the Misfortune we are threatened with, we hope your
Excellency's Generosity will divert it from us. We are with respect,

SIR, Your Excellency's most Humble and most Obedient Servants.


This Answer was sent to the Sieur de Feuquieres by the same Peasant that was
the Bearer of his Letter, who was glad of having escaped the Rope, which
according to his demerits he had been threatened with.

June the 12th. between 14 and 15 a Clock of Italy, or between 10 and 11 in the
Morning, the Enemy invested the Town. As soon as their Troops drew near, the
Governor gave orders to discharge the Cannons; the first Bullet carried away a
whole rank of four Dragoons, according to our own sight, and their own relation
afterward, which obliged them to a little retreat.

Toward Night another Letter was sent by the Sieur de Feuquieres, in these
following terms:

Gentlemen,
I Did not think fit to Answer your Letter, before I had taken a full view of
your Place. It is indeed in too bad a condition to think on defending it. Do
not expect an honorable Capitulation, if you put us to the troubles of
discharging our Cannons, and make a serious reflection, I beseech you, of what I
tell you. Monsieur de Julien's Battalion, if it was much stronger than it is,
will not prevent what you are to suffer, and which you may now avoid. It will
hereafter be too late to think on a Capitulation, which you may now expect.

I am, Gentlemen, Yours, Feuquieres.
From the Camp before Coni, June 12. 1691.

There was sent no Answer to this second Letter. Every Body did only think on
making a vigorous Defense, and to give the Enemy good Impressions of the
strength of the Place, as well as of the Bravery of the Defendents. The Body of
the University was very anxious in discovering the Sentiments of the Commanders
and the Troops; and sinding in them nothing but what was recommendable, were
delivered from their panick Fears, and encouraged to forget nothing that might
contribute to the Defense of the Place, and their Liberties.

The same day the Governor thought fit to divide the Posts, which was done in
this manner: To the Count de Provane Commendant was committed the Guard of the
Gate of Turin, of the Bastions of Notre Dame, of the Lorme de Carait, with the
Gates of Succors that are in this Precinct; as also of the demi-Bastions of
l'Orme, that are on the side of the River de Gez: The Vice-Commendant Vibau was
to defend the Bastions of de l'Hospital of St. Francis and St. Ann, with the
Gate of Succors, and to him was committed the Care of sending Ammunition to
the several Magazines: The Commander of the Batallion of the French Refugees
had the Guard of the Two half Moons; the Place where the Citadel was formerly,
and where at present there is only a bad Glacis, a Counterscarp, and a
Covert-way, that goes from the Gate of Turin as far as to the Bastion of St.
James, toward a dead Angle, which is called the Cittatelle, the Gate of Turin,
the Bastion of St. James, the Gates of Succors, the Rivas and la Pierre. As
for the whole Covertway, it was abandoned for want of Troops to guard it; and
it was not secured till after the arrival of the Succors, after which this
Order was changed. The Engeneer Guibert had the direction of all the Works that
were to be made during the Siege; and he had under him the Engeneer Garroue to
assist him in the Execution of his Designs: All the Commanders were to inform
him of what did happen in their Posts, and to give immediately notice of it to
the Governor, who charged himself with the whole weight of the Affairs in
general, retaining near his Person the Major and the Adjutants, in order to
carry to every Body his Orders.

The Troops were sent each to their Posts, where they continued always, because
there were none to relieve them.

The Body of the Reserve in the Place was very inconsiderable.

The Night between the 12th and the 13th was past without Allarm; but our
Musketeers sired continually, to force the Enemy to begin their Approaches
from afar off.

The 13th. between 10 and 11 a Clock before Noon, we saw the Enemy's Horse
March toward us with great haste, followed by some of their Foot, which made
us believe that our Succors was a coming. Our Cannons, that were placed on
that side playing upon them, made them March yet with greater precipitation,
and killed some of their Horse. The Governor sent 200 Refugees, commanded by
their Lievtenant-Colonel, out of the Place, to favor the entering of our
Succors, in case they were upon their March; but it was sound a mistake. A
little time after it two Deserters came over to us, relating that the Sieur de
Feuquieres had at the most but four thousand Men with him, viz. three Regiments
of Foot, and the rest of Horse and Dragoons, three pieces of Cannon, but no
Mortar-pieces; but that he expected a considerable re-inforcement from Monsieur
Catinat's Army, where there were but lately arrived eighteen Mortar-pieces and
fifty three of Cannon; and that the Army that was coming to besiege us was to
consist of between eight and nine thousand Men.

The 14th. two hours before Daybreak, the Sieur de Feuquieres designed to
surprise a Post of the Citadel; to which purpose he commanded thither two
Companies of Granadeers, who having made some noise in mounting toward an old
Breach, an Allarm was made, and five Soldiers with their Officer fired upon the
Enemy, which they endured without saying one Word. The Engineers and some
Officers were immediately called: The Governor asked what they had seen?
Guibert said they had seen no Body. The Governor answered, some Body must have
been there, that it was no illusion, and that he himself had heard a noise:
Whereupon the place was reinforced, and the Soldiers ordered to continue their
firing. In the Morning we discovered that the Enemy had endeavored to make
themselves Masters of this Post, but that the great Fire which was made by our
Men had put them into a great confusion, and turned several of them down into
the River Gez; for we found 12 Muskets, some Hats, a Perriwig, a Sword, and
two wounded Soldiers, who informed us of the Enemies, and that forty Granadeers
had been made useless on this occasion.

The same day Pallisadoes were set up on that place where the Enemy had
mounted, and this was the only Attack they made during the Siege toward the
Citadel; we pulled down the Bridge of the Gate of Turin, which was no more
opened, and we made use of the Gate of Succors that leads into the Citadel;
some new Works were also ordered to be made that Day, and Lievtenant-Colonel de
Julien posted a detachment of the Refugees to cover the Workmen.

Toward Night some Volunteers dislodged a Guard of the Enemies Dragoons, that
had posted themselves near the River Gez, and the Night was past without Allarm.

The Governor was informed that Count de Bernez that conducted our Succors,
was departed from Mondovi, and toward five a Clock at Night, having received
advice that he was near the Place, he sent out a detachment of three hundred
Men, under the command of Monsieur de Julien; and his orders were proclaimed
through the whole Town, That all those that were provided with a Horse should
mount on Horseback, with their Arms, in order to meet our Succors; which was
punctually executed. The Commendant de Prouane posted his Men so
advantageousiy, that he beat back the Enemy, who pressed our Succors with
great vigor. Count Bernez did confess, that without his Sally, the Enemy would
have made a great slaughter amongst his Men; we lost only 14 of our Men, a
Servant, and a Sergeant, and seven or eight of them were killed by the
Refugees, who took them for the Enemy; it is true, that the Peasants of Mondovi
suffered very much, 40 of them being killed upon the spot, and several wounded;
which was the reason that the Sieur de Feuquieres bragged, that on this
occasion he had killed 600 Men of our Succors, that the rest had hidden
themselves in the Wood, and entered during Night into the City, which is so far
from Truth, that between six and seven a Clock at Night their Horse were
charged by our detachment, that forced them to repass the River Gez with great
precipitation and disorder; and afterward the Engineer Guibert having given
notice to the Commendant, that there was still some Ammunition left upon the
Bridge de Sture, he made half a Tour to the Right with his Troop, who took it
and carried it into the Place before Night. And in this manner the Count de
Bernez entered into Coni with the Succors. It was indeed one of the boldest
and happiest Actions we have heard of these many years; and it cannot be
denied, but that the Sieur de Feuquieres had mightily forgot himself on this
occasion, since there was nothing easier than to destroy this Succor, it being
only composed of 280 of the Regiment of Saxe-Coburg, (The Emperors Troops;) 130
Soldiers of the Regiment of Wirtemberg, (The King of Spain's Troops;) 120
Italians of the same Troops; and the Regiment of Salusses, consisting of 450
Soldiers, commanded by the Marquess de Vauqueres, Son to the Prince de la
Cisterne; there were besides 50 Dragoons that were not designed for the Place,
but only to Convoy the Count de Bernez, he having order to retreat after he had
thrown the Succors into the Place; but besides the difficulty of his retreat
this Marshall de Camp did not think fit to leave a Place that was invested and
going to be besieged.

June the 16th. The Garrison not being paid, the Governor, who has behaved
himself very prudently during the Siege, and who has always done more than he
promised, found some means to pay them; and having afterward taken a full
review of all the Garrison, it was found that we had only lost fourteen
Soldiers, one Sergeant, and a Valet-de-Chambre to the Lievtenant-Colonel of the
Regiment of Salusses.

The Governor sent a Tambour into the Enemies Camp to challenge the two last;
but he was answered that they had not heard of them.

The same day the Guards of the Posts were changed. The Refugees remained upon
the Post of the Citadel, the Bastions of St. Anne, St. James, at the Gate of
the Succors, and of Nisse, at the dead Angle, and at the Rivas, and possessed
themselves besides of the Bastion de Carail; the Regiment of Salusses possessed
themselves of the Half Moon of Rouere, that was in very good order and lined
with Stone, they had also the Guard of the Gate of Nisse, till to the Bastion
of L'orme; Saxe-Coburg was posted in the Covert-way from the Place of Arms to
the Counterguard of the Half Moon Balbiane, that is only made of Earth and in a
bad condition, they had also one part of the Guard of the Bastion de Carail and
Notre-Dame; the Italians were partly put upon the Bastion de l'Hospital and St.
Francois, and partly upon the Counterscarp that regards the River Sture; the
new-raised Companies guarded la Pierre and the Environs; the Half-Bastion de
L'orme was guarded by the Burghers; and the Surplus with the Militia were
posted in the Main Place, in case of an Allarm or Attack: The Governor remained
upon the Place of Arms, with the Body of Reserve, in order to send some
Succors to the Attacked Posts; the Counts de Prouane and Vibau had also their
Posts assigned them; the Count de Bernez and the Marquess de Vauqueres were
near the Half Moon Rouere; and the Lievtenant-Colonel de Julien was with his
Battalion. These Commanders visited the Posts from time to time, and the
Governor made exactly his round to make every Body mindful of his Duty.

The 17th. we were informed that Monsieur de Bulonde came to join the Sieur de
Feuquieres with a considerable re-inforcement; whereupon the Governor called a
Counsel of War, wherein it was concluded, that the Germans should be relieved
out of the Outworks, as not thinking it convenient to expose the best Troops
at the very first Attacks; and accordingly they were relieved by the Refugees,
and the Germans were posted in the Citadel, and some other places of the City.
The Refugees being well pleased with their new Post, remained there during the
whole Siege.

At Night we were always upon our Guards expecting the Enemy would open their
Trenches.

June the 18th. The Enemy received another re-inforcement, and about 2 a Clock
the next Morning they opened the Trenches, near an ancient Wall that runs along
a Courtin, opposite to the Bastions of Notre-Dame and Carail, about 300 Foot
from the Pallisadoes, and the Half Moon Balbiane, which they advanced strait to
the Gallows, about 350 Foot in length, they met in one place with so hard a
ground, that we heard it was like to have made them mad: So soon as we
perceived it, our Men fired furiously upon them from the Outworks, during the
remainder of the Night. Our Gunners discharged unadvertently a Cannon from the
Bastion de Carail that killed four of the Refugees and two of their Officers
that were posted at the Counterguard, guarded by their Company of Granadeers,
with 60 other Soldiers.

The same Night twenty Men made a Sally to retard the Works of the Enemy, and
they came back without loss, except that of a Sergeant of the Refugees, who was
killed by a Musket Shot from the Bastion of Notre-Dame.

June the 19th. The Enemy advanced their Trenches, to which 300 Workmen were
employed instead of 600 that had been busy about it during Night.

At Night they continued their approaches, and made a Battery of 6 pieces of
Canon, and another of four Mortarpieces, with which they played upon the City;
we found that they had thrown 36 Bombs into the Place and the Outworks, whilst
in the mean time they continued their Works under the favor of a Corn-field
that covered them, and which has saved them a great many of their Men during
the Siege.

June the 20th. By break of Day they played continually upon us with six pieces
of Cannon, and continued to throw their Bombs into the City, during the whole
Day; but the little harm they did us gave a fresh courage to the Inhabitants.
Several of the French Refugees, that had never seen this sort of Engines, were
presently used to it, and did not mind them at all, although their Posts were the
most visited by them.

The Enemy did not at all endeavor to make a breach with his Cannon, of which
some were 24, others 36 Pounders; but they always shot at random, sometimes
toward a Steeple, sometimes amongst the Houses, sometimes toward the Bastion
of Carail, where we annoyed them very much with two pieces of Cannon, and
sometimes toward the Bastion of Notre-Dame, where we had also planted some
Cannons. Some young Men that found some Bullets in the Ditches and the Streets
carried them to the Governor, who at first gave them a French Livre, and
afterward fifteen pence a piece; but the number of them increasing very much,
he gave them at last but five pence a piece.

This day was spent in working on both sides. The Enemy took Post at a
Silk-Mill, situated upon the River Sture, from whence they fired furiously upon
those that guarded the Countuergard de Carail.

During Night two Houses were burned, either by the negligency of some
particular Persons, or the Bombs of the Enemy. This Fire Alarmed somewhat the
Inhabitants; but they were appeased by the Governors order to remove all Wood,
and other combustible things from the top of the Houses.

A little Sally was made, but without any effect. Our Musketeers in the
Outworks continued their Firing, as usually, to hinder the approaches of the
Enemy, who surrounded the whole Front from the Counterguard de Carail till to
the point of the Bastion of Notre-Dame, which comprehended exactly the Posts
that were guarded by the Refugees.

June the 21st. The whole day was spent in Firing on both sides, but the Enemy
had the advantage of the Bombs.

At night the Counsel of War did assemble, where all the Officers that were
designed to be there were present, except Monsieur de Julien. It was there
represented by the Engineer Guibert, That besides that our Troops were
extremely harras'd, it was impossible to maintain the Covert way with so few
Forces, it being in a bad posture, and every where surrounded by the Enemies
Works. That by endeavoring to maintain it, we would run the hazard to lose all
the Men that guarded it; especially the French Refugees, who had behaved
themselves so courageously, and who were exactly posted toward the Attack and
the Approaches of the Enemy, who undoubtedly would in great numbers fall upon
them, in order to possess themselves of the Covert-way and the Half Moon, which
they knew to be almost in no posture of defense. That therefore it would be
more prudent to keep only the Sallying places of Arms, and to abandon all the
rest; especially, when according to the Project that was made, a good Body of
Men should be put into the Half-moons and the Counterguard of Carail. This
advice seemed to be very rational, and the Counsel having resolved upon it
accordingly, the Engineer went toward Night into the Covert-way, to inform the
Commander of the Refugees of it, (who did not stir from that place night and
day;) he acquainted him with what he had proposed to the Counsel, and that they
all had given him their consent, to which Monsieur de Julien answered, That it
was a very wise and recommendable resolution, but since it only aimed at the
preservation of our Men, if they would believe him, he did not think fit to
abandon a place without blows, which he had guarded with so much care from the
beginning of the Siege; and since we were in expectation the Enemy would
possess themselves of it with their Swords in their Hands, he would maintain it
as long as it was possible without exposing his Men to be cut in pieces: That
he would contrive the matter in such a manner, that advice should be given him
in what condition each of his Posts were during the Attack, and that as soon he
would find one in a condition to be forced, he would save the rest of the Men
in the best manner he should be capable of. To which the Engineer replied: Sir,
you have reason not to be willing to abandon a part of your Posts which your
Men have guarded till now; but you will certainly be forced to t: Nevertheless,
I am going to inform the Regiment of Salusses of your design, and that
consequently they are to guard their Outworks as well as you do.

At night the Musketeers continued their Firing, and an hour before daybreak
a detachment of Dragoons made a false Attack at the Counterguard de Carail;
whereupon a detachment was sent thither by the Commendant, de Prouane but
afterward he found it to be only a false Attack.

June the 22d. By break of day the Enemy made the true Attack, after a Signal
given by eight Bombs and three Cannons: They attacked one of the most advanced
places guarded by the Refugees, who behaved themselves with so much bravery,
and made so vigorous an opposition, as could hardly be expected from such a
handful of Men, against 500 Granadeers, 500 Fusileers, and 200 Dragoons,
seconded by two Regiments of Foot; but whereas they were a little too eager in
some places, we had great pains to save those that were not killed in the
Attack.

We ought here to render Justice to our Enemy, and confess that they behaved
themselves very well, since they made themselves Masters of our Outworks with
their Swords in their Hands, forced a way to the Half Moon in three places, and
mingled themselves amongst our Men into the Ditch of the place, with an
extraordinary Courage and Boldness. One of their Colonels was killed near the
Gate of the Succors; and indeed he was not the only Man of their Officers that
were left behind in the Ditch. The Refugees having put some of their Men into
the Courtine of the Bastion de Carail and Notre-Dame, fired so furiously upon
the Enemy, who was already much weakened, that it was impossible for them to
maintain themselves in the Half Moon, nay to lodge themselves in the
Counterscarp; and they confessed themselves that it had been too hot to remain
there. Their Dragoons, who had lost their Officers, were the first that run
away; and we ought not to be surpised, that all the rest followed them in
great disorder; since we continued to Fire upon them from the Counterguard of
the Bastions de Carail and Notre-Dame, and being assisted by those of the
Courtine, left the Enemy no time to lodge themselves, except they had been
willing to lose their whole Army, which at that time consisted of twelve
Regiments of Foot, two of Horse, and two of Dragoons.

The Regiment of Salusses annoyed the Enemy very much with the Cannon from
their Posts, that were not attacked by the Enemy, the Cannon of the Bastion of
Notre-Dame broke twice their Squadron of Horse, and this attack lasted an hour
and a half. Our loss consisted for the greatest part of French Refugees, and of
7 or 8 Germans; three Captains were killed upon the spot, besides one who dyed
afterward of his wounds, one Ensign, one Sergeant, and 30 Common Soldiers. Of
the number of the wounded were the Lieutenant Colonel, who was wounded in his
Hand, one Captain, one Ensign, two Sergeants, and 55 Soldiers. It would be to
no purpose to say with several others, that the Refugees regained the Half Moon
with their Swords in their Hands, since the Enemy will certainly deny it,
because they retreated without being pursued, and were only forced to leave
their Post, by the great Fire that was made upon them from our Bastions.
Lieutenant Colonel de Julien, who was the Man in the World that praised most
this bold Action of theirs, answered to those that complemented him for having
regained this Outwork, and driven the Enemy out of the Half Moon with the Sword
in his Hand, and planted the Standard of England upon one point of the
Half Moon, (the latter of which he really did,) Gentlemen, If you had seen the
whole course of this Action, you would not trouble me with such complements;
for if I have forced the Enemy to abandon all our Outworks, it was by reason of
the great Fire I ordered to be made by our Men, after which, it is true, that I
went out and conducted them into Half Moon, but I found no Enemy there, no more
than in the Covertway and upon the Counterguard: Confirming by this Answer of
his, that it is very Natural to Men of a Noble and Generous Mind, to render
Justice to all the World, and by no means to accept of praises they have not
deserved, neither to hear those but with uneasiness which they have bought with
the very hazard of their Lives.

The loss of the Enemy was far more considerable than we at first imagined, we
talked then only of 5 or 6 hundred of their Men killed, but afterward we were
informed by the Deserters, as well as the Prisoners of War, (amongst which
there were several considerable Officers,) that in this Action a thousand of
their Soldiers had been killed, the Flower of their Troops, with about seventy
Officers killed or wounded, and amongst them several that were in great esteem
in their Army, we have six of them wounded in our place. The rest of the day we
had no disturbance at all given us, the Enemy being almost afraid to show
their Faces; they only played with their Cannon, and threw some Bombs and Stones
into the City.

We buried our Dead, and those of the Enemy that were found in our Outworks:
Some fresh Men were put into the Covert-way, and we contented our selves to
guard the Places of Arms, upon each of which there were posted ten Soldiers
with one Sergeant.

The Enemy did not at all desire leave to carry away their Dead, nor did they
enquire after a Colonel of theirs, and several other Officers of Note, that
were left behind upon the place, and indeed we saw several of them that lay
upon the Counterscarpe lifting up their Heads, as if they begged their Friends
assistance, which yet was not granted them till at Night.

The Enemy had advanced their Trenches within 20 or 25 yards of the
Pallisadoes, and it was from thence they endeavored, without pushing more
forward, to possess themselves of our Outworks.

At Night they endeavored to draw near to the place of Arms, near the covered
way, but were hindered by the continual firing of our Musketeers; the Enemy
threw some Bombs and Stones into the place, and the former being all spent,
they sent for more from Carmagnole.

June the 23d. The Enemy continued their Approaches but very slowly, and we saw
plainly, that they had no mind to lose more of their Men.

At Night they advanced their Batteries, and we repaired the Breaches their
Cannon had made into the Courtine, we raised also a Traverse upon the Bastion
of Carail, to cover the Houses on that side from the Cannon of the Enemy. Our
Musketeers and Gunners fired as they were used to do.

June the 24th. Early in the Morning the Enemy began to play from their new
Battery, and were for some Hours taken up to ruin that part of the Courtine
that defends the right side of the Half Moon, and the Ditch near it. They threw
a power of Stones, but few Bombs, into our place, expecting without doubt those
they had sent for from Carmagnole. They made also frequent discharges of their
Cannon charged with Stones; and during this day and the following night they
advanced Outworks some Foot, but always very slowly, by reason of the continual
Firing of our Men.

Our Troops having suffered great Fatigues, and being much weakened by the loss
of many Men, and several Officers and Soldiers wounded, some of them being
killed every day, the Council of War, having all things well examined and
considered, the poor condition of the Half Moon, resolved not to defend it any
longer, but negligently, ordering him that was to command in this Outwork, to
take great care not to be cut off there, and in case of an Attack, after two or
three discharges to withdraw with his Men into the Body of the Place, to put
them into the Courtine, and to Fire from thence upon the Half Moon, that it
might cost the enemy very dear to be lodged there, which was the best thing we
could do, considering the State of our Affairs, the Counterguard being a very
hot Post, and easy to be taken from behind, was always left to the Guard of
120 Refugees, and for a Guard of the Half Moon, and of all the Places of Arms,
which till that day the Refugees had been trusted with, there was established a
Body of Men, drawn proportionably out of all our Troops; insomuch that at Night
these 200 men were dispersed in the Half Moon, the Places of Arms, and the Gate
of Succors, under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel de Julien, who was
relieved the next day toward Night by the Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment
of Salusses, and an equal number of Soldiers. And indeed it was very just that
since the Enemy made but one Attack, a detachment of all the Bodies should be
opposed them, without suffering that the Refugees should be alone sacrificed,
and that the rest should remain in such places that were not at all insulted;
yet their Commander would not willingly have consented to this change, in case
the Council of War had not before resolved to defend but weakly the Half Moon,
and to abandon it to the Enemy when they should come near it, in order to save
our Men that were necessary to defend the Body of the place, till his Royal
Highness should be in a condition to raise the Siege.

At Night the Enemy advanced their Works within eight Foot of the Pallisadoes,
they threw a great quantity of Bombs into the place, and our men fired briskly
upon them.

June the 25th. This Day was spent in suriously firing from both sides; at
Night the Sieur Fichet, Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Sallusses, a
brave and Gallant man, and an experienced Officer, relieved the Commander of
the Refugees, who took Post that Night upon the Courtine, where the rest of his
Battalion was. The same Night the Enemy lodged themselves upon the
Counterscarp, notwithstanding our Firing, and the Work they made was near the
Sallying Angle of the Half Moon.

June the 26th. It was resolved early in the morning to make a Mine, in order
to dislodge the Enemy, and the Engineer Guibert had the direction of it;
whereupon they went immediately to work about it, but somewhat slowly; the day
was spent in Firing on both sides.

At Night the Commander of the Refugees relieved the Lieutenant Colonel of the
Regiment of Salusses. It was resolved to leave only some Sentrys upon the
Places of Arms, to lessen also the Number of the Guard of the Counterscarp, of
the Half Moon and the Outworks, and it was this manner; Into the Counterguard
were put twenty Refugees under the Command of a Lieutenant and a Sergeant, with
order to be always upon their Guard, partly not to be surprised, and partly not
to be cut off, and to make a great Fire during Night; into the Half Moon there
were only put 50 men to Fire all night long, and 50 more were posted into the
Ditch before the Half Moon, having the Gate of Succors behind them, and these
fifty should every hour relieve the fifty of the Half Moon; and in case of an
Attack, they had orders, after two or three discharges, to withdraw through the
Gate of Succors into the Courtine, from whence a prodigious Fire was to be
made at the first Signal that the Half Moon was abandoned, and after these 50
men should be entered by the assistance of the Fifty that should be in order of
Battle in the Ditch; the latter should retreat also, and should be followed by
twenty Soldiers that were placed on the Right and the Left of the said Ditch,
near a little retrenchment. The surplus of the 200 men designed for the Guard
of these Outworks, with a hundred that were drawn out of the Counterguard, were
posted twenty of them near the Gate of Succors, under the Command of a
Captain, and the rest upon the Courtine in the Face and Left-Flanck of the
Bastion of Carail, where the surplus of the Refugees were posted, except 60
that were put to the Left of the Bastion of St. Francis and de l'Hospital, who
were by turns relieved by the Regiment of Salusses.

During this Night the Enemy lodged themselves upon an Angle of the
Counterscarp, at the point of the Bastion of Notre-Dame, we fired suriously
upon them, especially the Regiment of Salusses, who had their Post from this
Bastion till to that of l'Orme with all the Outworks.

The Enemy spared this Night neither Bombs nor Stones, and the Latter were very
troublesome to our men. By break of day we saw plainly their Lodgment, on which
they were still at work, and it was scarce big enough to cover them by nine a
Clock in the Morning. We detached ten Granadeers of the Refugees, under the
Command of one of their Captains, to slip through the Pallisadoes of the
Covert-way, and to throw Fireballs into their Lodgment, which was not only
punctually executed by the said Captain, but he did much more; for after he had
ordered three or four Fireballs to be thrown into the said Lodgment, he past
over the Pallisadoes and leapt into their Lodgment, crying kill, kill;
whereupon all the Workmen ran away with an incredible haste, and there was not
one Soul left behind them, neither in the Work nor the Lines of Communication;
and if our Officer had been provided with Workmen, he might have entirely
ruined their Work; but having no other orders than to make an attempt he
retreated. Afterward the Counts de Bernez and de Rouere, having discoursed
with most of the Principal Officers about this Lodgment, which showed plainly
that the Enemy had a design to insult the Bastion Notre-Dame, it was resolved
that one hundred Fusileers and 60 Workmen should make a Sally to destroy their
Work; 50 Fusileers of the Refugees, with some Officers proportionably, were
appointed for it, being sustained by an equal number of the Regiment of
Salusses. Both detachments were ready: yet I do not know why their Sally was
put off for four hours; during which time the Enemy worked with great
application; at last the Sally was made under the Command of a Captain of the
Refugees, and they had admirable Success; the Work was entirely cleared, and
almost all the Lines; and if they had not had Orders not to engage themselves
too far, the Enemy would certainly have had but an ill time on it, considering
the condition of their Affairs: But if they drive the Enemy out of the Lodgment
and the Line of Communication, they did not execute the rest, and whether it be
for the great Fire the Enemy made, or for some other reason, the Workmen slipped
all away, and we were above an hour in possession of the Enemies Works, without
hearing of any of our Workmen in order to destroy them. The Enemy did as we had
done in the Half Moon, they returned thither as soon as our men had order to
retreat; and indeed the Honor of this Action cost us very dear, since the
French Protestants had there two of their Captains, two Lieutenants, and two
Ensigns wounded, and eight Soldiers killed, and fifteen wounded: Those of the
Regiment of Salusses lost two brave and valiant Captains, viz. him that
commanded the detachment, and another who was Adjutant, and who turned that
way, either to carry some Orders, or only out of curiosity. We were informed,
that the Enemy was extremely surprised at this Sally, they thought it a very
bold Action, and during it they sent some Foot to re-possess themselves of
their Work, but in vain. Some Squadrons of the Enemies Horse, that had a mind
to be seen, were welcomed by our Cannon, and sent briskly back behind their
Courtains. We fired very furiously toward the Enemies Trenches from all our
Posts that look toward them, and some of their Deserters told us that more
than three hundred men of theirs had been killed and wounded there. We had this
day the welcome News of great Succors that was coming toward us.

At Night the Lieutenant Colonel of Salusses relieved the Lieutenant Colonel de
Julien; and whereas a wounded Lieutenant, that was made Prisoner in the Sally
of the Morning, gave us notice, that the Enemy made a Mine to blow up the
Half Moon, and that it was to be executed this very Night, we employed our
utmost endeavors to bring our Mine to a perfection, to be beforehand with the
Enemy; but it could not be done that Night. It was resolved not to leave in the
Half Moon but some Centries, and ten Soldiers upon every Flanck, and to let all
the rest March into the place upon the Courtine and the Bastions, which was
executed during Night.

The Enemy threw a great number of Bombs and Stones into the place; but before
Daybreak they took the pains to decamp, without either Drum or Trumpet,
leaving us as a sign of their retreat one of their Canons upon their Battery,
which without doubt, for want of Horses, they could not carry along with them:
Neither had they a mind to charge themselves with a great quantity of Bullets
and Fireballs, and a little Powder which they left also behind them, in order
to serve this Place, whenever they shall be pleased to come again to besiege it.

Truly it was a very strange retreat; and if we may believe those that have
seen it, their Troops were in the greatest disorder in the World. They left 70
Soldiers and four or five Officers wounded behind them, of which number is the
Engineer Vasel, and a Captain of the Regiment of Vandome, and Gentleman to the
Prince of that Name. We are assured that besides this number there were more
than fifty Soldiers that made a shift to creep away, drawing one another, and
Swearing and Cursing against their Officers and Generals.

June the 28th. By break of Day we received our Deliverance, and we went out
immediately to see if there was a Mine under the Half Moon; but we did not find
but the beginning of a Gallery, and considering the manner they were to
approach to the Half Moon, they were in no condition to be soon Masters of the
Place, which indeed seems to be preserved by a particular Favor of God's
Providence.

I will not trouble my self to enquire into the Reasons that made the Generals
of the Enemy raise the Siege, after a Blockade of seven, and a full Siege of
ten days. It is enough that Coni has been saved by the particular assistance of
Heaven, and the Courage and Bravery of those that did defend it. Prince Eugene
of Savoy, with the Sieurs de Parelle and St. Croix, arrived between nine and
ten a Clock in the Morning, with 2300 Horse and Dragoons, and near 300 Mules
laden with Ammunition; whilst in the mean time the Sieur de St. Silvestre, with
a Body of 2500 Horse, and 500 Granadeers, came to join the Sieur de Bulonde, in
order to go on with the Siege; but he did not arrive till after the Enemy had
abandoned their Trenches, and past the River Sture. It is reported, that he
said to the Sieur de Bulonde, What, Sir, have you raised the Siege, you must
return again to it; for the Prince of Savoy has no more than 2000 Horse with
him? To which he replied, exceedingly troubled, The Thing is done, the Trenches
are abandoned, we have past the River, and I will never return thither. As for
the Sieur de Feuquieres we have not been able to know yet what Projects he
formed in his Head; but certain it is, that at his return through Villefalet,
he played no more the Gallant and the Gascoon, as he had done when he came to
Besiege Coni; a little Entertainment being presented to him in this Place, he
refused to Eat, and gave only some few bits to his Dog; and mounting on
Horseback said, Although the whole Army of France should perish, we'll return
again to Coni and take it: But he might have been answered, That then the
Honor of the Action would be Monsieur Catinat's due, and that the Bells of the
Place would belong to the General of the Artillery. I say this, because at the
beginning of the Siege the Sieur de Feuquieres said to the Sieur Ducre,
Lieutenant-Genneral of the Ordnance, Morbleu, Sir, make haste to put your
Cannons upon the Batteries to play out of them, before they surrender; or else
you will lose the Bells. And indeed if he could but remember all his Gasconnades,
which he has been guilty of during this Siege, in his Letters as well as in his
Discourse, he would so much the more be mortified by the ill success of his
Enterprise. The French Brigadeers may very well reproach him with the Troubles
he gave them to lie every Night in the Trenches, since all their Watchings and
Care has been fruitless.

This Governor of Coni, whom he threatened to hang at the Gate, and this
Commander of the Refugees, whom he would exterminate before his Eyes, with the
whole Body that is under his Command, have indeed great reason to laugh at his
folly; and, for all his Calumnies, to comfort themselves with the Glory they
have acquired, and the Justice his Royal Highness renders them; having made the
Governor, Lieutenant General of the Marquisate and Province of Salusses; and
presented the Lieutenant Colonel de Julien with a Ring of great value; and
besides obtained for him from his Majesty of Great-Brittain the charge of
Colonel of his Troops. The Marquess de Vauqueres, who during the Siege has also
done his duty extreme well, and who brought the News of the raising of the
Siege to his Royal Highness, received also a very considerable present; the
Count de Bernez, the first Engineer Guibert, and Lieutenant Colonel Fichet will
not fail to be rewarded also by his Royal Highness, for the Courage and Bravery
they have showed during this Siege. In fine all the Troops, Burghers and
Militia have exactly done their duty, and it would be too long for me to Name
every Body that has signalized himself on this occasion: Yet I cannot pass over
in silence the great faithfulness of the People, and the affection of the good
Women, who upon all occasions carried Bread and Wine to the Soldiers, and
assisted those that were wounded. The Clergy, who did behave themselves very
devoutly before and during the Siege, did sing the Te Deum with great solemnity
so soon as the Siege was raised.

Of the Battalion of Monsieur de Julien there were 12 Officers wounded and 7
killed, 79 Soldiers wounded and 51 killed; in all killed and wounded 149. There
are still 25 of them that have not yet recovered of their Wounds, and some are
in danger of Life. The whole Battalion consisted of 500 Men.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
MR. Fleetwood's Sermon, Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, Nov.
5. 1691.

Discourses upon Trade, principally directed to the cases of the Interest of
Coinage, Clipping, and Increase of Money.

The Monarchs of England, from the Heptarchy to their present Majesty's King
William and Queen Mary, taken from Medals and Original Paintings, with a
compendious History of their several Reigns. By Guy Miege, Gent.

Regula Placitandi: A Collection of special Rules for pleading from the
Declaration to the Issue.

Ars Clericalis: The Art of Conveyancing explained: Being a Collection
gathered, with great care and industry, out of the many Books of the Law;
wherein the Nature and Effect of such Deeds, and Instruments by which Lands are
conveyed from one Man to another are clearly demonstrated. Also the forms and
orderly parts which ought to be observed in Deeds and Conveyances are laid open
and explained.


