LOGOS AYTOPISTOS, OR, Scriptures Self-Evidence:

TO PROVE Its Existence, Authority, Certainty in it Self, and Sufficiency (in
its kind) to ascertain others, That it is Inspired of God to be the Only Rule
of Faith.

PUBLISHED As a Plea for Protestants in the Defense of their Profession, and
intended only for the use and instruction of the Vulgar sort.

Isa. 8. 20. To the Law, and to the Testimony.
John 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, etc.
Canonica autoritas veteris and novi Testamenti, quae. Apostolorum consirmata
temporibus per successiones Episcoporum, and propagationes Ecclesi^rum, tanquam
in sede quadam sublimiter constituta est.

Aug. contr. Faust. Ma. 1. 11. c. 5. LONDON, Printed for Edward Brewster, and
are to be sold at Mr. Marriotts a Scrivener, over against Hicks-Hall, in St.
John's street, 1667.

TO ALL Well-meaning Protestants, Who desire and resolve to hold fast their
Profession; Especially those, who are least able to Dispute Controversies.
SIRS,
I Marvel not, if you think your selves well grounded in your Religion, whiles
you are able to give a Reason of the hope that is in you, by proving the
Articles of your Faith out of Scripture. For in this persuasion you are of
(...) same mind with me, whoever you are. However, I must admonish you, that
what pleases you and me, does not satisfy all. For there are still (as of late
have been;) such as will ask you, How you are able to prove Scripture to be the
word of God, and the only Rule of Faith? Therefore it concerns you, and me too,
(as the times are) to bethink our selves what to Answer, when we shall be put
to the Question. And that you may have some what to reply, I have in this
ensuing Discourse given you some of those thoughts, which I have taken up by
occasion of this Question, that may be put to us.

I know well, That diverse Learned (both English and Outlandish) Divines have
bestowed their pains, to prove the authority of Scripture such, as we account
it, and that it is the only Rule of Faith. But the labors of those Learned men
are such (either for language, or somewhat else) as they would be to you (if
you had them by you) as the word of a Book that is sealed. I have therefore
composed, this Discourse in a plain English style and phrase, and of no great
price, to ease your purses, that you may have by you somewhat to answer your
Adversaries. In it I use and urge Scripture very little, or nothing at all in a
manner, because I will cut off occasion from our Adversaries, who will else
say, I prove my Conclusion, by that which is the thing in Question.

How necessary it is for you to be well informed in this Case, and to be
fortified against the assaults of such as lie in wait to undermine you, and
turn up the foundations of your Faith, I must leave you to be Judges. For our
Adversaries, I am resolved never to draw the Saw against them; partly, because
of mine insufficiency many ways to enter the Lists with such Giant-like men;
and especially, because there are so many worthies on our side, whose great
abilities and advantages (such as I want) cannot but encourage them to what I
dare not undertake. All my design is to instruct the ignorant, whose desire is
to learn. And to such I offer these weak endeavors of mine, in hope they may
suggest somewhat that may serve to stay and uphold the weak, till they be
further established by the help of some more able hand. And if this be, I have
all my design, so as God may have all the glory.

SCRIPTURE THE Only Rule of Faith.
PRotestants have always counted the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament,
to be the Inspiration of God, and the only Rule of Faith and Manners. And that
they may abide and increase more and more in this persuasion, is, and shall be
my hearts desire and prayer to God for them. But though they hold Scripture for
a Principle and Ground-plot of their Faith, yet they are called upon (somewhat,
methinks, besides the Laws of Science) to prove it. And this Task I am willing
in their behalf to undertake; because the Lord has commanded us, to be always
ready 1 Pet. 3. 15.
to give a reason of the hope that is in us. For this consideration, and
nothing else, has emboldned me to let the World know the rational Grounds
which Protestants have to persuade them, that Scripture is the Word of God, and
written by his command, to be the only Rule of Faith unto all Christians. And
what I have to say upon this account, I shall reduce unto these two particulars.

1. I shall allege some of those rational Grounds by which Protestants are
induced to believe the Scripture to be divinely inspired, with the Conclusion
which (we think) must unavoidably follow; viz. That it is the only Rule of
Faith.

2. I shall a little discuss the Queflion, wherher Tradition, the Churches
Testimony, or any thing of that nature, can be rationally allowed this great
Privilege of being a Rule of Faith; and then conclude all with an Answer to
the grand Objection of Papists against Scripture, (because as it is all they
can say worth our notice, so it is looked on by them as an invincible Achilles)
and a short, but serious admonition to all Protestants who mind the
concernments of their souls, or may be persuaded to it.

The former Part, Showing the Rational Grounds upon which Protestants believe
Scripture to be inspired of God, etc.
SCripture is (as it calls it self) a Light, and therefore is best seen in, and
by, and of it self, though there be nothing else to show it. Hence it is, that
when we have said as much as we can, to prove its Divine authority, we must ^i
I leave it to be seen in its own Light, and to prove it sel^ the Manitestation
of Gods mind and will, made to the sons of men. And upon due consideration it
will appear so, to any that are judicious and impartial. For how can it be
proved to be what it is by any argument, besides the attestation given it by
God, and his Spirit, and the evident tokens of God speaking in it? And so it
proves it self, just as a Learned man proves himself a Scholar by his learned
Exercises, when he is called to them; or as God proves himself to be what he
is, by what he says and does.

However, we are put to prove our Principles, and we are contented so to do, as
well as we can. I say as well as we can, because all Scholars know that
Principles are most hardly proved against such, as have impudence enough to
deny them. And here I must in order to my intended work, request the Reader to
grant me somewhat which seems very reasonable, and (I hope) will be supposed
such by all that are indifferent and impartial.

1. That in this Case, I can allege no rational Arguments, other then such as
Scripture yields and offers, to prove it self inspired of God; so that my work
is to let others see the light wherein Scripture shows it self.

2. I do not in this undertaking charge Papists, as denying in terms the
Scripture to be Divinely inspired. For they grant it in a sort, when they say,
The Churches Testimony makes it not Authentical and Canonical in it self, but,
quoad nos, in respect to us, who cannot otherwise be ascertained of its Divine
authority.

3. I hope it will not be expected from me, that I shall prove the Divine
authority of Scripture so, as to silence all Gainsayers, since nothing can be
so proved as there will not be some to make exceptions. What can be more
certain then Gods Existence? And yet how many are there who deny, or question
i.? Christ came a Light into the World, and what Christian dare say or think he
did not sufficiently prove himself to be (what he was) the promised Messiah?
yet all he could say or do for that purpose, was not enough to satisfy the
most of his Countrymen and Kindred, that he was the Lords Christ. All that I can
reasonably design, is to show, that Scripture is a shining Light, that does
sufficiently prove it self to be inspired of God, though many have not eyes to
see it.

4. It must be supposed in this Discourse, that as there is one living and true
God, so this God is to be honored and adored by his reasonable Creatures, with
that service and worship which may become his infinite and most excellent
Majesty. Hence it cannot be denied, that there must be some Revelation made by
God himself, concerning that way of worship wherein he will have his Creatures
to serve him. For who can know what pleases God, but he himself, and they to
whom he makes known the good pleasure of his will?

Now supposing some Revelation of Gods will in order to that service which he
will accept, and be well pleased with, I may ask this Question, viz. If
Scripture be not this Revelation, where is it? And this will lie hard upon all
who acknowledge one only true God, that made Heaven and Earth, to show some
other, and better manifestation concerning the will and ways of God, then what
he has made in his written word. But this is to be discussed hereafter; and
for the present I am to show how, and wherein Scripture speaks it self the word
of God, and by consequence the Rule of Faith.

Rational Grounds upon which Protestants are persuaded, that Scripture is
Divinely inspired.
1. THere is nothing which does so fully and clearly, so punctually and
perfectly declare the mind of God in all particulars, which concern his Glory,
or man's everlasting happiness, as Scripture does. To enforce this a little; we
readily grant the law of Nature to be a light showing us somewhat, yea very
much of God, and concerning our Duty toward him. But how imperfect and obscure
is this light, in comparison of that which shines out to us in Scripture?
Scripture indeed does not contradict it. How should it? Both are of God, and
one Truth cannot possibly contradict another. Nay further, as Scripture
consents to, and concurs with the light of Nature, so it reproves the neglect,
and incites to a due improvement of it, as might be showed in many particulars,
if we were put to it. But how dim and dark is Natures light, as to the way of
reconciling the world unto God, when it teaches nothing at all about it? The
Heathens had their Offerings and Sacrifices to appease their Gods, and in these
(for ought any can say to the contrary) they had light from Gods people who had
the Divine Oracles. But all those Offerings of theirs were lying vanities,
because they had not any the least apprebensions of God manifested in the flesh
to be a Savior of sinners. And what revelation has God made of his mind about
this great concernment, besides what we have in Scripture? did ever any of the
Learned Heathens so much as dream of such a work, as Gods reconciling the world
to himself by Jesus Christ? And yet Papists (I hope) will acknowledge with us,
that he alone is the Mediator of propitiation between God and man.

Now how came we and they to know this great mystery, if we learnt it not from
Scripture? And could any but God reveal it to us? And since it is revealed in
Scripture, have we not reason to believe, that it was written by the finger of
God?

For the only way of purging sin, and sanctifying our sinful natures; what
have any Heathens done by their utmost improvement of their natural light? They
have indeed many of them commended virtue to the skies, and exhorted others to
it. But what is that moral excellency and perfection, which the Philosophers
and learned men of the world have labored to promote amongst men? Is it not of
a far inferior nature, and quite another thing from that true holiness which
is taught in Scripture? For this I refer the Reader to a learned Discourse of
the Divine authority of Scripture, (not long since printed) and only say,
though many Heathens by their natural light discovered many vices, to shun the
practice of them, and were sober, just, and temperate in comparison of others,
yet all this moral righteousness in them, was far short of Gods image, and the
Divine nature in those, who are renewed by the Holy Ghost, and as different as
a living man, and his statue, or picture, though drawn (as we say) to the life.
And to prove this I shall only say, That true holiness consists especially in
the inward impressions and dispositions, which make a man meet for communion
with God, and in the inclinations, and carriages of the soul toward God
immediately, such as meet Moralists never knew. There Is a fountain and root
within, from whence springs all that honesty, and integrity, and purity which
appears in the outward conversation, and all is from a man's being ingrafted
into Christ, and receiving from him a continual supply of his Spirit. And this
(I hope) Papists will not deny, viz. That all spiritual good is wrought in us
by the Spirit of God.

Now this way of holiness being taught us in Scripture, we conclude Scripture
to be written with Gods finger, because no other then God could reveal such
glorious truths to us. Let it be showed us, how these things came to be written
where we find them, and who wrote them, if God did not. Once we think it a
rational and unquestionable conclusion, That Scripture is given by inspiration
of God, because we find in it the only way of our access to, and acceptance
with God, and the only way of Purifying us so, as we may be meet for communion
with him for ever. And why? Even because God alone could teach us these things,
which the hearts of men or Angels otherwise could never have conceived.

All this while we grant, that these things were revealed to some men, before
they were recorded in the written word. But we expect Papists will not send us
to Revelations now adays: And for any other way of knowing these mysteries,
then by Scripture, we know none, and therefore resolve it is of God, and cannot
be of any other.

How much will this argument be enforced, when we further consider, of many
other particulars revealed in Scripture, which none but God could (...) Joh. 5.
8. (...) Tim 3. 6. Joh. 1. 14.
possibly know? As that there are three that bear record in heaven. That God
was manifested in our flesh, so as the alone Mediator was God-Man in one
Person. Could any creature declare these, if it were not inspired, and ^ht of
God? Again; How could any Creature come to know, how ^he world was made? or how
could man come to know, how himself was first made out of the dust? Can the
creature remember the time, or know the manner of its own Creation? And where
have we these but in Scripture?

You will say, these and the like are Quest.
revealed in Scripture: But how does the argument hold good, that the Scripture
is of God, because these things are revealed in it?

The argument is good, and cannot Sol.
be otherwise accounted by any, that are not professed Antichristians, because
they own these Revelations as Divine, and Heavenly Truths. For (I say again)
seeing we have in Scripture the great concernments of our Eternity., and so
many things past finding out by any creature, we must of necessity own and
acknowledge God alone to have written this word. Nay Atheists themselves cannot
but know that they are dust.

And now I shall enforce this, by showing further, that Scripture cannot be the
work or invention of any Creature, either Angels, or Men, good or bad. Good
men, or Angels would never devise such things, and say they were of God; For
that would be such a belying God, as we cannot rationally believe them capable
of. Wicked men and Devils would never attempt any such thing, as penning and
publishing such a Book which tends so much to the exalting of God, and the
abasing of themselves. This would have been to destroy, and overthrow all which
they labor so much to uphold. Hence we make this challenge, who it was that
composed this Book (we call the Bible) if God did not?

If any object, that it may be a collection Obj.
of many things made up out of the monuments of many ages: We may justly
demand, what hands they Sol.
were that compiled them, and when, and where they lived? If they lived in
Moses time, how could they write of the Kings? If in the times of the former
Kings, how could they give an account of the latter? If in the times of the
latter, how came the dispersed Jews to have so many Copies of the Law of Moses?
In a word; how could any man, or men write of so many things done in so many
ages, so far distant one from another? or how could any man give an account of
what was done from the very beginning, and before man was made?

If it be said, that it is the work of many in several ages, we desire to be
satisfied, How all should agree so exactly together? and who were they that
compiled our Bibles? or how came they all to agree in calling it the Word of
God? Mahomet indeed compiled a Book, which is to Turks and others, as the
Scripture is to us. For those deluded souls count the Alcoran their Rule of
faith and manners. And Mahomet calls himself a great Prophet, and so his
followers account of him to this day. But what reasonable man sees not a bundle
of fallacies and follies in that Book, which by its contradictions and
ridiculous relations, confutes it self without more ado?

There are many passages in Scripture which seem to contradict one Obj.
another. There are so, but they seem only contradictions, and are not such Sol.
indeed. And who are they which apprehend such contracictions? are they not
commonly such as are most ignorant, or least affected to the Scripture? But the
mutual cons^ency of all those passages may be soon found out by all that are
intelligent, and will use their diligence for that end. And what is there were
some passages to us irreconcilable, will it follow, they are such in
themselves? Surely the general consistency of Scripture with it self might be
enough to persuade us, rather to charge our selves with ignorance, then to
suspect it of any mistake. And here I cannot omit what a learned man has
observed, viz. a majestic kind of security (as he is Jo. Goodwin.
pleased to c^ll it) in the Scriptures, under many (...) (yea man s^mingly
bold, and ^urous) contradictions, that y^ either the honor of their truth, nor
that unity which they have in, and with themselves, shall (as he says) at all
suffer by. For reconciling those seeming contradictions, it is not my work at
present. Only I shall give you one consideration, which I find in the same
Author, and it is this, That Scriptures do not stand to excuse or purge
themselves, as if there were any cause to ^ffect them of any cross^, or
contrariety unto one another. No; They speak from place to place, what they
have a mind to say, with that liberty and freedom, as if there were nothing
said by them elsewhere, that either was like to suffer the least prejudice by
it, or else to cast the least prejudice on it. They that have a mind to
satisfy themselves further about this consideration, may read his Discourse of
the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, Page 55, 56, and c.

I shall add for a further confirmation of Scriptures Divine Authority; That
whatever it has foretold, has been accordingly fulfilled, and that not as
St^gazers Prognoflications, atrandom and adventure, but punctually and
precisely in every particular circumstance. So the New Testament confirm the
Old, by showing how what was foretold many ages, and some thousands of years
before, came to be fulfilled and accomplished in every particular, just as it
was foretold. Many things (we know) may be foreseen in their causes, so, as
intelligent and observant men may foretell them, as more then mere surmises or
conjectures; and the Devil (probably) can do very much this way. But Scripture
foretells those things of which no reason of man can make any probable
conjecture, because as they are high and heavenly, so they are purely
contingent, depending only on the will and pleasure of God, and therefore the
exact performance of those things in all particulars, is a strong evidence to
prove it written by the singer of God. And hence it is so often repeated in the
New Testament, [ That it might be fulfilled, etc.]

But here is no warrant more then Obj.
Scripture, whose authority is the thing that is questioned.

1. We have the consent and testimony Sol.
of an ient Heathen writers, who have recorded and hinted many of those
particulars. Besides; none of the Heathens ever contradicted those Prophecies,
or the fulfilling of them, as (for instance) our Saviors Birth, Death,
Resurrection, and c. Though questionless they would have done their utmost, had
they not been silenced by the notoriety of the events, every way answerable to
the predictions.

2. What need we any more witnesses, when all that Scripture has foretold, and
declared as the counsel and will of God, is always fulfilled every day, as we
may see with our eyes. And this serves to confirm the Divine authority of it,
That no work of God is contrary to his word, or varies from it in the least,
but all his Providence of Mercy and Judgment, in all changes and chances,
^ill answer his promises and threat^ings in Scripture. Yea, the sufferings of
Gods Servants show as clearly is any thing else, the fulfilling of the written
Word, since nothing is spo^en of in Scripture more often, fully, or plainly.
And here we may challenge the World to show any particular passage of
providence, which ^utes not exactly with what is revealed ^n the Word; and
therefore we are confident of this consent between the word, and works of God,
as a strong evidence in the Case. For how impossible is it that any one, or all
men together, should pen a Book so precisely an^weting to all and every thing
that happens in the World? What (I pray) has happened to this ho^r, whereof an
obiesvant and knowing Christian may not say, This is no more then what was
foretold, and no other then what God has said in his word should be? Indeed
Atheists and Epicures may dally awhile with Scripture, as they do with God
himself, and count such things as these of small consideration. But they of
them who are ye^ alive might see, if they shut not their eyes, how Scripture is
continually fulfilling in their fellows; and hence we are bold to question
them, ye^ and dare them to show, that Go^ word has not laid hold on such as
they are, just so as is foretold (...) Scripture. Oh! That these mis^ would but
read, and observe Scripture! surely then they would discer^ what will be their
end, even the same as of those that went before them. And though God has left
himself a latitude in all his provid^ial dispensations, so as we cannot
precisely resolve in every particular concerning wicked ones, what shall befall
them on earth, yet even that latitude is hinted, and what Case is there wherein
we are not provided for by some resolution of it in Scripture? To instance yet
again; What design has the Devil been driving on in these last ages of the
World, for troubling and di^bing the Church, or hindering the work of God in and
about it, of which there is not a President, or parallel Instance in Scripture?
Or what distresses, dangers and sufferings have ever attended Gods people, of
which there are not some, the same, or like, to be found upon record in the
written Word, that so all Saints even to the worlds end, through patience, and
comfort of the Scriptures, might have Hope? And hence all that fear God have
this to encourage them, that their troubles are no more then what others before
them have undergone; and that when it is at worst, there will be deliverance and
enlargement, as there has been always heretofore in the same, or the like
Cases. And hence also, they may challenge all those who quarrel Scriptures
authority, who, or where is he, that conceived, and contrived such a Writing,
beside him who alone can foresee, and provide against all events, though never
so contingent and casual? Let Atheists then sport themselves as they please,
and as long as they can, their time is short, and it will not be long ere they
come to know, whether Scripture be the word of God or no Doubtless the
continual fulfilling of Scripture in the course of Gods providence, is a
singula^ good argument to any sound Christian, who can set his seal to
Scripture, and say, This is so, and I know it by what is to be seen every day.

Scripture shows it self the word of God, in the mighty force and efficacy of
it upon the hearts of all men. Sometimes in casting down, and sometimes again
in comforting, and lifting up. Yea strange and wonderful have been the effects
of it on the godly, and the wicked, as might be showed by many Instances, but I
may not enlarge my self this way, not is there need more then to hint it, as an
argument, and leave it to be considered of by such as are sober and
perswadable. All that I shall do more, is only to answer an objection, which is
this, viz. That only some Obj.
precise and over-nice People so conceit, as if Scripture could do great
matters: But others are not bound to a belief of their fancies. For themselves,
they find no such power it has to wound, or search their hearts, and therefore
they believe no such thing, as some talk of, about the force of Scripture
working upon the consciences, and discovering the hearts of men.

They are not Phanaticks only who are so conceited of Scripture. There Sol.
are, and have been many too well conceited of themselves, and who had little
regard either to the Scripture, or him that (we say) penned it with his own
finger, which have found by experience the mighty force of it prevailing
against, and over them. But I forbear Instances, and shall only argue thus. The
corruption of man's heart and nature running out in so many infinitely various
ways, as it has and s^ill does, and so cunningly hiding it self (as much as
possibly) from the eyes of the world, How should the written word meet with it
in all, and every of those ways, (as it does) if it were not of God, that
alone searches the hearts? And whether it do, or no, we appeal to the
consciences of the most profane scoffers. What is it (let them speak) that
has many times challenged them for what they have done in secret, when no eye,
but that of God, could see them? was it not conscience within them? And could
conscience have thus challenged them, if there had not been some Law where on
to draw the Indictment? How could any man's heart smite him for what no creature
knows but himself, if his heart did not know there is a Judgment, and a
Sovereign power that will call to an account for the hidden things of darkness?
It must be some sense of a supreme Authority, that keeps the heart in awe, and
causes it to reflect sadly upon its irregularities in secret; and this sense
must arise from some manifestation, which has been made by the only Lawgiver,
who searches the hearts. Men are never afraid of men for any thing, which
(they are sure) can never be found out, or proved against them: But they are
afraid of Gods Judgment; which could not be, if there were not some known Law
that f^ighted them with sad expectations; and what Law can that be, other then
what we have in Scripture? Now let them speak (if any can) what it was that
ever entered into their hearts, which the written word did not let them know,
as well as they themselves in every circumstance, if they please to consider
it, and compare all together, And let them show too (if they can) how the
written word should be privy to all their inmost thoughts, if it were not
penned by him that searches the hearts, and reins. The wisest of men could
never frame a Law to control more then the overt act. But this Law gives a
check to men's inward thoughts and lusts, when no act appears, and spits
Hellfire in their faces for what no creature knows besides themselves.

To discourse it a little farther, where is such another Law, as that of the
Decalogue? or who but God could frame a Law (all comprised in ten words) to
order the hearts and lives of all men in all ages to the worlds end? A Law that
discovers and condemns all offenses, in thought, word, and deed, and never had,
nor will have need to be altered in any the least tittle of it. And where do we
find this Law? Is it not in Scripture? It is indeed all of it written in every
man's hearr, ^nless any please to except one Commandment in it. But how does
Scripture explain, and clear up those inbred notions of Religion, and moral
righteousness imprinted in the hearts of men, which otherwise would be very
obscure and uncertain, as they have been in all, or most of the Heathens?
Though nature teach that there is a God, and he to be served, and worshipped,
yet Scripture alone teaches the right way of Divine Service. And it alone shows
us the right way of doing all offices of love to men, so as our charity and
righteousness may be more then an outside show of fair dealing, when the inside
is nothing but hypocrisy and deceir. In one word, Scripture alone gives us a
Law that commands body and sonl, and therefore we have cause to believe it a
Law which God alone bath made. And if any proud and scornful men shall say,
they know no such thing, I can deny it with more truth, then they can affirm
it. And affirm what they will not be able to deny, when they shall find it true
by woeful experience on their deathbeds, or before, as others have done.

I could here (to prove Scriptures Divine authority) ask the reason, why such
as are most vicious and abominable in their conversation, contrary to the rule
of Reason, care so little for Scripture. If it were the word of a man, or any
creature, what need they be afraid, or troubled about it? For what were it more
to them, then a Play-book, or a Romance? certa^nly it is not for nothing, that
the vilest of men care so little for Scripture read, or opened, and applied.
No; Scripture searches their sores even to the bottom, and farther by far, then
they have a mind to be discovered to others, or themselves. And now let the
world be judge, if the v^st of men be not mostly the greatest enemies to
Scripture. This is enough, if there were no more, to prove Scriptures descent
and pedigree (as I may say) to be from above.

Let me add this to all the rest, That a man may read a philosiphical
discourse, or any Book that treats of any civil and worldly matters, and never
be tempted, as men commonly are about Scripture. What Is the reason? and why
should it be thus? If I may judge, I must pro^ess from my heart, I can think of
none so probable as this, That Scripture is of God, For certain the Devil is
(as I may say) tooth and nail against it; and if it were of men, the Devil
would cherish (as much as he could) the belief of it, because it were a lie.
But now, when all Books almost are owned and received under the names of their
respective Authors, it shows. Scripture to be of God, (whose name only it
b^ars) because there is so much ado about the authority of it.

Another beam of light to show Scriptures Divine authority, is its Antiquity,
beyond all Records that make the fairest pretense to it, as, has been showed
of lare by an emine^t Schol^r in his labors this way. The gray h^rs (as one
says) which, are upon the hend of Scripture, show it to be the offspring of
the ancient of days; and this writing has the preeminency to be in this
respect, the first born of all its brethren. What Book dare to compare with it,
as to Antiquity? And that not only as to the matter, and contents which were in
the mind of God from eternity, but as to the writing which now pastes up and
down the world, and may be seen, and read of all. Let the world show, if it
can, any Book of so long standing, as the five Books of Moses. Alas! The most
ancient of all the Ancients are but novices in comparison, and how uncertain
and confused any of them are in their discoveries, is to be seen at large in
the learned Author of Orig. S^cr. abovesaid. Has any given us an account of
the worlds Creation and beginning, such as we have in Moses? Surely any that
will be at pains to compare all together, will soon perceive the difference,
and vote our Bible as most transcendent. To say no more, Unumquodque sapit
authorem; and Scripture in this is a resemblence of God, who is called the
ancient of days. Yea, Scripture is in respect of its contents eternal, Dan. 7
as delivering to us the everlasting counsels of God. What Book ever pretended
to such discoveries? Heathens have talked ridiculously and absurdly enough of
the feats, and famous exploits of some of their dunghill Deities: But never any
dreamt of their counsels. Whereas Scripture shows us the only living and true
God, not only in his effects and properties, but also acquaints us with his
mind and will, as it was from all Eternity. Once the long standing of Scripture
shows, that it bath outstood all trials, whiles the world has had so much
opportunity to enquire into it, and prove it unsound, and vain, if it had not
been far otherwise. For still it retains, and keeps up its reputation, though
there have been so many in all ages, that would gladly (if they knew how) have
fastened on it absurdity, vanity, or contradiction, or any thing else, that
their wit, or malice could devise. So we see in it, as an experiment, how truth
is everlasting, whiles men's opinions vary, and alter much; and as the leaves of
trees spring, and flourish awhile, and then fade, and fall to the ground: So a
lie is never long lived, but as paint, or varnish wears out, or washes off,
because it has no substance to uphold it. But great is the truth, and shall
preva^le, this truth especially, when Heaven and Earth shall fall.

And this argument has the more force, because that Scripture has met with so
much opposition, and conquered notwithstanding. For what else but an Almighty
power co^ld preserve it, when all the ungo^ly that ever were, could look upon
it no otherwise, then an Engine framed to batter, and overthrow all their
fleshly, and filthy interests? And that is indeed the design of Scripture, to
throw down the Kingdom which Satan has always labored to set up to himself
in the would through the lusts of Men. There are but two parties in the world,
whatever men may dream, and of these, one is for Gods, and the other for the
Devils Kingdom, and command. Now whiles all men are by nature, and of
themselves addicted to the Devils interest in serving their own lusts, and the
most are alwa^es this way given, there must be more then an ordinary power to
preserve that doctrine, which cries down all sinful interests, and advances
only the glory of Christ in his Kingdom. The greatest work done by the
doctrine of Christ, is the sub^uing of men's hearts and lives to the obedience
of the only Lawgiver. But whiles it is a doing this work, it always meets with
many and great disadvantages from the world, that makes account to silence it
quite, and even swallow it up. And if it be considered what contrariety, and
enmity is in the hearts of men against this doctrine, and the weak, and
contemptibie means it had to advance and promote it against that arm of flesh
which was listed up against it; who can conclude otherwise, then that God alone
was its strength, and therein showed himself the owner, and author of it? For
the Penmen and first publishers of it, they were most of them of low estate
and degree in the world, and had indeed nothing to protect them, more then the
shadow of the Almighties wings. And for those who professed the doctrine of
Christ in Scripture, were they not for the most part of the same rank and
quality? For the Penmen, they never insinuated themselves to curry favor with
any by goodly titles, or flatteries, as men commonly do that write by their own
instinct. Nor is Scripture composed (as may be observed) as if it meant to take
men with excellency of speech, or man's wisdom. Only (which is remarkable) there
is in it a majesty, and it speaks with a majestic au^hority, such as pretends
an Author of it more then man. For such as professed the doctrine of Christ in
Scripture, what reward had they in the world more then troubles and sufferings,
even to greatest extremity many of them.

Now who can look on these, who have been the instruments and means of
propagating and promoting the doctrine of Scripture, and not presently bethink
himself of some hidden invisible power that upheld them, and the work they were
engaged in?

Let it be considered too, that those poor souls who in all ages chose to
suffer, rather then forsake the doctrine of Christ taught in Scripture, cannot
be rationally suspected as guilty of a perverse spirit, transporting them to
maintain what once they had taken up, though with the loss of all that was dear
to them. For how unlikely is it, that such a multitude, at so great a distance,
both in place and time, should be all so unanimous (and that in cool blood,
against many temptations and entreaties to favor themselves) in a deliberate
resolved laying down lives, and all, for a thing of uncertainty, yea, for any
thing less then the matters of their Eternity? Nothing else could provoke, and
put them on to encounter those hard trials of afflictions, but the faith they
had in Scripture-promises, and the fear of that word which threatens all
without exception. Promises such as no creature durst to make, and threats of
judgment and vengeance, beyond all the power of creatures to inflict. These
considerations (and nothing else) could ^way them to hate Father, and Mother,
and House, and Lands, ye^, and their own Lives, seeing they were not mad men,
or such as had cast off all natural affection to themselves, or theirs, but
held them clear and precious as their own souls. Nothing for certain could put
them upon such h^zards and adventures, but the impul^es of that spirit, which
spoke and wrote those Scripture-truths as their greatest and only concernments.

And to reason no further; How credible is it, that God should suffer the world
to be so long abused, and deceived by a fardle of lies fathered upon himself?
Questionless, if Scripture be not indeed the very word of God, it can be no
other then the most pernicious and blasphemous lie, that ever was vented by man
or Devil. For it calls it self by the name of Gods word, and avouches him the
author of it; and what can be said more false, and blasphemous, if it be ^ot
what it pretends to be? And would God suffer such a lie to pass ^urrant so long
in the world to his ^ishonour, without checking it?

Some Impostures have prevailed Obj.
(...), and for a long time.

They have, and it is confessed, and Mahomets Alcoran may be an instance. But
how came that to get place with ^o many? was it not beaten(as I may ^ay) into
men's brains with dint of word? Besides, was it not a doctrine that gained it
self credit by gratifying ^ens ^ilthy lusts? Avenge your selves (said he to his
followers) and take as ^any wiv^s as you are able to keep. And what has served
to spread, and propagate other devices and inventions of men, but the craft and
subtlety of ^uch as lay in wait to deceive, or the ^uelty of unreasonable men
that knew the most of the world are won^ to comply with that Religion, which
complies most with their ease and fleshly interests? But the doctrine of Christ
designs nothing but self denial, and to this it does most authoritatively call
both high and low, rich and poor, none excepted, no not (...) the greatest upon
earth. Now the a doctrine which requires a man wi^ greatest importunity to
submit all (...) interests and enjoyments to the wi^ of God, and make
performance accordingly, whenever the glory (...) God, or the good of men call
for it or give occasion of it, should take place and prevail, and that against
all means used for suppressing it, (...) such a miracle of Divine providence as
we may justly call it a seal which God has set to assure us of Scripture^
Divine authority. We know well that any doctrine which suits with and will
serve the lusts and interests of men, may easily find entertainment. But it is
unconceivable, how a doctrine of denying self, and all things else, even the
most pleasing to corrupt and sinful nature, should preserve and propagate it
self without the help of such an hand, as is ^ble to subdue all things. Now
Scripture was prepared and penned ^or no other purpose, but to show men the way
of honoring God with the utmost abasing of themselves, and it is indeed the
great Engine that God uses to the pulling down of strong holds in the hearts of
men, and whatever is exalted in opposition to the glory and government of Jesus
Christ in the world. And to ^ay no more of this; the word and Spirit of Christ,
have subdued mankind to the obedience of his name, so far as the world is, or
can be justly called and accounted Christian.

It were easy for me to multiply arguments in this kind, as so many evidences
of Gods speaking to us in ^he Scriptures. But I shall forbear, and proceed to
somewhat that comes nearer to the Question concerning ^he Rule of Faith.

It is well known, that this Question has been much disputed between us, and
our Adversaries, for many years, and that two things especially have been
insisted on by them, to prove the Scripture no competent Rule of Faith, viz.
the obscurity, and the imperfection (...) it. In this dispute they have
labored to puzzle and plunge us, by putting us to show, how Scripture prove^
it self to be (what we account it) the Word of God.

To this we may justly think it (...) sufficient answer to say, (as one yea
many have said long since) tha^ in every profession the Principles a^
indemonstrable, assented to without discourse; and the Scriptures are the
Principles of Christian Religion, an^ therefore first we must grant them to be
the very Word of God; and ther^ say, they contain all points needful to be
known. And since Scripture avoucheth it self to be the word of God, 2 Timothy 3.
16. 2 P^t. 1. 20, 21 Luke 1. 70. it is rational in us to believe it.
Notwithstanding our Adversaries are not satisfied, but insis^ much on this
Question, viz. How we know, that the Scripture, that says it is the Word of
God, is so in very deed.

To this the Protestants have long since answered, That they know this first
and principally by the illumination of Gods Spirit, as the inward means, and
then by the restimony of the Scriptures themselves, as the outward means; and
lastly, by the ministry of the Church inducing us to assent.

Here we say not, that the certainty of the Scripture is written in any
particular place, or Book of it, but the virtue and power that shows it self
in every line and leaf of the Bible, proclaims it to be the Word of the
eternal God; and the sheep of Christ discern the voice and light thereof, as
men discern light from darkness, and as children are known by their faces and
favors, resembling their parents. As the purity, and perfection of the matter,
and many particulars else, some of which I have hinted before, and whoever will
see them more fully, may find them in a large and learned discourse of the
Divine authority of Scripture, which I name the rather, because it is a Book
which the vulgar may better understand, then many others that handle this
question.

Though the grounds I have hinted, and others which I have omitted, induce us
strongly to believe the Scriptures Divine authority, and we may count them
sufficient to fence us against the cavils of our Adversaries, yet it is one
thing to answer the arguments of men, and another to satisfy the doubts and
fears of our own consciences. Therefore we stand to this, That no man can be
effectually persuaded of the Scriptures authority (as he ought to be) in order
to a sound and saving belief of the truths therein contained, unless he be
taught of God by the teachings of his Spirit, which alone teaches to know
spiritual things in a spiritual manner. God (we say) is the best witness to his
own Word, and his Spirit the best seal that can be put to it. In the
particulars forementioned, and many others, we see evident tokens of God
speaking to us in the Scriptures. But the faith that saves us, must have this
foundation, viz. Gods sealing the truth of Scripture by the special grace of
his own Spirit to our souls. And when this is done, then is a man fully
persuaded, and confident indeed, so as he can say, (and swear too if there be
need) the doctrine of Christ in Scripture, is that which God has revealed, to
lead and guide me to my happiness in the enjoyment of God for ever. Then, and
not before, a man has comfort and peace in believing, having not only a grant
of eternal life, but the great seal of the Kingdom of Heaven put to it. Such a
man so assured, and sealed by the Spirit, (unless in a fit of temptation) never
troubles himself about this Question, Whether Scripture be the Word of God? His
trouble is most about his own deceitful and unbelieving heart, that he can
trust God no better, when he has so good security for all that is needful in
order to his happiness. He never thinks (what some have said) that the
Scriptures have been corrupted, and are not what once they were. He knows that
Gods Word is pure, and perfect, and is only troubled at the corruption of his
own heart. Papists (to show what good will and respects they have to Scripture)
have a long time been quarrelling it, as if some part of the Canon were lost;
and some of ours seem to yield somewhat to this, thinking no prejudice to come
thereby to it. But others conceive that no part or member of Scripture that
ever was Canonical, is lost, bu^ that we have it as whole and compieat as ever
it was. Indeed (a^ one faith) if any Book were lost o^ those which were
commended to the whole Church, it must argue a strange conspi^acy of this whole
Church i^ carelessness and negligence, such a^ is not lightly incident to this
generation of men. We grant, that some particular Churches, and single persons
have doubted some parts o^ Scripture, now generally acknowledged, for
Canonical. But we deny, that the whole Church has ever done any such thing. As
for the old Testament, who can justly suspect ^he Jews for corrupting them,
when their zeal for them, even almost to ^uperstition, has been so notorious
^n all ages, and is so still even to this ^ay? Our Savior blamed them ^uch,
and often for their vain Tra^itions, but never spoke one word ^out their
corrupting the Scripture, which (questionless) he would have ^ne (had there
been cause) since was a matter of such high concernent. And if any had
attempted it, had been impossible for them to complish it, when there were so
any Copies dispersed in all places ^d Countries (which were many) ^erein the
Jews dwelt. If any ^ereticks had essayed it since the ^w Testament was written,
how ^uld one party have observed ano^er, and so preven^ed the design? ^d to say
no more; it is impossible, ^ess we imagine that all and every one who had a
Bible, should at once, with one consent, in all places o^ the world, resolve to
corrupt those ancient Records commended to mankind as the Word of God. To clear
this further, (having inserted it here occasionally) The Scriptures have been
written in parchment and pape^ which are things perishable, and ic are subject
to the injuries of time. But who knows not the difference that is between the
Word of God and the paper, and parchment, an^ ink which have been used to
preserve and conveigh it to us? Gods Wo^ must and shall stand, when all the^
parchments and paper Records she be no more. And whatever alte^ tion there has
been, we stand to i^ that the Records we have to t^ day, have in them all the
mind God necessary to be known in or^ to our salvation. They who man tain a
Reli^ion that cannot be man good by Scriprure, may well quar^ it, as they have
cause. But all W^ believe it as they ought, know much efficacy in it, as they
will n^ easily heed such flim-flams, as ^ome now adays are b^zzing into
peoples ears. Al^s! poor souls that have tasted how gracious the Lord is in his
Word, have an argument which all the world can never answer to them, whatever
it may do to others. These men know, and are sensible of a light within them,
and that it is of God, and they heed and attend it. But they know too, that
Scripture is a far more glorious light, showing them the way of life by Faith
in a Saviou^ who is the Son of God. And this light showing the only way of
life, they find so to perfect all the natural light in them, as they are the
more confirmed in the belief of Scripture-Revelations. For no man ever denied
the principles of Reason and Nature to be the impressions of God, excepting
Atheists, of which there are so many now adays. Hence every civil and sober
man considers seriously, how the light of Scripture and Nature agree, and that
the one is superadded, not to eclipse, but to clear the other, by a more
glorious discovery of grace and mercy in a Mediator, for pardoning and purging
all sin, which else could never have been. He is therefore the more persuaded
of Sc^iptures descent from God, as a light from Heaven, to give a luster to the
more obscure Principles of Nature and Reason within him.

What shall I say? Gods word is known, as his work is known. And how is that?
Even because none can do as God does. He works like himself, so that any man
may say, when he looks on Gods work, Here is the finger of God; Dent. 3. 24. Is
not every work of God such as no creature can do the like? And such is every
word that God has spoken, as any man that has reason may say, This is the
voice of God, and not of man. Who can thunder with a voice like him? so we may
say of Scripture, who but God could ^eak such things, or in such a manner?
Never man spoke like this man, said the Officers who were sent to apprehend
Christ, John 7. 46. so say we, Never any creature did, or could speak as
Scripture. And therefore we believe it to be the Word of God.

Now being thus persuaded, we infer (what we think will unavoidably follow)
that Scripture is the only Rule of faith. For let Papi^ say what they can, the
Rule of faith, and manners too, can be no other then that Revelation which God
has made of his mind, and will for that end. What! shall man, or any creature
prescribe what we are to believe concerning the matters of God? It is against
all common sense, and reason so to imagine.

But I shall dispute the case in two considerations, whereof one is taken from
the nature and quality of a Rule, the other from the Office, and work of faith.

First, a Rule, as it regulates or him that uses it, so it swaies and commands
the things that are regulated by it, that they stand, or fall, are allowed, or
rejected as they are conformable to it, or otherwise. And this holds good in
every Rule, whether properly or improperly so called. The standard of all
weights, and measures has (as I may say) an authority to allow, or lay aside
all other weights and measures that do not exactly answer to it. And so is
Scripture a Rule of faith, because it shows what is to be believed, and what
not. But here I must prevent, what will be objected by Papists, viz. That
Scripture is no complete Rule, (...)
but some things are necessary to be believed, which are not contained in it.

1. That Popery has many such Sol.
things as are not in Scripture, we believe. But therefore we reject them;
because to make Scripture a Rule not complete, is indeed to make it none at
all. Who ever heard of a Rule, that was not usfficient to regulate all things
for which it was intended? or if there was devised such a Rule, who can be so
unreasonable, as to call or count it so? surely Masons and Carpenters make use
of no Rules but such as will serve to measure all the work which they take in
hand.

2. Whereas they say that God has left some things unwritten to pass from hand
to hand by Tradition, who shall believe this? more then what the Jews have said
a long time, and for many ages, that Moses had some commands given him to be
written, and others to be delivered from Father to Son by word of mouth? Alas!
we know what account our Savior made of their oral and practical Traditions,
which he calls vain, and so may we justly account of these. Our Savior called
the Jews to Search the Scriptures, Joh. 5. 36 Mark 77 and 9.
and condemned all their Traditions. And why may not we take the same course
and say To the Law, and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this
Word, it is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8. 20.

3. Let Popish Traditions give as much evidence for their descent from Heaven,
as Scripture does, and we shall embrace both alike. B^t in this case we say, as
the Jews did in another. We know that God spoke unto Moses, But for this
fellow, we John 9. (...) 29,
know not whence he is. We know by the Contents and matter of Scripture, the
Majesty of the dispensation, the power it has upon conscience, the certain
fulfilling of all the Prophecies to a tittle, and many other tokens, and testim
onies of God speaking in it, that it is the Word of God, and no other. When
Tradition can produce such, and the like evidences, we may happily attend it more
then we have done. In the mean while, we are at a loss, and cannot believe the
written Word of God, and unwritten Word (which Papists count so much of) to be
of like authority, because one contradicts the other in many particulars.

To instance; Scripture shows a communion in both kinds so instituted, as is to
be seen in all the Evangelists, and so administered in the Churches, 1 Cor. 11.
23, etc. according to the first Institution. But Papists give only bread to the
Laity, after the Tradition which they have a while received. Here is a manifest
contradiction of Scripture by Practical Tradition.

And so there is in forbidding Priests marriage, which Scripture allows, as
honorable among all men, excepting none, Heb. 13. 4. and taxes the prohibition
as a departing from the Faith, and c. 1 Timothy 4. 1, 8.

What should I mention abstinence from meats; having public. Divine Service in
an unknown tongue; worshipping God in, and before an Image, and the like? If
these do not contradict Scripture, there are no things contradictory to be
sound upon earth. Yea, worshipping God in an Image, is against the light of
nature, if the Apostle speaks truth, Romans 1. 19, 20, 21, and c. And
particularly ver. 25. it is plain, that the Heathens Idolatry was serving the
creature with the Crea or.

To return where we were before; we call Scri^ture a Rule of Faith as it
reveals the Truths of God, and commands our belief. For if we had not such a
Revelation of Gods will in Scripture, we know not where to look for it. And
they who question us about this, should do well to show us another Revelation
of Gods mind then what we have in Scripture. For as we believe in God only, so
we acknowledge no other to have dominion over our Faith; and hence we can
acknowledge no Rule of Faith, but what God himself has made. For certain, what
is the Rule, must be the Law of our belief, and who can make a Law of this
nature but God only? And this I leave to be tried by the Law of Reason, whether
any thing can be the Law of Faith, that is not a Law of God? What! shall men,
or any creatures prescribe us what we are to believe concerning God? It is
unreasonable to imagine it. And then let it be further considered, if the Rule
of Faith, and the Law of Faith, be not all one. For it is not possible to prove
that to be the Rule of Faith, which does not command us to believe, prescribe
what is to be believed, and secu^e ^s of the promised good, viz. eternal life
upon our believing, as we are commanded.

And this leads us to our second Argument, from the Office and work of faith;
which is such a believing God in revealed Truths, as leads us to our bliss.
There is a faith that saves not (as all grant) and I need not show what it is.
But we mean a true faith, or a sincere and saving faith, and this being
undeniable, let it be considered, How any thing can be the Rule of this faith,
besides Divine and supernatural Revelation. But of this we may take more notice
hereafter.

In the Interim, we appeal to the consciences of all sober men, whether we are
not rational in making Divine Revelation to be the Rule of Divine Faith. For
sure footing to our faith, we hope we have it, where alone it is to be had. And
this will appear more plainly, in the discourse of the Question, Whether
Tradition, the Churches Testimony, or any thing of that nature, is, or can b^
the Rule of Faith.

The second Part. Wherein is debated this Question, viz. Whether Tradition, the
Churches Testimony, or any thing besides Scripture, is, or can be a Rule of
Faith?
IN this Question Protestants hold the Negative, and say, That Scripture alone
is, and Tradition cannot be a Rule of Faith.

And now I must first show, what Papists mean by Tradition. Not (as they say)
the Doctrine delivered, But a delivery down from hand to hand (b^ words, and a
const^t course of frequent and visible actions conformable to those words) of
the sense, and faith o^ F^re-fathers. This they call Oral, or Practical
Tradition, and this they would have to be the only Rule of Faith. For they
charge Scripture with imperfection, and obscurity, and affirm it to be no
competent Rule, as being not evident, or certain in it self, and therefore not
sufficient to ascertain others. Hence they speak of Scripture, as a Rule
regulated by Tradition, which is indeed to say, it is none at all; and this
they avouch some of them in express terms before all the world.

Now if we Protestants are once compe^l'd to let go all Scripture authority in
matters of Faith, I know nothing we have to do more, then burn our Bibles, and
as fast as we can, turn Roman Catholics. Papists do not indeed say (as far as
I know) that Scripture is not of Divine Inspiration. But they say plainly, that
the doctrine of Scripture cannot be ascertained to us, without Tradition; and
so Tradition is the Rule ruling, as i^ a^lures us what is Canonical Scripture,
and what not. Yea, they say expressly, Tradition is a competent Rule, and
Scripture is not. Now in this we cannot yield to them, and we have this
argument for our dissent: Tradition by their own concession is but a certain
way of delivering down the Faith, and can be no other at most, and that it is
so much, we cannot yield. But supposing it only, we say, therefore it cannot be
the Rule of Faith, for it only delivers down to us the Rule. And if any think
this reason weak, let him take notice of this also to back it, that Tradition
is but an humane Testimony, and cannot therefore be a Rule of Divine Faith.
What! The Faith Divine, and the Testimony received by it humane! What reason is
in this, let any reasonable man judge. I need say no more.

Nor will it help in this case to allege the supernatural assistances of the
Holy Ghost. For our argument is, That our Faith is as the, Testimony received
by it. If therefore the Testimony be humane, the Faith is such, and where are
we then? Is our Faith in God (that must save our souls) only an humane, and not
a Divine Faith? who ever heard such things as these? If it be said again, That
this humane Testimony serves to ascertain us of the doctrine of Christ, even so
it cannot be the Rule, for it is of men; and it must be somewhat of God
(whatever it be) that is the Rule of Faith in God. F^r I may justly question in
this Case, In whom do we believe to the saving of our souls? Surely no man will
say other, then that we believe in God. Well; and if we believe in God, it must
be because of some Revelation he has made of himself, and this can be no
other, then his promise in Christ of grace, and pardon to poor sinners. This is
the Testimony, or Record, That God has given to us 1 John 5.
eternal life, and this life is in his Son. And this is the Testimony we
receive by Faith, and so our Faith is Divine. If we receive the Testimony of
men, our Faith is only humane. This (I say again) is our argument, That our
Faith being Divine, the Testimony received by it is so also. And therefore we
receiving only the Testimony of God by Faith, it cannot be reasonably imagined,
that our Faith should have its foundation, and sure footing in any thing of man.

But here they ferch in the assistances of the Holy Ghost, but to little
purpose, seeing those assistances are yielded us most likely to help us in
believing the Word of God, and not the Testimony of men. And may not
Protestants more rationally by far say, they believe the Scripture by the
persuasions of the holy Ghost, then Papists say, that Tradition receives
incomparable strength by the supernatural assistances of the same holy Ghost?
surely if God have, made any Revelation of his mind and will, his Spirit most
likely will help us to believe it, much rather then a^y thing else. Hence it
is, that we care so little sor Tradition because it is the testimony of men;
For we have no faith to save us, but faith in God, and know not how we can have
faith in God, but by receiving the Testimony, which he himself has given.

When Papists attribute so much to Tradition, for ascertaining Scripture, we
cannot yield to them in it, because we believe that God so speaks to men, as
they may know that it is he that speaks. If he do not, it is because he will
not, or because he cannot. That he cannot, no man can say without blasphemy. To
say he will not, is little better. For he has not spoken in secret, but
openly, and plainly, so as they to whom he has spoken, have known certainly,
it was the Lord that spoke to them. And this is indeed the Spirit of Prophecy,
not only to decl^re the will and mind of God, but to ascertain those unto whom
it was declared, that it was so. And such is Scripture, vz. a Revelation of
Gods will so made, as men may know that God has spoken. Wherefore though
Papists say of Scripture, as the Jews said of our Savior, Thou bear record
of thy self, thy record is not true. We answer, as Christ answered for himself,
Though it bear record of it self, yet its record is true. For as it was the
will of God that men should understand his mind, so he spoke in such a manner,
as they might know it was God that spoke, and not man, or any creature. For
what can be said or thought more unworthy of God, then that he has spoken to
men but in such a manner, as he cannot be understood, unless there be some
other to ascertain them, it is he that speaks? we can speak to one another,
either by word or writing, so as to know who speaks, as well as what is spoken.
But God (it seems to Papists) must have some others to pass their word for him,
before he can have any credit with men.

And what is it, that must ascertain us, beyond all further question, that
Scripture is the very Word of God? Only Tradition, or the Testimony of the
Church in all ages successively conveying down the faith once delivered by
Christ and his Apostles.

For the satisfaction of those who need, or desire it; we shall enlarge in our
answer, yet not to exceed the bounds of our intended breviy.

1. We acknowledge, That the Church is bound to give testimony to Scripture as
the Word of God; and that the true Church has so done in all ages, we
Protestants do believe. But we say withal, that the Church is only an outward
instrument or means in giving this testimony, and has no authority (such as
Papists plead for) or dominion over our faith. We are so far from making it the
Rule of faith, as we stand to affirm, we do not be^ieve the Scripture because
the Church says it is the Word of God, but we believe it such for its own and
the Spirits testimony, though no men bear witness to it. For what is the Church
(make the best of it) but a company of men (more or less) that believe the
doctrine of Christ? And where had these men this doctrine? Or how came then by
it? Had they it not in Scripture? Christ indeed delivered it by word of mouth,
and by his Spirit to his Apostles, and they preached this doctrine. But (I
hope) Papists will not say, That the new Testament was not penned by the
Evangelists and Apostles? or that the next Church received any doctrine, other
then is therein recorded? so we are come to the very foundation of the Church,
such as is mentioned Ephesians. 2. 20. The Church is founded upon Scripture, and
not Scripture upon the Church. Indeed a Church is nothing but a company of men,
that believe Scripture, and make it the ground work of their Faith. And so is
it distinguished from all other societies. The Church did not make or frame the
Scripture, but received it made ready to their hands. God had his Secretaries,
who wrote his wills and commands, and to the obedience of these men have been
called, and such as submitted, and came in, have been the Church in all ages.
Hence the Church (we say) has more need of Scriptures testimony, then
Scripture has of the Churches; and accordingly, Protestants judge of the
Church by Scripture, and not of Scripture by the Church. Questionless, when God
shall judge all by the Man whom he has appointed, he will try all Churches and
men by his own Laws. And where those Laws are, we leave Papists to enquire? For
we know none, but such as we find in Scripture.

They tell us a very fair tale of the infallibility of Tradition, How
impossible it is that the first Church, which received the doctrine of Christ
from the Apostles, could be so unnatural, as wittingly to hide it from
posterity, and deliver over to the next generation such lies as would
unavoidably damn them.

Now we suppose (as well as they) that all Parents, and Progenitors, have so
much natural affection, as not to procure willingly, or wittingly the damnation
of their Children. But this will not prove (say we) Tradition to be so
infallible, as they would have it. For Tradition, or delivering any matter from
hand to hand, by word of mouth, is and must be uncertain, yea, and soon fail,
if there be not some Records whereupon to bottom it. And for this we desire
them to consider, That though in the first ages, God was pleased to let his
will be made known from Father to Son, after he had once declared and revealed
it, yet God did not leave all to Tradition, but ever and anon renewed the
Revelations of his will, as occasion required. And this he did, when those
Patriarchs lived ten times so long as any have ordinarily lived for very many
ages. And when afterward Abraham's seed was grown into a multitude, it seemed
good to the wisdom of God, to have the lively Oracles enrolled and committed to
writing. Hence we think it rational to conclude, that God thought his will
written to be more infallible and certain, then as delivered by word of mouth,
from hand to hand. Once we are sure, That whiles the mind of God was delivered
without writing it all the world was corrupted, so as all flesh had perverted
their way in the times of Noah. They had all of them at first the doctrine,
which God revealed to Adam, and how came they to be corrupted as they were, if
Tradition cannot possibly fail? Or how came the world after the Flood to be
filled with Idols, so as Abraham must be called out from the posterity of Shem,
whose posterity had the true Religion delivered to them? If Tradition be so
faithful in the delivery of what is committed to it; we wonder how true
Religion should fail so soon, and that not among a few, but all the world over.

When it is said, That some Heretics have risen from time to time, and these
following their own lusts, and humors, and Interests, have perverted, and
drawn aside others, we grant it. But we say too, That not a few, or a small
party, but multirules have been corrupted, as once it was, when all the world
wondered to see it self Arian. Not to mention the times of Noah, and Elijah,
which are famous for a general Apostasy, we ask, How all Israel came to be
corrupted after Joshua, and the Judg's that outlived him? Yea, how the Body of
that people were corrupted, even while Moses was alive, and upon all'occasions
turning themselves to Idols? And how came the Jews in our Saviors time to have
so many Traditions, not only besides, but contrary to the written Word? Now the
force of our arguing lies in this, That notwithstanding Tradition, and a
written Word too, for some thousands of years past, the generality and whole
body of people, who had the mind of God revealed to them, have been corrupted
and perverted. And when it is thus, what credit is to be given to Tradition? Or
what shall the Fathers deliver over to their Children, other then they
themselves have received, believed, and practiced? We cannot enough wonder at
Papists arguings in this kind. And therefore desire to be resolved in some
particulars, ere we can yield so much to Tradition as they would have us.

1. We would know who these Foref there is were, that have so carefully delivered
over the doctrine of Christ in all ages. For our Forefathers after the flesh,
till this and the last age, we know (and are sorry for it) that they were Roman
Catholics, this land having taken the infection, as much as any other place;
and we acknowledge that other Kingdoms and Nations were as they; so as those
whom we count our Forefathers after the faith, were for a great while up and
down in the world, as they that had not bowed the knee to Baal in Elijahs time.
And what then can be inferred from the Tradition of Forefathers? We know there
is a precious promise Isa. 59. 21. that Gods Word and Spirit should continue
with his Church and the Churches children, to all generations, as our Savior
promised his Disciples, Mat. 28. 20. to be with them to the end of the world.
But observe, the Spirit is promised as well as the Word, because one is
unavailable without the other cooperating with it, Isa. 30. 20, 21. 2 Cor. 2.
16. 2 Cor. 3. 6. and 4. 13. But where is there any promise, that the Word and
Spirit shall continue with any one people uninterruptedly unto the worlds end?
We read, that the word of the kingdom should be taken from the Jews, and so it
was, and is not restored to them yet. And in many places where once were famous
Christian Churches, there is not to be seen at this day, so much as a relic
of Christianity. Witness the Churches of Asia, now possessed by Mahometans. We
think it certain and undeniable, that errors and impieties of all sorts, may
infect whole Nations of such as have professed the doctrine of Christ, and when
the infection has once taken a few, it will spread like a gangrene, till the
body be all overrun. So when some have once departed from the faith, others are
too apt to follow, and the tares soon outgrow the good seed.

Hence we answer, That we cannot admit Tradition as an infallible witness,
since multitudes, yea, whole Nations have been overspread with errors, and
those no small ones. For when a generation is once corrupted in their
Principles, it is not imaginable to us, how they should teach their children
other then what they themselves have learned. So our Forefathers after the
flesh, would (we believe) have taught us the same Religion which had been
taught them for many ages, i. e. the Popish, or Romish. But we deny them to be
our Forefathers, as to our faith.

If any ask us, Who these were? We answer, all they, who in all ages protested
against the errors and abuses of the Church of Rome. We know well, that England
was Christian before Austin the Monk came hither. For he found such here, as
stoutly withstood his Romish impositions, though it cost them dear. And what if
there never had been a Church in England before, or that Church had utterly
failed, yet the Church truly Catholic never fails, but God has had always,
and will have to the end, a company that contend for the faith once delivered
to the Saints, and desire to worship him in spirit, and in truth. And these we
own for our Forefathers, as to our faith, and from these we received, what we
now profess, and believe according to Scripture.

To clear the matter yet further; we say this argument of Tradition supposes
what we cannot yield, viz. That the present Church of Rome holds the same faith
in all particulars with the Apostolic and Primitive Church, and that the same
faith has been handed down to them in all ages successively to this day. That
there was once a famous Church at Rome, we grant, but that the present faith of
Rome is the same with that in the Apostles days, can never be made good,
unless Papists will have the difference of mea's and days to be the whole
Catholic faith. Let them now prove their faith to be the same with what it was
in the Apostles times, and we may then heed this argument more then now we can.
For our parts, we stand to prove (as others before us have done) that there
has been a general departing from the faith; and when the generality are once
corrupted in principles and practices, we know not what they should teach
posterity other then what they themselves have learned. Do not Heathens now (as
in all former ages) teach their children to worship Idols, as themselves have
done? And is it so hard to conceive, how the face, yea, whole body of the
Church may be overspread by errors and heresies? Who knows not, that one
scabbed sheep will infect a whole flock, and how a little leaven will soon
leaven the whole lump. We hear of vain conversation received by Tradition from.
Forefathers, 1 Pet. 1. 18. And we know too well, that Children for the most
part betake themselves to such courses, as their Fathers have taken before them.

That our Savior delivered the whole truth to his Apostles, and they to the
Churches in those times, we make no question, yea, we think it a sin to
question it. But we know, and can show, how the Churches planted by the
Apostles, degenerated quickly. and by degrees came to be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ, and his Gospel. And is this strange? Alas! Even
in the Apostles times, how were some Churches perverted, in so much as he
wonders, Gal. 1. 6. they were so soon removed to another Gospel.

And here I might enlarge in showing, how by degrees the first Churches came to
be perverted and corrupted: But it lies on our Adversaries to prove their
faith, as it is now, to be as it was in the Apostles time. We have said enough
to show how Tradition (which they so much commend and magnify) may fail, and
so prove no infallible Testimony. And who were our Forefathers (from whom we
learnt our faith) we have showed already, and now shall name some of them; viz.
The Reformers in the last ages, and Jo. Hu, and Hi^rome of Prague, and before
them Wickliff, and before him the Waldenses, and all that protested against the
Churches corruptions in all ages upward, as might be showed, if it were
pertinent. Jo. Whites Way, p. 336. 45. and 337. Digress. 48.

2. Tradition being the Testimony of the Church, let Papists first ascertain
us, which is the true Church, whose Testimony we must believe. For our parts,
we know none upon earth that pretend to Christianity, that do not account
themselves the true Church, and that avow not themselves to have the true faith
which the Apostles delivered. Now there being so many pretenders, we are at as
great a loss which Tradition, as without it, since all say, they hold the
Apostolic faith, and yet extremely differ one from another, not in few
matters, or small, at least some of them. And it is said, and granted on all
hands, that there are dissenters, and of these some are ignorant, and some
obstinate, and some Scepticks, and we know too many professing Christians, who
are in their ways and doings no better then Infidels. Now may not any, or all
of these question Tradition, as well as Scripture, upon this pretense, that
they know not which is the Church, whose Testimony they are obliged to believe?

If it be said (as it has been by some) that there is no Christian but knows
the Church, It may be justly replied, that there is no Christian, but knows the
Scripture as well. For all that own not Scripture, we may justly disown them,
as being no Christians. A man may be a Christian (it is confessed) though he
never saw a Bible, if he have heard the doctrine of Christ, as many Gentiles
(yea, all for ought I know) did in the first times of the Church, when the
Gospel was first preached to them by the Apostles. But to be a Christian and
not know the doctrine of Christ, is a pure contradiction. Now how we shall know
which Church gives the truest testimony to the doctrine of Christ, if not by
Scripture, let Papists resolve us, for we know not what to answer. We think
among so many pretenders there will be differences, such as ^^^^adition will no
better reconcile then Scripture, and that as Protestants cannot agree about the
sense of Scripture, but some interpret it one way, and some another, so they,
and others will agree no better about the Church, and its Tradition. For (as I
have said) there are many Churches, and those hugely differing in some things,
and yet all pretend to the Apostolic faith. Therefore we have need of somewhat
to ascertain us of that Church which has preserved, and delivered down all
along the same faith which the Apostles taught. For the true Catholic Church;
we believe it has been faithful in its testimony to the truth in all ages.
But we Protestants cannot own the Church of Rome as such, though we know there
was there one sound part of the Catholic Church, in the Apostles times.
Papists indeed pretend, and boast great things of their Church, but what is
that to us, who can well distinguish between a Roman Catholic, and a Catholic
Christian.

Here then we Protestants resolve to believe the Church for the Scripture, and
not the Scripture for the Church. And yet we allow what that ancient Father
says of himself, That he had not believed Scripture, but for the Church. For
we know, that after he came once to learn the Scriptures, he then believed it,
not upon account of the Churches authority, but its own only. The Church (we
grant) may at first persuade Infidels to attend and heed the Scripture, as the
Word of God, even as the woman persuaded her neighbors to come, and see
Christ. But as they, when they had heard him themselves, John 41. 41. 44.
believed, not because of her saying, but because of his own word: even so is
^in the case that now is in question. The Church of Christ has the office of
ministry, to hold out the light, that others who are in darkeness may see it.
But this will never prove the Church to have such an authority, as Papists
plead for, and much less that their Church is the Catholic Church, which only
holds the Apostolic faith. And when they have said all they can, they say no
more then any Church, never so corrupt, will say for it self, viz. That it has
the doctrine of Christ which the Apostles taught. Hence we say again, that
Tradition leaves us at an irrecoverable loss, and that we must have somewhat
more certain, then the Churches testimony, which any company (of never so
corrupt principles) may pretend unto, as well as the Church of Rome.

3. We desire to be satisfied, whether the doctrine delivered down, be true,
because the Church has delivered it, or that the Church has delivered it,
because it is the truth. For we think the Church ought to receive and believe
the truth only, and to deliver that, and nothing else to be believed by others,
and if it received other then the truth, it was deceived, and if it delivered
other, it was not only deceived, but deceived others also. The Church can make
nothing to be true, but what is such before of it self, and all it can do, is
to declare the truth which it has received, and persuade others to believe it.
Therefore when Papists press us (as they do) about our being assured of
Scripture, we say, that we believe it upon account of its own authority,
because it speaks it self the Word of God. For as when a place of trust and
honor is conferred upon a person by his Prince, and assured to him under the
Great Seal, though the messenger (that brings the Patent) may avow it to be the
Princes act, yet that which gives assurance to the person of his interest in
that office and honor, is the Patent it self, and the Seal annexed. So we know
the voice of God speaking to us in his Word, and even so has the true Church,
in all ages, received Scripture, as the true Word of God, and commended it to
others for such, as a Patent sealed from Heaven.

4. We desire to know when the Church first resolved the Case in Question, and
determined, what is the doctrine of Christ. For the (...) and (...) Councils,
we count them of a latter date, and but of yesterday in comparison. For our
part we think (under correction of better judgments) that the Canon was agreed
upon very early, because two eminent ones among the Ancients, ^counted upon
Aug. cont^ Mar. ^. 11 c. 5.
the same number of Canonical Books which we now do; and one of them says,
that the Canonical authority of the old and new Testament was confirmed in the
Apostles times. And that it was so agreed very early, we have reason to think,
because Constantine in the first Nicene Council, would not else have persuaded
the Fathers assembled to examine and try all questions and controversies by the
Canon of Scripture. For had it been otherwise, it had been rational to move
them, first to resolve what the Canon was. Once we know, the Christian Church
had need to be resolved of a Rule of faith, even from the beginning, at least,
so soon as the Apostles had departed this life. For if any thing, surely this
is of concernment to the Church, viz. To have the Rule of faith stated, as the
standard, whereby all doctrines are to be weighed and measured. And this (we
think) was done, even from the Apostles times, and that upon the determination
which they had made; so as there was no such Question of old about the Rule of
faith, such as Papists have made of late. That some have questioned the
authority of some Books of the New Testament, we know; but we say, they were
only some, and not the whole Church. Besides, to question the authority of some
few Books, is not to question the authority of the whole Scripture. And indeed
this question was never made, till of latter times, when Papists could no more
defend their Tenets by this Rule of faith.

5. We would know how the Church came to know all the mysteries of Christian
Religion. And this we have reason to question, because Papists make so much of
the Churches Testimony, as if Scripture had no authority, as to us at least,
without it. What^ did the Church devise the whole model of the Christian faith,
out of her own heart? No, certainly this will never be said by any that are
sober. What then? Questionless she was taught it of God, and in this (I hope)
we all agree. Well; And how was she taught it? was it not by the Revelation of
Jesus Christ? And where is this Revelation if it be not in Scripture? But I
proceed, and say, the Christian Church learnt the doctrine of Christ from
Scripture, the Spirit working with the Word. For the Apostles did not in
preaching the Gospel, bring to light what had never been heard of, or thought
on before: But they only declared to the world, the performance of what God had
foretold, and promised in the old Testament, concerning his Son made of a
woman, and made under the Law, when once the fullness of time was come. And so
the Apostle avows, Acts 26. 22. that his doctrine was no other, then what Moses
and the Prophets had signified before. And did not Christ come to fulfill the
promises made to the Fathers, which promises were recorded in the old
Testament? Yea, and Christ himself expounded the Scriptures concerning himself.
Luk^ 24. 27. And verse. 25. he up-(...) he two Disciples with their not (...)
what the Prophets had spoken. (...), i^ the Church in all ages, (...)
themselves knew the (...) of Christ by (...), (...) there is enough to show us
(...) is the only Rule of faith.

Once (...); If Scripture be not the Rule (...), let Papists tell us what it
serve ^or. Truly we are so ignorant, as if it be not the Rule of our faith, we
know no use of it. And if that be granted, which our Adversaries plead for, why
may we not hearken to the Church, and her Tradition, and never look on
Scripture more? For they have of late framed a Rule of faith that is
allsufficient, and tell us plainly, Scripture is not so. Surely if we thus let
go the Word, and take up Tradition, we had best let God go also, and content
our selves with the Church.

But there are some Questions to be answered, and till this be done, we talk to
no purpose, whatever we say of Scripture, or against Tradition.

For how know we,

1. Whether the Originals be entire, and the same with those which were first
ponned by the Prophets and Apostles?

2. What Books of Scripture are Canonical, and what not?

3. Whether the Originals are rightly translated into the English, and other
vulgar languages?

4. Whether they are truly sen^'d and interpreted, etc. and what not?

These, and such like, are pressed upon us, to enervate the sorce of Scriptures
authority, and prove it no Rule of faith. For the Rule of faith (say Papists)
must be easy to be understood of all, and it must evidence it self so, as we
may be ascertained of it, that it is the Word of God; and how can the vulgar be
sure of this, when the wisest, and most learned are not well agreed about it?
What shall become of the unlearned, and such as make any doubts about these
things? And there are many such, whereof some are Rational, and others
Skeptical, and others (no question) are Atheistical to an high degree.

To all these we count our selves bound to answer, and our answer in general is,

I. That if Scripture were never so plain and certain, there will be some
doubters and dissenters, and enemies to it also. There are too many who
question, and some who deny the Existence of God. Is there no certainty
therefore of Gods Existence? Or has not God sufficiently showed himself to be
known as he is? so did Christ give evidence enough of himself, though the blind
Pharisee could nor, or rather would not see him to be what he was. We know,
there are many in the world, who are dissenters to the Rules of common honesty
and righteousness; and yet they are plain enough, and Papists (I am confident)
think so. It is abundantly sufficient, if Scripture prove it self so far, as
all honest, sober, and uninterested persons may be satisfied. These (I am sure)
will be contented with such proofs, as the matter in question will bear. And
who, that is reasonable, will expect arguments in this case, to prove more then
a moral certainty, always excepting that inward assurance which a gracious
soul has by the seal of Gods Spirit.

2. We answer, That the Rule may be easy, though all men do not understand it.
And such is Scripture, easy (we say) to be understood by all that will use
means for that end. What! do our Adversaries think it may be known by dreaming
of it? or shall we think that God has not sufficiently provided for our souls,
because we cannot come to the knowledge of the Truth, and Salvation by it,
without pains-taking? This is (to say no more) unreasonable. What can be learnt
without using means, and taking pains?

3. We may justly look on these Queries about Scripture, as if a man should ask
another, How do you know light from darkness, white from black, sour from
sweet? For Scripture gives as clear a discovery of it self, as things white and
black, sour and sweet, show their taste and color. But I shall endeavor to
answer particulars, as they lie in order.

To the first Question about the Originals we answer.

1. That we know them to be entire, and not defective, and the same with those
that were penned by the Prophets and Apostles, as well as any such thing can be
known. These Records are very ancient, some of them of some thousand years
standing. And must we now prove every particular, as if we had been
eyewitnesses? Is it not enough, if we have more certainty of these, then can
be had of any others that bear the same date, or somewhat near? Not to say,
that that this Question seems to strike at the force of all ancient Records and
evidences. For it may be said by any concerned, How are we sure, that these are
the Authentic Copies, or transcribed exactly to a letter?

2. We are certainly assured in this Case as well as they that question us,
seeing they pretend only to Tradition for their Security, and we know no
certainty of that more then of Scripture.

3. We know the Original Old Testament by the consent of our Bibles, and those
which the Jews preserve to this day (as we think) by a special providence.
What better evidence can there be in such a case then this? They had the honor
to have the lively Oracles committed to them, and we never heard they could be
justly blamed for being ^alse to their trust thus far. And these Infidels still
retain the old Testament, as it was, though the Christians make use of it to
justify the Christian faith against them. And if they had attempted any
alteration, they could never have effected it, as was showed before. Now while
their Copies and ours agree so well together, as we have no difference with
them about this, have we not good reason to persuade our selves, that our
Original Bibles are as at first?

4. We know it by as good evidences, as our Adversaries know it, viz. by the
consent of all Ages bearing witness to it. We do not indeed plead the authority
of the Churches Testimony, as Papists do, nor have we need, seeing the
Testimony may be valid through its truth, without any such authority. We give
as much as we ought to the Church, when we say, it has been all along an
external instrument or Medium, to declare and testifi^ concerning the doctrine
of Christ in Scripture. And so it has testified the Originals to be as at
first.

I have yet more to say for clearing this Question, only I must needs insert,
that we cannot think our selves so fairly dealt withal in such a question. For
we lay our claim by prescription, and therefore think our adversaries should
rather prove the contrary by undeniable arguments, then pick quarrels with us
by captious questions, such as they can no better answer then we. But we know
the design, and shall say no more of it.

5. It is enough, if the Originals be in the matter and substance of them the
same as at first. That they may have some alterations as to letters, or words,
in the transcribing and printing of them, who questions, since the
Transcribers, and Printers had no infallible Spirit that we ever heard of? But
this being granted, we have no cause to doubt Scriptures authority any whit the
more. What though no Original Copy now extant be so absolutely pure, as no
mixture can possibly be found in it, as to words and letters, yet Scripture
ceases not to be a sufficient Rule, so long as there is in it no violation,
mutilation, or falsification through the ignorance, negligence, or malice of
men, as disables it for teaching all men what to believe and do, in order to
their salvation. For this is it which we contend for, That all the doctrine of
Christ necessary to be known unto salvation, we have in our present Bibles, and
this doctrine the very same that was delivered by the Prophets and Apostles. It
lies still however on our adversaries to prove any alteration so much as in any
words. Hence we say further, that Books made of ink, and parchment, or paper,
are things that are perishable, yea, and will come to nothing. But dare Papists
say, that God has not given his Laws in writing? dare they say, that there
never was such a man as Moses, who at Gods command delivered a Law to Israel,
and after it was written caused it to be read in the audience of all the
people? or dare they say, there never were such men as the Prophets and
Apostles, and that they never wrote any such Books, as are now called the holy
Scriptures? We do not know, and therefore dare not say, that they have hi^herto
said any such thing, and we have so much charity, as to believe they will never
say it. What mean they then by such quirks, and quibles as these, viz. That we
cannot be assured now that the Scriptures are not altered from what they were
at first? etc. What thoughts have they of God Almighty? was he not wise enough
to foresee what might be objected in after times, so as to provide against it,
and prevent all such questions as they now make about the written word? This we
know, and they too, that the only wise God thought it best to have the lively
Oracles committed to writing, though he could not but know, that in process of
time, there might be some alteration in those writings, and that the outside
materials, as parchment, etc. are such as wast and wear out. Yea this way of
writing was (as I may say) consecrated at first by the finger of God, who wrote
the ten Commandments in two T^bles of sione. And those two tables were soon
broken, and the others afterward prepared at Gods command, and kept along
time, are yet long since gone, so as none can give any account of them.
Notwithstanding we are not to seek of the Ten Commandments, nor (we hope) will
any say these are not the same that God wrote at first, or we cannot be sure
that they are so. Alas! to argue in this manner is to bring Heaven and Earth
together. Then farewell all the credit of all ancient Records, that ever have
been preserved in the World. Yea, then let the Scriptures (which are the most
ancient Records in the world) go too, upon the same account. And this, we
think, some would have, or they would no more trouble the world with such
frivolous Queries as these. How (say they) can we be sure, that the Originals
are the same that were first penned? what pity it is, that these men stood not
by, when God commanded a Law to be written for his people, and the same to
continue unto all genera ions! they could have prompted God, and told him what
was to be considered of, viz. That those Books might decay in time, and the
Copies be corrupted in the transcribing of them, or they might be lost, and hid
aside; (For so they were in Josiahs time, when 2 Kings 22. 8^
one Copy was lighted on by chance, and counted as a Jewel for its rarity.) And
that in after ages, there might be much questioning about them, whether they
had not under the revolutions of many ages been altered, from what they were at
first by his appointment. But the only wise God, who certainly could foresee
all these things, thought it best to have his Word written, and yet made no
extraordinary provision for transcribing them upon occasion, or preventing such
questions, as are now made by some. Sure we are, that our Savior calls the
Jews to Scripture, and they do not excuse themselves, by saying, they know not
whether they have the Law of Moses, as it was first delivered; nay, they
confess, that God spoke by Moses, and they knew it. And our Savior pu s the
question [ whether he were the Ch in] to be proved by Scripture. ph. 5. 39.
Strange! that the only wise God should not foresee this quarrel mi^h be made
in after ages, which P^pists make now. For might not the (...), the Law of
Moses, and the writings of the Prophets, were no Rule of faith and manners to
them, because they could not evidence their own certainty, so as to ascertain
them. And how could they ^icertain them then, more then us new?

But Tradition is it which must secure all, by its affidavit made to O^j.
Scripture.

And what do we then believe in Sol.
believing Scripture, the authority of God, or men? If Scriptures authority, as
to us, depends upon the Churches Testimony, in our belief of Scripture, we
believe men, and not God; at least, we believe God for the Testimony of men.
And what kind of faith that is, let them who question us so much about
Scripture, resolve us. For the various readings that are in the Originals, we
acknowledge them, and think, they happened much through the mistakes of those
who transcribed the Copies from time to time. However they happened (for we
stand not much upon it) Papists know, that the Jews Masoreth has well provided
for the Old Testament. And though the New has very many, we stand to maintain,
that all those various readings put together, (let the worst be made of them)
can never be improved to prejudice the authority of Scripture in one Article of
Faith. For all the written and printed Copies of the Original Bibles, do
concur in the whole main doctrine of Christ throughout. And thereupon we
challenge Papists to show any alteration, that clashes with the doctrine first
delivered, notwithstanding all the various readings in so great a multitude of
Copies.

Hence we conclude, (as a learned man has it) That the true and proper
foundation of Christian Religion is not ink and paper, nor any writing, or
writings, whether Originals, or Translations, but that substance of matter,
those gracious counsels of God concerning the salvation of the world by Jesus
Christ, which are indeed represented and (...), both in Translations and
Orginals, but are really and (...) distinct from both, and no ways, for their
natures and beings, depending on either of them. The writing (as he says)
declares the nature, or tenor of the bargain, which was in reality, and
compleatness of being, before the writing, and consequently the w^iting can be
no part of it. In like manner, the good pleasure of God concerning man's
salvation, bad its being in God himself, long before any part of it was
imparted unto the world by any writing. For it was savingly imparted; first, By
immediate inspiration of God unto some men. And secendly, By word of mouth from
these to many others, long before any part of it was ordered by God to be set
down in writing. So that no Book or writing whatsoever, is either in whole or
in part, the Word or Will of God, and consequently no foundation of Christian
Religion, unless we make some other foundation besides the Word of God.

As for the Originals; we are assured that they are entire, and not defective,
as any can be sure of any thing that is of so long standing. And therefore we
are bold to think, that they who question us, as they do in this kind, might
rather have questioned God himself, for representing his mind and will in
writing, when he could not but foresee that such manner of questions might be
put in after-ages, as are made now adays. None dare say, that God never
ordered his will to be written. And seeing it is so ordered by him, why should
we question the wise and gracious hand of his providence, in contriving the
preservation of these ancient Records unto all posterity, for whom he intended
them? Methinks it were a more direct course for our Adversaries to take, if
they would say downright, that God never committed his mind and will to
writing, then now to say (as they do) that no man can be sure that these
writings are the same which were at first. For this seems to cast an aspersion
upon God, for taking such a way of representing his mind unto the sons of men,
as must leave those of these latter ages of the world, under invincible
doubtings about his will, that respects their greatest and only concernments.
As for their expedient of Tradition; what does it other, then resolve all the
Divine authority of Scripture, into the authority of men? For they say,
Scripture cannot ascertain us concerning it self, nor can any thing else but
Tradition, which yet is no more then the Testimony of men: And so the Testimony
of God, as to us, must be less then that of men.

To the second Querie, we need not say much in way of answering it, seeing the
Books accounted by us Apocryphal do sufficiently show, what account we are
bound to make of them, while they confute themselves by their own contents.
That the Maccabees are a story of which there is good use, we deny not; and
that Ecclesi^sticus, and the Book of Wisdom, etc. contain many and sundry moral
instructions, we do not question, no more then that the like are found in other
Books, which yet pretend not to Divine authority. But this proves them not to
be Canonical, as the Church of Rome has determined. Once the Jewish Church
never owned them for part of the Canon, nor were they ever written in their
language, as the other parts of the Old (...). True, they have been allowed to
be read in some Churches, for instruction in manners. But the Christian Church
never received them into the Canon of Scripture, nor will it ever be proved,
The Romish Church indeed. (for what cause she best knows) has Canonized these
Books: But what is that to us, who can as easily distinguish in this case, as
we can between light and darkness? But we appeal to the Churches Testimony, and
say, that the true Christian Church had no other Canonical Books, then what we
own for such. There were indeed some who questioned some particular Books of
the New Test^ment, but that question continued not long; and if some also gave
too much to these Apocryphals, that is not enough to countervail the general
vote of the whole Church, which always rejected them from having any place in
the Canon.

Hence our answer is, that we know what Books are Canonical, by that light and
luster of Divine truth, which shines out, and shows it self in them. And this
light is so glorious, as those Atocryphals dare not pretend to it, but rather
seem willing to be in a lower form. For this I instance in 2 Mac. 2. 24. where
the Author (whoever he was) consesses, that he had taken what he wrote, out of
Jason of Cyrene, and contracted five Books of his into one Volume; and whoever
pleases to read on in that Chapter, may easily perceive that the Spirit of God,
(which spoke by the holy Prophets) could never frame to speak in such a manner.
God in Scripture (as has been already said) speaks pro imperio, as the only
most sovereign Lord, and never makes Apologies for himself to be excused with
those to whom he speaks. For why should he, seeing they are all his vassals;
his creatures? The distance is so infinitely great between him, and them, as it
cannot be reasonably imagined, that he should court them, as that Author does.
For the many fictions and tales told in some of those Apocryphals, I ^all not
mention them, because they are so well known to such as have perused them, and
may be to others, who have a mind to be satisfied.

What need have we then of Tradition to determine in this Case? And whoever
has a mind to be further satisfied, may find enough in all our Divines, who
have maintained Scriptures authority against our adversaries.

But the great question is about the Scriptures transl^ted. For our adversaries
think, we can never prove them to be the Rule of faith. The Rule (say they)
must be certain, and infallible. But Translations are many and various, and
much different, if not in many things contrary to one another. And then how
shall the vulgar understand which of them does indeed declare the mind of God?
Or how shall the unlearned be infallibly sure, that this or that Translation
does not err?

Now to clear our selves in this puzzling question, I say (what Papists cannot
deny) that the whole Canon was at first written in two Languages, which very
few in comparison for these many Ages have understood, better then our common
people do. But when the Scripture was penned, these Languages, viz. Hebrew and
Greek, were best known to the Church of any other. Hebrew was the Mother tongue
of the Jews, and Greek was a language very familiar to such of them, as were
scattered abroad before our Saviors time, and then, seeing they were called
Hellenists, or Grecists, for using the Greek Translation of the old Testament
by the Seventy. For the Gentiles (unto whom the Gospel came as well as to the
Jews) many of them had it for their Mother Tongue, and others familiarly used
it, because the Grecian Monarchy had not long before swayed in all those parts
of the World. This I thought good to mention, that it might appear the more
probable, that Gods mind was to have his Word understood by all.

But there were other people, who Obj.
understood neither of those Languages.

There were, and are still such, Sol.
and we do not deny it. But this is evident, that God was not pleased to cause
his Word to be written at first in the Vulgar languages of all Nations. For if
he had, we should not be pozed (as now we are) with this Question. However what
I have said, and cannot be denied, serves to hint this, That Gods mind was to
have his Word understood by those to whom it came, seeing he wrote to the Jews
in Hebrew, and to the Grecians in Greek. True, other people could not
understand it without a Translation. And what shall we say in this Case? God
did not cause the Scripture to be penned at first in the several Languages of
all people and Nations. We must here leave out adversaries to question God for
it, for we cannot deny, That the Scripture was penned at first only in two
Laguages, which many could not possibly understand without a miracle, unless it
had been translated. Only since it was thus, we hope our adversaries will not
say; it ought not to be translated, seeing there was a necessity for it, in
order to the understanding of it, which else could never have been without a
miracle.

But how shall the vulgar know Q^est.
whether Translations be according to the Originals? And then how can the
Scripture translated be a Rule of faith which must be such as a man may be
sure, that there is no error in it?

This is indeed the Question, Sol.
where with they go about to puzzle us. For the Scripture (say they) as
translated into the English tongue, cannot be the Rule of faith, because not
infallible. And to this we intend Mr. Jo* ^bite, Mr Anth. Wotton.
to answer, though others have answered it long ago*. And our answer is, that

1. We know of no infallible Spirit promised, or given of God for translating
Scripture. And this is that which our adversaties think will give the cause
wholly on their side. For seeing all Translations are liable to mistakes, the
vulgar, and unlearned can never have a Rule of faith in Scripture, say they.
But we shall not quit ou^ claim to Scripture for all this. For we can
distinguish (as that learned Divine has) between the doctrine taught in To.
White his way to the ^ue Church.
the Scriptu e, and the means whereby the doctrine is (...) to our capacity, as
between things, and words. The Divine truth which is the infallible Word of
God, is (say we) the Rule of faith. The Translations are only means to show it
us, and the vessels wherein it is presented to us.

And thus in rigor of speech, we do not count the English, or any other
Translation, no nor the Greek or Hebrew the Rule, because all Language is but a
certain form, or manner, or means whereby it comes to us. But because the
doctrine is not made known but by words, and languages: Therefore the Scripture
translated into English is a Divine authority for faith. So men believe a
Divine truth although delivered by humane voice, in p^eaching; and just so we
have the infallible Doctrine of the Scriptute, immediately inspired by the holy
Ghost, though by an humane Translation it be manifested to us.

2. But how do we know, that our Translation is right, and according to the
Originals? Or how can our unlearned people be sure of it? And if they cannot,
how can the English Bibles be to them a Rule of Faith?

Sol. Our English Bible (says our learned White) contains in it two things,
viz. The Doctrine, and the Translation. The Doctrine was inspired by God, and
written by men infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost. The Translation was done
by the ministry of the Church, and industry of certain men, who th^ugh they ha^
no supernatural inspiration, yet we know infallibly, they have not erred in the
matt^r, by the same means whereby we know other Truths, and discern other
Articles of Chri^ian Faith; viz. The light of the Doctrine Transl..ted, the
testimony of the Spirit, the ministry of the Word, the rul^s of Art, the
knowledge of the Tongues, etc.

Obj. Some Translations have erred, and how shall we be sure of this, or that
Translation?

Sol. We grant, that some have erred, and any may, unless there were an
infallible Spirit to a^st. What is this to us, who maintain not this or that
Translation, but the Scriptures well and faithfully translated, to be the Rule
of Faith? True, our Translations have been altered; but this alteration has
been in words, more then matter. And one and the same sense may be expressed
diverse ways. So we may have different Translations, without any error in the
matter and Doctrine. Nay further; what if one Translation should differ from
another in sense, we are not therefore bound to quit our English Bibles, unless
it did appear that we have not in them the matter and substance of all
Ch^istian Doctrine. And here we require it be showed and proved, that our
various Translations do not all agree exactly so far, as we have in them all
the Articles of Christian Faith, which are necessary to be known and believed
in order to our happiness. The differences in all our Translations are not
such, or so many, as that we should need the Churches authority to assure and
settle us. For God opens the hearts of his people to know his voice from
others, whiles the light of Divine truth gives testimony to it self, and
receives authority from no other, as the Sun is seen by its own light, and as
we discern sweet from sour by its own taste.

However (as a learned man has said) we deny not, that there are diverse means
whereby our consciences may be assured. Some private, as skill in tongues,
learning, labor, prayer, conference, etc. Some public, as the ministry, which
act of the Church is not authority to secure, but ministry to show us, that
which shall secure us; which ministry is founded on the Scripture it self, in
that from thence it fetches the Reasons that may p^rswade us, and sh^weth the
light that does infallibly assure us. And the difference between these two is
this, That the Spirit is an inward means, the teaching of the Church an
outward. The Spirit Secureth us by kis own authority, the Church directs us
by her ministry. The Spirit has light in it self, the Church borrows hers
from the Scripture. For certain, God never since his people had his Laws
written to them, has left them without a ministry, and this is the great work
of that ministry, to cause the people to understand the Laws of God. And how
this can be done amongst our vulgar, unless by translating the Scripture, let
them show, that can, for we cannot.

Whereas our Adversaries take occasion hence to quarrel Scripture, as no
competent Rule of faith, because the unlearned vulgar want a Rule, and can have
no other then a Bible translated, which is liable to many and great mistakes;
we may justly question them about their Translations: For they know, there is a
Latin Translation (not the Original for certain) which is with them commended
as authentical, to say no more. Only we desire them first to answer for
themselves. However we may justly marvel, that they send us to Tradition, for
our assurance about Translations, seeing our present English Translations are
of no such ancient date, as we need to enquire much, what our Fathers thought
of them. They are best known and discerned by those who best understand the
Originals, and have the most helps and means which God has allowed for such a
work, as Translating the Scriptures. And for these we may without ostentation
say, that we have as good, and as many, as they have, and the Translations we
have are approved of by our Church, though not by theirs. If the Papists would,
or could prove that the Scriptures ought not to be translated at all, or else
help us to a Translation absolutely answerable to the Originals, and give us
good security for it, they should do both us and themselves a good piece of
service. But there is an absolute necessity of Translations, unless we knew of
any extraordinary and miraculous way of bringing our people to understand the
will of God in his written Word. And what then is to be done? or what can we do
in order to the salvation of poor souls? There are some perhaps, who can
resolve this otherwise then we dare, and say, Let them alone to be as ignorant
as may be, and believe only, as the Church believes, right or wrong. But for
our part, we are of the mind, that our people will never grope out the way to
Heaven, while they are blindfolded, nor can we be persuaded, that ignorance is
the mother of devotion, though we know it is the mother of superstition. God
(...) m^n from darkness unto light, when he turns them from the power of Satan
(...) himself, Act. 26. 18 and why came our Savior a ligh^ into the world, if
we may go to Heaven as blind as we are born? what have we to do while we are
here upon earth, more then to get grace and knowledge, and grow in it more and
more? Heaven is called the inheritance of the Saints in light, and Hell is
called utter darkness.

To say no more of this; we have the Scriptures translated into English,
because the greatest number of our people (whose souls are as precious as
others) cannot otherwise understand them without a miracle. And we use the best
means we have left us, to make our people know Gods mind and will in (...)
written Word. And for Tradition; we know no use of it, unless i^ be first
resolved beyond all exception, that we must believe as the Church believes,
whatever the Scripture says.

What has been said already in answer to the former Queries, may serve in part
for the (...) hand last Q^ery, about the sense and interpretation of Scripture.
However we shall say what we th^nk, about the letter of Scripture not senc'd,
and to be senc'd.

Now the sense of (...), that Scripture has words and (...), is the Rule of
faith, and they read it, as any m^n reads his friends, or correspondents
letters to know his mind in them, or as Factou^s beyond sea come to know their
Merchants orders, given them in and by their letters. Sometimes a difference
arises amongst these, and ^hen what can a Factour do to clear himself more,
then to produce his Merchants le^ters, and say, Here is the order you gave me,
and I have followed it? so do we, when we are questioned about our faith; we
know no other answer but this, that we have orders given us in Scripture to
believe so and so, and not otherwise. We cannot in this case abstract the
le^ter from the sense. Scholars indeed, in their contemplations, may make such
abstractions. But what have we to do with them in practical use, or about moral
actions? for in such cases, we must (as all sober men do) take words, and sense
together, Words and letters (as far as we ever learnt) serve only to signifi^
men's sense, and meaning. And so does the letter of Scripture signify Gods mind
and meaning in i^. And so we produce them in any matter of question, as men do
their written evidences in a trial at Law. Would it be allowed in such a case,
that a Lawyer (if any such could possibly be found) should evade a full, and
clear evidence, by abstracting the letter from the sense? all men of common
reason know, that written evidences are intended to show men's sense and
meaning, and that the letter and the sense cannot be separated, though every
puny Sophister can distinguish them.

In this distinguishing between the letter, and sense of Scripture, and saying
that Protestants have only the letter of Scripture for their Rule, we can guess
at no design but this, that (...) would have us run as far as Rome, to fetch
the sense of Scripture thence. And then we may have it sen^'d as it has been
heretofore by some of them. For instance; ^ehold here are two swords, L^ke 22.
38. that is, the Pope has the power of the spi^itual and temporal sword. Then
^ast put all things under his f^et, "(...) and (...), and the beasts of the fi
(...), P^l. 8. 6, 7. and this is applied to Christ, Heb. 2. but the Roman sense
is, that all things are subject to the Pope. By catte^, they will have us
understand men on Earth; by the fishes in the sea, the souls in Purgatory; and
the birds are the blessed souls in Heaven. Or as they all seem to sense that
command of Christ, Drink ye all of this, Drink ye not not all of this. These
seem for certain to make neither the letter, nor the sense of Scripture to be
the Rule, b^t some^hat else.

But the letter cannot be a Rule Ob^.
(say they) seeing the letter speaks things otherwise then they ought to be
understood. For the letter attributes hands and seet, (...). to (...) which
must not be so much as imagined, seeing he is a (...).

We need not for all this be beholden Sol.
to Tradition, o^ seek for the sense of Scripture from the Church of Rome. Our
reason (if we had no other thing to help us) will reach us* that God has no
limbs, nor senses as we men have, and therefore we abhor to make any
representations of God in any bodily shape, as knowing it unreasonable to
represent God by the similitude of any creature. What reasonable man can be
ignerant, that Gods hands (...) his power, and his eyes, his providence, etc.
and that such expressions are made use of by the Holy Ghost, in a way of
condescension to our in^rmity? To say no more, these reasonings are no better
then (...), and are best (...) by taking least notice o^ them.

For giving the sense of Scripture, we have the ministry, which is an ordinance
of God appointed for that end. So (...) el had a Law, and Priests to give the
sense of it, Malac. 2. 7. and we have a precedent recorded, N^hem. 8. 8. and we
think, that Papists meaning is, the people should seek the sense of Scripture
at the P^iests lips, seeing they allow theirs to have no Bibles. But what need
they make such ado about this? are they, or can they be ignorant, that all the
great necessary truths of the Gospel are set down so plainly in Scripture, as
no man can miss of the true sense, if he do but read them with deliberation?
there is no Translation but has all these, and no man in his senses can be
ignorant of them, if he will but read the Bible. And this is the love and
kindness of God to us, to give us a plain and an easy Rule. What though some
things are hard to exercise our diligence, yet all the necessary saving
doctrine of Christ is open and obvious to such as are willing to understand and
to use means for that end. Thus God has written Laws, as men do for such as
are concerned, and both the Laws of God and man may be understood by all, if
they will do what is their duty in order to it. There are Records of men's Laws,
which we may call the Originals, and there are Statute-B oks printed for men to
read, and know the Laws. And therefore all that transgress these Laws, are
questioned and punished, though there are many that cannot read them, because
they know not a letter. For it is justly and reasonably presu^ed, that all that
have a mind, may come to know the Laws so much as concerns them. And so may our
people (say we) come to know the Laws of God in Scripture, if they are willing
to it. Therefore such Queries about the sense of Scripture, and c. are no
better then quibbles. They that b^sie themselves to trouble us with such
captious Questions, might do well to bestow their pains about some others, who
may give them more thanks, then we can, for their labor. I mean our untowardly
people, who are some of them sometimes tried for their lives, being indicted
upon the Laws and Statutes of our Land. Let them prompt these poor wretches to
plead, that the Laws are no Rule for them to walk by, seeing they never could
read them, nor perhaps ever saw a Statute-Book, and they cannot be sure, the
printed Sta^utes are the same word for word with the original Records; nor can
they be sure what is the sense of the Laws, for Lawyers are sometimes divided
in their opinions about it. O! what a brave piece of service this would be
counted by some, thus to make void all the Laws of the Land! But the Laws of
England must not be laid down upon such pre^ences, and (we hope) the L^ws of
God in Sc^ipture shall not be made void upon no better grounds.

For our vulgar; they have as many advantages to know the Rule of ^aith in
Scripture, as they have to know the Laws of the Land, and no ^ber man can say,
or think otherwise. For as we have such as are studied and understanding in the
Laws of England, so we have such as are by office bound to cause others to know
the Laws of God. And thus has God provided in all ages of the Church, that his
people may not perish for lack of knowledge. True; the Priests may, as once
they did, M^l c. 2. 8. depart out of the war, and cause many to stumb^e at the
Law. And when it is thus, no marvel if Tradition in the Church be not so (...)
a witness of the says of Forefathers, seeing mostly, as is the P^iest, so are
the people. However this has been Gods ordinary way for teaching his people,
and Gods Ordinance is not the worse for man's abuse. His Laws are plain and
easy to be known by such as are willing, and will use means to learn them,
because he has appointed Officers to teach the good knowledge of his ways and
wills. Hence we may justly say of these exceptions, that they are to small
purpose, and whoever weighs the argument, will find it to strike almost
directly at the dealings of God, in declaring and dispensing the knowledge of
his will. For this is confessed, and cannot be reasonably denied, that
Scripture was penned by the Holy Ghost, not in the several languages of all
people, but in two only, which few now adays in comp^on do understand. Hence
there is a necessity of translating and in^erpreting Scripture, and for this
purpose God has given gifts to men, and these gifts we use as we ought to do.
What need our Adversaries quarrel us about what we cannot help? but we know
what lies at bottom. They would fain have us go down to them to sharpen our
shares and our coulters, and c. which we are not willing to do, so long as we
have Smiths enough at home to make us Swords and Spears.

I shall now conclude our answers, with that which we count the Pillar of our
hopes, and (as I may say) the Sure-footing of our faith in Scripture. We do
indeed make the Scriptures our only Rule, and believe that in them alone is
prescribed to us, whatever God would have us to know and do in order to our
salvation. And in this our faith we own the Divine authority, whereof we see so
many evident tokens in the Scriptures themselves. But yet we say, that as God
only is a competent witness of himself speaking to us in his Word, so his Word
is never well rooted in our hearts, till it be sealed to us by the inward
Testimony of his Spirit, that Spirit which spoke by the Prophets pier^ing our
hearts, and persuading us, that what God commanded has been faithfully
delivered to us accordingly. And this promise we have, Isa. 59. 21. not his
Word only, but his Spirit also to seal it upon the soul of every true believer.
To this seal of the Spirit we owe all that acquiescency we have in Scripture.
For when we are therewith enlightened and enlivened, we do no more trust our
own, or others judgment, but are carried up above whatever is of man, and so
we resolve beyond all doubtings and fears, that Scripture is of God alone. Then
we look no more after proofs, or probabilities, but submit our reason and all
we have. to that authority which we dare not any longer to deny, or dispute.
For then we have an inward lively sense of God speaking in Scripture, and are
effectually drawn wittingly and willingly to submit to our Master in Heaven. So
we account (as we have reason) that only to be faith unfeigned, which God by
his Spirit seals upon our hearts, in our hearing and reading the Scriptures.

But this may seem strange doctrine to such as know nothing of these matters by
experience. Therefore I shall discourse it a little, that I may (if possible)
make it manifest even to reason.

The question between us and our Adversaries is about the Rule of faith. This
faith (i^ is granted) is such as leads us to our bliss. Hence we Protestants
conclude, that this faith cannot be wrought in us but by the Spirit of God,
which alone works all spiri^ual good. And this al^o, that the Spirit of God
works it (ordinarily at least) by the Word, as its most proper instrument. Will
any put us to prove this? surely they must have too much of the A^heist that
question it. For how was all the world converted to the faith of Christ? was it
not by the preaching of Christ's Word, and his Spirit opening their hearts to
receive it in the power of it? did not Christ and his Apostles open and expound
the Old Teslament to confirm the truths of the Gospel? Luke 24. 27. Acts 26.
22. and did not the Spirit work that faith whereby thousands believed that
truth?

But this is Sc^ipture, and it must not be allowed (if our Adversaries be
judges) to give evidence for us in this Case.

We shall therefore require them to show, what service Tradition did when
Christ and his Apostles p^eached the Gospel. We hope, they ( viz. Christ and
his Apostles) were assured some other way, that the Old Testament was the Word
of God. And if they made use of it to open the blind eyes; we may be excused
for saying, that God works faith in man by his Word, as the most usual
Instrument. And if this also be questioned, let Papists show, how faith, which
saves our souls, is, or can be wrought by their O^al, or Practical Tradition.
We know well, that children are apt enough to take up what they see, or hear
their Progen^tors do, or say before them. And so they commonly p ofess the
Religion (whatever it be) which they find ready to their hands. Yea, it is with
many, the great argument for their Religion, that their Forefathers were so
minded. But what is all this to the bringing us unto a sound believing on our
Lord Jesus Christ, to the saving of our souls? we believe Scripture to be the
Word of God, because it is the witness which God has given of himself. Nor do
we know any other way of receiving any Testimony, nor our Adversaries neither,
as we think. We know too, that a man may believe the Scriptures to be the Word
of God, and yet be far enough from that faith which will bring him to his
happiness. The Devil (it is said) cited and urged Scripture, at. 4. 6.
as Gods Word, though to a very bad purpose. Certainly, that faith which brings
men to their happiness, is somewhat more then a bare belief of Scripture-Truth.
It is indeed a receiving of Christ offered in the Promises, such as causes us
to account all but loss and dung for Christ. And for this purpose, God shines
in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6.

Now it almost amazeth us, to hear of such a faith wrought by Tradition. What!
has God no Word at all, or has he given no testimony nor witness of himself,
and his will, beside the testimony of men? what need is there of Scripture if
this strange doctrine take place? For (say our Adversaries) Tradition is the
only Rule of faith, and it has admirable strength by the supernatural
assistances of the Holy Ghost. Nay further, we must be all Fanatics, if we
hold to Scripture, and let go Tradition. But this needs no answer with those
who believe that God has a Word of his own to be a witness of his will. And
shall we be persuaded, that the Testimony of men is greater then that of God?
there may be (we grant, and question nor) some force of Tradition for the
descent of the main body of Christ's doctrine. But what is this to the purpose,
unless it be proved, that the Testimony of men is the power of God to
salvation, whiles by it, and not by his Word, he brings men to believe? Alas!
what faith do our Adversaries count upon!

Do they dream of being saved only by a certain persuasion, that the doctrine
of Christ is a truth, and no lie? If they do, let them keep their faith to
themselves. We count upon somewhat else, which (we are sure) can never be
effectually wrought in us b^t by the Word, and Spirit of God. And yet we do not
yield to them, that we can be no other way ascertained of the doctrine o^
Christ as true, then by Tradition. For we believe the Testimony of God speaking
to us in Scripture, and shall (I hope) while we live, account of it more then
Tradition, or any Testimony of men.

I shall now add somewhat as an Answer in general to all, and every one of the
former Exceptions, or any others of the same, or like kind.

We s^y, that there is one only Rule of Faith and manners, and that is the
Divine truth, or the Doctrine of Christ, which is summed up into these two
general heads, viz. Faith and Obed^ence, or faith and holiness, according to
what God has declared, as his mind and will. What he promises, we are to
believe; and when he commands we are to obey. And in both we fulfill the will
of God, and walk in the ways of eternal life. This Divine truth we never found
any where, but in the Scripture, and if our adversari^s have made any other
discovery, we think it their duty, to acquaint us with it. That the Son of God
was made man, died, and ro^e again, etc. for our redemption, all Christians
acknowledge; as also, that all who hope for salvation by Christ Jesus must deny
all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live soberly, ^ighteously and godly in
this present world. And this to know and do is eternal life, and if our
adversaries, or any before the^, ever knew this doctrine otherwise then by
Scripture, we are willing to lea^n. For their Traditions (as they signify
R^straditas) we have nothing to do with them. For the question put to us, is
only this, how we are, or can be ascertained of Scripture, that it has
delivered over to us the Doctrine of Christ? and this question drawn out into
many and several Queries, we have answered already, and now give this as an
answer to all of them or any the like. And this we do, not for the sake of such
as are more knowing, and better grounded in the faith, but only for the benefit
of poor souls, who through want and weakness of understanding, may be puzzled
with such questions.

Now to these we say again, that we hold nothing for a Rule of faith but the
Divine truth, which teaches the way of salvation by Christ. For Originals, or
translations of Scripture, we know there was a time, when there was neither of
them. And yet there was ever, since God had a Church upon earth, a revelation
of the doctrine of Christ. Hence this Doctrine must be the Rule, unless we will
say the people of God had no Rule of faith for two thousand years, and more.
For whatever God reveals as his mind, that we must heed to believe, and obey.
There may be a difference, and has been in the manner of Revelation, but the
Divine truth revealed was always the same, viz. Jesus Christ the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever. Heb. 13. 8. There is no other name given under
Heaven, whereby men can be saved, Act. 4. 12. This we believe, as all Gods
people have done from the beginning, and this doctrine of Christ (which we find
no where but in the holy Scriptures) is the Rule, and Law, and foundation of
our faith. So the Rule is, and has been always the same; though the way and
manner of revealing it has been various, according to the will and pleasure of
God, and that at first more ob^cure, and after more and more clear, till the
Sun of righteousness arose. And of this doctrine revealed no Christian (we
suppose) has ever made question. What need is there then of such captious
Queries about the Originals and Translations? or about the letter and sense of
Scripture? We are sure, that all Originals and Translations offer and hold
forth the doctrine of Christ, and whatever the letter be, this is the sense,
that Christ is the only salvation of God.

And is there indeed no way of assuring this to us, but Tradition, or the
Churches Testimony, as it has been given in all ages? This ^as has been said)
is to confirm the Testimony of God, by that of men. And if our Faith be
grounded only on the Translation. (English, or other) our foundation is the
knowledge, skill, and faithfulness of men, and they that cannot read (as some,
we are sure, cannot) must have no foundation at all. But he that has the truth
of God concerning the salvation of men by Jesus Christ, whether in the
Originals, or Translations, or whetesoever, has a sure foundation, viz. the
unchangeable counsel of God which never fails. As for the Translations, or the
Originals; though the truth of God contained in them be the Rule, yet neither
of them is any part of it. For they are only means to conveigh and deliver over
to men the Divine truth, which is the only Rule. And this we have (I say again)
in all Originals and Translations; and whatever senses have been made of
scripture by any, all agree unanimously in the doctrine of salvation by Christ.
What need we then be questioned about that, which no Christian ever made
Question of? If there be any such as doubt, whether men are saved by Christ
only, or whether they who are saved by him, must walk in love, and show their
love by keeping his Commandments, we desire to have nothing to do with them, as
not deserving the name of Christians. And whether we can be assured of this
doctrine in no other way then by Tradition, I shall now leave to be judged by
such as will impartially weigh what has been said.

I have now done arguing and answering, and shall only advise such, as are by
their profession Protestants, that they would seriously bethink themselves, how
they may hold fast the profession of their faith, without wavering, unto the
end.

The advice I offer them, is,

1. That they labor much, and earnestly to understand the mind and meaning of
God in his written Word. And good reason there is for it: Gods Word is his last
Will and Testament, by which alone we come to know, what Inheritance there is
laid up for us in Heaven, and what Legacies he has bequeathed us for our
livelihood and subsistence to all Eternity. Scripture is (as I may call it) the
Charter by which we have and hold all the Liberties and Privileges which are
freely conferred and bestowed on us, by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ; as
also, all the Laws and Orders we are bound to observe, as we are Citizens of
the New and Heavenly Jerusalem. What should Christians then do other, then read
over their Fathers Will, and study exactly in every particular what concerns
them in order to their everlasting happiness. The Letter, and the sense, the
History, and the mystery, every part and particle should be in our hea^ts and
heads, so as we may have them (as we say) at our fingers ends.

If any ask, How shall this be? I answer, That I intend no direction to those
who know better then my self, what is to be done for that end, nor yet for
those who are more knowing, or of better estates and abilities. For these have
many and great advantages to understand the Scriptures, by improving the
labors of those learned ones that have made it their work and business to
clear the more obscure and difficult passages in them. My only aim is, to help
those poor souls, who want the help of larger Commentaries, Annotations, or
Paraphrases, and c. and have no means to procure them, or if they had, are no
way capacitated to use them. I mean such as can hardly read our English Bibles,
and others (too many) who cannot do so much. For these, as well as others, are
concerned to enquire after the knowledge of Gods will in his Word, and these
are therefore to read it, or hear it read to them, in such a manner, as to
understand what they read and hear. And this (I am confident) they may be
enabled to do in some good measure, by following the directions ensuing.

1. Let them be first, and most in studying those Scriptures, which are
plainest and most easy to be understood; viz. The New Testament, wherein the
Evangelists and Apostles speak to them, as to children, easily and plainly, in
all points of says and manners, whiles they declare more familiarly, according
to the dispensation of Gospel-^mes, how all the P^ophecies and Promises of the
Old Testament concerning Christ, and his Kingdom, are accomplished and
fulfilled to a ^ittle, so as there is to be expected no other manifestation,
till his coming to (...) all ^he world in righteouiness. The Old Testament
(which shows what were the cispen^ations of Gods grace toward his people, till
Christ's coming in the fle^h) must also be read in its order, and heeded too, if
there were no other reason, for this, that we may be the more confirmed in the
faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, seeing he only from the beginning has been
promised and offered to mankind, as the only name under Heaven whereby we must
be saved. For this is easy to be seen by all, who will open their eyes, That
all the Histories of the Old Testament, the Books of Moses, and all the Laws
and Ordinances by his hand delivered to Israel, as also the Psalms, and all the
Prophets in every leaf and line of them, speak nothing but Christ, and the
great things of God to be accomplished in and by him, unto the end of all
things. They must therefore read both, comparing the one with the other, so as
to observe, how all that was foretold and promised, is fulfilled and performed
in these last days.

2ly. In reading both the Old and New Testament, let them take most notice of
those places and passages, which more plainly and fully lay before them the
main points and Articles of the Christian Faith, such as we may call the
Pillars of the Christian Church, built upon the only foundation Jesus Christ.
And those I shall reduce to these three or four Heads.

1. The Fall of all Mankind, with the woeful extreme corruption, and
depravation of our nature so perverted, as we are of our selves in every thing
contrary to God, and his will, Enemies to all that is good, and inclined to
nothing but evil.

2. The only all-sufficient remedy prepared for that malady, which was in it
self desperate, and past all cure, or hope, viz. The fullness of Christ mighty
to save, and the way of faith in applying him to our selves, for the pardon of
all sin by his satisfaction and merit, and the purging of it by the efficacy of
his grace and spirit.

3. The many and great obligations laid upon us by that grace, which has
appeared, and brings salvation; to deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts,
and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, so to answer
the condition of the Gospel Covenant in serving him, who is our only Redeemer.

4. The providence of God, disposing of his people in all their ways here
upon earth, together with the Crown of righteousness laid up for them in
Heaven, when they shall have run out their race, to receive the end of their
faith.

Now who can look into Scripture, and not see all these clearly presented to
his view? For what so plain to be read there, as Gods mercy through the merit
of our Lord Jesus Christ, for the recovery of fallen man out of sin and misery,
and the duty unto which he is obliged upon that account? What need any be
troubled at Scriptures difficulty? Can any read, or hear these read, as they
are there set down, and make the answer which the Eunuch made to Philip, Act.
8. 3.
asking him, If he understood what he read? And who is there that understands
and believes these things with all his heart, that shall not be saved in the
day of Christ? Here then (I say again) let them labor to be rooted and
grounded in the knowledge and belief of these things, which they may run and
read in Scripture, and till they are so stablished, let them look no further.
Yet is it not my mind, they should never look further. I would only have them
begin with these, and so lay a sure foundation, and then build upon it by
making a more strict inquiry into all, and every Particle of it, so as their
hearts may be comforted, being Col. 2. 2.
knit together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of
understanding, to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of the Father,
and of Christ. Or (as the same Apostle has it) To be filled with the Col. 1.
9. 10.
knowledge of his will in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding, that they
may walk worthy of his calling, to all pleasing, being fruit full in every good
work, and increasing in the knowledge of God.

3ly. Let them read, and read again, over and over as often as possible, though
they always meet with some things hard to be understood. For some, yea many
things in Scripture are such, and yet it is not upon that account no Rule of
Faith to the meanest Christian, and of the lowest form in Christ's School. Yea
we are justly confident to challange our Adversaries, and put them to name one
Article of our Faith, which the Scripture teaches not as plainly, as any man
can wish, or as they themselves can devise to speak it. Now these being so
easily understood at first sight without an Interpreter, our often reading them
(in so many places repeated) serves, as to help our memories, and confirm us
the more in our belief, so to quicken us the more to our duty, in walking more
answerably unto those great things of God. But there is somewhat more in it,
and this they shall know that will be at pains to make a trial, that often
reading of these is a singular help to understand those which are more hard to
be understood. For what is somewhere spoken more obscurely, is in other places
spoken more plainly; and the plai^ places, well remembered, will be as a
Commentary upon the more dark, and difficult. And for this purpose, let it be
considered, that Scripture is difficult to none so much, as to those, who are
greatest strangers to it, and seldom take a Bible into their hands to read in
it with any attention, whereas many (and I wish there were more) who can only
read it, and use such small helps, as God ministers to them, while they are
concionable in what is their duty, are able to prove, and justify the main
grounds, and articles of their faith out of the word of God against any that
question them. What if some things be difficult, so long as these which are
absolutely necessary be plain, and easy? all are not bound to the same degree,
and measure of knowledge, and this (I hope) no sober man will question, I am
now persuading those of the meanest, and lowest rank to study what (I say
again) they may sufficiently understand, though they have none to guide them.
And let them be still pressing forward and prying further, to discover as much,
as may be seen, and known. For why has God revealed his will, but that we
should acquaint our selves with it? Let the word Col. 3. 1.
of Christ dwell in you richly, etc. i. e. plentifully, abundantly. He means,
It should not lodge as a stranger for a night, but abide with them, and they to
give it rich and liberal entertainment, and make it their familiar, by frequent
reading, hearing, meditating upon, and conferring about the Scriptures. And
they who take this course, will soon find by experience, the improvement made
by it. The often reviewing of any thing (as all men know) is a great help to
see more in it, then ever we saw before. Now Scripture deserves (as I may say)
to be much and often look^ upon, if it were only for this, that it is the Word
of the great God. But there is somewhat else: Scripture resembles its Author in
this, that as he is unsearchable, never to be known by any of his Creatures, or
all of them, as he is in himself, so neither can it be sought into so far, as
there will not still remain something that requires a further search. He that
digs the deepest into this Mine, shall ever find new veins, such as were never
discovered before; yea, and when we have made the utmost search, the wisest of
us must leave the world, signing some Texts with a Non l^quet; In these we
could never be resolved. Men have been in the discoveries of Natures mysteries
ever since the Creation, and yet there is much that needs a further enquiry,
yea somewhat (if not very much) that will never (I doubt) be found out by any.
But however it be in Nature; we may reasonably conceive, that in supernatural
Revelations, we can never stretch our selves so far, as to reach the utmost.
All that is necessary to be known in order to our salvation, is easy enough to
such as are willing to understand, and therefore ignorance can be no excuse.
But all things in Scripture are not of the like necessity, and therefore we may
think (I hope) without prejudice, that as Gods Spirit has written some things
more darkly to exercise our diligence, so he has written some also to humble
us, and make us know our selves. And what of all this? Scripture is still a
plain and complete Rule, fit for any that will make use of it, even such as can
only read it, and their reading it will help them to understand enough, if they
be serious, and attentive in it, though I would have them neglect no other
means offered them, viz. Meditation, Conference, and c. And unto all, let them
add servent Prayer, never opening the Bible without putting up to God that
which was David's great request, Psalm. 119. 18. Lord open thou mine eyes, that I
may behold wondrous things out of thy Law.

4ly. Let them not bring their own sense to Scripture, but fetch the sense of
it from out of it self, because (as one says) the Divine Scripture contains
the whole and firm Rule of Faith, and so its authority must sway us to take up
that which it I yes down, and nothing else. They take a wrong coarse therefore,
who first entertain, and harbor a conceit, or opinion of their own, upon some
base or by-respects, and then search, and rack, and torture Scripture, to make
it speak what they have a mind to, which is in a manner to make God a liar, in
wresting his Word to justify and avouch the groundless conceits and fancies of
men's deceived hearts. The only right way to know the sense and meaning of
Scripture in any doubtful Case, is to bring hearts as pure as white paper, apt
to receive, and rest in the determinations of it, whatever they be, though
never so contrary to our designs.

Q^. But what shall we do to know the true and right determination, as
Scripture gives it, especially when many, as knowing as our selves, cannot
agree about it?

Sol. 1. It is altogether impossible for some men to understand aright the mind
of God in Scripture, because they enquire after it, with a mind resolved to
hold what they have once taken up, whatever it be. Such are all that are wise
in their own eyes, and wilful in their own ways, wedded to their wills, and
abandoned to their filthy and fleshly Interests. Such as these are constant and
ordinary in works and ways of ungodliness and unrighteousness, notwithstanding
Scripture-commands are so expressly and clearly against them. What can be more
plain, then the 6th. 7th. 8th. and 9th. Commandments, and yet how many make a
constant trade (as I may say) of uncleaness and cruelty, oppression, deceit and
falsehood? These might easily know Gods mind, if they had a mind to it. But they
are Rebels against the light, resolved to serve their lusts, and have their
wills, whatever God has said to the contrary. And till these come to be of
another mind, I am sure, they can never understand the mind of God in his Word,
as he intended it.

2. To be resolved aright in all practical Questions and Cases, we must first
resolve to renounce and abandon our own wills and affections, our lusts and
interests, as the Apostles advise, Jac. 1. 22. 1 Pet. 2.1. No paper that's
besmeared, or blotted, can be good to write upon: The unlearned and unstable
(such as all are, who are swayed by their own lusts) will pervert all Scripture
to their own destruction, as the Apostle has it, 2 Pet. 3. 16.

Q^. But what must there be?

Sol. An honest upright heart, disposed and resolved to do all the wills of
God, unto whose obedience it is sabdued by the power of his grace and spirit.
New born babes desire Pet. 2. 2. ^ac. 1. 18.
to feed on that which bred them: Now by the word of Truth they were begotten,
and that the Apostle Peter calls milk, exhorting Christians, (...), ^t ne
insi^ida sit ^mpl citas, ^c p^o in^clligentia, ^alitiosa ^asrities ^repat.
Calvin in ^c.
after they are new born, to desire it, as little Infants do milk, to grow
thereby. And lest they might think he meant, they should be always children,
he calls it * reasonable sincere milk, to show, they should be in understanding
men, as well as in malice children. An honest heart can never miss the mark,
because it aims at nothing but to know, and do the will of God: For such a one
has the promise of God for his security. The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him, and Psalm. 25. 14.
he will show them his Covenant: And verse. 12. Him shall he teach in the way
that he shall choose. Let none therefore that are truly honest, and sound at
heart, fear or doubt lest they should mistake their way, so long as God
undertakes to be their guide. The Word is, as God himself, a light, and often
Psalm 19. 7, 8.
so called; and how can he go astray, that has God and his Word to lead him?
Yea, the entrance of thy words Psalm. 119, 130.
is light, it gives understanding unto the simple, says the Psalmist Even the
veriest Idiots may here learn at first sight, what the wilest of the world
without grace will never attain unto. And what if such poor souls should never
understand all Scripture-Passages, so as to satisfy themselves about the true
sense and meaning of them! Surely there is no hutt, nor hazard, so long as they
are sure to be taught of God in all the concernments of their souls.

To close up this; Read (I say) with an intention and resolution to practice
all that appears to be duty, and remember well those words of our Savior, Joh.
7. 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be
of God. For to Mat. 13. 12.
him that has, ( i. e. that improves what he has) shall more be given, and he
shall have abundance. And thus (as one says) they want no gists for
understanding the Text, that have, and use the Text it self, in that all
Exposition is to be fetched out of it.

I shall add to the foregoing Direction this one word, viz. That they who are
honest, be also humble, because to such only is the promise of grace made, Jac.
4. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 5. The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he
teach his way, Psalm. 25. 9. He that is wise in his own conceit, cannot hope to
be wiser through the teachings of the Spirit, because God resists the proud,
or he scorneth the scorn^rs. He is not (...). 3 34
with them, but against them, and is so far from giving them more, as he takes
away from them even that which they have.

5ly. Let their delight be in Gods Word, to meditate and muse often and
seriously upon what they have read and heard. This was David's constant
practice, as is to be seen by his professing it so often in the Psalms. And
Psalm. 1. 2. he gives it, as the character of a Blessed man, and one that is
truly godly. Whoever delights in any thing, cannot but often think of it, yea,
and take any occasion that is offered, to speak of it, because his heart is full
of it. And this often thinking, and speaking of the Word, causes us both to
understand it, and also to be more affected with it. Reading, and hearing, is
as taking in meat; Meditation is as concoction and digestion, without which we
shall never grow, or gather strength. There are many that read the Scripture,
and can discourse of it, as being no strangers to it; and yet they are great
strangers to it all the while. And why? Because it is not in their hearts, to
love and delight in it, as David did. They have a conceit of it, as somewhat
worthy of some discourse now and then, when they have little else to do, or
when company, or some accident gives them an occasion. But a professed
Christian should be as David, so affected always, as to say, O how love I thy
law! It is my meditation Psalm. 119. 97. Psalm. 119. 11.
all the day. And again; Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not
sin against thee. So the Word, thus hid, and laid up in the heart, would be at
home, always at hand to answer those bad neighbors that will be always about
our doors, to creep in, whenever there is an opportunity, yea and thrust them
out, when they are urgent, as troublesome, unwelcom guests, and shut the door
upon them. So much is clearly implied in the place next abovecited. The Word in
the heart, as in a place of constant residence, is a Barricado against all the
assaults and insinuations of sin, and Satan; and our Savior gave a sufficient
proof and experiment of it, when he was tempted of the Devil, Mat. 4. Search
the Word therefore, so as to get it into thy heart, that it may lodge there, to
be as a guard about thee, and whoever reads, or hears it with any other
intention, I dare warrant him, shall never thrive in his soul by it. He may
perhaps know much of the letter, and sense also, and be able to argue from it,
so as to puzzle others about some difficult passages in it, but will never know
any thing of it, so as he ought to know. For God has given us his Word, as a
choice Jewel, worthy of the best Cabinet we can find to lay it in, viz. The
secret of our hearts, or the inmost closet of our souls. Our outward senses,
our tongues, our understandings, our memories will give no entertainment to
such a guest as the Word, which says as God himself, Give me thy heart,
there is nothing else will cont nt me. There Is never a room besides in our
houses, where the Devil has not a through-fare: Only the heart filled and
fenced with the Word laid up in it, is an impregnable Fort, which Satan may
assault, but can never enter.

6ly. Let them study the Scriptures, and their own hearts together, so as to
observe, how they suit one with the other, and how they clash, or accord
together. Scripture is (we say) the only Rule, not of faith only, but of
manners also, and by it alone we are to examine and try all the workings of our
whole man, bodies and souls, our thoughts and fancies, our affections,
purposes, and resolutions; whatever we design, or take in hand, all must be
done by Rule, and there is no other Rule appointed of God for the regulating of
our ways and walkings, but his written Word. Let us then do as Workmen, that
have their Square, or some other Rule always by them, and ever and anon are
measuring and examining how their work answers, and agrees with it. Now our
work; in order to our Eternity, being of infinitely more consequence, we have
more need to be always measuring, that we go not beyond, or beside the line.
This do therefore when you read, and study Scripture, viz. Apply it to the
frame of your spirits, and the course of your lives, by a serious questioning
your consciences, as in the presence of God, to this purpose, or somewhat like,
viz. Did I this or that according to this Rule? Did I consult God, and his
Word, when I undertook such a business? Is the way I am now in, answerable to
what God has commanded? Do not I in such a design or undertaking, clash with
some Commandment or other? O! that so many loose and vicious persons as are now
adays, would be persuaded to sit down, and seriously question themselves,
whether their uncleanness, excess, revellings and riotings, cursed O^ths and
blasphemies, and many other horrid Impieties, be agreeable to the Rule of Gods
Word! But I must let them alone, and leave them till the time come, when
they will be made to know, that Gods Word is such a Rule, as will overruled, yea
and run them down so as they shall never rise more to contradict it, as now
they do. For such as are more civil and sober; so as to read the Scripture
sometimes (which those other likely seldom or never do) I heartily wish, they
will henceforward observe, what has been said before, and lay their lives to
the Rule and Line, which (I hope) they will do, if they heartily believe the
word of God to be that Law, by which they and all mankind shall one day be
judged, and tried. How e^se can they hope to stand, and abide the trial? And
when shall they do this work of searching and trying their hearts and ways, if
they set not about it now, when they have nothinh else to do, but to frame
their works, and doings unto that which God has laid out to lead, and guide
them to their happiness?

7ly. Let them in reading observe, and attend chiefly those things, which are
often inculcated, and most insisted upon in Scripture. If any shall ask why, I
answer, Because those (to be sure) are matters of greatest concernment. It Is a
great vanity (specially in men of weak parts, and small gifts) to pry, and pore
much (as some will do) upon such passages, as have difficulty enough in them to
poze, and puzzle the wisest. And their vanity (to say no worse) is the more,
because those difficult passages have, for the most part, nothing in them but
what we may be safely ignorant of. And yet some things of greatest concernment
may be more obscurely in some places delivered, But still I affirm confidently,
they are otherwhere expressed more fully, and plainly, so as no man of common
sense can doubt or make any question about them.

And if any shall object against what I have said, that we may be safely
ignorant of some things declared in Scripture, I answer, That in this I am (if
I mistake not) of the same mind with all Divines in the world, who hold some
things to be of the foundation, so as they are necessary to be known, and
believed in order to salvation, and others only superstructive, such as
ignorance or error about them, is not in it self damnable. Who can rationally
suppose, that '^is of the same consequence, to know every passage of
Scripture-History, as to know, and believe that Jesus Christ died for our Sins
and rose again for our Justication? No question the Lord (who never did any
thing in vain) would never have revealed, and recorded any the smallest matter,
but that there was a cause. But thereupon 'twill never follow, that all things
revealed do alike concern us. To instance; That the dead shall rise again, and
come to Judgment, is (as I take it) a fundamental Article of our Faith: But
that the dead in Christ shall rise first, before they, who shall be found alive
at the last day, shall 1. These. 4.
be changed, is not (I think) of so much consequence, though this also is a
truth of Divine Revelation, and therefore to be believed. If the dead be not
raised, our faith is vain. 1. Cor. 15. But so long as we believe the
Resurrection, I suppose, we may be saved, though we should not know the order
that will be in raising the dead, and changing them who will be then alive. All
this however must be so understood and interpreted, as I intend it, not to
allow, or countenance any wilful neglect, or affected ignorance of any
Scripture-Truths, but only to salve the Consciences of such, as cannot after
all their most careful enquiry, come to know all the mind of God in every
particular, as Scripture has it. Can any man reasonably think, we are bound to
mind, and remember every descent in all the Genealogies, as we are to have in
mind the Birth, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ?
who knows not the d^fference, that has be among the most learned, and still
is, in reconciling the Genealogy of our Savior, as it is with some difference
recorded in two Evangelists? And are there not (think we) many in Heaven, who
never much studied Christ's Pedigree, after the flesh? To return therefore where
we left; I say again, observe those things especially, which are most insisted
on, because those are of most concernment, and the Holy Ghost often repeats
them for this reason, that we may the better mind, and remember them. We know,
and believe, that in some one or more Books of Scripture there is revealed so
much of Gods mind and will, as is necessary to be known in order to Salvation.
And yet it pleased the Lord to give us his mind in other Books of Scripture,
about the same things, and many others besides, that the joint consent of many
might the more confirm our faith, and we might in that which so much concerns
our Souls, have full measure pressed down, and running over. Witness the
Evangelists all recording the History of our Savior with some variety, though
no contradiction in the least. As also Paul's Epistles so often repeating the
doctrine of Salvation by Christ alone, through faith in his blood, and the
duties of all Christians in all their Relations. Now (I say again) observe, and
attend those things, as being of greatest concernment, and others also in their
order; For in so doing, we shall be sure to know so much as we need to do.

In a word; Read attentively, and that as often as may be, with all humility,
and an earnest sincere desire to know the will of God in order to your doing
it, always begging the assistance of his grace and spirit, who alone teaches
us to (...). Then will your own experience convince you, against all the
reasonings of corrupt minds, that there is a clear light in Scripture, such as
may easily be seen of all, whose eyes the God of this World has not blinded,
lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them.

3. Not to rest themselves satisfied in a notional knowledge of (...)
re-truths, (...) to labor for, and never leave till they come to that which is
practical and experimental. For then men are indeed grounded and established in
the truth, when they have tasted of it so, as to know it by experience. Then
they believe Scripture to be the Divine truth, as a man believes snow to be
white, because he sees it, or honey to be sweet, because he has tasted of it.
Labor (I say) to set your [ Probatum cst] to every Gospel Truth, that you may
be able to say out of your own experience, this is the truth of Christ, and
cannot be otherwise. Then you may reason as that woman did, Joh. 4. 29. Come
see a man that has told me all things that ever I did; Is not this the Christ?
So you may say, here is doctrine that has discovered me, as nothing else could
have done. Can this be any other then the Word of God? there is nothing in it,
but what I am certainly assured of, by what I know, and have found, and felt in
my self. Surely God who is infinitely good, could never produce out of himself,
such an unclean thing, as I am by nature. And that I am now altogether
corrupted so, as in me dwells no good thing, I know by experience. Hence I
cannot in the least question, what Scripture has revealed concerning the fall
of man from that estate of holiness wherein God first made him. For I am sure
of it, because I find my natural and sinful condition discovered to me in
Scripture, just as I have felt in my self, and so laid open as I could never
express it, yea or have imagined it. And so is all that I read of the woman's
seed [ Christ] and all the graces of Christ revealed in me, as that my heart is
now the counterpart (as it were) of that act of pardon drawn with Gods own
hand, and recorded in the Scriptures of truth. For the ways of Gods
Commandments; I now find they are not grievous, but all pleasant, easy, and
plain, as scripture makes them. I care no^ for the reasonings of men, so long
as I know the truths of God by what I find and feel in my self.

And for a motive take this, viz. Thou can never be well rooted in the faith
otherwise. Let the head be never so full fraught with knowledge, so long as the
heart is not seasoned with grace, a man is capable of being overcome by such
arguments, as will be suggested from worldly and sleshly Interests. He that
loves any thing better then Christ, what ever be his present profession, or
resolution, may be dissuaded from following him, when he comes to tempted with
fears, or favors from the world. Only he who has learnt Christ as the truth
is in him, to put off the old, and put on the new man is impregnable in all
assaults, having the root of the matter in him, such as will never quail, or
die right away. Many a Demas has fallen off, having loved this present world,
and no arguments will make a man invincible to all temptations, but an
unfeigned says that is always attended with a good conscience. This, and
nothing else can give a man Sure-footing in his Christianity. There is many a
great Scholar, who can dispute the truth against all gainsayers, and never be
moved, or shaken, because he is thoroughly studied in the grounds of it, and
understands the deceits and fallacies of all who are otherwise minded. But so
long as his heart is not right with God, he is but as a tree with a great top,
that may soon be turned up by the roots, if there come a great tempest or blast
of temptation from worldly Interest, either to fright or flatter him out of his
Religion. Hence I say again, never think your selves well grounded in your
Christianity, t^ll you have studied the Scriptures, and your own hearts
together, and found by experience that you are transformed by the renewing of
your minds into that doctrine which is therein delivered to you.

3. And when you have found out the Divine truth in Scripture, by your
experimental feeling of the grace and power in it, labor to hold it fast, and
by no means let it go. Buy the truth, and sell it not; rov. 23. 3. ^d. 3.
but contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the Saints. If any now
question, how this is to be done? my advice is; 1 To order all your ways and
doings exactly according as you find the Rule of them laid down in Scripture.
For it is not the profession, or form, but the power of godliness (as I said
before) that will will keep you steadfast unto the end. Now Looseness and
Carelessness in your ways and walkings will expose you to temptations, and not
only so, but they will also loosen and unrivet your souls from cleaving so
close to the truth, as you have formerly done. You will find by woeful
experience, that any indulgence to worldly Interests, and fleshly lusts, will
much weaken your wonted affections to the truths of Christ, and if there be a
continuance of that indulgence, it will eat out all the life and heart of your
Religion, so as you will never suffer, or venture much for that which you love
no better. So long as your hearts are kept warm in the love of the truth, so
long only you are steadfast, and unmovable in the profession of it. There are
many Protestants (so called) who know little (the more pity) of what they
profess. And there are too many who (whatever they profess, or know) are
vicious and abominable in their lives and conversations. For these, we must
leave them to the mercy of God, in hope, that yet their eyes may be opened, and
their hearts turned. But we cannot reasonably expect, that such should be
constant in their profession, if once they meet with a strong temptation. Alas!
how should they, who know, and love the truth no better? Yea, though men may
persuade themselves and others in a calm, what courage and resolution they
have, and will be ready to show in a storm, yet if there be not sincerity and
real mortification of all lusts constantly endeavored and exercised, their
hearts will deceive them, when they are most confident of them. Any prevailing
Interest in a Soul is as a strong biass in a boule. A man may aim to cast the
boule so, as it shall run in a right line to the mark, but the biass will never
suffer it to run, as is intended. And so it will prove by every one whose heart
has a biass in it. For it will turn aside (ere it come half way home) whither
its Interest carries it. Sirs, it is no small matter to abide by a man's
profession and Religion, when he is put to it by any great trial, whether of
persecution, or promotion. Nay how can it be at all, unless the Interest of
Christ, and the allurements of his love are such, as will counterpoyse all that
is laid into the balance against them? Will any man in cool blood venture life
and all, unless there be somewhat of far more worth to countervaile the loss?
this therefore must be in order to our stedfastness in the faith, viz. A
constant exercise of practical godliness for keeping up a good understanding
and correspondence between God and our Souls, that we may be so warmed with
continual influences from Heaven, as to say with the Apostle, 2. Cor. 5. 14.
That the love of Christ constrains us. Such, and so great are the
manifestations which he has made of himself, and his love to our Souls, as we
can never be thankful as we ought, but in a full and absolute resignation of
our selves, and all we have to his service and glory.

2. I advise yet far^her; that in our greatest inlargements we walk humbly with
God, as knowing that his power alone is all the strength whereby we are enabled
to stand. Peter's pre^umptuous confidence in his own strength, wrought nothing
but repentance for his sainting in an evil day. By his own strength shall 1.
Sam^ 9.
no man prevail. And therefore the Apostle exhorts, to be strong in the Lord,
and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6. 10. and to put on the whole armor of
God that we may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil, v, II. It is
God alone that keeps the feet of his Saints, 1 Samuel 2. 9.

There need no motives (I hope) to persuade. However consider,

1. What we have believed. Not cunningly devised fables, but a sure Word of
Prophecy, such as the Apostle Pet. 1. 9.
seems to prefer (if the comparative be senc'd according to the letter) before
visions and immediate Revelations: Or he might so call them, because the
Prophecies might be more sure to the godly Jews through long use and
acquaintance. We know the Jews at Berea examined Paul's doctrine by the
Scriptures, and are not taxed, but commended for it. And if an Angel from
heaven should preach any other doctrine, then what we have in Scripture, we
have no reason to believe it. Those blessed Spirits indeed never did it, nor
ever will. But we make the supposition, which the Apostle does, Gal. 1. for the
more Emphasis. For Scripture-truths, they are of long standing, and approved by
their abiding the test and trial of so many ages. Christ and his Apostles made
the old Testament the Standard of their doctrine, and appealed to it for the
proof of all they preached to the people. Moses and the Prophets are more to be
heeded, then if a man rose from the dead, Luke 16. 31. And they who hear not
the one, will never regard the other, if our Savior said true. Was it ever
heard that any doctrine so much as pretended to Scriptures antiquity? Or is it
possible that any thing but certain truth should outstand the siftings and
winnowings of so many ages, specially when it has had so many professed
enemies? Shall we now call in question what was never questioned before? Have
not all Christians (who deserved that name) unanimously agreed in believing the
faith and truth delivered in Scripture? or do Protestants now believe any thing
that was not believed by all Saints ever since any part of Scripture was
penned? we believe on the Son of God who gave himself a ransom for all. And
this Doctrine we have in Mos^s, who was the first penman of Scripture, and (as
our Savior says) Joh. 5. 46
wrote of him. Must we now call in question all that Moses, and the Prophets,
and the Apostles have written, yea, and cry it down as no Rule of faith? then
farewell all our Christianity, and the Christian Religion at once. For where
have we learnt all the mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh,
justified in the spirit, etc. 1 Timothy 3. fin. Who, or what has given us to
know, what have been all the Transactions of God with the sons of men, in order
to eternal life from the beginning? Will our Adversaries say roundly once for
all, that the doctrine of Scripture is not the doctrine of Christ? Let them
speak out, if they have a mind to say so, and then we know what to answer them.
But if they will not avow this, (as indeed they have not yet in plain terms) we
have this to say for our selves, that we believe, what they deny not to be the
truth of God, and the doctrine of Christ. That we cannot be assured of this
otherwise then by Tradition, has been already answered, and no more needs to
be said about it. For men's Tradition, we know it will serve (nothing better) to
usher in and establish men's Inventions. But shall we renounce our own Reason so
far, as to appeal to men (who are all liars) for the truth of what is spoken by
him that cannot lie? Oh! consider and remember, that in believing Scripture, we
believe not Prophecies, or Prodigies, not heard of till yesterday. No; we
believe the everlasting Gospel, and the good old way to rest and peace. The
very doctrine of practical godliness, and moral righteousness, taught us in
Scripture, is such as we cannot but assent unto it, as agreeing with, and
approved by our natural light, so as we must forfeit out Reason, ere we can be
persuaded to question Scriptures authority. Read but the Prophets, and the
Psalms, and the Proverbs, and Paul's Epistles, or other parts of Scripture, and
consider the precepts of sobriety, temperance, righteousness, justice and
truth, which are there so many; and will not our consciences say, these are all
of God, and we know they are Divine by the natural light which is in us? Who
could have cleared up the inbred notions and impressions that are upon all men's
hearts, so as they are cleared in Scripture, but that light in which alone we
see light? for the mystery of Godliness; we know it is altogether of
supernatural Divine Revelation, and being such, what need is there, or can
there be of any men's or Churches authority to confirm it? To say no more, let
Reason judge and determine, whether the faith of men can authoritatively
confirm the faith of God. And yet it must, if we cannot be ascertained of the
one without the other; yea, and our faith in Gods testimony must be resolved
into the testimony of men, as yielding to us the greatest certainty, beyond all
doubt or question. Consider, I say, what we have believed, viz. the ancient,
yea, eternal Word of the everliving God, and this Word always one and the same
as God is, only at sundry times, and in diverse manners, it was spoken to the
Fathers, by the Prophets, and in these last times to us by the Son himself, and
such as he has sent.

2. Consider, that in believing the testimony of God in his written Word, we
believe and receive the faith of our Forefathers, who suffered for their close
adhering to Scriptures doctrine, and could not be parted from it, but rather
chose to part with their lives for it. And herein they approved themselves the
genuine and kindly issue of all the ancient Martyrs, who loved not their lives
unto the death for the testimony of Jesus. We should too much wrong our selves,
and the cause of Christian Religion to yield that, which our Adversaries will
never be able by dint of argument, to force from us, viz. That we are upstarts,
newly s^rung out of the ashes of our late Reformers. They were (as we call
them) Reformers, that repaired the desolations which had been made in many
ages, and did not coin a new faith never before heard of. We are not
Calvinists, or Lutherans, (though so miscalled by some) but Christians, as
Luther, Calvin, and others were in the last age. And they and all others of the
same profession, stood to maintain their doctrine, as the faith of Forefathers,
all along from the beginning of the Gospel. And our Adversaries are not
ignorant, that this has been held and sufficiently made good by the vote and
testimony of the most ancient Fathers, unto whom our Learned have appealed as
unto Judges in this Cause. But our faith is not in the Fathers never so ancient
or learned, but in our Lord Jesus Christ, whom we have learnt to count and call
our Father and Master, as being the only Lawgiver. Only we appeal to the
Fathers thus far, as to produce them for our witnesses, and know we have reason
to allege their testimony, because they owned the same doctrine of Christ,
which we now do. And though the appellation of Protestants was occasioned in
the last age by the Protestation made against the Interim, yet these were but
successors to those, who had for many ages before protested against the
additions and inventions of men, besides the Rule of faith. We can therefore
plead Antiquity and Succession, as well as others, and better too, unless they
could prove better then they have done yet, that their Faith is the same that
was delivered by the Apostles. For this is it which we build our faith upon,
and by this are we confirmed in it, viz. That we profess the same truths, which
the Apostles received from Christ, and delivered unto the first Christian
Churches. Hence we say, when we are told, that the Tenets of our Adversaries
(wherein they differ from us) have been received for many ages, that they are
not so old as the Apostles. Besides we know, that custom besides or Cypr. Ep.
74. Tert. de veland. virg. c. I.
against truth, is but an old error: And whatso^ver is against truth, is an
Heresy, though never so old: Truth is older then error, and good was before
any evil. And so we consent, that what was first, was best. But that our
Adversaries Tenets are such, we deny, and say, they were not from the
beginning, though some of them were taken up early enough, and too soon, as (we
know) it was not long ere sin got into the world, and yet it was after God had
made men righteous. Our Savior, Matthew. 5. corrects many things that had been
long received, and went for current, by opposing his Word against them, [ But I
say unto you] It is abundantly enough to justify us in what we hold, that we
find our faith in Scripture, and this our Adversaries know very well, and
therefore we need not marvel, that they are so busy in raising doubts and
questions about its Divine authority. For let us once let Scripture go (as some
would have us) our faith is gone also. Were it not for Scripture, I know
nothing to hinder, why every man may not coin a faith to himself, and say it
is the doctrine of Christ. Yea, deny Christ and all Christianity. For what have
we to prove it besides the Scripture? or how can we disprove any damnable
doctrines and devices of men without it? O! let us never think of turning from
the good old way, wherein we follow all those Champions, whom nothing could
persuade to part with it.

3. Consider what, and how much we loose, if we hold not fast this ground of
our confidence steadfast unto the end. It is not for nothing, that our
adversaries press and urge us so much this way. They tell us plainly, that let
go this and all is gone. And they say truly in it. For our faith has no Sure
footing, if Scriptures authority be such as they would make it. We have
separated from them for many years past, and the true reason and ground of our
separation was, that they held and practiced so many things contrary to
Scripture, and would not yield to lay them aside. Hereupon we resolved to
communicate no longer with them, because we could not admit what we judged
sinful, as being against, or beside that which we count the only Rule.

This (I say) has been and still is the quarrel between us; For if it be
observed, in our differences with them, we still are on the negative part. And
why so? Surely, because our differences are about such things as they hold
besides and against Scripture. For in these we are bound to deny what they
affirm. I say again bound, sub poena of loosing all our profession, so far as
we are Protestants in opposition to Papists. And this let any man that is sober
and intelligent judge of. For let Oral and Practical Tradition (as they call
it) be the only Rule of faith, what is become of Scripture? may I not justly
ask, whether it be something, or a mere empty nothing? what can it be (at best)
more then a Cipher, which (we know) in numbering stands for nothing, unless a
figure be put to it? Tradition (say they) is that, and that only, which can
ascertain us, that this is the very doctrine of Christ which we believe. And
then what is Scripture more then a dead letter? and Tradition is it which gives
Spirit and life to it. And where are we then? even where our adversaries would
have us to be. Then we must go to the Church for our faith, and take that for
the truth, which has been delivered down for many ages whatever it be, right
or wrong. The Church (say they) cannot err. And so say we. But they, and we
are not agreed for all this. For they mean no other Church, then their own, and
this (say they) has the true faith which from the Apostles was delivered at
first, and has been conveyed down succesfively in all ages, and it now rests
only among Roman Catholics. God has and ever had (say we) a Church, or
society of men on earth, who did not, indeed could not (because of Gods
promise) err in any thing necessary to to be known and believed in order to
salvation. But we cannot admit their Church, and this to be all one. God has
made a promise to his Church that he will be with it to the end of the world,
and this Church shall be led into all necessary saving truths. But let our
adversaries show us (if they can) one promise of God made to any generation of
men after the flesh, such as was made to Abraham's seed, and was made good to
them until the promised seed came. Israel so long continued to be Gods people,
because of his promise. But God has no one people of one stock and kindred
ever since, unto which he has made any such promise. For many, who were once a
people to God, afterward became none, and they who yet are none, are in a
capacity to be Gods people, and shall be such, when he pleases to call them.
Hence we count nothing of any arguments drawn from personal and lineal
succession, but look only after succession in doctrine. And this we have reason
to do, seeing the Heavenly inheritance is entayled only upon those who know,
and obey the truth. And where is this truth, if not in Scripture? and if we
once let go Scriptures verdict in the Cause, must we not stand, or fall
according to the sentence of the Church? and what Church can pretend to more
then the Church of Rome will pretend unto? but let Scripture be judge in the
Case, and it will soon appear, that all is but a vain and empty pretense. And
why should we not appeal to it alone, and leave it to umpire the differences?
Our adversaries never durst say as yet (for ought I have known) that it is not
the Word of God, though some of them have spoken most unworthily of it, and
reproached it so, as none would (I think) do, that seriously believed it to be
indeed the Word of God. However they say not in terms, that it is not the Word
of God, though that will be the consequence of what they say, and that (we
think) unavoidable, if all things be duly considered. Surely to us it must be
so. For if it has no credit as to us, without a Certificate under the hands of
men, it deserves no credit at all (such as we must give to it) as a Rule of
faith, and the ground work of all our hopes. And this is rational, because then
we need not go to Scripture, since there is somewhat else that is more to be
credited, then it. For no man that is reasonable can be ignorant, that what
makes any thing to be what it is, must be more such, if not formally, yet
virtually, or eminently. And our adversaries take it so, and therefore say
plainly, that Scripture for many reasons is no competent Rule of faith, but
Tradition does the work that is needful to be done, and is a Rule in every
respect complete.

Now let this be granted, and then look about, and see what follows. They say
and think, (though not truly) that they have Tradition by the forepart, viz.
that all the first ages of the Christian Church held as they do now. And for
the hinder end, they h^ve it fast enough, as we all know. For we must grant,
what we cannot (without impudence) deny, (...) of these parts of the (...)
ward, for many of the latter ages. And we do not wonder at it, because it is no
more then what Scripture has foretold. And now if Scripture be thus laid by,
what will become of all that faith which we have, other then what Papists have?
or how can we refuse whatever they shall impose by their Tradition? And shall
it be ever said, that we have made a separation so long, and now turn back
again upon no other ground then this, viz. that Tradition is the Rule of Faith,
and Scripture is every way unfit for such a work? what is this, but to cast
dirt in the faces of all that went before us, and hazarded all to vindicate and
ob^ain that liberty, which the written Word, so long suppressed, has since had
amongst us? For this was the rise and root of all the disorders and distempers
that ever have been since the Apostles times unto this day, viz. that men have
not contented themselves with a Rule of Gods making, but (in the pride of their
hearts) would frame Laws unto themselves. And this began in the Apostles times,
by the workings of Satan in the false Apostles, who would then keep up the
ancient Laws of God (intended only till the time of Reformation) when according
to his will they ought to be laid aside. This (I say) we may justly suspect to
have given the first occasion to others afterward of devising many things
besides the only Rule. And so it is come to pass by many degrees at last, that
Scripture is no Rule at all, if some men may be credited in what they say.

And now let us consider what we have been adoing for an hundred years and
more. Have we all this while believed in vain? And have all those who are gone
to another world before our eyes, died without hope? What! have we been in a
sweet dream so long, and could never be awakened till now? Are we now to seek
of a Rule of faith? Indeed we have then believed to small purpose, and so have
many others whom we have hitherto thought to be with the Lord. What! have we
never received any fruits of the Spirit, such as have been a seal to the truths
of the written Word, so as we can say, we know what and whom we have believed?
were our eyes never opened, nor our hearts ever humbled or melted? If they have
been, then consider, what doctrine has been preached to us, and by what means
we came to be what we are. And have we not enough for all intents and purposes?
we have Jesus Christ evidently set forth to us in Scripture, and no where else.
And have we need of any other Savior? we have the way of holiness in
Scripture, as no where else, and can we go to heaven in any other way? Are we
in danger of perishing by believing in Christ alone? or will the denial of our
selves, and all ungodliness and worldly lusts (as Scripture commands, and
requires) hazard our souls? Nay will not faith in Christ alone, such faith (I
mean) as works by love, save us? then what will become of me, and others who
never yet learnt any other way of salvation, and resolve (through Gods help and
grace) never to think of any other?

But I shall say no more, when I have related one story. Darbishire ( Benners
kinsman) said to Hawks (the Martyr) You will have nothing, but your pretty
Gods Book. No, (said Hawks) and is not that enough for my salvation? Yes,
(said the other) but not for your instruction. Then (said Hawks) God send me
the salvation, and take you the instruction. And of his mind am I, and many
others too, I hope. If Scripture be not sufficient to show and assure us, what
we are to believe and do in order to our salvation, (as some would persuade us)
we are resolved, however to leave our souls to Gods free mercy, as it is
revealed therein, and leave others, that have a mind, to take all the
Instruction, that is to be had by Tradition.

FINIS.
AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
THE late dreadful Fire, kindled by our God-provoking sins and abominations,
transcending all our Forefathers, (after so many miracles of mercies and
deliverances) within three days space turned no less than 88 Pari^es and
P^ish-Churches, with the Cathed^al Church of the late great and glorious City
of London, into heaps of ashes and rubbish, to the just horror and amazement of
all Spectators of their ^mes and ruins; which as it proved extremely
prejudicial and destructive to most Companies of the City, yet none of them
received so grand losses and damages by that devouring Conflagration, as the
Company of Stationers, most of whose Habitations, Storehouses, Shops, together
with all their Stocks, Books, bound and unbound, (by reason of their
combustibleness, and difficulty to remove them) were not only consumed in a
moment, but their ashes, and scorched leaves, carried with the violence of the
wind in the air, were scattered in sundry places above 16. miles distance from
the City, to the great admiration of the Beholders. Amongst other millions of
Books thus suddenly consumed, this little Book suffered in the same kind;
however thou have it now with many Additions. Reader, pray for the Author, and
beg a blessing upon his endeavors for thy good.

Farewell.
A brief Collection out of Simeon Dunelmensis his History, written Anno 1134.
Johannes Hagustaldensis his Continuer, and others, when and how often the City
of London has been almost totally burnt by sudden Fires in former ages.
A N^o Domini 798. Sim. Dun^lm. Hist. col. 114. l. 45.
Lundoni^ igne repentino cum magna hominum multitudine consumptacst.

Ibid^m, col. 118. l. 2.
Anno 801. Hathuberht Lundoniae Civitatis antistes vitahu^us contempsit
tempora: Et paulo post, magna pars vic^ ipfius repentino igne consumpta est.

These two great Fires in London within three years space, made it in a manner
desolate and unhabitable for 85. years, till re-edified by King Alfred, Anno
886. as the same Ibid^m, col. 131. l. 31. col. 150. l. 9. (...) Bromton, col.
812, 813
Historian, and the Chronicle of Bromton thus record: Eodem tempore ( Anno
886.) Rex Anglorum Elfredus, post incendia u^bium, stragesque popul^rum
Londoniam per maximam Civita^ honorifice restauravit, and habitabil^m fecit; as
if it was not habitable before.

Ibidem, col. 161. l. 30. col. 177. l. 37.
Anno 982. Civitas Lundoniae ig^e cremata est; so Simeon Dunelmensis But the
Chronicle of Bromton, fereigne cremata est.

Sim. Dunelm Hist. col. 213. l. 45. Hen^y de (...) de Ev^nt. Ang^. l. 2. col.
2353. l. 37.
Anno Dom. 1087. Ferox flamma urbes multas, (...) quoque Sancti Pauli Apostoli,
cum majore and meliori part: Londoniae consumpsit.

Sim. Dunelm. Hist. continuata per Johannem Hagustaldesim, col. 263. l. 3.
Anno 1133. (21 H. ^.) Maxma pars Londoniae Civitatis in ebdomala (...); before
which, stella Cometes ^ctavo idus Octobris fere per dies 7. apparuit: as we had
two Comets succeeding each other in few Months, before the late devouring
Pestilence, and consuming Fire, visibly seen in and over London, not to be
paralleled in any Age.

FINIS.

