THE EXAMINATION OF THE BISHOPS, Upon their Refusal of Reading His Majesty's
Most Gracious DECLARATION; And the Nonconcurrence of the Church of England, In
Repeal of the Penal Laws and Test, Fully Debated and Argued.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for H. W. and are to be Sold by most Booksellers. MDCLXXXVIII.

THE EXAMINATION OF THE BISHOPS, etc.
IT has pleased that Almighty Power which rules the Hearts of Princes, to
enlighten and adorn His present Gracious Majesty with such peculiar Beams of
Mercy and Clemency, those truly Royal Virtues, that render Him the nearest
Pourtraict of that Deity whose Vicegerent He is. To win therefore the Universal
Love of his People, a Conquest worthy of, and indeed reserved for His Great
self, He has set up the Standard of Compassion; resolving to recover the
alienated Affections of those of his Subjects, whom the Administration of his
Predecessors may have any ways rendered uneasy.

There are but Two things in the World dear to all Mankind, Religion and
Property. The last of these, I confess, in the most moderate Distribution of
Common Right, has all along had its free course in the true Channels of Equity;
only the first has been a little restrained; for Conscience has sometimes been
shackled.

The Sighs therefore and Groans that have lately breathed from that Restraint,
have moved him to that Sacred Commiseration, that He is resolved to break the
Fetters that extort em, The Penal Laws. Which to effect, He has already
declared His Determination for that choice of Magistrates in Authority under
Him, that in His Princely Judgment He thinks will be most Hearty in
contributing their best and ablest Endeavors for that Great End.

To carry on this pious work, it is not at all to be doubted but the suffering
party on all sides, who are aggrieved by those Laws, by the mere dictates of
Self-preservation, will be no ways wanting to throw off a Yoke they have so
long so unquietly born. And if all their Helps, His Majesty (as in Reason may
be expected) is so well secure of, there remain, only the Concurrence of the
Church of England; which, if obtained, His Kingdom would reap the Fruit, and
Himself the Honor of being the Founder of those lasting Blessings, so much in
themselves the more Glorious, as that all Hands, and all Hearts, are assistant
to their Creation.

But since the late Refusal of Reading His Majesty's most Gracious Declaration
seems to intimate the Church of Englands Aversion (or at least their Leading
Endeavors to create that Aversion) to the Repeal of the Penal Laws and Tests;
the Design of this Address to our Episcopal Pastors, is to examine the stress
and tendency of those Laws, and truly to reason and argue with our Pious Mother
the Church of England, why the Preservation of those Laws, either is, or ought
to be, any part of her Care, and indeed, how far those Statutes, her sometimes
Darlings, are in themselves either Just, Equitable, or consistent with
Christianity it self; and how far she is equally, if not more, than the
Dissenters obliged to abolish them. Nor shall I endeavor to urge her Consent
from any Resignation or Compliance (those fainter motives of mere Generosity)
to the Pleasure and Will of the King, that desires to have it so; but enforce
the Argument from the Bonds and Ties of Conscience and Justice that require her
Assistance to their Dissolution; and hereby illustrate the Equity and
Reasonableness of His Majesty's Proposal, and prove the Work it self no more
than the incumbent Duty of every Christian Subject to labor to perfect. For
inquiry therefore first into the Penal Laws, I shall make bold to trace the
Grounds of their Rise and Original.

After the Death of Queen Mary, her Protestant Sister Elizabeth, being seated
on the Throne, under so fair a Prospect of establishing her Religion, as having
the Half, if not the Majority of the Nation of Her Persuasion, all Hands were
set at Work for so glorious an Enterprise. But the main Engine was, That the
Reformers having before their Eyes the late severity of her Sisters Reign, the
Protestant Church either truly, or rather seemingly ashamed (as time will show)
of the Romish Cruelty, the Popular out-crys against Smithfield Fires, was
conscious that she had no means so proper to recommend her self to the Peoples
Esteem as the avoiding all those occasions of Odium, which had rendered the
Romish Church so much the Object of their Aversion; and therefore the Change
must be wrought and Affections won, by the opposite Extremes of Mercy and
Moderation.

These Measures for a while seemed terrible; but, alas! in few years Indulgence
appeared a too slow-paced Progress of Reformation; for still notwithstanding
the Encouragement of a Protestant Queen, and the Establishment of our Church,
the Ecclesiastic Advances went on too leisurely, and Conversions not fast
enough, to satisfy either the Churches Itch of Power, or Warmth of Zeal, under
the looser Reins of Toleration. For whilst the Popish party were connived at,
and permitted any Liberty of their Worship, their Church, though falling, could
not want some few unshaken Members at least that would still follow even its
very Ruins; and perhaps the Romish Priests, though thrown out of Church
Preferment, could not, or would not forbear, to confirm and encourage their
thin and scattered Party, and possibly through an indispensable (as they
thought) Duty to that Communion, in which invincibly persuaded, they only
expected Salvation, they might not omit either Arguments or Industry (as
Opinion wants neither) to render their Religion nevertheless lovely for the
Cloud it wore; which indeed, is but natural to all Religions, whilst they think
their own either the only, or at least the nearest way to Heaven.

These Remora's, how small stops soever to her advancing Glory, the Church of
England beholding with Impatience, and repining even at her smallest Favors to
the Romish Party, whilst but the least Impediments to her yet unsatisfied
Ambition, (for to be Uppermost was not enough, unless she could be All too)
began to think of some more expeditious way for the weeding out of Popery, and
to look out for a sharper Pruning Hook than mere Teaching and Preaching to do
the Work of Reformation; set agog therefore upon Dispatch and Execution, she
felt the Itch of her Forefathers, and if Honor and Reputation could be safe,
she should not scruple at a little of the old-fashioned Shamble-work to gain
her Point. But considering that to punish Dissent in Religion, and barefaced
too with Death, would carry too much the looks of Old Smithfield, and so
beslain her own long boasted Gentleness and Innocence; she is therefore put to
no little Study and Invention to over-leap this Difficulty, and accomplish her
Projection; till at last she lights upon this incomparable Stratagem to Mask
her Designs, and smooth All, viz. to punish Recusancy with DEATH, under the
black and dismal Brand of HIGH TREASON. The Measures and Gradations used and
made toward raising this Artful Superstructure, take in short as follows.

In the first year of Q. Elizabeth, she asserts her Spiritual and Ecclesiastic
Supremacy in all Things and Causes whatever; and creates an Oath to be tendered
her Subjects for confirmation of that Power.

In the fifth of her Reign, grown warmer in that Supremacy, she imposes the
Oath upon all her Ministers and Officers of the Government, even to Lawyers,
Atturneys, etc. and particularly to be taken by ever Member of Parliament: And
the second Refusal of taking it, after a first tender of it three Months
before, is made High Treason.

In the 13th of Her Reign. All persons taking upon them by Color of any Bull,
Writing, or Authority whatever to absolve or reconcile any persons, or grant or
promise to any person or persons within Her Majesty's Dominions any such
Absolution or Reconciliation by any Speech, Preaching, Teaching, Writing, or
any other open deed; and if any person or persons shall willingly take or
receive such Absolution or Reconciliation shall suffer pains of Death; And also
lose and forefeit all their Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels, as in Cases
of High Treason. [A very sour sort of Grape to set their Childrens Teeth an
Edge with.]

In the 23d of Elizabeth, This Act is explained and confirmed, and in fine the
Person reconciling or reconciled to the Church of Rome, Priest or Layman, are
Equally declared Traitors; and so onwards till the very taking of Orders from
Rome is High Treason and doomed to suffer as such.

Ay, God knows a very just sentence if the Indictment be but true. But I desire
to know by what Legerdemain is this Reconciliation made High Treason! Is either
the Life or Dignity of the King or the Government, struck at by my being a
Member of This or That Communion! by my believing This or That the Way to
Heaven? Can Faith in God be Treason against Man! For that is the Result of the
point. Can a Christians best Endeavor to save his own or his Brothers Soul be
a Machination to destroy his Prince or his Country; or can my praying or not
praying to a Saint, my adoring or not adoring the Eucharist render me a true or
not true Leige-man. If Errors in Faith can amount to High Treason, and the
Government is in Conscience obliged to treat 'em as such, Lord have mercy upon
us, how came the Jews to live with that Impunity in the Commonwealth, that
instead of misbelieving in points of Doctrine, believe not so much as in the
Gospel or Christ himself.

No, no, the Sophistry of the matter lies not there; it is not the Doctrine of a
Romanist as to Godwards makes him a Traitor, but his belief of the Popes being
Head of the Church in Derogation to the Ecclesiastic Supremacy inherent to,
and Lodged in the Crown, and so religiously asserted and maintained by the
Protestant Laws of the Kingdom. Hinc Illae Lacrymae? There lies the Apostasy,
the hideous yawning Gulf that swallows all, Faith, Duty, Honor, Loyalty, and
consequently calls for Axes, Halters, Gibbets, and what not.

Is this the Treason then; it is well we have fixed it there; though upon true
Inspection, the Impeachment will be found full as feeble here as before. For
this is but mere matter of Faith still all this while, nor carries in it the
least shadow of a Breach of the Subjects Duty to the Sovereign. For Instance,
when this Law was made, suppose a poor Roman Catholic of those Days by an
Invincible power of persuasion rooted and grounded in him by an Article of
Faith (how rightfully is not the matter) received from Age to Age, and
Generation to Generation in favor of the Pope, could not possibly believe her
then She Majesty by her Accession to the Crown to be instantly the Spiritual
Head of the Church in all matters and Causes whatever, that otherwise before
was utterly incapable even of so much as a Subdeaconship in a Country Parish,
and if St. Paul may be believed, not so much as qualified for speaking in a
Religious Assembly; yet nevertheless this Roman Catholic lived under her
Government with all the Allegiance and Fealty, in all Respects of Obedience,
and believed himself in conscience so obliged to do, as much as any other of
her more believing Protestant Subjects, would it not be a little severe to
adjudge him a Traitor.

And that the Romish Opinion that the Spiritual Supremacy lies not in the
Temporal Prince, is mere matter of Faith, is demonstrable from the very
Sovereign Power it self, when so many successive Kings never believed they had
that Supremacy themselves. For Prerogative is of its nature so jealous that
though never so considerable a Jewel in a Crown had they had Faith to have
challenged it theirs, they would have had wit enough to have worn it too.

What if our Protestant Kings and their Parliments for them believe that
Supremacy wholly lodged in the Crown; must their Roman Catholic Subjects be
Traitors, because they cannot be of their Belief? If the Princes Belief must be
the standart of the peoples Loyalty, by the same Equity the Catholic Kings
might have made it High Treason in their Reign to assert that Supremacy in the
Crown Then; as the Protestant Kings do to deny it there now; and consequently
the Protestants then, (if such there had been) might by Equal Justice have been
Traitors too. If Crowned Heads must necessarily be believed the Spiritual Heads
of the Churches under their Obedience, I wonder what strange stretch of Faith
those Thousands of Christians must have that are born and bred Subjects to the
Mohammedan Grand Signior.

But that the Members of the Church of Rome may not look altogether so black
for this unhappy Part of their Belief; and that their asserting of that
Spiritual Supremacy in their Pope does not any ways threaten either the Crown
or the public peace; That wise and prudent Monarch King James the First shall
be their Compurgator. For as many Laws as that Prince made for the Defense of
the Established Church of England, and as great Industry as he used for the
extirpation of the Romish Religion, he was nevertheless pleased to allow the
Pope, though not Universal Head of the Church, yet Patriarch of the West (in
which precinct of consequence must England be included.) And if so zealous a
Protestant King thought it no Diminution to his own or his Churches Dignity to
be of that Opinion, and to grant the Pope that Prerogative; what mortal High
Treason against the Crown of England do the Members of the Popes own Church
commit in throwing him in the East too (a part of the World not much relating
to us) into the Bargain; and so making him Universal Patriarch. Jacob. Contr.
Perron.

But some People will tell you, It Is almost an Impossibility to fancy any such
things as Principles of Loyalty in a Romish Subject to a Protestant King.

I shall not endeavor to confute this uncharitable Censure, by the Universal
Heroic Examples, of that Parties Loyalty in the Battles of Charles the First;
so truly may I call it Universal, that upon Petitions made to Cromwell for his
Clemency to the Roman Catholics, he was observed to challenge them to prove so
much as one Man of that Religion that had ever fought for him or served him.
But to wave that Plea, How are we sure that the Romanists are guilty of
Traytorous Principles! Does any man of them own any such Principles! No, sure
they have more Wit than to talk Treason, and be Hanged for it. If they are so
hardy as to do that, we have other Laws to noose 'em without the help of Penal
Statutes.

Do they then commit any open Act of Treason! Let 'em do that if they dare. If
we once catch them 'em at that Game the Government has 'em fast enough by the
Heels and the Necks too. Nor is that the Treason, that these Statutes pretend
to arraign. Who ever heard of any Overt act of Treason indicted by the 13th or
23d of Elizabeth.

Then, if neither Speaking nor Acting of Treason be the Capital Guilt these
Statutes are levelled at; then Thinking of Treason must be the Crime. A Roman
Catholic then belike is such an offender, that by the very Affections of his
Soul cannot be Loyal to the Crown; and to prove all this mortal Accusation
infallibly true, the Protestant Wisdom has by Divine Inspiration formed a Law
to arraign and condemn the very Thoughts of the Heart, of which God only can be
Judge.

In fine, if the Government can make matter of Faith, nay even thoughts
Themselves High Treason, when their Hand was in they might e'ne as Lawfully
have made it High Treason to eat too. For if the firm Belief in God, and the
zealous Worship of him by the Best Light of a Christian Conscience, be either
the Bread of Life, or at least the means to get it, as we are so taught, the
same Legality that can condemn the one may exclude the other too.

To this they will say, It Is true indeed a Lay Romanist is a more excusable, and
that part of the Statute that affects him is a little hard; however it is very
strong, and nothing but High Justice, against the Romish Priest; for here are
visible Overt-acts of Treason: As taking of Orders from Rome, in themselves
little less than Damnable and Diabolical, and undoubtedly Antichristian, as
received from the Papal See, the very seat of Antichrist; and then returning
home again expressly against the Commands of the Law; All which outrageous
Transgressions are but reasonably declared High Treason, and justly exposed to
the severest of punishments under the Legality of that Denomination.

To this Thundering Charge, as big as it sounds, I shall only make this short
Reply.

If the Church of England has and always does admit a Convert Romish Priest
into the Protestant Clergy, without any Reordination to capacitate him for that
Admission, as we need look no further than to the constant practice of the
Church, (without so much as one example to the contrary) from the very
beginning of the Reformation, how unjustly are taking Orders from Rome charged
with High Treason! If the Orders from Rome be in themselves Holy and Sacred,
how are they Damnable, or Antichristian? And how the taking of them
High Treason? If not Holy nor Sacred (as if High Treason in the very receiving
of them they cannot be) does the Church of England entertain Pastors into her
Ministerial Function unconsecrated for the Divine Service of God? God forbid!
No, the very Practice and Concession of the Church in this Case does so
confront the palpable Injustice of this Statute, as nothing can be plainer. And
how Black, how Capital, or Traiterous soever the Popular Calumny, or the
Protestant Lawmakers had occasion to make these Romish Orders, under all their
loads of Guilt, they stood upright enough not to want the Crutch of an Act of
Parliament, as some others have done (as much more Sacred as they are) for
their Support and Confirmation. And if such are the Romish Orders, and the free
choice of our Belief in God, and the Church we hope to be saved in, be in our
own Election (for our own Souls are answerable for it) by the same Liberty of
choice why may not a man be either a Member or Pastor of the Flock he chooses,
as his Abilities to serve God in either station shall dictate to him. And if no
such Holy Orders be to be had and received at home, why is it Death to seek for
them abroad? And why are men banished and excluded from their Native Right in
the Kingdom in which they are born, for only endeavoring to secure themselves,
their no less Native Right in that of Heaven?

One observation in the Statute of the Fifth of her Reign I had almost
forgotten, not a little worthy Remark. In this Statute where the Incapacity of
taking the Oath of the Queens Spiritual Supremacy (for a Refusal of an Oath in
that Case is only a Conscientious Incapacity of taking it) is made
High Treason, in one Clause of it the Queen is pleased to tell us, she is so
sufficiently assured of the Faith and Loyalty of her Temporal Lords, that this
Act, nor any thing contained in it, shall not extend to her Barons, nor the
Oath to be imposed upon them, etc.

What Contradictions and Cobweb Laws are here! A Commoner, belike, for his
Incapacity of taking that Oath, is guilty of High Treason: But a Baron so
incapacitated is a very faithful and Loyal Gentleman; as if they were not both
of them equally Subjects to the Crown, and equally Criminal in any
Transgression against it. It Is true, had the particular Favor and Indulgence
of the Government resolved to exempt a Peer from the Penalty of this Law, it
had been something; but to discharge him eo nomine from the Guilt too, makes
the whole Statute such an Arbitrary Declaration of Treason, that both the
Compilers of such Laws, and the Defenders of them, ought to blush at. But as
whole as the Barons kept their Scutcheons in this Statute, they came in for a
snack in the 13th of her Reign, being in that Statute Indictable for
Delinquency against it.

What Rubbish is here put together to build the great Fence of a Church with!
But our Church has at least this Apology, that it does not pretend to
Infallibility. And who knows but the Jargon of these, and the rest of her Penal
Laws might be wilful Oversights on purpose to make out her Assertion to the
World, and prove her Fallibility true.

But to come to the full Result of all: Here Is the Church of England so poorly
prevaricating, as to follow those very steps, which with all her highest Noise
and Exclamations she pretends, are her greatest Detestation and Abhorrence. And
whilst the more frank and generous Romanist Enacts and Executes his Capital
Laws against Heresy from his Church, under the downright Name of Heresy; our
poorer spirited Protestant Lawmakers, are for punishing Heresy from their
Church under Masque and Disguise, obtruding their Penal Laws upon the World
under the meanest of Hypocrisy and Imposture.

And to be plain with our later Protestant Lawmakers, the Shamm past so
current then, that it has been practiced ever since. Is there any one Law made
against our later Nonconformists whose preamble does not run upon this Topic,
the Breach of the Peace, and the undermining the very Foundations of the
Government; and all for deserting the Church of England, and meeting in their
own Religious Assemblies, to offer up their Prayers and Devotions to God
according to their Consciences. Was there ever a late Conventicle disturbed
with any other Warrant than as Riotously and Routously assembled, and thereupon
punished with Fines, Imprisonments, and Sequestrations; sometimes even to the
Ruins of whole Families. Does not the same Masquerade run through all the
Penal Laws? And the very mere meeting to Worship God charged with no less than
Sedition and Tumult.

But wherein lies the Sedition and Tumult? Was it in their so meeting? No,
sure. For as the Intention makes the Guilt, the Intention was only a Religious
Worship, and not a State-disturbance.

Was the Sedition then in the Doctrines they Preached? If so, why was it not
proved against them? Their Meeting House Doors stood open, and their Enemies
were both potent and numerous enough to hear and detect any Seditious Design or
Doctrines against the Crown or State. And the Law was furnished both with Rods
and Axes, to punish any Crime of that kind according to its Demerit, before the
Penal Laws were so much as thought on.

No, though that was the Pretense, it pincht not there The Dissenters grew too
numerous, and the Church of England began to see her Grandeur shrink, and her
Dominion lessen, and therefore her Old Arts must once more be her Refuge. The
Nonconformists must be crushed and suppressed, and to avoid all imputations of
Oppression and Cruelty, Sedition and Riots must be the charge against them, and
the Law gilded over with that fair Title to make it swallowable. It Is true,
indeed, the Law here did not reach to Death, however it took care to make their
Purses, if not their Veins, bleed for it, and that too sometimes with so total
a Drein, that whole Families have been reduced to the condition of starving,
which is the very next door to it. And all things considered, Liberty next to
Life is so dear, that whole years of noisome Imprisonment have been very little
the easier punishment.

Having given you this true Pourtraict of our Penal Laws, I shall only add some
few Lineaments more, and so finish the piece. And to make a farther Balance
betwixt our selves and Rome in that point, how unchristian or unwarrantable
soever all such Penal Inflictions for mere Conscience may be, the Church of
Rome has, or at least fancies she has some little Pretext for such Laws. For
under her famous Tenent of Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus, and her Confinement of
Salvation only within her own Boundaries, she may have sometimes consented to
the Practice of now and then cutting off a stray Sheep, to terrify the rest of
the Flock from leaping the Fold, as imagining to her self in so doing, and in
now and then Sacrificing one or two lost Sons of Perdition (for such she
accounts them) and thereby lopping off some corrupt Member already past hope of
Redemption, she only secures possibly the whole Body, as she thinks, from
Apostasy and Damnation. And consequently such exemplary Acts, though of the
greatest Rigor, are only intended as absolutely necessary for that Great End,
Universal Salvation. But, alas! our more Charitable Church that pretends not to
bound the Grace of God, but by a larger latitude and more extended Operation of
the Blood of Christ, Equally allows Salvation to true Zeal and Piety in both
Churches, and indeed in all Christian Professions: Under all this Concession, I
say, our Protestant Church utterly wants this Loop-hole, and upon true
Examination will be found wholly inexcusable, if not impardonable. For in
executing of her Sanguinary Laws in punishment of mere matter of Conscience,
she cuts off, not like Rome, the supposed Members of Perdition; but even those
Professors of Christianity, which by her own Confession may be equally with her
self the Sons of Grace, and Coheirs of Salvation.

Nay, I Will venture to add one bold Word more, because a true one. The Church of
England in her once executing of her sanguinary Laws, is undoubtedly guilty of
more Barbarity than the ten Primitive Heathen Persecutions. For in all cases of
Suffering for Religion, it is an undeniable Maxim, That He that makes the Martyr
least thiks he makes him. The bloodiest Pagan Tyrants in all their studied Arts
of Blood and Christian Massacre, did not believe that they butchered the then
only Professors of Truth and Heirs of Heaven: But on the contrary, in Devotion
to their own supposed true Deities, they thought they only executed Apostates,
Blasphemers and Infidels; for such they accounted the Christians as professed
Deserters of their Heathen Gods and Sacrifices: Nor is the forementioned Romish
Case much different, as lying under the unhappy Belief of Heretics irreparable
State of Damnation. But all this while our Church of England (I am sorry to her
Shame it must be spoken) outdo's the very Heathens themselves, in enacting and
executing those Penal Laws, by which she cuts off those very Members of
Christianity, who (if true Zealots in their Profession) she owns are in the
number of the Elect of God: And if any true Zealots amongst them, those
certainly that have Courage and Constancy to DIE for their Religion, are not
the least of them; and consequently she cannot deny, but in executing those
Laws, she both makes the Martyr, and knows she makes him too.

And if she is so blameable in her Severity against the Romanists, much more
criminal must her Rigor against the Dissenters be, whom she owns to differ
from her self in little more than Ceremonies and Punctilio's.

Nay, the Ferment has sometimes boiled so high, that our Protestant Church has
put her Zeal upon the stretch to find means to vent her Indignation, when some
of those very Laws against Recusancy have been extended against the Protestant
Dissenters, and the greatest part of their Sufferings received from the Lash of
those Laws. I shall not pretend to dive so far, as to ascertain whether that
Comprehension was originally designed by those Laws, or otherwise an artificial
Superstructure to serve a State turn; but either way the severity of those Laws
is not a little notorious, where so trivial Matters of Dissent in Religion, as
has been said before, have been so cruelly treated.

But if our Protestant Church cannot possibly be reconciled to Liberty of
Conscience, and therefore these Laws were her Weapons against it, her more
generous way, at least more agreeable to a Christian Profession, had been first
fairly to have overthrown it by Dint of Argument, before she had made use of
Dint of Steel to do it by: And for that purpose, I wonder how that famous
Bishop Tailor has past for so great a Doctor of the Church all this while, and
his Treatise upon that subject called Liberty of Prophesying not yet answered;
or at least the Author under no small Ecclesiastic Fulminations (if no other
way to answer it) for so terrible a Blow against the Churches long main
Favorite Bulwark, her Penal Laws.

It Is true, some People will object, What are all these Laws to the CHURCH,
when enacted only by the Civil Power as an Expedient for its own Security and
Defense, and therefore warrantable and lawful; nor in any respect are
chargeable upon the Ecclesiastics.

Alas! this is such a feeble Objection, that it is scarce to be named without
Blushing: As if the Clergy did not act in Parliament by their Representatives;
nay, the very Bishops sitting there in Person, assenting to, and undoubtedly
little less than Original Founders of those Laws. But grant it, as they say,
the mere Establishment of the Civil Power: The Clergy by owning the Justice,
and asserting the Necessity of such Laws for Defense of their Church, the
Lay-Power in this Case is little more than the Cats Paw to rake out the
Chestnut. Nor are the Civil Rulers and Temporal Power of a Christian Government
any ways more authorized to outgo the Gospel Moderation and Clemency for any
Politic Consideration whatever, than the more immediate Oracles of Truth the
Preachers themselves.

And this the great Legislators of those Penal Statutes very well knew, and
therefore as I told you before, they cunningly converted Recusancy into High
Treason, and Nonconformity into Riots and Routs; to find something, tho but
seemingly justifiable for the Fangs of their Laws to lay hold of; and so
boulster'd up their Penal Statutes to make them able to walk upright.

I Will only put this one Question to all the Doctors of our Church: With what
Conscience can a Church that owns it self Fallible, establish Laws to punish
Dissenters in Religion, when by her own Concession of Fallibility, she neither
has nor CAN have any Certainty or Assurance (how strong soever she thinks or
hopes her own Foundation) but that she punishes those that possibly may be more
in the Right than her self; more especially, in those Professions that found
their Dissenting Doctrins on her own Basis the Scripture?

I cannot tell what Equity wiser Heads may find out for the Ordination of Penal
Laws; but truly in my Opinion, the Great Prince of Peace that reprimanded the
Drawing of that Sword that cut off but the Ear of the High Priests Servant, tho
in his own immediate Cause, very little intended the raising his Church, or the
propagation of his Gospel, by either Axes or Gibbets, or Gaols or Dungeons. And
He that left us the Standard of Christianity in the Innocence of Doves, never
commissioned us the Rapine of Vultures; and though we are conceded the Subtilty
of Serpents, I know no warrant that he gave us either for the Stings or the
Poison of them.

And tho my Zeal for Truth makes me thus plain in detecting the only Shame and
Frailty of the Reformed Church, I hope she has Goodness enough to forgive the
Boldness of a Blushing Son, who is no otherwise solicitous than for her
covering her own Nakedness. And that I may truly term it such, the Reformation
that otherwise may boast her Purity and Principles only founded on Holy Writ,
and all the rest of her Doctrins and Practices derived from those sacred
Oracles, will be only found tripping here; and in all her support of Scriptural
Records in all other Points, I am afraid must have recourse even to the
exploded Authority of TRADITION only for her Penal Laws. For I shrewdly suspect
that Lollards Towers and Inquisition Houses (let her mince it as she will) will
be found the only Precedents for the Estates she has confiscated, the Families
she has beggared the Gaols she has filled, besides her sometimes loading of
Gibbets, and ripping up the Bowels even of her own Co-Disciples, because
Dissenting Professors of Christ, and all by her Penal Laws.

Nor will it suffice for an Excuse to insinuate that the Establishment of
Religion and Conformity of Worship on one side, and the Preservation of Peace
and Tranquillity of the State on the other side, exact the necessity of such
rigid Laws. [Though by the by, the Peace of States is rather destroyed then
upheld by such Laws; for what Civil War in almost all the Christian World, that
directly or indirectly has not had the Oppression of some Religious Party, its
greatest, if not only Incendiary?]

No; to gain the first of these great Ends, let the Teachers and Professors of
our Established Church live up to the height of their Profession, and re-call
the Wanderers, and reduce the Strays into the Fold by their own convincing
Examples of Christian Piety; a much more commendable way of making Proselytes
than the forementioned rigid Arts of Conversion. And for the second great End,
the Governments Security, if her Temporal Fences are not strong enough, let her
make stronger; and if any of her Dissenters are the disturbers of her Peace,
let her single out the Guilty from the Innocent, and wreak her just Vengeance
where it is deserved; and not punish the Dissent it self (which as being mere
matter of Religion, is wholly incapable of such Crime) for the sake of any
corrupted Members, that either are of, or Herd under the Covert of such or such
a Congregation of Christians. For to do that work by the undistinguishing
merciless Hand of her Penal Statutes, is so little conformable to the
Evangelical Precepts, that I am afraid the doing such notorious Ills that Good
may come of it, whatever Religious Security, or Gospel Propagation may be
intended by them; these Penal Laws, I say, that can swallow the Estates,
Fortunes, Liberties and Lives, of their weaker Brethren and fellow Christians,
instead of being either Christian or Just, or any ways related to 'em, will at
last appear much nearer of kin to that famous Rover that wanders round the
World to seek whom he may devour, insomuch that their Ordination will be found
little less than borrowing Engines from Hell to help to set up Heaven!

Now to the Case of the Church of England, if these are her Penal Laws (for I
shall not trouble my self with a tedious recital of the several Statutes of
that nature, as being all but Scions from the same Root) I should gladly know
what Beauties or rather invisible Charms the Church of England can find in
these Statutes to be in the least solicitous for their preservation. For, alas!
maugre all her Volumes written upon the Unreasonableness of Separation from her
Communion, and her Justification of her zealous Endeavors for Conformity,
unless the Means and Methods used to obtain it (as these Laws were intended for
such) be equally Justifiable, her whole Pretensions fall to the Ground.

Nor will it excuse her to say, that they were chiefly enacted in Terrorem, as
being but seldom put in execution; as if a studied ill Deed were therefore more
excusable because committed, suppose but once in an Age; when a foul Act for
that very Cause, should rather appear the more deformed, as it is the Rarity
that makes the Monster. -- Besides, Queen Mary had that Plea to make; for what
were 206 Protestants even by Foxes Muster-Roll, burnt for Religion in her five
years Reign, to the some millions of Protestants in those days, when half the
Kingdom was of that Persuasion? an infinite larger number to c^ll out so many
Sufferers from, than all the Popish Priests that Rome has sent over these 130
Years past, or shall do in as many more to come.

To return therefore to His Majesty's Proposal of Abrogating these Laws, it is a
greater Duty upon the Church of England to abolish 'em than in the Dissenters
themselves; for as it is a Yoke imposed upon their weaker Brethren, in it self
wholly unjust, the Sufferer under that Yoke in endeavoring to break it, only
acts by the Motives of Self-defence, the common Principle of Nature: But the
Imposer of that Yoke is tied by the Obligations of Religion it self, to repeal
and repent his own Act of Injustice.

Besides, if all Arguments of Conscience cannot prevail; and Policy, not Equity
(though Heaven forbid so uncharitable a Thought) is our Churches Guide; yet,
even then too, What does she yield up in abolishing those Laws? Why, truly
nothing. For whilst the Government continues in the Hands of a Prince of the
Romish Religion, those Statutes will utterly lie dead; for the Royal
Indulgence, a Prerogative in the Crown, will never put them in execution: And
if abolisht, however the next Protestant Prince has the power of Resumption, if
his Conscience shall think fit to give them a Resurrection. What reason
therefore has the Church of England for her Nonconcurrence to a Proposal so
equitable, when she has not so much as the least Pretext even of mere Interest
it self for her Refusal?

But this I am sure, as the Church of England can have no solid Reasons to
oppose their Repeal, the State has very substantial ones to enforce it. For as
TRADE is the greatest support and strength of a Kingdom, I know no Politics so
conducing to the Commerce and Wealth of a Nation as Liberty of Conscience. What
greater Encouragement to Naturalization? And England that is not overloaded
with People, can have no fairer Inlet to bring in whole Families and Estates,
and indeed the Wealth of the World (besides the opening that Current of
Commerce even amongst our present Natives, which the late Restraint of Worship
had so much shut up) than Liberty of Religion. Nor can I better instance the
Effects of this Policy than in the growth of the Dutch Greatness, and the decay
of the Spaniard from their different Extremes of National Conduct in that Point.

I am certain His Majesty resolves to eternize his Glory, by being the truest
Pater Patriae of all the Crowned Heads since the Conquest; nor has He a fairer
Prospect of making His Kingdom a true Paradise of PEACE and PLENTY, but by
taking this Pattern at least from the first Paradise, that is, by making the
Lion and Lamb lie down in Peace together; our long Disunions being no otherways
to be reconciled, and our Enmities hushed but by this only Universal
Pacification.

I shall only add this last Consideration. The execution of our Penal Laws and
the restraint of Conscience, has been the greatest Blow that ever was given to
the Hereditary Right of the Subjects of England, their natural Properties and
Immunities given and sealed to them by Magna Charta it self. For who can call
his Liberty or Estate his own, whilst a Superior Opinion in POWER shall seize
our Persons and confiscate our Estates, for no other cause but difference of
Worship and Faith; and neither Person, Estate or Liberty, redeemable under a
less Composition than renouncing of God; for Conformity of Worship absolutely
against Conscience is little else. And all this Capital Offense so unfixt and
so undeterminable a sort of Transgression, that a Man has only a mere Lottery
to be in the Right or the Wrong: For the blackest Criminal in one Reign has
been the whitest Saint in the next, and so vice versa over again, witness the
Reigns of Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, where the
Protestants were the Devils one while and the Papists another: Nay, in the
Reign of Henry the Eighth, both Papist and Protestants were at one time in the
wrong: For 'twas remarkable in his Reign, that in the same day have Papists
been hanged for Traitors, for disowning his Church Supremacy; and Protestants
burnt for Heretics for denying of Transubstantiation. Thus in their turns have
all Religions and Opinions lain under the Scourge of the severest of Laws, and
all for want of that Obedience to a Law, which Humanity it self is utterly
unable to pay. For though our Breach or not Breach of all other Laws, either
Humane or Divine, lies in our own free will and choice: To conform or not
conform to this or that Belief, is wholly above the power of Man; Faith only
being Irresistible. And if our worldly Well-being, and all we enjoy in this
Life, depends upon such caprichious Decrees of Law, certainly the Great Charter
of our Liberties and Estates that confirmed 'em both under no such Condition or
Restriction, is not a little invaded by the Penalties of such Laws: And I
cannot tell what greater or more glorious Design His Gracious Majesty can
undertake, than by repairing so deep a Breach wrought through the very
Fundamentals of his Peoples original Freedom and Birthrights: Nor is there, or
has been a greater Friend or Patron of the Church of England than His present
Majesty, who himself alone tenders Her the Means and Opportunity to wash off
those long Stains and Blots, which either the petulance or remissness Her
Protestant Defenders of Her Faith, through these Penal Statutes have cast or
left upon Her, and so to restore Her to Whiteness and Innocence.

Having made this fair Inquest into the Penal Laws, I shall take a little
Search too into the TEST, and lay down those Reasons that equally oblige us to
concur with His Majesty in a Repeal of that too.

In order to which, it behooves us first to sum up all the great and popular
Arguments (if I may so call 'em, tho in reality rather the Language of Fears
and Jealousies than the Voice of right Reason) daily urged for the Preservation
of the Test, viz. That the whole Defense of the Protestant Religion relyes on
that Basis. If the Test were once abrogated, the Church of England would soon
be blown up, when all Offices both Ecclesiastical and Civil, and all Power and
Authority both in Church and State shall be lodged in Roman Catholic Hands;
and what not?

To answer which hideous and formidable Outcry, we'll begin first with the
pretended Dangers threatened the Church of England by Repeal of the Test. Not
to insist upon His Majesty's reiterated WORD and HONOR, His inviolable
Engagements to maintain the Church of England as now by Law established, in her
uninterrupted Rights and Privileges, all her Churches and Church Livings
whatever thereunto belonging, etc. in it self alone no little Security. But
waving that Plea, the Ecclesiastical Government and the Church of England
neither are, nor can be shaken or touched by the Abrogation of the Test, the
Test being indeed no part of her Defense. For first, the very taking of the
Test, is no part of the Qualification of any of the Clergy of England, nor was
ever so much as mentioned or thought upon to be imposed to tendered to the
Clergy: No; as jealous as the Founders of that Test were (or pretended to be)
of the Danger of Popery, and as zealous as they could be for the Security of
the Protestant Religion, they very well knew the Church of England had two
impregnable Bulwarks, the two great Acts of UNIFORMITY that themselves alone
sufficiently established, guarded, and preserved the Church of England in all
Points without any Fortification from the Test; nor indeed was the Test wanted
in the Ecclesiastic Administration, those very Statutes being a greater and
stronger Test before: For by those Statutes is the whole Liturgy, the
Administration of the Sacraments, and indeed all the Canons and Articles of the
Church supported: For by the Fence of those Laws, first, no Romanist can
possibly be admitted into the Clergy unless under the most damnable Hypocrisy
(which no Human Test can discover) an Hypocrisy too no ways beneficial to the
Romish Cause whilst tied up to the Divine Service as now by Law established.
Secondly, No other Divine Service, as the Mass, or the like, can be introduced
into our Churches already constituted or assigned for the Divine Service of the
Church of England.

The strength of these two Laws His Majesty very well knows, and is so far even
from the Thought of hurting or infringing the least Particle of either or those
Laws, or the Security our Church has, does, or can receive from them, by
abrogating any Penal Laws or Tests whatever, that on the contrary there is not
undoubtedly that farther Confirmation of those Laws, and the Religious
Observance of them, or any thing conducing thereunto, that may or shall be
offered to His Majesty in Parliament, that His Majesty shall not readily assent
to, and as inviolably maintain.

If then the Church of England, Her Administration and Government (as it is
plain) stand of themselves alone secure and firm, without any borrowed Prop or
Support from the Test whatever; the Test therefore is only a Buttrice (or at
least so intended) to the Civil Magistracy; as first, Excluding all Roman
Catholics from all Offices of Trust in the State. Secondly, From all Domestic
Services near the Person of the King. And Thirdly, From all Right to Session in
Parliament.

These three Incapacities are by the Test thrown upon the Romanists. And for
confuting all Suspicions and Jealousies, let us examine how the loosening of
all these three Restrictions can tend to the Subversion of the Protestant
Religion as now by Law established.

In the first place, as to the Civil Government: What Office in the State can a
Roman Catholic hold, any ways empowering him to prejudice the Church of
England? Suppose even in the Courts of Judicature (for if any Apparition of any
such Power, it is there;) Were Romanists (imagine) in all those Offices? Why may
not a Sir Thomas Moor be as honest as a Lord Chief Justice Hales, and execute
his Office with as great Integrity and Justice? Why not Men of equal Abilities
be of equal Uprightness in all Religions? Besides, the Distribution of Meum and
Tuum (more especially when Liberty of Conscience shall be past into a perpetual
Law, and all Penal Inflictions for matter of Religion thrown out of their
Jurisdictions) will then be the whole Business that lies before them; and
wherein is a Roman Catholic Judge any more incapacitated for the administering
of Justice than another Man? Moreover, in a Kingdom where their number is so
truly inconsiderable, as scarce the Two hundredth Man in the Nation, if they
have hopes of making any Converts or any Endeavors that way, it can only be
done by holding the Scale of Justice upright, and in all Posts of Trust by
keeping up the steddiest Standard of Right and Equity, as the only means
thereby to recommend and endear themselves to the World, and wipe off those
Blemishes that the mistaken Jealousies and Popular Misapprehensions have so
long so unkindly cast upon them. And This, and This only they are very sensible
is their Chart to steer by; and their Great Pilot, their Royal Master, the best
read Student in the Arts of Empire that possibly ever graced a Throne, equally
knows to be His only Course, and undoubtedly as sacredly resolves to make it
so. And if the Judges of the Land suppose of the Romish Religion (besides their
Oaths that bind 'em, and His Majesty's Honor that shall influence them to it)
have these Obligations more and above even of INTEREST to their very Religion
it self, to move in so regular a Sphere of Justice, where lies our Danger? And
if this higher Station will be so Inoffensive, what can the poorer Justices of
the Peace, or the inferior Subministration of the Government signify, in
Popish or not Popish Hands?

But in this Case I have heard some People say: Alas! What stretch of the Laws
will not such Judges make? Perhaps for instance, pick a hole in the Abby-Lands,
and start some dormient Title or other to revert them to the Church of Rome; a
Patrimony that will not a little enrich the Romanists and advance their Cause.

This idle Objection was scarce worth naming; as if the stretching of our Laws
in that Point was not as notorious and Arbitrary as a total Violation of the
Subjects Right, and rending the whole Frame of the Laws in sunder. But to check
this idle Surmize; If a Romish Parliament it self in the Reign of Queen Mary,
with the very Restoration of the Romish Religion and Papal Supremacy into the
Saddle, never so much as attempted to revert those Lands: Nay, on the contrary,
their whole Title was confirmed to the present Possessours by a Decretal from
Rome it self, as was then so solemnly done by Cardinal Pool, the then Popes
Legate: How groundless must the Fear be of any Thought or Attempt of reverting
them now? Or why must the Romish Judges in any kind subvert or undermine the
Laws, contrary to all their best Politiques in the present State of England, to
no true advantage either to themselves or their Church, and possibly to be
answerable for it with their Heads, if they live to the next Protestant Prince.

To come next to the Officers of his Majesty's Household, etc. To have those
Posts too barricado'd with Tests, and the Imperial Dignity so shackled, as to
be debarred the Choice of its own Menials; nay, even of its Conversation it
self, is an Insolence put upon Majesty, as had been scarce tolerable from an
Ordinance of Forty eight, much less an Act of Parliament. But for our less
Wonder at it, we are to consider 'twas Hatched in the same Republic Nest: for
no less than the great old Patriot of Three Names sat for the brooding of it.

I think I need not raise Arguments to prove how little those Gentlemen of
Honor, the Courtiers I mean, of any Religion whatsoever, in that innocent
Station are, or can be concerned in shaking either Church or State. It is
enough to say that greater Indignity under the Sanction of a Law, was never
imposed upon a Crowned Head. The meanest Gentleman in England, whilst this Test
keeps Footing, has a Prerogative above the King. For the choice of his Steward,
Bailiff, Attorney, or Solicitor, etc. are in his own free Election: But these
were Privileges thought too large for a King; and therefore he is Stinted and
Bounded to such Elections, as the more Imperial Wisdom of His Great Masters in
Parliament judge fittest for him.

Monarchical Rule is said to be like that of Heaven, where the Primum Mobile
acts altogether by inferior Spears, and second Causes. And so Majesty by its
Officers and Ministers, as so many Vehicles, by which the Influences of the
Royal Power are Conveyed, to set the Great Machine a moving: But truly this
Ascendancy the late Lawmakers, judged too great for the King of England; and
therefore they found an Expedient to render the Monarchy little more than
precarious, making the whole Ministers of the State the Creatures of the Test,
and not of the King.

Now I desire to know how in Reason we can imagine, that a King, in himself the
Fountain of Honor, and Original of Power; though in his Nature, the Mildest
and best Tempered of Princes; though without the least Thought of Unhinging the
Frame of the Government, or Disturbing the Settled Church of his Kingdom; to
blast his own Glory, and lose his Subjects Hearts; (for that would be all the
Crop 'twould yield him;) I wonder I say how we can imagine, that the Best and
most Gracious of Princes, tho without the forementioned Designs, could
nevertheless brook so Unprincely a Yoke as the Test. -- And truly to justify
his Majesty's heartiest Endeavors against both Penal Laws and Test, in not
laboring to abrogate the first, as they stand in Force against the Lives and
Liberties, (and how unjustly has been proved before) of the Members of his own
Communion, he would be the most unnatural of Men; and in not laboring to
repeal the last, as standing so egregiously in force against the Right and
Prerogative of His Crown, and indeed originally forged in Affront to himself,
he should be the most Dishonorable of Princes: Nor will it serve to object,
that His late Majesty (whatever diminution to the Prerogative it might be) by
passing it into a Law, has alienated that Power from the Crown. For to answer
that Argument, we are assured, that whatever Alienations of that kind the
Easiness of the present Possessour of the Crown, or any other Reasons may
induce him to make, are no ways truly binding to the Successor.

Now to come to the last Point, the Qualification of Members in Parliament by
the Test: And first, I shall not so much insist upon the notorious Invasion of
the Birthright of the Peers by this Exclusion from Parliament, as being a Point
already so well handled by better Pens, and never yet answered; nor shall I so
much insist upon the Illegality and Unreasonableness of Tests in general of any
kind, as was once argued in Parliament by the Lord Delamere in opposition to a
Test proposed by the Earl of Lindsey, a Test, which (though not thought legal
to be imposed as such) contained no other than the highest Obligations of
Loyalty that every Subject owes to his Prince. But if the making of Tests in
Parliament, which with the Sovereign Consent (as Kings are but Men, and
sometimes the Exigence of Affairs, may extort the Royal Fiat) lies in the
Majority so to do: Suppose the Forgers of this Test (for by the by they were
none of the best Friends of the Church as now by Law established) had followed
their Blow, and formed a second Test to deny Episcopacy to be Jure divino; a
Dispute much bandyed in those days: Here had the Bishops been thrown out of the
Parliament, if not the whole Hierarchy out of the Kingdom. And so by Tests ad
Infinitum, how might the Basis of the whole Government been overturned, and the
very Houses of Parliament dwindled at last, to the scandalous Dimensions of the
old fashioned Rump. For if one Test to exclude a Score, why not another to lop
off a hundred? And indeed, how are our present Parliaments the comprehensive
Body of the Nation, when so many of the Peers, not there by Representatives,
are shut out? Nay, how much is the Dignity of the Laws they make, and the very
Constitution of our later Parliaments themselves impaired and lessened by such
an Exclusion?

But to come to the main Business, viz. to obviate the greatest and terriblest
Clamor of Fear and Jealousy against the Repeal of the Test, viz. If the Test
were destroyed, who knows but Parliaments may be so managed as to turn out the
Church of England, and set up Popery even by Law it self?

This indeed is the Gorgon, that frights half Mankind out of their little
Senses. But where, or how is this Popish Parliament to be gotten, (for a
Protestant one will hardly be so Complaisant:) But to search out every Cranny
that this imaginary Danger is supposed to creep in at, Let us examine the House
of Lords, and try their Inclinations that way.

If the Test were laid aside, and the excluded Lords restored; what would their
Number signify! At our last Parliament, the Protestant Peers amounted to 160,
and the excluded Romish Barons (nor are they much increased since) were not a
Tenth of their Number. So that here is an absolute want of a Prodigious Creation
of Romish Barons to rise to a Majority; Nay, and of so many Estates too, to
support the Grandeur, as possibly would stagger imagination it self to find a
Treasure, enough to purchase: for so many New Dignifications, especially of
Gentry, or Landed Men to start up Lords, among so thin sown a Party, would put
'em damnable hard to it. But for once, grant such an Extravagant Donation of
Honor, and such Golden Mines to maintain it, might form a House of Lords
capable of over-ballancing on the Popish side; where shall the House of Commons
be had? for without both they do nothing! They would go nigh to find such a
Dead Weight in the Lower House, as all the Tuggs of Rome would never be able to
stir; and this stupendous Parliamentary Subversion of the Church of England a
Phoenomenon only in Nubibus.

A Popish House of Commons too! Alas, they will tell you, very easily. Has not
the King for instance, got a new way of Regulating Corporations, Nay, has he
not (or will do before next Sessions) already Modeled all their Charters, and
undoubtedly left few or none, either Citizens, Burghers or Freemen, in whom
the Election lies, but such as are his Friends and Creatures.

Very Well: Suppose he has, or will take Care, to the best of his Endeavor or
Power, to Establish Corporations to his own Hearts liking: After all, where
shall there be One Roman Catholic in all the next Election; and what shall
these Creatures, (if you will have 'em so) do more than Choose every Numerical
Member a Protestant: For till the Test be Legally dissolved, they must all be
so. And truly what if this next, though Protestant Parliament, out of an
Abhorrence of the Unchristian Barbarity of the Penal Laws, shall do
themselves, their Posterity, their Country, and His Majesty Justice in
dissolving them? And what if likewise their true Sense of the most servile
Imposition that Imperial Dignity ever bore, their Tenderness for His Majesty's
Honor and Prerogative, together with their Gratitude, for the Plenty and Peace
His Reign has Blessed them with, shall incline them also, to break those
Fetters of the Crown, the Test; and all no more than High-Justice and Right
Reason shall oblige them to; Must it therefore follow, that they shall do
themselves, their Families, their yet unborn Heirs, and their no less Concern
their Country that Wrong, as to give up their tenderest and nearest Care, their
Religion, or any thing tending to it!

Well, but say they, if this next Parliament will not do the Work; when the
Test is once gone; it is but calling n^w Popish ones that will.

I, but who shall choose them? The Electors are all the same: For the
Corporations are, or will be settled to his own Model; and Test or no Test in
Being, their Inclinations will be all the same; and upon any New Choice, beyond
all Dispute, the Majoritie of the Old Members Elected again; and if any New
Ones amongst them, those too as far from ^eaning toward Rome, as the Popular
Frantic Jealousies are from Common Sense.

Upon the upshot, I defy all Mankind to form one Reasonable Projection, or
indeed, imaginary possibility of such a Popish Parliament. For instance we must
run into endless Labyrinths and Chimaeras, for the mere Shadow of such a
Danger. For first the King must dissolve all his late Charters again; no matter
whether forfeited or not; and so throw Dirt in the Face of his own yesterdays
Royal Acts and Grants: For all the Freemen, Burggers, or Aldermen, and
whatever the present Electors, and consequently all the Trading Part of the
Nation, must be displaced and cashierd, (a very Violent Reform, and an
ingratitude, which His Majesty's Nature abhors, to those very Men, that by
rescinding the Penal Laws and Test, shall have Duty fully given him all he
could ask:) And a new set of Romans planted in their Rooms; or otherwise, if
the present Electors continue in their Posts, a Majority of Papists must be
crowded in to over Vote them: But where to be had, let Machiavil himself inform
us. For alas, where are these Popish Vpstarts to be found. Not amongst the
present Inhabitants of the Corporations: For how many Corporations are there in
England, that have not so much as one Man amongst them of that Religion. Nay,
take some parts of England, as the West for Example, where Corporations stand
Thickest, and Papists grow Thinnest, and you shall not find in whole Counties
the Hundredth (Nay, if I trebled it, I should not mistake.) Part of Papists, of
all Degrees whatever, to supply such a Corporation Majority of Electors, or any
thing like it. And indeed, take the whole Nation round, and make every Romanist
that Writes the Age of Man an Alderman, they shall fall so short still of the
Account, that they must be forced to send over for Jago Pilgrims, (a good jolly
Troop too) or some other, as Extravagant Helps to make out the Number, or
otherwise our Outcry will be but Noise, and our Fears but Fantoms.

But suppose any such wondrous Electors, such Alien or Foreign supplies of
Romanists could be found, and so irregularly thrust into Corporations, as to
carry a Popish Majority of Corporation Members: Nor will such a bare Majority
do the Work. One additional Hundred of Popish Members extraordinary must be
had, to overpower the Knights of the Shire, who in Spite of all pretended
Corporation Feats, will be firm Protestant Members; the Over-byassing of whole
Counties, being an Apprehension that Lunacy it self can never Forge.
Nevertheless, suppose all these Alien Supplies so obtruded upon us, enough to
carry the Cause. Alas, what Palliation, Nay, what Eloquence of Angels is enough
to vindicate such Irregular and such Arbitrary Foundation of a Parliament; and
instead of a Legal Assembly, and truly National Senate, or Popery so Established
the Sacred Sanction of a LAW, Even half an Eye would see through the Fraud, and
the whole World explode and condemn so visible a Deceit and Illusion:
Insomuch, that His Majesty with as much Justice, and twice as much Honor;
(Pardon the Profanation even of such a Supposition) might as well set up, Sic
volo sic Jubeo for Law, and save himself the trouble of calling of Parliaments,
for dissolving Penal Laws or Tests, or any other such tedious, and indeed, of
the two more Unprincely Toil and Labor.

What Mountain Height, are Fears raised to; but how shallow a Basis are they
Built upon? Alas, we are not in any kind to take Comparisons from Queen Marys,
or Queen Elizabeth's Reign. The turning the Scale of Parliaments in those Days,
was the least part of any Reasonable Man's Wonder. What an easy Matter for the
Influence and Ascendancy of Imperial Power to sway Laws, and Establish
Churches, as the Sovereign Inclination leaned; when the Church of Rome was not
so low in its Wane, or the Young Reformation so high in its Increase, but
either Party were in a manner the Moiety of the Nation, and consequently the
Favor of the Crown might go far, and a Majority on the Royal Side, be more
easily obtained.

But in the present, even Despicably Diminitive Number of Romanists, and so
almost a Total Bent of the whole Nation to the other side, the Project is so
impracticable, and the Turn so impossible, as only Delirium can shape a Fear of
it.

But now to Sum up all, and draw toward a Period: between such Penal Laws,
and such Tests, and the wondrous Episcopal Tenderness for their Beloved
Preservation, Our Church, though a good Mother, is but a Course Nurse, when
such Vnlickt Brats as these, are her Hugged and Dandled Bantlings. And Our
Conscientious Mute Prelates, were certainly under the Fascination of no
ordinary Hot Zeal, or something else as Warm, to be warpt into Disobedience in
so poor a Cause, viz. The Reading so inoffensive a Paper as His Majesty's
Declaration. -- But perhaps, after all, there may be more in it than we are
aware of. For who can Fadom the Depth of such a Disobedience? Who knows but
this very Mask of Conscience might be one of the subtlest Stratagems of
Interest. Who, I say, knows but the Loss of so considerable a Church Regalia,
so dear an Ensign of Ecclesiastic Sovereignty as their Tormenta and Flagella,
their Tests and Penal Laws; and so sensible a Diminution of their GRANDEVR,
their Diana GRANDEVR, threatened by the Relaxation of those Laws, might be so
near a Concern to them, that seeing the Royal Indulgence to Religious Liberty,
daily more and more gaining upon the Hearts of the People, and to stop the
Carreer of so General a Compassion, the Fatal Effects of so growing a
Contagion; their Denial of Reading so Pacifick a Declaration might possibly be
one of the most exquisite Artifices to stiffle the generous Product of it into
Abortion; Their very Refusal being really no more than purposely to Court
Sufferings, to gain Proselytes, as well fore knowing, upon the least Punishment
for it, though ever so much their Due, to have their Condoled and Pittyed Cause,
seen through those Popular False Optics, as should turn even Justice it self
in Persecution: And so by Alaruming the Old Ignorance into New Jealousies, they
might so harden that present (too Universal) popular Lenity toward Tender
Consciences, and more than probably so affect the Frightened Populace, and
thereby so far influence the next Election as to defeat the whole Royal
purposed Clemency, and gain their own Point.

I should be sorry to be mistaken in this Suspicion; but truly the shallowness
of so Weak-reason'd an Obstinacy against so Innocent, a Command of the King
looks so very like some such sort of Ecclesiastical Polity, that I am afraid
the Conscientious stumble at so Diminitive a Gnat, will at last be found a mere
artful Piece of Priest craft, to keep their Dagon from falling: And what that
Dagon is, let the World judge; for excepting the Engines of their Tyranny, and
the supporters of their Pride, I know no strength the Penal Laws or Tests,
either have or can yield them.

But above all things that the Illegality of the King's Dispensing Power,
should be a Specter that appeared so dreadful to their Lordships, yet walks
invisible to every Mortal Eyesight else, is not a little surprising, The very
Straitest-laced Prerogative Men, never denied the King his Dispencing Power in
Cases of Offense only against himself, Absq. Damno alterius; and wherein the
bare Exercise of Religious Worship is, or can be alterius Damno, their Wisdoms
would have been kind to inform us: Or wherein any Minister or Officer,
qualified or not qualified by the Test, in any Civil or Military Station, (for
His Majesty pretends to no other Dispensation) can be Damno Ecclesiae would be
another piece of Discovery, as kind as the other. Wherein, and what has our
Church, or our Nondispensing Churchmen suffered by all this Toleration. Have
they lost the least Particle of their Government, Discipline, Rights,
Privileges, or Possessions whatever. Is there any of our Nontested
Magistrates, or our Vnpinion'd Dissenters in all this Freedom, has wronged our
Church of so much as a Sprig of Mint, or a Corn of Cumminseed that she can
challenge Hers. Is she denied either Law or Justice, for so much as the claim
of a Tythe-Egg?

And that this Dispensing Power, may not look altogether so hidious, What is
the King's Dispensing Power in Penal Laws, really any more than his pardoning
Power. The Transgression of those Laws, incurrs such a Penalty or Punishment,
and the Royal Clemency, is Graciously pleased to remit the Forfeiture. And
indeed, what does his Declaration amount to more than a Noli prosequi, (only a
more universal one) the Common and daily Plea of the Crown. His Majesty, by his
unquestioned Right can pardon; and what is his Declaration truly more than that
he will do it. Our Great Crown-sticklers, have to a very fair purpose, so long
Preached up our King's, the Vizegerents of GOD, to come at last to the denying
them any part of the brightest Prerogative of the Divinity MERCY. And as to the
backing the Credit, of their Assertion, by their Parliamentary Authority of 72,
etc.

I am sorry to hear our Divine Gamalels lay hold of so Weak a Handle, as to set
up a Transient Vote against a Fundamental Prerogative. And as to their
Insinuation, that upon our conceding a Dispensing Power, in the Case of the
Penal Laws and Tests; it must therefore follow, that we should open an Inlet to
lay aside All Laws, both Ecclesiastic and Civil; it is an Ergo sequitur, so
strangely far stretched, that they might e'ne as well have said, (and the
Consequence have hung as well together too) that because some of our Severe
Fathers of our Church, have Reasons of Conscience and Policy, to support Laws
for the depopulating of Kingdoms, therefore the Gentler FATHER of our Country,
ought to have the same Reasons too.

I hope, their Lordships, if for nothing but the Reputation of their Wisdom and
Learning, did not tender these Petitioning Reasons to His Majesty, as intended
for Convincing ones. For truly by the strength, both of their Alleging and
inferencing, this part of their Petition, if not all of it, I am afraid looks
more like Written for the Reading of the Rabble, than of the King.

But to conclude. As the forementioned are all our Dangers from their Repeal,
wherein are His Majesty's Demands unreasonable, in asking the Repeal of the
Penal Laws, in which almost the whole Vox populi, Witness the late Numerous
Adresses, joins with him, and the Principles of Nature, Humanity and Conscience
plead for him. Or in asking the Repeal of the Test, for the asserting of his
own Honor, and the Recovering the Birthright of a King, by endeavoring to
shake off the most shameful Vassalage that Monarch ever truckled under. And why
must his Endeavors of doing his People so much Right in the first; and Himself
so much Right in the last, be so poorly mis-interpreted, by the unnatural
Surmises of his Ungrateful People. But let us Blush and mend, and by giving up
these Laws, do Equity in Return of Clemency and MERCY.

FINIS.

