A FURTHER ACCOUNT OF THE TRIALS OF THE New England Witches.

WITH THE OBSERVATIONS Of a Person who was upon the Place several Days when the
suspected Witches were first taken into Examination.

To which is added, Cases of Conscience Concerning Witchcrafts and Evil Spirits
Personating Men.

Written at the Request of the Ministers of New England.

By Increase Mather, President of Harvard College.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London: Printed for I. Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultrey 1693. Of whom may
be had the Third Edition of Mr. Cotton Mather's First Account of the Trials of
the New England Witches, Printed on the same size with this Last Account, that
they may bind up together.

Advertisement.
THere is now preparing for the Press, An APPENDIX to this Work, giving an
Account of the late Dispossessing of a Person in England by Fasting and Prayer.
Printed by the Consent of the Minister chiefly concerned. With a Preface to it
by a Reverend Divine living in London. Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in
the Poultrey.

A TRUE NARRATIVE of some Remarkable Passages relating to sundry Persons
afflicted by Witchcraft at Salem Village in New England, which happened from
the 19th. of March to the 5th. of April, 1692.
Collected by Deodat Lawson.
ON the Nineteenth day of March last I went to Salem Village, and lodged at
Nathaniel Ingersol's near to the Minister Mr. P's. House, and presently after I
came into my Lodging, Capt. Walcut's Daughter Mary came to Lieut. Ingersol's
and spoke to me; but suddenly after, as she stood by the Door, was bitten, so
that she cried out of her Wrist, and looking on it with a Candle, we saw
apparently the marks of Teeth, both upper and lower set, on each side of her
Wrist.

In the beginning of the Evening I went to give Mr. P. a Visit. When I was
there, his Kinswoman, Abigail Williams, (about 12 Years of Age) had a grievous
fit; she was at first hurried with violence to and fro in the Room (though Mrs.
Ingersol endeavored to hold her) sometimes making as if she would fly,
stretching up her Arms as high as she could, and crying, Whish, Whish, Whish,
several times; presently after she said, there wa^ Goodw. N. and said, Do you
not see her? Why there she stands! And she said, Goodw. N. offered her THE
BOOK, but she was resolved she would not take it, saying often, I wont, I wont,
I wont take it, I do not know what Book it is: I am sure it is none of God*s
Book, it is the Devil's Book for ought I know. After that, she run to the Fire,
and begun to throw Firebrands about the House, and run against the Back, as if
she would run up Chimney, and, as they said, she had attempted to go into the
Fire in other Fits.

On Lords Day, the Twentieth of March, there were sundry of the afflicted
Persons at Meeting, as, Mrs. Pope, and Goodwife Bibber, Abigail Williams, Mary
Walcut, Mary Jews, and Doctor Grigg's Maid. There was also at Meeting,
Goodwife C. (who was afterward Examined on suspicion of being a Witch:) They
had several sore Fits in the time of Public Worship, which did something
interrupt me in my first Prayer, being so unusual. After Psalm was sung,
Abigail Williams said to me, Now stand up, and name your Text! And after it was
read, she said, It is a long Text. In the beginning of Sermon, Mrs. Pope, a
Woman afflicted, said to me, Now there is enough of that. And in the Afternoon,
Abigail Williams, upon my referring to my Doctrine, said to me, I know no
Doctrine you had, If you did name one, I have forgot it.

In Sermon time, when Goodwife C. was present in the Meeting House, Ab. W.
called out, Look where Goodwife C. sits on the Beam suckling her Yellow Bird
betwixt her fingers! Ann Putman, another Girl afflicted, said, There was a
Yellow Bird sat on my Hat as it hung on the Pin in the Pulpit; but those that
were by, restrained her from speaking loud about it.

On Monday the 21st. of March, the Magistrates of Salem appointed to come to
Examination of Goodwife C. And about Twelve of the Clock they went into the
Meeting House, which was thronged with Spectators. Mr. Noyes began with a very
pertinent and pathetical Prayer; and Goodwife C. being called to answer to what
was alleged against her, she desired to go to Prayer, which was much wondered
at, in the presence of so many hundred People: The Magistrates told her, they
would not admit it; they came not there to hear her Pray, but to Examine her,
in what was Alleged against her. The Worshipful Mr. Hathorne asked her, Why
she afflicted those Children? She said, she did not Afflict them. He asked her,
who did then? She said, I do not know; How should I know? The Number of the
Afflicted Persons were about that time Ten, viz. Four Married Women, Mrs. Pope,
Mrs. Putman, Goodwife Bibber, and an Ancient Woman, named Goodall; three Maids,
Mary Walcut, Mercy Jews, at Thomas Putman's, and a Maid at Dr. Griggs's; there
were three Girls from 9 to 12 Years of Age, each of them, or thereabouts, viz.
Elizabeth Parris, Abigail Williams, and Ann Putman; these were most of them at
Goodwife C's. Examination, and did vehemently Accuse her in the Assembly of
Afflicting them, by Biting, Pinching, Strangling, etc. And that they did in
their Fits see her Likeness coming to them, and bringing a Book to them; she
said, she had no Book; they affirmed, she had a Yellow Bird, that used to suck
betwixt her Fingers, and being asked about it, if she had any Familiar Spirit,
that attended her? she said, She had no Familiarity with any such thing. She
was a Gospel Woman: Which Title she called her self by; and the Afflicted
Persons told her, Ah! she was A Gospel Witch. Ann Putman did there affirm, that
one day when Lieutenant Fuller was at Prayer at her Father's House, she saw the
shape of Goodwife C. and she thought Goodwife N. Praying at the same time to
the Devil; she was not sure it was Goodwife N. she thought it was; but very
sure she saw the shape of Goodwife C. The said C. said, they were poor
distracted Children, and no heed to be given to what they said. Mr. Hathorne
and Mr. Noyes replied, It was the Judgment of all that were present, they were
Bewitched, and only she the Accused Person said, they were Distracted. It was
observed several times, that if she did but bite her under lip in time of
Examination, the Persons afflicted were bitten on their Arms and Wrists, and
produced the Marks before the Magistrates, Ministers, and others. And being
watched for that, if she did but Pinch her Fingers, or Grasp one Hand hard in
another, they were Pinched, and produced the Marks before the Magistrates, and
Spectators. After that, it was observed, that if she did but lean her Breast
against the Seat in the Meeting House, (being the Bar at which she stood) they
were afflicted. Particularly Mrs. Pope complained of grievous Torment in her
Bowels, as if they were torn out. She vehemently accused the said C. as the
Instrument, and first threw her Muff at her; but that flying not home, she got
off her Shoe, and hit Goodwife C. on the Head with it. After these Postures
were watched, if the said C. did but stir her Feet, they were afflicted in
their Feet, and stamped fearfully. The afflicted Persons asked her, why she did
not go to the Company of Witches which were before the Meeting House Mustering?
Did she not hear the Drum beat? They accused her of having Familiarity with the
Devil, in the time of Examination, in the shape of a Black Man whispering in
her Ear; they affirmed, that her Yellow Bird sucked betwixt her Fingers in the
Assembly; and Order being given to see if there were any sign, the Girl that
saw it, said, it was too late now; she had removed a Pin, and put it on her
Head; which was found there sticking upright.

They told her, she had Covenanted with the Devil for ten Years, six of them
were gone, and four more to come. She was required by the Magistrates to answer
that Question in the Catechism, How many persons be there in the Godhead? She
answered it but oddly, yet was there no great thing to be gathered from it; she
denied all that was charged upon her, and said, They could not prove a Witch;
she was that Afternoon Committed to Salem-Prison; and after she was in Custody,
she did not so appear to them, and afflict them as before.

On Wednesday the 23d. of March, I went to Thomas Putman's, on purpose to see
his Wife: I found her lying on the Bed, having had a sore Fit a little before;
she spoke to me, and said, she was glad to see me; her Husband and she both
desired me to Pray with her while she was sensible; which I did, though the
Apparition said, I should not go to Prayer. At the first beginning she
attended; but after a little time, was taken with a Fit; yet continued silent,
and seemed to be Asleep: When Prayer was done, her Husband going to her, found
her in a Fit; he took her off the Bed, to set her on his Knees, but at first
she was so stiff, she could not be bended; but she afterward sat down, but
quickly began to strive violently with her Arms and Legs; she then began to
Complain of, and as it were to Converse Personally with, Goodwife N. saying,
Goodwife N. Be gone! Be gone! Be gone! are you not ashamed, a Woman of your
Profession, to afflict a poor Creature so? What hurt did I ever do you in my
life? You have but two Years to live, and then the Devil will torment your
Soul; for this your Name is blotted out of God's Book, and it shall never be
put in God's Book again; be gone for shame, are you not afraid of that which is
coming upon you? I know, I know what will make you afraid; the wrath of an
Angry God, I am sure that will make you afraid; be gone, do not torment me, I
know what you would have (we judged she meant, her Soul) but it is out of your
reach; it is clothed with the white Robes of Christ's Righteousness. After
this, she seemed to dispute with the Apparition about a particular Text of
Scripture. The Apparition seemed to deny it; (the Woman's Eyes being fast closed
all this time) she said, She was sure there was such a Text, and she would tell
it; and then the Shape would be gone, for, said she, I am sure you cannot stand
before that Text! Then she was sorely Afflicted, her Mouth drawn on one side,
and her Body strained for about a Minute, and then said, I will tell, I will
tell; it is, it is, it is, three or four times, and then was afflicted to
hinder her from telling, at last she broke forth, and said, It is the third
Chapter of the Revelations. I did something scruple the reading it, and did let
my scruple appear, lest Satan should make any Superstitiously to improve the
Word of the Eternal God. However, though not versed in these things, I judged I
might do it this once for an Experiment. I began to read, and before I had near
read through the first Verse, she opened her Eyes, and was well; this Fit
continued near half an hour. Her Husband and the Spectators told me, she had
often been so relieved by reading Texts that she named, something pertinent to
her Case; as Isa. 40. 1. Isa. 49. 1. Isa. 50. 1. and several others.

On Thursday the Twenty Fourth of March, (being in course the Lecture-Day at
the Village) Goodwife N. was brought before the Magistrates Mr. Hathorne and
Mr. Corwin, about Ten of the Clock in the Forenoon, to be Examined in the
Meeting House, the Reverend Mr. Hale begun with Prayer, and the Warrant being
read, she was required to give Answer, Why she afflicted those persons? She
pleaded her own Innocence with earnestness. Thomas Putman's Wife, Abigail
Williams, and Thomas Putman's Daughter accused her that she appeared to them,
and afflicted them in their Fits: but some of the others said, that they had
seen her, but knew not that ever she had hurt them; amongst which was Mary
Walcut, who was presently after she had so declared bitten, and cried out of
her in the Meeting House, producing the Marks of Teeth on her wrist. It was so
disposed, that I had not leisure to attend the whole time of Examination, but
both Magistrates and Ministers told me, that the things alleged by the
afflicted, and defenses made by her, were much after the same manner as the
former was. And her motions did produce like effects, as to Biting, Pinching,
Brusing, Tormenting, at their Breasts, by her Leaning, and when bended back,
were as if their Backs were broken. The afflicted Persons said, the Black Man
whispered to her in the Assembly, and therefore she could not hear what the
Magistrates said unto her. They said also, that she did then ride by the
Meeting House, behind the Black Man. Thomas Putman's Wife had a grievous Fit in
the time of Examination, to the very great impairing of her strength, and
wasting of her spirits, insomuch as she could hardly move hand or foot when she
was carried out. Others also were there grievously afflicted, so that there was
once such an hideous scriecth and noise (which I heard as I walked at a little
distance from the Meeting House) as did amaze me, and some that were within,
told me the whole Assembly was struck with Consternation, and they were afraid,
that those that sat next to them were under the Influence of Witchcraft. This
Woman also was that day committed to Salem Prison. The Magistrates and
Ministers also did inform me, that they apprehended a Child of Sarah G. and
examined it, being between 4 and 5 years of Age. And as to matter of Fact, they
did unanimously affirm, that when this Child did but cast its Eye upon the
afflicted Persons, they were tormented; and they held her Head, and yet so many
as her Eye cold six upon were afflicted. Which they did several times make
careful Observation of: The afflicted complained, they had often been Bitten by
this Child, and produced the marks of a small set of teeth accordingly; this
was also committed to Salem Prison, the Child looked hail, and well as other
Children. I saw it at Lieut. Ingersol's. After the Commitment of Goodw. N. Tho.
Putman's Wife was much better, and had no violent Fits at all from that 24th.
of March, to the 5th. of April. Some others also said they had not seen her so
frequently appear to them, to hurt them.

On the 25th. of March (as Capt. Stephen Sewal of Salem did afterward inform
me) Eliz. Paris had sore Fits at his House, which much troubled himself, and
his Wife, so as he told me they were almost discouraged. She related, that the
great Black Man came to her, and told her, if she would be ruled by him, she
should have whatsoever she desired, and go to a Golden City. She relating this
to Mrs. Sewal, she told the Child, it was the Devil, and he was a Liar from the
Beginning, and bid her tell him so, if he came again: which she did
accordingly, at the next coming to her, in her Fits.

On the 26th. of March, Mr. Hathorne, Mr. Corwin, and Mr. Higison, were at the
Prison-Keeper's House to Examine the Child, and it told them there, it had a
little Snake that used to suck on the lowest Joint of its Forefinger; and when
they enquired where, pointing to other places, it told them, not there, but
there, pointing on the lowest Joint of the Forefinger, where they observed a
deep Red Spot, about the bigness of a Flea-bite; they asked who gave it that
Snake? whether the great Black Man? It said no, its Mother gave it.

The 31 of March there was a Public Fast kept at Salem on account of these
Afflicted Persons. And Abigal Williams said, that the Witches had a Sacrament
that day at an house in the Village, and that they had Red Bread and Red Drink.
The first of April, Mercy Lewis, Thomas Putman's Maid, in her Fit, said, they
did eat Red Bread, like Man's Flesh, and would have had her eat some and but
she would not; but turned away her head, and spit at them, and said, I will not
Eat, I will not Drink, it is Blood, etc. she said, That is not the Bread of
Life; that is not the Water of Life; Christ gives the Bread of Life; I will
have none of it! The first of April also Marcy Lewis aforesaid saw in her Fit a
White Man, and was with him in a glorious Place, which had no Candles nor Sun,
yet was full of Light and Brightness; where was a great Multitude in White
glittering Robes, and they Sung the Song in the fifth of Revelation, the 9th
verse, and the 110 Psalm and the 149 Psalm; and said with her self, How long
shall I stay here! let me be along with you: She was loath to leave this place,
and grieved that she could tarry no longer. This white Man has appeared
several times to some of them, and given them notice how long it should be
before they had another Fit, which was sometimes a day, or day and half, or
more or less, it has fallen out accordingly.

The 3d of April, the Lord's Day, being Sacrament-day, at the Village, Goodw.
C. upon Mr. Parris's naming his Text, John 6, 70. One of them is a Devil, the
said Goodw. C. went immediately out of the Meeting House, and flung the Door
after her violently, to the amazement of the Congregation. She was afterward
seen by some in their Fits, who said, O Goodw. C. I did not think to see you
here! (and being at their Red bread and drink) said to her, Is this a time to
receive the Sacrament, you ran-away on the Lord's Day, and scorned to receive
it in the Meeting House, and, Is this a time to receive it? I wonder at you!
This is the sum of what I either saw my self, or did receive Information from
persons of undoubted Reputation and Credit.

Remarks of things more than ordinary about the Afflicted Persons.
1. They are in their Fits tempted to be Witches, are showed the List of the
Names of others, and are tortured, because they will not yield to Subscribe, or
meddle with, or touch the BOOK, and are promised to have present Relief if they
would do it. 2. They did in the Assembly mutually Cure each other, even with a
Touch of their Hand, when Strangled, and otherwise Tortured; and would
endeavor to get to their Afflicted, to relieve them. 3. They did also foretell
when another Fit was a-coming, and would say, Look to her! she will have a Fit
presently, which fell out accordingly, as many can bear witness, that heard and
saw it. 4. That at the same time, when the Accused Person was present, the
Afflicted Persons saw her Likeness in other places of the Meeting House,
suckling her Familiar, sometimes in one place and posture, and sometimes in
another. 5. That their Motions in their Fits are Preternatural, both as to the
manner, which is so strange as a well person could not Screw their Body into;
and as to the violence also it is preternatural being much beyond the Ordinary
force of the same person when they are in their right mind. 6. The eyes of some
of them in their fits are exceeding fast closed, and if you ask a question they
can give no answer, and I do believe they cannot hear at that time, yet do they
plainly converse with the Appearances, as if they did discourse with real
persons. 7 They are utterly pressed against any persons Praying with them, and
told by the appearances, they shall not go to Prayer, so Tho. Putmans wife was
told, I should not Pray; but she said, I should: and after I had done, reasoned
with the Appearance, Did not I say he should go to Prayer. 8 The forementioned
Mary VV. being a little better at ease, the Afflicted persons said, she had
signed the Book; and that was the reason she was better. Told me by Edward
Putman.
Remarks concerning the Accused.
1 For introduction to the discovery of those that afflicted them It is
reported Mr. Parris's Indian Man, and Woman, made a Cake of Rye Meal, and the
Childrens water, baked it in the Ashes, and gave it to a Dog, since which they
have discovered, and seen particular persons hurting of them. 2 In Time of
Examination, they seemed little affected, though all the Spectators were much
grieved to see it. 3 Natural Actions in them produced Preternatural actions in
the Afflicted, so that they are their own Image without any Poppits of Wax or
otherwise. 4. That they are accused to have a Company about 23 or 24 and they
did Muster in Arms, as it seemed to the Afflicted Persons. 5. Since they were
confined, the Persons have not been so much Afflicted with their appearing to
them, Biteing or Pinching of them etc. 6. They are reported by the Afflicted
Persons to keep days of Fast and days of Thanksgiving, and Sacraments; Satan
endeavors to Transform himself to an Angel of Light, and to make his Kingdom
and Administrations to resemble those of our Lord Jesus Christ. 7. Satan Rages
Principally amongst the Visible Subjects of Christ's Kingdom and makes use (at
least in appearance) of some of them to Afflict others; that Christ's Kingdom
may be divided against it self, and so be weakened. 8. Several things used in
England at Trial of Witches, to the Number of 14 or 15 which are wont to pass
instead of, or in Concurrence with VVitnesses, at least 6 or 7 of them are
found in these accused see Keebles Statutes. 9. Some of the most solid
Afflicted Persons do affirm the same things concerning seeing the accused out
of their Fitts as well as in them. 10. The Witches had a Fast, and told one of
the Afflicted Girls, she must not Eat, because it was Fast Day, she said, she
would: they told her they would Choke her then; which when she did eat, was
endeavored.
A Further Account of the Trials of the New England Witches, sent in a Letter
from thence, to a Gentleman in London.
HEre were in Salem, June 10. 1692. about 40 persons that were afflicted with
horrible torments by Evil Spirits, and the afflicted have accused 60 or 70 as
Witches, for that they have Spectral appearances of them, tho the Persons are
absent when they are tormented. When these Witches were Tried, several of them
confessed a contract with the Devil, by signing his Book, and did express much
sorrow for the same, delareing also their Confederate Witches, and said the
Tempters of them desired 'em to sign the Devils Book, who tormented them till
they did it. There were at the time of Examination, before many hundreds of
Witnesses* strange Pranks played; such as the taking Pins out of the Clothes of
the afflicted, and thrusting them into their flesh, many of which were taken
out again by the Judges own hands. Thorns also in like kind were thrust into
their flesh; the accusers were sometimes struck dumb, deaf, blind, and
sometimes lay as if they were dead for a while, and all foreseen and declared
by the afflicted just before 'twas done. Of the afflicted there were two Girls,
about 12 or 13 years of age, who saw all that was done, and were therefore
called the Visionary Girls; they would say, Now he, or she, or they, are going
to bite, or pinch the Indian; and all there present in Court saw the visible
marks on the Indians arms; they would also cry out, Now look, look, they are
going to bind such an ones Legs, and all present saw the same person spoken of,
fall with her Legs twisted in an extraordinary manner; Now say they, we shall
all fall, and immediately 7 or 8 of the afflicted fell down, with terrible
shrieks and Out-crys: at the time when one of the Witches was sentenced, and
pinnim'd with a Cord, at the same time was the afflicted Indian Servant going
home, (being about 2 or 3 miles out of town,) and had both his Wrists at the
same instant bound about with a like Cord, in the same manner as she was when
she was sentenced, but with that violence, that the Cord entered into his flesh,
not to be untied, nor hardly cut -- Many Murders are supposed to be in this way
committed; for these Girls, and others of the afflicted, say, they see Coffins,
and bodies in Shrowds, rising up, and looking on the accused, crying,
Vengeance. Vengeance on the Murderers -- Many other strange things were
transacted before the Court in the time of their Examination; and especially
one thing which I had like to have forgot, which is this, One of the accused,
whilst the rest were under Examination, was drawn up by a Rope to the Roof of
the house where he was, and would have been choked in all probability, had not
the Rope been presently cut; the Rope hung at the Roof by some invisibletye.
for there was no hole where it went up; but after it was cut the remainder of
it was found in the Chamber just above, lying by the very place where it hung
down.

In December 1692, the Court sat again at Salem in New England, and cleared
about 40 persons suspected for Witches, and Condemned three. The Evidence
against these three was the same as formerly, so the Warrant for their
Execution was sent, and the Graves dug for the said three, and for about
five more that had been Condemned at Salem formerly, but were Repreived by the
Governor.

In the beginning of February 1693. the Court sat at Charlestown, where the
Judge expressed himself to this effect.

That who it was that obstructed the Execution of Justice, or hindered those
good proceedings they had made, he knew not, but thereby the Kingdom of Satan
was advanced, etc and the Lord have mercy on this Country; and so declined
coming any more into Court. In his absence Mr. D -- sat as Chief Judge 3
several days, in which time 5 or 6 were cleared by Proclamation, and almost as
many by Trial; so that all are acquitted.

The most remarkable was an Old Woman named Dayton, of whom it was said, If any
in the World were a Witch, she was one, and had been so accounted 30 years. I
had the Curiosity to see her tried; she was a decrepid Woman of about 80 years
of age, and did not use many words in her own defense. She was accused by about
30 Witnesses; but the matter alleged against her was such as needed little
apology, on her part not one passionate word, or immoral action, or evil, was
then objected against her for 20 years past, only strange accidents falling
out, after some Christian admonition given by her, as saying, God would not
prosper them, if they wronged the Widow. Upon the whole, there was not proved
against her any thing worthy of Reproof, or just admonition, much less so
heinous a Charge.

So that by the Goodness of God we are once more out of present danger of this
Hobgoblin Monster; the standing Evidence used at Salem were called. but did not
appear.

There were others also at Charlestown brought upon their Trials, who had
formerly confessed themselves to be Witches; but upon their trials denied it,
and were all cleared; So that at present there is no further prosecution of any.

CASES of CONSCIENCE Concerning Evil Spirits Personating MEN; WITCHCRAFTS,
Infallible Proofs of Guilt in such as are Accused with that CRIME.

All Considered according to the Scriptures, History, Experience, and the
Judgment of many Learned MEN.

By Increase Mather, President of Harvard College at Cambridge, and Teacher of
a Church at Boston in New England

PROVE. xxii. xxi. -- That thou might Answer the Words of Truth, to them that
send unto thee. Efficient Daemones, ut quae non sunt, sic tamen, qua^^ sint,
conspicienda hominibus exhibeant. Lactantlus Lib. 2. Instit. Cap. 15. Diabolus
Consulitur, cum iis mediis utimur aliquid Cognoscendi, quae a Diabolo sunt
introducta. Ames Cas. Cons. L. 4. Cap. 23. Printed at Boston, and Reprinted at
London, for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultrey. 1693.

Christian READER.
SO Odious and Abominable is the Name of a Witch, to the Civilized, much more
the Religious part of Mankind, that it is apt to grow up into a Scandal for
any, so much as to enter some sober cautions against the over hasty suspecting,
or too precipitant Judging of Persons on this account. But certainly, the more
execrable the Crime is, the more critical care is to be used in the exposing of
the Names, Liberties, and Lives of Men (especially of a Godly Conversation) to
the imputation of it. The awful hand of God now upon us, in letting loose of
evil Angels among us to perpretate such horrid Mischiefs, and suffering of
Hell's Instruments to do such fearful things as have been scarce heard of; has
put serious persons into deep Musings, and upon curious Enquiries what is to be
done for the detecting and defeating of this tremendous design of the grand
Adversary: And, though all that fear God are agreed, That no evil is to be done,
that good may come of it; yet has the Devil obtained not a little of his
design, in the divisions of Reuben, about the application of this Rule.

That there are Devils and Witches, the Scripture asserts, and experience
confirms, That they are common enemies of Mankind, and set upon mischief, is
not to be doubted: That the Devil can (by Divine Permission) and often does vex
men in Body and Estate, without the Instrumentality of Witches, is undeniable:
That he often has, and delights to have the concurrence of Witches, and their
consent in harming men, is consonant to his native Malice to Man, and too
lamentably exemplified: That Witches, when detected and convinced, ought to be
exterminated and cut off, we have God's warrant for, Exodus 22. 18. Only the
same God who has said, thou shall not suffer a Witch to live; has also said,
at the Mouth of two Witnesses, or three Witnesses shall he that is worthy of
Death, be put to Death: But at the Mouth of one Witness, he shall not be put to
Death, Deuteronomy. 17. 6. Much debate is made about what is sufficient Conviction,
and some have (in their Zeal) supposed that a less clear evidence ought to pass
in this than in other Cases, supposing that else it will be hard (if possible)
to bring such to condign Punishment, by reason of the close conveyances that
there are between the Devil and Witches; but this is a very dangerous and
unjustifiable tenet. Men serve God in doing their Duty, he never intended that
all persons guilty of Capital Crimes should be discovered and punished by men
in this Life, though they be never so curious in searching after Iniquity. It
is therefore exceeding necessary that in such a day as this, men be informed
what is Evidence and what is not. It concerns men in point of Charity; for though
the most shining Professor may be secretly a most abominable Sinner, yet till
he be detected, our Charity is bound to Judge according to what appears: and
notwithstanding that a clear evidence must determine a case; yet presumptions
must be weighed against presumptions, and Charity is not to be forgone as long
as it has the most preponderating on its side. And it is of no less necessity
in point of Justice; there are not only Testimonies required by God, which are
to be credited according to the Rules given in his Word referring to witnesses:
But there is also an Evidence supposed to be in the Testimony, which is
thoroughly to be weighed, and if it do not infallibly prove the Crime against
the person accused, it ought not to determine him guilty of it; for so a
righteous Man may be Condemned unjustly. In the case of Witchcrafts we know
that the Devil is the immediate Agent in the Mischief done, the consent or
compact of the Witch is the thing to be Demonstrated.

Among many Arguments to evince this, that which is most under present debate,
is that which refers to something vulgarly called Spectre Evidence, and a
certain sort of Ordeal or trial by the sight and touch. The principal Plea to
justify the convictive Evidence in these, is fetched from the Consideration of
the Wisdom and Righteousness of God in Governing the World, which they suppose
would fail, if such things were permitted to befall an innocent person: but it
is certain, that too resolute conclusions drawn from hence, are bold
usurpations upon spotless Sovereignty: and though some thing if suffered to be
common, would subvert this Government, and disband, yea ruin Humane Society;
yet God does sometimes suffer such things to evene, that we may thereby know
how much we are beholden to him, for that restraint which he lays upon the
Infernal Spirits, who would else reduce a World into a Chaos. That the
Resolutions of such Cases as these is proper for the Servants of Christ in the
Ministry cannot be denied; the seasonableness of doing it now, will be
justified by the Consideration of the necessity there is at this time of a
right Information of men's Judgments about these things, and the danger of their
being misinformed.

The Reverend, Learned, and Judicious Author of the ensuing Cases, is too well
known to need our Commendation: All that we are concerned in, is to assert our
hearty Consent to, and Concurrence with the substance of what is contained in
the following Discourse: And, with our hearty Request to God, that he would
discover the depths of this Hellish Design; direct in the whole management of
this Affair; prevent the taking any wrong steps in this dark way; and that he
would in particular Bless these faithful Endeavors of his Servant to that end,
we Commend it and you to his Divine Benediction.

William Hubbard. Samuel Phillips. Charles Morton. James Allen. Michael
Wigglesworth. Samuel Whiting Sen. Samuel Willard. John Baily. Jabez Fox. Joseph
Gerrish. Samuel Angier. John Wise. Joseph Capen. Nehemiah Walter.


CASES of CONSCIENCE CONCERNING Witchcrafts.
THE First Case that I am desired to express my Judgment in, is this, Whether
it is not Possible for the Devil to impose on the imaginations of Persons
Bewitched, and to cause them to Believe that an Innocent, yea that a Pious
person does torment them, when the Devil himself does it; or whether Satan may
not appear in the Shape of an Innocent and Pious, as well as of a Nocent and
Wicked Person, to Afflict such as suffer by Diabolical Molestations?

The Answer to the Question must be Affirmative; Let the following Arguments be
duly weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary.

Argu. 1. There are several Scriptures from which we may infer the Possibility
of what is Affirmed.

1. We find that the Devil by the Instigation of the Witch at Endor appeared in
the Likeness of the Prophet Samuel. I am not ignorant that some have asserted
that, which, if it were proved, would evert this Argument, viz. that it was the
true and not a delusive Samuel which the Witch brought to converse with Saul.
Of this Opinion are some of the Jewish Rabbis R. Saactias. R Eleazer Athias.
Lyranus, Sic and Josephus.
and some Christian Doctors Ambrose, Hierom Basil, Nazianzen
and many late Popish Authors Thomas, Tostatus, S^arez. c^^j ta^. (^) In
Ecclesi^st. Chap. 46. 22, 23.
amongst whom Cornel. a Lapide is most elaborate. But that it was a Demon
representing Samuel has been evinced by learned and Orthodox Writers:
especially In Locum.
Peter Martyr, In 2 Cor. 11. 14. Page 555.
Balduinus De Spectr^. Cap 7.
Lavater, and our incomparable John Rainolde. I shall not here insist on the
clearing of that, especially considering, that elsewhere I have done it: only
let me add, that the Witch said to Saul, I see Elohim, i. e. A God; (for the
whole Context shows, that a single Person is intended) Ascending out of the
Earth. 1 Samuel 28. 13. The Devil would be Worshipped as a God, and Saul now,
that he was become a Necr^mancer, must bow himself to him. Moreover, had it
been the true Samuel from Heaven reprehending Saul, there is great Reason to
believe, that he would not only have reproved him for his sin, in not executing
Judgment on the Amalekites; as in Ver. 18. But for his Wickedness in consulting
with Familiar Spirits: For which Sin it was in special that he died, 2 Chronicles.
10. 13. But in as much as there is not one word to testify against that
Abominaon, we may conclude that it was not real Samuel that appeared to Saul:
and if it were the Devil in his likeness, the Argument seems very strong, that
if the Devil may appear in the form of a Saint in Glory, much more is it
possible for him to put on the likeness of the most Pious and Innocent Saint on
Earth. There are, who acknowledge that a Demon may appear in the shape of a
Godly Person, But not as doing Evil. Whereas the Devil in Samuel's likeness
told a pernicious Lie, when he said, Thou have disquieted me. It was not in the
Power of Saul, nor of all the Devils in Hell, to disquiet a Soul in Heaven,
where Samuel had been for Two years before this Apparition. Nor did the Spectre
speak true, when he said, Thou and thy Sons shall be with me: Though Saul himself
at his Death went to be with the Devil, his Son Jonathan did not so. Besides,
(which suits with the matter in hand) the Devil in Samuels shape confirmed
Necromancy and Cursed Witchery. He that can in the likeness of Saints encourage
Witches to Familiarity with Hell, may possibly in the likeness of a Saint
afflict a Bewitched Person. But this we see from Scripture, Satan may be
permitted to do.

And whereas it is objected, that the Devil may appear indeed in the form of
Dead Persons, but that he cannot represent such as are living; The contrary is
manifest. No Question had Saul said to the Witch, bring me David who was then
living, she could as easily have shown living David as dead Samuel, as easily
as that great Conjurer, of whom De Praestig^^ Daemonum. Lib. 1. Cap. 16.
Wierus speaks, brought the appearance of Hector and Achilles, and after that
of David before the Emperor Maximilian.

And that evil Angels have sometimes appeared in the likeness of living absent
persons, is a thing abundantly confirmed by History.

D^ C. D. L 18.
Austin tells us of one that went for resolution in some intricate Questions to
a Philosopher, of whom he could get no Answer; but in the Night the Philosopher
comes to him, and resolves all his Doubts. Not long after, he demanded the
reason why he could not answer him in the Day as well as in the Night; The
Philosopher professed he was not with him in the Night, only acknowledged that
he dreamed of his having such conversation of his Friend, but he was all the
time at home, and asleep. Paulus and Palladius did both of them profess to
Austin, that one in his shape, had diverse times, and in diverse places appeared
to them De Appar. Spirituum Lib. 2. Cap. 7.
: Thyreus mentions several Apparitions of absent living persons, which happened
in his time, and which he had the certain knowledge of. A Man that is in one
place cannot ( Autoprosopos) at the same time be in another. It remains then
that such Specter are Prodigious and Supernatural, and not without Diabolical
Operation. It has been Controverted among Learned Men, whether innocent Persons
may not by the malice and deluding Power of the Devil be represented as present
amongst Witches at their dark Assemblies. The mentioned Thyreus says, that the
Devil may, and often does represent the forms of Innocent Persons out of those
Conventions, and that there is no Question to be made of it, but as to his
natural Power and Art he is able to make their shapes appear amongst his own
Servants, but he supposes the Providence of God will not suffer such an Injury
to be done to an Innocent Person. With him Misq. Magicar. Lib. 2. C. 12.
Delrio, and Spineus concur. But Cumanus in his Lucerna Inquisitorum (a Book
which I have not yet seen) defends the Affirmative in this Question. Bins
Fieldius in his Treatise, concerning the Confession of Witches, inclines to the
Negative, only De confess. sag. page 191.
he acknowledges Dei extraordinaria Permissione posse Innocents sic
representari. And he that shall assert, that Great and Holy God never did nor
ever will permit the Devil thus far to abuse an Innocent Person, affirms more
than he is able to prove. The story of Germanus his discovering a Diabolical
illusion of this nature, concerning a great number of Persons that seemed to be
at a Feast when they were really at home and asleep, is mentioned by many
Authors. But the particulars insisted on, do sufficiently evince the Truth of
what we assert, viz. That the Devil may by Divine Permission appear in the
shape of Innocent and Pious Persons. Nevertheless, It is evident from another
Scripture, viz. that in 2 Cor. 11. 14. For Satan himself is transformed into an
Angel of Light. He seems to be what he is not, and makes others seem to be what
they they are not. He represents evil men as good, and good men as evil. The
Angels of Heaven (who are the Angels of Light) love Truth and Righteousness,
the Devil will seem to do so to; and does therefore sometimes lay before men
excellent good Principles and exhort them (as he did Theodore Maillit) to
practice many things, which by the Law of Righteousness they are obliged unto,
and hereby he does more effectually deceive. Is it not strange, that he has
sometimes intimated to his most devoted servants, that if they would have
familiar Conversation with him, they must be careful to keep themselves from
enormous Sins, and pray constantly for Divine Protection? But so has he
transformed himself into an Angel of Light, as Desecre^^ mag. p. 31. see also
Lavat^r de Spect. Lib. 2. Cap. 18.
Boissardus shows. He has frequently appeared to Men pretending to be a good
Angel, so to Anatolius of old; and the late instances of Dr. Casa^bon: of
Spirits.
D^. Dee and Kellet are famously known. How many deluded Enthusiasts both in
former and latter times have been imposed on by Satan's appearing visibly to
them, pretending to be a good Angel. And moreover, he may be said to transform
himself into an Angel of Light, because of his appearing in the Form of Holy
Men, who are the Children of Light, yea in the shape and habit of Eminent
Ministers of God. So did he appear to Mr. Earl of Colchester in the likeness of
Mr. Liddal an Holy Man of God, and to the Turkish Chaous Baptized at London,
Anno 1658. pretending to be Mr. Dury an Excellent Minister of Christ. And how
often has he pretended to be the Apostle Paul or Peter or some other celebrated
Saint? Ecclesiastical Histories abound with Instances of this nature. Yea,
sometimes he has transfigured himself into the Form of Christ. It is reported
that he appeared to Sulpitius severus in vita martini.
St. Martin Gloriously arrayed, as if he had been Christ. So likewise to
G^accius co^^send. malefi^. p. 342.
Secundellus, and to another Saint, who suspecting it was Satan, transforming
himself into an Angel of Light had this expression, If I may see Christ in
Heaven it is enough, I desire not to see him in this World; whereupon the
Spectre vanished. It has been related of Luther, that after he had been Fasting
and Praying in his Study, the Devil come pretending to be Christ, but Luther
saying, away thou confounded Devil, I acknowledge no Christ but what is in my
Bible, nothing more was seen. Thus then the Devil is able (by Divine
Permission) to Change himself into what form or figure he pleases,

Omnia transformat sese in miracula rerum. A Third Scripture to our purpose is
that, in Rev. 12. 10. where the Devil is called the Accuser of the Brethren.
Such is the malice and impudence of the Devil, as that he does accuse good Men,
and that before God, and that not only of such Faults as they really are guilty
of, he accused Joshua with his filthy Garments, when through his Indulgence
some of his Family had transgressed by unlawful Marriages, Zach. 3. 23. with
Ezra 10. 18. but also with such Crimes, as they are altogether free from. He
represented the Primitive Christians as the vilest of men, and as if at their
Meetings they did commit the most nefandous Villainies that ever were known; and
that not only Innocent, but Eminently Pious Persons should through the Malice of
the Devil be accused with the Crime of Witchcraft, is no new thing. Such an
Affliction did the Lord see meet to exercise the great Athanasius with
Binsfeild de Confess. Sag. p. 187.
only the Divine Providence did wonderfully vindicate him from that as well as
from some other soul Aspersions. The Waldenses (although the Scriptures call them
Saints, Rev. 13. 7.) have been traduccd by Satan and by the World as horrible
Witches; so have others in other places, only because they have done
extraordinary things by their Prayers: It is by many Authors related, that a
City in France was molested with a Diabolical Spectre, which the People were
wont to call Hugon; near that place a number of Protestants were wont to meet
to serve God, whence the Professors of the true reformed Religion were
nic*named Hugonots, by the Papists, who designed to render them before the
World, as the Servants and Worshippers of that Demon, that went under the name
of Hugon. And how often have I read in Books written by Jesuits, that Luther
was a Wizard, and that he did himself confess that he had familiarity with
Satan! Most impudent Untruths! nor are these things to be wondered at, since
the Holy Son of God himself was reputed a Magician, and one that had
Familiarity with the greatest of Devils. The Blaspheming Pharisees said, he
casts out the Devils through the Prince of Devils, Matthew. 9. 34. There is then
not the best Saint on Earth (Man or Woman) that can assure themselves that the
Devil shall not cast such an Imputation upon them. It is enough for the
Disciple that he be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord: If they have
called the Master of the House Reelzebub, how much more them of his Household,
Matthew. 10. 25. It is not for men to determine how far the holy God may permit
the wicked one to proceed in his Accusations. The sacred story of Job gives us
to understand, that the Lord whose ways art past finding out, does for wise and
holy Ends suffer Satan by immediate Operation, (and consequently by Witchcraft)
greatly to afflict innocent Persons, as in their Bodies and Estates, so in
their Reputations. I shall mention but one Scripture more to confirm the Truth
in hand: It is that in Eccles. 9. 2, 3. where it is said, All things come alike
to all, there is one event to the Righteous and to the Wicked, as is the Good,
so is the Sinner, this is an evil amongst all things under the Sun, that there
is one Event happens to all. And in Eccles. 7. 15. it is said, There is a just
man that perishes in his Righteousness.

From hence we infer, that there is no outward Affliction whatsoever but may
befall a good Man; now to be represented by Satan as a Tormentor of Bewitched or
Possessed Persons, is a sore Affliction to a good Man. To be tormented by Satan
is a sore Affliction, yet nothing but what befell Job, and a Daughter of
Abraham, whom we read of in the Gospel: To be represented by Satan as
tormenting others, is an Affliction like the former; the Lord may bring such
extraordinary Temptations on his own Children, to afflict and humble them, for
some Sin they have been guilty of before him. A most wicked Person in St. Ives,
got a Knife, and went with it to a Ministers House, designing to stab him, but
was disappointed; afterward Conscience being awakened, the Devil appears to
this Person in the Shape of that Minister, with a Knife in his hand exhorting
to Self-murder: Was not here a Punishment suitable to the Sin which that Person
had been guilty of? Perhaps some of those whom Satan has represented as
committing Witchcrafts, have been tampering with some foolish and wicked
Sorceries, though not to that degree, which is Criminal and Capital by the Laws
both of God and Men; for this Satan may be permitted so to scourge them; or it
may be, they have misrepresented and abused others, for which cause the Holy
God may justly give Satan leave falsely to represent them.

Have we not known some that have bitterly censured all that have been
complained of by bewitched Persons, saying it was impossible they should not be
guilty; soon upon which themselves or some near Relations of theirs, have been
to the lasting Infamy of their Families, been accused after the same manner,
and Personated by the Devil! Such tremendous Rebukes on a few, should make all
men to be careful how they join with Satan in Condemning the Innocent.

Arg. 2. Because it is possible for the Devil in the Shape of an innocent
Person to do other mischiefs. As for those who acknowledge that Satan may
personate a pious Person, but not to do mischief, their Opinion has been
confuted by more than a few unhappy Instances. Mr. Clark Examples Vol. 1. p.
510.
speaks of a Man that had been an Atheist, or a Sadduce, not believing that
there are any Devils or any (to us) invisible World; this Man was converted,
but as a Punishment of his Infidelity, evil Angels did often appear to him in
the Shape of his most intimate Friends, and would sometimes seduce him into
great Inconveniences. It has been elsewhere, and but now noted, that a Demon
in the shape of excellent Mr. Dury appeared to the Turkish Chaos, Anno. 1658.
to dissuade him from prosecuting his desires of Baptism into the Name of
Christ: Also to Mr. Earl in the likeness of his Friends, to discourage him
from doing things lawful and good. A multitude of Jews were once deluded by a
Person pretending to be Moses from Heaven, and that if they would follow him
they should pass safe through the Sea (as did their Fathers of old through the
Red*Sea) whereby great numbers of them were deceived and perished in the
Waters. Socrat^'s Hist. p. 7. C. 38. ^
Learned and judicious Men have concluded that this Moses Creensis was a
Demon, transforming himself into Moses: And that the Devil has frequently
appeared Lege Villalpond de Magia, etc. L. ^. Cap. 27.
in the shape of famous Persons to the end that he might seduce Men into
Idolatry, a Sin equal to that of Witchcraft) no Man that has made it his
Concern to enquire into things of this nature can be ignorant. Many Examples of
this kind are collected by Mr. Bromball in his Treatise of Specter, and the
cunning Devil, to strengthen Men in their worshipping of Saints departed: And
by Mr. Bovet in his Pandemonium. It is credibly reported that the Devil in the
likeness of a faithful Minister (as St. Ives before mentioned, near Boston in
Lincolnshire) came to one that was in trouble of Mind, telling her the longer
she lived, the worse it would be for her; and therefore advising her to
Self-murder: An eminent Person still living had the account of this Matter from
Mr. Cotton (the famous Teacher of both Bostons.) He was well acquainted with
that Minister, who related to him the whole Story, with all the Circumstances
of it: For Mr. Cotton was so affected with the Report, as to take a Journey on
purpose to the Town where this happened, that so he might obtain a satisfactory
account about it, which he did. Some Authors say, that a Demon appeared in the
form of Sylvanus (Hierom's Friend) attempting a dishonest thing, the Devil
thereby designing to blast the Reputation of a famous Bishop. I have in another
Book mentioned that celebrated Instance concerning an honest Citizen in Zurick
(the Metropolis of Helvetia) in whose shape the Devil appeared, committing an
abominable Fact (not fit to be named) very early in the Morning, seen by the
Prefect of the City, and his Servant; they were amazed to behold a Man of good
Esteem for his Conversation, perpetrating a thing so vile and abominable; but
going from the Spectre in the Field, to the Citizen's House in the Town, they
found him at home, and in his Bed, nor had he been abroad that Morning, which
convinced them, that what they saw was an Illusion of the Devil: This Passage
is mentioned as a thing known and certain by Lavater in his Treatise of
Specter, Part 1. Chap. 19. Page 86.
who was a most learned and judicious Preacher in that City. Our Juel says of
him, that he must ingeniously confess, that he never understood Solomon's
Proverbs, until Lavater expounded them to him: That Book of his De Spectris
has been published in Latin, High and Low Dutch, French, Italian. The learned
Zanchy Epistol. 2.
speaks highly of it, professing that he had read it both with Pleasure and
Profit. Voetius In Disput. de Magia. p. 575.
takes notice of that passage which we have quoted out of Levater as a thing
memorable.

Some Popish Authors argue, That that Devil cannot personate an innocent Man as
doing an act of Witchcraft, because then he might as well represent them as
committing Theft, Murder, etc. And if so, there would be no living in the
World: But I turn the Argument against them, he may (as the mentioned Instances
prove) personate honest Men as doing other Evils; and no solid Reason can be
given why he may not as well personate them under the Notion of Witches, as
under the Notion of Thieves, Murders, and Idolaters: As for the Objection, that
then there would be no living in the World, we shall consider it under the next
Argument.

Arg. 3. If Satan may not represent one that is not a Covenant Servant of his,
as afflicting those that are bewitched or possessed, then it is either because
he wants Will, or Power to do this, or because God will never permit him thus
to do. No Man but a Sadduce doubts of the ill will of Devils; nothing is more
pleasing to the Malice of those wicked Spirits than to see Innocence wronged:
And the Power of the Enemy is such, as that having once obtained a Divine
Concession to use his Art, he can do this and much more than this amounts unto:
We know by Scripture-Revelation, that the Sorcerers of Egypt caused many untrue
and delusive In Mr. Coupe^'s Mystery of Witchcraft, Page 174, 175.
Representations before Pharaoh and his Servants. Exodus 7. 11, 22. and 8. 7.
And we read of the working of Satan in all Power and Signs, and lying Wonders.
2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. His Heart is beyond what the wisest of Men may pretend unto: He
has perfect skill in Optics, and can therefore cause that to be visible to
one, which is not so to another, and things also to appear far otherwise then
they are: He has likewise the Art of Limning in the Perfection of it, and knows
what may be done by Colors. It is an odd passage 6. Acta Eruditorum Anno.
1690. Page 113*
which I find in the Acta Eruditorum, printed at Lipsick, that about Thirty two
Years ago an indigent Merchant in France was instructed by a Demon, that with
Water of Borax he might color Taffities, so as to cause them to glister and
look very gay: He searches into the Nature, Causes, and Reasons of things,
whereby he is able to produce wonderful effects: So that if he does not form
the Shape of an innocent Person as afflicting others, it is not from want of
either will or power. They that affirm, that God never did, nor ever will
permit him thus to do, allege that it is inconsistant with the Righteousness
and Providence of God, in governing Humane Affairs thus to suffer Men to be
imposed on: It must be acknowledged In Mr. Glanvil's Philosophical
Considerations.
that the Divine Providence has taken care, that the greatest part of Mankind
shall not be left to unavoidable Deception, so as to be always abused by the
mischievous Agents of Hell, in the Objects of plain Sense: But yet it is not
for sinful and silly Mortals to prescribe Rules to the most High in his
Government of the World, or to direct him how far he may permit Satan to use
his power: I am apt to think that there are some amongst us, who if they had
lived in Job's days, and seen the Devil tormenting of him, and heard him
complaining of being scared with Dreams, and terrified with Night-visions, they
would have joined with his uncharitable Friends in censuring him as a most
guilty Person: But we should consider, that the most high God does sometimes
deal with Men in a way of absolute Sovereignty, performing the thing which is
appointed for them, and many such things are with him: If he does destroy the
perfect with the wicked, and laugh at the trial of the innocent, (Job. 9. 22,
23.) Who shall enter into his Councils! who has given him a Charge over the
Earth! or who has disposed the whole World! Men are not able to give an account
of his ordinary Works, much less of his secret Counsels, and the dark
Dispensations of his Providence: They do but darken Counsel by Words without
Knowledge when they undertake it: If we are not able to see how this or that
can stand with the Righteousness of him that governs the World, shall we say
that the Almighty will pervert Judgment? or that he that governs the Earth
hates Right? Shall we condemn him that is most just? But whereas it is
objected, where is Providence? And how shall Men live on the Earth, if the
Devil may be permitted to use such Power? I demand, where was Providence, when
Satan had Power to cause Sons of Belial to lie and swear away the Life of
innocent Naboth, laying such Crimes to his charge as he was never guilty of?
And what an Hour of Darkness was it? How far was the Power of Hell permitted to
prevail, when Christ the Son of God was accused, condemned, and hanged for a
Crime that he never was guilty of? That was the strangest Providence that has
happened since the World began, and yet in the Issue the most glorious: We must
therefore distinguish between what does ordinarily come to pass by the
Providence of God, and things which are extraordinary: It is not an usual thing
for a Naboth to have his Life taken from him by false Accusations, or for an
Athanasius or a Susanna to be charged, and perhaps brought before Courts of
Judicature for Crimes of which they were altogether innocent.

But if we therefore conclude, that such a thing as this can never happen in
the World, we shall offend against the Generation of the Just: It is not
ordinary for Devils to be permitted to reveal the secret Sins of Men; yet this
has been done more than once or twice: Nor is it ordinary for Demons to steal
Money out of Men's Pockets, and Purses, or Wine and Cider out of their Cellars.
Yet some such Instances have there been amongst our selves. It is not usual for
Providence to permit the Devil to come from Hell and to throw Fire on the tops
of Houses, and to cause a whole Town to be burnt to Ashes thereby; there would
(it must be confessed) be no living in the World, if evil Angels should be
permitted to do thus when they had a mind to it; nevertheless, Authors worthy
of Credit, tell us, that this has sometimes happened. De sub^ilita^e. Lib. 19.
Both Erasmus and Cardanus* write that the Town of Schiltach in Germany, was in
the Month of April, 1533. set on fire by a Devil, and burnt to the ground in an
Hour's space: It Is also reported by Sigibert, Aventinus and others, that some
Cottages and Barns in a Town called Bingus were fired by a wicked Genius; that
spiteful Demon said it was for the Impieties of such a Man whom he named, that
he was sent to molest them: The poor Man to satisfy his Neighbors, who were
ready to Stone him, carried an hot Iron in his Hand, but receiving no hurt
thereby, he was judged to be innocent. It is not ordinary for a Devil upon the
dying Curse of a Servant, to have a Commission from Heaven to tear and torment
a bloody cruel Master; yet such a thing may possibly come to pass. There is a
fearful Story to this purpose, in the account of the Bucuneers of America, P.
75, 76.
wherein my Author relates that a Servant, who was Spirited or Kidnapt (as they
call it) into America, falling into the Hands of a Tyrannical Master, he ran
away from him, but being taken and brought back, the hardhearted Tyrant lashed
him on his naked Back, until his Body ran in an entire stream of Blood; to make
the Torment of this miserable Creature intolerable, he anointed his Wounds with
Juice of Lemon mingled with Salt and Pepper, being ground small together, with
which torture the miserable Wretch gave up the Ghost, with these dying Words, I
beseech the Almighty God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, that he permit a wicked
Spirit, to make thee feel as many Torments before thy Death, as thou have
caused me to feel before mine: Scarce four days were past after this horrible
Fact, when the Almighty Judge gave Permission to the Father of Wickedness to
possess the Body of that cruel Master, and to make him lacerate his own Flesh
until he died, belike surrendering his Ghost into the Hands of the infernal
Spirit, who had tormented his Body: But of this Tragical Story enough.

To proceed, Is it not usual for Persons after their Death to appear unto the
Living: But it does not therefore follow, that the great God will not suffer
this to be: For both in former and latter Ages, Examples thereof have not been
wanting: No longer since than the last Winter, there was much discourse in
London concerning a Gentlewoman, unto whom her dead Son (and another whom she
knew not) had appeared: Being then in London, I was willing to satisfy my
self, by enquiring into the Truth of what was reported; and on Febr. 23. 1691.
my Brother (who is now a Pastor to a Congregation in that City) and I
discoursed the Gentlewoman spoken of; she told us, that a Son of hers, who had
been a very civil young Man, but more airy in his Temper than was pleasing to
his serious Mother, being dead, she was much concerned in her Thoughts about
his Condition in the other World; but a Fortnight after his Death he appeared
to her, saying, Mother you are solicitous about my Spiritual Welfare; trouble
your self no more, for I am happy, and so vanished; should there be a continual
Intercourse between the Visible and Invisible World, it would breed Confusion.
But from thence to infer, that the great Ruler of the Universe will never
permit any thing of this nature to be, is an inconsequent Conclusion; it is not
usual for Devils to be permitted to come and violently carry away persons
through the Air, several miles from their Habitations: Nevertheless, this was
done in Sweedland about twenty Years ago, by means of a cursed Knot of Witches
there. And a learned Physician now living, gives an account of several
Children, who by Diabolical Frauds were stolen from their Parents, and others
left in their room: And of two, that in the nightime a Line was by invisible
Hands put about their Necks, with which they had been strangled, but that some
near them happily prevented it. V. Germ. Ephem. Anno 1689. page 51. 516.

Let me further add here; It has very seldom been known, that Satan has
Personated innocent Men doing an ill thing, but Providence has found out some
way for their Vindication; either they have been able to prove that they were
in another place when that Fact was done, or the like. So that perhaps there
never was an Instance of any innocent Person Condemned in any Court of
Judicature on Earth, only through Satan's deluding and imposing on the
Imaginations of Men, when nevertheless, the Witnesses, Juries, and Judges, were
all to be excused from blame.

Arg. 4. It is certain both from Scripture and History, that Magicians by their
Enchantments and Hellish Conjurations, may cause a false Representation of
Persons and Things. An enchanted eye shall see such things as others cannot
discern; it is a thing too well known to be denied, that some by rubbing their
eyes with a bewitched Water, have immediately thereupon seen that which others
could not discern; and there are Persons in the World, who have a strange
Spectral sight. Mr. Glanvil In his Sadducism Triumph. Collection, p. ^01.
speaks of a Dutchman that could see Ghosts which others could perceive
nothing of. There are in Spain a sort of men whom they call Zahurs, these can
see into the Bowels of the Earth; they are able to discover Minerals and hidden
Treasures; nevertheless, they have their extraordinary sight only on Tuesdays
and Fridays, and not on the other days of the Week. Delrio says, that when he
was at Madrid, Anno Dom. 1575. he saw some of these strange sighted Creatures.
Mr. George Sinclare, in his Book Entitled, Satan's Invisible World discovered,
p. 215. (Disa. Magic.) l. 1. c. ^. p. 22.
has these Words, I am undoubtedly informed, that men and women in the
High-lands can discern Fatality approaching others, by seeing them in the
Waters or with Winding Sheets about them. And that others can lecture in a
Sheeps shoulder bone a Death within the Parish seven or eight Days before it
come. It is not improbable but that such Preternatural Knowledge comes first by
a Compact with the Devil, and is derived downward by Succession to their
Posterity: Many such I suppose are Innocent, and have this sight against their
Will and Inclination. Thus Mr. Sinclare, I concur with his supposal, that such
Knowledge is originally from Satan, and perhaps the Effect of some old
Enchantment. There are some at this day in the World, that if they come into a
House where one of the Family will die within a Fortnight, the smell of a dead
Corpse offends them to such a degree, as that they cannot stay in that House.
It is reported that near unto the Abbey of St. Maurice in Burgundy V(...) de
Fascino Lib. 2*
there is a Fishpond in which are Fishes put according to the number of the
Monks of that place; if any one of them happen to be sick, there is a Fish seen
to Float and Swim above Water half dead, and if the Monk shall die, the Fish a
few days before dies. In some parts in Wales Death-lights or Corpse Candles (as
they call them) are seen in the night time going from the House where somebody
will shortly die, and passing in to the Churchyard. Of this, my Honored and
never to be forgotten Friend Mr. Richard Baxter, p. 131.
has given an Account in his Book about Witchcrafts lately Published: what to
make of such things, except they be the effects of some old Enchantment, I know
not; nor what Natural Reason to assign for that which I find amongst the
Observations of the Imperial Academy for the Year 1687, viz. That in an Orchard
where are choice Damascen Plumbs, the Master of the Family being sick of a
Quartan Ague, whilst he continued very ill, four of his Plumb-trees instead of
Damascens brought forth a vile sort of yellow Plumbs: but recovering Health,
the next Year the Tree did (as formerly) bear Damascens again; but when after
that he fell into a fatal Dropsy, on those Trees were seen not Damascens, but
another sort of Fruit. The same Author V. Germ. Ephemer. Anno 16. ^. 379.
gives Instances of which he had the certain knowledge, concerning Apple Trees
and Pear Trees, that the Fruit of them would on a sudden wither as if they had
been baked in an Oven, when the owners of them were mortally sick. It is no
less strange that in the Illustrious Electoral Henkelius de obsessis page 86.
House of Brandenburg before the Death of some one of the Family Feminine
Specter appeared: Came^a^. cent. 1. c. 73. Cardan de re^um varie^a^e Lib. 16.
cap. 93.
and often in the Houses of Great men, Voices and Visions from the Invisible
World have been the Harbingers of Death. When any Heir in the Worshipful Family
of the Breertons in Cheshire is near his Death, there are seen in a Pool
adjoining, Bodies of Trees swimming for certain days together, on which Learned
Cambden In his Bri^^nni^ p. 609.
has this Note, These and such like things are done either by the Holy Tutelar
Angels of Men, or else by the Devils, who by Gods Permission mightily show
their Power in this Inferior World. As for Mr. Sinclare's Notion that some
Persons may have a second Sight, (as it is termed) and yet be themselves
Innocent, I am satisfied that he judges right; for this is common amongst the
Laplanders, who are horribly addicted to Magical Incantations: They bequeath
their Demons to their Children as a Legacy, by whom they are often assisted
(like Bewitched Persons as they are) to see and do things beyond the Power of
Nature. An Historian who deserves Credit, relates, See the Hist. of Lapland,
and Mr. Burton's Hist. of Demons.
that a certain Laplander gave him a true and particular Account of what had
happened to him in his Journey to Lapland; and further complained to him with
Tears, that things at great distance were represented to him, and how much he
desired to be Delivered from that Diabolical Sight, but could not; this
doubtless was caused by some Enchantment. But to proceed to what I intend; the
Eyes of Persons by reason of Enchanting Charms, may not only see what others do
not, but be under such power of Fascination, as that things which are not,
shall appear to them as real: The Apostle speaks of Bewitched Eyes, Gal. 3. 1.
and we know from Scripture, that the Imaginations of men have by Enchantments
been imposed upon; and Histories abound with very strange Instances of this
Nature: The old Witch Circe by an Enchanted Cup caused Ulysses his Companions
to imagine themselves to be turned into Swine; and how many Witches have been
themselves so bewitched by the Devil, as really to believe that they were
transformed into Wolves, or Dogs, or Cats. It is reported of Simon Magus,
Schotten Physic. cur^os. lib. 1. c. 16.
that by his Sorceries he would so impose on the Imaginations of People, as
that they thought he had really changed himself into another sort of Creature.
Opollonius of Tyana could out do Simon with his Magic: The great Bohemian
Conjurer Zyto See Wan^^ of the Wonders of the World. p. 215.
by his Enchantments, caused certain Persons whom he had a mind to try his Art
upon, to imagine that their Hands were turned into the Feet of an Ox, or into
the Hoofs of a Horse, so that they could not reach to the Dishes before them to
take any thing thence; he sold Wisps of Straw to a Butcher who bought them for
Swine, that many such prestigious Pranks were played; by the unhappy Faustus,
is attested by Camerarius, Wyerus, Voetius, Lavater, and Lonicer.

There is newly Published a Book (mentioned in the Acta Eruditorum) wherein the
Author Ubi Supra.
( Wiechard Valvassor) relates, that a Venetian Jew instructed him (only he
would not attend his Instructions) how to make a Magical Glass which should
represent any Person or thing according as he should desire. If a Magician by
an Enchanted Glass can do this, he may as well by the help of a Demon cause
false Idaeas of Persons and Things to be impressed on the Imaginations of
bewitched Persons; the Blood and Spirits of a Man, that is bitten with a
Mad-Dog, are so envenomed, as that strange Impressions are thereby made on his
Imagination: let him be brought into a Room where there is a Looking-Glass, and
he will (if put upon it) not only say but swear that he sees a Dog, though in
truth there is no Dog it may be within 20 Miles of him; and is it not then
possible for the Dogs of Hell to poison the Imaginations of miserable
Creatures, so as that they shall believe and swear that such Persons hurt them
as never did so? I have heard of an Enchanted Pin, that has caused the
Condemnation and Death of many scores of innocent Persons. There was a
notorious Witchfinder in Scotland, that undertook by a Pin, to make an
infallible Discovery of suspected Persons, whether they were Witches or not, if
when the Pin was run an Inch or two into the Body of the accused Party no Blood
appeared, nor any sense of Pain, then he declared them to be Witches; by means
hereof my Author tells me no less then 300 persons were Condemned for Witches
in that Kingdom. This Bloody Jugler after he had done enough in Scotland, came
to the Town of Berwick upon Tweed; an honest Man now living in New England
assures me, that he saw the Man thrust a great Brass Pin two Inches into the
Body of one, that some would in that way try whether there was Witchcraft in
the Case or no: the accused Party was not in the least sensible of what was
done, and therefore in danger of receiving the Punishment justly due for
Witchcraft; only it so happened, that Colonel F^nwick (that worthy Gentleman,
who many years since lived in New England) was then the Military Governor in
that Town; he sent for the Mayor and Magistrates advising them to be careful
and cautious in their proceedings; for he told them, it might be an Enchanted
Pin, which the Witchfinder made use of: Whereupon the Magistrates of the place
ordered that he should make his Experiment with some other Pin as they should
appoint: But that he would by no means be induced unto, which was a sufficient
Discovery of the Knavery and Witchery of the Witch-finder. There is a strange
Diabolical Energy goes along with Incantations. If Balak had not known, that
he would not have sent for Balaam, to see whether he could inchant the Children
of Israel. The Scripture intimates that Enchantments will keep a Serpent from
biting, Eccles. 10. 11. A Witch in Sweedland confessed, that the Devil gave her
a wooden Knife; and that if she did but touch any living thing with that Knife,
it would die immediately: And that there is a wonderful Power of the Devil
attending things enchanted, we have confirmed by a prodigious Instance in Major
Wein, a Scotch Man: That wretched Man was a perfect Prodigy; a Man of great
Parts; esteemed a Saint, yet lived in secret Uncleanness with his own Sister
for thirty four Years together: After his wickedness was discovered, he did not
seem to be troubled at any of his Crimes, excepting that he had caused a poor
Woman to be publicly whipped, because she reported that she had seen him
committing Bestiality; which thing was true, only the Woman could not prove it.
This horrid Creature, if he had his Enchanted Staff in his Hand could pray to
admiration, and do extraordinary things, as is more amply related in the
Postscript to Mr. Sinclares his Book before mentioned: But if he had not his
Enchanted Rod to lean upon, he could not transform himself into an Angel of
Light: But by all these things we may conclude, that it is not impossible, but
that a guilty Conjurer, that so he may render himself the less suspected, may
by his Magical Art and Enchantment, cause innocent Persons to be represented as
afflicting those whom the Devil and himself are the Tormentors of.

Arg. 5. The Truth we affirm is so evident, as that many Learned and Judicious
Men have freely subscribed unto it.

The memorable Relation of the Devils assuming the shape of an innocent Citizen
in Zurick, is in the Judgment of that great Divine Lud Levater, of weighty
Consideration: And he declares, that he does therefore mention it, that so
Judges might be cautelous in their Proceedings in Cases of this nature,
inasmuch as the Devil does often in that way entangle innocent Persons, and
bring them into great Troubles. His Words are, De Spectri^, p. 86, 87.
Hanc Historiam ideo recito, ut Judices, in hujusmodi, Casibus cauti sint:
Diabolus enim hac via sape innocentibus insidiatur. He confirms what he says
by reciting a Passage out of Alertus Granzius, who writes that the Devil was
seen in the shape of a Nobleman to come out of the Empress's Chamber: But to
clear her Innocence, she (according to the superstitious Ordeals then in
fashion) walked blinfold over a great many of glowing hot Irons without
touching any of them. Voetius in his Dsput Selce^. Vol. 1. page 1008.
Disputation of Specter proposes that Question, whether the Devil may not
untruly personate a Godly Man, and answers in the Affirmative: And withal adds,
that it is a sufficient Argument ( ad hominem) to answer the Papists with their
own Histories, which give Instances of Satan's appearing in the Figure of
Saints, nay of Christ himself. And in his Discourse concerning the Operations
of Demons P. 944.
he has the like Problem, whether the Devil may not possibly put on the shape
of a true Believer, a real Saint, not only of such as are dead, but still
living, and answers, Quidni? Why not? It is true Popish Casuists Thyraeu^ de
Appari^^onibus, Lib. 2. Cap. 14.
do generally incline to the Negative in this Question: Nevertheless, the
Instance of Germanus, who saw a Company of honest People represented by the
Devil, as if they had been feasting together, when they were really asleep in
their Beds, does a little puzzle them, so as that they are necessitated to take
up with this Conclusion, Bin^ field de confessionibu^ sagarum, p. 183. 191.
That by an extraordinary Permission of God, innocent Persons may be
represented by Satan in the Noctural Conventicles of Witches: And if so, much
more as afflicting bewitched Persons. Delrio gives an account of an innocent
Monk, whose Reputation was endangered by a Daemon's appearing in his shape. He
writes more like a Divine than Jesuits use to do, when he says that, Disquis.
Magic. Lib. 2. Q. 12. p. 143.
It is not absolutely to be denied, but that the Devils may exhibit the Forms
of innocent Persons, if God permit it, who when he does permit it, usually by
some Providence discovers the Fraud of the Devils, that so the Innocent may be
vindicated, or if not, it is to bring them to repentance for some Sin, or to
try their Patience. It is rare to see such Words dropping from the Pen of a
Jesuit: As for Protestant Writers, I cannot call to mind one of any Note, that
does deny the Possibility of the Affirmative, in the Question before us. Dr.
Henkelius has lately Printed at Frankford, Anno. 1689.
published a learned and elaborate Discourse concerning the right Method of
curing such as are obsessed with Cacodaemons, in which he asserts, that Satan
may possibly assume the Form of innocent and pious Persons, that so he might
thereby destroy their Reputations, and expose them to undue Punishments. As for
our English Divines, there are not many greater Casuists than Mr. Perkins; nor
do I know any one that has written on the Case of Witchcraft with more Judgment
and Clearness of Understanding: He has these Words, Discourse of Witchcraft,
Chapter 7. Sect. 2. p. 644.
If a Man being dangerously sick and like to die upon suspicion, will take it
on his death, that such an one has betwitched him, it is an allegation which
may move the Judge to examine the Party, but it is of no moment for Conviction.
The like is asserted by In his Witchcraft discovered, p. 277.
Mr. Cooper, Mr. Bernard, (once a famous Minister at Batcomb in Somerset) his
Book called, A Guide to Grand Jurymen in Cases of Witchcraft, is a solid and
wise Treatise. What his Judgment was in the Case now under debate, we may see,
page 209, 210. where his Words are these; An Apparition of the Party suspected,
whom the Afflicted in their Fits seem to see, is a great suspicion; yet this is
but a Presumption, though a strong one, because these Apparitions are wrought by
the Devil, who can represent to the Fancy such as the Parties use to fear, in
which his Representation he may well lie as in his other Witness: For if the
Devil can represent to as the Witch seeming Samuel, saying, I see God's
ascending out of the Earth, to beguile Saul, may we not think he can represent
a common ordinary Person, Man or Woman unregenerate, though no Witch to the
Fancy of vain Persons, to deceive them and others that will give Credit to
the Devil. Thus Mr. Bernard.

As for the Judgment of the Elders in New England, so far as I can learn, they
do generally concur with Mr. Perkins, and Mr. Bernard. This I know, that at a
Meeting of Ministers at Cambridge, August 1. 1692. where were present seven
Elders besides the President of the College, the Question then discoursed on,
was, Whether the Devil may not sometimes have a Permission to represent an
innocent Person as tormenting such as are under Diabolical Molestations? The
Answer which they all concurred in, was in these words, viz. That the Devil may
sometimes have a Permission to represent an innocent Person as tormenting such
as are under Diabolical Molestations; but that such things are rare and
extraordinary, especially when such Matters come before Civil Judicatures: And
that some of the most eminent Ministers in the Land, who were not at that
Meeting are of the same Judgment, I am assured: And I am also sure, that in
Cases of this nature the Priest's Lips should keep Knowledge, and they should
seek the Law at his Mouth, Mal. 2. 7.

Arg. 6. Our own Experience has confirmed the Truth of what we affirm.

I have in another Book given an account concerning Elizabeth Knap of Groton,
who complained that a Woman as eminent for Piety as any in that Town, did
appear to her, and afflict her: But afterward she was satisfied that that
Person never did her any harm, but that the Devil abused them both. About two
Years ago, a bewitched Person in Chelmsford in her Fits, complained that a
worthy good Man, a near Relation of hers did afflict her: So did she likewise
complain of another Person in that Town of known Integrity and Piety.

I have my self known several of whom I ought to think that they are now in
Heaven, considering that they were of good Conversation, and reputed Pious by
those that had the greatest Intimacy with them, of whom nevertheless, some
complained that their Shapes appeared to them, and threatened them: Nor is this
answered by saying, we do not know but those Persons might be Witches: We are
bound by the Rule of Charity to think otherwise: And they that censure any,
merely because such a sad Affliction as their being falsely represented by Satan
has befallen them, do not do as they would be done by. I bless the Lord, it was
never the Portion allotted to me, nor to any Relation of mine to be thus
abused: But no Man knows what may happen to him, since there be just Men unto
whom it happens according to the Work of the Wicked, Eccles. 8. 14. But what
needs more to be said, since there is one amongst our selves whom no Man that
knows him, can think him to be a Wizzard, whom yet some bewitched Persons
complained of, that they are in his Shape tormented: And the Devils have of
late accused some eminent Persons.

It is an awful thing which the Lord has done to convince some amongst us of
their Error: This then I declare and testify, that to take away the Life of
any one, merely because a Spectre or Devil, in a bewitched or possessed Person
does accuse them, will bring the Guilt of innocent Blood on the Land, where
such a thing shall be done: Mercy forbid that it should, (and I trust that as
it has not it never will be so) in New England. What does such an Evidence
amount unto more than this: Either such an one did afflict such an one, or the
Devil in his likeness, or his Eyes were bewitched.

The things which have been mentioned make way for, and bring us unto the
second Case, which is to come under our Consideration, viz.

If one bewitched is struck down at the Look or cast of the Eye of another, and
after that recovered again by a Touch from the same Person, Is not this an
infallible Proof, that the Person suspected and complained of is in League with
the Devil?

Answer; It must be owned that by such things as these Witchcrafts and Witches
have been discovered more than once or twice: And that an ill Fame, or other
Circumstances attending the suspected Party, this may be a Ground for
Examination; but this alone does not afford sufficient Matter for Conviction:
As Specter or Devils appearing in the Shapes of Men that have been murdered,
declaring that they were murdered by such Persons and in such a place, may give
just occasion to the Magistrate for Enquiry into the Matter: One great
Witch-Advocate Webster's displaying of supposed Witchcraft, p. 298, 308.
confesses, that by this means Murders have been brought to light; yet that
alone, if other Circumstances did not concur, would not by the Law of God take
away the Life of any Man. If my Reader pleases, he shall hear what old Mr.
Bernard of Batcomb says to a Case not unlike to this, and the former: His
Words are these, Vbi supra. p. 207, 208.
The naming of the suspected in their Fits, and also where they have been, and
what they have done here or there, as Mr. Throgmorton's Children could do, and
that often and ever found true; this is a great Presumption: yet is this but a
Presumption, because this is only the Devils Testimony, who can lie, and that
more often than speak Truth Christ would not allow his Witness of him in a
point most true; nor St. Paul in the due Praises of him and Sylas; his Witness
then may not be received as sufficient in case of ones Life: He may accuse an
Innocent, as I showed before in Mr. Edmund's giving over his Practice to find
Stolen Goods; and Satan we read would accuse Job to God himself to be an
Hypocrite, and to be ready to be a Blasphemer, and he is called the Accuser of
the Brethren. Albeit, I cannot deny but this has very often proved true, yet
seeing the Devil is such an one as you heard, Christian Men should not take his
Witness, to give in Verdict upon Oath, and so swear that the Devil has therein
spoken the Truth; be it far from good men to confirm any Word of the Devil by
Oath, if it be not an evident Truth without the Devil's Testimony, who in
speaking the Truth, has a lying Intent, and speaks some Truths of things done,
which may be found to be so, that he may wrap with them some pernicious Lie,
which cannot be tried to be true, but must rest upon his own testimony to
ensnare the Blood of the Innocent. Thus Mr. Bernard resolved the Case above
sixty Years ago* and truly in my Opinion like a Wise and Orthodox Divine, what
he says, reaches both this and the former Case. Dr. Cotta (a Learned
Physician) in his Book, about The Trial of Witchcraft, showing the true and
right Method of the Discovery, with a Confutation Erroneous ways (which Book he
dedicates to the Right Honorable Sir Edward Cook, Lord Chief Justice of
England Chapter 15. p. 1 4, etc.
He discourses concerning Exploration of Witches by the touch of the Witch
curing the touched bewitched, and shows the Fallibility and Vanity of that
way of Trial, though he had often seen Persons bewitched in that way immediately
delivered from the present Fit or Agony which was upon them: But he takes it
to be a Diabolical Miracle. He argues thus, Page 1^^* 122.
No Man can doubt but that the Virtue wherewith this touch was endued, is
supernatural: If it be so, How can Man to whom nothing is simply possible that
is not natural be justly reputed an Agent therein? If he cannot be esteemed in
himself any possible or true Agent, then it remains that he can only be
interessed therein as an Accessory in Consent, or as a Servant unto a Superior
Power: If that Superior Power be the Devil, the least reasonable doubt, whether
the Devil alone, or with the Consent or Contract of the suspected Person has
produced that wonderful effect; with what Religion or Reason can any Man
incline rather to credit the Devil's mouth in the Bewitched, than to pity the
Accused, and believe them against the subtilty of a deceitful Devil: If the
Devil by Divine Permission may cause supernatural Concomitances and
Consequences to attend the natural Actions of Men without their allowance, as
is manifest in possessed Persons, how is it reasonable and just that the
Impositions of the Devil should be imputed unto any Man: And (says he) God
forbid that the Devil's Signs and Wonders, nay his Truths should become any
legal Allegations or Evidences in Law. We may therefore conclude it unjust,
that the forenamed miraculous Effect by the Devil wrought and imputed by the
Bewitched, should be esteemed an infallible mark against any Man, as therefore
convinced for that the Devil and the Bewitched have so decyphered him? Thus
that Learned Man. But to the Case in hand, I have several things to offer.

1. It is possible that the Persons in Question may be possessed with
Cacodaemons: That bewitched Persons are many times really possessed with evil
Spirits, is most certain. And as Mr. Perkins observes, no Man can prove but
that Witchcraft might be the Cause of many of those Possessions, which we read
of in the Gospel: And that Devils have been immitted into the Bodies of
miserable Creatures by Magicians and Witches, Histories and Experience do
abundantly testify. Hierom In vita H^^ar^o^.
relates concerning a certain Virgin, that a young Man, whose Amors she
despised, prevailed with a Magician to send an evil Spirit into her, by means
whereof she was strangely besotted. It Is reported Anastas^^^ Q^. 23.
of Simon Magus, that after he had used an Hellish Sacrifice, to be revenged of
some that had called him a great Witch, he caused infernal Spirits to enter
into them. Many confessing Witches have acknowledged, that they were the Cause
of such and such Persons being possessed by evil Angels, as In Disp^^. de
Daemoniaci^, part 1. chap. 16. p. 30
Thyaeus and others have observed: Now no Credit ought to be given to what
Demons in such as are by them obsessed shall say. Our Savior by his own
unerring Example has taught us not to receive the Devil's Testimony in any
thing. The Papists are justly condemned for bringing Diabolical Testimony to
confirm the Principles of their Religion. Peter Cotton the Jesuit Thuan^^ lib.
130. p. 1136.
enquired of the Devil in a possessed Person, what was the clearest Scripture
to prove Purgatory. At the time when Luther died, all the possessed People in
the Netherlands were quiet: The Devils in them, said the Reason was, because
Luther Thyaerus ^^^ supra, p. 16.
had been a great Friend of theirs, and they owed him that respect as to go as
far as Germany to attend his Funeral. Another time when there was a talk of
some (Ministers of the Reformed Religion, the Devils in the) Obsessed laughed
and said, they were not at all afraid of them, for the Calvinists and they were
very good Friends. The Jesuits insult with these Testimonies as if they were
Divine Oracles: But the Father of Lies is never to be believed: He will utter
twenty great truths to make way for one lie: He will accuse twenty Witches, if
he can but thereby bring one innocent Person into trouble: He mixeth Truths
with Lies, that so those truths giving credit unto lies, Men may believe both,
and so be deceived: And whereas some say, that the Persons in question are only
bewitched and not possessed, let it be considered that possessed Persons are
called Energumens from EPLOMAI Agitor: They whose Bodies are prenaturally
agitated, so as to be in danger of being thrown into the Fire, or into the
Water, though they may be bewitched, are undoubtedly possessed with Demons,
Mark 9. 22, 25. Learned Men Henke^ ^^^supra, p. 47. 50.
give it as a most certain sign of Possession, when the afflicted Party can see
and hear that which no one else can discern any thing of, and when they can
discover Brock^^^^ Theol. p 265.
secret things, Acts 6. 16. past, or future, Mel^^^thon Epist.
as a possessed Person in Germany foretold the War which broke out in the Year,
1546. And when the Limbs of miserable Creatures are bent and disjointed so as
could not possible be without a Luxation of Joints, were it not done by a
preternatural Hand, and yet no hurt raised thereby that argues Possession.
Also, when Persons are by the Devil cast into Fits, in the which they speak of
things, that afterward they have no remembrance of T^stat^^ in M^^ 8. Q. 114.
or, if they are by cruel Devils tortured, so as to cause horrendous Clamours
in the distressed Sufferers, that is another sign of Obsession by evil Spirits:
If all these things concur in the Persons concerning where the Question is, we
may conclude them to be Daemoniacks: And if so, no Juror can with a safe
Conscience look on the Testimony of such, as sufficient to take away the Life
of any Man.

2. Falling down by the cast of an Eye proceeds not from a natural, (^) Baldwin
Case of Cons. l. 3. c. 3. p. 621.
but an arbitrary Cause; not from any Poison in the Eye of the Witch, but from
the Agency of some Demon: The opinion of Fascination by the Eye is an old
Fable, and (says Mr. Perkins) as fond as old. Pliny Lib. 7. Cap. 2.
speaks of a People that killed folks by looking on them; and he adds, that
they had two Apples in each Eye: and Tully writes of women who had two Apples
in one Eye that always did mischief with their mere Looks; so Ovid, Popula
duplex fulminat. And Plutarch 5 Sym^^^. cap. 7.
writes, that some persons have such a Poison in their Eyes, as that their
Friends and Familiars are Fascinated thereby; nay he speaks of one that
Bewitched himself sick by looking on his own Face in a Glass: Others write of
Fascination by a mere Prolation of Words; and for ought I know, there may be as
much Witchery in the Tongue as there is in the Eye. Sennertus M^d. precl. lib.
6. pars 9 cap. 1.
has discovered the Superstition of these Fancies; Sight does not proceed from
an Emission of Rays from the Eye, but by a reception of the visible Species;
and if it be (as Philosophers conclude) an innocent Action and not an Emission
optic Spirits, so that Sight as such, does receive something from the Object,
and not act upon it, the Notion of Fascination by the Eye is unphilosophical:
It is true, that sore Eyes will affect those that look upon them, Dum spectant
O^uli Laesos* Leduntur and ipsi, for which a natural Reason is easily to be
assigned; but if the Witches Eyes are thus infected with a natural Contagion,
Whence is it, that only Bewitched Persons are hurt thereby? If the vulgar Error
concerning the Bas^^sks killing with the Look of his Poysonful Eye were a
Truth, whatever person that Serpent cast his Eye upon would be poisoned. So if
Witches had a physical Venom in their Eyes, others as well as Fascinated
Persons would be sensible thereof; there is as much Truth in this fancy of
Physical Venom in the Eye of a Witch, as there is in what Pliny Lib. 2. cap. 2.
Wierus l. 6. c. 9. p. 683.
and others relate concerning the Thibians, viz. that they have two Apples in
one Eye, and the Effigies of an Horse in the other Eye; and that they are a
people that cannot be drowned.

3. As for that which concerns the Bewitched Persons being recovered out of
their Agonies by the Touch of the suspected Party, it is various and fallible.

For sometimes the afflicted Person is made sick, (instead of being made whole)
by the Touch of the Accused; sometimes the Power of Imagination is such, as
that the Touch of a Person innocent and not accused shall have the same effect.
It is related in the Account of the Trials of Witches at Bury in Suffolk 1664,
during the time See the Trial* p. 40. 43, 45.
of the Trial, there were some Experiments made with the Persons afflicted, by
bringing the accused to touch them, and it was observed that by the least Touch
of one of the supposed Witches, they that were in their Fits, to all men's
Apprehension wholly deprived of all Sense and Understandings, would suddenly
shriek out and open their Hands.

Mr. Sergeant Keeling did not think that sufficient to Convict the Prisoners,
for admitting that the Children were in truth Bewitched, yet (says he) it
cannot be applied to the Prisoners upon the Imagination only of the Parties
afflicted; for if that might be allowed, no Person whatsoever can be in safety,
for perhaps they might fancy another Person who might altogether be innocent in
such matters: To avoid this Scruple it was privately desired by the Judge, that
some Gentlemen there in Court would attend one of the distempered Persons in
the farther part of the Hall, whilst she was in her Fits, and then to send for
one of the Witches to try what would happen, which they did accordingly. One of
them was conveyed from the Bar, and brought to the Afflicted Maid. They put an
Apron before her Eyes, and then another person (not the Witch) touched her,
which produced the same effect, as the Touch of the Witch did in the Court.
Whereupon the Gentlemen returned much unsatisfied. Bodin In Daemono^ania. See
Mr. Brom^al's History of Appa^itions, p. 136.
relates, that a Witch who was Tried at Nants, was commanded by the Judges to
touch a Bewitched person, a thing often practiced by the Judges of Germany in
the Imperial Chamber. The Witch was extremely unwilling, but being Compelled by
the Judges, she cried out, I am undone; and as soon as ever she touched the
Afflicted person, the Witch fell down dead, and the other recovered. That
horrid Witch of Salisbury, An^ Bodenham See the Printed Relation, p. 30, 31.
who had been Servant to the Notorious Conjurer Dr. Lamb, could not bear the
sight of one that was Bewitched by her. As soon as ever she saw the Afflicted
Person, she ran about shrieking, and crying, and roaring after an hideous
manner, that the Devil would tear her in pieces, if that person came near her.
And whilst the Witch was in such Torment, the Bewitched was at ease. By these
things we see, that the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom of darkness, are not
always and in all places the same.

And it is good for men to concern themselves with them as little as may be.

I think there is weight in Dr. Cotta's Ubi supra, p. 121.
Argument, viz.

That the Gift of healing the Sick and Possessed, was a special Grace and
Favor of God, for the Confirmation of the Truth of the Gospel, but that such a
Gift should be annexed to the Touch of Wicked Witches, as an infallible sign of
their guilt, is not easy to be believed. It is a thing well known, that if a
person possessed by an Evil Spirit, is (as often it so happens) never so
outrageous whilst a good man is Praying with and for the Afflicted, let him lay
his hand on them, and the Evil Spirit is quiet. I hope this is no evidence of
any Covenant, or voluntary Communion between the Good Man that is Praying and
the Evil Spirit; no more does the Case before us evince any such thing.

4. There are that Question the Lawfulness of the Experiment. For if this
healing power in the Witch is not a Divine but a Diabolical Gift, it may be
dangerous to meddle too much with it. If the Witch may be ordered to touch
afflicted Persons in order to their healing or recovery out of a sick Fit, why
may not the Diseased Person be as well ordered to touch the Witch for the same
cause? And if to touch him, why not to scratch him and fetch Blood out of him,
which is but an harder kind of touch? But as for this Mr. Perkins doubts not to
call it a Practice of Witchcraft. It is not safe to meddle with any of the
Devils Sacraments or Institutions; For my own part, I should be loath to say to
a Man, that I knew or thought it was a Witch, do you look on such a Person, and
see if you can Witch them into a Fit, and there is such an afflicted Person do
you take them by the Hand, and see if you can Witch them well again. If it is
by virtue of some Contract with the Devil that Witches have Power to do such
things, it is hard to conceive how they can be bid to do them, without being
too much concerned in that Hellish Covenant. I take it to be (as elsewhere
Remarkable Providence, p. 267.
I have expressed) a solid Principle, which the Learned S^nnertus insists on,
viz. That they who force another to do that which he cannot possibly do, but by
virtue of a Compact with the Devil, have themselves implicitly Communion with
the Diabolical Covenant. The Devil is pleased and honored when any of his
Institutions are made use of; this way of discovering Witches, is no better
than that of putting the Urine of the afflicted Person into a Bottle, that so
the Witch may be tormented and discovered: The Vanity and Superstition of which
practice I have formerly showed, and testified against. There was a Conjurer
his name was Edward Drake See Mr. Burton's History of D^mons, p. 136. and Mr.
Robert'^ Na^. of the Witches in Suffolk.
who taught a Man to use that Experiment for the Relief of his afflicted
Daughter, who found benefit thereby; But we ought not to practice Witchcrafts
to discover Witches, nor may we make use of a White healing Witch (as they call
them) to find out a Black and Bloody one. And how did men first come to know
that Witches would be discovered in such ways as these, which have been
mentioned? If Satan himself were the first Discoverer (as there is reason to
believe) the experiment must needs have deceit in it. See Dr. Willet on Exodus
7. Quest. 9. And such Experiments better become Pagans or Papists than
Professors in New England; whereas it is pleaded, that such things are practiced
by the Judges of the Imperial Chamber, I reply, that those Judges (as Bodia
relates, Lib. 3. Demon. Cap. 6.) have required suspected Witches to pronounce
over the afflicted persons, these words, I bless thee in the Name of the
Father, etc. upon which they have immediately recovered; but is the dark day
come upon us, that such Superstitions as these shall be practiced in
New England: The Lord Jesus forbid it. See Baldwin's Testimony against the
Practice of the Camera Imperialis, Cas. Consc. L. 3. c. 3. p. 634.

5. If the Testimony of a bewitched or possessed Person, is of Validity as to
what they see done to themselves, then it is so as to others, whom they see
afflicted no less than themselves: But what they affirm concerning others, is
not to be taken for Evidence. Whence had they this Supernatural Sight? It must
needs be either from Heaven or from Hell: If from Heaven, (as Elisha's Servant,
and Balaam's Ass could discern Angels) let their Testimony be received: But if
they had this Knowledge from Hell, though there may possibly be truth in what
they affirm, they are not legal Witnesses: For the Law of God allows of no
Revelation from any other Spirit but himself, Isa. 8. 19. It is a Sin against
God to make use of the Devil's help to know that which cannot be otherwise
known: And I testify against it, as a great Transgression, which may justly
provoke the Holy One of Israel, to let loose Devils on the whole Land, Luke 4.
35. See Mr. Bernard's Guide to Juries in Cases of Witchcraft, p. 136, 137, 138.
And Brochmand Theol. de Angelis, p. 227. Although the Devil's Accusations may be
so far regarded as to cause an enquiry into the truth of things, Job 1. 11, 12.
and 2. 5, 6. yet not so as to be an Evidence or Ground of Conviction: The
Persons, concerning whom the Question is, see things through Diabolical
Mediums; on which account their Evidence is not mere humane Testimony; and if
it be in any part Diabolical, it is not to be owned as Authentic; for the
Devil's Testimony ought not to be received neither in whole nor in part. I am
told by credible Persons, who say it is certainly true, that a bewitched Person
has complained that she was cast into Fits by the Look of a Dog; and that she
was no more able to bear the sight of that Dog, than of the Person whom she
accused as bewitching her: And that thereupon the Dog was shot to death: This
Dog was no Devil; for then they could not have killed him. I suppose no one
will say that Dogs are Witches: It remains then that the casting down with the
Look is no infallible sign of a Witch.

8 It has always been said, that it is a difficult thing to find out Witches:
But if the Representation of such a Person as afflicting, or the Look or Touch
be an infallible proof of the guilt of Witchcraft in the Persons complained of,
it is the easiest thing in the World to discover them; for it is done to our
hand, and there needs no enquiry into the Matter.

9. Let them say this is an infallible Proof, produce any Word out of the Law
of God which does in the least countenance that Assertion: The Word of God
instructs Jurors and Judges to proceed upon clear humane Testimony, Deuteronomy. 35.
30. But the Word no where gives us the least Intimation, that every one is a
Witch, at whose look the bewitched Person shall fall into Fits; nor yet that
any other means should be used for the discovery of Witches, than what may be
used for the finding out of Murderers, Adulterers, and other Criminals.

10. Sometimes Antipathies in Nature have strange and unaccountable Effects. I
have read of a Man that at the sight of his own Son, who was no Wizzard would
fall into Fits. There are that find in their Natures an averseness to some
Persons whom they never saw before, of which they can give no better an account
than he in Martial, concerning Sabidius.

Non Amo te Sabidi, nec possum dicere quare. That some Persons at the sight of
Bruit-Creatures, Cats, Spiders, etc. Nay, at the sight of Cheeses, Milk,
Apples, will fall into Fits, is too well known to be denied. Pensingius in his
Learned Discourse De Pulvere Sympathatico, p. 128. says, there was one in the
City of Groaning that could not bear the sight of a Swine's Head: And that he
knew another who was not able to look on the Picture thereof. Amatus Lusitanus
speaks of one that at the sight of a Rose would swoon away: This proves that
the falling into a Fit at the sight of another is not always a sign of
Witchcraft. It may proceed from Nature, and the Power of Imagination.

To conclude; Judicious Casuists Ames. Cas. Consc. L. 4. C. 23.
have determined, that to make use of those Media to come to the Knowledge of
any Matter, which have no such power in them by Nature, nor by Divine
Institution is an Implicit going to the Devil to make a discovery: Now there is
no natural Power in the Look or Touch of a Person to bewitch another; nor is
this by Divine Institution the means whereby Witchcraft is discovered:
Therefore it is an unwarrantable Practice.

We proceed now to the third Case proposed to Consideration; If the things
which have been mentioned are not infallible Proofs of Guilt in the accused
Party, it is then Queried, Whether there are any Discoveries of this Crime,
which Jurors and Judges may with a safe Conscience proceed upon to the
Conviction and Condemnation of the Persons under Suspicion?

Let me here premise Two things,

1. The Evidence in this Crime ought to be as clear as in any other Crimes of a
Capital nature. The Word of God does no where intimate, that a less clear
Evidence, or that fewer or other Witnesses may be taken as sufficient to
convict a Man of Sorcery, which would not be enough to convict him were he
charged with another evil worthy of Death, Numb. 35. 30. if we may not take the
Oath of a distracted Person, or of a possessed Person in a Case of Murder,
Theft, Felony of any sort, then neither may we do it in the Case of Witchcraft.

2. Let me premise this also, that there have been ways of trying Witches long
used in many Nations, especially in the dark times of Paganism and Popery,
which the righteous God never approved of. But which as (judicious Mr. Perkins
expresses it in plain English) were invented by the Devil, that so innocent
Persons might be condemned, and some notorious Witches escape: Yea, many
Superstitious and Magical experiments have been used to try Witches by: Of this
sort is that of scratching the Witch, or seething the Urine of the bewitched
Person, or making a Witch-cake with that Urine: And that trial of putting their
Hands into scalding Water, to see if it will not hurt them: And that of
sticking an Awl under the Seat of the suspected Party, yea, and that way of
discovering Witches by tying their Hands and Feet, and casting them on the
Water, to try whether they will sink or swim: I did publicly bear my Testimony
against this Superstition in a Book printed at Boston eight Years past.

I hear that of late some in a Neighbor Colony have been playing with this
Diabolical invention: It is to be lamented, that in such a Land of Uprightness
as New England once was, a Practice which Protestant Writers generally condemn
as sinful, and which the more sober and learned Men amongst Papists themselves
have not only judged unlawful, but (to express it in their own terms) to be no
less than a Mortal Sin, should ever be heard of. Were it not that the coming of
Christ to judge the Earth draws near, I should think that such Practices are
an unhappy Omen that the Devil and Pagans will get these dark Territories into
their Possession again: But that I may not be thought to have no reason for my
calling the impleaded Experiment into Question, I have these things further to
allege against it.

1. It has been rejected long agone, by Christian Nations as a thing
Superstitious and Diabolical: In Italy and Spain it is wholly disused; and
D^^^io. Disquiss. Magi^. page 642.
in the Low Countries, and in France, where the Judges are Men of Learning. In
some parts of Germany old Paganism Customs are observed more than in other
Countries, nevertheless all the M^lderus de M^gia. cap 10. dub. 11.
Academies throughout Germany have disapproved of this way of Purgation.

2. The Devil is in it, all Superstition is from him; and when Secret things,
or latent Crimes, are discovered by superstitious Practices, some Compact and
Communion with the Devil is the Cause of it, as Austin De Doctr. Christiana.
Lib. 2. Cap. 20. 22.
has truly intimated; and so it is here; for if a Witch cannot be drowned, this
must proceed either from some natural Cause, which it does not, for it is
against Nature for Humane Bodies, when Hands and Feet are tied, not to sink
under the Water: Besides, they that plead for this Superstition, say that if
Witches happen to be condemned for some other Crime and not for Witchcraft,
they will not swim like a Cork above, Water, which Cause shows that the Cause
of this Natation is not Physical: And if not, then either it must proceed from
a Divine Miracle to save a Witch from drowning; or lastly, it must be a
diabolical Wonder: This superstitious Experiment is commonly known by the Name
of, The Vulgar Probation, because it was never appointed by any lawful
Authority, but from the Suggestion of the Devil taken up by the rude Rabble:
And some D^^ri. and mald ^u^.
learned Men are of Opinion, that the first Explorator (being a white Witch)
did explicitly covenant with the Devil, that he should discover latent Crimes
in this way: And that it is by Virtue of that first Contract that the Devil
goes to work to keep his Servants from sinking, when this Ceremony of his
ordaining is used. Moreover, we know that Diabolus est Dei Simia, the Devil
seeks to imitate Divine Miracles. We read in Ecclesiastical Story, that some of
the Martyrs when they were by Persecutors ordered to be drowned, proved to be
immersible: This Miracle would the Devil imitate in causing Witches, who are
his Martyrs not to sink when they are cast into the Waters.

3. This way of Purgation is of the same nature with the old Ordeals of the
Pagans. If Men were accused with any Crime, to clear their innocence, they were
to take an hot Iron into their Hands, or to suffer scalding Water to be poured
down their Throats, and if they received no hurt thereby they were acquitted.
This was the Devil's Invention, and many times (as the Devil would have it)
they that submitted to these Trials suffered no inconvenience. Nevertheless, it
is astonishing to think what innocent Blood has been shed in the World by means
of this Satanical device. Witches have often (as In mali^o malle^^c^^um. p. 421.
Sprenger observes) desired that they might stand or fall by this Trial by hot
Iron, and sometimes come off well: Indeed, this Ordeal was used in other Cases,
and not in Cases of Witchcraft only it And so was the the Vulgar Probation by
casting into the Water practiced upon Persons accused Menna de purgatione
vulgari, cap. ult.
with other Crimes as well as that of Witchcraft: How it came to be restrained
to that of Witchcraft I cannot tell; it is as supernatural for a Body whose
Hands and Feet are tied to swim above the Water, as it is for their Hands not
to feel a red hot Iron. If the one of these Ordeals is lawful to be used, than
so is the other too: But as for the fiery Ordeal it is rejected and exploded
out of the World; for the same Reason then the trial by Water should be so.

4. It is a tempting of God when Men put the Innocence of their
Fellow Creatures upon such trials; to desire the Almighty to show a Miracle to
clear the Innocent, or to convict the Guilty is a most presumptuous tempting of
him. Was it not a Miracle when Peter was kept from sinking under the Water by
the Omnipotency of Christ? As for Satan, we know that his Ambition is to make
his Servants believe that his Power is equal to God's, and that therefore he
can preserve whom he pleases. I have read Caesari^^, Lib. 9.
of certain Magicians, who were seen walking on the Water: If then guilty
Persons shall float on the Waters, either it is the Devil that causes them to
do so, (as no doubt it is) and what have Men to do to set the Devil on work; or
else it is a Divine Miracle, like that of Peter's not sinking, or that of the
Iron that swam at the Word of Elisha. And shall Men try whether God will work a
Miracle to make a discovery? If a Crime cannot be found out but by Miracle, it
is not for any Judge on Earth to usurp that Judgment which is reserved for the
Divine Throne.

5. This pretended Gift of Immersibility attending Witches, is a a most
fallible deceitful thing; for many a Witch has sunk under the Water.
Godelmannus De Lamiis, L. 3. C. 4.
gives an account of six notorious and clearly convicted Witches, that when
they were brought to their vulgar Probation, sunk down under the Water like
other Persons; Althusius affirms the like concerning others in the Dubravius,
Hist. Cohim. Lib. 8.
Bohemian History it is related, that Uratslaus the King of Bohemia, extirpated
Witches out of his Kingdom, some of which he delivered to the Ax, others of
them to the Fire, and others of them he caused to be drowned: If Witches are
immensible, how came they to die by drowning in Bohemia? Besides, it has
sometimes been known that Persons who have floated on the Water when the
Hangman has made the Experiment on them, have sunk down like a Stone, when
others have made the trial.

6. The Reasons commonly alleged for this Superstition are of no moment: It is
said they hate the Water; whereas they have many times desired that they might
be cast on the Water in order to their purgation: It is alleged, that Water is
used in Baptism, therefore Witches swim: A weak Fancy; all the Water in the
World is not consecrated Water. Cannot Witches eat Bread or drink Wine,
notwithstanding those Elements are made use of in the Blessed Sacrament: But
(say some) the Devils by sucking of them make them so light that the Water
bears them; whereas some Witches are twice as heavy as many an innocent Person:
Well, but then they are possessed with the Devil: Suppose so; Is the Devil
afraid if they should sink, that he should be drowned with them? But why then
were the Gadarens Hogs drowned when the Devil was in them?

These things being premised, I answer the Question affirmatively; There are
Proofs for the Conviction of Witches which Jurors may with a safe Conscience
proceed upon, so as to bring them in guilty. The Scripture which says, Thou
shall not suffer a Witch to live, clearly implies, that some in the World may
be known and proved to be Witches: For until they be so, they may and must be
suffered to live. Moreover we find in Scripture, that some have been convicted
and executed for Witches: For Saul cut off those that had familiar Spirits, and
the Wizzards out of the Land, 1 Samuel 28. 9.

It may be wondered that Saul who did like him that said, Flectere si nequeo
Superos Acherenta Movebo, should cause the Wizzards in the Land to be put to
death. The Jewish Rabbis say, the reason was, because those Wizzards foretold
that David should be King. It is (as Mr. Gaul In his Cases about Witchcraft, p.
181.
observes) the Opinion of some learned Protestants, that Saul in his Zeal did
over do: And that under the Pretext So D^. Willet conjectures on 1 Samuel 21. 1.
of Witches he slew the Gibeonites, for which that Judgment followed, 2 Samuel
21. 1. Neither (says Mr. Gaul) want we the storied Examples of God's
Judgments upon those that defamed, prosecuted and executed them for Witches,
that indeed were none. But we have in the Scripture the Example of a better Man
than Saul to encourage us to make enquiry after Wizzards and Witches in order
to their Conviction and Execution. This did the rarest King that ever lived
cause to be done, viz. Josiah, 2 Kings 23. 24. The Workers with familiar
Spirits and the Wizzards, that were spied in the Land of Judah, did Josiah put
away, that he might perform the Words of the Law. It seems there were some that
sought to hide those Workers of Iniquity, but that incomparable King spied them
out, and rid the Land and the World of them.

Q. But then the Enquiry is, What is sufficient Proof?

A. This Case has been with great Judgment answered by several Divines of our
own, particularly by Mr. Perkins, and Mr. Bernard; also Mr. John Gaul a worthy
Minister at Staughton, in the County of Huntington, has published a very
Judicious Discourse, called, Select Cases of Conscience touching Witches and
Witchcrafts, Printed at London A. D. 1646. wherein he does with great Prudence
and Evidence of Scripture light handle this and other Cases: Such Jurors as can
obtain those Books, I would advise them to read, and seriously as in the fear
of God to consider them, and so far as they keep to the Law and to the
Testimony, and speak according to that Word, receive the Light which is in
them. But the Books being now rare to be had, let me express my Concurrence
with them in these two particulars.

1. That a free and voluntary Confession of the Crime made by the Person
suspected and accused after Examination, is a sufficient Ground of Conviction.

Indeed, if Persons are Distracted, or under the Power of P^renetick
Melancholy, that alters the Case; but the Jurors that examine them, and their
Neighbors that know them, may easily determine that Case; or if Confession be
V. B^din Daemonomania, L. 4.
extorted, the Evidence is not so clear and convictive; but if any Persons out
of Remorse of Conscience, or from a Touch of God on their Spirits, confess and
show their Deeds, as the Converted Magicians in Ephesus did, Acts 19. 18, 19.
nothing can be more clear. Suppose a Man to be suspected for Murder, or for
committing a Rape, or the like nefandous Wickedness, if he does freely confess
the Accusation, that is ground enough to Condemn him. The Scripture approves of
Judging the wicked Servant out of his own Mouth, Luke 19. 22. It is by some
objected, that Persons in Discontent may falsely accuse themselves. I say, if
they do so, and it cannot be proved that they are false Accusers of themselves,
they ought to dye for their Wickedness, and their Blood will be upon their own
Heads; the Jury, the Judges, and the Land is clear: I have read a very sad and
amazing, and yet a true Story to this purpose.

There was in the Year 1649, in a Town called Lauder in Scotland, a certain
woman accused and imprisoned on suspicion of Witchcraft, when others in the
same Prison with her were Convicted, and their Execution ordered to be on the
Monday following, she desired to speak with a Minister, to whom she declared
freely that she was guilty of Witchcraft, acknowledging also many other Crimes
committed by her, desiring that she might die with the rest: She said
particularly that she had Covenanted with the Devil, and was become his Servant
about twenty years before, and that he kissed her and gave her a Name, but that
since he had never owned her. Several Ministers who were jealous that she
accused herself untruly, charged it on her Conscience, telling her that they
doubted she was under a Temptation of the Devil to destroy her own Body and
Soul, and adjuring her in the Name of God to declare the Truth: Notwithstanding
all this, she stiffly adhered to what she had said, and was on Monday morning
Condemned, and ordered to be Executed that day. When she came to the place of
Execution, she was silent until the Prayers were ended, then going to the Stake
where she was to be Burnt, she thus expressed herself, All you that see me this
day! Know ye that I am to die as a Witch, by my own Confession! and I free all
Men, especially the Ministers and Magistrates, from the guilt of my Blood, I
take it wholly on my self, and as I must make answer to the God of Heaven, I
declare I am as free from Witchcraft as any Child, but being accused by a
Malicious Woman, and Imprisoned under the Name of a Witch, my Husband and
Friends disowned me, and seeing no hope of ever being in Credit again, through
the Temptation of the Devil, I made that Confession to destroy my own Life,
being weary of it, and choosing rather to Die than to Live. This her lamentable
Speech did astonish all the Spectators, few of whom could refrain from Tears.
The Truth of this Relation (says my Mr. Sinclare Invisible World. p. 45. and
Burton Hist of Demon* p. 122.
Author) is certainly attested by a worthy Divine now living, who was an Eye
and an Ear-Witness of the whole matter; but thus did that miserable Creature
suffer Death, and this was a just Execution. When the Amalakite confessed that
he killed Saul, whom he had no legal Authority to meddle with, although it is
probable that he belyed himself, David gave order for hiis Execution, and said
to him, Thy Blood be upon thy Head, for thy Mouth has Testified against thee,
2 Samuel 1. 16. But as for the Testimony of Confessing Witches against others,
the case is not so clear as against themselves, they are not such credible
Witnesses, as in a Case of Life and Death is to be desired: It is beyond
dispute, that the Devil makes his Witches to dream strange things of themselves
and others which are not so. There was (as Authors beyond Exception relate) in
appearance a sumptuous Feast prepared, the Wine and Meat set forth in Vessels
of Gold; a certain Person whom an amorous young Man had fallen in Love with,
was represented and supposed to be really there; but Apollonius Tyanaeus
Boisard invita Apollonii.
discovered the Witchery of the Business, and in an instance all vanished, and
nothing but dirty Coals were to be seen: The like to this is mentioned in the
Arausican Council. There were certain Women that imagined they road upon Beasts
in the Night, and that they had Diana and Herodius in company with them,
besides a Troop of other Persons; the Council gives this Sentence on it;
Satanas qui se transfigurat in Angelum Lucis, transformat se in diversarum
personarum species, and mentem quam captivam tenet, in somnis deludit. Satan
transforms himself into the likeness of diverse Persons, and deludes the Souls
that are his Captives with Dreams and Fancies; see Dr. Willet on 1 Samuel 28. p.
165. What Credit can be given to those that say they can turn Men into Horses?
If so, they can as well turn Horses into Men; but all the Witches on Earth in
Conjunction with all the Devils in Hell, can never make or unmake a rational
Soul, and then they cannot transform a Bruit into a Man, nor a Man into a
Bruit; so that this Transmutation is fantastical. The Devil may and often does
impose on the Imaginations of his Witches and Vassals, that they believe
themselves to be be Converted into Beasts, and reverted into Men again; as
Nebuchadnezzar whilst under the Power of a Demon really imagined himself to be
an Ox, and would lie out of Doors and eat Grass: The Devil has inflicted on
many a Man the Disease called Lycanthropia, from whence they have made
lamentable Complaints of their being Wolves: In a word, there is no more
Reality in what many Witches confess of strange things seen or done by them,
whilst Satan had them in his full Power, than there is in Lucian's ridiculous
Fable of his being Bewitched into an Ass, and what strange Feats he then
played; so that what such persons relate concerning Persons and Things at
Witch-meetings, ought not to be received with too much Credulity.

I could mention dismal Instances of Innocent Blood which has been shed by
means of the Lies of some Confessing Witches; there is a very sad Story
mentioned in the Preface to the Relation of the Witchcrafts in Sweedland, how
that in the Year 1676, at Stockholm, a young Woman accused her own Mother (who
had indeed been a very bad Woman, but not guilty of Witchcraft,) and Swore that
she had carried her to the Nocturnal Meetings of Witches, upon which the Mother
was burnt to Death. Soon after the Daughter came crying and howling before the
Judges in open Court, declaring, that to be revenged on her Mother for an
Offense received, she had falsely accused her with a Crime which she was not
guilty of; for which she also was justly Executed. A most wicked Man in France
freely confessed himself to be a Magician, and accused many others, whose Lives
were thereupon taken from them; and a whole Province had like to have been
ruined thereby, but the Impostor was discovered: The Confessing pretended
Wizzard was burnt at Paris in the year 1668. I shall only take notice further
of an awful Example mentioned by A. B. Spotswood in his History of Scotland, p.
449. His words are these, This Summer ( viz. Anno 1597.) there was a great
business for the Trial of Witches, amongst others, one Margaret Atkin being
apprehended on suspicion, and threatened with Torture, did confess herself
Guilty; being examined touching her Associates in that Trade, she named a few,
and perceiving her Delations find Credit, made offer to detect all of that
sort, and to purge the Country of them; so she might have her Life granted: For
the reason of her Knowledge, she said, That they had a secret mark all of that
sort in their Eyes, whereby she could surely tell, how soon she looked upon
any, whether they were Witches or not; and in this she was so readily believed,
that for the space of 3 or 4 Months she was carried from Town to Town to make
Discoveries in that kind; many were brought in question by her Delations,
especially at Glasgow, where diverse Innocent Women, through the Credulity of
the Minister Mr. John Cowper, were condemned and put to Death; in the end she
was found to be a mere deceiver, and sent back to Fife, where she was first
apprehended: At her Trial she affirmed all to be false that she had confessed
of herself or others, and persisted in this to her Death, which made many
fore-think their too great forwardness that way, and moved the King to recall
his Commission given out against such Persons, discharging all Proceedings
against them, except in case of a voluntary Confession, till a solid Order
should be taken by the Estates touching the form that should be kept in their
Trial. Thus that famous Historian.

2. If two credible Persons shall affirm upon Oath that they have seen the
party accused speaking such words, or doing things which none but such as have
Familiarity with the Devil ever did or can do, that is a sufficient Ground for
Conviction.

Some are ready to say, that Wizzards are not so unwise as to do such things in
the sight or hearing of others, but it is certain that they have very often
been known to do so: How often have they been seen by others using
Enchantments? Conjuring to raise Storms? And have been heard calling upon their
Familiar Spirits? And have been known to use Spells and Charms? And to show in
a Glass or in a Shew-stone persons absent? And to reveal Secrets which could
not be discovered but by the Devil? And have not men been seen to do things
which are above humane Strength, that no man living could do without Diabolical
Assistances? Claudia was seen by Witnesses enough, to draw a Ship which no
humane Strength could move. Tuccia a Vestal Virgin was seen to carry Water in a
Sieve: The Devil never assists men to do supernatural things undesired. When
therefore such like things shall be testified against the accused Party not by
Specter which are Devils in the Shape of Persons either living or dead, but by
real men or women who may be credited; it is proof enough that such an one has
that Conversation and Correspondence with the Devil, as that he or she, whoever
they be, ought to be exterminated from amongst men. This notwithstanding I will
add; It were better that ten suspected Witches should escape, than that one
innocent Person should be Condemned; that is an old saying, and true, Prestat
reum nocentem absolvi, quam ex prohibitis Indiciis and illegitima probatione
condemnari. It is better that a Guilty Person should be Absolved, than that he
should without sufficient ground of Conviction be condemned. I had rather judge
a Witch to be an honest woman, than judge an honest woman as a Witch. The word
of God directs men not to proceed to the execution of the most capital
offenders, until such time as upon searching diligently, the matter is found to
be a Truth, and the thing certain, Deuteronomy. 13. 14, 15.

An Acquaintance Mr. M^rden in his Geogra. Phy. p. 577.
of mine at London, in his description of New England declares, that as to
their Religion, the people there are like Mr. Perkins; it is no dishonor to
us, if that be found true: I am sorry that any amongst us begin to slight so
great a Man, whom the most Voetius Bib^ioth. l. 2. Lecus in Compend. Histo^.
Learned in Foreign Lands, speak of with Admiration, on the account of his
polite and acute Judgment: It is a grave and good Advice which he gives in his
Discourse of Witchcrafts (Chap. 7. Sect. 2.) wherewith I conclude; I would
therefore wish and advise all Jurors who give their Verdict upon Life and Death
in the Court of Assizes, to take good heed, that as they be diligent in zeal of
God's glory, and the good of his Church, in detecting of Witches, by all
sufficient and lawful means, so likewise they would be careful what they do,
and not to condemn any party suspected upon bare Presumptions, without sound
and sufficient Proofs that they be not guilty through their own Rashness of
shedding Innocent Blood.

Boston, New England, October. 3. 1692.
The CONTENTS.
THE first Case proposed, whether not may Satan appear in the Shape of an
Innocent and Pious, as well as of a Nocent and Wicked Person, to afflict such
as suffer by Diabolical Molestation? The Affirmitive proved from six Arguments.
1. From several Scriptures. Page 1. 2. Because it is possible for the Devil in
the Shape of Innocent Persons to do other Mischiefs, proved by many Instances.
p. 6. 3. Because if Satan may not represent an Innocent Person as afflicting
others, it must be either because he wants will or power to do this, or because
God will never permit him so to do it; either of which may be affirmed. p. 8.
4. It is certain both from Scripture and History, that Magicians by their
Enchantments and Hellish Conjurations may cause a false Representation of
Persons and Things. p. 12. 5. From the concurring Judgment of many Learned and
Judicous Men. p. 16. 6. Our own Experience has confirmed the Truth of what we
affirm. p. 18.
The Second Case considered, viz. if one bewitched be cast down with the look
or cast of the Eye of another Person, and after that recovered again by a Touch
from the same Person, is not this an infallible Proof that the party accused
and complained of is in Covenant with the Devil? p. 23. Answ. This may be
Ground of Suspicion and Examination, but not of Conviction. p. 24. The Judgment
of Mr. Bernard and of Dr. Cotta produced. p. 25, 27. Several things offered
against the Infallibility of this Proof. 1. It Is possible that the persons in
question may be possessed with Evil Spirits. Signs of such. Page 22. 2. Falling
down with the cast of the Eye proceeds not from a natural but an arbitrary
Cause. p. 23. 3. That of the bewitched Persons being recovered with a Touch is
various and fallible. p. 24. 4. There are that question the Lawfulness of the
Experiment. p. 25. 5. The Testimony of bewitched or possessed Persons is no
Evidence as to what they see concerning others, and therefore not as to
themselves. p. 27. 6. Bewitched Persons have sometimes been struck down with
the Look of Dogs, ibid. 7. If this were an infallible proof, there would be
difficulty in discovering Witches. 8. Nothing can be produced out of the Word
of God to show, that this is any proof of Witchraft, p. 28. 9. Antipathies in
nature have strange and unaccountable effects.
The Third Case considered, whether here are any Discoveries of Witchcraft,
which Jurors and Judges may with a safe Conscience proceed upon to the
Conviction and Condemnation of the persons under Suspicion, p. 51. Two things
premised, 1. That the Evidence in the Crime of Witchraft ought to be as clear
as in any other Crimes of a Capital nature, p. 29. 2. That there have been ways
of Trying Witches long used, which God never approved of. More particularly
that of casting the suspected Party into the Water, to try whether they will
Sink or Swim. The Vanity and great Sin which is in that way of Purgation
evinced by six Reasons, p. 29, to 30?
That there are proofs for the Conviction of Witches, which Jurors may with a
safe Conscience proceed upon, proved from Scripture, p. 33. That a free and
voluntary Confession is a sufficient ground of Conviction, p. 34. That the
Testimony of confessing Witches against others, is not so clear an Evidence as
against themselves, p. 35. That if two Credible Persons shall affirm upon Oath
that they have seen the Person accused doing things, which none but such as
have familiarity with the Devil, ever did or can do, that is a sufficient ground
of Conviction: And that this has often happened, p. 38. Mr. Perkins his Solemn
Caution to Jurors, p. 39.
POSTSCRIPT.
THE Design of the preceding Dissertation, is not to plead for Witchcrafts, or
to appear as an Advocate for Witches: I have therefore written another
Discourse, proving that there are such horrid Creatures as Witches in the
World; and that they are to be extirpated and cut off from amongst the People
of God, which I have Thoughts and Inclinations in due time to publish; and I am
abundantly satisfied that there have been, and are still most cursed Witches in
the Land. More then one or two of those now in Prison, have freely and credibly
acknowledged their Communion and Familiarity with the Spirits of Darkness; and
have also declared unto me the Time and Occasion, with the particular
Circumstances of their Hellish Obligations and Abominations.

Nor is there designed any Reflection on those worthy Persons who have been
concerned in the late Proceedings at Salam: They are wise and good Men, and
have acted with all Fidelity according to their Light, and have out of
tenderness declined the doing of some things, which in our own Judgments they
were satisfied about: Having therefore so arduous a Case before them, Pity and
Prayers rather than Censures are their due; on which account I am glad that
there is published to the World (by my Son) a Breviate of the Trials of some
who were lately executed, whereby I hope the thinking part of Mankind will be
satisfied, that there was more than that which is called Spectre Evidence for
the Conviction of the Persons condemned. I was not my self present at any of
the Trials, excepting one, viz. that of George Buroughs; had I been one of his
Judges, I could not have acquitted him: For several Persons did upon Oath
testify, that they saw him do such things as no Man that has not a Devil to be
his Familiar could perform: And the Judges affirm, that they have not convicted
any one merely on the account of what Specter have said, or of what has been
represented to the Eyes or Imaginations of the sick bewitched Persons. If what
is here exposed to public view, may be a means to prevent it for the future, I
shall not repent of my Labor in this Undertaking. I have been prevailed with
so far as I am able to discern the Truth in these dark Cases, to declare my
Sentiments, with the Arguments which are of weight with me, hoping that what is
written may be of some use to discover the Depths of Satan; and to prevent
innocent ones having their Lives endangered, or their Reputations ruined, by
being through the Subtilty and Power of the Devils, in consideration with the
Ignorance and Weakness of Men, involved amongst the Guilty. It becomes those of
my Profession to be very tender in Cases of Blood, and to imitate our Lord and
Master, Who came not to destroy the Lives of Men, but to save them.

I likewise design in what I have written, to give my testimony against these
unjustifiable ways of discovering Witchcrafts, which some among us have
practiced. I hear that of late there was a Witch-cake made with the Urine of
bewitched Creatures, as one Ingredient by several Persons in a place, which has
suffered much by the Attack of Hell upon it: This I take to be not only wicked
Superstition, but great Folly: For though the Devil does sometimes operate with
the Experiments, yet not always, especially if a Magical Faith be wanting. I
shall here take occasion to recite some Passages in a Letter, which I received
from that Eminent pious and learned Man, Mr. Samuel Cradock; during my abode in
London; the Letter bears date Febr. 26. 1690. Then take it in his own Words,
which are these; We have at this present one in our next Town, who has a Son
who has strange Fits, and such as they impute to Witchcraft: He come to consult
with me about it, but before he came, he had used a means which I should never
have directed him unto, viz. He took the Nails of his Son's Hands and Feet, and
some of his Hair, and mixed them in Rye-paste with his Water, and so set it all
by the Fire till it was consumed, and his Son (as he says) was well after, and
free from his Fits for a whole Month, but then they came again, and He tried
that means a second time, and then it would not do; He removed his Son into
Cambridgeshire the next County, and then he was well, but as soon as he brought
him home he was afflicted as before. The Poy says, He saw a thing like a Mole
following of him, which once spoke to him, and told him he came to do the
Office he was to do: I advised his Father to make use of the Medicine
prescribed by our Savior, viz. Fasting and Prayer. Here have been others in
this Town, that though they were under Ill-handling as they call it: One Family
had their Milk so affected, that they could not possibly make any Cheese, but
it hov'd and swelled, and was good for nothing: They are now rid of that
trouble, but how they got rid of it I do not know: Thus my Letter. By which it
is evident that Towns in England as well as New England are molested with
Demons, only I wish that the Superstitions practiced in other places to get
rid of such troublesome Guests had never been known, much less used amongst us
or them.

Some I hear have taken up a Notion, that the Book newly published by my Son,
is contradictory to this of mine: It Is strange that such Imaginations should
enter into the Minds of Men: I perused and approved of that Book before it was
printed; and nothing but my Relation to him hindered me from recommending it to
the World: But my self and Son agreed unto the humble Advice which twelve
Ministers concurringly presented before his Excellency and Council, respecting
the present Difficulties, which let the World judge, whether there be any thing
in its dissentany from what is attested by either of us.

It was in the Words following:

The Return of several Ministers consulted by his Excellency, and the
Honorable Council, upon the present Witchcrafts in Salem Village.
Boston, June 15. 1692.
I. THE afflicted State of our poor Neighbors, that are now suffering by
Molestations from the Invisible World, we apprehend so deplorable, that we
think their Condition calls for* the utmost help of all Persons in their
several Capacities. II. We cannot but with all Thankfulness acknowledge, the
Success which the merciful God has given unto the sedulous and assiduous
Endeavors of our honorable Rulers, to detect the abominable Witchcrafts which
have been committed in the Country; humbly praying that the discovery of these
mysterious and mischievous Wickednesses, may be perfected. III. We judge that
in the prosecution of these, and all such Witchcrafts, there is need of a very
critical and exquisite Caution, lest by too much Credulity for things received
only upon the Devil's Authority, there be a Door opened for a long Train of
miserable Consequences, and Satan get an Advantage over us, for we should not
be ignorant of his Devices. IV. As in Complaints upon Witchcrafts, there may be
Matters of Enquiry, which do not amount unto Matters of Presumption, and there
may be Matters of Presumption which yet may not be reckoned Matters of
Conviction; so it is necessary that all Proceedings thereabout be managed with
an exceeding tenderness toward those that may be complained of; especially if
they have been Persons formerly of an unblemished Reputation. V. When the first
Enquiry is made into the Circumstances of such as may lie under any just
Suspicion of Witchcrafts, we could wish that there may be admitted as little as
is possible, of such Noise, Company, and Openness, as may too bastily expose
them that are examined: and that there may nothing be used as a Test, for the
Trial of the suspected, the Lawfulness whereof may be doubted among the People
of God; but that the Directions given by such Judicious Writers as Perkins and
Bernard, be consulted in such a Case. VI. Presumptions whereupon Persons may be
committed, and much more Convictions, whereupon Persons may be condemned as
guilty of Witchcrafts, ought certainly to be more considerable, than barely the
accused Persons being represented by a Spectre unto the Afflicted; inasmuch as
it is an undoubted and a notorious thing, that a Demon may, by God's
Permission, appear even to ill purposes, in the Shape of an innocent, yea, and
a virtuous Man: Nor can we esteem Alterations made in the Sufferers, by a Look
or Touch of the Accused to be an infallible Evidence of Guilt; but frequently
liable to be abused by the Devil's Legerdemains. VII. We know not, whether some
remarkable Affronts given to the Devils, by our disbelieving of those
Testimonies, whose whole force and strength is from them alone, may not put a
Period, unto the Progress of the dreadful Calamity begun upon us, in the
Accusation of so many Persons, whereof we hope, some are yet clear from the
great Transgression laid unto their Charge. VIII. Nevertheless, We cannot but
humbly-recommend unto the Government, the speedy and vigorous Prosecution of
such as have rendered themselves obnoxious, according to the Direction given in
the Laws of God, and the wholesome Statutes of the English Nation, for the
Detection of Witchcrafts*

FINIS.
Books now in the Press, and going to it, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven
in the Poultry.
MEmoirs of the Right Honorable Arthur Earl of Anglesey, late Lord Privy Seal
intermixed with Moral, ^olitical and Historical Observations, and many Secret
Passages not before made public. To which is added, A Letter written by his
Lordship, containing the Reasons of his retiring from Court, in the late King's
Reign. Published by Sir Peter Pet, Knight, according to his Lordship's Request
upon his Death bed.

The Genuine Remains of that Learned Prelate, Dr. Thomas Barl^w, late Lord
Bishop of Lincoln; containing various Points, Theological, Philosophical,
Historical, etc in Letters to several Persons of Honor and Quality; with some
Remarkable Passages in his Lordship's Life; written with his own Hand. To which
is added the Resolution of many abstruse Points in Divinity, with great Variety
of other Subjects; written by his Lordship; and Published by Sir Peter Pet,
Knight.

A Directory for Young Communicants. Wherein the Nature of the Haly Sacrament
is Explained, the most weighty Cases of Conscience about it are resolved, and
all those Scruples alleged for the Omission of it, are considered. By a Divine
of the Church of England. To which is added Mensalia Sacra, or Meditations
suited to all the parts of that Solemn Ordinance.

The History of the Famous Edicts of Nants: Containing the most Remarkable
things that have happened in France both before and since its Publication, upon
Occasion of the Diversity of Religions, and especially a full Account of all
the Contraventio^s, Non-Executions, Elusions, Artifices, Violences, and other
Injustices, which the Protestants reasonably Pretend, and Complain they have
Suffered, contrary to the Tenor of the said Edict, called and held Sacred and
Irrevocable, to the time of its most Perfidious Revocation in October, 1685.
with all the Remarkable Occurrences that have followed since the said New
Edict. In Four Volumes. This French Book of Martyrs, which the World has been
so long expecting (is Licensed and Entered in the Hall-Book, and) will be
Translated with all the Accuracy so great a Work requires.

A Peaceable Enquiry into the Nature of the present Controversy among the
United Brethren, about Justification. By a Reverend Divine.

A New and Comprehensive Book of Trade, by William Leybourn, Author if the late
book entitled, Eursus Mathematicus.

The Third Edition of the first Account of the Trials of the New England
Witches.

The Complete Library for June (will be published in a few days) containing an
Historical Account of the Choicest Books newly printed in England, and in the
Foreign Journals; as also the State of Learning in the World.

A Directory for Youth, through all the Difficulties attending that State of
Life. By the Reverend Mr. Pomphret.

May the 16th, 1693. New Proposals for the Printing of a Book of William
Leybourn's, Author of the Late Cursus Mathematicus, and of diverse other
Mathematical Tractates: Who has now by him, a Miscellanious Manuscript ready
for the Press, which he Intends to entitle, Pleasure with Profit: It consisting
of Recreations of diverse Kinds: Viz. Numerical, Geometrical, Mechanical,
Optical, Astronomical, Horometrical, Cryptographical, Statical, Magnetical,
Automatical, Chemical, Historical. Published for Ingenious Spirits to make
farther Scrutiny into these (and the like) Sublime Sciences; and to divert them
from following such Vices, as Youth (in this Age) are too much inclined to.

This Book, when Printed of a good Letter, will contain above One Hundred
Sheets, with near Two Hundred Cutts. And as he has already Published his Two
last Treatises, viz. Dialling, Plain, Concave, Unequal, Projective, Reflective,
Refractive, etc. And Cursus Mathematicus, by way of Subscription; he now again
offers this to all Lovers of Laudable, Pleasant, and Profitable Recreations.

And to the end that This may come to Public View in his Life time, he
presents the following Overture (for the promotion of it) to all Masters,
Heads, Provosts, Fellows, Scholars, etc. of both Universities. -- To all
Public and Private Schoolmasters, Ushers and Scholars under them -- To all
Gentlemen of Inns of Courts or Chancery -- And to all other Private Gentlemen
of what Degree soever.

The New PROPOSALS are as follow, Viz.
I. THE Subscribers to give Thirteen Shillings and six pence for each Book in
Quires; whereof six shillings is* to be paid at the time of Subscription, and
seven shillings six pence at the delivery of the Book.

II. To encourage all persons, they that shall contribute to the procuring
Subscriptions for six books, shall have a seventh Gratls.

III. All who intend to assist in the advancement of this Useful Work are
desisired to send in their Subscriptions with all speed unto the persons here
under-named, where printed Receipts shall be given them.

IV. In this Work will be inserted (above what was at first proposed) a New
System of Algebra, according to the last Improvements and Discoveries that have
been made in that Art, particularly as to the Nature and application of
Couverging Series, whereby all possible Equations however adfected, devolved,
or interrupted, are readily resolved, and the business of Equations now brought
to perfection.

As also a demonstration of the process of all the Rules commonly given for
Addition, Substraction, Multiplication and Division, especially in Fractions,
not sufficiently cleared by any Algebraic Author whatever: The whole is now
made familiar and easy to an Ordinary Capacity, by Richard Sault, Professor of
the Mathematics, in Adam's Court in Broadstreet, near the Royal Exchange.

There will also be added several Great Curiosities in Cryptography,
Horometria, etc. by another Hand.

VI. This Addition will occasion its not being published so soon as at first
proposed, and will inhance each book to sixteen shillings in Quires to those
that do not subscribe; those who expect the henefit of the Proposals, are
desired to send in their first payment, viz. six shillings, before the 26th of
July next, after which time no Subscriptions will be taken in under Eight
shillings in hand, and the like at delivery.

The Undertakers are the Author, Dorman Newman, R. Baldwin and John Dunton.

Books lately Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultry.
THE 9th Vol. of the Athenian Gazzette, resolving all nice and curious
Questions, with a general Title, Preface, and Index to it, sticht up in Marble
Paper, Price 2 s. 6 d.

The Tigurine Liturgy, published with the approbation of several Bishops.

Sadeurs New Discovery of Terra Incognita Australis; translated from the French
Copy. Printed at Paris by Public Authority.

The Agreement in Doctrine, among the Dissenting Ministers in London,
subscribed December. 16. 1692.

The sixth Edition of the second Spira.

A Conference between a modern Atheist and his Friend: By the Methodizer of the
second Spira; Printed in the same size, that they might bind up together.

An Earnest Call to Family-Catechism and Reformation: By a Reverend Divine.
Several Ministers and private Christians perusing this Piece, earnestly moved
for its pvblication, whsch the Reverend Author at length consenting to; the
following proposals are now made, for the general dispersing of it; viz That
whatever Gentlemen will be so publick-spirited, as to give 50 of them away,
they shall have that number for 20 ^. stitched up in Blew Paper, and ready cut;
but as for others who buy lesser numbers, they must not expect them under 6 d.
per book.

Theodore John, a late Teacher among the Jews, his late Confession of the
Christian Faith, before he was baptized.

The Day of Jubilee; or, a plain and a practical Discourse of the Saints
gathering together, and of their meeting the Lord in Glory at his second
coming, on 1 These. 4. 17. By J. Brandon, Rector of Winchamstead in Berks.

The late Trials of several Wi^ches: published by Cotton Mather*

A farther account of the Trials of the New England Wi^ches*

The 4th Edition of the New Mar^y^ology* or* Bloody Assizes. With additions so
large, as render it* a New Secret History of the lat^ times.

All the 9 Volumes of the Athenian Gazette, with a general Title, Preface and
Index to them, or single Mercuries to this time.

The 1st Vol. of the Complete Library, being an Historical Account of Books and
Novelties, published Monthly, with a alphabetical Tables.

The ad Vol. of the Complete Library for December, January, February, March,
April, May, that for June is ^ow in the Press.

A Mourning Ring in memory of your Departed Friend, containing the House of
Weeping, Deathbed Thoughts, etc. The Second Edition.

The Young Students Library, published by the Athenian Society.

-- A Scheme of Enquiries, published by the Athenian Society.

-- An ODE to the Athenian Society.

-- The Visions of the Soul* by a member of the Athenian Society.

The History of the Athenian Society.

The Entire Set of Athenian Gazetts, with the Supplements to them* bound up
altogether for the year 1691. with an alphabetical Table for the whole year.

An account of the Divisions amongst the Quakers in Pensylvania.

The Principles, Doctrines, Laws and Orders of the Quakers.

The Character of a Williamite, by a Divine of the Church of England. Price 6d.

The Character of a Jacobite, by a person of Quality, Price 6d.

The Sense of the United Nonconforming Ministers, against some of Mr. Davis's
erroneous Opinions.

Casuistical Morning Exercises, the Fourth Volume.

Heads of agreement assented to by the United Ministers.

The Countries Concurrence with the London United Ministers. By S. Chandler.

The 2d Edition of Gospel Truth stated.

A defense of Gospel Truth; being a Reply to Mr. Chancy's first part.

A Discourse showing what Repentance of National Sins God requires.

The Vanity of Childhood and Youth. All 4 by Daniel William^.

The Life of Mr. Thomas Brand, by Dr. Annsley.

The Mourners Companion. By ^. Shower.

A Practical-Discourse on Sickness and Recovery.

Early Religion, or a Discourse of the Duty of Youth.

Fall not out by the way; or, a Persuasion to a Friendly Correspondence between
brethren of the same Faith* all 3 by ^. Rogers, M. A.

The Life and Death of the Reverend Mr. Eliot; by Cotton Mather.

Mr. Barker's Flores Intellectuales both parts.

Mr. Quick's Young man's Claim to the Sacrament.

A Practical Discourse on the late Earthquakes.

Mr. Crow's Vanity of Judicial Astrology.

Mr. Oaks's Funeral Sermon. By Mr. Sam. Slater.

The Celestial Race. By Mr. Bush.

Mr. ^ushes Sermon on a Person that died suddenly.

The Divine Captain by Mr. Hickeringal.

Infant Baptism stated. by J. R. Presbiter of the Church of Engl^ad.

The first and second Volume of the Packet broke open.

Religio Bibliopol^ in imitation of Dr. Browns Religio Medici.

The Double Descent, a Poem.


