A DEFENSE OF THE RESOLUTION OF THIS CASE, VIZ.

Whether the Church of England's Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church
of Rome, makes it Unlawful to hold Communion with the Church of England.

In Answer to a Book Entitled A Modest Examination OF THAT RESOLUTION.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons, against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1684.

A DEFENSE OF THE Resolution, etc.
SIR,
I who know the Author of the Book, which has given you this trouble, better
than any man, do conclude that you are not more a stranger to him, than he is
to you, from the Epithets you so frequently bestow upon him throughout your
Papers; except you do it (which I would not be so uncharitable as to think) by
way of Irony.

In your First Paragraph you express a Liking of the Complexion of his Book;
and I perceive you mean, that it pleases you to find it not written in a heat,
and that there is nothing of a Censorious or Peevish humor, or of a haughty
contempt of those he deals with, therein expressed. And he hopes that upon the
same accounts, you are no less pleased with the other Resolutions of Cases,
which bear this company. But he thinks it no mighty Attainment, to be able in
writing to manage a Controversy Coolly and Sedately; without bitter or
provoking Reflections, or contemptuous Expressions. Though men of warm Tempers
may find it somewhat difficult, to govern their Spirits and Passions, as it
becomes them, in the heat of disputing by word of mouth; one would think that a
small measure of Humility or Good nature, or of Discretion and Prudence, should
make it no hard matter to acquire that other Attainment: And, much more, that
no one who is a Christian in Spirit and Temper, as well as in Notion and
Profession, can find it a difficult thing to arrive at it. But enough of this.

In your Second Paragraph, you seem to intimate, that our Author might have
spared his pains in dwelling so long upon the Distance between our Church and
the Church of Rome, in points of Doctrine: But he is not satisfied with the
reasons you give for the needlesness of so doing. Your reasons are two; First,
because he argued chiefly for Communion in Worship. And Secondly, you never met
with the Doctrinal part of the 39 Articles charged as Popish, nor our Church
reflected on, as symbolizing with that Idolatrous Church, in Points of
Doctrine. But these reasons have not convinced our Author, that he is over long
upon this Argument; for it was not his design to show, that our Church does not
symbolize in Points of Doctrine with that of Rome, but that She stands at
greatest defyance with that Church: Not, that She does not teach her Corrupt
Doctrine in her Articles; but that she designedly confutes them, and exposes
the falsity and corruption of them. And this surely was worth the showing in so
many instances, for their sakes who never read or considered those Articles; as
I fear very few of the Dissenters have done.

And, whereas you say, you never met with the Doctrinal part of the 39 Articles
charged as Popish (and it would be strange if you had) I say, there is too
great cause to suspect, that very few of our Dissenting Brethren do understand
how Anti-popish they are, though they do not charge them as Popish. And I doubt
you have met with many* (I am sure very many are to be met with) who have
reflected upon our Church as an Idolatrous Church, though you never heard her
accused as symbolizing with the Idolatrous Church of Rome, in Points of
Doctrine. But they will find it somewhat hard to understand, how a Church can
be Idolatrous in matters of Practice, and yet be pure in her Doctrine from any
tang of Idolatry. Surely her Practices must be grounded upon her Doctrines, or
they would be strange Practices indeed. And it would be wonderful, if she
should Practice Idolatry, and yet Believe nothing that tends to the
encouragement of that soul Sin; nay believe and teach all those Doctrines that
are as Opposite to Idolatry, as Light to Darkness. So that I conceive nothing
could be more to our Author's purpose, than to endeavor to remove that
prejudice of many, against the Constitution of our Church, which is grounded
upon an Opinion of its being near of kin to Popery. And what could signify
more to their Conviction, that there is not any ground for such an Opinion,
than the showing how abhorrent to Popery our Church is in her Doctrine; and
what a testimony she bears in her Articles against the Idolatrous and
Superstitious Doctrines of the Romish Church, and the Practices which she
foundeth upon those Doctrines?

As to the several Additions you say may be made to the page 4.
Anti-popish Doctrines contained in the 39 Articles, our Author conceives he
was not guilty of any Oversight in not preventing you, because some of them are
not properly Anti-popish, but contrary to the Doctrine of other Sects, which
are to be found among Abhorrers of Popery as well as Papists; and others of
them our Author has not omitted, but if you will look again, you may find them
in their proper places. Viz. those Doctrines contained in Artic. VI. and Artic.
XI. This, under the head of Doctrines flatly contradicting the Holy Scriptures,
page 9. That, under the head of the Authority on which each of the two Churches
founds its whole Religion, page 18.

Now I hope by this time, you understand very well what our Author would have
you conclude, from this first part of his Performance, which you say page 4.
you do not well understand.

And whereas you ask, whether it be that the 39 Articles have in them nothing
of kin to Popery, as to matters of Faith? And add that you dare say, there is
not a judicious Dissenter in England will say they have. I answer, if there be
any injudicious Dissenters in England, that will say they have, I hope these
poor people ought not to be so despised, as that we should use no means for the
undeceiving of them. But our Author would have you conclude, that he has done
what he designed, which is (as has been already said) not to show that the 39
Articles have nothing of kin to Popery, but that they are most abhorrent from
it; and that our Church is at the widest and vastest distance from Popery in
her Doctrinals; and consequently one would think too, in matters of Practice.
But our Author does not satisfy himself to prove this by this consequence; but
goes on to show it in the particular instances of matters of Practice, after he
had done it in Points of Doctrine.

To return now to your Second Page, You say that it is mightily Satisfactory to
you to hear our Author assuring you, that our Church allows her Members the
judgment of Discretion, etc. But, Sir, you needed no Authors to assure you of
this, since our Church has done it as fully, as it can be done by words; and
our Author no otherwise assures you of it, than by citing our Churches
Articles. But whereas you add, that this you cannot but think implies a
Liberty, not only to Believe and Judge, but to Do also according to what a
man believes and judges; surely you will find your self able to think
otherwise, when you have considered, what is the necessary and immediate
consequence of such a thought, viz. that all such things as Laws are utterly
inconsistent with allowing to men the Judgment of Discretion, according to this
large notion: And that, therefore our Church does faultily Symbolize with the
Church of Rome, in having any such things as Government and Discipline.

You next say, that our Author speaks very true as to the Popish Rites and
Ceremonies, and that those in our Church are comparatively few; but you much
doubt, whether the use of those few was long before Popery appeared in the
world, unless he means Popery at its full growth; for that Mystery of Iniquity,
as to Rituals, began to work very early. To this I answer, that the Papists may
con you great thanks for this passage, it plainly enough intimating that the
Primitive Father and Christians were for the most part Papists, though not
fully grown Papists. And as to those words of St. Paul, The Mystery of iniquity
does already work, if you can do any thing like proving that the Apostle meant
by the Mystery of iniquity, which began to work in his days, the use of such
Rites as those you are offended with in our Church, I will engage for our
Author, that he shall immediately set up for a Nonconformist.

You say in your Third Page, that you cannot well understand how our Author
says, that our Church does not impose her Rites as necessary, unless he means
as necessary in order to Salvation, etc. But does he not expressly tell you what
he means by necessary? you found he did, if you read the whole Sentence, which
runs thus, page 4. And she imposes her Rites not (as the Church of Rome does
here is) as necessary, and as parts of Religion, but as merely indifferent and
changeable things, as we find in her 34th Article, etc. And why, Sir, did you
conceal this part of the Sentence, and thus stop at a Comma?

You thus proceed; Nor do I well understand how they are not made necessary to
Salvation, when the non-observance of them is made sinful, and meritorious of
a being cast out of the Church, etc. And I assure you, that I do as little
understand, if this be good arguing, how whatsoever the King commands of his
Subjects, or a Master of his Servants, is not made by them necessary to
Salvation, since the non-observance of the Lawful Commands of each, is
acknowledged to be sinful, by all that believe these Precepts binding, viz.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, for the Lord's sake, etc. And,
Servants obey in all things your Masters, etc. And as to the Penalty you
mention, of being cast out of the Church, and cut off from the Body of Christ,
which is the same thing, it amounts to thus much; That those who will by no
means be prevailed with, to conform to the Laws of the Society of which they
are Members, shall be cast out of it: which all Societies and Bodies Politic
whatsoever, have ever thought fit to have inflicted, upon obstinate
Transgressors of their Laws, in order to the preservation of themselves, and
the upholding of Government amongst them. And our Author I am certain will
readily grant, that none but Obstinate Transgressors of the Churches Laws, and
such as are incorrigible by all other means first tried, ought to be cast out
of the Church, and that the Sentence of Excommunication should never be
pronounced against them, but as the last Remedy: As also that the design
thereof ought always to be the Reformation of the Offender (as well as for
example to others) never his Destruction. But how does this Penalty's being
made the Sanction of the Laws of our Church, which ordain Rites and Ceremonies
for Order's sake, and the decent administration of Divine Worship in Public,
speak these to be enjoined as necessary to Salvation, when the non-observance
of any of them is no otherwise judged to be sinful, than as it is an Act of
disobedience to Humane Authority; and when this Penalty is never (according to
the Rules of our Church) to be inflicted, but in case of the Offender's adding
contempt to his disobedience? If any instances can be given of persons being
Excommunicated upon the account of Nonconformity, who are humble and modest and
peaceable, and that give good evidence of their willingness to comply with the
Laws of their Governors as far as they are able with safe consciences, this I
am sure is wholly the fault of Persons, not of our Constitution. But this
Objection is too inconsiderable to deserve our bestowing so many words upon it.

All that follows to the bottom of your Fifth Page, wherein our Author is
concerned, has been replied to: And there you thus speak. As in England we
have a Silent and a Speaking Law, so we have also a Silent and a Speaking
Church, etc. We know the Doctrine of the Church of England in the 39 Articles;
but this is but Ecclesia Muta: How many have we that will tell us, We are
Ecclesia Loquens, the Living Church of England; and we tell you, etc. Here
follow no fewer than thirteen Doctrines taught by this Ecclesia Loquens,
contradictory to the 39 Articles. But

1. You have given us (we thank you) the very first information of this
Ecclesia Loquens: But why do you expect, unless we knew you better, that we
should take your bare word for it? Nay we have hardly that, for you do not in
express terms affirm, but ask this Question, How many have we that will tell
us, we are Ecclesia Loquens? And therefore it might suffice, to give you only
this short answer, Do you tell us how many, or whether there are any, if you
know. Surely this Church of yours is an Invisible Church; or, if not, none but
Dissenters Eyes are clear enough to get the least glympse of it. But the truth
of it is, it is a mere Figment, and the very Dream of a Shadow. But

2. Whereas a Positive Assertion of the being of such a Church of England is
implied in this Question, you cannot well be otherwise understood, than as
asserting, that the Prevailing party of our Church of England Divines, have
obtruded upon the World this long Beadroll of Heresies, as Articles of Faith;
and so have turned the Old Church of England out of doors: And therefore you
are brought to this miserable pass, that you cannot hold Communion with this
New Church, except you will separate from, and bid adieu to the Old. And, in
good earnest, if this be so, Dissenters are the only true Friends of the
Church of England, as by Law Established; and this Church is hugely obliged to
them for their Separation. But

3. I am well assured, that you will never be able to make good this charge, or
any part of it, against any number of the Divines of our Church. For I who
know, I am confident, as many of them, as most men in England, can truly
declare as follows,

That I cannot name any one Divine of our Church, who teaches your First
contradictory Doctrine to the 39 Articles, viz. That although we may not
terminate our worship in an Image, yet we may bow down and worship the true God
before an Image.

Nor your Second, viz. That departed Saints know our states here upon Earth,
and are praying to God for us; and therefore we may pray to them.

Nor know I any one of our Church, who teaches your Third, viz. That any
Priest may absolve, by commission from God, more than declaratively. I mean, I
know no one that makes the Priest's Absolution to be other in Effect than
declarative, though it signifies more than if pronounced by a Layman.

Nor your Fourth, That the Natural Body and Blood of Christ, is in the Elements
of Bread and Wine really. Our Church-Catechism says that, The Body and Blood
of Christ, are verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful in the
Lord's Supper: And I know no Divine of ours that explaineth this otherwise than
thus, That Believers feed on the Body and Blood of Christ, in the Lord's
Supper, as truly and really as they do on the Elements; but not after a
corporal and carnal manner, but after a spiritual, viz. by applying to
themselves the Benefits of Christ's death by faith. And I presume you will
neither assert this to be Popish Doctrine, nor deny that it is true Doctrine.

Nor do I know any one of our Divines that holds your Fifth Proposition, for it
may not be called a Doctrine, viz. That our Conformable Congregations are no
better than Conventicles, where the Minister reads not the Communion Service at
the Altar. Which you assert to be tantamount to the allowing of Prayers in an
Unknown Tongue; because in multitudes of Congregations, the People cannot hear
a line from him. I say, I know of no Divine of our Church, that ever asserted
that such Congregations as the forementioned, are no better than Conventicles.
There was indeed lately a foolish Book published to Prove them Conventicles,
but it is strongly conjectured that this Book was written by a certain Layman:
And what Church he is of I cannot say, nor is it a pins matter to know. But I
may as much suspect him to be a Protestant Dissenter, as a Popish, upon the
score of that his Position; it being nothing of kin to the allowing of Prayers
in an Unknown tongue. For (as there is not One of your Multitudes of
Congregations, wherein the People cannot hear a line from him that reads at the
Communion Table, except you mean, wherein every one of the People cannot; for,
I doubt not, the Major part can in all where the Minister has a voice to be
well heard from the Pulpit, so) all that is read is known before to those who
are not Strangers to our Prayers, or at least they may have Books to enable
them to go along with the Minister, whether they can, or cannot hear distinctly
one sentence from him.

Nor do I know any one of our Divines that has ever taught your 6th Doctrine,
That whole Christ is under each Element: which you intimate is the only
foundation on which the Sacrilegious Romish Practice stands. But if I could
believe that Doctrine to be true, I should notwithstanding judge it an
intolerable thing to refuse the Cup to the Laity, against the express
Institution of our Lord.

Nor know I any Divine of our Church guilty* of the 7th particular of your
Charge, viz. That there are those who interpret the Ten Commandments so as that
he who will ever be saved must do a great many works of supererogation. And if
I did know any one that so interpreted the Commandments, as to make any one
such work necessary to Salvation, I would not call him a Papist for it, but an
Ignoramus; who understands not the word Supererogation.

Nor know I any one that teaches Original Sin, (thereby understanding
Corruption of Nature) to be rather our Misfortune than our Fault: which is your
8th Doctrine.

Nor consequently, that Concupiscence is no sin; which is your 9th.

Nor your 10th, That man has a power in his own will to choose and do what is
spiritually good; (i. e.) without the Assistence of Divine Grace: And with this
Assistence I hope you Dissenters do all hold it.

Nor know I any one of our Divines who teaches, That we are not accounted
righteous before God (or Justified) only for the Merits of Christ: that is,
that there is any other Meritorious cause of our Justification besides the
Active and Passive obedience of Christ.

Nor your 11th, That we are not Justified by Faith alone: Understanding by
Faith, not a dead but a living Faith, that purefies the heart, and works by
love.

Nor your 12th, That good works must go before justification, and are not the
fruits of Faith, but Faith it self. For I know no one of our Church that
asserts more than this, that a sincere Resolution to obey all God's
Commandments must, in order of nature, go before Justification.

Nor your 13th, That there is no Eternal Predestination of persons to life, and
the means tending thereunto. I know of none of our Church that have ever taught
this Doctrine, as you have expressed it; nor any worse than this, That Eternal
Predestination to life is not Irrespective or Absolute; which no Article of our
Church says it is. And Abundance of you Dissenters hold this Doctrine, as well
as Church of England men.

And thus have I gone over all the Doctrines contradictory to the 39 Articles,
taught by your Ecclesia Loquens, yours I say, for she is not ours; and I
declare again, that I know of no Divine of our Church, that teaches or holds
such Doctrines. If you know any, as one would think you do very many, I pray
name them. You say, we spare any names in these cases; but be you entreated not
to spare them. But if you will not be prevailed with, we shall very shrewdly guess
at the reason.

Sir, to deal freely with you, I cannot but wonder, at your adventuring into
the World this other Celeusma; since the Author of the former had so ill
success, and must needs have repented him heartily of that Undertaking. All
that have consideratively read his Answerer, I am confident are convinced, that
after a Great Cry, Little Wool appeared; or rather none at all. Nor can such
be ignorant, what foul play was used to make our Divines of the Church of
England broach Heresy. And I doubt not but you your self have blushed at it,
if you have ever read the Parallela imparia; five Specimen fidei Celeusmaticae.
Could you catch us thus dealing with the Books of your Authors, as ours have
been dealt with by that Author, and some others that might be named, we should
at another kind of rate have been exposed, than they have been.

But, Sir, for God's sake, let us make as much Conscience of vile Calumny, than
which there is not a more express Transgression of the Law of God, nor of the
very Light of Nature, as of Obedience to Authority in such things as no Divine
Law can be produced against; and nothing but strained and far-fetcht
Consequences. And, for God's sake also, let us at length be persuaded to have
so great a concern for our common Religion, as to give over exposing it by such
unchristian doings, to the Scorn and Derision of our Common Enemy.

But I cannot take my leave of this heavy Charge of yours, till I have asked
you, what you infer from thence, on supposition you can make good proof of it?
It is plain your design in all this talk, is to justify, if not a total, yet a
partial Separation. You do indeed (to conceal nothing of your Candor) after
all acknowledge, p. 7.
That you are very far from thinking that there are not multitudes of Holy and
Learned men in our Ecclesia Loquens, that in these things are of another mind:
And therefore, I hope, you will not excuse Separation from their Churches.

Nay you say, p. 9.
That hundreds of the Speaking Church are, as we believe, as far from
symbolizing with the Church of Rome (you mean in Doctrine) as the Articles; And
that in this thing a Separation from the Silent, as well as this part of the
Speaking Church, must needs be highly Sinful. And in thus declaring, you
condemn the generality of those that Separate; it being well known that
Communion with those whom you will acknowledge to be Orthodox Divines, and
those which you account Heterodox, is much alike boggled at. But I fear, when
all is done, you condemn only separation in Heart from these Orthodox men;
your Undertaking in your 8th Page makes me fear this; viz. That all the
Valuable persons in Presbyterian and Independent Congregations, shall give any
reasonable assurance, that they are not in Heart divided from a Single Person,
in the Church of England, that speaks in matters concerning Doctrine, as our
Church does in her Articles: But if you think that all the Communion you are
obliged to hold with these Divines, is only that of the Heart; that is,
thinking them Orthodox, and loving them as such, but allow it to be lawful, to
refuse to worship God with them, nay and not so much as to hear them, we thank
you for nothing. This is such Church Communion as will well consist with
rending and tearing the Church in pieces.

But I pray do not think that all this while I take it for granted, that it is
lawful to separate from the Congregations of those Divines whom we take to be
in some points Heterodox. Nay upon supposition that your Ecclesia Loquens did
as generally depart from the Doctrine of our Church, as the Pharisees in our
Savior's time did from the Law of Moses, I shall be far from granting that
Separation from their Congregations is lawful, except there be a constraint
laid upon us to subscribe to their Heterodox Opinions, till you can prove that
our Savior allowed of the Jews Separation from the Pharisees; which you never
can, but the contrary who cannot show? He bad his Disciples indeed, to beware
of the Leaven of the Pharisees; and so are we to beware of the Leaven of such
Heterodox Teachers; but not so to beware of it, as not to come within their
Churches; for that that caution of our Savior is not to be so interpreted,
appears not only from his own practice (who was far from being a Separatist
from the Jewish Temple or Synagogues) and by what he says, Mat. 23. 2, 3.

In the last Paragraph of your 9th Page, you return to speak more directly to
our Author: And first you reflect upon these words in his Book, p. 24. But I am
so far from taking it for granted, that a Church is guilty of Sin in agreeing
in some indifferent things with the Church of Rome, that I must needs profess,
I have often wondered, how this should become a Question: Seeing whatsoever is
of an indifferent nature, as it is not commanded, so neither is it forbidden by
any Moral or Positive Law; and where there is no Law there is no Transgression,
etc. To this you say, that it is an obvious begging the Question. And it might
be so, if our Author stopped here, but he thus proceeds: And whereas certain
circumstances will make things, that in themselves are neither Duties nor Sins,
to be either Duties or Sins, and to fall by Consequence, under some Divine
Command or Prohibition, I have admired how this Circumstance of an indifferent
thing, being used by the Church of Rome, can be thought to alter the nature of
that thing, and make it cease to be indifferent, and become sinful. So that
this is the Obvious meaning of our Author's words, that he has wondered how it
should become a Question, whether a Church may lawfully agree in some things
with the Church of Rome, which the Law of God has not forbidden: And whereas
somethings that are not forbidden by the Law of God directly, are
notwithstanding forbidden thereby Consequentially, he has admired how the more
Circumstance of a thing's being practiced by the Church of Rome, can speak it
to be forbidden by God's Law Consequentially. And then he immediately betakes
himself to the consideration of some of those Laws given to the Israelites,
that prohibit their imitating the Doings of the Egyptians and Canaanites, which
are urged by Nonconformists, to prove it unlawful to imitate the Church of
Rome in things of a mere indifferent nature, and that that circumstance of
their being practiced by that Church makes them cease to be indifferent, and to
become Sinful: And endeavors to show, that this cannot with any show of
reason be gathered from these Laws.

And how, I pray, is this an Obvious begging of the Question? which is, Whether
a Church's symbolizing, or agreeing in some things, with the Church of Rome, be
a warrant for separatian from the Church so agreeing? This, I say, is the
Question which our Author handles*

But you next make a Question for him, and say it is this, p. 10.
Whether a thing in its own nature indifferent, be still indifferent as to
Christians use in God's worship, when it has been once used in Idolatrous
Services; if the use of it be neither Naturally necessary to the worship of
God, as it is an humane Act, nor suitable to the Ends of it, nor such without
which it cannot in common judgment be decently performed? But our Author much
more wonders, how this should become a Question, than how that of his own
propounding should. For

First, There are three apparent Contradictions in it. It being a contradiction
to say concerning the same thing, that it is in its own nature indifferent, and
yet naturally necessary to the Worship of God, as it is an humane Act. It being
so too, to say of the same thing, that it is in its own nature indifferent, and
yet Unsuitable to the Ends of Divine Worship. It being a contradiction again,
to say of the same thing, that it is in its own nature indifferent, and yet such
as without which the Worship of God cannot in common judgment be decently
performed. For you must mean by things in their own nature indifferent, things
that are so in Divine Worship: for otherwise, you trifle egregiously in putting
this Question, or make your Nonconformists so to do, for whom you put it. But
you abuse them, if you do so; for that which diverse of them do assert, and
which occasioned our Author's Resolution of the Case of Symbolizing, etc. is
this; That things which might otherwise be lawfully used in the Worship of God,
do become unlawful, by their having been abused in Idolatrous or Superstitious
Services. And some of them do understand this in a more limited and restrained
sense (as our Author has showed) than others of them do.

Secondly, as this Question is put, you are sure to have no Adversaries. For
who ever doubted whether a thing be unlawful in the Worship of God, that is
Unsuitable to the Ends thereof, whether this thing has been abused or no in
Idolatrous Services*

Now, having thus strangely put the Question, you proceed to show that from
thence will follow several things, as things out of controversy betwixt us.
And I perceive you are very cautious herein of reviving a certain Old
controversy among your selves, viz. Whether our Old Churches, Bells and Fonts,
etc. may still be used. For you thus word your third particular wherein we are
agreed, viz. That things of mere convenience for a Religious Action, for the
Service of the Ends of it may be used, though Idolaters have used the like (you
are shy, I perceive, of saying the same) so as none scruple the using of
Churches to meet in, etc. You say not, none scruple the using of the Old
Churches which were built by Papists.

In your next Page, you tell our Author, that you think that, p. 11.
Zanchy's Rule is at least Safest, and that he knows that, in dubiis animae
tutior pars est eligenda. But I think you might have Englisht it better than
thus, in matters of Sin, the Safest part is always to be preferred. For in
matters of Sin, or sinful matters, in my silly judgment, there is no safest
part to be preferred.

Next you positively assert, that in matters of Divine Worship, if the things
used by Idolaters be not necessary, both the abuse and the use also ought to be
abolished. And you say, you cannot understand what else is the meaning of the
Apostle in that his Application of the words found, Psalm. 24. 1. in 1 Cor 10.
28. viz. If any man say unto you, this is offered in Sacrifice unto Idols; Eat
not, for his sake that showed it, and for Conscience sake: For the Earth is the
Lord's and the fullness thereof, etc. That is (you say) you shall not need to
starve, though you do not eat of that meat, etc. To this I answer, that our
Author has freely acknowledged, page 36. That all things of an indifferent
nature, that have formerly been abused to Idolatry, or Superstition, ought to
be taken away by the Governors, whenever they find their People inclined
again so to abuse them: At least, if such abuse cannot probably be prevented by
other means. But our Author utterly denies, that those Rites which our Church
retains, that have been abused, and are still, by the Church of Rome, have
been observed to be any temptation to Idolatry, or to the embracing of Popery.
And therefore there is (upon this supposition) no Argument to be drawn from
that Text, against the Sinfulness of using those Rites: because the Apostle
there forbids the Strong Christian the eating of that meat, which a Weak
Christian shall inform him, was a portion of an Idol-sacrifice, for this
reason, lest he be confirmed in, or betrayed to, the sin of Idolatry by his
example, not rightly understood by him. And consequently this Christian is
supposed to be such a weak one, as would be in danger of making this ill use of
his Example; as being but lately converted from Paganism, and not yet
sufficiently instructed in the precepts of Christianity. It is manifest from
the immediately following verse, that the Apostle forbids the eating of meat
offered to Idols upon this sole account: For saying in the former verse, Eat
not for his sake that showed it, and for Conscience sake, he adds in the
latter, that he means not that he should forbear for the sake of his own
Conscience, but only for the sake of the others Conscience. If therefore you
can prove that these Rites of our Church are Temptations to any of its Members
to go over to the Romish Church, or to commit Idolatry still continuing
therein, you shall be so far from being opposed by our Author, that he will
heartily join with you in endeavoring by all lawful means to have them
abolished; on supposition that the Temptation cannot otherwise be taken away.
But I desire you, by the way, to take notice, that it is not the Design of his
Book (which you could not but see, though you would seem not to see it) to
plead for the continuance of these Rites (as innocent and harmless things at
least as he takes them to be) but only to persuade Dissenters not to separate
from our Church upon the account of such things; and to show that their having
been abused is no just ground for Separation. And, having minded you of this, I
shall not need to tell you, that the other Old Testament Text, which you have
added to those which he has replied to, is alleged very impertinently: which
yet we'll bestow two or three words in answer to.

But first let us see what you reply to what he says to these Texts. You say,
p. 12.
you cannot possibly get leave of your self (considering under what terms of
Divine Abhorrence God every where mentions Idolatry in Holy writ, etc.) to be
of the mind of our Author, that the Texts, Lev. 19. 2. Deuteronomy. 14. 1. Lev. 19.
19. are merely to be understood of things in themselves evil. Nor, by the way,
is our Author of that mind, for he acknowledges, page 27. that the things
forbidden in the last of these places are things of so indifferent a nature,
that none can be more indifferent. But, he asks, where it is said, that these
things were forbidden, because the Heathens used them? And he adds, that
though Maimonides says, that the Egyptians used these Mixtures of Seeds, and
of Linen and Woollen in many of their Magical Exploits, yet it is universally
acknowledged, that these things, among many others, were forbidden to the Jews,
as Mystical instructions in Moral duties. But to this you are perfectly silent.
But why cannot you be of our Author's mind, as to the two other Texts? You say,
The following part of the Chap. Lev. 18. gives some color to interpret that
place of things morally evil; yet, why are they forbidden under the notion of
things done, after the doings of the Egyptians and the Canaanites? I answer,
because they were the doings of those people, whom they were exceedingly prone
to imitate, even their greatest Immoralities: And this is a sufficient Answer.
Then you tell us, Nor is Deuteronomy. 14. 1. or Lev. 19. 8. capable of such a sense.
But our Author says not a word of Lev. 19. 8. for it is verse the 19th that he
speaks to, and (as has been said already) he never says that in this place
the things forbidden are morally evil, but the contrary. But as to those things
forbidden in Deuteronomy. 14. 1. he shows that they are morally evil, nor is your
bare saying, that that place is not capable of such a sense, a confutation of
him.

And now we come to the Text, which you desire your Author to consider, in
these words. p. 12.
But because our Author tells us, he can find no other Texts, that make more,
if so much, for this purpose, I shall desire you, Sir, but to consider Hos. 2.
16, 17. And it shall be at that day says the Lord, that thou shall call me
Ishi, and shall call me no more Baali. For I will take away the names of Baalim
out of her mouth; and they shall no more be remembered by their name. Now upon
this Text you say, That Baali was a very good name; if we consider it in its
self what does it signify more than my Lord? Adonai is of the same
signification, by which name it was never unlawful to call God: But because
the Idol was called Baal, God abhorred it; though he allowed himself to be
called by another name of the same significancy. Nor will I believe our Author
himself owns that it was lawful for the Jews, to apply themselves to God under
the name of Baali. Now because you lay so much weight upon this Text, you shall
have the fuller Answer* And,

1. I say that God does not in the former verse give the Jews a Prohibition no
more to call him Baali, but makes them a gracious Promise that they shall not.
*It Is plain by what goes before, that the words are a Promise, viz. by the two
foregoing verses: wherein God promises them to cease from plaguing them for
their Idolatry, (that is, upon their true Repentance) and to give them again
happy days. And then he says, Thou shall call me Ishi, and shall call me no
more Baali. That is, thou shall call me no more by a name of Fear as (...) was,
but by a name of Love as (...) is, this signifying Sponsus Benignus, but that,
Durus and imperiosus Maritus, or Dominus, such as Baal was to his Worshippers;
as the Critics will tell you. Which is as much as to say, there shall no more
be an occasion given you from my severe usage of you, to call me by a name that
signifies, a harsh Lord, or he would not be to them like such a Lord as Baal
was, but he would show them the kindness of a tenderly loving Husband, for the
time to come.

2. It is manifest that God's meaning was not, that they should never use that
word Baal, because Idolaters used it, and an Idol was called by that name; for
then they might not use the name Jah neither, because the Heathens used the
name (...). Nor would God have called himself by the name of Baal, as you will
find he does, Isa. 54. 5. if you consult your Hebrew Bible, as that word
signifies no more than Husband.

3. Whereas it follows in the next verse, For I will take away the names of
Baalim out of her mouth; and they shall no more be remembered by their name. The
following Critics do give such a sense of them as will not in the least favor
your purpose. This is Liveleius's, In the renovation of the Church, Idolatry
shall be abolished. Calvin's is, I will cause my people to cast away all their
Lies, and to be content with the pure Doctrine of my Law. The Exposition of
Vatablus is this, By Baalim God understands the various Images of Baal, which
had various names according to the places wherein they were erected; as there
were many Jupiters among the Heathens. And whereas you say, because the Idol
was called Baal, God abhorred that name, I must needs tell you, that to think
God can abhor a good name merely because of its having been given to an Idol,
speaks a childish notion and opinion of that Infinitely perfect Being.

But after all this, let us suppose that God here forbad the Jews to call
himself for the future by the name of Baal; this will not in the least affect
our Author; for if it were so, it could be only upon the account of their
vehement inclination to the worship of the Idol Baal; and therefore they might
not take his name into their mouths, that so they might not be tempted, by
using it, to worship him again: But our Author has said enough to convince
you, that there is not the least appearance of an Argument to be fetched from
hence, against the lawfulness of our Ceremonies; or to prove, that since they
were used without any Idolatry or Superstition by the Ancient Fathers, before
they were abused by the Apostate Church of Rome, they may not return to their
first use, the Idolatry and Superstition being perfectly removed: and moreover,
no danger arising from the using of them, to the Members of our Church, of
returning to Popery.

But in your p. 13.
next Page, you find fault with our Author for asserting, as he does in his
28th Page; That there is no such inclination in the Members of our Church, to
go over to that of Rome ( nor has any such inclination been observed, ever
since the Reformation) as was in the Jews, to the Superstitious and Idolatrous
practices of the Heathens. But need I show you the impertinency of your Answer
to this passage? which is this, that the people now are more devoutly inclined,
I very much doubt; I am sure they had much more reason then than now, to be
averse to it; having more miraculous Operations and extraordinary appearances
of God to them, than we can pretend to. And I am sure the hearts of all are by
nature now, as bad as then. But,

1. Does it argue that our people are more devoutly inclined, than the Jews
were, because they are not so inclined to Idolatry? Men that have nothing of
Devotion in their tempers, may have no inclination at all to some certain
Vices. But I need only to ask you, whether the Turks be a devouter sort of
people than the Jews then were, or whether the Jews be more devout now, than
they were then? because (as every body knows) they both have at present not
only no inclination, but the greatest abhorrence to Idolatry, and so have had
for many ages.

2. What if the Jews had more miraculous Operations among them, etc. does it
thence follow, that we must therefore be necessarily as much inclined to
Idolatry, as they were? why then are not the Turks as much inclined, or the
present Jews, who have no more Miraculous Operations among them, than we have
among us?

3. What though our hearts be as bad by nature, as the hearts of the Ancient
Jews were, must we needs be therefore as much inclined to Idolatry as they
were? Why then, I ask again, are not the hearts of the Turks and Modern Jews as
much inclined thereunto? And yet I fear the hearts of each of these are no
better by nature, than theirs were. But I am almost ashamed to make any reply
to such talk as this. And how, Sir, is it, that you can persuade your self thus
to object, against so plain a matter of fact, as no one can be plainer, or more
indisputable?

But in what follows, you suppose that we have a greater antipathy to Popery
now, than we had formerly, though you do not grant it; and then add, that if
so, you fear the Irish Rebellion, and the Fire of London and other places, have
more contributed to it, than peoples natural inclinations to true Worship, or
aversion from Idolatry. Well, let the cause thereof be what it will, if we have
a greater Antipathy, that is as much as our Author asserted: He did not assign
the Cause of it.

But, I pray, did you observe any greater inclination to Popery before the Fire
of London, than you now observe? Or before the Irish Rebellion either, if you
are so old as to be able so early to make Observations? I may ask too, what
has made the so often mentioned Turks or Modern Jews to be so exceedingly
averse to Idolatry, that the Irish Rebellion, and Fire of London must needs
make us so, and nothing else?

By this time, I hope you need not to be told the reason, which you say you
understand not, why there is not a necessity, for the keeping as wide a
distance between Protestants and Papists, as God appointed should be kept
between the Jews, and the Egyptians. Though I will lay you a wager, you cannot
prove that there is not as great a distance in Rites and Ceremonies between our
Church and the Church of Rome, as there was by Divine Appointment between the
Jews and the Egyptians. And I Will lay you another, that there is a greater than
was by Divine Approbation between the Jews and diverse of the Heathen Nations.

The next Page, viz. the 14th, contains nothing but what has been already
fully answered; or what is so trifling as not to deserve the least
consideration.

In your 15th Page, you say that our Author cannot but know that Calvin, P.
Martyr, and Zanchy, and others of our Famous first Reformers, have said much
more against the retaining unnecessary things abused to Idolatry, than he can
bring to testify any of their Approbation of them. But, in the mean time, I
perceive you are very willing to have it thought, that Mr. Calvin made no bones
of contradicting himself; though we beg your pardon for not believing it, till
you are pleased to cite those passages wherein he does so. Methinks you might
have favored us with one at least, in opposition to those many our Author has
cited. But why should you be so altogether silent too, in the quoting of your
other Authors? But if you had been never so copious herein, except you could
have brought them in pleading for the Lawfulness of Separation upon the account
of the Rites retained in our Church, which are abused by the Papists, you
cannot but be aware that all your Quotations had been nothing to the purpose of
confuting our Author. But you are so far from being able to do this, that you
cannot find them so much as pleading against the Lawfulness of Ministerial
Conformity. But, on the other hand, I presume you need not be told, that diverse
of them have declared their Judgments for it: Nor that Zanchy particularly, at
the same time endeavored to persuade Queen Elizabeth to moderate the urging of
Ceremonies, and to persuade the Ministers not to stand it out against her
Majesty's pleasure, if she could not be prevailed with. And this he says he
did by the advice of his Prince, and many Ministers.

You proceed to tell us, That our Famous Reformers by the Spirit of Prophecy
have lamented the probable future state (you should have said the certain
future state, if they were acted by the Spirit of Prophecy) of those Churches,
that have retained any Nest Eggs belonging to those Old Birds. What Religion is
come to the Saxon, and diverse other Lutheran Churches, we need not tell our
Author; what is coming among us, time will show. But no considerative man needs
to be told, Sir, that if we should be so miserable as to have Popery again
prevail in this Kingdom, we are not to thank our Liturgy, or our Rites and
Ceremonies for it, as the true cause thereof, but our as Unreasonable as
Unchristian Divisions, and our being crumbled into so many Sects and Parties,
which have extremely weakened our Church; which, were she as a City united
within her self, would still be, no doubt, as impregnable a Bulwark against the
Assaults of the Romanists as she has (God be thanked) hitherto been. And for
this reason alone, though these Divisions tended to no other Mischief (as
several other great and lamentable ones are produced by them) I would not for
all the world fall under the guilt of having contributed to them, by instilling
such prejudices into the minds of people as might cause them to withdraw from
the Communion of our Church, and embody themselves in separate Congregations.

^^ge 15. You next reply to what our Author says in reference to Hezekiah's
breaking in pieces the Brazen Serpent, in his 35th Page. And whereas he says,

1. That it was not only a thing defiled in Idolatrous Services, but was made
an Idol it self. You reply, but no more than the Cross, or the Picture of the
Virgin Mary, is at this day made by the Papists. I answer, do you show, if you
can, what Papists have made an Idol of an Aerial Sign of the Cross. And as to
the Picture of the Virgin Mary, is that one of our Ceremonies?

2. Our Author says that the Brazen Serpent was at that time actually used as
an Idol. You reply, So is the Cross by the Papists. But is this an Answer? You
know the only pertinent Answer would have been, that it is made use of as an
Idol by Church of England-men, as the Brazen Serpent was by Jews. But this is
so far from being true, that there is no Cross used among us, that was ever
made an Idol, or Object of Worship, by the Papists.

3. Our Author says, That the Jews were generally lapsed into this Idolatry.
You reply, so are the Papists universally. But if you would speak to the
purpose, you should have said, and proved, that so are Church of England-men,
either universally or generally.

4. Our Author says, that there was little hope of reclaiming the Jews any
other way. You say, there is as little hope of reclaiming the Papists from
their Idolatry of the Cross. But I will not a third time repeat the same
Answer. Only I will ask whether there be any hope of reclaiming the Papists
from their Idolatry by our laying aside our Ceremonies?

5. Our Author says, that although the Brazen Serpent had been a thing only
defiled in Idolatrous Services, yet we freely grant, that it ought to have been
destroyed, or removed out of the peoples sight, if the continuance of it in
their view were like to be a snare to them, and a temptat^^^ to Idolatry. You
reply, may not the like be said of what Dissenters plead against? But you have
been already told, that the like may not be said, with any color or show of
reason.

6. Our Author says. That if Hezekiah had let it stand, private persons might
have made use of it, to put them in mind of the wonderful mercy of God,
expressed by it to their Forefathers. This you acknowledge, but say, that the
Question at present under our debate is, whether Hezekiah might lawfully have
let it stand, and removed it into the Temple? whether his setting it up by the
Ark, or Mercy Seat would have purged it? But for shame, Sir, do not say that
this is the Question in debate between us.

In your 16th Page, you express very great offense, at those next words of our
Author, page 36. And much more might they have lawfully continued in the
Communion of the Church, so long as there was no constraint laid upon them, to
join with them in their Idolatry. But you leave out what follows, viz. as we do
not read of any that separated from the Church, while the Brazen Serpent was
permitted to stand, as woefully abused, as it was, by the Generality. And do you
find that the pious Jews did separate upon this account? Or if they did not,
will you say that they were guilty of Sin? For my part, I dare not say so; nor
that it would be a sin now, not to separate from our Church, though our
Governors were so remiss as not to Excommunicate Idolaters, if such were sound
therein; any more than it is so, upon the account of Promiscuous Congregations,
and Mixed Communions: As the Worthy person that published the Resolution of that
case, has clearly proved, and proved too that it is Unlawful to separate upon
that pretense. But you say, you can never believe this, till some can prove to
you, that a Wife may lawfully, contrary to the command of her Husband, stay in
a Family of Whoremongers, provided that she be not compelled to play the Whore.
I answer, that a Wife may not lawfully, though her Husband has not expressly
forbidden it, stay in a Family consisting wholly of Whoremongers, except to
bear her Husband company, and in that case it is her duty to stay. But where
has Christ forbidden us to Communicate with a Church out of which Idolaters
are not ejected, though Idolatry be not enjoined. You say he has done it in
those words, Rev. 18. 4. -- Come out of her my people, but I pray read on, and
you have an answer, that ye be not partaker of her sins, and that ye receive
not (viz. by partaking of her sins) of her plagues? And moreover, I presume you
will acknowledge, that the Babylon which the Christians were commanded to come
out of, is the Idolatrous Church of Rome: But I need not acquaint you, that you
cannot continue in this Church, except you will your self also be an Idolater.

But I will not stand to dispute this point with you, it being nothing to the
business of our Author's Book; and all he asserts as to this matter, does
amount to no more than this, That we are not obliged to renounce Communion in
pure Ordinances, with such as we know to be guilty of Idolatry, when it lies
not in our power to keep them away.

And now you have brought me to our Author's Third Head of Discourse, viz. That
the Agreement which is between the Church of England, and the Church of Rome,
is in no wise such, as will make Communion with the Church of England unlawful.

You say, Page 17th, That if our Author had said all Communion, (viz. with the
Church of England) is not unlawful, you had fully concurred with him;
believing that this Church cannot be justly charged with Idolatry, and that
some Communion may, and ought to be held with any Church that is not so
charged. If you mean by some Communion, a not being divided in heart, as you
before express it, I say again, we thank you for nothing; the Communion which
our Author pleads for, being (as your self observes in your first Page.)
chiefly Communion in Worship. But you proceed, saying, but as he has laid it,
I cannot agree with it. I am sure Christ had Communion with the Jewish Church,
and I believe he had so, in all acts of worship of his Father's Institution,
and I am as sure he had no Communion with them in the Traditional part of their
worship, as I am, that he would not himself practice, what he condemned so
severely. But are you not as sure that our Blessed Lord had Communion with the
Jewish Church, in all acts of worship instituted by his Father, as you are that
he had no Communion with them in the Traditional part of their Worship? I am
sure, that in the former part of that saying you are too too cautious, and in
the latter not so cautious as you ought to have been: For you may be sure of
the contrary to what you affirm so positively, when you have considered, that
our Lord could not have so freely been admitted into the Temple, had he not
observed diverse Traditions or Canons of the Elders, without complying with
which none might come thither. I shall not stand to instance in particulars,
but refer you to Dr. Leightfoot's Temple Service, page 115. to 120. And again,
you may yet be more sure of the contrary, when you have considered, how our
Lord complied with Jewish Traditions, in the celebration of the Passover; and
such too as altered certain circumstances prescribed in its First Institution.
Particularly, his ordering the Preparation of the Lamb on the 14th day, when
Moses ordained the taking of it up upon the 10th day. His eating the Passover
lying along, being the posture in which they ate their ordinary Meals,
according to a Jewish Tradition, as you may see in Dr. Leightfoot's foresaid
Book, page 143, 144. whereas, according to Moses his Institution, it was to be
eaten with their Loins girded, etc. and in haste, or standing. His complying
with the Jewish customs of drinking Wine at the Passover, and concluding with
the Hallel, or a Hymn. And not these only but more Traditions than these, Dr.
Leightfoot will satisfy you, were conformed to by our Blessed Savior.

But you say Christ condemned severely the Jewish Traditions: But I say, he did
not at all condemn all Jewish Traditions, and none but such as by which they
made the Commandments of God of none effect: And such as they placed special
Holiness in, and necessary to acceptance with God; as is too evident to need my
standing to prove it. And, Sir, when you can prove that our Ceremonies are like
to those condemned Traditions, I will undertake that our Author shall be as
zealous against complying with them, as he is now against separation from our
Church upon the account of them.

But to go on, whereas our Author says, of Episcopal Government and the three
other following things, page 38. That he takes it for granted that there is
nothing of Viciousness or Immorality in any of them, to make them Unlawful;
and therefore that they are indifferent in their own nature. You reply, page
18. That there are few things to be named unlawful in this sense. I answer,
there are as many things unlawful in this sense, as there are things
prohibited by the Moral Law, and if you please to consult our Expositors of the
Decalogue, I presume you will find those things not a few.

You say at the bottom of this 18th Page, That it troubles you to read your
Author saying, I know not how our Brethren will defend the Apostolical
Institution of the Observation of the Lord's day, while they contend that this
of Episcopacy cannot be concluded from the uninterrupted Tradition of the
Catholic Church, etc. And why, I pray, Sir, does this trouble you? You give
this reason why, viz. Because certainly, for the Apostolical practice in the
Observation of the Lord's day, we have the infallible evidence of Holy
Scripture, Acts 20. 1 Cor. 16. But you must prove that we have in those
Scriptures, or some other, infallible evidence for the Apostolical Institution
of the Observation of the Lord's day, and not for the mere Apostolical
practice, or you will say nothing to the purpose. But to save my self the
labor of saying more upon this Argument, and of replying to those few lines
that follow against the Primitiveness of our Episcopacy, I entreat you to
consult Mr. Chillingworth's Apostolical Institution of Episcopacy demonstrated,
together with the most Learned Dean of St Paul's his Ample Proof of these two
Propositions, in his Unreasonableness of Separation, p. 244, etc. viz. First,
that our Diocesan Episcopacy is the same for substance which was in the
Primitive Church. And Secondly, That it is not repugnant to any Institution of
Christ, nor devising a new species of Churches without God's Authority.

As to what you say, p. 19. about Liturgies, viz. that they cannot be
indifferent, if indeed (as our Author speaks) they be highly expedient to be
universally imposed, yea necessary. I reply, you have not caught him in a
Contradiction, as you think; for his saying concerning Liturgies, etc. page 38.
is, That he takes it for granted, that they are all indifferent in their own
nature. And tells you what he means by those words, in the next; viz. that
there is nothing of viciousness or immorality in any of them, etc. Now is it a
contradiction to say of the same thing, that it is indifferent in its own
nature, and that it is necessary considering certain circumstances? And I
farther say, that Liturgies are necessary, considering, that through humane
Weakness and Frailty, the performance of public worship with that Solemnity
and Gravity, which it calls for, cannot be secured; and yet notwithstanding
they are still things in their own nature indifferent; and so are all those
things too which God' s Positive Laws have made necessary; as all know who
understand the difference between Moral and Positive.

But as to the Antiquity of Liturgies, which you say our Author knows to be
denied, you have had a good while extant that Discourse which he said was
expected, and which you say you will patiently wait for, to give you
satisfaction, about this matter. And it is excellently fitted (as I hope you
have before now found) not only for the satisfying of Dissenters about that
point relating to Liturgies, but diverse others also.

In your next Paragraph, you tell us, that all Divines will readily
acknowledge, that such a Method and Order of a Liturgy, as is not contrived in
Subserviency to the 3 General Rules, of Doing all to Edification, the Glory of
God, and not giving offense to any of the Churches of God, may make it
unlawful. And I also do readily acknowledge this, and am confident that you
cannot prove, that Ours is not so contrived as to be made not Subservient unto
those Rules. And as to the last of them, whatsoever Churches please to take
offense at our Liturgy, I am sure it gives no offense to them.

In what follows you profess, that you never thought it unlawful for any
Laick, wholly to separate from the Church of England, because of our Liturgy
(and I hope you think it no more Lawful for a Clergyman) nor did your self
ever so separate. But for all that, you know that many hundreds and I fear some
thousands do. But you say, there is a new Generation started up, that not only
makes you a Separatist, but all Conformable Ministers, if they do not every
time read the Second Service at the Altar. This in good earnest, is somewhat a
hard Case; but I pray Sir, by what figure do you call one Start-up Warm Head a
new Generation?

In your next Paragraph, page 20. You say, Our Author has spied four little
Thorns in some Dissenters Flesh, which he has very charitably endeavored to
pick out. And you add, that you will heartily enquire if no bit of them remain
which may cause pain, and hinder healing. To make no reflection, Sir, upon your
expressing your self thus phancifully, your meaning must be, that you will
enquire whether our Author has not well defended the four things in our
Liturgy, which Dissenters object against as symbolizings with the Roman
Service, from being liable to just Offense: Of which,

The First is, The shortness of many Prayers. But you say not one word in
answer to what he speaks in the Vindication thereof: But tell us, that if some
Dissenters think that throughout the Scriptures there is nothing like this to
be found, either in the Prayers of Solomon, etc. or any others, and be a little
stumbled at it, you cannot condemn them: But you must needs condemn it as an
error in them, to think there are no short Prayers to be found in the Holy
Scriptures, when there are many more short, than there are long Prayers: When
our Savior used in the Garden thrice, a shorter Prayer than is any one in our
Service: And when the Form he left behind him for our use is a very short one.
But if the using of a short Prayer be not the thing blamed, but the using of
several such in the same Service, instead of one very long one, I must take
leave to say, this is more Wantonness. And whereas you say, you cannot condemn
Dissenters, if they be a little stumbled at it; I say, to be stumbled at it so,
as to make it one pretense for not joining with us in our Prayers, is not to be
a little stumbled at it. And you know that that which our Author is concerned
to do is, to persuade Dissenters not to be so much stumbled at any thing in
our Prayers, as to leave our Communion upon the account thereof. Though he
would be very glad to have them so well pleased with all of them, as not to be
in the least stumbled at any of them.

The Second instance is, The Peoples bearing a part with the Minister in Divine
Service. And whereas our Author has thought it enough to transcribe what Mr.
Baxter has said in five particulars, to vindicate both the Lawfulness and
Fitness hereof; you reply not one word to any of them. But you think you have
balanced (as your word is) those five with five of your own. 1. You say, These
Responses do not suit the gravity and solemnity of Divine Worship. But we say
they do; and our yea is as good as your nay. 2. You say, many read false
oftentimes. And whose fault is it, if they do? But it appears from what is
coming, that you cannot prove it. 3. You say, Many Children and Girls,
understand not what they do. And therefore why do you permit them to join in
Singing? And why do you suffer them to hear Sermons? 4. Those that cannot read,
you say, are not edified in a confused noise, not being able to understand what
is read. And then I hope you might have spared your second particular; for
those that read falsely cannot then be observed so to do in this confused
noise. 5. You say, Many lewd and profane persons, are thus made to bear their
share in the Ministerial part of Public Worship, etc. But do you prove that
this is bearing a share in that part of Public Worship which is proper and
peculiar to the Minister; and then we will grant that not only no profane men,
but no Laymen neither, be they never so good, may have their part therein. 6.
You say, There is no such practice in the Churches of God, in New England,
Scotland, France, Holland, etc. Do you think that our Author has taken the
Solemn League and Covenant, that you urge such an Argument as this to him? If
you do, you are much mistaken, Sir. But Mr. Baxter tells you, in his fifth
particular, That it was the decay of zeal in the people that first shut out the
Responses: And therefore those Churches you mention should do well to imitate
ours in this particular. I am constrained, Sir, to tell you again, that I am
ashamed of taking any notice of such talk as this.

The Third instance is, The taking of some of the Collects out of the Missal.
You say you wish our Author had told us how many. But I say, it is not worth the
knowing (if it were I could soon tell you) if those that are taken thence are
all good ones. And (considering what has been said) this is a sufficient
Answer. Remember our Author has told you, that our Departure from the Church
of Rome, was designed to be a Reformation, not a total Destruction and
Extirpation. And I suppose the zeal of some Reformers that hurried them upon
making no discrimination between things faulty, and those that were innocent,
occasioned that honest saying of Zanchy's, which I have heretofore somewhere
met with, viz. Non intelligo istam Reformatorum Mundi Theologiam.

As to that which follows to the last Paragraph of page 23d. Enough abundantly
has already been said to satisfy you that you might have spared it. Only let
me once for all tell you, that whereas both here and elsewhere, you insist upon
our being at perfect liberty as to the using or not using those unnecessary
things, wherein we symbolize with the Church of Rome; you ought to know that
while they are Enjoined, we who are under Government are not at liberty; as the
Christians in the Apostles days were, as to the Eating of Meats, etc. And
whereas you touch here upon the topic of Scandal, I can not hope to satisfy
you about this Point; if the two late judicious Resolutions of that Case cannot
do it: To which I refer you, and ought so to do, it not falling within our
Author's Undertaking.

The Fourth instance is, The Appointing of Lessons out of the Apocryphal Books.
And what you say under this head, amounts to thus much, that you think it were
better if they were not appointed. And therefore I perceive you are not for
making this a Pretense for Separation, and Consequently you can have no
controversy with our Author about it. Whether it were better or not, that we
should imitate the Primitive Church in reading them now and then on Holy Days
and ordinary Weekdays, merely for Example of life, and instruction of Manners,
but not for the Establishing of any Doctrine, let it be left to our Superiors
to judge. But though you have a greater latitude than many other Dissenters, as
to this matter, yet you say that all should not be forced out of their wits,
nor made to do what, they cannot, as well as you, apprehend lawful. No, God
forbid, that any one should be forced out of his wits upon such an account. But
whom can you name that has had the least trouble given him, for not being at
Church on a Weekday Holy Day?

But I must take notice of one more passage, before I proceed, viz. Holy Days
are the same with Sabbath Days, with those who judge that there is nothing but
Tradition for either. Here is a good Wipe for our Author. But I pray, Sir, did
he say that there is nothing but Tradition for the Observation of the Sabbath?
He said that indeed, page 10th, from whence it may be inferred, that he
believes that the Apostolical institution of the Observation of the Lord's day,
is wholly to be gathered from the uninterrupted Tradition or Practice of the
Catholic Church; and is that such a small matter to found it upon? When it is
the foundation on which is built the Canon of the Holy Scriptures. But who are
they that tell you, that from the Uninterrupted Tradition of the Catholic
Church may be gathered the Apostolical institution of the Other Holy Days? Name
any one if you are able that so says, or that says that they are of
Apostolical institution.

Now we are come to those particular Rites and Ceremonies of our Church, in
which our Author says, page 15. Our symbolizing with Popery is so much
condemned. And you say, page 24th. that he observes in the general,

1. That our Ceremonies are not the hundredth part (you should have added
scarcely) of those used by the Papists. And this you grant; but you add, that
we may as well Symbolize in thirty as in three. But I must make bold to tell
you, you never uttered a more inconsiderative saying. It seems then, it is no
matter how many Ceremonies are used in Divine Worship, so they be all innocent.
I am sure St. Augustine was not of this mind. But it may be you will say there are
none innocent. But if so, you cannot say that we may as well use thirty as
three: Because the thirty must necessarily be a great hindrance to that
attention of mind that Divine Worship calls for; but he must have a Weak head
indeed, whose mind must needs be diverted by three.

2. Our Author says, that our Church imposes them not, as the other does, on
the Consciences of her Members, as things of Necessity, as parts of Religion or
meritorious Services. And you need not one word more of Answer to what you
object against this than you have had already given you, viz. page 6.

In your 25th. page, you begin, as our Author does, with the Ceremony of the
Surplice; and

1. You say, he rightly observes that all are not obliged to wear it. And this
is sagaciously indeed observed by him, if he does observe it; but he only
says, that he cannot imagine why those who are not obliged to wear it, should
be affrighted from our Churches, by the mere sight of so innocent a thing, as
he before had proved it to be, as it is used in our Church; but showed it is
far from being an innocent thing, as it is used in the Church of Rome.

2. You say, that you are not scandalized at the sight of it. But for all that,
you know that not a few Dissenters do profess to be so.

3. You say, that you are not sure, that they use a Garment of the same form in
the Church of Rome; though they use some Garment of the same Color; so that
you doubt, whether in that we do symbolize with the Church of Rome or no. I was
in good hope when I had read thus far, that there would have been no
Controversy between you and our Author about this Ceremony. But I presently
found my self mistaken; for

4. You make us notwithstanding faultily to symbolize with the Church of Rome,
in that we will not suffer this Garment to be worn but in Acts of Worship. So
that, you say, it is neither merely for necessity, nor natural decency, nor
Ornament, nor for distinction. But I say that this Garment is required, both
for Ornament and Distinction. You say it is not required for either, because
all Ministers wear it not at other times. But I deny your Consequence; for it
is required as an Ornamental Garment in Divine Worship, and for distinction
between a Minister officiating and not officiating. You may as well say that
for the same reason, the Judges Scarlet is neither for Ornament nor
Distinction. And seeing it is such an Offense that this Garment should be
appropriated to Divine Worship, I desire you, Sir, at your Leisure to answer
our Famous Hooker's Question, viz. To solemn Actions of Royalty and Eccl. pol.
Book 5th. p. 228. Last Edit.
Justice, their suitable Ornaments are a Beauty; are they only in Religion a
Stain? Time was when putting on a Gown merely for the Desk and Pulpit was
accounted no Offense by Nonconforming Ministers, and consequently they did not
then espy any Unlawfulness, in appropriating a Garment to Religious exercises.
Nor do we place one jot more holiness in a Surplice than in a Gown, or Cloak
either. But you say, may not jealousies of some homage by it intended to God,
and such thoughts, as those you suggested, arise in weaker Christians? I
answer, whether these thoughts may arise in them or no, you take as effectual a
course as you can that they should arise in them. And as for Homage intended to
God by wearing the Surplice, I don't think any Christians so weak as to fancy
such a thing, if you and others would but let them alone, and not fill their
heads with objections against innocent things, when you might employ your time
with them to infinitely better purpose. I pray, Sir, be not offended if I once
for all freely tell you, that by your possessing these weak Christians with all
imaginable objections against the Lawfulness of obeying Governors in things
which are made by your selves doubtful to them, and not with one Objection
against the Unlawfulness of Disobedience in doubtful matters; is the way to
make them everlastingly weak, and to make them worse than weak too. It saddens
the hearts of not a few good people to observe, that the fearful consequents
of such doings have not yet made you sensible whose interest you have all along
served, by the means of them.

You next object three things against the Ceremony of the Cross in Baptism,
page 26.

1. You say, it is an adding to the Divine Institution unnecessarily. I answer
we add nothing to Divine Institution. I mean we add nothing more to Baptism, or
any other Ordinance, as of Divine Institution, than your selves do. And as to
the Vnnecessariness of this Ceremony: if it were necessary it would be no
Ceremony, at least no humane one. If you mean there is no necessity of imposing
it. It is enough for a Ceremony that it is imposed for good and profitable ends
and uses: And our Church tells you for what ends and uses this of the Cross is
required, in the 30th Canon. If you mean there is no necessity of using it, now
it is imposed: I beg your pardon for being of a contrary opinion, till you
prove it to be a Transgression of any law of God: And when you have done this,
I will grant that it is necessary not to use it.

2. You say, we attribute to the sign of the Cross, more than is truly due to
it, as the Papists do. But we say, we do not, and shall persist in saying so,
till you prove we do.

3. You say, that to expound Dedicated in the Canon by Declared (you should
have said declared to be dedicated) is a Catachrestical use of the word. What
care I for that, if the word ought so to be expounded. You say, you will take
no private Doctor's word for it, though greater than Dr. Burges. But you cannot
otherwise understand that word, except you will make our Church to speak
contradictions in that Canon.

There is nothing you object, or I think can object, against the Ceremony of
Kneeling at the Communion, but you may find most satisfactorily answered in the
Learned Resolution of the Case of Kneeling, etc. But yet we will not wholly
pass by what you say against it. Having called the Declaration of our Church
concerning it, an excellent Declaration, page 26th, you say, page 27th, that it
may be it satisfies you, abstracting your thoughts from the Bread, while you
are upon your Knees: And he that cannot, with the greatest ease in the world,
abstract his thoughts from the Bread, must be almost starved with fasting. But,
it follows, if all cannot be so satisfied, shall they therefore be Ruined for
their doubt in this thing? You shall have no new answer to this, besides asking
you this Question, if there be any danger of Ruin in this case, who are most
charitable to these Doubters, those that do their utmost to satisfy them,
that they may not come near the danger, or those that use their utmost
endeavors to make all means unsuccessfull, that are used for their
Satisfaction?

I must needs take notice also of your pleasant answer to this passage in our
Author, page 49. viz. That there being nothing said of the Gesture in our
Savior's Institution of this Sacrament, he has consequently left the
particular Gesture to the Determination of the Church; a Gesture being in the
general necessary. Your answer is, Our Savior bad his Disciples Baptize, but
says nothing of Water, nor from what Fountain or River; has he therefore left
it to the Churches determination; that Ministers shall Baptize only with
Rose Water, or Water fetched from the River? Truly, Sir, a smile is the best
Reply that is due to this. But do you in sober sadness then think, that nothing
is left by Christ to the Churches Determination, neither place, nor time, nor
any other Circumstance? If this be not wild Fanaticism, there is no such thing
in nature; and I know you will acknowledge it. But if the Church may determine
the place of public worship, and the times of day when to meet, because our
Lord has not determined such particulars; why may not the Church determine
particular Gestures, when they are not by him determined? And can you think,
Sir, that it is well done after this manner to Ridicule the Church's Power?
No, I know you cannot think so, and therefore this was an hasty Slip from your
Pen, which you will not upon Second thoughts justify.

You say at the Bottom of this page, That you do not think what our Author
mentions, page 50. of the Ring in Marriage worth the speaking to: Because
Dissenters generally believe the Ring a Civil Pledge, etc. I wish they
universally thought so, and if they do not (as time was when you know they did
not) I know not why you should add, that How it comes into our debate you
cannot tell.

Next you spend the best part of two pages upon our Holy Days, which is our
Author's last instance of Rites which Dissenters are offended with, upon the
account of our Symbolizing in them with the Church of Rome. And

1. You say, That it is God's Prerogative alone to make a day Holy, i. e. such
as it shall be sinful for any to labor in. But do you think that God' s
Vicegerents have not power given them to set apart days to a holy use? And in
any other sense we do not think that any day is capable of being made Holy.
It Is manifest from what follows, that you do not think so. And if you do not,
can you think that our Governors have no power to forbid ordinary Labor upon
those days, which they have so set apart? And if they have this power, can you
think it lawful to disobey those laws of theirs, that prohibit working on
those days? And, if this be not lawful, then I fear it is Sinful.

2. You say, That God's Revelation of his Will for solemn Praises upon the
Receipt of Signal Mercies; or solemn Prayers in times of great Distress,
justifies Magistrates, or Churches in setting apart in such Cases, Days for
Praise and Prayers. Then, I hope, the Magistrates or the Church, have power to
make a day Holy; and Consequently, they may forbid opening of Shops, and
Ordinary labor, on such a day: And therefore it is sinful to disobey them
herein.

3. You say, That all such days ought to be entirely spent in Religious
Exercises. But notwithstanding you are so dogmatical, in this thing, I am
Confident upon second thoughts you will acknowledge you were too rash: For you
cannot really think what you assert with such Confidence, except you can find
in your heart to reprove Ringing of Bells, and innocent Recreations after
Sermon, on the Fifth of November, as Profanations of that Holy Day. And I hope
we may make bold to call that day a Holy Day; it being so according to your own
Concession in the foregoing particular.

4. You say, That to spend an hour of such a Day in Prayer, and all the rest in
Idleness, Drinking, Revelling, Gaming, etc. is not to keep a Holy but a
Licentious Day. No body doubts this: But are you obliged by our Church so to
spend Her Holy Days? And if you are not, but may keep them as strictly as you
please, what a strange objection is this against the lawfulness of observing
them!

5. You say, That there is no need of keeping any such days, in Commemoration
of the Birth, Death, Resurrection or Ascension of Christ; because God has
appointed fifty two, every year for that purpose. I answer, if you mean by no
need, that there is no absolute necessity of the Churches setting apart days
for the Commemoration of Christ' s Birth, Death, etc. we will perhaps grant it;
but what then? Does it thence follow that the well observing such days does not
tend to our Edification, to the more building us up in our holy Faith, and
increase in Holiness? you dare not say or think so. But I say farther, that the
well observing them is of admirable use. And nothing would tend more to our
Growth in all the Christian Virtues, than besides the general Meditation on the
Birth, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of our Lord every Lord's day, to set
days apart for the particular Meditation on Each of these Grand Mysteries of
our Religion: There being in each of them more than enough to employ a whole
day in admiring thoughts of it, and in praises to God for it, and in making
Applications of it to our Spiritual Advantage. And therefore I am certain, you
would spend your pains to far better purpose, if instead of prejudicing Peoples
minds against the observance of such days, you would Excite them (like the good
Fathers of the Primitive Church) to the well observing, and making the best
improvement of them. The generality, God knows, of Professors of Christianity,
are too too carelessly and irreligiously disposed of themselves, to need to be
dissuaded from the using of any helps to their being made more devout, and
better People. And where there is one among us that is apt to be too
superstitiously inclined, I fear there are some hundreds, who are more inclined
to the other Extreme, that of profaneness. But our Author has sufficiently
showed, that the Popish Superstitions are perfectly removed by our Church from
the Observation of Holydays. And no man that observes them as our Church
directs, can have the least temptation from the Observance of them to be
superstitious.

6. You say, That to keep a day Holy to any Saint, is to make an Idol of that
Saint. And do you think our Church in her Festivals, designs keeping Days holy
to Saints? if you do not think so, why are you thus impertinent? But if you do,
then you declare that she makes Idols of Saints. And if so, why did you page
17th declare it, as your belief, that the Church of England cannot be justly
charged with Idolatry? But I think, that the making an Idol of a Saint, is
idolatry.

7. You say, That to keep a Day of Thanksgiving, for blessing the world with
such a Saint, is what God has no where prescribed; what neither the Jews, nor
Christians, in the first times ever did. So that it seems you are not so
ignorant, as you now seemed to make your self; but, do know why many of our
Festivals receive their names from certain Saints. And why may we not, on
certain Days, meet together, to praise God for blessing the world with such
Saints, as have been next to our Blessed Lord, the most Glorious instruments of
good to the world; and at the same time hear those Chapters read wherein their
worthy deeds are recorded; and together with other Prayers put in one, for
grace to follow those blessed Examples of a holy Life (of both active and
passive Obedience) which they have, through the Divine grace, left behind them?
What Sin is there in all this? Nay, why should not this highly become us, and
be of singular advantage to us?

You give two reasons why this is unlawful. 1. Because God has no where
prescribed it. But must we be at this time of day, told that nothing is lawful
relating to the Worship of God, but what is expressly commanded; when the
Idleness and Folly of that Doctrine, has been over and over exposed as it has
been? But 2dly you say, That this is that which the Jews, nor Christians in the
first times never did. But, if you mean by the First times, the times of the
Apostles, it is more than you can prove, that the Martyrdom of St. Stephen was
never solemnly commemorated by the Christians in their time. And I presume you
would not have had the Martyrdoms of the Apostles commemorated, before they
were Martyred, what if this be not recorded, is it therefore a certain Argument
that it never was? You find not I think the Martyrdom of any one of the
Apostles recorded in holy Scripture, except St. James's. But if you mean by the
first times, the Primitive times, I perceive you never read, or have forgotten,
The Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, concerning Policarp's Martyrdom. But I
hope it needs not to be proved to you, that the Catholic Church observed
Martyrum Natalitia, the Days whereon they were crowned with Martyrdom, even
from the Second Century: But where do you find it prescribed in God's word, or
recorded that it was practiced in the Apostles times (for to be sure you mean
those by the First times) to praise God for the good Examples of Holy men,
among other great Blessings, is it therefore unlawful so to do, as well as to
do it upon Set Days? You will not assert so absurd a thing. In short, Sir,
think not that we need either Precepts or Examples, to justify our doing of
that, which the very Light of Nature, and Right Reason, do plainly declare to
us, to be, though not a necessary duty, yet highly becoming us, and
praiseworthy. And we are certain that it is dictated thereby to be highly
becoming us, to commemorate, at Annual Selected times, the unspeakable Goodness
of God to us in giving us such Shining Lights as the Holy Apostles, etc. and to
meditate upon Christ glorified in them, who with admirable courage first
preached and propagated his Gospel in the World, and with admirable Patience,
for the sake thereof, endured the greatest of Miseries and Calamities, and at
last Sealed it with their Blood.

8. You say, But if Devout persons will set apart Days, (you might have said
too, will observe Days set apart by the Church) to give God thanks for any
signal mercies (among which I think, every Apostle is a most signal one) or to
put up Prayers for any people in distress, provided they do not mock God, in
giving him an holy hour, instead of an holy day, and spend the rest of the day
in Idleness, Gaming, Drinking, etc. (And can you think that any of our Devout
people, do not abhor such practices as much as you?) Dissenters will never
blame, or condemn them for it. I hoped you would have said, they will join with
us, since Authority requires it.

9. You say, Finally Dissenters will never separate from the Church of England,
for the true keeping of a day holy to God, etc. Yes surely they will, if it be
a Saint's day at least, as one would think by what you have said. But you add,
that they will separate from the Looseness and commonly practiced Profanation
of it (and so do thousands of those that are no Dissenters, I hope) or such as
were only so, in the Pope's Calendar, as St. George, etc. Now you would, Sir,
again feign your self more ignorant than you are; for, no doubt, you know as
well as we, that St. George his day is no Church of England Holy Day. And for
all your [ etc.] you cannot but know too, that Our Church has no Festival-days
called by any Saints names, but such as all Christians own for the Greatest of
Saints, except those Innocents who had the honor to suffer for Christ's sake,
before they were of age to know him. We have indeed a Fast Day, occasioned by
the Horrid Murder of King Charles the Martyr, whom we deservedly honor as a
Great Saint. But I never heard that this Saint stands in the Pope's Calendar,
and I Will warrant you never shall. We should be glad to hear, that He stands in
yours; however we hope He will never be blotted out of ours.

And now, having done with our Author, you spend a good part of your five last
Pages in such discourse, as is so far from tending to the composing of our
Differences, and healing our wide and most dangerous Breaches, that it has the
most apparent tendency to the making them irreparable beyond all Remedy. And
it is enough to convince all sober people, that the cause of those that separate
is desperate, to observe what strange principles are taken up of late in the
defense of Separation; even such as the Old Non-conformists would have thought
very wild ones, serving no better purpose than the Unhinging of all. And those,
Sir, which you here lay down so dogmatically not offering any proof of them,
you shall find most shamefully baffled by the Dean of St. Paul's, in his
forementioned excellent Book.

For my part, I am too much tired with Scribbling thus long, to take into
consideration this close of your Book, farther than reflecting upon two or
three passages; though I am not at all obliged to take notice of those neither,
as a Defender of our Author. And indeed (to deal like a plain-hearted Friend
with you) it was but the other day before I could be persuaded to think it
needful to Reply at all.

You say, page 31. That Separation in these three Cases is Lawful, if not
Necessary.

Your First case is, When such errors are in the Constitution of a Church, as,
if they had been known before, ought to have hindered Union with it. But you do
not tell us what Errors those are. Would you have your Readers take it for
granted, that there are such Errors in the Constitution of the Church of
England? But we may guess at one of those Errors in our Constitution, from
that which you say, page 30. viz. That Governing Churches must have proper
Officers, which cannot be, unless elected by the Governed; who could never part
with their Right in choosing Officers, etc. But what Right they have you will
soon learn from the Reverend Dean Stilling fleet, in his Unreasonableness of
Separation, page 307, etc. There you will find they have no Right at all, or I
am much mistaken. From what you say in these two Pages, and that which follows
(in which your discourse is such, that it is hard to say certainly what you
would be at) I shrewdly conjecture, that you believe it Lawful to separate
from the Church of England, although she had neither Ceremonies nor Liturgy to
score men away.

Your Second case is, When a Church is turned Idolatrous; that then it is
necessary to depart from it. And here we have no Controversy.

Your Third is, When a Church will not admit a man's abiding in it, unless he
will do something which his Conscience tells him is sinful. But, Sir, will
you not acknowledge, that it cannot justify our Separation that something is
required which we judge sinful, whilst we will not impartially use all means
for the duly informing of our judgments: whilst we call it a running into
Temptation, to read what is offered us in Defense of the Lawfulness of that, we
have a prejudice against: Whilst we so confide in our own judgments, or in the
judgments of our Party, as not to bear to hear that it is possible we should be
mistaken? Surely all truly good men will acknowledge this.

You say, in all these Cases Separating is Lawful, if not Necessary: For in
the two first Cases we ought to Separate (And then I hope in those cases it is
Necessary and not only Lawful to Separate) in the last we may prudently and
warily depart, etc. And why do you so mince the matter, by changing your
phrase, when your meaning is that you may Separate? And why do you so mince is
too in saying, in the two first Cases we ought to Separate? which supposes
that in this Case you are at your Liberty, and that, though you may lawfully
Separate yet it is not a necessary duty so to do. And why again do you say, we
judge this no sinful Separation? Why don't you speak out and say it is a
Necessary one? Except you think that a man may lawfully act against his
Conscience. But you have given me sufficient assurance in your Book, that this
you do not think.

You say, page 33. If any others in former Ages, or in our own, have had any
other apprehensions of the significancy (you would have said signification) of
the Terms, Church, Schism and Separation, whom we own to have been Holy and
Excellent men, till we see their Notions justified from Holy Writ (which alone
can determine these things) we must crave leave to dissent from them, and
believe that had they lived in our times, they would have dissented from their
own Apprehensions under a more perfect light, etc. But

1. What would you have said to us, if we had given this Answer to your citing
Holy and Excellent men, such as Calvin (whom our Author has so often appealed
to in his Book) and others against our Notions? I am sure you would have
severely upbraided us with having a wonderful opinion of our own judgments.
Especially if our Notions ran counter to all Antiquity, and the Judgments of
all Holy Excellent men in former Ages, and to the generality of such in our own
Age and Time. But this I dare say may be asserted of your Notions concerning
the Terms, Schism and Separation; and much of your talk concerning the Term
Church too.

2. How came you to have more light than the Holy and Excellent men in former
Ages, and in our own Age too? which you plainly suppose your selves to have.
Nay you suppose this, as to multitudes of such persons also as are your
Contemporaries. For you say, page 7. We are far from thinking that there are
not multitudes of Holy and Learned men, in our Ecclesia Loquens, etc. that is,
Among Conformable Divines of the Church of England.

3. This Answer would far better become the Quakers than you; they pretending
to inspiration, which you do not.

I will now conclude with a Remarque or two on those words, with which you
begin the concluding part of your Book.

You say, page 29. And now how happy should we not only think our selves, but
indeed be, would our Brethren but leave disputing; how far it is lawful for
the Spouse of Christ, to have Communion with the Great Whore; and only argue
how far we come short of symbolizing with the First and Purest Gospel Churches,
of which we have Records in Holy Writ. To this I say

1. How Unaccountable is this Charge you lay against your Brethren! when you
know that they are in as perfect a Separation as your selves, from the
Communion of that Apostate Church, which you mean by the Great WHORE.

2. It lies not in your power to show us a Church, which more symbolizeth with
the First and Purest Gospel Churches, than the Church of England. And as for
those Churches which you believe do come nearer to the First and Purest, it
has often enough been demonstrated with invincible strength, that the main
thing ( viz. the point of Government) in which you conceive they more agree
with these Churches, does speak them far less to agree with them, than the
Church of England does: And speaks them to be therein unlike to the whole
Catholic Church of Christ for fifteen hundred years together, from the time
of the Apostles.

We do not pretend that the Constitution of our Church is absolutely perfect,
we do believe that such a Constitution is the peculiar privilege of the Church
Triumphant; but we bless God that it is no more imperfect, and we who live in
complete Communion with this Church are well assured that there is nothing
either in the Constitution thereof, or in what is required thereby, that
hinders us from being as good Christians as ever were in the world. We cannot
find after all the pains that you and others have taken to prove the contrary,
that there is imposed upon us any one condition of Communion that does
contradict any Law of God; that tends in the least to the depraving of our
Souls, to the gratifying of any one corrupt Affection, or the making us unmeet
for the Heavenly Happiness. And this our Holy Martyrs thought as well as we:
And gave a Demonstration hereof by their Excellent Lives, and Heroic Behavior
under the greatest Torments; they not only patiently but also joyfully
enduring them for the sake of Christ. Nor do we find, any more than they did,
that we are debarred by our Church of any Helps for the building of us up in
our most holy faith. And whereas you express such mighty zeal for Purer
Ordinances, we think that zeal would be much better employed in endeavoring
after Purer Hearts: And that this contending with your Superiors, and your
Brethren about some things enjoined, has been infinitely more prejudicial to
men's Souls, and contributed unspeakably more to the impurity both of men's
hearts and lives, than the impure Ordinances you so complain of. And therefore
all good and pious Church of England men cannot but say, How happy should we
not only think our selves, but indeed be, would our Brethren but leave
disputing with such mighty concern about little things, and things that are
perfectly harmless and innocent* Would make no more Sins, than God and their
Blessed Savior have made* Would be as fearful of culpably Disobeying
Authority as of culpably Obeying it* Would be as thankful that they are in no
worse Circumstances, as they are full of Complaints that they are in no better*
Would take as much pains to satisfy themselves, how far they may lawfully hold
Communion with our Church, as how far they may lawfully Separate from it* Would
be as willing to read those Books that are written in the defense of the things
enjoined by our Church, as to read those which are written in opposition to
them* Would as impartially consider the vast distance between our Church and
that of Rome, as thus dwell upon the most inconsiderable Agreement that is
between them; which our Author has convincingly to any unprejudiced person
proved, to be no justifiable pretense for Separation. And if we would well
digest those excellent words of the Apostle, Romans 14. 17, 18. The Kingdom of
God is not meat or drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost:
For he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God and approved
of men. And, if we would follow after the things that make for v. 19.
peace, and things wherein one may edify another. And lastly, if we would at
length be persuaded to Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and Ephesians. 4.
31, 32.
clamor, and evil speaking, against one another, be put away from us, with all
malice: And to be Kind and affectionate one to another (notwithstanding the
Difference of Apprehensions) tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven us. I say, if we could once be brought to this
temper, we should be unspeakably more happy, than those things you express so
passionate a desire of could possibly make us. And without this blessed temper,
we shall be miserable wretches, though there were no Agreement in any one Rite
between Rome and us, and though our Ordinances were as pure as it is your wish
to have them: Nor will our bidding the greatest defiance to the Antichrist in
the Roman Chair one whit avail us, while the Spiritual Antichrist, which is the
worse of the two, continues possessed of his Seat in our Hearts.

And so, Sir, I heartily bid you Farewell.

ERRATA.
Page 19. Lin. 12. read in their greatest. p. 27. l. 30. dele? p. 32. l. 1.
read is so contrived.

FINIS.

