THE HUMBLE PROPOSALS And DESIRES of His Excellency the Lord Fairfax, And of
the General Council Of OFFICERS, In order to a speedy prosecution OF JUSTICE,
AND The Settlement formerly propounded by them.

BY the Appointment of His Excellency the Lord Fairfax, Lord General, and His
General Council of Officers, December. 6. 1648.

Signed, JOHN RUSHVVORTH Secr'

London, Printed by JOHN FIELD for John Partridge December. 7. 1648.

To the Honorable, The Commons of England assembled in Parliament: THE HUMBLE
PROPOSALS And Desires of His Excellency the Lord Fairfax, and of the general
Council of Officers, in order to a speedy prosecution of Justice, and the
Settlement formerly propounded by them.
HAving, with others, for a long while sadly beheld and tasted, in your
proceedings, the miserable fruits of Councels divided and corrupted by Faction
and personal Interest, even to the neglect, betraying and casting away all
that's public and good, to the lengthning out of endless troubles, burden and
damage to the Kingdom, to the continuance and widening of that issue of blood,
whereby these Nations have been so much polluted and consumed, and to the
perpetual hazard of Bondage and Destruction to them at last: And both we and
many others having propounded foundations of Justice and Settlement, which are
of evident Advantage and Security to the public Interest, and clear from any
thing that's personal or particular; But finding that through th'aforesaid
Corruption and Divisions in your Councels, the same can obtain no place or
consideration at all: And foreseeing evidently that the condition of the
Kingdom will not bear delay of Settlement one way or other, We conceive our
selves and others that are sensible hereof, to be necessitated unto some
extraordinary vigorous and speedy way, whereby those roots of Faction,
Division, and private Interests may be weeded out from amongst you, and so your
Councels cleared and united, to the timely and effectual prosecution of
Justice, with a sound Settlement and public good to the Kingdom, and to the
speedy introducing of such a succeeding Authority, wherein future Differences
may be prevented, and a general Acquiescence obtained.

Therefore seeing no better or other way, We propound and demand as follows:

1. Whereas Denzil Hollis Esquire Lionel Copley Esquire Major Gen: Massey, and others
of your Members, (whose Names you well know) were in the year 1647. impeached
by your selves for Treason, or for high Crimes and Misdemeanors, in relation to
the Treasonable Engagement in the City of London, The violence then done upon
the Parliament, and The levying of a new War, and other evils in maintenance
and prosecution thereof; and upon clear proofs against them, were by your
censure expelled the House, and disabled from further trust therein, and upon
new Writs issued out new Members were chosen and returned in some of their
rooms; and yet by the prevalence of their Faction ( When in the last Summers
War diverse faithful Members were engaged abroad upon necessary public
service, and others through Malignant Tumults and Disturbances could not safely
attend the House) the same persons were afterward readmitted to sit in the
House, and Vote as formerly, without any trial or satisfaction in the things
whereof they were accused: We demand, That all those Members so Impeached, may
be forthwith secured, to be brought to Justice or Trial for their said Crimes;
and that such others of their Faction, by whose Votes, Councels and Confederacy
they were so readmitted, may be secluded from the House, and not sit as Judges
for those their confederates.

2. Whereas by the Confederacy of Major Gen: Brown now Sheriff of London, with
the said Impeached Members, the Scots were invited and drawn in to invade this
Kingdom the last Summer, in so much as when upon the actual Invasion the House
proceeded to declare them Enemies, and those that adhered to them Traitors; yet
the said Confederates and other treacherous Members (to the number of Ninety
and odd, as upon the division of the House appeared) did by their Council and
Votes endeavor to hinder the House from declaring against their confederate
Invaders; We desire, That the said Major Gen: Brown may be secured and brought
to judgment, for that and other his treacherous Confederacies or
Correspondencies with the public and declared Enemies of the Kingdom (which
we hereby charge him with, and shall be ready to make proof of) And that the
rest of the Ninety and odd persons dissenting in the said Vote, may be
excluded, and not trusted further in your Councels.

3. Whereas in a continued Series of your proceedings for many months
together, we have seen the prevalence of the same treacherous, corrupt and
divided Councels, through Factions and private Interests, opposing or
obstructing Justice in all kinds, diverting your Councels from any thing of
public good, hindering any proceedings to any such Settlement, as would
consist with Security to the public Interest, or put a real end to the
Troubles, Burdens or Hazards of the Kingdom, and precipitating into
treacherous and destructive Compliances and Conjunctions with the acknowledged
Enemies thereof; and this we have have seen particularly in the corrupt
Councels and Resolves of receding from, and recalling the Votes of No more
Addresses to the King, etc. (the justness and necessity whereof you had once so
cleared to the world) also in the Votes for entertaining or seeking (after all
that) a Personal Treaty with the King your Prisoner, upon such Propositions as
himself should tender, as well as your own, offering upon imperfect (and those
but wrested) Concessions from him, to Restore him, with impunity, to Honor,
Freedom, Safety, and his Revenue, exempting all (even the principal) Authors
and Actors in the last Summers War from capital Punishment or Trial, and
bringing off the rest with Fines or Censures most inconsiderable to the
public Damage and Mischief they have done; whereby both they and others are
encouraged to renew and multiply the Kingdoms Troubles: And lastly, in the
Votes declaring the Kings past Concessions to be a Ground for the House to
proceed upon, for the Settlement of the PEACE of the Kingdom, notwithstanding
the visible insufficiency and defects of them in things essentially concerning
the public Interest, and Liberties of the Kingdom (as those propounded in our
late Remonstrance are) and in other matters both Religious and civil (from
which, by express Covenant or public Faith given, you were obliged not to
recede) In which Votes and councels it is apparent, those that are guilty of
the^ have deserted, betrayed and justly forfeited their Trust for the public;
insomuch that we dare appeal to all well affected or reasonable men, Whether
there be any hopes by, or with the conjunction of such men in your Councels, to
have any sound or timely Settlement, to have any end of Troubles, Burdens or
Hazards, or any public good done for the Kingdom: We therefore most earnestly
desire, That all such faithful Members who are innocent in these things, would
immediately (by Protestation and public Declaration) acquit themselves from
any guilt of, or concurrence in the several Votes or Councels here before
particularly mentioned, as corrupt or destructive, that the Kingdom may know
who they are that have kept their Trust, and distinguish them from the rest
that have thus falsified the same; and that all such as cannot or shall not so
acquit themselves particularly, may be immediately excluded or suspended the
House, and not readmitted, until they shall have given clear satisfaction
therein to the Judgment of those who now so acquit themselves, and the grounds
of such satisfaction be published to the Kingdom.

4. Thus, such as by faithfulness have retained their Trust, being set in a
condition to pursue and perform the same, without such Interruptions,
Diversions and Depravations of Councels, as formerly, We shall desire and hope
you will speedily and vigorously proceed, To take order for the execution of
Justice, To set a short period to your own Power, To provide for a speedy
Succession of equal Representatives, according to our late Remonstrance,
wherein Differences in the Kingdom may be ended, and we and others may
comfortably acquiesce; as (for our parts) we hereby engage and assure you we
shall.

By the Appointment of His Excellency the Lord Fairfax, Lord General, and His
General Council of Officers, December 6. 1648. Signed, JOHN RUSHWORTH Secr'

FINIS.

