A LETTER OUT OF FRANCE, From one of the Duke of Monmouths SOLDIERS, To his
FRIEND in LONDON.

Pontoise, the first of May, 1672.

With Allowance.

NOSCE TE IPSVM NE QVID NIMIS printer's or publisher's device

LONDON: Printed for Robert Cutler, over against the Globe in Little Britain.
1672.

A Letter out of France, etc.
My Dear FRIEND,
LEt it be no wonder to you, that when I parted from you last, which was when I
came into the Duke of Monmouth's Regiment, and therein intended for France,
that I should give you no account of my Intentions, or Proceedings in that
Affair. There were many things (which as representations of your ill liking
thereof) dissuaded me from making you acquainted therewith: for I taking you as
my real Friend, well knew the influence which you had always over me, ever
since our first acquaintance; and that your many Arguments (which you knew how
well enough to fit up for that purpose) would be Armor of Proof sufficient
against all the Weapons I could ever be able to use for my self in that case.
These things thus working upon me, made me keep my mind to my self, that as I
would not be found openly acting against your will, so what I did do should be
without your knowledge. I did it rashly at all adventures, and became a
Volunteer in the Duke of Monmouth's Regiment: as yet I have no cause to
complain, nor in the least to repent, from which I am as far as the East is
from the West; and do further resolve, to spend all the remainder of my days in
a Soldiers life.

And now, SIR, I doubt not but you are desirous to hear something of our
Procedure in this our Design into France; of which I can inform you as yet but
of little, beside what is reported as common amongst us. After our arrival upon
the French Shore, we were kindly entertained among the Frenchmen, where we had
good Meat; Drink, Lodging, and other accommodations; as also our Coats, Hats,
Hose, Shoes, Musket and Sword, and other Ammunition, according to promise.

We traveled three hundred and odd miles into the Country: during all which
way and time, I met not with any so great content in England; besides the
courtesy and civility of the people, and the Kings allowance; by which as we
were wholly free from want, so nothing more could well be desired by persons in
our condition. At length we came to a Town called Tontoise, where our whole
Regiment was completed, to the number of two thousand and four hundred men at
Arms, besides Officers. We were thus completed the twenty third of April last,
being St. Georges Day, being Commanded by his Highness JAMES Duke of Monmouth,
under the Conduct and Banner of the King of France. The same Day we received
Orders from His Highness, to march for the Camp on the 25 of April next
following, which is now in Flanders: the whole bent of all the Kings Forces is
against the Dutch, where, unless some strange Providence prevent the Politic
designs of this Monarch, it cannot be judged less in reason, but that people,
will not only prove really miserable, but rather hazard a Certain destruction:
For although it is true, that they may be really strong by Sea; yet their
strength there, compared with the English, is no more than a Pigmy to a Giant:
But at Land (whatsoever they may be at Sea) their strength is little, their
Soldiers few, and of them the greatest part (as far as I can hear by credible
intelligence) very pusillaminous and faint-hearted.

We have no fear no despair upon our Spirits, and it is judged it cannot be
long before we come to the trial of our Valor: Impossible it is but that some
of us must be cut off; but we doubt not in the general to perform what we
undertake, having so truly Noble a Person to be our Commander, and the
Encouragement of so great a Prince.

I am at this time in perfect health, and have not had the least sickness since
I came into France; where I have lived, not only with much freedom and content
of mind, besides the pleasantness of the journey; but also hope to live to
return again into England, with much more satisfaction, than all my Friends
were able to give me. I would have given you a larger account, but because of
my present occasions and haste, I am forced to be short, and indeed shorter
than I would: pray have respect for your Friend, and have me in remembrance in
your daily prayers to God Almighty. My love to your self, your wife and family,
and to all the rest of my friends in London, who enquire after my Welfare.

Your Friend and Servant, J. F.

FINIS.

