DIEV ET MON DROIT

royal blazon or coat of arms
At the Court at Hampton Court the 28th day of July 1681.
Present The Kings most Excellent Majesty, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury Lord
President Lord Privy Seal Earl of Clarendon Earl of Bathe Earl of Craven Earl
of Halifax Earl of Conway Lord Viscount Fauconberg Lord Viscount Hyde Lord
Bishop of London Mr. Secretary Jenkins Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer Mr.
Seymour Mr. Godolphin.


HIs Majesty by His Order in Council of the One and twentieth of July instant,
having been Graciously pleased to refer a Memorial presented to His Majesty in
behalf of the distressed Protestants abroad, to the Consideration of the Right
Honorable the Lords Committees of this Board for Trade and Plantations, with
directions to Report their opinion thereupon; And their Lordships having this
day made their Report to His Majesty in Council, His Majesty upon due
Consideration thereof had, was pleased to Declare, That He holds Himself
obliged in Honor and Conscience to comfort and support all such afflicted
Protestants who by reason of the Rigours and Severities which are used toward
them upon the Account of their Religion, shall be forced to quit their Native
Country, and shall desire to shelter themselves under His Majesty's Royal
Protection, for the preservation and free exercise of their Religion; And in
order hereunto His Majesty was pleased further to Declare, That He will Grant
unto every such distressed Protestant who shall come hither for refuge, and
reside here, His Letters of Denization under the Great Seal without any charge
whatsoever, and likewise such further privileges and immunities as are
consistent with the Laws, for the Liberty and free exercise of their Trades and
Handicrafts; And that His Majesty will likewise recommend it to His Parliament
at their next Meeting to Pass an Act for the General Naturalization of all such
Protestants as shall come over as aforesaid, and for the further enlarging
their Liberties and Franchises granted to them by His Majesty, as reasonably
may be necessary for them. And for their encouragement, His Majesty is likewise
pleased to Grant unto them, That they shall pay no greater Duties in any case
then His Majesty's own Natural born Subjects, and that they shall have all the
privileges and immunities that generally His Majesty's Native Subjects have,
for the Introduction of their Children into Schools and Colleges.

And His Majesty was likewise pleased to Order, and it is hereby Ordered
accordingly, That all His Majesty's Officers both Civil and Military do give a
kind reception to all such Protestants as shall arrive within any of His
Majesty's Ports in this Kingdom, and to furnish them with free Pass-Ports, and
give them all assistance and furtherance in their Journeys to the Places to
which they shall desire to go. And the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners
of His Majesty's Treasury are to give Orders to the Commissioners of His
Majesty's Customs, to suffer the said Protestants to pass free with their Goods
and Housholdstuff, whether of a greater or a smaller value, together with their
Tools and Instruments belonging to their Crafts, or Trades, and generally all
what belongs to them that may be Imported according to the Laws now in force,
without exacting any thing from them. And for the further relief and
encouragement of the said necessitous Protestants, His Majesty has been
pleased to give Order for a General Brief through His Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick, for Collecting the Charity of all well
disposed persons, for the relief of the said Protestants, who may stand in need
thereof. And to the end that when any such come over, being Strangers, they may
know where to address themselves to fitting persons to lay their requests and
complaints before His Majesty: His Majesty was Graciously pleased to appoint
the most Reverend Father in God, his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
and the Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of London, or either of
them, to receive all the said Requests and Petitions, and to present the same
to His Majesty, to the end such Order may be given therein as shall be
necessary.

PHI. LLOYD.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1681.


