A DECLARATION Of His Electoral Highness The DUKE of BRANDENBURGH, CONCERNING
The present War with FRANCE: DIRECTING His Subjects and Vassals, and all other
His Dependants, how they are to demean themselves in Their Trading,
Negotiation, and all incident Occasions during the present War.

AS ALSO A LETTER sent from the IMPERIAL DIET at RATISBON to the Thirteen
Cantons in SWITZERLAND, March 7. 1689. Exhorting them to adhere to His Imperial
Majesty, and the Princes of the Empire, in the present War against France.

LONDON; Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

Licensed

May 28. 1689. J. FRASER.

A Declaration by His Electoral Highness the Duke of BRANDENBURGH, concerning
the present War with France. Directing His Subjects, and Vassals, and all other
His Dependents, how they are to demean themselves in their Trading,
Negotiation, and all incident Occasions, during the present War.
FREDERICK the third, by the Grace of God Duke and Marquess of Brandenburgh,
Arch-Chamberlain and Elector of the Roman Empire, etc. etc. etc. To all
Christian People, Greeting. Though hitherto we have most earnestly wished and
longed for the continuance of the universal Peace of Christendom; and that the
Countries, by the Providence of God committed to our Charge, might under our
Conduct enjoy in some degree the Blessings of Peace and Quiet, in which they
have been so long interrupted by the Wars, wherein our Father of blessed Memory
was entangled, during almost the whole Time of His glorious Government. Yet at
this Time the French King having not only in an hostile Manner invaded the
Empire of Germany, without any reasonable Cause or Provocation offered; and
with a Cruelty and Barbarity not used or known among Christians, destroyed
whole Towns and Provinces by Fire, Sword, and utter Desolation; but also
threatened to exercise the same Cruelties on Us, and Our Relations and Friends
in Franconia, and other Countries under Our Subjection: putting such his unjust
Purposes actually in Execution, wheresoever he had Power and Opportunity, (not
to mention many other Attempts against Us, and other States of the Empire and
its Allies, in and without the Empire, expressly contrary to the Articles of
Peace and Truce formerly made with the French King, even to his greatest
Advantage) from which Nothing was more certainly to be expected than the total
subversion of the State of Europe, and particularly the utmost Prejudice and
absolute Ruin of Us, and our Electoral Family. Therefore, as well in compliance
with the common Acts and Ordinances of the Empire, the unanimous Decree lately
made in the Diet at Ratisbon, and the Injunctions given by the Imperial
Mandate, to all the Loyal Members and States of the Empire; as out of the Duty
incumbent on Us to provide for the Defense of our Self and our Estate,
according to the Law of Nations, and by virtue of our Sovereignty against these
and the like Provocations, and to the utmost of our Power to consult all such
Ways and Means conducing to our Safety, as God and Nature has supplied Us
with; We have been unavoidably obliged to take a Resolution to have Recourse to
our Arms, in order to Our necessary Defense, against the Violence of the said
French King. And we have thought it fit hereby to give Notice to all People,
especially to Our Loyal Subjects, and to all the Inhabitants of our Provinces
and Countries, and all others that belong to Us; but in a more especial Manner
to all Our Lords-Deputies, Governors, Officers Civil and Military, and to all
and every of our Subjects, of what Rank, Dignity, or Condition soever they be:
and to publish such plain and distinct Directions, that every Man may
understand how to behave himself upon all Occasions, in this present Juncture
of Affairs.

I.
THat none of Our Subjects, Vassals, or other Inhabitants of Our Countries, or
such as for a certain Time shall sojourn, or reside therein upon Occasion of
Trade, or other Business, do entertain, or hold any Correspondence,
Communication, or Intelligence with the French King, or His Subjects,
Relations, Adherents, and Abettors; much less to presume to do any Service, or
Kindness to Him, or contribute the least Aid or Assistance to Him for carrying
on the present War; Upon pain of Confiscation of their Estates both Real and
Personal, and on Peril of Death, if their Offenses merit it.

II.
If any of our Subjects or Vassals, or other Inhabitants of our Countries, have
at any Time before this been employed in the Service of the said King, or his
Adherents, either in War, or other Affairs. Our Pleasure is, that such Persons
do forthwith, after the publishing this our Declaration, actually quit such
Service, and immediately return into our Countries; or in default thereof, and
in case of Disobedience to these our Commands, that they forfeit, ipso facto,
all their Fees and Freeholds, and all other their Rights and Privileges in any
of our Countries, either in Possession or Reversion, and all Pretensions,
Claims, and Benefits whatsoever; to be seized upon by the Commissioners of our
Exchequer.

III.
If it so fall out, that any Subjects, Officers, Soldiers, or Adherents
belonging to the said French King, shall be found in any of the Countries
belonging to Us: We require and authorize all Officers under our Command, to
seize and apprehend them, that so upon Notice thereof given to Us, We may give
Order to proceed against them according to their Demerits,

IV.
If any Goods, Wares, Merchandises, Manufactures, Claims, Debts, or Obligations
belonging to the said King, or his Subjects, shall be discovered and found in
any of our Countries, at the publishing of this our Declaration, or at any Time
after during the present War, they shall be forthwith forfeited, without
respect of Persons: And We strictly require all our Subjects to give Us an
Account accordingly, with all Expedition, and of all the Circumstances
attending it.

V.
We do further declare, charge, and inhibit, That none of our Subjects, Allies,
Friends, or such as during the present War shall remain in a Neutrality, do
import, or bring into any of our Countries, by Water, or by Land, any Corn,
Wares, or Merchandises of what kind soever they be, either of the Growth,
Product, or Manufacture of the Kingdom of France, or of any of the Islands,
Countries, Provinces and Colonies thereunto belonging; unless the said Wares,
etc. have been in the possession of the Subjects of other States of the Empire,
and our Allies, for some Months before the Prohibition of all French
Commodities was published by the Emperor, and by the United Provinces of
Holland and West-Friezeland: that so upon sufficient Evidence such Wares, etc.
may be exposed to sale in our Countries; and such, for which no Evidence can be
made to appear, may be presently taken away and confiscated.

VI.
All our Subjects, Vassals, and other the Inhabitants of our Countries;
especially such Foreign Merchants as shall have a temporary Residence in our
Countries, Cities, and Havens, in Order to Trade; are prohibited to have any
Commerce with France, or any of the Provinces thereto belonging, and are
commanded utterly to forbear Trading toward the French King's Dominions with
any sort of Commodities, or in any kind of Ships whatsoever, on pain of
Forfeiture of all such Ships and Goods that shall be employed in such Traffic.

VII.
As it is not Our Intention to prejudice Our Allies, Confederates, and Friends,
or such Princes and States, and their Subjects, who during this present War
shall remain in a Neutrality, or to debar them that Liberty of Trade which by
the Law of Nations they enjoy, both in the Time of War and Peace: So We expect
that they manage their Commerce and Negotiation with the French King's Subjects
in such manner, as may not be prejudicial to Us, or our Allies interessed with
Us in this War: more especially that they neither do, nor attempt any Thing
which may enable the French King and his Adherents to become the more hurtful
to Us in this his unjust War; or hinder us from recovering from the French King
what We, and Our said Allies in this present War have to just a Title to claim.
Wherefore We do hereby admonish the Subjects of Our said Friends, Confederates,
and Neutral States, not only to forbear all manner of Trade or Traffic with
any of the Cities, Fortresses, Havens, or other Places, which are, or hereafter
may be, actually invested by the Forces of Us, or Our Allies; or to import into
the same any kind of Corn, Goods, or other Things that may be of Advantage or
Support to the French Subjects so besieged: but also,

VIII.
During this present War, not to carry any Contraband Goods, wrought or
unwrought, to any place within the French Jurisdiction, and in particular no
Cannons, Muskets, Pistols, or Barrels or Locks for them, Guns, Mortar-peices,
Petards, Bombs, Carcasses, Grenades, Stink-Pots, Carriages, Pike-Heads,
Bandeliers, Gunpowder, Shot, Saltpeter, Bullets, Swords, Lances, Pikes,
Halberds, Head-peices, Curiasses, Horses, Holsters, Saddles, Hemp, Flax, Pitch,
Tar, Corn, Iron, Copper, Masts, round-Timber, Boards, Planks, crooked-Timber,
and other such like Materials, which may be used or employed in Military
Actions by Sea or Land. But if contrary to our Expectation, such Commodities
shall either by Sea or Land be stopped by our Generals, or any inferior
Officers, Captains of Ships, or their Lieutenants. Bailiffs, or ordinary
Seamen, or by any Officers belonging to the Custom-house (who by their Duty
are obliged to use all care and Circumspection in this matter, and to make
diligent Search upon all occasions) and upon due Examination and Trial in our
Admiralty, or other Courts, shall be found to have been directed to the
Dominions and Countries belonging to the French King, or to his Armies or
Fleets; the same to be forthwith seized and forfeited.

IX.
If any of the Commodities and Manufactures of the French King's Subjects shall
happen to be found in the Ships belonging to the Subjects of our Friends,
Allies, Confederates or neutral Princes: We freely declare, that we will let
them pass, provided they be not contraband Goods. But if any such Wares shall
be found on Board any of the French Ships, our Officers may justly seize both
Ship and Goods, as forfeited according to the Practice of other Nations on such
occasions, notwithstanding that such Wares do really belong to the Subjects of
our said Friends, Allies, and neutral Princes; being very well content, that
the same course be taken with our Subjects, and their Effects in the like case.
Wherefore we do strictly command, and (under pain of our highest Displeasure,
and such Punishments as justly we may inflict on such as are refractory and
disobedient to our Commands) and enjoin all our Lords-Deputies, Governors,
Generals, and other Officers by Sea and Land, together with all Civil
Magistrates in Cities and Towns, and all others who by any way are subject to
our Jurisdiction, to put this our Declaration exactly, in Execution in all the
Points, Clauses and Articles of it, and steadfastly to observe the same; but in
no case to act, or suffer others to act contrary to the Tenor of it.

And as we have been necessitated to emit this our Declaration, and to take up
Arms in our own Defense against the French King (not only out of our Duty to
the Roman Empire, our renowned Native Country, but particularly to use all
effectual means at this time to preserve us and our Countries against the
Hostilities already practiced, and to restore them to their former Security;
and to procure full Recompense and Satisfaction for the Injuries done to us,
and our Allies, and other States of the Empire) So we put Our whole Confidence
in Almighty God, that he will maintain our just Cause, and continue to bless,
and make the Armies of Us and our Allies victorious, who are so unjustly
provoked, and to give so happy an Issue to this present War; that they (whose
unsatiable Ambition to bear sway in the World, could not be appeased and
satisfied by the many considerable Advantages suffered to be taken from time to
time for the sake of Peace, nor by the Obligation of Treaties and Promises
sworn and agreed in the most solemn and religious manner; but for many Years
past have exercised all Christendom with continual Troubles, Diffidence and
Irresolution; nay made use even of the very Articles of Peace to begin and
foment a War) may at last by the most considerable Forces of Europe, now by the
miraculous Providence of God united in one common Interest, be compelled and
constrained to cease from those Hostilities and Oppressions, under which so
many thousand innocent Souls of all Degrees have hitherto groaned, and to
suffer the Empire, our renowned Native Country, to enjoy a constant Peace and
Tranquillity, according to its most ancient Luster, Liberty, and Authority;
toward which good Design we shall never fail to contribute all that lies within
the compass of our Power, even to the Hazard of our Life.

Given at our Court at Colloin upon Sprea the (...) of April. 1689. Signed,
FREDERICK. Eberhard Danckelman.

Printed at Colonia upon Sprea, by Ulric Liebpert Printer to his Electoral
Highness. 1689.

A Letter sent from the Imperial Diet at RATISBON, to the thirteen Cantons in
SWITZERLAND, March the 7th, 1688/9, to adhere to the Empire in the present War
against France.
WE have understood at large by the Letters of his Imperial Majesty, our most
gracious Lord, how fairly it was represented to you, why his Imperial Majesty,
upon the unexpected Breach of Peace made by the French King, without any just
or reasonable Cause, (and even in Despite of Faith it self) could not, because
of the Arch-Dutchy of Austria, consent to the Neutrality by you proposed
between his Majesty and the French King, concerning Constantz, and the four
Forest Towns, as also a Liberty of two Leagues, as they commonly call it, in
regard that it did not at all consist either with the Interest of his Imperial
Majesty and the Empire, or of your selves, to engage in a particular Neutrality
with the said French King, after so manifest a Violation of the Peace; but
rather that it conduced to your Advantage, and to the Preservation of your free
State, to continue in good Correspondence, and to hold a friendly Intelligence
with his Imperial Majesty, and the Archdukes of Austria, and to observe
inviolably the perpetual Agreement respectively made, so that his Imperial
Majesty might also effectually receive the Benefit of your Assistance, all
which in his Imperial Majesty's said Letter more amply does appear.

Neither do we doubt, but that before this Time you have received
Advertisement, what an unanimous Resolution, touching this Affair, has been
taken by this Diet, and most graciously approved by his Imperial Majesty; and
that the French King (by reason of his invading the sacred Roman Empire, and
particularly the Estates of the Electors on the upper Rhine, with the Circles
of Franconia, Suabia, and Westphalia, without the least Provocation, or
Pretense of any lawful Cause imaginable; Acting therein in a Hostile and
Barbarous manner against the Articles of Peace concluded in Westphalia, and at
Nimiguen (in which your selves are more especially concerned, in regard of the
many considerable Privileges and Advantages obtained thereby from the Empire)
and lastly against the Twenty-Years Truce here concluded, and the many repeated
Sanctions on the Word of a King) is declared the Common and Public Enemy of
the Empire. Wherefore, among other Dispatches, it was adjudged most necessary
to make a particular Address to the illustrious Confederate Cantons in
Switzerland, and to admonish them to preserve a good and neighbourly
Correspondence, as appears out of the two enclosed Papers, to which, to avoid
Repetition, we refer our selves.

Tho we do not in the least doubt, but that the further advantageous Proposal
and Demand made by His said Majesty, according to our most humble Address
presented to Him, out of the sincere and unwearied Care he takes for the Roman
Empire, and the Common Good of Christendom, will carry its own recommendation
to you, whose Interest is so evidently interwoven with it: yet upon especial
Command given us by our most Gracious Master, and Superiors, we must not be
deficient in the friendly imparting our thoughts to you, and duly representing
the necessity thereof. And first of all be pleased a little to reflect how you
are not only really straightened, and every day more and more confined, and
surprised by the French King's taking Alsatia, Sundian, Brisac, Friburgh, and
the Free County of Burgundy together with the Dukedom of Lorrain, and several
other Places, but are yet more pinched by the many erected Fortresses, Sconces
and Bridges as well on this side, as beyond the Rhine; on purpose that he may
the more conveniently intercept all Succors designed for you by the Roman
Empire, which at this very Time seems to be aimed at by the undertaken Design
with Creutznack, and which will indubitably as well now as hereafter be carried
on, whenever the French King shall observe you to be in a Condition not to
hinder it, or shall think it fit to fall upon your selves, accordingly as he
has since his coming to the Government given many Proofs to the World, that he
seeks to bring all under his Yoke. Nay he places his inward Peace in foreign
Wars, from whence you may easily judge what you are to expect in time to come,
if it should so fall out, that the French King should according to his Evil
purposes get the upper hand in Germany; not to mention the unbecoming usage and
Entertainment your Ambassadors lately met with in France, and other Passages
there.

And now if you will take this and other matters into your most serious
Consideration, and particularly call to Mind how little any of the French
King's Promises, how obligatory soever they may seem to be, are to be relied
on, since no Articles of Peace or other Treaties (to the Performance of which
he has bound himself with an Oath) have been kept, but hitherto violated and
broken upon several frivolous Pretenses, nay even sometimes without any Pretext
at all, at his Will and Pleasure: We cannot believe, or fear, that in respect
to the said Towns you will either insist with his Imperial Majesty upon any
Neutrality, not at all allowable in this case, by Virtue of the Acts, and the
approved Decree of the Empire aforesaid; or that you will resolve to enter upon
any such Terms with the French King, for the sake of your Estates, whereby the
Enemy would be strengthened, and unavoidable Danger and Mischief would fall
upon you. Wherefore we desire you, as it becomes us, that you will be pleased
not only not to hearken to the Enemies Overtures and Proposals, which have
been, or hereafter may be made, but rather wholly to abandon the French King,
and to adhere to the Roman Empire, and especially without delay to recall the
Forces of your Nation, and free Companies, wheresoever they may have their
Quarters, or remain in the French King's Service, on pain of severe Punishment,
according to the Example of former times, and in imitation of your Ancestors;
since they have been already engaged against the Empire, and done so great
Mischiefs, though we are apt to believe, without your Knowledge, and against
your Will, and directly contrary to the Hereditary Agreement. And that
hereafter you will not permit the said King to list, or raise Recruits of any
Soldiers, to buy Horses, export Corn, Ammunition, or Provisions; nor be
helpful to him, either directly or indirectly with Money, or in giving him free
Passage; but that by all means possible you will prohibit the French
Manufactures in all the Cantons, and other places belonging thereunto, and in
general break off all Commerce with him. Further, that you will take Constantz,
and the rest of the four Forest-Towns into your particular Protection, in whose
Conservation you are equally concerned with his Imperial Majesty and the
Empire; and that upon emergent occasions you may be in a Readiness to march
your Troops toward the Frontiers. All which as it tends directly to your own
Interest, and to the maintaining a good and neighbourly Correspondence (to the
sincere Observance whereof you have hitherto always tendered your Willingness;
while the Alliance formerly made with France, could not, or ought not to be any
Obstruction, in regard a saving Clause for his Imperial Majesty, and the Roman
Empire is there expressly inserted, not to mention that this War is undertaken
merely for Self-defence; whereas the French King has again at this time,
appeared a notorious Truce-breaker, and a hostile Invader of Germany.) So we
hope you will take these things into your serious Consideration, and proceed in
the good Correspondency, which has been kept time out of Mind with the said
Roman Empire: particularly that you will adhere to the perpetual Hereditary
Agreement with the Archdukes of Austria, which hitherto has proved so
gloriously successful, and which you have not many Years since constantly
assured us, always to observe sincerely, exactly and inviolably, with all the
obligatory Contents of it. And further that you will freely declare your Mind
to these our Messengers (dispatched to you for that purpose, and to whom we
desire full Credence may be given) concerning his Majesty's most gracious
Demand, and this our reasonable Request: assuring your selves, that the Roman
Empire shall not fail upon all occasions to afford you considerable Assistance;
as we are still willing and ready to do you all possible Kindness.

Given at Ratisbon, March the 7 th. 1688/9. SIRS, Your Friends, The
Plenipotentiaries, Counselors, Nuncii, and Ambassadors of the Electors,
Princes, and States in this present Diet.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswel.
THE Case of Allegiance in our present Circumstances considered, in a Letter
from a Minister in the City to a Minister in the Country.

A Sermon preached at Fulham, in the Chapel of the Palace, upon Easter* Day
1689. at the Consecration of the Right Reverend Father in God Gilbert Lord
Bishop of Sarum: By Anthony Horneck, D. D.

The Judgments of God upon the Roman Catholic Church, from its first rigid
Laws for universal Conformity to it, unto its last End. With a prospect of
these near approaching Revolutions, viz. The Revival of the Protestant
Profession in an eminent Kingdom, where it was totally suppressed. The last End
of all Turkish Hostilities. The general Mortification of the Power of the Roman
Church in all parts of its Dominions. In Explication of the Trumpets and Vials
of the Apocalypse, upon Principles generally acknowledged by Protestant
Interpreters. By Drue Cressener, D. D.

A Breviate of the State of Scotland in its Government, Supreme Courts,
Officers of State, Inferior Officers, Offices and Inferior Courts, Districts,
Jurisdictions, Buroughs Royal, and Free Corporations. Fol.

Some Considerations touching Succession and Allegiance. 4 to.

A Discourse concerning the Worship of Images; preached before the University
of Oxford. By George Tully, Sub-Dean of York, for which he was suspended.

Reflections upon the late Great Revolution: Written by a Lay-Hand in the
Country, for the satisfaction of some Neighbors.

The History of the Dissertion; or an Account of all the public Affairs in
England, from the beginning of September, 1688. to the Twelfth of February
following. With an Answer to a Piece called the Dissertion discussed, in a
Letter to a Country-Gentleman. By a Person of Quality.

K. William and K. Lewis, wherein is set forth the inevitable necessity these
Nations lie under of submitting wholly to one or other of these Kings; And that
the matter in Controversy is not now between K. William and K. James, but
between K. William and K. Lewis of France, for the Government of these Nations.

An Examination of the Scruples of those who refuse to take the Oath of
Allegiance, by a Divine of the Church of England.

A Dialogue betwixt two Friends, a Jacobite and a Williamite; occasioned by the
late Revolution of Affairs, and the Oath of Allegiance.

Two Sermons, one against Murmuring, the other against Censuring: By Simon
Patrick, D. D.

An Account of the Reasons which induced Charles the Second, King of England,
to declare War against the States General of the United Provinces in 1672. And
of the Private League which he entered into at the same Time with the French
King to carry it on, and to establish Popery in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
as they are set down in the History of the Dutch War, printed in French at
Paris, with the Privilege of the French King, 1682. Which Book he caused to be
immediately suppressed at the Instance of the English Ambassador. Fol.

An Account of the Private League betwixt the late King James the Second and
the French King. Fol.

The Case of Oaths Stated. 4 to.

The Answer of a Protestant Gentleman in Ireland to a late Popish Letter of N.
N. upon a Discourse between them, concerning the present Posture of that
Country, and the Part fit for those concerned there to act in it. 4 to.

An Apology for the Protestants of Ireland, in a brief Narrative of the late
Revolutions in that Kingdom; and an Account of the present State thereof: By a
Gentleman of Quality. 4 to.

A Letter from a French lawyer to an English Gentleman, upon the Present
Revolution. 4 to.

Mr. Wake's Sermon before the King and Queen at Hampton Court.

-- His Fast-Sermon before the House of Commons, June 5. 1689.

Dr. Tennison's Sermon against Self-love, before the House of Commons, June 5.
1689.

Mr. Tully's Sermon of Moderation, before the Lord Mayor, May 12. 1689.

A Letter written by the Emperor to the late King James, setting forth the true
Occasion of his Fall, and the Treachery and Cruelty of the French.

The Resolution of the Electors, and the Princes of the Empire, February 11.
1689. Containing the Reasons of their Declaring War against France: Together
with the Emperor's Concurrence with them in it; and approving the same.

An Account of the late Revolution in New England. Together with the
Declaration of the Gentlemen, Merchants, and Inhabitants of Boston, and the
Country adjacent, April 18. 1689. Written by Mr. Nathanael Byfield, a Merchant
of Bristol in New England, to his Friends in London.


