THE DEVIL Was and Is the Old Informer AGAINST THE RIGHTEOUS*
HE that is an Informer, is a Persecutor, and Spoiler, and a Destroyer; and the
DEVIL is the Head of all Informers, Persecutors and Destroyers of the RIGHTEOUS.

He is an Adversary of the Happiness of all God's People, and an Accuser of
them: He is a Serpent, an Enemy to all that which is good: See his Emnity
against Adam and Eve, and against their Happiness, how it did appear against
Adam and Eve in Genesis.

And see his Enmity in the Sodomites, who vexed Just and Righteous Lot's Soul
from day to day: and Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness to the old ungodly
World, who did not regard him, no more than Sodom did Lot; but the one was
drowned, and the other was turned into Ashes.

And see the Serpent's Enmity in the Jews, and in Corah, Dathan and Abiram
against Moses; and what became of them who would have stoned him?

And you may see the Enmity of the Serpent in the Jews against the P^ophets:
and did not both the ten Tribes and the two Tribes go into Captivity for
disobeying the Lord? like their Father Adam in their Enmity against his
Prophets and righteous People.

And likewise you may see the Enmity of the ^erpent in the Jews against Christ
and his Apostles, insomuch that Christ called the Jews, Serpents, and of their
Father the Devil: and what became of those Jews? were they not scattered among
all Nations, and Jerusalem and their Place of Worship destroyed?

And what Condition is all Christendom in, that is erred from the Holy Ghost
and Power the Apostles were in? have they not received the unclean ghost or
soul spirit of the Devil, the Enmity, Adversary, Accuser and Destroyer, that
old Informer, that makes them to destroy one another, makes them to envy and
accuse, and Informers, and Destroyers of the Righteous? And that soul spirit or
unclean ghost has brought Christendom all on heaps, one against another, that
are not in the Spirit and Power of Christ the Apostles were in.

And in Job, chap. 1, 2. there you may see, the Devil and Satan, who was the
Enmity and Murderer, appeared against Job and his Sons and Daughters, to the
spoiling of his Goods, yea and his Wife, who said unto Job, Curse God and dye;
but Job called her, A foolish Woman, and did not sin with his Lips, though he
lost his Sons and Daughters, and his Goods, and was stripped of all; and though
the Devil, Satan, said unto the Lord, If that he would put his hand against
Job, Job would curse him to his face, Chap. 1. ver. 11.

And again, Satan the Informer said, Skin for skin, yea all that a man has,
will he give for his Life; but put forth thine Hand now, and touch his Bone,
and Flesh, and he will Curse thee to thy face, Job. 2.

But in all these false Informations of the Devil, who was a murderer and a
Liar from the beginning, and so was proved and manifest to be both a murderer,
and a liar and a false accuser; for Job blessed the Lord, and did not sin with
his Lips, Job 1, 2. Chapters.

And Job's Friends were miserable Comforters; for the Lord said, His Wrath was
kindled against them: for they had not spoken right of the Lord, as his Servant
Job had; and therefore Job was to pray to the Lord for them; and the Lord heard
Job's Prayer for them.

And Ioseph's mistress was a wicked Informer, to her husband, against innocent
Joseph; first she Informed the men of her house, then she Info^med her husband,
whose wrath was kindled against him, that he took him, and cast him into
prison. And all this was because Joseph would not yield unto his Mistriss's
wickedness, and Sin against God; so here was the Serpent, and the Devil, the
adversary, appeared against Innocent Joseph whom God was withal, and made him
to prosper, Genesis 40.

But in Proverbs 7. you may see, how the Woman, with the attire of a Harlot,
and subtilty of heart, whose feet abides not in her House, and lies in wait,
in every Corner of the Street, in Twielight in the Evening, in the black and
dark Night, deceived the Young Man, void of understanding; for they that have
understanding, will shun her; for by the means of a Whorish Woman, a man is
brought to a piece of Bread, and the Adulterous will hunt for the precious Life
of the Righteous.

And though the Informers, and Archers, did sorely grieve Joseph, and shot at
him, and hated him, yet his bow abode in strength, and Joseph's Brethren did
envy him for his Dream, but his Father Jacob observed his sayings.

And you may see how Pharaoh King of Egypt, informed his People, the
Egyptians, against the Children of Israel, and set Taskmasters over them,
that made their lives bitter; and the Egyptian Taskmasters obeyed Pharaoh's
Commands, and made them to make Brick without Straw, and serve with Rigor: But
the Hebrew-Midwives would not obey Pharaoh, to kill the Men-Children; and the
more Pharaoh and his Taskmasters persecuted and oppressed them, the more they
Multiplied, But what became of Pharaoh, and all his Persecutors and Informers
at Last? Did not God overthrow them in the Sea, and deliver his People?

There Ran a Young man, and told Moses, and said, Illdad, and Madad were
Prophesying in the Camp: and one said unto Moses, My Lord forbid them; and
Moses said unto him; Enviest thou for my sake? would God that all the Lords
People were Prophets; and that the Lord mould put his Spirit upon them, Numb.
11.

Here Moses did not give Credit, to those Informers, but rather reproved them,
and encouraged the Prophets, desiring that all the Lords People were Prophets.
So Moses was far off from saying have them before a Magistrate, and Fine them
20 l. apiece, for speaking. And what became of all those that went to search
the Land of Canaan, and brought an evil report upon the Land of Canaan,
contrary to God's promise, and to Joshua and Caleb, that these false Informers
made the Congregation so envious, that they were ready to stone Moses? and did
not those false Informers, and them that joined with them, their Carcasses fall
in the Wilderness? Numb. 14. And what became of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and
the 250. Princes, that were famous in the Congregation, and men of renown,
which told Moses and Aaron, Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the
Congregation were holy, every one of them; for the Lord is among them:
wherefore them lift you up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord. See
what high words these Informers could speak, to insense the Congregation
against Mose. and Aaron, and such as feared God. Did not the Earth swallow up
Corah and his Company alive? and did not a Fire come from the Lord, and consume
the 259 And on the morrow all the Congregation of the Children of Israel
murmured against Moses, and told him, He had killed the people of the Lord: Did
not the Wrath of the Lord go out against them, and there dyed of the Plauge
1470 of them; So here was the End of those murmurers, or Informers, and Rebels
against the Lord, his Truth and People; Numb. 16.

And again, you may see what Moah said unto the Elders of Median against the
Children of Israel; and Balack sent the Elders of Moah, and the Elde^s of
Median, to Balaam with Rewards of Divination in their hands, to Curse the Jews,
the People of God; but the Lord for bad Balaam to Curse them, though Balaam
loved the Rewards of Unrighteousness: and Balack sent yet again Princes more
honorable than the first Elders; and Balack told Balaam, He would promote him
to great Honor, if he would Curse the Children of Israel. But see what came
upon Balaam; his Ass reproved him, and the Lord made him to speak that which
confounded Balaam: and after was not Balaam and the Medionites destroyed? Numb.
22. and 31. Here you may see how the Enemy appeared in Balack, who would have
destroyed the Jews? but the Lord prevented him, and Balaam.

And many Informers were against David, but especially Doedg the Edomite, which
informed Saul against David, and Ahimelech the Priest, and all his Father's
house, because he received David: and Saul commanded his Footmen to slay the
Priests; but Readiness Servants would not put forth their Hands to fall upon the
Priests of the Lord; and Saul bid Doedg the Edomite, the Informer, and he fell
upon them, and slew eighty five persons on that day, that wore the Linen Ephod
and Noh, the City of the Priests, smote he with the edge of the Sword, both
Men, Women, Children and Sucklings. And here you may see the Informer was a
Murderer of the Innocent, 1 Samuel 22. And in chap. 23, 25, 26. you may see how
the Informers went to Saul, and informed him against David. And you may see in
Psalm. 52. how David prophesied the destruction of Doedg the Edomite, who came
and told Saul, and said unto him, David is come in the house of Ahimelec.

And in Ezra 4. there you may see several Informers writ Letters against
Jerusalem to Artaxerces, to hinder the building of the City Jerusalem. And you
may see how busy Tobiah, and the Arabians, and the Amonites, and Ashdodites,
and Sanbalat were aganst the Jews when they built Jerusalem; and how that
Tobiah and Sanbalat hired the False Prophets to Prophecy against Nehemiah; but
their Prophecies and their works came to naught; for the Lord helped his People
against them, whom the Serpent made Enemies, and Adversaries, and Informers
against them.

And Hamon, that great Informer against Mordecai and the Jews; Hamon said unto
King Ahasuerus, there is a certain people scattered abroad in all the Province
of thy Kingdom, and their Laws are diverse from all people, neither keep they
the King's Laws; therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them: if it
please the King, let it be written, that they may be destroyed, and I will pay
Ten thousand talents of silver to the hands of those that have the charge of
the business to bring it into the King's Treasuries. Now here you may see the
Devil, the Destroyer, who is the Enemy and adversary of God's People, how this
Informer has exceeded all the Informers before, and all the Informers in our
times; for instead of being an Informer to get Money; he would give the King
Money to destroy God's People, yea 10000. Talents of Silver; and he got the
Kings Seal for it too, to seal his Writing; but for all this, what became of
Hamon? Was not he hanged on the Gallows which he built for Mordecai, and
abundance of his confederates destroyed? And there was the End of proud Hamon
whom the destroyer led to be an Informer, and a destroyer, who was destroyed
upon the Gallows that he built for another.

And in Jer. 38. Pashur, with many others, were Informers against Jeremiah, to
Zedekiah the King; and you may see this Pashur, the Son of a Priest, had put
Jeremiah in the Stocks, and smote him; and the envious Informers said unto
Zedekiah, whom the Devil stirred up to murder him, We beseech thee, O King, let
Jeremiah be put to death; for he weakens the hands of the men of war, that
remain in the City, and the hands of all the people, in speaking such words
unto them; for Jeremiah seeks not the welfare of this people, but their hurt:
then Zedekiah said, He is in your hands; for the King is not he, that can do
any thing against you. Then they took Jeremiah, and let him down with Cords
into the Dungeon, and he sunk in the Mire; and the Ethiopian, one of the
King's Eunuchs, told the King what these Informe^s had done, and how that
Jeremiah would dye in the Dungeon; and the King bid him take thirty men with
him, and take up Jeremiah before he dyed; and the Ethiopian took old clouts
and rotten rags, and let them down by Cords into the Dungeon, and bid him tie
them under his Arm-holes, and so he drew him out of the Dungeon, and put him
into the Court of the Prison, where he remained till Jerusalem was taken by
Nebuchadnezzer, who put Jeremiah out of Prison, and gave him Liberty; and so he
found more mercy at the hands of the Ethiopian, and Nebuchadnezzer's Officers,
than he did among the professing Jews, the Informers: And you may see what a
Destruction came upon the City, Zedekiah, and his Sons, and his men of War, and
his people, for disobeying the Word of the Lord: And Jeremiah told the
Athiopian, that helped him out of the Dungeon, That he should not fall by
Nebuchadnezzer's Sword, because he put his trust in the Lord, Jer. 39.

So here was the End of these Informers, carried into Babylon, and many
destroyed. And you may see how the Devil, the Murderer, and his Informers, his
Persecutors that put Jeremiah in the Dungeon, and thought to have taken away
his Life, were put into Prison themselves, and many of their lives lost; and
Jeremiah, who was faithful, and trusted the Lord, saved, Jer. 39, and 40.

And Dan. 3. you may see how the destroyer raised up Informers against the
three Children, and went to the King, and accused the Jews, and said, Thou O
King have made a Decree, that every man should fall down, and worship the
Golden Image; and whosoever falls not down, and worshippeth, he shall be cast in
a Fiery Furnace; there are certain Jews (said they) which are set over the
Affairs of the Province of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego; those men,
O King, have not regarded thee, they serve not thy Gods, nor worship the Golden
Image which thou have set up: This said the Informers. Then Nebuchadnezzer in
his Rage and Fury commanded to bring Shadrach, Meshech and Abednego before him,
and he said unto them, Is it true? do you not serve my Gods, nor worship the
Golden Image which I have set up, etc? but if you worship not, ye shall be cast
the same ho^r into the midst of the Fiery Furnace: Who is that God that shall
deliver you out of my hands? Then said the three Children unto the King, We are
not careful to answer thee in this matter; but if it be so, our God, whom we
serve is able to deliver us from the burning Fiery Furnace; and he will deliver
us out of thy hands, O King: But if not, be it known to thee, O King, we will
not serve thy Gods, nor worship the Golden Image which thou have set up. Here
was a positive Answer, and a Godly Confidence. Then was the King full of Fury,
and the form of his Visage was changed against the three Children; and he
commanded his Furnace to be heat seven times more than it was wont to be, and
commanded his most mighty men of his Army to bind the three Children in their
Coats, Hose and Hats, and other Garments, and cast them into the midst of the
burning Furnace; which Flames of Fire slew those men that cast them in: Then
the King was astonished, and rose up in haste, and said unto his Counselors,
Did not we cast three men bound in the midst of the Fire? And they answered,
and said unto the Knig, True O King: And he answered and said, Lo I see four
men loose, walking in the midst of the Fire, and they have no hurt, and the
form of the fourth is like the Son of God: and the King called the three
Children out of the Fire. And so the King was made to bless the God of
Shadrach, Meshech and Abednego; and made a Decree, That every People, Nation
and Language, which spoke any thing amiss against the God of Sadrach, Meshech
and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their Houses shall be made a
Dunghill, because there is no other God that can deliver after this sort.

Now here you may see, the Lord confounded the Murderous Informers, and the
Fury and Rage of Nebuchadnezzer; and his Mighty men were slain, that cast the
three Children into the Fire; but the Lord delivered the three Children that
trusted in him, to the Exaltation of his Glory and Name.

And also you may see in Daniel 6. Darius made Daniel chief of the Presidents,
and the Presidents and Princes turned Informers against Daniel; and these
Informers could not find any fault or Error in him, because he was faithful;
then said these Informers, We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel,
except we find it against him concerning the Law of his God. And therefore they
got the King to establish a Decree in writing, that it be not changed,
according to the Law of the Medes and Persians, which alters not; which Decree
was, That whosoever should ask a Petition of any God or Man for thirty days,
saving of thee, O King, they shall be cast into the Den of Lions. And all the
Presidents of the Kingdom, and the Governors, and the Princes, and the
Counselors, and the Captains, consulted together concerning this Decree, which
the King signed. Now Daniel knew the Writing was signed; he went to his House,
and his Windows being open in his Chamber, etc. he kneeled down three times of
the day, and prayed and gave thanks to God, as he had done before time. Then
these men, the Informers, assembled, and found Daniel praying, and making
supplication before his God; then these men assembled unto the King, and
informed him against Daniel; then the King commanded Daniel to be brought, and
be cast into the Lions Den, according to the Decree that they had wickedly got
of the King; and the King encouraged Daniel, and said unto him, Thy God, whom
thou servest, he will deliver thee: and early in the morning the King rose, and
went in haste unto the Den of Lions, and said, O Daniel, the Servant of the
living God, is thy God, whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee?
And Daniel said, My God has sent his Angel, and shut up the Lions Mouths,
that they have not hurt me, forasmuch as before him Innocence was found in me,
and also before thee, O King, I have done no hurt. And then the King commanded
them to take up Daniel out of the Lions Den; and commanded them to take those
great men, which were the Accusers and Informers against Daniel, and cast them,
and their Wives and Children into the Lions Den; and the Lions had the mastery
over them, and broke all their Bones in pieces or ever they came at the bottom
of the Den. So here was the end of these devilish Informers, or Accusers, who
were Princes and Presidents. And then Darius made a Decree, That in every
Dominion of his Kingdom, men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel; for he
is the Living God, and steadfast forever, and his Kingdom that which shall not
be destroyed, and his Dominion shall be even to the end. Here you may see, God
was exalted by them that believed in him, and the wicked destroying Informers
were destroyed.

And the Chief Priests and Scribes sought how they might kill Jesus, for they
feared the people; then entered Satan into Judas, and he communed with the Chief
Priests and Captains, how he might betray him unto them; and they were glad,
and covenanted with him to give him Money (to wit) thirty pieces of Silver; and
the Chief Priest persuaded the multitude, that they should ask Barrabas, and
cruci^ie Jesus; and all the Chief Priests and Elders of the people took counsel
against Jesus to put him to death; and they sought False Witnesses against him,
but found none; at the last came two False Witnesses, and said, This Fellow
said, I am able to destroy the Temple of God, and build it in three days: and
Pilate sought to release Jesus; but the Jews cried oat, If thou let this man
go, thou art nor Caesar's Friend etc. And so when these False Accusers, and
Informers, and False witnesses, with Pilat's Judgment, had crucified Jesus;
after he was risen, the Chief Priests assembled with the Elders, and after they
had taken Counsel, they gave large Money to the Soldiers that watched the
Sepulcher, to say, That Christ's Disciples came by Night, and stole him away
while they slept. So here is the Devil and Satan, which entered into the Jews,
and Judas, etc. which made Judas a Betrayer, and the Jews False Witnesses,
Liars and Murderers of the Just; and the Jews to this day believe their Lies,
and false Information, That Christ's Disciples stole him away by Night while
the Watch slept; but the Lord recompensed them all according to their Works.

And you may see how Satan made False Witnesses and Informers against Steven;
and they brought him to the High Priests Court and there he examined him; but
at last you may see they Murdered him, and stoned him to death as he was
calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Acts 7.

And did not Judas betray Christ with a Kiss? And was not Christ led to Caiphas
the High Priests Court, or Hall, where the Scribes and Elders were assembled,
and the High Priest examined him in his Court until the Cock cr^^ twice? And
did not the Truth that Christ spoke to the High Priest put him into such a
Wrath or Rage, that he tore or rent his Clothes?

And were not Peter and John haled before, Ananias the High Priests Court,
where the Rulers, and Elders, and Scribes, and John, and Alexander, and many of
the Kindred of the High Priest, were gathe^ed together? And did not they set
Peter and John in the midst, and examine them, and charged them, to speak no
more in the Name of Jesus; but Peter and John said unto them, Whether it be
right in the sight of God to hearken unto you, or unto God, judge ye; for we
cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard; then the High Priest
threatened them, and let them go. Acts. 4.

And again, you may see how the High Priest, and all that were with him, were
silled with Indignation, and rose up against the Apostles, and cast them into
the common Prison; but the Lord delivered them.

And you may see all along in many places of Acts, how the Jews rose up against
the Apostles; and how that one of the Officers came and told the Chief Priests
and Captain, That the Apostles were preaching in the Temple, which they cast
into Prison; and the Captain and the Officers brought them, and set them before
the Council; and the High Priest and they took counsel to slay them; but
Gamaliel said unto them, Refrain your selves from these men, and let them
alone; for if this Work or this Counsel be of men, it will come to naught; but
if it be of God, you cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found even to
fight against God: And his Counsel swayed, and stopped the High Priest and his
Court for Murdering of them,

And Saul, he made Havoc of the Church, entering into every house, and haling
men and women, committing them to prison; and Saul yet breaths out
Threatenings and Slaughters against the Disciples of the Lord, and went to the
High Priest, and desi^ed of him Letters to Damascus to the Synagogues, If he
found any of this way, whether they were men or women, he might bring them
bound to Jerusalem. So his Authority was from the Chief Priest, to persecute;
but Christ met him in the way, and told him; It was hard for him to kick
against the Pricks; and said unto him, Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? For
he was persecuting Christ in his Members; and Christ converted him, and after
some time sent him to Damascus, to Preach his Gospel, where he was going to
persecute; but after many days that he had Preached the Gospel at Damascus, the
Jews there took counsel to kill him, and and they watch't night and day at the
Gates to kill him; but the Disciples of Christ took Paul by night, and let him
down by the Wall in a Basket, and so he escaped those murdering Professors;
without Possession, as you may see in Acts 9. So he that went to persecute at
Damascus, was persecuted at Damascus for Preaching Christ, whom he was going to
persecute: And here you may see how the Persecutors were Confounded.

And in Acts. 14. there you may see how the unbelieving Jews stirred up the
Gentiles, and made their minds evil affected against the Brethren; and Elimas
the Sorcerer withstood Barnabas and Paul, to turn away the Deputy from the
Faith. Here you may see the professing Jews and the Sorcerer were found in one
spirit; but the Jews were spiritually blind with evil, and God struck Elimas
naturally blind: and the Jews, which were more than sorty, that came to the
Chief Priests and Elders, and said unto them, how that they had bound
themselves under a Curse, that they would neither eat nor drink until they had
killed Paul; and the Chief Priests and the Council were to manage this matter
for the Murderers; then they were to send to the Captain; that kept Paul a
Prisoner, to bring him out of the Castle, which was his Prison, to the Chief
Priests and Elders, under a pretense, that they would enquire something of him;
and these Murderers were ready to Murder him, before ever he came near them:
but the Captain of the Castle understanding the thing, the Lord put it in his
mind to send Paul away, by which the Innocent escaped the hands of these
Murdering Informers and Liars, which the Chief Priests and Counsel had a hand
in; and Paul had more Mercy from the Roman Captain, than he had from the
professing Jews, and their Priests: And after a while Ananias the High Priest
with the Elders, with a certain Orator, named Tertullus, informed the Governor
Faelix against Paul; and after a great deal of dawbing and plausible
expressions, as you may see in Acts 24. said they, we have found this man a
Pestilent Fellow, a Mover of Sedition among all the Jews throughont the World,
and a Ringleader of the Sect f the Nazareans; and so after many grievous false
Charges they laid against Paul, Paul had liberty to clear himself from their
Lies, and Slanders, and false Informations; and when they had kept Paul about
two years in Prison there, Festus came into the Province, then the High Priest
and chief of the Jews informed him against Paul, and desired favor against
him, that he would send for him to Jerusalem, the Jews lying in wait in the way
to kill him; but Festus said unto them, Which among you are able, go down to
Caesaria to accuse this man; and when they came there, they laid many grievous
Complaints against Paul, which they could not Prove; and so the Lord delivered
him out of these Murdererous Informers hands, though Feflus would have done the
Jews a pleasure, as having Paul up to Jerusalem, to be judged there by him; but
Paul appealing unto Caesar, prevented him, and the Jews, and the high Priest of
their Design against him, as you may see in Acts 25. more at large.

And what became of Jezebel, with her informing Letters, that she wrote in
Ahab's name, to the Elders and Nobles that were in the City, dwelling with
Naboth, who bid them, Proclaim a Fast, and set up Naboth on high among the
People; and sent two Sons of Belial before him, to bear witness against him,
saying, Thou did Blaspheme God and the King; and then carry him out, and
stone him, that he may dye; and they did so, according to Iezebel's
Information; and when they had killed him, she and her Husband took possession
of his Estate: but what Destruction came upon Ahab and Iezebel, and all that
took their part, as you may read the Sentence and Judgment? 1 Kings 21.

And therefore let all Murderers, Informers, and Sons of Belial, take heed, who
seek the Destruction of the Righteous, in that they bring Destruction upon
themselves, as you may see all along in the Scriptures, what was the End of
such, whether they were high or low, Priest, Professor or Profane, the
Righteous God spared none; and therefore read the Scriptures from on End of the
Book to the other, and here you may see the sad Examples and Judgments that
have come on such, whom the Devil (who was the great Informer) has made Liars
and Informers, False Witnesses and False Accusers against the Righteous; and
let them be like so many Way-marks, to shun the Evil; but Christ is come to
destroy the Devil and his Works, and to bruise his Head, who was the Informer
against Job, and the False Teacher and Informer of Adam and Eve, to transgress
the Command of God; therefore if Christ destroys the Father of all such
Informers, Persecutors and Liars, and False Witnesses, his Children may fear
Destruction; and the Saints can sing Halelujah over the Devil, Satan, Serpent,
and all his Followers, that do his work, whom the Living God will Reward
accordingly.

G. FOX.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed by JOHN BRINGHVRST, at the Sign of the Book in Grace-Church
Street. 1682/3.


