PEACE The End of the Perfect and Upright, Demonstrated and usefully Improved
in a SERMON, Preached upon the Occasion of the Death and Decease of that
Piously Affected, and truly Religious MATRON, Mrs. ANNE MASON: Sometime Wife
to Major Mason, who not long after finished his Course, and is now at rest.

By Mr. James Fitch Pastor of the Church of Christ at Norwich.

Prove. 10.7. The Memory of the just is blessed. Psalm. 112.6. The Righteous
shall be had in everlasting remembrance. Heb. 6.11. We desire that every one of
you do show the same diligence, to the full assurance of hope unto the end. 12.
That ye be not sloathful, but followers of them, who through Faith and Patience
inherit the promises. CAMBRIDGE Printed by Samuel Green. 1672.

Christian Reader:
THe Abusive, and justly to be Condemned practice of too too many, who in
Preaching Funeral Sermons, by mis-representing the Dead, have dangerously
misled the living, and by flatteri^s corrupted many, has occasioned not a few
to question (if not conclude against) the lawfulness of Preaching at such
seasons: and made others less forward, and almost afrai^ to make a due
improvement of such awful, ^olemn oportunities, by comporting with the
providence of God, in making use of those heart awakening strokes of his angry
(...) Almighty Arm, whereby we have been bereav^d of much of our strength and
glory. But surely it i^ the holy will of God which determines what is good and
lawful, and that by an eternal Law, not alterable by the sinful lusts of men.
(...) The Vessels of the Temple lost not their Holiness of Consecration to the
service of the true and living God, by their ill usage in Babylon. Holy Paul, 1
Cor. 3 22. setting down and summing up the rich of true Believers, put into
the Inventory, Life and Death, Life is yours, and Death is yours, but not your
own only, but of others, who are Fellow members of the same Mystical Body, and
part of the fullness of him who fills all in all. Th^se Worthies whose Live
and Deaths are Recorded in Heb. Chap. 11. are presented, Chap. 12.1. as a Cloud
of Witnesses, to be minded by us, and followed in running with patience, the
race that is set before us. Had not importunity of such as k^ew and honored
the eminent piety of that deceased Saint, now at rest (whose departure out of
this World occasionea this ensuing Sermon) out of a desire to Embalm her Name,
and preserve the memory of a life and death so exemplary and instructi^^,
prevailea with the pious Author (too much a lover of privacie and retirement)
these useful Notes had not so publicly presented themselves unto t^y view;

Now the God of al^ Grace, vouchsafe so to sanctify this with other like
help^, that when summ^^ed hence into another World, thou may be able to say
and pray wit^ good Hezechiah, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have
walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which
is good in thy sight:

Unto His mercy I comm^^^ thee, and rest thine in him J. S.

PSALM. 37.37. Mark the Perfect and behold the Upright, for the end of that man
is peace.


EVery Word of God as its his Word is very precious, but some Honey Combs
contain more Honey and better Honey then some other, The Word of God is more
precious then Gold, then fine Gold, and sweeter then the Honey and the Honey
Comb, as in Psalm. 19.10. Judicious and pious Calvin, that famous Expositor
says of this Psalm, that it contain^ Doctrine Principally useful; and he
gives weighty Reason to pr^^^ it, because David by this Psalm shows that
though the Godly suffer Adv^^si^y in a Godly way, and the wicked prosper in
their wicked way and (...) seemingly goes ill with the best, and well with the
worst person^ for a time, yet the vast difference the Lord makes between the
Godly and the wicked, making the Godly to be happy through his Grace, in their
greatest misery, and leaving the wicked through his just ^udg^ment, in a cursed
and miserable state, in their greatest outward (...), and the difference
between these two is very Remarkable, in th^^ (...) and in their Death. First
The difference in their Lives, and the ^^^rious disp^^sations of God to them,
are in many particulars speci^^^^ from the ^^^rse to the 25. And the difference
in respect of the^^ Death, from the 35 verse to the end of this Psalm: The
General which contains the specialties is expr^^sed in my Text, this 37 verse.
Mark the Perfect, and behold the Upright: for the end of that man is Peace

The Text implies.

1. That some Persons are remarkable Subjects of Gods mercy and Divine favor.
Who are these? but the Perfect, the upright.

2. In what are they remarkable? First, As they are perfect and upright ones,
so they are to be marked in their Lives. Secondly, In respect of their latter
end, and thus they are to be marked in their D^^^ (...) Mark the perfect man
and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace. Thirdly, Our Duty,
the Psalmist calls for special observation, mark and behold the upright how he
lives, and how he dies? what his life is, and what is his end? and as Calvin
renders it, observe and consider: This Psalm, of which these words are a
principal part, they may be taken as an Epitome, briefly containing the whole,
being to open that which is a Paradox as he calls it: The Doctrine from these
words is,

Doct. The Life and Latter end of the Godly containt observable things, which
God requires us to consider.

What the Life, and what the Death of the Godly is, our God calls us to mark
and behold: For the Explication of this Doctrine, let us consider, (1.) What
are the Observable things in the Life and in the Death of the Godly? and 2.
what ought to be our Observation of them? We are not to expect that all the
Observable things respecting the Life and the Death of the Godly can be
particularly contained and expressed in one Sermon, although an Angel from Heaven
should be sent at this time to Preach to you; for much of the time through all
Eternity shall be spent upon this Subject amongst the Spirits of the Just made
perfect; But I shall give you some Observations concerning some specialties, to
set your Observations to work so far as God shall assist in this very
afflicting time.

First, Concerning the Observations respecting the life of the Godly, the Text
presents us with two Generals: First, The perfection of the Godly. Secondly,
The uprightness of such, Mark the Perfect and behold the Upright; concerning
the first of these, the Question arises, What perfection can be observed in a
Godly man's Life, while he lives with a body of sin in him? I Answer, Yet it is
to be marked, (1) That the Godly in this life have some beginnings of
perfection, and those which shall grow up till they come to perfection, and so
abide for ever: There is a spirit in a Believer which breathes and reaches
after, and is restless for perfection, and which is called, A heart perfect
toward God, 2 Chronicles 1^.11. and you know the usual distinction, which Divines
make use of, a perfection of parts though not of degrees, Every part and power
of Soul and Body being Sanctisfied, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. and fitted in some degree
and measure to every good work, 2 Timothy 2.21. Oh mark how the Godly will be
doing and trading in every good work to which God calls him, according to the
Relation toward God or Man in works of Holiness, and Righteousness, Love and
Mercy, showing himself to be a child of his Heavenly Father, and will be
imitating his Divine and absolutely perfect Example, Mat. 5 ult. be you perfect
as your Heavenly Father is perfect, and he is a perfect Child of God though
not grown up to be a perfect man in Christ. (2) It Is likewise to be observed,
that sincerity and uprightness in Gospel sense is called perfection, and the
God of Grace calls his upright ones, perfect ones, and accept their upright
service, as pecfect service; you know David's charge to his Son, the charge of a
Godly and dying Parent to his surviving and succeeding child, My Son, serve
God with a perfect heart, 2 Chronicles. 28.9. and Hezechiah served God with a
perfect heart, 2 King. 20 3. and in this sense the next words may be expositive
to the former, mark the perfect. Question is, Who is perfect? the Answer,
Behold the upright, as Hezechiah under a sentence of death, turned his face
toward the wall and prayed to the Lord and said, Remember how O Lord, I have
walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, have done that which is
good in thy sight, and wept sore, Isai. 38.2, 3. How I have walked in Truth,
that is in uprightness and sincerity, doing that which is good in thy sight,
not wandering after the sight of m^^e eyes; not pleasing carnal and sinful
affections, and therefore that I have walked with a perfect heart, that which
the God of Grace will accept. perfect, and calls it perfect, and therefore the
question y^^ remains u^answered; Quest. What are the remarkable things
res^^cting the life of the upright? I Answer, First, In respect of actings
toward God. Secondly, Actings toward man. First, The observable things in the
life of the upright in his actings; nextly toward God, The first Character is
a holding forth the highest esteem of Communion with God in his Ordinances, and
therefore a faithful improvement of all good opportunities for that purpose:
For that purpose, Oh mark how the upright soul prizeth Communion with God; his
prizing Communion with God, is like the price the thirsty sets upon drink, an
only good, none such at that time, the voice of the upright especially in time
of privation is expressed experimentally by David, Psalm 42.1, 2, As the Heart
pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee O God; My soul
thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I come and appear before God,
ver. 3. My tears have been my meat day and night, while they continually say
unto me where is thy God, ver. 4. when I remember these things, I pour out my
soul in me: Oh! what pantings, thirstings, weepings, and soul-pourings out for
the enjoyment of Communion with the Living God, which do most feelingly argue
the highest esteem of Communion with God in the hearts of his upright
attendants: Hence these longings for a Sabbath, for a Fast day, for a Sermon,
while others long for an end of the Sabbath, that they may be again into their
worldly occasions and vanities; and hence follows that ^aithful improvement of
all good oportunities for the sake of Communion with God, I say all seasons
both set and solemn seasons, and occasional seasons, taking the opportunity when
given and redeeming time, as it is called, Eplus. 5. and when it cannot be
gained without it costs him something; yet an upright Soul will and must have
seasons for Communion with God what ever they cost him, though he makes the
World pay for it, and sleep pay for it, and hazards his health for it, and all,
yet Mark the upright, how faithful he is in taking and improving seasons of
Communion with God, while the Hypocrite, the Deceiver is willing to take an
excuse, and make an excuse, and occasion that he may not come into the presence
of God, but his deceit is manifest.

The Second Remarkable thing, in respect of the life of the Upright, in his
Communion with God, appears in his secret Communion with God, in secret Prayer,
and self examination, these are contained in former generals, as they are means
of Communion with God: but yet because these have very spiritual specialties in
them, we m^^^ especially mark and behold them, and how the Upright behaves
himself in them. First, In secret Communion with God in secret Prayer, an
upright Soul cannot content himself with public Prayer and humily, but he must
come in secret into the presence of his Heavenly Father, and Pray in secret,
that he may see him in secret, and reward him openly, Mat. 6. and if there were
no positive command, to require this and that, Conscience, upon this account
could not (...) him for a neglect of a Command of God, yet if the Lord will
only grant him liberty to appear in where before him he could not but come, und
could no more refrain then you can refrain from going to, and porning out your
heart in secret to an intimate friend in whom you love is your own Soul, (...).
62.8. Pour out your ^ent^ fore him, can a Lover refrain from secret meetings
with his Beloved, the Upright who love the Lord must have their, secret
meetings with Christ, wherein they may pour out that which they cannot before,
and with others, for they have to d^ wi^h him whom their Souts love, Cant. 1.7.
Second place in self- examination, the Application of the Dectrine is the life
of the Sermon, and Self ex^m^^ation is the life (...) Application of the
Sermon: the upright cannot content themselves without frequent and solemn
practice of this duty, no more then you can content your self when you are a
hungry, to have food let you only to look upon, or speak of it, and not take it
into your mouth to chew it, therefore mark and behold how he eats Sermons, and
they are the joy of his heart, Jer. 15.16. and how does he eat them but by
examining his estate and actions, his Spirit and Life by them, and not in a
slighty and overly manner, but by most serious Communings with the Lord and his
own heart upon his Bed, Psalm. 4.4. or in some other secret place, and not only
once in a long time, but this is his work every Lords day, yea every day in the
Week in some measure, he is upright in this matter, thus working out his
Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12.13. We can but hint at some
observab^e things: Thus of the actings of the upright toward God; in the
second follows his actings toward man.

First in Words, Secondly in Works.

1. In Words, whose endeavor is so to speak that he may not offend with his
Tongue and therefore keeps a Watch before the door of his lips, Psalm. 141.3.
But that which the upright strives after, and in so he measure attain, is
better then this, to administer Grace to the heare^^ that his words may be
seasoned, Eph^s. 4.29 Col. 46. and may become to others a tree of life, bearing
precious fruit, Prove. 15.4. and the words of the upright, proceeding from the
uprightness of their hearts, are very observable things.

2. In Works, Mark and behold the upright, how in his works he lives without
offense, Phil. 2.15. blamel of, and harmless, and not only so, but shining as a
Light in the World, as in works of Holiness God ward, so in works of Justice,
Love and mercy toward others; full of mercy and good fruit without Hypocrisy,
Jam. 3.17. He that s^es not observable thing; in the works of the Upright is
strangely blinced: Hitherto of the life of the Upright, nextly follows the
remarkable things respecting their Death; The Text says, For the end of that
man i^p^ace, is the end of the Upright peace, how does this appear? do not some
who have been upright suffer much trouble of mind in their death, and do
express none or very little of peace at their latter end? I An^wer, First, le^s
usual with the Lord, to shine in upon their Souls of his upright one^ before,
or at their. Death, that before their departure out of the World it is manifest
to them, and to discerning Spectators, that while they are yeas in their
Enemies Land, they are more then Conquerors, and that (...) death it self, Romans
8.37. Hence the peace that passes understanding, and the unspeakable joy which
some upright ones feel in their dying hour, which makes them very willing to
depart, Simeon like, they can depart in such peace, Luke 2.29. Secondly, When
it is the pleasure of the Lord to withhold such a measure of this peace, yet
it is usual that he affords them so much of this peace as shall rule in their
hearts, and meekly dispose their spirits to divine providence; and behold in
this is often seen a mavelous thing, that if an upright person has not much
of the sense of the sweetness of that unspeakable peace in his dying hour, and
though he is now aware of the misery of falling short, for none can be so
sensible of that, as those who know experimentally the preciousness of Christ
and heavenly things: and though also many times the very thought, what if
deceived? what if fall short at last? that thought would make the flesh
tremble; the heart feeling the intolerable weight of a supposed separation
from Christ, and yet for such, without any clear evidence of the love of God,
to have peace ruling in the heart, as in Col. 3.15. and to say I am content now
to be at the Lords dispose, I commit the cause of my soul to him, this is very
observable, Eli sentenced to death, both he and his two Sons, and many other
things which shall make the cars of every one who hears it to tingle, 1 Samuel
3.11, 17, 18. and yet Eli enabled to say, It Is the Lord, let him do what
seems him good, there is a peace which is the inseparable companion of
meekness; a meek and a quiet spirit is of great price, 1 Pet 3.4. Christ's
Soulness; a meek and a quiet spirit is of great price, 1 Pet 3.4. Christ's
Soul-trouble was extreme in his dying hour, but yet he had the peace and
quietness of a meek spirit which did rule in his heart, and compose his spirit
to submission to his Fathers Will, and to commit his Spirit into his Fatherly
hand, Luke 23.46. and what if it should be the pleasure of the Lord, that some
of his Children shall have a fellowship with Christ in his suffering
Soul-trouble in their dying hour, yet if the Lamb of God does by his Lamb-like
spirit, compose the heart to a childe-like committing of the Soul into his
fatherly hands, here is peace, the peace and quietness of a meek spirit; but
it is a marve lous thing to have peace ruling in the heart in the midst of
many-troublesome thoughts in the mind.

Thirdly, to conclude this, if the marks of uprightness appear in their life;
there is no reason for us to doubt but that the Lord will make the end of such
to be peace, whatever troubles they suffer before their and, if I behold a
Christian walking in integrity, making it his integrity making it his dally
exercise to keep a Conscience void of offense ^owards God and toward man,
whatever trouble he may suffer in time of sickness and nigh his latter end; yet
the Lord says, Mark this upright one, and have I seen the mark of uprightness
stamped upon his life and walk, surely the Lord who says His end shall be
peace, does say to me that I ought to believe it, and ought as certainly to
believe it, as it I see ^ensibly the Angels taking the Soul, and Heavens
opening to receive it, and heard a now Song tuned in Heaven for the triumph of
this Soul over death: He that walks in integrity, what ever his labor may be
in his journey, and when nigh to his journies end, yet as soon as his labor
ends his ^est is eternal rest, his peace the peace which passes understanding
begins; He shall enter into p^a^e, they shall rest in their b^^^, each one
walking in ^is uprightness, Isa^ 572.

The Second Particular ^ollows, what ou^ duty is in observing these observable
things; The Lord calls us to mark and behold:

Quest. What is the marking and beholding?

Ans. It Is an affectionate Attention of the mind, It Is as when the eye affects
the heart, and the heart being affected keeps the eye looking upon the Object,
you have the like expression in another place, used by ^obs friends to lob Job
33 31. Mark well. Oh Ioh, an^ hearken to me, hold t^y pea^e and I will speak,
Oh mark well the lite and latter end of the upright! Oh hearken to what the
Lord says concerning their life and death; the same Expression the Lord
improves to the Prophet, when he would prepare him for the Visions of the
Ordinances of his House, Ez^k. 44.5. The Lord said, Son of Man, mark well, and
behold with thine Eyes, ^^h^ar with thine Ears all that I say to thee,
concerning the Ordinances of mine House, and mark well the entering into it; But
in my Text the Lord says, Mark the perfect and behold the upright, it is as if
the Lord had said, us I would have you mark well and behold mine Ordinances, so
I do requi^e you to mark well and behold the life and latter end of those who
have loved my Habitation and seen my beauty in my Hou^e, have walked with me in
the faithful improvement of all my holy Ordinances: This is only the general,
let us more particularly consider, First, it is a marking by way of comparison,
the blessedness of the upright in their lives and latter end in comparison of
others, this is a principal scope of the Text, and of the foregoing and
following words, and therefore let us comparatively mark the Upright, as if we
see them stand at the right hand of Christ, and others at his lest hand, both
in their life and death: Behold the life of the Upright, how he shines as a
light in a darksome World, and shall shine as the Stars for ever and for ever;
and behold how others walk in darkness, and shall go into outer darkness, Prove.
3.18, 19. Behold the Upright lives as a Citizen of Heaven, having his
conversation in Heaven, Phil. 3. and Heaven is his Country and own place, Heb
11.10. and behold how others live as slaves to the World, and in bondage to
their Lusts and the Devils temptations, and they shall go to their own places,
Act. 1.25 Behold the Upright lives and walks in the spirit of Christ, Gal.
5.28. and you may behold Christ living and walking in him, Gal. 2.20. but
others live and walk in their own spirits, and you may see the evil one living
and walking in them, Joh. 8.44. Oh mark the latter end of the Upright, in
comparison of the latter end of others; the end of the Upright man is peace,
the end of others is no peace but hellish woe! Oh when the Upright dye, the
Angels stand ready to receive the Soul, and carry it into Abrams Bosom, or
rather into Christ's Bosom; when others dye, the Devils stand ready to take
hold of their Souls, and to hurry them into intolerable and endless misery:
were our eyes opened to see the Attendants, the Upright have at their dying
hour, like the sixty Valliant men spoken of in Cant. 3.7. about Solomon's Bed of
the valliant of Israel; but the black Guard, and cursing, and cursed tormentors
which are about others in their dying hour, we should readily acknowledge an
infinite difference and distance the Lord has made between the Upright and
others.

Secondly, We should mark the Upright by way of Imitation; if we do not in this
sense mark them we mark in vain, and behold them to no good purpose; the Lord
requires us to mark the life of the Upright as a living example, that may live
with us, and in us, and that when they are dead; and to consider the end of
their conversation, that we may live and dye as they, Heb. 13.7. the Lord
commands us to behold the upright who have gone before us, as the Israelites
did behold the Cloud which went before them in the Wilderness, showing them
their way through the Wilderness unto Canaan, and as if they heard a voice
saying, Follow me, Heb. 12.1. We are compast about with a Cloud of Witnesses;
Oh all the examples of the Upright who are gone before us, and they are the
Cloud in the Wilderness to guide us, Isai. 6.16. Ask for the way wherein they
walked and found rest to their Souls; Oh mark well and behold the light side of
this Cloud of their upright Example, it has a voice saying, Follow this way of
Communion with God, and walking with the Lord, and ye shall have rest to your
Souls.

Thirdly, Mark the Upright by way of Lamentation, Isai. 57.1. the Upright
perish and (...) man lays it to heart, and the merciful taken away and none
considering that the Righteous is taken away from the evil to come; We should
so mark the life and death of the Upright, that we lay it to heart, not
mourning because of their state for they are happy, all tears wiped away, and
are lead by the Lamb to the Fountains of waters, Rev. 7.17. and Rivers of
pleasure, Psalm. 1.16. But mourn because they no longer be so helpful to us, Oh
that wholesome Tongue which was a Tree of life, and o helpful to administering
Grace to the hearer, you shall hear it no more, Oh that countenance, and in
which Wisdom and Grace shined, you shall see it no more! Oh that hand which
relieved and refreshed, the bowels of many in mi^e^y shall help no more: help
Lord, the Godly ^easeth and the faithful fail, Psalm. 12.1. and who knows but
such are taken from the evil to come, there may be a dreadful storm at hand,
which it may be in tenderness to them they are taken away, but we must abide
and suffer it.

The Application of the Doctrine follows: The Doctrine it self and the
Explication of it is so Applicatory in all the parts of it; That I can not but
think that you who are conscientiously attentive have been applying this
Doctrine to your Souls while I have been opening of it:

1 Use It commends to us, and sets before us the surpassing excellency of
Uprightness: Does the Lord call us to mark and behold the Upright, because of
their happy life and blessed death, can we behold their excellency and
happiness, and not behold the excellency of Uprightness, which makes them to
excel? that is the good which does us the greatest good, which does us good at
the latter end, to humble, and to prove, and do thee good at thy latter end,
for that is thy good for ever and for ever; but it is uprightness, that which
does thee good at thy latter end: Behold the Upright, the end of that man is
peace; Oh it is not thy riches and wealth! Oh what can that do in the day of
wrath; the covetous who has spent his time and strength in the pursuit of the
World, and has neglected communion with God, the Ordinances and Means of his
Souls good, Oh how is he tormented in that day, Ezekiel. 7.19. wealth cannot
deliver his soul, Psalm. 49.7, 8. it is not honor and applause of men, it is not
visible profession and some common gifts and abilities, when thy dying hour is
come, all the questions are reduced to that one, Whether upright or no? whether
upright in thy Family relations? whether upright in thy Church Relations?
whether thy walk was in uprightness? and if any one Minister of Christ, or any
Godly Friend can Answer thee this Question to thy Souls satisfaction, he shall
be to thee a Messenger indeed, one of a thousand, Job. 33.23.

2 Use. Does the Lord call u^ to mark and behold the Upright in their life and
death: You know what has befallen us, and whom the Lord has lately taken away
from us unto himself, His Servant and Handmaid, who lived to the Lord, and dyed
to the Lord, and is with the Lord; but was a Mother, a nursing Mother to this
afflicted Church and People: I know it will be without offense to you, if I
declare to you the remarkable things worthy of observation in her life and
death: My God in the express words of the Text requires me to Mark and Behold
Her Godly life and Happy end, and not bury those Observations with her, but
that they may live in us, and in the Generations to come.

First. You have heard how uprightness shows it self in prizing communion with
God, and in a faithful improvement of all opportunities for that purpose (1) In
respect of prizing of Communion with God, its a rare thing to behold such
constant freshness of Spirit, and affectionate esteeming of Communion with God:
I have frequently seen her weep in her speaking of, and lamenting after
Communion with Christ, but it was a rare thing for her to weep because of any
outward loss or cross whatsoever. Oh she having kept the strength of her
affections for the Lord Christ, whom her Soul loved: the Communion with God
which she had was manifest in pourings out of her heart in his presence, Psalm.
6 2. and it was likewise manifest in her thirstings after opportunities of
meeting with God; I have observed such a frequent longing for a Sabbath, and
longing of Soul for a Sermon, for a day of Fasting and Prayer, and other
opportunities, and I have heard her frequently say, That a joyful Sabbath did
comfort her all the week after, and a sad Sabbath made a sad week, that the
Lord had brought her desires into that one desire, Psalm. 27.4. and thus
precious to her Soul was one day in the House of the Lord, Psalm. 84. 10.
Secondly, In respect of faithful improvement of her opportunities of Communion
with God: Oh with what weakness and trembling, difficulty and danger to health
and life did she many times come to the public Ordinances, but she would
purposely conceal her sickness, often times from her near Relations of the
Sabbath day, least in tenderness to her, they should hinder her from going to
the public Ordinances; and I have heard her often say, that if she could
possibly go to the House of God, whatever her bodily weakness was, yet she did
not suffer any harm, but many times felt that it was strength, not only to her
Soul but health to her body, Prove. 4.8.

You heard in the Second place, How Uprightness shows it self in secret
communion with God, in secret Prayer, and Self-examination.

First, In respect of secret Prayer; She had been so acquainted with that
Ordinance from a child, that upon conference I had with her upon that
occasion, I could not perceive that she could charge and accuse her self of any
neglect, not so much as one time in thirty years; Oh her Soul knew right well
what it was to Pray in secret to her Heavenly Father, Mat. 6. and to be in the
secret places of the stairs with the Lord, whom her Soul loved, Cant. 2.14.
(2.) And concerning Self examination; besides other daily exercises and
communings with her heart; I know for many years it was rare that one Sermon
passed, but she must at some time or other in that week take an opportunity to
confer about it, and gather out that portion which did belong to her: It was
very rare that one day in the week passed but she must set a time to read and
meditate, and apply the Word to her own Soul; and were I able to rehearse the
many Spiritual, Weighty, and Narrow Questions and Discourses I have heard from
her, it would fill up a large Book: Thus did she eat the Word, Jer. 15.16. and
was thus laborious in working out her Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil.
2.12. Thus of her Actings toward God. (2.) You have heard how Uprightness
shows it self in actings toward others: First, In Words. Secondly, In Works.
In respect to her Words, You know what a Law of Wisdom and Heavenly
mindedness, of meekness and kindness was in her mouth, Prove. 31.26. The Lord
having gifted her with a measure of Knowledge above what is usual in that Sex;
So I know if she had an opportunity with a Godly friend, and the time had been
spent in Discourse about Worldly occasions, and if she had not redeemed some
time out of it for Heavenly Conference, I have heard her speak of it with
grief, For the mouth of the Righteous speaks Wisdom, and his tongue talks
of Judgments, Psalm. 37.30. as she had opportunities by reason of her
usefulness to the afflicted, so how the Lord supplied her with a Word in
season; Oh you who have been afflicted know these things right well.

2. Concerning her Works, I need not tell you what a Dorcas you have lost Men
Women and Children, are ready with weeping, to acknowledge what works of mercy
she has done for them, Act. 9.39. the short time and my afflicted state will
not suffer me to enlarge, but if I could, I do not affect saying any more, but
that which my Text, and the present providence calls me to speak: These are
Monuments to mind you of much more. But before I conclude, I must not omit
some very observable things concerning her Death.

First, She knew nothing by her self that was matter of trouble of Conscience
in this day, but the Lord had quieted her spirit concerning her Spiritual
state: She was desirous to live for the good of her Family, but content to dye
if the Lord would have it be so, as she said; But the observable thing with me
is this, I know she was usually in time of health, full of spiritual exercise
and darksome objections about her spiritual state: but in time of sickness
still the Clouds were scattered, full of fears at other times, but the Lord was
no terror to her in the evil day, but her hope; and so it proved at her Death.

Secondly, She had some taste of unspeakable peace and comfort, which in the
midst of such pains so disturbing and confounding to the outward and inward
senses, yet made her say, she should be at home in a little time, being ready
to depart to her Fathers house, Joh. 14.2, 3. and she who had the Spirit of
Adoption, could not but under the pains of death, call Abba Father for help,
Romans 8.

Thirdly, When she was under the pangs of Death, and Nature could not be at
^est, yet I speaking to her whether I should Pray once more with her? to which
she readily answered yea, and during all the time of the Prayer, lay as fully
composed as at any time; that either the Lord at that time rebuked the pangs of
death, and caused the King of terrors to retreat his force, or else the Prince
of peace would show us that his peace when he pleases shall rule, and that in
the Enemies Land, in the midst of the terrors of Death, and that she had to
encounter with a Conquered Enemy, John 16. uit.

The last Use is by way of comfort, to those who mourn because the Upright are
taken away from them. (1.) Consider, there is no reason to mourn because of
their state, for their end is peace, and they would not change their place
again for ten thousand Worlds, Rev. 14. Blessed are they who dye in the Lord,
they rest from their labors and their works follow them, I have heard her say,
that when the Lord in an Ordinance had come nigh to her Soul, it was a grief to
her to think of going into worldly occasions; Oh how is her Soul ^^^^sfied, and
abundantly fill in the presence of Christ now, Rev. 7.17.

2. If you would have comfort against your loss, lament after the Lord Christ
his Spiritual presence; this Upright one makes the Upright such, and keeps them
such to their end: are they so precious, Oh how precious is Jesus, the savor
of whose Ointment is such that the Virgins love him, and his love is better
then Wine, therefore the Upright love him, Cant. 1.3, 4. Oh pour out thy heart
to Christ, and say, I lament my loss of an upright Servant of thine: Oh thou
can make up my loss by thy presence.

3. Preserve the memory of the Upright by imitating of them; It Is a pleasing
thing to love when it can no longer enjoy the presence of the Beloved, yet to
preserve the memory of the Beloved, and is there any way to preserve the memory
of the Upright so as by imitating of them, Children are the Offspring of
Parents, and are their Images, and therefore Parents live in their Children,
especially if the Child imitates his Parent; thence is the Proverb, That a
Parent will live so long as that Child lives. you Children, who have lost a
very Godly Mother: you Christian Friends and Neighbors; who have lost a Godly
Friend, I need not exhort you to mourn, you have more need at this time of some
comfort to prevent excess: But would you show love indeed to her, Oh preserve
her memory, and that must be by imitating of her; think and speak of, Oh weep
and pray over these observable things in her Life and Death, that you prize
Communion with God as she did, that you may love Prayer and Self-examination as
she did, and abound in good works: Thus shall her memory be blessed to you,
Prove. 10.7. and you shall be Blessed at your latter ends.

FINIS.

