VOYAGES AND TRAVELS OVER ALL Europe. CONTAINING All that is most Curious in
that Part of the WORLD. In Eight TOMES.

Done out of French.

LONDON, Printed for H. Rhodes next Bride-Lane in Fleetstreet, and J. Harris at
the Harrow in the Poultry. 1693.

FRENCH F. H. van. Hove. Sculp:



Licensed,

Jan. 20th. 1692-93. Edm. Bohun.

TO THE READER.
It Is a Custom among Travelers, that are Persons of Curiosity, that when they
come to any City or Town of Note, one of the first Questions which they put to
their Hosts is generally, what is most-remarkable in the Place. To this,
Monsieur la Fer, Geographer to the Dauphin of France, makes a particular
Answer, so far as concerns the most Considerable Cities and Towns of Europe, in
Eight small Tomes of Historical Travels, successively intended to be presented
to your View; wherein he gives a neat and short Account of what is most worthy
the Observation of a Quaint and Inquisitive Traveller in all the most Eminent
Places of this the Most Noble fourth Part of the World. A pleasing Pocket
Information for a Traveller, where e're he comes, to desire to see, and not to
ask what is to be seen. He gives ye moreover, the true Character of the
several People, by telling ye their Predominant Humors; which is no less a
useful Direction for him to manage his Conversation with that variety of
Strangers among whom his Curiosity or his Business leads him.

These Historical Travels, will consist of Eight Volumes, of which the First as
you see begins with France; The Second will treat of Spain and Portugal; The
Third of Italy; The Fourth of Germany, Switzerland and Hungary; The Fifth of
Muscovy, Turkey and Tartary; The Sixth will enclose Poland, Swedeland and
Denmark; The Seventh Holland and the Low Countries; And the Eighth will
Comprehend England, Scotland and Ireland. Neither is it to be thought that
these are Collections and Relations of the Author by hearsay; for he tells ye
that he had been Abroad in Foreign Countries about Twelve or Thirteen Years,
and that all that while he made his Remarks upon the Religion, Customs, Humors
and Strength of several Nations, and observed what was most rare and curious in
their Countries: Confessing withal, that he took into his assistance the
Memoirs of a certain Learned Friend of his, who had been Two and Twenty Years
Collecting 'em together; but lived not long enough to put 'em into Order.

About the same time came forth the King's Geographer, de la Croix's Universal
Geographie, or his New Method for the Understanding that Science; but besides
that, there is little in it but what has been repeated over and over again, and
that we had nothing to do with learning Geography; I made a Vow, had I been a
Novice, not to learn it by his New Method, which is the Obscurest that ever I
met with; in regard he has so concealed and hid up his Towns in References and
Subdivisions of Provinces, that he that looks for any City, must run from Post
to Pillar, and be at a tedious and unnecessary Trouble, prevented by the common
Alphabetical Way, before he can find it out. However I made this Use of him,
that where he had any thing Proper for our Use, which la Ferr had for brevity
omitted, I thought it but reason, that one Brother should help another; and to
that end, I took out all that was material in him and made for our Purpose.
Which as it serves to Complete la Ferr, so it does de la Croix no Injury; who
may go on with his New Method for all us.

It Is to be confessed, That out of a natural Propensity of the French to brag
of their own Country, Monsieur la Ferr is sometimes too apt to fall into
Ecstasies and Raptures in Applause of the Beauties and Prodigies of Transcending
France, and the Conquests of his Invincible Monarch. But though we could not
but leave some sprinklings of his Folly in some places, as well because we
could not interrupt his Sense, as to show the Nature of the French Bird, yet
care has been taken to Prune off the greatest part of those Impertinencies, and
to keep him as close as possible to his Text: For in short, the Thing in the
main is Useful and Pleasant, as being the most Delightful part of Geography,
altogether a Novelty, and prosecuted with Judgment by the Author, to the great
Benefit and Ease of those, who not having the Opportunity, or Bodies fitted to
endure the Tempers of various Climates, are by this means enabled to Travel
over whole Countries and Regions with their Eyes, and have all the Curiosities
of Europe brought home to their own Studies, at the Labor and Expense of other
Men.

ADVERTISEMENT.
YOu will meet with many Hard Names of French Courts and Jurisdictions in the
following Relations, which many in England understand no more then the French
understand our Cursitors, Custos Brevium's, Philizers, Sheriffs Turns,
Wardmoots, etc. And therefore we thought it convenient to give a short
Exposition of what the Reader will frequently find repeated in this first
Volume.

BAilliage, is the Precinct, Office Jurisdiction of a Bailly. A Bailli, is a
Magistrate appointed within a Province or certain Precinct, to execute Justice,
maintain the Peace, and preserve the People from Oppression, Vexation, and
Wrong. To which purpose, he takes Cognizance of Treasons committed, False Money
Coined, of Robberies, Murders, Rebellions, etc. He makes Proclamation in his
own Name, calls the Ban and Arriere Ban; and leads forth those that are raised
by it. He also determines Appeals from the Sentences of the Provosts, and other
Inferior Judges. Chamber of Accounts, The Court of Accounts or of the
Exchequer; of which there is one in every Town of France where there is a
Parliament. Chamber of Money, Chamber de Monnoyes is a Sovereign Court wherein
the Currantness, Weight and Value of Money are examined, and the Disorders and
Offenses of Mintmen, Coyners, and Clippers punished. Which Court has two
Presidents, and Eight general Assistants belonging to it. The Exchequer of
Normandy, is an Assembly of High Justiciaries, wherein the Decrees, Orders,
Commissions and Injunctions, awarded by Bailli's, Viscounts, etc. may be (...)
and avoided. A Chancery. By the Chanceries of Cities are meant the Perites
Chanceleries, or the Chanceries of Parlaments, which are visited once a Year by
the Masters of Requests in their Circuits assigned them by the Grand Chancellor
of France. Consular Jurisdiction; The Consuls in the good Towns of France, are
Five Honest and Substantial Citizens, who Determine all Cases of Debt not
exceeding 400 Livres Tournois (a Livre Tournois is Two Shillings English)
between Merchant and Merchant; their Authority continues a Year, and the utmost
Punishment they can inflict extends but to Imprisonment. Election, The Office
and Circuit of an Eleu, who is a General Assessor of the Kings Aids and
Subsidies, who rates and taxes the Villages and Parishes of the Election or
Division wherein he resides. Generality, A Place for the General Receipt of the
Finances, of which there are such a Number in France, as Rouen, Toulouse,
Orleans, Limoges, etc. Jurats of Bourdeaux, are as the Eschevins or Sheriffs in
other Cities. Mareschalship is the Office and Jurisdiction of a Marshal of
France. The Lord Marshals of France in the time of Francis I. were but two, who
having their several Provinces assigned 'em by the King, rode their Circuits
into 'em, and were present at all General Musters, to observe how Military
Discipline was observed; to View the Fortifications and Reparations of Frontier
Towns; How the Arsenals were stored with Ammunition and Provisions; and lastly,
to provide for the Punishment of Idle, Vagrant and loose Persons. But now their
Number is uncertain; the Marshal's Battoon of Command being given as the Reward
of Prowess and Conduct. Presidial Seats; are Courts of Justice Established in
the Year 1551. in diverse good Towns of France, wherein Civil Causes not
exceeding 250 Livres Tournois are heard and adjudg'd Soveraignly and without
Appeals. Seneschalship, the Jurisdiction of a Seneschal, who is a Chief Justice
or Magistrate of a Precinct, who has the same Authority which is enjoyed by a
Bailli, from whom he differs only in Name.
Historical Voyages and Travels OVER EUROPE.
CHAP. I. Of Europe in general.
THE World is usually divided into four Parts; that is to say, Asia, Africa,
America and Europe. This last is the smallest of all; but without contradiction
the most considerable, in regard it is most Populous, most Fertile, and under
the most noble and best ordered Forms of Government. The Bounds of it to the
North, are the Northern, or the Frozen Sea; to the West the Atlantic Ocean;
the Mediterranean, to the South, which separates it from Africa; and to the
East, the Aegean Sea, the Straight of Gallipoli, the Sea of Marmara, the
Straight of Constantinople, the Black Sea, the Palus Maeotis, the Tanais, etc.
which part it from Asia.

The Length of it from Cape St. Vincents in the Western part of Spain, to the
mouth of the River Ob, in the Frontiers of Muscovy, is about thirteen hundred
Leagues.

Moreover there are always said to be in Europe, besides the Territories of the
Church in Italy, two Empires, that of Germany, and that of Turkey; seven
Kingdoms under different Sovereigns who acknowledge no Superior; France, Spain,
England, Portugal, Sweden, Denmark and Poland. The first six Hereditary, the
latter Elective. There are now nine Electorates, Mayence, Treves, Cologne,
Bohemia, Bavaria, Saxony, Brandenburgh, the Palatinate, and Hanover; which are
all Sovereign States under the Titles of Dukedoms, Marquisates, etc. We have
also in Europe two Great Dukedomes, Muscovy and Tuscany. Six other Dukedoms,
besides those which are enclosed within the Empire; viz. Lorrain, Savoy,
Mantoua, Modena, Parma and Curland. Seven Republics; viz. The United
Provinces, otherwise called Holland, Switzerland, Venice, Genoa, Luca, St.
Marin, and Ragusa. And besides all this there is the Arch-Dukedom of Austria,
the Patrimony of the Empire, who also possesses Bohemia and Hungary. As for the
Principalities of Transylvania, Moldavia, and Walachia, they are possessed by
particular Princes who are tributary either to the Emperor or the Grand
Signior, and sometimes to both together.

The Principal Islands of Europe are England united to Scotland, Ireland,
Majorca, Minorca, Sicily, Sardignia, Corfu, Creet, and an infinite number of
others in the Archipelago. And the Highest Mountains are in France, the
Pyreneans and the Alps; La Sierra Morena in Spain; the Apennine in Italy;
Parnassus in Greece; the Crapack in Poland; the Rhipheans in Muscovy; and Mont
Gibel in Sicily.

This part of the World is watered with an infinite number of fair Streams and
vast Rivers, which contribute not a little to the Fertility of it. The most
considerable are the Seine, the Loire, the Garonne, the Rhone in France; the
Duero, the Tagus, the Guadiana, the Guadalquivir, the Ebro in Spain; the Po and
Tibur in Italy; the Danaw, the Rhine, the Elbe, the Order in Germany; the
Vistula and Niepor in Poland; the Volga, and Don, in Muscovy; the Thames,
Severn and Trent in England, the Tay in Scotland, and the Shanon in Ireland.

CHAP. II. Of France in general.
FRance is to Europe, as Europe is to all the other parts of the World, for
number of Inhabitants, for the Ingenuity of the People, the Fertility of the
Soil, the Temper of the Climate, and the Excellency of the Wine. The Government
is Monarchical, but too severely Absolute, tho the Nobility are brave and
Warlike. This Kingdom is seated between the forty second and fifty first degree
of Latitude, and the fifteenth and nineteenth of Longitude. It is bounded to
the West by the Great Ocean; to the East, by the Rhine and the Alps, that
separate it from Germany and Italy; to the South, by the Mediterranean Sea, and
the Pyreneans that divide it from Spain; and to the North by St.
Georges-Channel, which the French call La Manche, that parts it from England.
But these Bounds have not hindered the Kings from frequently extending their
Dominions beyond these Limits, and without searching past Ages for Examples, no
body can be ignorant that in our days neither the Rhine, the Alps, nor the
Pyreneans could stop the Rapidness of the Conquests of Lewis the XIV.

France is about two hundred and sixty Leagues in length, if we take it from
the Coasts of Britany, to the Frontiers of Switzerland, and two hundred and
forty in breadth from Dunkirk to Perpignan

The Kingdom is composed of Three Estates, the Clergy, the Nobility and the
People. In 1614. the States General of the Kingdom being summoned to meet at
Paris, appeared there under Twelve great Governments; which are Picardy,
Normandy, Champagne, the Island of France, Britany, Orleanois, Burgogne,
Lionois, the Dauphinate, Provence, Languedoc and Guienne; and under these
Governments are comprehended Le Maine, Anjou, Tourain, Poictou Xaintoin,
Perigort, Limozin, Querci, Rovergne, Auvergne, Gevodan, Albigeois, Bearne,
Bigorre, Foix, Cominges, Armagnac, Vivarez, Le Forest, Beaugelois, Bugeay,
Valcomay, La Bresse, Nivernois, Bourbonnois, Berri, Salogne, Gatinois, Beauce,
etc.

All this shows us that France must needs be a very Potent Kingdom, since it
includes so great a number of Fair Provinces; some of which contain more
Cities, Buroughs and Villages then many Sovereign Kingdoms and Principalities.
But if you add to these the Conquests of Lewis the XIII and XIV, you will find
the Limits of this Kingdom to be of a much larger Extent, since those two
Monarchs subdued Franche Conte, Lorraine, Alsatia, Artois, part of Flanders,
Hainault, Luxemburgh, etc.

France, which was known to the Ancients under the name of Gaul, is a
Hereditary Kingdom, the Crown of which cannot descend to the Female Sex, by
virtue of the Salique Law. It always belongs to the Eldest Son and for want of
Male Issue to the next of Kin. France has beheld upon the Throne Kings of three
Races. The first was that of Meroveus; the second, that of Charlemaigne; and
the third that of Hugh Capet. Pharamond was the first King of France: He began
to Reign in the year 400 of our Salvation; and Clovis who was the Fifth King of
this Monarchy, was the first who embraced Christianity in 499 being baptized by
St. Remi, Bishop of Rheims; and ever since that time it was that our Kings have
born the Title of Most Christian King, and Eldest Son of the Church which no
other Potentate disputes with 'em.

As to the Humor of the French, they are looked upon to have a quick and
penetrating Wit, to be civil, jolly, and generous, but the most inconstant and
most impatient in Europe.

There are reckoned to be in France Eight Arch-Bishopricks, which have under
their Jurisdiction a hundred and eleven Bishoprics; that is to say, as far as
I can remember, Paris, Lim, Rouen-Tours, Reims, Sens, Cambray, Bourges,
Bourdeaux, Auch, Vienne, Ambrun, Toulouse, Narbonne, Aix, Arles, Avignon, and
Treves, which have under 'em a hundred twenty five Suffragans. Fourteen
Parliaments or Sovereign Courts; viz. Paris, Toulouse, Grenoble, Bourdeaux,
Dijon, Rouen, Aix, Rennes, Pau, Metz, Tournay, Perpignan, Besanson and Chamberi.

Besides an infinite number of Colleges, with which all the Cities of France
are provided for the Education of Youth, there are sixteen famous Universities;
viz* that of Paris, Toulouse, Montpellier, Orleans, Angers, Poictiers, Caen,
Bourdeaux, Bourges, Cahors, Nantes, Rheims, Valence, Aix, Avignon and Orange.

This is all I have to say of France in general: I now come to the Remarks
which I have made in my Travels, beginning with Provence, which is one of the
Extreme parts of the Kingdom.

CHAP. III. Of Provence.
GEographers usually divide this Province into the Upper and Lower Provence:
The Upper is very Mountainous and Barren: But to recompense compence that
defect, the Lower may be looked upon as a Terrestrial Paradise. And did not
Sacred History inform us of the Rivers Phison, Gehon, and Euphrates, that
environed the Garden of Eden, which God gave to our First Parent Adam, we might
have just reason to believe that the Paradise of all Delights was in Lower
Provence. The Air is so mild and temperate, and the Soil so fertile, that it
produces Corn in abundance, Wine, Oil, Silk, together with great variety of
Excellent Fruits; and in the depth of Winter, you may without any trouble find
Oranges, Jelsomines, Roses and Violets in Flower.

The Provencials are generally accounted a more rude and clownish sort of
People then they who inhabit the Neighboring Provinces. Perhaps their nearness
to the Sea, and the resort of all sorts of Nations that come thither for the
sake of Trade, may not a little contribute to it. But the Women are merry and
jocund, and have excellent Voices.

Aix is the Capital City of the Province, large and fair; the Houses are built
after the Modern Fashion, and those that stand next the Court are like so many
Palaces. It is the Seat of the Parliament of Provence, and of an
Archbishopric, a Chamber of Accounts, a Court of Aids, a Mint, and a
Generality. There is also in it an University for Law and Physic, founded by
H. the IV. The Churches are very beautiful, and the Curious fail not to examine
the Font of Baptism in that of St. Savior, supported by eight Marble Columns,
upon which it is said that in Old Time they sacrificed to Baal. In the Church of
the Carmelites is to be seen the Sepulcher of Renatus, King of Jerusalem.

Some Leagues from Aix stands a Borough called Sallon, where Nostre Damus, so
famous for his Predictions, was born, and interred in the Church of the
Franciscan Grey-Fryers; his Tomb being half within the Church, and half
without: Which has given an occasion for some people to say, that it was so
contrived, because it was not known whether he were a Prophet or a Conjurer:
But the Monk that showed it us, told us, that Nostre Damus himself had ordered
it to be erected after that manner: For that finding the World to be so corrupt
as it is, he was desirous to leave it in a singular manner. For that having
raised his Tomb to Man's height, he caused himself to be enclosed therein while
he was living, after he had made provision of Oil for his Lamp, Pens, Ink and
Paper, and pronounced a Curse upon him that should open it before such a time;
which by the Calculation of the Friar, was to expire at the beginning of the
eighteenth Age.

And upon my saying to the Friar, that by the Epitaph which appeared upon his
Tomb, it did not appear that he was enterr'd alive, but that he di'd the first
of July 1566. in the 62th year of his Age; the Monk replied, that from that day
he was dead to the World, and that in engraving the Epitaph, they had followed
his directions; all which was to be justified by the Registers of the Convent;
and that he would have part of his Tomb to be in the Street, to let the World
know the remaining part of Human Life, which perhaps he employed in pious
works. For my part, I had much ado to believe the Monk, but that the respect
which is owing to his Character persuaded me that he would not suffer an
Impostor to escape his Lips. However it were, I cannot tell whether honest
Nostre Damus repented or no, but I am sure he was in an ill condition, if he
let his Lamp go out, before he had finished what he had to write.

Beaucaire is a City seated upon the Banks of the Rhone, famous for the Fair
which is there held the 22d of July, which draws to it all the Nations of
Europe, and Immense Wealth.

On the other side of the River is to be seen the City of Tarascon, where
Renatus King of Jerusalem and Sicily built a very fair Castle. Some years ago a
certain person digging a Vault in his Cellar, found a Wall with an Iron Gate,
which he caused to be opened, and then discovered a hollow passage, from whence
he heard a most dreadful Noise, so terrible indeed, that he durst not satisfy
his Curiosity any farther. However, the Magistrates of the City being informed
of it, were resolved to know what it was. To which purpose they proffered a
condemned person his Life, if he would but go and take a view of that
Subterraneal Gallery.

This man being fortified with every thing which he thought necessary to infuse
a confidence into him, entered in. But before he got five and twenty or thirty
paces, he returned like a man hard out of his senses, crying out, That they
might hang him if they pleased, for he would not die a Death which he did not
understand. He told 'em he heard a most dreadful Noise, which grew louder and
louder the farther he went. After they had given him time till the next day to
recover himself, they offered him new favors, and some Money if he would go to
the End of the Gallery. That allurement made him resolve to scorn all dangers,
and having recovered fresh strength, he went to the Bottom, where he found
another Iron Gate, at which he knocked, as he said, but no body answered; he
added also, that the roaring Noise continued for half the way, and seemed to be
over his Head.

This Rehearsal augmented the Curiosity of the Magistrates of Tarascon, and
obliged 'em to send Workmen to force open the Gate; but unwillingness or fears
over-mastering their Obedience and Duty, there were none resolute enough to be
found: for they looked upon the last Gate to be certainly the Gate which led to
Hell. However, the Magistrates found an Expedient to gain their good wills,
persuading 'em that there was some vast Treasure hid there, and that if they
found it to be really so, they would give 'em the twenty fifth part of it. Upon
that, they found Workmen more than enough, and the Gate being soon opened, they
as soon discovered that the hollow way led to Beaucaire, that it was a
Subterranean Communication between one City and the other, and that the Noise
was nothing but the Rapidness of the Rhone, which rolling the Stones along with
it, caused that hideous rumbling in the Vault. Since which time, it is a common
saying among the Bricklayers of Tarascon, That the Twenty fifth part of
Beaucaire belongs to them.

Arles, formerly the Capital of a Kingdom, is seated also upon the Banks of the
Rhone, drawing toward the Sea. People say, the Air is not so wholesome there,
and that there is a passage from thence under Ground to Nimes, but I could
never find any certainty in that report. There are to be seen in this City two
Porticoes of an admirable Structure, an Amphitheater and an Obelisque, built by
the Romans, and the Sepulcher of Rowland, Nephew to Charlemaine. There is also
in the Townhouse a Marble Statue of Diana, which Goddess had formerly a Temple
in an Island of the Rhone a little below the City. Travelers that delight in
viewing Ancient Tombs, may find a great number near Arles. For it is said, that
the Pagans called these parts the Elysian Fields, and that they who inhabited
along the River from Arles to Lions, desirous that their Bodies should be there
buried, they tied 'em to Planks, with Money sufficient for their Enterment, and
put 'em into the Water, verily believing that the Stream would carry 'em to the
Elysian Fields, without going any farther.

They also showed me the house where Eight Children, all Twins were born at one
Birth, which the Mother would needs have thrown into the River all but the
Ninth. And they farther told me, 'twas through the Judgment of God that this
Woman had so many Children at a time, because she had taxed a Beggar-woman of
unchastness for having Three at one Delivery, who thereupon wished, if she were
not a Whore, that her Accuser might have as many as a Sow barrows Piggs at
once. Let the Story be true or false, certain it is, that it is not only in
these parts where such Prodigies are pretended to have happened; for I have
seen in Holland the Castle of a Lady, who is reported to have been brought to
Bed at one time of as many Children as there are days in the year. St. Maximin
is a little City in the Neighborhood of Aix, remarkable for the Holy Vial,
which is there kept, and which draws Pilgrims to it from all parts of Europe.
They pretend that in this Holy Vial there is the Blood and Water which issued
from our Savior's side, which by a Miracle, moves every Good Friday from
Eleven a Clock till high Noon.

In the year 1679. I was there upon the same day, and what I happened to
observe was this. They carried us up into a Gallery guarded by six Halberdeers,
as well to prevent disorder as for the security of their precious Relic. In
the midst of the Gallery in a kind of by-corner we found a Jacobin Friar
holding the sacred Vial in his hand; Which is a Vial much in the Form of our
Hour Glasses of Sand, in which you may perceive a Liquor as clear as
Rock-water, with a little black Moat that danced up and down in the Viol, and
which sometimes inclining to fall down to the Bottom, sometimes mounted up all
of a sudden to the Top.

This Devotion draws great Profit to the Convent; So that the Inhabitants of
the place would never care how often the Miracle happened. There is also in the
same Church the Head of Mary Magdalen in a Golden Shrine, and her Body in
another.

From thence we mounted for four Hours together, that we might get to St.
Baume, through a dreadful Desert. In this place they say it was, that Mary
Magdalen did Penance, and there is to be seen in a Grotto where the Rock-water
distills from all parts, one little place dry, which was the Place where
Magdalen lay. There is in this Nook a small Convent of Jacobins, with one only
Inn belonging to it, where were above four thousand Persons in all, very ill
accommodated. The next day we ascended above the Clouds; at least when we were
at St. Piton, we saw the Clouds thicken and gather together under us. This is
the Place, as the Tradition goes, where the Angels brought Penitent Magdalen
her Victuals. Afterward we traveled through a continual Desert to Toulton;
For we went above eight Leagues before we met with one House, or a drop of
Water to drink.

Toulton is a very fair City seated upon the shore of the Mediterranean Sea: It
has a good Haven, where the Kings biggest Men of War ride secure from the
injuries of the Weather or the Attempts of an Enemy. Henry IV. fortified it
with Walls, for the security of the Port and the Arsenal, which is the chiefest
the French have upon that Sea.

Marseilles is another Sea Port, which is held to be the safest in all Europe.
The City is very ancient; as having been built six hundred thirty three years
before the Birth of Christ: and it is the usual place where the Kings Galleys,
which are very numerous, ride. This Haven is defended by the Fortress of our
Lady of the Guard; by two Citadels at the entrance into the Port, which is
barred up with a huge chain; and there are there Forts in the little Islands a
league from the City which secure the Road. They are called the Fort of St.
John, Le Rattoneau, and the Castle Dif, furnished with good Garrisons, and with
all things necessary for their Defense. This last Castle is remarkable for
this, that it is the Place where they shut up Youths of Good Houses, that vex
their Superiors by their Exorbitant Debaucheries and Lewd behavior; and where
they are kept so long as is thought convenient with a moderate allowance.

The City it self is very Beautiful and without all contradiction the most
wealthy in the Province, by reason of the Haven, by which means it has all the
Trade of the Levant, Italy, Spain and Africa to it self. The Cathedral is
dedicated to St. Lazarus, in memory of this, that the Persecutors of the
Primitive Church, having put Lazarus together with Mary Magdalen and Martha his
Sisters, into a Vessel without Sails and Seamen, and exposing it in that manner
to the Merciless Waves, the Vessel after it had been tossed to and fro for some
time by the raging Billows, was by Providence guided into the Port of
Marseilles, where Lazarus having preached the Gospel was made Bishop of the
place, and di'd there.

The Slaves at Marseilles, all the length of the Port, keep Barbers Shops and
Fripperies, like those upon Pont Neuf at Paris, where they sell all manner of
Linen Clothes, Breeches, and other necessary Furniture at second Hand. They
who have this leave, are chained there in the Morning, and know what they must
give a day to their Officers. There are others that make up together Companies
of Fiddlers, noises of Trumpets, Hautboys and other Instruments, who being all
chained together and attended by a Soldier, go about from Tavern to Tavern,
and House to House, to play to those that will give 'em any thing.

There is in the Convent of the Observance, the Head of one called Borduni, the
son of a Notary Public of Marseilles which is of a Prodigious bigness. For,
tho the Man, who lived at the beginning of this Age, were not above four foot
high, his Head takes up the fourth part of that height, and three foot in
compass at the sides. He had so little wit, tho his Head were full of Brains,
that he gave occasion to the Proverb, when you would talk of a Man that wanted
sense, He has no more wit then Borduni.

When you go out of the City, it looks as if you were entering into Suburbs that
are near two Leagues in extent. For that in the parts adjoining to Marseilles,
there are above six thousand Country Houses, which the Provensals call
Bastades, and which stand so near one to another, that many times there is
hardly a Garden between 'em. This is a very great Ornament to the out parts of
the City, and of great Benefit, when the Town is afflicted with the Pestilence;
there being few of the Burgesses but who have one of those Bastades: for they
are still in fear lest some Vessel or other should bring that spreading
Contagion among 'em. Which is the reason that they are to observe an exact
Quarantan under the Cannon of the Castle Dif, and those other Fortresses which
I have mentioned.

They are excellent Artists at Marseilles for working in Corral, and you meet
there with that which is extraordinary for the whiteness of it.

CHAP. IV. Of the County of Venaissin, and the Principality of Orange.
THE County of Venaissin is a little Province enclosed between Provence and the
Dauphinate, the Capital City of which is Avignon, which is seated upon the
Banks of the Rhone, surrounded with the most Beautiful Walls in Europe. It has
been frequently the residence of the Roman Pontiffs, and that suffices to
convince the Reader that it must needs be stored with beautiful Edifices both
Sacred and Profane. The Popes are also still in possession of it to this day,
and send a Legate thither; and it was thus that the Holy See came to have a
Title to it.

Pope Clement the sixth, taking advantage of the necessity to which the
Princess Joane, Daughter of Charles II. Count of Provence, to whom Avignon with
all dependencies belonged, had reduced her self, purchased this City of her for
forty eight Thousand Livres, Money of France. The Contract of Sale was passed
the 19th of June 1348. and History reports that the Money was never paid.
However it were, the Princess was a Minor at the time of the Sale, and besides
that, she could not alienate her Demeans, there being Laws that expressly
ordained the contrary. So that this Sale was indeed no more than a Mortgage.
Thereupon the Parliament of Provence reunited the City of Avignon, and the
whole County of Venaissin to the Crown. Which shows that the Holy See enjoys it
only by the liberality of the Kings of France; neither is this the only nor
the most considerable benefit which Rome has received from the French Crown.

There is a Jewish Synagogue at Avignon very nasty and out of Order; and though
they are bound to hear a Friar Preach every week; they are so obstinate in
their Judaism, that there are very few that embrace Christianity. They all wear
yellow Hats, to distinguish 'em from Christians.

Avignon had formerly a stately Bridge over the Rhone, but the rapidness of the
Stream has carried away a good part of it. The Pope keeps an Italian Garrison
in it, and they keep a Guard as exact there as in the exposed Frontier Towns in
Time of War. They are not contented to examine all strangers that come into the
Town, to know where they lodge, and to direct people that are not acquainted
with the Town what Inns to go to, but in the Night time they visit all those
parts where the new comers lodge, and tell how many persons lie in every Bed,
which sometimes surprises those that are ignorant of the Custom.

The University of Avignon, founded in 1391. was formerly more famous then now
it is. I shall not undertake to describe all the Tombs and Relics that are to
be seen in most parts of the Churches; which would carry me too far. Nor have I
seen any thing there more remarkable then the Fountain of Daucluse, which
dividing it self about ten or twelve paces from the source of it, forms a most
delightful Island and a Navigable River. There, are also to be seen the Houses
of Petrach and Laura his Mistress.

Orange is the Capital of a little Province of the same name, not above three
Leagues broad and four in length. This Principality depending upon the County
of Provence, fell long since to the Counts of Nassau, by the Marriage of
Claudia de Chalons with Henry of Nassau.

This City had not long since a Castle belonging to it, which was looked upon to
be one of the strongest Castles in France: it had a Well dug into the solid
Rock above thirty fathom deep, and a subterranean passage that led from the
Castle to a House of Pleasure about half a league distant. But the Castle was
razed and the City dismantl'd about twenty years since by the King of France,
out of a particular enmity to the Prince of Orange under pretense that it
served as a Refuge for the Protestants that were Dragoon'd out of France.

However it affords very beautiful Pieces of Antiquity, and among the rest the
Circus which is very spacious, with a Pavement of Mosaic work in a low Chamber
or Room of State; a Triumphal Arch Erected in Honor of Marius and Lacturius,
Consuls of Rome after the Victory which they obtained over the Cimbrians and
Teutons. This edifice which is commonly called the Tower of the Arch, was
formerly in the middle of the City: afterward it came to be one of the Gates
of the City; but now stands a good quarter of a League from it. Which shows
that Orange was in ancient Time a very large and beautiful City. When you are
at the top of this Tower, you may see all at once five Provinces of France,
Provence, the Dauphinate, Languedoc, Auvergne and Forest.

Though this City still enjoys a Parliament, and an University for Law, Physic
and Sciences, founded by Raimond V. Prince of Orange in the year 1365. it may
be truly said that there is nothing now left, but the sad remainders of the
former Grandeur and Magnificence, which formerly rendered it considerable.
There is only the goodness of the Soil which never alters: for it produces
generally whatever is necessary for humane Life; and all the Highways are
bordered with white Mulberry Trees that nourish an Infinite number of
Silkworms, which are a good part of the Wealth of the Inhabitants.

CHAP. V. Of the Dauphinate and Vivarez.
THE Dauphinate is one of the most beautiful Provinces of France: Historians
speak wonders of it; and as such, they observe seven things extremely
remarkable, which they call the seven Wonders of the Dauphinate; that is to
say, the Tower without Poison, the Inaccessible Mountain, the Burning Fountain,
the Caves of Sassenage; the precious Stones of the Mountain of Sassenage. The
Manna of Brianson, and the Grove of our Lady de la Balm.

It Is commonly divided into the Upper and Lower, and is bounded eastward by
Piemont and Savoy; to the South by Provence; northward by la Bress, and to the
west by the County of Venaissin. The sterility of the Mountains of the Upper
Dauphinate is not so bad, but that they afford great quantities of Cassia,
Manna, Turpentine and Agaric. But the Lower Dauphinate bestows in a bundance
upon the Inhabitants Wine, Corn, Silk and all sorts of Fruit. The People in
general are stout, civil and courteous to Strangers: which Civility extends
even to the most rustical Peasants: for it is a common thing to see a Ploughman
leave his Plough to put a Stranger in the right Road, when he has lost his way.

Historians have always charactered the Dauphinois to be faithful to their
King; jealous of their Liberty; somewhat given to litigious petty-fogging, and
inclined to praise themselves. Nevertheless, the learned Mr. Richelet has not
done 'em all this justice in his Dictionary; perhaps because he would make the
Province suffer for the injury which some Dauphinois might have done him.

This Province is not so much celebrated by all those Advantages which I have
recounted, as for the Honor which it has of being the Title born by the Eldest
Son of France and presumptive Heir of the Crown. They who know not why the
Dauphinate enjoys this Honor before any of the Provinces of France, may here
be informed in few words.

Hubert II. Sovereign Prince of the Dauphinate, having but one only Son, at
that time very young, and being at his Castle of Vienne, took him in his Arms
to play with him, and making a show as if he would throw him out of the Window,
the Infant being a brisk lively child, slipped out of his Hands and fell into the
Rhone; nor did the unfortunate Father ever hear more of him. His Grief was such
as is not to be imagined: and his despair transported him so far as to make a
Donation of the Dauphinate to Philip Valois King of France, in the year 1349.
upon condition, among other things, that the First born Son of the Kings of
France, for the time to come should be called Dauphins.

Grenoble is the Capital City of the Province, seated among the Mountains upon
the Banks of the River Isere, which divides the City into two parts. It is the
Seat of a Parliament, a Chamber of Accounts, or place for the public Receipt
of the Finances, a Generality, a Baillage, a Mint, and a Bishopric. It is
adorned with Magnificent Buildings, of which the principal are the Palace of
the Duke de L'Ediguieres, the Bishops Mansion, and the Parliament House. The
Prelates of this Diocese assume the Title of Prince, by reason of several
Donations of the Lords of the Country at several times.

There are some things in the Parts about Grenoble, worthy the curious
observation of Travelers; chiefly the spacious Charter House, which is usually
the Residence of the General of that Order. Never was Desert better baptized
then this Nook which those Monks have made choice of for their place of
Retirement: for indeed the Mountain has something of a dreadful Aspect. But
when you come to the Convent, you are presently surpised to meet with so
goodly a Mansion, so magnificent a Church, and Monks so civil and courteous,
where you thought to find nothing but Precipices and Wild Beasts.

The Order of the Chartreux was founded in 1084 by St. Bruno, who was the first
General of it. The Air is very healthy, the top of the Mountain Fertile; and in
a word it may be said, that a Man is amply recompensed for the trouble and
dread in clambring up, which redoubles when you are about to quit that
delightful solitude; the descent being worse then the ascent, and much more
terrible.

Among the wonders that environ Grenoble, the burning Fountain is not the least
considerable, which darts forth Flames through the Water a foot high; whither
the young Men and Virgins go frequently to make Fricassees, and fry Pancakes.
Not far from thence is to be seen a Tower where no venomous Creature will live;
and they which are sometimes brought thither dye presently after.

Valence is the second City of the Dauphinate, and much better situated then
Grenoble, as being seated on the Banks of the Rhone, and upon the High Road
from Paris to Marseilles. It is adorned with a Bishopric, and a University for
Law and Physic; founded by Lewis the Dauphin, Son of Charles VII. in the year
1452. who confirmed the Privileges it enjoys, in the year 1475. when he came
to the Crown. It is also the Seat of a Presidial-court and a Seneschalship.

There is to be seen in the Church of the Jacobins the Body of a Giant fifteen
foot high, and seven in breadth, some of the Bones of which were carried to
Paris where they are preserved in the Kings Closet. There is a Fountain without
the City very hot in the Winter, and extremely cold in the Summer. The
principal Churches are the Cathedral dedicated to St. Apollinaris; St. John's
which is said to have been a Pantheon in ancient time, the Abbey of St. Ruff,
and St. Peter's Church in the Borough Les-valence, in which is to be seen a
Cavern which it is said crosses under the Rhone, near to which stands a
Sepulcher, wherein formerly was found the Body of a Woman covered with Gold and
Precious Stones, which appeared to be fresh, but so soon as it was brought into
the Air, crumbl'd to dust. There was also found in the same Tomb a Latin
Inscription in these words, The Happy Justina Mother; whence some infer, that
it was the Empress Justina's Tomb. Near St. Felix's Gate there is also a Round
Tower which leans forward more at the top then below; and most people believe
that the Tower bowed out of respect when St. Felix entered the City.

Pont St. Esprit, or The Holy Ghost's Bridge, is a very pleasant City that
derives its name from a Bridge built over the Rhone with extraordinary labor
and expense. It consists of two and twenty Arches twelve hundred Fathom long,
and fifteen broad; so that it may not be vainly looked upon to be one of the
largest and most beautiful Bridges in France.

The Dauphinate includes several other Cities which have their particular
Ornaments and Beauties, as Montelimar, Cret, Die, Gap, Ambrun and Vienne, which
is the first City you meet with, as you enter into the Dauphinate through
Lionnois. It was formerly inhabited by the Allobroges; at what time Le Viennois
was called the Island of the Allobroges as being situated between the Rhone
and the Isere.

At Vienne they make the Blades of Swords in such vast numbers, that it is the
wonder of all people, how the Artificers can sell 'em so cheap. But the reason
is, because their Engines are so disposed as to be moved by the Water, and that
in such a manner, that one workman can attend several sorts of Workmanship at
one time Pilate was banished to Vienne by the Emperor Tiberius; There is also
to be seen the Tower where he was kept a Prisoner; and the Precipice from
whence he threw himself Headlong, which is always covered with Clouds and
Mists. Vienne had formerly two Castles belongit to it which were accounted
impregnable; but they were demolished, for fear they might prove a Recepticle
for such as had a design to disturb the State.

Die, or Diva Augusta, seated upon the Drome among the Mountains, with a
Bishopric, suffragan to the Archbishop of Vienne. It was one of the nineteen
principal Cities of the ancient Vocantis mentioned by Tacitus, and once a
Colony of the Romans.

Gap lies two leagues from Durance with a Baileage, a Bishopric, a strong
Citadel, and the Fort of Puymore. But neither the Citadel nor the Fort could
hinder it from being ruined by the Duke of Savoys Army in the year 1692.

Ambrun is a Bishops See, and lies among the Mountains at the Foot of a Rock
upon which stands a Castle. This City is said to stand the highest of any City
of Europe. It is a Town of great antiquity; and it is said that Nero granted the
Citizens of it the right of Latinity, which Galba afterward enlarged with new
Privileges. In the year 1692. it was taken by the Duke of Savoy, but quitted
the same year, after every thing was demolished that rendered it Tenable.

Before I leave the Dauphinate, it behooves me to make one Observation not
unacceptable to the Curious, of a peculiar Wind that blows at Nyons, six
leagues from Orange. It is called the Wind Pontius, from the name of the
Mountain whence it comes. Nyons is seated in a Bottom, upon the bank of a River
called Egue, where there is a Bridge with one only Arch, accounted the most
beautiful in the World. It is said to be a Piece of Roman workmanship, round
like the Letter O, and to be as deep from the Foundation under Ground as above.
And indeed, although it be of a Prodigious height, yet there appears but the half
of the Circle above Ground. And I have heard the People of the place aver, that
when they have gone to search for the Foundation, they could never find any.
But they perceived, that still the lower they dug, the narrower the circle
contracted.

As to the Wind of Pontius, it usually blows from Midnight till ten or eleven a
Clock in the Morning, and it is almost as cold as the North Wind. It issues out
of the Cleft of a Rock, about a small League from Nyons near a Hermitage. Into
this cleft the people have often thrown Stones, and let down a Sounding Line,
but could never reach the Bottom. Nor is the Wind so violent in this part, as
about a quarter of a League from thence. Now in regard the cleft is not very
wide, it was stopped up toward the end of the last Age, and so it remained for
seven or eight years; but then they were forced to open it again, in regard the
Earth surceas'd to bear, the Olive Trees, Vines, and other Fruit Trees
withered, so that their Autumnal Harvests were very Barren, and the Inhabitants
were seized with Contagious Diseases, which caused a great Mortality among 'em.

As for Vivarez, it being a Province very Mountainous and Barren, Travellours
take no pleasure in it; unless it be at Viviers, which is the Capital City of
it, and the Sea of a Bishop. You may also visit Annonay, where the Gentry are
very Civil and Courteous; but where the Common People make it no scruple of
Conscience to discharge their Fusee's upon you from behind a Hedge upon any
slight occasion.

CHAP. VI. Of Savoy and part of Piedmont.
SInce the King has brought Savoy, the County of Nice, and some part of
Piedmont under his Subjection, it is requisite that I say something of those
Parts, before I engage farther into France. Chamberi is the Capital City of
Savoy, and the Seat of a Parliament, but the King of France being desirous to
extend his Conquests this way, having this Wind of Victory in his Poop, first
made himself Master of this City: after which, the County and City of Nice and
Villa Franca which was called the Bulwark of the Mediterranean, were forced to
acknowledge the Dominion of France, under pretense that Nice was formerly a
part of Provence. Not long after the Fortress of Montmelian, which the
Savoyards accounted Impregnable was likewise carried by the French, and then
they took and burnt Oneglia, the only remaining Sea Port Town in Savoy. The
Fortifications of all these Towns are very Regular, and the Churches very
Beautiful.

Besides these places, the King of France has Pignerol seated upon a Mountain
of the Valley of Perousa, five leagues from Turin. The other is Casal the
Capital City of Montferrat, upon the River Po, which the Duke of Mantoua
surrendered to the King in 1681. These two Towns are very considerable in
respect of their strength and situation, in regard they secure France from the
Invasions of the Princes of Italy, and open him a passage, when he shall be at
leisure to look that way. But in regard I propose to my self a particular
Volume of Italy, I omit here several remarks more proper for that Tome, then
this of France.

CHAP. VII. Of Languedoc.
THere is no Province of France so vast in the extent of it as Languedoc.
Eastward, it is bounded by the River Rhone, which parts it from the Dauphinate
and Lorrain; to the South, by the Mediterranean and the Pyreneans; by the
Garonne, to the West; and to the North by Rouergne and Quercy. The Climate is
accounted the best in the Kingdom, and the Soil is the most Fertile; insomuch
that it produces whatever is to be found in all the other parts of the World
except Spices, your rich Gums and Sugar. The People are charactered to be very
witty, much addicted to Study, and to appear often in their Accoutrements what
they are not. They are accused of being great Talkers, very inconstant, and
unfit to keep a secret. Their Women are wanton and frolicksome, much given to
Paint, and love a greater liberty then becomes their Sex. However these Rules
are not so general, but that they admit of many exceptions: and they that are
not stained with these defects, need not concern themselves with common fame;
and as for others if they are so happy to amend 'em, People of Virtue will
always do 'em Justice.

Toulouse is the Capital City of this beautiful and spacious Province, seated
upon the Garonne; and so ancient, that it is said, that Tholo, one of the Sons
of Japhet was the Founder of it. Certain it is however that when the Romans
Invaded the Gauls they found Toulouse to be a very considerable City, and
therefore beautified it with a Capitol, Amphitheaters, and Aqueducts, the
Remainders of which, besides her Churches and other Structures are sufficient
Testimonies of her Antiquity. Afterward it was the Metropolis of the Kingdom
of the Visigoths, and after that, of the Kingdom of Aquitain.

It is the seat of a Famous Parliament, an Archbishopric, a Generality, a
Chamber of Accounts, and a University. The Cathedral is dedicated to St.
Stephen; and that of St. Saturnin is a beautiful Pile; where it is said they
have the Bodies of no less then seven of the Apostles, and one of the Thorns of
our Savior's Crown. There is a vast Treasure which could never be taken away,
whether it be by reason of the noisomness of the Water, or whether it be
guarded, as they say, by Prodigious Serpents that threaten to devour all those
that disturb their Rest. However it were, History tells us, that the Gauls
making War with the Inhabitants of Delphos brought away vast Riches: and that
the share of the Tectosages, who inhabited Languedoc, came to a hundred and ten
thousand pound weight in Gold, and five millions of pounds weight in Silver:
that their Priests enforced 'em to throw the Riches into the Lake of Toulouse,
whence Cepio, the Roman Consul caused it to be carried away, sometime after,
having put the Lake to Sale by Outcry: and there is some reason to believe that
a great deal of it might be left behind; but I am not certain whether it lies
in that part where the Church of St. Saturnin is built.

In the Church of the Observantin Friars is a Vault which consumes the Flesh of
Dead Bodies without hurting the Skin, or Dislocating their Members. In the
Church of the Jacobins is to be seen a Pillar that supports after a wonderful
manner five or six Vaults one above another: I forbear to mention the rest of
their Monasteries, in some of which there are several Relics and Curiosities.

The University of Toulouse is accountted one of the most famous in Europe,
except the two Universities in England, and the second in France; for which
reason perhaps it was that Ausonius calls it the City of Pallas, and that it
generally bears the Epithete of Toulouse la Savante, or Toulouse the Learned.

Castres is another very ancient City of Languedoc with a Bishopric. Lavaur,
Pamiers, a Bishops See, Mirepoix, a Bishops See, and some other Cities in the
Parts adjoining are very pleasant places, where the People feast and make good
cheer at a cheap rate; which is the reason that it is a common saying among 'em
that they have more good Victuals then Money.

Carcasson is commanded by a Citadel which is very strong, both by reason of
the situation of it and the Works about it; and before you enter into it you
must leave your Sword at the Gate. The City is considerable for the Woollen
Manufactures, for the neatness and uniformity of the Streets, and the sweet
temper and civility of the Inhabitants.

We must not remove far from Languedoc without visiting Perpignan in
Roussillon, where the Men go after the French Fashion; and the Women after the
Spanish Mode. The Citadel is composed of Five Bastions, commanded by a Fort
which is called the Donjon. Some Leagues from thence, you meet with a Fountain
of Salt Water, which springs out of a Rock in such abundance, that about six or
seven Paces from thence it forms a River, over which there is built a Bridge of
several Arches.

Narbonne disputes the Point of Antiquity with all the other Cities of France;
for they pretend that Narbo, K. of the Country was the Founder of it, long
before the Birth of Christ. But that which we find most certain is, that it was
in great Request in the time of the Romans, who graced it with a Capitol and an
Amphitheater, erected Municipal Schools within it, adorned it with a Bath and
Aqueducts, and all the marks of Roman Grandeur, as being the Seat of the
Proconsuls, and their first Colony out of Italy in Europe; in acknowledgment of
which Favors, the Inhabitants set up a Statue to Augustus: So that Rome and
Narbonne were leagued to each other under the Title of Sisters; and it is said,
that the Sympathy between 'em was so great, that in the Year 145. Rome and
Narbonne were afflicted both at the same time with a dreadful Conflagration
that happened by Accident. But the greatest part of the Roman Antiquities were
ruined by the Goths and Vandals. This, being a Frontier Town, is regularly
fortified; and the Canal of Conjunction between the two Seas, a Royal
Undertaking, becoming a great Prince, derives the beginning of it from
Narbonne. It is the Seat of an Archbishopric; and the Archbishop is Primate of
the Province, President born of the States of Languedoc, and dignified with the
Title of Lord of the Sea.

Bezieres, is a City not far distant from Narbonne, seated upon a Hill, the
Avenues to which are somewhat difficult. It is both Large and Ancient, and
greatly valued by the Romans, who erected there two famous Temples to Augustus
and Julia. It is still one of the most Delightful Places of Abode in France.
Insomuch, that the beauty of the place, and the fertility of the soil, have
begot a Proverb among the People of the Country, Que si Dieu habitoit sur la
Terre, il choisiroit Bezieres pour sa Sejour. That if God were to live upon the
Earth, he would make choice of Bezieres for his Place of Residence.

The City of Pesenas is no less pleasant, and the Inhabitants are much more
civil and courteous: and no question but the Residence of several Princes there
from time to time, as the late Prince of Conti deceased, and Monsieur de
Montmoranci, contributed not a little to infuse into 'em the Air of the Court.

Though I shall end this Chapter with the Cities of Montpellier and Nimes, it is
not because they are less considerable: the contrary rather may be said, that
Travelers tarry longer at Montpellier, then in any other City of Languedoc, by
reason of the Variety of Divertisements which they meet with in the Place, good
Cheer, good Company, Familiarity, Galantry, and Learning; all which Advantages
they meet with there in a Superlative Degree.

The University is accounted the most famous for Physic in all France. And it
is to be observed that no Dr. in that Faculty is to be admitted, till he has
first received seven times the Robe and Bonnet of Rabelais in the Castle of
Monac. In such Veneration is that Doctor among those that govern this Academy.
The reason of it is this.

The Scholars having committed some Disorders in the City, which occasioned
Complaints against the University at Court, they were deprived of some part of
their Liberties* and Privileges. Rabelais, who had been a Monk, and was a
person of a Luxuriant Wit, being then at Montpellier, could not choose but
participate of the Trouble the Academians were in when they heard the News.
What does he do, but goes to Paris, and presents himself at the Chancellor du
Pratt's House? The Swiss, who took him for a Fool, asked him, what his Business
was? To which Rabelais answered him in Latin. Upon which, the Swiss not
understanding a word he said, called for one of the Chancellor's Officers, who
understood the Language; which Rabelais finding out, answered him in Greek:
With that they brought him a person that understood Greek perfectly well; but
to him the Doctor spoke Hebrew: and if they talked to him in Hebrew, he
answered in Syriack or Arabic, etc. So that having puzzled and exhausted all
the Learning in the Chancellors House, the Chancellor desired to see him
himself: at what time having Harangu'd him in favor of the Students of
Montpellier, he obtained the Restoration of the Privileges that had been taken
from 'em. This Rabelais was made Curate of Meudon, and died at Paris in 1553.
and being a Man of such a pleasant Humor, this Epitaph was made upon him:

Pluto, Prince of Shades Infernal,
Where sad Souls never laugh, but burn all,
Be kind to Rablais, and they will all
Fall a laughing, great and small.
Near the Convent of the Cordeleers, there is to be seen a Lake full of Frogs
that have never been heard to make a Noise, as the people of the County say,
since St. Anthony of Padua, being interrupted by 'em in his Prayers and
Meditations, commanded 'em to be Silent; and it is observed, that if you take
any of those that make most noise in other places, and put 'em into this Lake
they presently become as Mute as Fish. On the other side, if you take 'em out
of this Lake and put 'em in another place, they shall be the first that shall
fall a Croaking and the loudest in the Consort of Paddocks. Pliny recites the
same thing of the Frogs in the Island of Seriphos in the Archipelago. The City
it self is very Ancient, commanded by a Citadel with fair and royal Bastions,
and is the Seat of a Bishop Suffragan to Narbonne, a Presidial Court, and a
Seneschalship, a Court of Aids, a Chamber of the Finances, etc. without the
Town is to be seen the Royal Physick-Garden, stored with Curiosities in
abundance.

Nimes is a very fair City, and where the Inhabitants, were they not such great
Talkers, and less Malapert, would be very good Company. The City is very
Ancient; for they affirm, that Nemausus the Son of Hercules was the Founder of
it, and gave it his own Name as being called in Latin Nemausis or Nemausus. It
was formerly much more spacious then it is, as including within it seven Hills
like Old Rome, and the Walls were fortified with a Thousand Towers.

Among the most remarkable Pieces of Antiquity we must reckon the Amphitheater
erected by the Emperor Antoninus, Four hundred and seventy Paces in compass.
There are also to be seen two Gladiators cut in Stone; the Wolf that suckl'd
Romulus and Remus, and the Vultures that appeared to those two Founders of Rome.

There is likewise to be seen at Nimes, a Cavern that runs underground as far
as Arles: for it was the Custom of the Romans to have in several parts such
subterraneal Communications between one City and the other. In the Neighborhood
also appears a very Curious Piece of Roman Workmanship; that is to say, Three
Bridges one above another; the lowest of six Arches; the second of two; and the
third of thirty: so that the whole Structure may be about Fourscore and two
foot high. This Bridge is called Pont du Guard.

I shall say nothing of the Grotto's, the Garden of St. Private, or of the great
number of Curious Statues; only I may add this in short, that this City is an
Epitome of the Roman Antiquities: and give me leave to insert this one thing
more, that without the City some Remainders of a Building are to be seen, which
is said to have been a Temple of Diana, and that the Fountain of Vesta, which
is near it, was famous heretofore, because the Water was made use of to Purify
the Vestal Nuns.

The City is a Town of great Trade, and there are made in it great Quantities
of Woollen Stuffs. It is also the Seat of Bishop, a Seneschalship, and a
Presidial Court.

CHAP. VIII. Of Guien and Gascoignie.
MAny People under the Name of Gascognie, comprehend all the Provinces that lie
beyond Lion; as the Dauphinate, Provence and Languedoc; whereas Gascognie is no
more then a small Province included with in Guienne.

The Garonne contributes not a little to enrich this Province; it receives the
Merchandises which Foreign Vessels import, and carries away the Wines and
other Commodities of the Country.

The People are looked upon to be a little Insolent, excessive Boasters, and
somewhat given to Thieving. But the Rule is not without Exceptions, for there
are as virtuous People among 'em as in other places, and free-hearted beyond
compare. They are the best Soldiers in France, especially after they have had
a Campaign or two in their Bellies; and the Soldiers from the Neighboring
Provinces are as good as they: Their Train'd-Bands have made themselves
sufficiently known in Piedmont and Catalogna these last Years.

Bourdeaux is the most considerable City of this Province, as being the seat of
a Venerable Parliament, an Archbishopric, and a famous University for the
Civil and Canon Law, founded by Eugenius IV. and Lewis X. in 1473. It affords
very beautiful Pieces of Antiquity; among the rest the Statue of Jupiter, and
that of the Emperor Adrian, which a Counselor of the City has got into his
Study. The Hollow-Stones that lie at St. Severin's, are very much worth
Observation; in regard they are full or empty of Water, as the Moon is either
at the Full, or in her Wain. Lewis XIV. has not a little contributed to make
this City considerable by the Castle Trompette, which he built for the Defense
of the Haven, which by means of the Garonne, receives the biggest of Merchants
Vessels, that bring great Wealth to the City. Some Years since the Parliament of
Bourdeaux was removed to Reaule, which did a great Injury to the City,
discontented the Members of that Venerable Body; but brought great Advantages
and Profit to that little Borough.

There are an Infinite Number of other Cities in Guyenne, and the parts
adjoining, where Travelers may meet with a Thousand* pleasing Objects; as
Cadillac, Baza, Bayonne, St. Jean de Luz, etc. But I leave those that have seen
'em, or have a mind to visit 'em, to judge of their Beauty.

CHAP. IX. Of Xaintonge and Angoumois.
I Join these two Provinces together, first, because they both give their names
to the Capital Cities, and are very near under the same Climate; and secondly
because the Remarks which I have made upon each in particular, being added
together, will afford matter but for a very small Chapter.

Xaintes, seated upon the Banks of the Charante, is beautified with many marks
of Antiquity. The Bridge over the River makes it evident by a Latin Inscription
that it was built by Caesar; upon which are also to be seen the remains of a
Triumphal Arch. The Church of St. Peter's, which was the one and twentieth of
those that Charlemaign caused to be built was ruined in the last Civil Wars.
Nor is it less remarkable for the remains of an Amphitheater and several
Aqueducts, and diverse other Monuments of Roman Antiquity. It is also a Bishops
See, and the Seat of a Presidial Court. It Is likewise observed that the Water
of the River Charante keeps much longer sweet at Sea, then the Water of other
Rivers.

There are also several other fair Cities in Xaintoigne, as Coignac, Tonnay,
and Brouage; famous for the Salt Pits adjoining to it. At the Mouth of the Sea,
which is called the Sea of Bourdeaux, stands a Tower built upon a Rock, which
serves as a Pharos or Land mark to direct Ships that Sail upon that Coast. It
is called the Tower of Cordouan; and we are assured, that it is much higher and
more beautiful then the Pharos of Alexandria.

Blaye, built upon the River side, is considerable for the Fortifications which
hinder the Entrance of any Enemies Ships into the Harbor. There is also to be
seen the Sepulcher of Charibert King of Paris, the Eldest Son of Clotaire the
First.

The County of Xantoigne is very fertile in Corn, Wine, Pasturage, Saffron,
etc. greatly stored with Fish, and abounding in Roman, or Pontic Wormwood; and
it is a common Proverb among the People of the Country, That if France were an
Egg, Xantoigne would be the Yolk.

Though the City of Angoulesm be seated upon a Rock at the top of a Mountain,
yet there is a Citadel also built for the better Defense of it: Which also
serves for a Curb upon the City it self should their happen any Sedition.

Two Leagues from Angoulesm, is a Fountain to be seen, which issuing out of an
Abyss, never increases nor diminishes. A certain Queen of France, being
desirous to know whence the Spring of this Fountain should arise, ordered a
Condemned Person to be let down into the Abyss, who reported that he could see
nothing but Dreadful Rocks and Monstrous Fish, that would have devoured him,
had he not speedily got out of their way. At Montmeron a Silver Mine was
discovered; but nobody was ever set to work in it. The reason of which I
believe to be, because Nature has furnished it with so small a quantity of that
Metal, that the Mine will not afford Ore enough to Pay the Workmen.

The People of Xantoigne are looked on to be very Witty, and more Courageous.
Those of Angoulesm are no less Warlike, and love to live like Gentlemen; but
the Common People are Clowns and Brutes.

CHAP. X. Of Limosin and Perigort.
THE City of Limoges, is the Capital of Limosin; remarkable for several
Monuments of Antiquity, and for three Councils held there in the Years 1029.
1031. and 1182. There are also to be seen several Aqueducts built by the
Romans, Three Churches, and a great Number of Monasteries. It Is also the seat
of a Presidial Court, and an Audit for the King's Finances. Nor are Travelers
to pass through it, without seeing the Artificers for Enamelling, wherein they
are so perfect in this City, that there is not better Workmanship of that sort
in any part of the World: and going to Vssel you see 'em no less busily
employed in making of false Diamonds. The other most considerable Cities of
Limosin, are Gueret, Tulle Brive, Vserche, a very Strong Hold, Roche Abeille,
famous for the great Battle there fought in 1569. Chalos, noted for the
Horse-Fairs there kept, Aines, Aimotier, etc.

Though Perigort be Stony and Mountainous, yet the Inhabitants are well enough
contented with their Condition. For the vast Number of Chestnuts which grow in
this County, not only serve 'em for the Nourishment of their Families, but to
fatten their Hoggs; Besides, that it is well stored with Medicinal Waters, and
Iron Mines.

Periguex is the Capital City of this Province; so very Ancient, that some
scruple not to affirm it to have been built by one of the Sons of Noah. But
others from the Name of Vesuna, which the Ancients gave it, derive the Name of
it from Venus, who was formerly worshipped in this City; where there are still to
be seen the Ruins of a Temple dedicated to that Goddess, with several other
Antiquities. The Fountain of Marlac, not far off from Periguex, ought to be
visited, for the Ebbing and Flowing of the Waters that supply it. Which
contributes not a little to confirm the Opinion of those who say, that Periguex
is built upon a floating piece of Ground. Some Years ago, there was a Well in
the Great Marketplace stopped up, which was thought to be an Abyss, in regard
that several People being let down, could could never find a Bottom; only they
reported upon their coming up again, that they saw a large Plain covered with
Water. It may be some may put the Question, whence those People had so much
light as to make such a Discovery? To which I shall answer according as they
told me, that it was from other Wells of the City, and parts thereabout, which
let the light into that Subterraneal Sea, and by floating Lanthorns which they
drove before 'em with Engines.

Besides there are few Houses in the City, but the owners if they dig never so
little in their Cellars, presently meet with Water, which by the weight, the
taste, and other marks, seems to be the same with that of the Well which was
stopped up, because the Harlots were wont to throw their Children into it.

Two Leagues from the City there is another Fountain, the Water of which
changes it self into Stones of what form you please. But among the most
remarkable things, there is a Cavern near Miramont, which is called Cluseau,
which extends it self five or six Leagues under Ground, wherein are to be found
Apartments paved with Mosaic Work, Altars adorned with beautiful Pictures,
Fountains, and a River six and twenty foot broad, and beyond that, as they say,
there is a vast Plain or Champian Country, where no body yet durst be so bold
as to plant any Colonies.

In the Abbey of Cadouan at Sarlat is to be seen a Sacred Napkin or rather
Winding Sheet, wherein they affirm that the Body of Christ was wrapped when he
was put into the Sepulcher of Joseph of Arimathea. Libourne, upon the Banks of
the Dordogne, is a pleasant City, to which that River Ebbing and Flowing brings
up Vessels of a Considerable bigness. But there is one thing very
extraordinary, nor do I know that there is any other like it in the World,
which is, that from time to time there runs from the Sea a Whirling Eddy of
Water, about the quantity of a Tunn, which without being driven by the Force of
violent Gusts of Wind, rowls up the River with such an Impetuous fury as would
overturn the biggest Ships, if they stood in the way of it; but in regard the
terrible noise it makes, may be heard three Leagues off, and for that they know
this Whirling Eddy which they call Macanet, always keeps along by the Shore,
the Vessels remove to the middle of the River; and by an Instinct no less
worthy of Admiration, the Wild Ducks and Swans, no sooner hear the noise but
they make haste to the Land, to secure themselves from the Rolling Waves.

CHAP. XI. Of Querci, and Rouergne.
QVerci cannot choose but be a very fertile Country, as being watered by the
Garonne, the Dordogne, and the Tarr, which are three Navigable Rivers. There
are said to be Mines both of Gold and Silver in it; but the Inhabitants take
little or no care to look after 'em; no question because they have plenty of
Corn, Wine, Prunes, Saffran and Pastorage, that will fetch Gold and Silver
without the pains of Digging and Delving. The Common People are Boarish, but
the Gentry and Nobility very Civil.

Cahors is the Capital City of Querci where the Amphitheater, the Bridges and
the Towers are infallible proofs of the Antiquity of it. Pope John XXII. a
great disturber of the peace of Europe, was born at Cahors, and founded there a
University for the Common Law in 1332. Wherein he showed more love to the place
of his Nativity then to all the World besides. It is also a Bishops See which
is said to bring in the greatest Profit of any other in France. The Cathedral
Church is dedicated to St. Steven, and was Consecrated by St. Martral. There
are also in it several other Churches and Monasteries and a College of
Jesuits, ever since the year 1605. It Is also the Seat of a Presidial Court,
from whence Judgments are carried by appeal to the Parliament of Toulouse.

Part of the Diocese of Montaubon is seated in Languedoc, and therefore the
Bishops have a seat in the Diocese of that Province. The Hugonots made
themselves Masters of it in 1562. and fortified it so well that it held out
three several Seiges; but at length it was snbdu'd in the year 1592. and
because it should be no more a refuge for Revolt, the Fortifications were laid
level with the Ground.

Moissac is another City of Querci, seated as well as Montauban upon the River
Tarr. It was taken from the Romans by the Goths, and from them by K. Clovis.
After that Gaiger Duke of Aquitain took it, and from him it was retaken by K.
Pepin in 1212. The English utterly ruined it. However afterward it came to be
considerable again; but it will hardly recover the ill usage it received from
the Hugonots in the Civil Wars. A traveller will find little considerable in
Rouergne except the Steeple of the Cathedral of Rodez, which is looked upon to
be the highest and the best wrought Piece of Architecture in France. The City
of Rodez is very ancient but has lost the Ancient splendor of it, as having
been ruined by the Goths, Saracens and Francks, etc. however it is still a
Bishops See, and the Seat of a Seneschalship. It formerly bore the Title of an
Earldom, which was united to the Crown by Hen. IV.

In the parts adjoining to this City stands the Mountain of Canseu, which Burns
when it Rains: and two Leagues from thence you meet with an Abyss, sixty paces
wide at the top, and two hundred deep: and by the side of this Abyss is to be
seen a hole which has no bottom.

The Quercinois are looked upon to be very great dissemblers; and the
Perigordins to be very quarrelsome, especially in their Cups.

CHAP. XII. Of Auvergne.
AVvergne is one of the principal Provinces of France: it bears the Title of an
Earldom; and is bounded to the East; by Forests, and Lyonnois; by Rouergne and
Velai to the South; by Querci, Perigort, and Limosin to the West, and by Berry
and Bourbonnois to the North. It is divided into the Upper and Lower. The Upper
drives a great Trade in Cheese, Horses, Cows, Mules, etc. The Lower abounds in
Corn and Wine, and Trades in Tapestry, Bone-lace, Cloth, Knives, and other
Commodities. The greatest part of the Auvergnois are laborious, crafty, full of
dissimulation, addicted to quarrel, and very self-conceited and opinionated of
themselves; so that if you do not give 'em their way with much compliance, a
little thing will create a squabble.

Aurillac is the Capital City of the Upper Auvergne, which was formerly adorned
with several fair Churches, for the most part ruined in the Civil Wars. Among
the most remarkable things we have there to be seen, the Refectory of the
Carmelites is reckoned to be the chiefest, which much surpasses in Neatness,
Bigness and Painting all the rest of the Convent.

The Presidial Court of Aurillac is looked upon to be one of the severest
Tribunals in the whole Kingdom.

In this Division of Auvergne stands the Mountain Cantal, remarkable for the
height of it, and for the Simples which it produces, tho it be extremely cold;
the other Mountains are also fertile in Pastorages. The lower Auvergne commonly
called la Limayne is not so wide in the extent of it as the Upper. But it is
much a more pleasant place to reside in. The soil is more fertile, and the
Inhabitants are more Civil and Sociable. Clairmont is the Capital City of it.
The Cathedral is covered with Lead, which the Air has purified to that degree,
that people have offered a considerable sum for the Covering, and to lay on
another of Lead of the same thickness; but neither would their Money be taken,
nor their proffer accepted. There is in it a Fountain that turns into Stone as
it falls: upon which account, some aver that the Bridge which is there to be
seen was the work of this strange operation of nature. It is eight fathom wide,
six in thickness, and thirty six long: for which reason Charles IX. had the
curiosity to see it. Several Councils have been held at Clairmont; among which
the most famous was that in the year 1095. at what time by the solicitations
of Urban the II. The celebrated Croisade was resolved upon for the Conquest of
the Holy Land. Charles the V. assembled the States of the Kingdom in this City.
It Is believed this City was built out of the Ruins of the Ancient Gergovia, so
highly applauded by Caesar in his Commentaries; and where there was a Tower
which could not be burnt when that City was all in Conflagration, by reason it
was made of Larch or Larinx wood, which resists Fire.

Rion famous for the Antiquity of it is seated upon a Hill, which renders the
Situation and the Prospect very pleasant. The Houses are well built, the
Streets straight and broad, the Churches Magnificent, the Monasteries stately,
the Inhabitants sumptuous: but nothing makes the City so remarkable, as St.
Amable's Tooth, which as they say, infallibly cures the bitings of mad Dogs, of
Serpents or any other venomous Beasts. In a word the Situation of the City and
parts adjoining is so pleasant, that it is called the Garden and Paradise of
Auvergne.

This City is the seat of a Mareschalship, a Presidial-court, a Generality of
the Finances, an Election and all the Officers of Justice sit in a Palace built
by John of Berry.

About a small quarter of a League from Clairmont stands Montferrand another
considerable City; which was the reason that the Marquess d'Effiat, would fain
have had 'em joined together under the name of Clairmont-Ferrand, but the
Jealousy of the Inhabitants started so many difficulties, that he could not
compass his design. The Buildings are very beautiful and the Magnificence of
the Churches inspire Devotion.

Some few Leagues from Rion is to be seen the little City of old Brioude,
remarkable for the Bridge that belongs to it consisting of one Arch* which is
supported by two Mountains of a prodigious height. It was built by Caesar's
Order; and it is observable, that one Stone falling out of the Building some
Ages since, could never be put again into the place from whence it fell.

Le Puy is a City very considerable for the largeness of it, the riches of it,
the fertility of the soil, and other advantages. The great number of Relics
which are there preserved draws the Devotion of the people for above seven or
eight leagues round. But in regard the People always magnify Objects, and
multiply Miracles, which the places where Relics are deposited, are seldom
sorry for, it many times happens that true Devotion is intermixed with
Superstition. Amongst the precious Gages which that City preserves, there is an
Image of the Holy Virgin, of Cedarwood, which the Ignorant People say was made
by a Prophet of the Old Testament that wrought Journey work under Joseph.

The same silly People also give credit to what a Demoniack formerly pronounced
in the Church of this City, that a Relic which is there preserved of one of
the Innocent Children which were Massacred by Herod was the begotten son of
that Barbarous King.

CHAP. XIII. Of Lionnois.
LIonnois is a small Province from the which Capital City derives the name of
Lion. The People are very courteous and civil to strangers; their prevailing
passion being desire of gain, which extends their Trade to that degree, that it
is called the Magazine of France. And it is commonly said in reference to the
Magnificence of Lion, that if Paris be without her equal, Lion has no
companion. It was formerly called the Colony of Claudius, because that Emperor
was born there.

The City of Lion, seated upon the Confluence of the Rhone and the Sone, is
accounted one of the best Situated, most Ancient, the Fairest and one that
drives the greatest Trade in all France. It is the Seat of an Archbishop who is
Primate of the Gauls, of a Presidial Court, an Audit for the Kings Revenues, a
Mint, a Seneschalship, an Election, a Tribunal of Trade under the Title of the
Conservation of Lion. It is said to have been founded by one Lugdus, King of
the Celtae, and therefore was in Latin called Lugdunum. Others say that one
Momor a Prince of the Gauls built a City upon the Confluence of the Rhone and
Sone by command of the Emperor, and because he saw a flight of Crows settle
upon a Mountain adjoining he called it the Lugdune or the Hill of the Crows. As
for those who assert it to have been a Colony of the Romans, it is a visible
Error, in regard the Druids had held their Assemblies there before ever Rome
was talked of; and the Phoenicians and Greeks had settled themselves in it,
before that Famous Republic ever sent any Colonies into Gaul. However it were
certain it is that there was an Altar in or near this City where the Orators of
those times disputed for the Prizes of Eloquence, and a Sacred Grove where the
Ancients offered up their Sacrifices. The City of Lion is divided into thirty
seven quarters, which are called Penonages, which have every one their several
Captains, and other Officers. It has seven Gates, the Market Places and
Piazza's are Magnificent, and the Buildings both Sacred and Profane are
sumptuous. The Cathedral is dedicated to St. John, and was built upon the Ruins
of the Altar which was dedicated to the Emperor Augustus the same year that the
Emperor Claudius was born. The Town House is one of the most superb Structures
in Europe: and among the Curiosities which are there to be seen, there are two
Tables of Brass, upon which are engraved the Speech which Claudius made to the
Roman Senate to incline 'em to admit the Lionnois and other Gauls into the
Senate as Citizens of Rome. The Arsenal is one of the best supplied in France.
The Archiepiscopal Palace is very Beautiful. Pope Gregory VII. confirmed in the
year 1079. to the Archbishop of Lion the Title of Primate of the Gauls. And
this privilege was adjudg'd to him by several other Pontiffs Successors to
Gregory. The Chapter of Lion is composed of three Churches under one and the
same Steeple; and upon the Tolling of the same Bell Divine Service begins and
ends in all the three Churches at the same Time, which are St. John's, St.
Stephans, and Holy Roods. This Chapter has been always filled with persons as
well Illustrious for the Nobility of their Birth, as for their Learning. Five
or six celebrated Authors have observed that in the thirteenth Age there had
been known to have been Canons, one Son of an Emperor, nine Sons of a King,
fourteen Sons of Dukes, thirty Sons of Counts, and Twenty Barons.

The thirteenth Ecumenical Council was assembled at Lion by Innocent IV. in
1245. and Gregory X. celebrated another there in 1274. where he presided
himself And besides these two Councils several other particular Councils were
held in this City at different times.

The Castle of Pierre Aneise may be said to have peculiar Beauties, if there be
any Beauty in a Prison. For Prisoners of Quality and Consequence are committed
to this Place: and thus the Duke of Milan was under Confinement in this Castle,
when the French took him after his being defeated.

The Antiquity of Lion is easily proved by the Amphitheaters, Aqueducts, and
old Ruins of the Palaces of several Roman Emperors who resided in it. Without
the Gate of the City is to be seen a Sepulcher, called, The Sepulcher of the
two Lovers. Some will have it to be the Monument of Herod and Herodias; others,
the Tomb of two Lovers, that had been long in Love together, but died in the
state of Virginity. Before the Gate of St. Justus lies a Stone of an Immense
weight, which is placed in such a true Equilibrium, that you may move it with
one Finger.

This City is endowed with several Privileges which have been granted her by
her Sovereigns from time to time; and they who have been once honored with the
Shrievalty of Lion, are ennobl'd, both they and their Posterity.

CHAP. XIV. Of Burgundy and Nivernois.
BVrgundy is a Province with the Title of a Duchy and Peerdom, though it were
formerly a Kingdom; and the Title is now born by the Dauphin's eldest Son. This
Province extends it self from North to South above Fifty Leagues (not above
Forty, says De la Croix) and Thirty from East to West (Thirty two, says De la
Croix). The Source of the River Seine, rises in a Village of Burgundy, which is
called St. Seine. The Burgundians are an obliging people, and love Honor; but
they are naturally opinionated and obstinate, and you must have a great
Ascendant over 'em to make 'em alter their Sentiments.

Dijon is the Capital of this Province; and Historians report, that the
Emperor Aurelian having utterly razed and destroyed a certain place called
Burg-Dogne, or Burgus Deorum, was afraid of the Anger of the Gods to whom that
place was Consecrated; whereupon his Mother, Priestess of the Sun, advised him
for the Expiation of his Fault, to build a Temple and a Castle in the same
place, which were the First Foundations of this Capital City. It is remarkable
for the Walls, which are fortified with Towers and Bastions; the Castle flanked
with Four Great Towers, and Two Ravelins; a fair Charter House, wherein are the
Stately Tombs of the Dukes of Burgundy, the Palace of Justice, the King's
House, Sixteen Churches, two Abbeys, five Hospitals, the Townhouse, and for
being the Place where the States of the Country meet every Three Years. This
Country enriches it self by her Corn and Wine, being generally called the
Magazine of Paris. St. Bernard was Born in a Village of this Province, called
Fontaine.

Beaune, is a very ancient City, with a Chancery and a Bailliage, seated
advantageously for every thing; but most chiefly fruitful in delicious Wines.

Autun is also very Ancient, and some there are who derive the Etymology of the
Name from Augustus. However it were, the Romans thought it worthy of their
Friendship, and entered into an Alliance with it. The Druids held their Senate
in this City. There are also to be seen the Ruins of a Temple of Juno, which
they call Janitoye. And among other Antiquities, there are still to be seen a
Field of Mars, the Mount of Jupiter, and the Ruins of Triumphal Arches,
Pyramids, Aqueducts, etc. The Cathedral Church, and the Episcopal Palace are
worth the sight of the most curious Travelers.

Auxerre is a very good City with an Episcopal See, a Presidial Court, and a
Bailliage. This City is very Ancient, and it is said, that Julian the Apostate
stopped here for some time to refresh his Army. In the next Age, it was taken and
almost ruined by Attila in the Year 451. After that, K. Robert took it in 1005.
from Landri, Count of Nevers. Since which time it was governed by particular
Counts of her own. It Is a very great Thorough-fare, having a Stone Bridge,
Large Piazza's, several Fountains, beautiful Churches, among which, the
Cathedral is very Magnificent, stored with Relics, and adorned with a most
beautiful Quire, a Steeple remarkable for the height of it, and a Chapter of
Fifty nine Canons: but the Earldom is now united to the Crown. The Bishop
resides in the Castle, which it would be no difficult thing to fortify, in
regard it stands upon a rising Ground which Commands the City. There have also
been two Councils held in this City, the one under the Pontificate of Pelagius,
in 578. the other in 1147. It is seated upon the River Yonne, that falls into
the Seine at Montereau.

Nevers, the Capital City of Nivernois, is a considerable City, not only for
the goodness and fertility of the Soil, but for the Advantages it receives from
the River Loire, which washes the Walls of it, and runs by the Fortress that
Commands it, and over which it has a Bridge of Twenty Arches. Travelers are
always used to visit these Parts, where the Inhabitants make Glasses and
Earthen Pots, which bring great Profit to this City. The Bishopric is under
the Archbishop of Sens, and one of the best in the Kingdom. In the last
Assembly of the States General of the Kingdom, the Deputies of Nivernois
appeared under the Government of Orleanois. There are in this Little Province
both Iron and Silver Mines, but the People make little Advantage of 'em.

CHAP. XV. Of Berry and Burbonnois.
THough the Province of Berry be of no great Extent, yet is it very Rich. The
Cloth which is there made is in great Esteem; and the Wool in this Province is
the best in the Kingdom. The Inhabitants who were in Ancient Time called the
Bituriges, were very formidable: And History informs us not only of the
Conquests which they made in Germany and Italy; but that the same People, who a
long time held the Empire of the Gauls, were they who gave Caesar the Greatest
Trouble in his Conquests.

The Capital City of Berry is Bourges, being an Archbishopric, with the Title
of a Primacy and Patriarchate, having also a Presidial Court, a Bailliage, a
Generality, and a University. The Situation of it is very Advantageous, by
reason of the two Rivers that make a kind of Bogg, and fill the Moats. It has
seven Gates, and as many Suburbs. The Walls are in a good condition, fortified
with Four and twenty Towers. The Ramparts are Cannon-proof, the Stones being
cut Diamond fashion, and Nineteen Foot thick. The Cathedral Church is dedicated
to St. Stephen, a most beautiful Structure, supported by Fifty Pillars.

The Treasury of this Cathedral contains many Curiosities which Foreigners will
be glad to see, and of which I would have inserted here a Catalogue, had I not
unfortunately mislay'd it in my Travels. This City suffered much by the
Irruptions of the Barbarians in the Fifth Age, and still it feels the furious
sack of the Huguenots upon the 27th of May 1562. when the Count of Montmorancy,
who was their General, took it.

Bourbonnois is separated from Burgundy by the River Loire, which lies to the
East; Berry bounds it to the West; Auvergne and Forest to the South; and
Nivernois to the North. This Province is not so considerable for it self,
though the Soil be very fertile, as for the Honor which it has to see the
Illustrious House of Bourbon wear the Crown of France.

The City of Bourbon bequeathed her Name to this Province, though it be not the
Capital; which is attributed to Moulins. The Castle of Bourbon is environed
with 24 Towers, which renders it extremely strong. Near the Castle lies a great
Marsh, where are the Baths of Bourbon, so renowned all over Europe.

Moulins is a very large and fair City, seated upon the River Allier, and
remarkable for the Mineral Waters, and for the great Number of Cutlers Shops.
The Presidial Court is one of the greatest Ornaments that belong to it.

CHAP. XVI. Of Poitou, and the Country of Aunis.
POitou is a large Province, containing near Sixty Leagues from East to West,
(De la Croix says, about 30 Leagues in Length, and 20 in Breadth) It is bounded
by Berry, Limosin, and Touraine. To the South, by Angoumois and Xantoigne; by
Anjou and Bretaigne to the North; and to the West by the Ocean. The Poictovins
are civil and obliging; but they are so addicted to Raillery, and nettling,
girding Sarcasms, that you must either forbear keeping 'em Company, or else be
forced to bear their Flouts; which being so frequent, change their Gay and
Sportive Humor into the Vice of Scurrilous Detraction.

The Capital City of this Province is Poiters, seated upon a rising Ground
between two Rivers. It is famous for being a Bishops See, and has a Presidial
Court, and a University for the Law, which Pope Eugenius IV. and Charles VII.
founded there in 1431. At what time the Parliament of Paris was translated
thither, because the English were Masters of the Metropolis of the Kingdom.
Near to Poitiers it was that the Battle so dismal to France was fought in the
Year 1356. where the English took K. John Prisoner.

The City of Poitiers is governed by a Mayor, Twelve Sheriffs or Aldermen, and
Twelve Sworn Counselors. The Walls and Castle rose from the Ruins of the
Amphitheater, and the other Structures are sufficient Proofs of the Antiquity
of it. Among the Relics which are there preserved, there is to be seen in the
Cathedral, a part of St. Peter's Beard, which St. Hilary brought thither from
Rome, as they say. The Statue of Constantine the Great, stands in the Church of
Nostre Dame. In the Church of St. Hilarious, is to be seen the Trunk of a Tree,
which they tell you, served that Saint instead of a Cradle, and has a peculiar
Efficacy to restore Madmen to their Wits. There is also a Sepulcher which
consumes Dead Bodies in Four and twenty Hours, but which becomes noisome to the
Smell, if you rub it with Iron.

Above half a League from the City, is to be seen that which is called La
Pierre Elevee, or the High-rais'd Stone, Five and twenty Foot long, and
Seventeen broad, supported by Four other Stones. They tell ye, that Pantagruel
drew this Stone out of a Rock, which is called, Passe-Lourain or the Lobcoch;
having this Distich engraved upon it,

Hic Lapis ingentem superat gravitate Colossum,
Ponderis and grandi sidera mole premit.
This Stone the vast Colossus far surpasses,
And with its ponderous Bulk the Stars oppresses.
This Stone, as I have said already, is supported by Four Pillars; and there is
also a fifth, upon which the Stone does not rest; though it stand within a
fingers breadth of it, of which the people of the Country tell this Story. That
Sir Aldegonde carrying the great Stone upon his Head, and the Five Pillars in
his Apron, let fall one of 'em; which the Devil presently taking up, followed
the Saint, who stopped half a League from Poitiers, and set the great Stone
upon the Four Pillars that remained in his Apron. But the Devil being desirous
to add a fifth, could never raise it so high as to bear with the rest, and to
be assistant in supporting the Burden.

Nor must I pass over in silence a certain Cavern about four Leagues from the
City, the Entrance into which is very difficult, and the Passage more
difficult. It Is said, that formerly they were wont to go and take a walk in
this Cavern, after the usual mirth and rejoicing that attends upon Weddings.
But that a Young Bride having fallen into it and broken her Head, they who came
after, thinking it more convenient to keep their Skulls whole, the Custom was
abolished. They who have a desire to Visit the Townhouse of Poitiers, may see
the Franchises and Privileges granted by the Kings of France from time to time,
to the City, Engraven upon Plates of Brass.

There are also other very fair Cities in Poitou, as Lodun, the Castle of which
is one of the best situated in the Kingdom. It was formerly called Juliodunum,
and has a Bailliage and a Presidial Court. Next to this Chasteleraut, famous
for Cutlers, and where they make the best false Diamonds in any Part of the
World. It Is said, that about a small League from this City, in former days, a
young Hind showed the Soldiers of Clovis the Great, where to pass the River,
going before 'em as their Guide, when they went to fight Alaric K. of the
Goths. The Bridge which Katherine de Medicis there built, is a very fair one;
as being Sixty six foot broad, and Two hundred and thirty long, supported by
Nine Arches. Mailluizay and Luson, are two Episcopal Cities, which have very
fair Churches; nor are they without some particular Beauties: Nevertheless the
First Bishopric was translated to Rochelle in 1648.

The Country of Aunis, so called, as they say, because a certain King undertook
to Conquer it by an Ell aday, though it be but of a small extent, yet is very
fertile and well peopled. The City of Rochelle is the Capital City. Which
though it be not very Ancient, became famous in the last Age, by reason of the
Civil Wars for Religion. The first Houses that were erected in this place, were
built to withstand the Incursions of the Normans, that many times Landed in the
Harbor. By the Treaty of Bretigny it was surrendered to the English against
the Will of the Inhabitants; but returned not long after under the Dominion of
France.

The Hugonets became Masters of it in the last Age. And La Noue, who was
Governor of it, valiantly defended it against the Siege which Charles IX. in
vain laid to it, with his Forces under the Conduct of his Brother Henry,
afterward Henry III. who left the Siege to take Possession of the Crown of
Poland. In the Year 1620. there was a meeting of the Huguenots at Rochel, to
consult about laying the Foundation of a small Protestant Republic. But Lewis
XIII. reduced 'em to their Duty in 1622. But in regard the English and
Hollanders encouraged 'em to revolt, and for that the Sea afforded an easy
entrance for their succor, they soon drew upon 'em the Indignation of their
Sovereign; at what time, in the Year 1627. Cardinal Richelieu having caused a
Mound or Dam to be raised, Seven hundred forty seven Fathom long, on purpose to
hinder their Communication with the Sea, they Surrendered the 28th of October.
1628. The King who was personally at the Siege, entered into the Town upon
All Saints Day, deprived the Inhabitants of their Privileges, and demolished
their Fortifications, leaving only the two Towers which Charles V. built, and
which were thought requisite for the defense of the Port, which he secured with
a Chain that reached from one Tower to another.

Since that time, the present King has surrounded it with New and Strong
Fortifications, a good Citadel, and other Works to hinder the Landing of a
Foreign Enemy. It is now a Town of great Trade, whither all the Merchandises
are brought that are transported from the Indies; and besides that it is a
Bishops See, it is also the seat of a Presidial Jurisdiction, and a Sovereign
Court for the Western Salt Pits. The people in their Humor, partake of the Air
of the Sea, which they breath, and are therefore very boisterous and insolent,
and no less full of Vanity and Pride. Rochefort is a Seaport Town at the Mouth
of the River Charante, formerly no more then a Village, now a City with good
Bastions, upon which are planted Rows of Trees, that make very pleasant Walks;
There is also in this place several Warehouses, and an Hospital for sick and
wounded Seamen.

CHAP. XVII. Of Bretagne.
BRetagne is a very large Province, which is also usually called by the Name of
Little Bretaigne, to distinguish it from Great Britain; which contains the
Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the small Islands adjoining.
There is no Province of France that has so great a Number of Havens as this;
for it is environed by the Ocean to the North, South and West: Eastward it is
bounded by Poitou, Anjou, Maine and Normandy. It extends it self above Forty
Leagues from South to North; that is to say, from the Island of Bouitz to the
Mouth of the River Couenon, and Sixty from East to West; that is to say, from
Vitrey, to the Point of Conquet, and contains Nine Bishoprics. Formerly it was
governed by Kings for above Three hundred Years together, but was afterward
contented with the Title of a Dukedom, till the Year 1491. that Ann of
Bretaine, the only Daughter of Francis II. the last Duke, married Charles the
Eighth of France, and after that Lewis XII. who both United this Duchy to the
Crown.

The Soil is fertile in Corn, Flax, Hemp and Fruits, affords good Butter, and
Breeds good Horses, but produces little Wine, to the great Grief of the
Inhabitants, who are great Lovers of it. Between Chasteau-Briant and Martigues,
are several Mines of Iron and Lead. In the Signory of Salle, is a Source of
Water that smells of Antimony, and drives before it a sort of Sand of the
color of Gold: and not far off upon a high Hill, they find Antimony, Sulphur
and Copper: And in another place, they dig out Talc and Stone Alum, which
being pounded into Powder, may be spun into long Threads or Candlewieks, which
never go out as long as there is any substance remaining, and is thought to be
the Asbestos of the Ancients. In the Mines of Valgoet, are to be found both
Jasper Stones, and very clear Crystal, with several other Rarities. Moreover,
in this Province there is a great Value put upon the Secrets of the Mount
Menehaldec, the Beauties of the Forest of Besban, where is still to be seen
the square Base of Stone called Perron-Merlin, the ancient Divertisement of the
Knights Errant, and the Fountain of Balanton, etc. They also make great
reckoning of the Amber of Bell-Isle, the Aqueducts of Dal, the Vaults between
Rieux and Redon. the Subterraneal Torrent in the Forest of St. Aubin du
Cornier, the Singularities of the River Ardre, and the Lake of Grandlieu near
Nantes. And having already told ye how the Province is seated upon the Sea, I
think it needless to tell ye that they are stored with all sorts of Fish;
among the rest, there is taken upon the Coast of Bretaigne, a certain Fish,
which at Marseilles is called Imperador or the Emperor, but in Bretanie,
Gracieux Seigneur, which is very delightful to the taste. The Bretons are of a
very sociable Humor, and there are two sorts of People, whose Company pleases
'em better then any other. The first are those that can stoutly hold out to
drink with 'em; The next, are they who in their Discourses, or otherwise, make
appear their Hatred of the Normans.

For the People of those two Provinces have such an Antipathy one against
another, that they can never speak well of each other.

Rennes is the Capital City of Bretagne, divided by the little River of
Vilaine, which brings up great Barks to the Town, though it stands above Twenty
Leagues from the Sea. Henry II. erected a Parliament in this City, which is also
a Bishop's See, adorned with fair Churches, two Abbeys, St. Magdalens and St.
Georges, with several other Religious Houses, and the Bell belonging to the
Palace Clock, is accounted one of the biggest in the Kingdom: and having been
formerly the Residence of the Dukes of Bretagne; it is stored with several
Relics for Travelers to see, either out of Curiosity or Devotion.

Nantes contends for Superiority with Rennes, as being likewise a Bishops See,
and pretending that her Haven renders her more wealthy, more famous, and makes
an ample amends for the Parliament, with which the other is Honored. But not to
trouble my self to decide the Controversy between these two Cities, I shall
only observe that Nantes is very ancient; and some Authors will have it, that
Nantes, one of the Progeny of Noah, was the Founder of it, and gave it his own
Name. However it were, she had once particular Counts of her own, and the
Beauty and Fertility of her Soil, appropriated to her the Surname of the Eye of
Bretagne. There is a Castle belonging to this City; which secures the Port: and
her Presidial Court, where there is a Tower and a Clock, both considerable for
the rarity of their Workmanship, and an Election render her no less remarkable
then her University for the Law, founded by Pope Pius II. in the time of
Francis II. the last Duke of Bretagne.

When you visit the Churches, you shall see the Tombs of several Dukes of
Bretagne: The Townhouse is built after the Modern Mode: and her large
Warehouses for all sorts of Merchandises merit the View of all Travelers, who
will then admire the vast Wealth of this City. The Edict which Hen. IV. set
forth at Nantes, in favor of the Protestants in April 1598. was revoked by
Lewis XIV. in October 1685.

St. Malo's is another famous Seaport Town of this Province seated upon a Rock
in the Sea, in the Island of St. Aron, joined to the Land by a long Causey; the
entrance into which is defended by a Castle flanked with large Towers,
environed with good Moats, where there is a Garrison and a Governor. The
Bishopric of St. Quidalet was translated thither in the Year 1172.

I have here two things to observe concerning St. Malo's, one of which is true,
the other seems to me to be a Fable. The first is, That every Night they let
out a dozen or fifteen great Mastiffs, that presently run their Rounds about
the City upon the Ramparts, and infallibly tear to pieces all people that they
meet with. So that before they suffer 'em to walk their Patrolle, there is a
Bell Tolled for some time to give people notice that the merciless Watch is a
coming. These Dogs are kept on purpose to preserve the City from surprise:
which gave occasion for some to say, That Dogs had the Guard of St. Malo's.

My second Remark relates to a Raven and a Crow that are in the Island, whose
number never increases. When one of these two Dies, all that are in the
Neighboring Parts flock thither to take possession of the Vacancy, as if it
were an Inheritance; and in regard they have no Knowledge of Littleton's
Tenures or the Canon Law, much less of the Genealogy of their Ancestors, so as
to leave their Estates to the next Heirs, they fall to Bloody Wars one among
another: many are slain on both sides, many are wounded, and many betake
themselves to Cowardly flight, and save themselves upon the Continent; and thus
at length the strongest carries it, and becomes peaceable Possessour of the
Island all the rest of his days. As to the Surviver, I know not whether upon
the loss of his Companion he loses his Privileges, or whether he measures Beaks
and Claws, and then Duels it out with the new Comer.

Breast is the best Seaport-Town which The French have upon the Ocean; for which
reason it is the Great Maritime Arsenal of the Kingdom, and the Rendevouz of
the French Fleets. The Entrance into the Bay is very dangerous by reason of
several Rocks that lie under Water upon high Tides; but there are always
skilful Pilots ready to carry in great Ships without any hazard. The King
caused this Place to be fortified after a wonderful manner, and not without
Reason, it being one of the Principal Keys of the Kingdom, and the Rendevouze
of all his Men of War.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Anjou and Touraine.
THE Province of Anjou, dignified with the Title of a Dukedom, has Bretagne to
the East, Maine to the North, Touraine to the West, and Poitou to the South. It
is Thirty Leagues in Length, and Twenty Broad (Twenty two, says de la Croix)
and being watered with the Loire, the Sarre, and several other Rivers (no less
then Six and Thirty, says de la Croix) it is extremely fertile, and the People
are Witty and very Crafty.

Angers, the Metropolis, called by some Authors the Black City, by reason that
all the Houses are covered with black Slate, which they dig out of the Quarries
adjoining, is the Seat of a Bishop, a Presidial Court, a Bailliage, a Mint, and
a University for the Law; Founded by Charles V. in 1364. others say, by Lewis
XII. in 1398. The Cathedral dedicated to St. Maurice, is a lovely Structure,
and the three Steeples over the Portal are wonderful pieces of Architecture, of
which that in the middle seems as if it hung in the Air, being supported by the
Foundations of the other two. Among the Antiquities of the Treasury, there is
to be seen St. Maurice's Sword, and one of the Cisterns, that contained some
part of the Water which Christ turned into Wine at the Galilean Wedding.

The Castle is very Ancient, and built upon a Rock, flanked with Eighteen large
round Towers, and defended with a wide and deep Moat cut out of the Rock,
whither many times Prisoners of State are sent, for more Security. The
Huguenots surpised this Castle in the Year 1585. but they were soon after
expelled again by the Anjovins. Angers is also remarkable for the University
there Erected, according to the King's Letters Patents bearing Date June --
1605. with the same Privileges which the Academy of Paris enjoys, except the
Comittimus. The Number of the Academies is fixed to Thirty, besides the Bishop,
the King's Lieutenant, the first President, the King's Proctor in the Presidial
Court, and some others who have their Places in the Academy by virtue of their
Employments. The City it self is governed by a Mayor and Twenty four Aldermen
or Sheriffs.

La Flesche stands upon the Loire, about Ten Leagues from Angers to the South.
There is in it a very fair College of Jesuits, Founded in the Year 1605. by
Henry IV. containing three Courts, and three Piles of Lodging Chambers,
sufficient to Lodge the King and all his Court. The Heart of that great Monarch
lies in the Chapel under the Steps ascending to the Altar, as he ordained by
his Last Will.

Saumur, is applauded by all Foreigners for the Pleasantness of the Situation;
where there is also a Strong Castle and well fortified.

Touraine lies to the North of Anjou, about Thirty Leagues in length, and as
many broad. This Country is so fertile, that it is called the Garden of France.
The People are good Natured, Sincere and Witty. If you will gain their
Friendship, you must have a care of being Melancholy: And therefore they are
called, The Laughers of Tours, Les Rieurs de Tours.

They who have seen Tours the Capital City of this Province agree, that it is
one of the most delightful Mansions in the Kingdom. It is the seat of an
Archbishop, a Presidial Court, and a Money-Chamber. The Loire, over which there
is a Bridge of Nineteen Arches, causes it to abound with all things. There are
great Quantities of Silk Stuffs made in this City, which are thence transported
all over Europe. The Church of St. Martins is of a vast length, being a Hundred
and sixty Foot long, with two and fifty Windows, twenty Columns, nineteen
Doors, and three very High Towers. in the Year 1591. there were found in it two
Urns full of the Ashes of several Bodies consumed by Fire.

Amboise stands upon the Loire with a Castle Royal built there by Charles VIII.
to signalize the Place of his Birth.

Loches is remarkable for the Castle and a beautiful Forest adjoining to it.
Lewis XI. enlarged this Castle, and added a Dungeon to it, where he kept the
Cardinal de Balve a long time: and here it was that Lewis Sforza being confined
by Lewis XIII. died in his Imprisonment, and was Buried in the Church of Nostre
Dame, where is to be seen the Tomb of Agnes Surel, Charles VIIth's Mistress.

Chinon is a pleasant City, where Charles the Seventh was retired, when Joane
of Arc came to find him out and proffer him her Service: And more lately
remarkable for being the place where Rablaise was Born.

CHAP. XIX. Of Beausse, which Comprehends Orleanois, Blesois, and Le Pais
Chartrain.
IN regard there have been no just Bounds given to this Province, because
several Authors, out of a humor join the Neighboring Provinces to it, I shall
not undertake to limit the extent of it; but following the Opinion of those who
divide it into Upper, Middle and Lower, which are commonly called Le Pais
Chartrain, Orleanois, and Blesois; I shall only observe what is most curious in
the Principal Cities of the Province. By the way, you are to observe that this
Country is called the Granary of France, by reason of the great quantity of
Corn which it produces. As for the People, the Chartrains are looked upon to be
Zealous Catholics: The Orleanois, somewhat addicted to Slandering and
Backbiting: The Blesois are said to speak the best French; yet both the one and
the other are very civil and obliging.

Chartres is a City so Ancient, that some Authors affirm it to have been built
by the Gomerites, who were sent into Gaul, a little after Noah's time. However,
certain it is, that the Druids built this City long before the Birth of Christ,
whose Nativity they foretold, and that he should be Born of a Virgin; which was
the reason that Priscus the Roman Governor erected a Temple there, which he
consecrated Virgini Pariturae, to the Virgin that should bear a Son. And seeing
that St. Paul coming to Athens, met with an Altar dedicated to the Unknown God,
we may the more readily believe that either by some Prophetic Spirit, or by
some other Prerogatives only known to Providence, that the Pagans in the midst
of their Darkness had some glimmerings of that knowledge which God reserved for
the Christians. And hence I may observe, that if some Christians were to be met
among the Pagans of those Times, there are more Pagans to be found among the
Christians at this day.

There is a Well to be seen at Chartres, which is called the Saints Well,
because the Romans were wont to throw the Primitive Christians into it. There
belongs to this City a Presidial Court, together with a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Paris, ever since 1622. for before it depended upon the
Archbishop of Sens. There are to be seen in this City many Pieces of Antiquity,
and a great number of Relics. The Cathedral dedicated to the Holy Virgin is
very considerable for the Quire, and the Church underground, and the two
Steeples are the Admiration of Foreigners. The Streets are fair and straight,
the Houses neatly built, the Marketplaces large, and the River Eure affords a
Water very proper for several sorts of Manufacture. In the Year 1591. Hen. IV.
took it from the League, and caused himself to be Crowned in it, by reason that
Reims held out in Rebellion.

Orleans is a very considerable City, dignified with the Title of Dukedom, and
a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Paris, with a Presidial Court and a
University for the Law, founded by St. Lewis, and confirmed by Philip the Fair
in 1312. All this advances much the Honor of the City, but her greater* Glory
to be the Appanage or Child's Portion and Title always belonging to the Second
Son of France, much more Exalts the Idea that Foreigners have of her.

This City is seated upon the Banks of the River Loire, in a Country full of
Vineyards that furnish it with excellent Wine.

Among the most considerable Buildings is to be seen the Church of the Holy
Cross, which the Religionaries ruined in the last Age; but though Henry the
Great caused it to be rebuilt, he has not restored it the Beauty of her Pristin
Antiquity. This City was several times Besieged, and twice miraculously
delivered: Once by the Prayers of her Bishop St. Aignan, when Attila King of
the Hunns besieged it in the Year 450. Long after that the English besieged it
in the Year 1417. at what time it was succored by Joan of Arc, called the Maid
of Orleans. The Kingdom was then in a Low condition, and upon the very brink of
Ruin; at what time this Maid, who was no more then a poor Shepherdess, born at
Dompremi upon the Meuse, received a Command from God to go and succor Orleans,
and to Crown Charles VII. K. of France at Reims. Coming to Court, she made up
to the King, whom she had never seen in her life before; and though he had
nothing to be signalized from the rest, in the crowd of Courtiers that were in
a huddle about him.

She told him of the Command she had received from Heaven; They gave her what
Men she desired, with which she defeated the English and relieved Orleans.
After that she caused the King to be Crowned at Reims, re-conquer'd all
Champagne, and had expelled the English quite out of France, but that she had
the Misfortune to be taken before Compiegne, which she had laid Siege to. When
the English had her in their power, they carried her to Rouen, and Burnt her
for a Witch. She was called the Maid or Virgin, because that having been
searched by several Matrons in the presence of the Queen of Sicily, she was
found to be so. The Orleanois had so great a Veneration for her Memory, that
they set up her Statue upon the Bridge of Orleans.

There are several very fair Country seats in the Parts about Orleans, of which
Chambort is the most remarkable, as being built by the Command of Francis I.
and the Stairs belonging to it, are looked upon to be a kind of a Prodigy; for
that when you would go up into the Chamber over head from the Room where you
are, instead of ascending, you must descend.

The Loire washes the Walls of Bloise as well as of Orleans. This City is
seated in a most delightful Air, which the Pleasure of the Walks about it
renders much more Charming, provided the Weather be dry. For otherwise the Soil
is so fat, that the least Rain makes the ways almost impassable. There is a
very beautiful Castle belongs to it, built upon a Rock, which has been the seat
of several Kings. There is also a Pyramid erected upon the Bridge that crosses
the River, in Honor of Hen. IV. of France. There are also to be seen some fair
Ruins of Roman Antiquity: and Travelers will find a great deal of Pleasure in
viewing the Park that belongs to the Royal Castle.

At some distance from the City is to be seen the Castle of Buri, in the Court
of which is erected a Pillar, on the top of which stands a Figure of King David
in Brass, which was brought from Rome.

The Lake also which is in the Duchy of Vendosme is very remarkable for this,
that the Water abounds in it for seven Years together; but the next seven Years
it lies quite dry. During which time you may perceive Caverns in it that are
extremely deep. The Country people also know by certain Marks of the Height of
the Water, whether the seven Years that the Water is absent will be fruitful or
barren.

Amboise is a very ancient City, where Charles VIII. was Born; and this Prince
it was who built the Castle, which is the greatest Ornament of it. In this
Castle Lewis XII. instituted the Order of the Knights of St. Michael, the First
day of August in the Year 1469. This City is also famous for the Conspiracy
there discovered against Francis II. Catherine de Medicis, his Mother, and all
the Court in 1560. And History informs us, that there was a most Bloody
Butchery of the Conspirators, among whom there was a great number of Persons of
Quality.

CHAP. XX. Of the Island of France.
When Foreigners hear talk of the Island of France, unless they cast their
Eyes upon the Map, they take it for a Land divided from the rest of the
Kingdom. But though it be intercut and intercepted with many Rivers, however
they do not make any Island; only it is a Name which the Province has derived
from little Islands which the Seine surrounds in several places, and among the
rest, from two within the Circuit of Paris; which are called, the Island of
Nostre Dame, and the Island of the Palace. This Island is the most Noble
Portion of the most Illustrious, most Potent and most Flourishing Kingdom in
the World.

This is what the Author stretches out in Praise of his own Country; but
whether it agree so well with the present Condition of France, is left for the
Impartial to judge.

Paris is not only the Capital of this Province, but the Metropolis of the
whole Kingdom; nor is it without good Reason that a certain Author calls it,
The Queen of the Cities in the World. It is so ancient, that the Time is not
positively known when it began to be built. Some say, that the Foundations of
it were laid before the Death of Noah. However it were, Authors agree that it
is more ancient then Rome, as it is much larger; in regard that Rome is not
above Twenty three Thousand and fifty Paces in Circuit; but that Paris is
Twenty six Thousand eight Hundred and fifty Paces in Compass, the Suburbs being
therein comprehended.

In the Year 1622. the Bishopric was Erected into an Archbishopric; The
present Archbishop is one of the most Learned, the most Illustrious, and the
most Obliging Prelates in the Kingdom; Messire Francois de Harlay, Duke and
Peer of France; Commander of the King's Orders; formerly Archbishop of Rouen,
and one whose Merit is Universally known. He has a Seat in the Parliament of
Paris, which is the first in the Kingdom; and which is usually called the
Parliament of Peers. But besides this Tribunal, there are several others in
Paris, as the Chamber of Accounts or of the Exchequer, which was made Sedentary
at Paris, at the same time that the Parliament was fixed; The Grand Chastelet,
where the Provost of Paris sits as a Judge, and may be called the Sessions
House of Paris. There is also the Conseil du Roy, or the King's Council, which
consists of such Persons as he pleases to make Choice of to Consult about
Public and Important Business; Conseil de Finances, composed of a
Superintendant, Intendants, Comptrollers, Registers, etc. and the Conseil Prive
de Parties, which is Assembled about particular Causes and Controversies
between Party and Party: Besides several other Courts and Chambers which we
omit for Brevities sake.

The University of Paris is the most famous in all France, Italy, Spain, or
Germany; where all manner of Learning and Sciences are taught. It was founded
in the Year 791. by Charlemaign, at the persuasion of the learned Alcuin, who
was the first Professor of it. And I am apt to believe, that to justify the
Opinion of M. Balzac, who calls the University of Paris the Latin Country,
there needs no more then to tell ye, that it consists of Fifty five Colleges,
which are always full of an Infinite Number of Scholars; and every Body knows
that the Sorbonne is a Nursery of Learned Men, and the most rigid College in
France.

I do not here propose to my self to make an exact Description of all the
Beauties of Paris; for a Volume in Folio would not contain 'em all. I shall
only take notice of those things that render it most remarkable, without
entering into a particular Enumeration of all Particulars. The chiefest without
doubt is this, that it is the place where the Monarchs of France have all along
kept their Courts: and when the Palace of the Louvre, which is joined to that
of the Tuilleries, shall be finished, with that Order and Magnificence as it is
begun, 'twill be the most Noble Building in the Universe. There will not be
only Lodging sufficient for all the Court; but also for the Ministers of State,
for all the Officers of the Crown, and all Foreign Ambassadors that come to
reside in the City.

The Cathedral Church which is dedicated to the Holy Virgin, is a Hundred
seventy four Paces in length, and Sixty broad, and a Hundred Paces high. There
is to be seen the Old and New Testament engraved upon the Stones of the Quire;
and over the Door of the Quire is to be seen a Crucifix, with an Image of our
Lady, which are two Masterpieces of Workmanship. The Frontispiece of the
Church is adorned with three large Portals, over which are One and twenty
Figures of the King's that Reigned from Childebert, to Philip the August. Two
high square Towers serve it instead of a Steeple, which are esteemed to be the
fairest in France. So that it is commonly said, If you would have a perfect
Cathedral, you must join the Quire of Bauvaise, the Body of Amiens, the Portal
of Reimes, the Steeple of Chartres, and the Towers of Paris. From the bottom to
the top of these Towers you ascend with Three hundred eighty nine Steps; and at
the top there is a Gallery that leads from one Tower to the other. To the
Church it self belong Seven Doors and Forty five Chapels. But that which is
most of all to be wondered at is this, that this Vast and Magnificent Structure
is built upon Piles driven into the Ground, by reason it stands at the farther
end of the Island of the Palace. The Quire, the Body of the Church, and the
Chapels are adorned with lovely Pictures, and many precious Relics are
preserved within those sacred Walls.

The Holy Chapel of the Palace, is a Church which is very remarkable, not only
for Antiquities and Relics, but for the Workmanship of the Building which is
supported by Pillars so small, that a Man would wonder how they are able to
bear so great a weight. The most famous Relics that are locked up within these
two Places, are the Crown of Thorns with which Christ was Crowned: The
Table-Cloath upon which he Supped with his Apostles: The Sponge, and Head of
the Spear wherewith his Side was pierced; Some of the Virgins Milk, Moses's
Rod, a piece of St. John Baptist's Head, etc. In short, not to engage my self
to give an account of all the Churches in particular; I shall only tell ye
that Paris contains One and fifty Parishes* of which the most part consist of
Twenty five, Thirty and Thirty five thousand Communicants; Two and fifty
Monasteries, Seventy eight Nunneries, and Thirty Hospitals.

If we add to this, that there are in Paris Eight hundred and thirty Streets,
Twelve Suburbs, of which St. German des Prez alone is larger then many Capital
Cities; Ten Bridges, Seventy three Piazza's and Marketplaces, though de la
Croix says but Twenty five, and a great Number of Palaces or Noble-Men's
Houses, 'twill be no wonder to us what Charles V. said, That he had seen in
France a World, a City and a Village: The World was Paris; the City was
Orleans, and the Village was Poitiers. It would be no difficult thing to Arm in
Paris Two hundred Thousand Men for the Service of the State; for an Army might
be raised only of the People that wear Liveries, from Eighteen to Thirty Years
of Age.

The Bastille is a Castle built near St. Anthony's Gate for the Security of the
Arsenal, which is one of the best provided in Europe. This Fortress is flanked
with Four Towers, surrounded with Moats, and furnished with Good Artillery; and
is the Place where many times Prisoners of State are secured.

The Royal Hospital for the Infirm, is a House which Lewis XIV. caused to be
built for the Entertainment of Officers and Soldiers who are not in a
Condition to bear Arms, as having been Maimed in the King's Service. And there
may be conveniently Lodged in this Hospital Four Thousand Men, who keep as
exact Guard within the Place, as if they were in a Garrison.

Now in regard that Paris lies in the Heart of the Kingdom, there is no need of
keeping any Garrison in it. But because it is the general Concourse of all
sorts of People, and for that it frequently happens that Rogues and
Night-Robbers wait their Opportunities, and generally practice their Villainies
in Places of great resort; the City therefore keeps a standing Watch of Two
hundred and fifty Men, part Horse and part Foot, which are divided into several
Quarters to walk the Rounds and ride the Patroule. But in regard the Criminals
make it their Business to avoid 'em, the Citizens and others are frequently set
upon after the Watch is past, not being able to help themselves. It Is true,
that in my Opinion it were an easy thing to secure Paris against the Robberies
and Murders which are too frequently there committed, with little Charge to
the City; but it would be a rashness in me to go about to instruct the most
understanding Magistrates in the World.

I have already mentioned, that in Paris there are Seventy and three Public
Piazza's or Marketplaces. I shall only speak of those three which are the most
Modern, and which are also the most considerable. The first is called the Royal
Place, which is in that part where formerly stood the Palais des Tournelles, or
of the Parlamental Court for Criminal Causes, near St. Antonies-Street. It Is
very regular, and environed with Thirty six Pavillions no less proportionable,
and railed quite round with Iron Spikes on all the four sides. All the
foreparts of the Houses round the Piazza are supported with Pillars that make a
kind of a Gallery or Portico, under which People may walk at all times
sheltered from the Sun and the Rain. Hen. IV. began it, but in regard it was
not finished till in the Reign of Lewis XIII. they set up a Brass Statue of
King Lewis, omitting his Predecessor, Erected the 27th. of September. 1639. upon
a Pedestal of white Marble, with Inscriptions on the four Sides.

The Second is the Place de Victoires in the Parish of St. Eustachius, at the
End of the Street des Petits Champs; which some People know better by Mazarin's
Quarter. Messire Francois d'Aubusson, Duke de Fueillade, built this Piazza, as
an Eternal Monument of his Fidelity and Zeal for the Honor of Lewis XIV. in
the Year 1686. and in his Memory Erected in the Middle of it, the King's Statue
of Gilt Brass.

The Groupe of this Statue is composed of three Figures: The one represents the
King standing upright in his Royal Robes: The other Victory, which stands
behind, having one foot upon a Globe, from whence she raises her self, and puts
a Crown upon the King's Head. The Third is a Cerberus, which the King tramples
under foot; alluding to the Triple Alliance, which the King made a shift to
break by the help of a Kind Neighbor. The King's Statue is Thirteen foot high:
and the Groupe with a Hercules's Club, a Lions Skin, and a Helmet weighs above
Thirty thousand weight. The whole is very neatly Gilt, and raised upon a
Pedestal of vein'd Marble, two and twenty foot high, adorned with four Bodies
of Brass in Chains, with Inscriptions denoting the Subjection to which the King
has reduced his Enemies. At the four Entrances into the Place stands a Brass
Lanthorn Gilt, into which there are Candles put every Night to enlighten the
Place. Which Lanthorns are sustained by three Columns of Marble, adorned with
Base Reliefs of Brass which represent the King's Victories.

Monsieur de la Fueillade foreseeing that Time brings all things to ruin, and
defaces the noblest Structures; and being desirous to preserve this Monument
entire to perpetuity, made a Deed of Conveyance of all his Estate to the
present Duke of Fueillade, and the Male Heirs of his Body, and for want of such
Issue to the next of Kin, that bore the Name and Arms of Aubusson, and for want
of such to the City of Paris, upon Condition that whoever inherit shall every
Five and twenty Years reguild the Statue, Lanthorns and Ornaments at their own
Costs and Charges, keep all the several Pieces of Workmanship in repair, and
find Candles for the Lanthorns to enlighten the Piazza.

The Third is a very fair and large Piazza very like the Royal Piazza, only
that it has not Arches round about in form of a Portico. It joins to St.
Honor's Street facing the Convents of the Brown Mendicants and the Capuchins;
and runs as far as the New Street of the Little Fields. M. de Louvois began it,
but since his Death, the Buildings have been discontinu'd. It Is called the
Piazza of the Conquests, and was designed for the setting up the King's Statue
on Horseback, which is already finished; and the Ornaments that are to
accompany it, are to set forth the Glorious Actions of that Monarch.

And since I am speaking of the Public Places where the Statues of our Kings
are to be seen, I must not omit the Statue of Henry the Great erected upon Pont
Neuf, just against the Dauphin Piazza. It is of Brass, upon a Horse of the same
Metal, raised upon a Pedestal of Marble and Jasper, adorned with Base Reliefs,
and Inscriptions in Letters of Gold, denoting the Principal Victories of that
Great Monarch.

Pont Neuf, standing over the Point of the Island of the Palace, was begun in
1578. under the Reign of Henry III. but was not finished till 1604. when Henry
IV. was come to the Crown, and had in part appeased the Troubles of his
Kingdom. It consists of two Bridges, which the Point of the Island joins
together, supported by Twelve Arches. On both sides of this Bridge upon an
Elevation of about three foot, stand a great Number of Brokers Shops, which do
not hinder, but that four Coaches may go abreast in the middle. It is also
adorned with a House that stands upon Piles, which is commonly called La
Samaritaine, because of the Figure of the Samaritan Woman which is there to be
seen, together with that of Christ, who instructs her that there is a Water
more wholesome then that which she seeks for.

Within these few Years there was another Bridge built much after the fashion
of Pont Neuf, over against the Palace of the Tuilleries, which is now called
Pont Royal, the Royal Bridge, and stands where the Red Bridge stood before.
There are moreover several other Bridges very considerable, as the Change
Bridge, St. Michael's, the Bridge of Nostredame, and Pont Marie; which have
Houses on both sides, so high that they cannot be perceived to stand over the
Water.

The French Academy is become so famous over Europe, that all Men have a
particular Esteem for all the Learned Men who have the Honor to be Members of
it. It was not Confirmed by the King's Edict till the Year 1635. though it were
set up five or six Years before, and was instituted by Chance. For that in the
Year 1620. certain Learned Persons that Lodged in several parts of the City,
resolved to meet once a Week at one of their Houses by Turns, that so they
might with more ease confer together. And this was that which gave a Beginning
to this Academy, which was at first under the Protection of Cardinal Richlieu.
Now the Number of the Academies is fixed to Forty.

Besides this Academy, Paris has also Three others; The Academy Royal of
Painting, which owes the Beginning of it to M. de Noyers Secretary of State,
and Surveyor of the King's Buildings in the Reign of Lewis XIII. They met at
first in the Palais Royal, but were afterward removed into the Galleries of
the Louvre, at what time it was settled by a Decree of Council in the Year
1648. The Academy Royal of Sciences, composed of a great number of Learned
Physicians, Philosophers, and Mathematicians, settled by Mr. Colbert, Minister
of State, at the Solicitation of M. du Clos, and the Abbot of Bonzaisi. And
for the sake of these Learned Men it is, that the King has erected an
Observatory in the Suburb of St. James, for the making new Experiences, and
discovery of new Secrets in Physic and Mathematics. And lastly, The Royal
Academy of Architecture, settled by the same Mr. Colbert in 1671.

As for the Divertisements of Paris* no body can be ignorant that there are
wanting neither Exquisite Voices for Opera's, nor good Actors for French and
Italian Comedies; nor any sort of excellent Company; whether for Conversation,
Play, or Courtship. And for Places of Meeting and Walking, there are the
Tuilleries, the Queen's Court, and the Groves of Boulogne and Vincennes.

But I perceive this Chapter has carried me too far, which obliges me to omit a
Thousand Wonderful Things which Paris encloses, and only to tell Foreigners*
That they can never be able to understand the Beauty and Magnificence of it,
till they have made a considerable stay in the Place; and that the most
elevated Idea's which I could give 'em, by a more Copious Description and
better Studied, would come short of what they really are.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Places adjoining to Paris.
AFter what I have said of the Grandeur, Beauty and Magnificence of Paris,
'twill be no hard matter to believe that the parts about it are extremely well
peopled; There being Ten Thousand Boroughs, Villages or Castles within Ten
Leagues round it. I shall only say something of the most Considerable places,
not much caring for the Criticisms of those who shall censure me for not
reporting faithfully all their Beauties. For I declare to 'em before hand, that
I shall not engage to satisfy 'em with a Piece of Perfection. For in short, if
a Man should go about to examine all the Wonders, Magnificence and Riches of
the Royal Seats not far from Paris, it would be enough to dazzle his Eyes; nor
can any Man Contemplate 'em without being ravished into Ecstasy.

Since the Reign of Lewis the Just, Versailles was no more then an Ordinary
Castle, consisting of a Body of Lodgings, accompanied with two Wings, and
ending in four Pavillons. But in 1661. the King proposing to himself to make
some stay there, enlarged this Building with another much more Magnificent. At
length in 1678, the Old Castle not appearing worthy the State and Grandeur of
so Great a Monarch, it was pulled down, to make room for another more Superb:
for the rearing of which, all the most Famous Masters in Europe for
Architecture, Sculpture and Painting were sent for to display their utmost
Skill. So that the Magnificence of every Apartment out-does whatever there is
of most rare in Foreign Countries: Even the Stables of Versailles are more
Magnificent and Nobler then the Palaces of several Princes of Europe. There is
a City built on two sides of the Castle with extraordinary Symmetry. The Castle
is of so large Extent, that not only all the Princes and Princesses of the
Blood have Large and Convenient Lodgings within it, but also all the Ministers
and Secretaries of State, and a great number of other Lords.

The Soil about Versailles is naturally dry and unpleasant. But Lewis the
Great, has enforced Nature, as I may so say, to be more favorable to that Part
which he had made choice of for his Residence. For the Earth not only produces
all the Plants, the Fruits, the Flowers that grow in the most fertile places in
the World, but by the benefit of the Aqueducts this place abounds so much in
Water, that you would take it rather for a Sea, when all the Engines play, then
for a Garden of Pleasure. And what is more particular and almost incredible,
those Engines throw the Water up into the Air in different Figures. You shall
perceive Galleries of Water, Triumphal Arches, Pavillions, Arbors, Theaters,
Mountains, etc. The fairest Receptacles for Water, are those of Ceres, Flora,
Apollo and Bacchus. The Banqueting-Hall, the Labyrinth, the Walk of Water, are
Machines worthy the Curiosity of Strangers.

All this Water is drawn from the Sein, by the Assistance of a great number of
Pumps ranvers'd, and carried to Versailles by the only Engine which is to be
seen in Europe; being the Invention of the Sieurs de Ville and Ranequin. This
Piece of Workmanship which may contend with the Seven Wonders of the World,
consists of Fourteen Wheels that have Eight and twenty Motions, which are
caused by Twenty Chains, and Eight Water Engines, with which they force up the
Water into an Aqueduct of Thirty six Arches seated upon the Top of a Mountain,
and Five hundred and seventy Foot from the side of the River. All these Motions
work Night and Day, there being no more then 18 Men, in three different
Divisions to look after 'em. All people admire the Effects of the King's Glory
and Grandeur, and the large extent of the Genius of those Artists who invented
this Engine to the highest degree of Perfection.

They who will visit the Apartments of Versailles, the Gardens, the Park, the
Place where all sorts of Strange Creatures are kept; the Grotto's, the
Labyrinths, and the Castle of Trianon, which is a real Jewel, all wrought
within and without with Marble of diverse colors, have need of Eight days time;
neither will that suffice to view all these Wonders that surpass Imagination.

The Castle of Merli, but a small League from Versailles, is another Royal
Seat, whither the King goes usually twice a Month, to spend two or three days;
during which time, he gives Audience to no body, unless it be to his Ministers,
and those that are sent for to Council, which his Majesty holds there,
concerning the most Important Affairs of State.

Next to Versailles, St. German on Lay may dispute for Priority before all the
other Royal Houses. This place is famous for the Birth of Lewis XIV. upon the
5th. of September. 1638. He was baptized in the Old Castle the 21st. of April,
1643.

Besides the Regularity and Magnificence of the Castle, there are the Gardens
and Grotto's to be seen, adorned with a Thousand Figures of Water. Among the
rest, in one of these Grotto's there is an Orpheus playing upon his Harp, and
with the motion of his Head and his Body keeping time to his Instrument. He is
also attended by a great number of Beasts that follow him, as being enchanted
with the Melody of his Harp; which also draws after him Rocks, Trees and
Plants. There is likewise Paradise, Hell, the Sea, and the Four Elements so
livelily represented, that you would think your self in some Enchanted Place.

About a League from St. Germans, upon one side of Paris, you meet with the
Traitors Wood, divided into two parts by a spacious Highway. The Branches
which you break off from one side of this Wood sink; but those which you break
off from the other side swim in the Water. In this Wood it was that the
Perfidious Ganelon contrived his Treason against the Peers of France, and all
the great Captains of Charlemagne, which was put in Execution at the Battle of
Roncevaux, so fatal to France, in the Passage of the Pyreneans.

St. Clou is another very beautiful Royal Seat, belonging to Monsieur, the
King's only Brother. It stands upon a Hill near the Banks of the River Seine,
almost half way between Paris and Versailles. The Paintings are very Noble, the
Furniture very Rich, and the Cabinet of China; wherein there are an infinite
number of Curiosities, and vast Riches, is worthy the Grandeur and Magnificence
of the Prince to whom it belongs.

As for the Castle of Madrit, Francis I. caused it to be built in the Wood of
Boulogne, in memory of his being carried a Prisoner into Spain; to let the
Spaniards understand, that he held it for no shame to have been made a Prisoner
of War at the Head of his Army; which had never befallen him, had he contented
himself to Command in his Cabinet, as the Kings of Spain do. They who believe
this Castle to be built after the same form as that, where this Monarch was
kept in durance, are much deceived; for it is little or nothing like it. It is
nothing so magnificent now as formerly; and the little care that is taken to
repair it, shows that the King has no great Fancy for the Seat, nor minds
whether it go to ruin or no.

The Castle of Vincennes is considerable, as being the Place where Prisoners of
War of great Quality are Confined; and many times Prisoners of State; witness
the Princes of Conde and Conti, and the Duke of Longueville, in the Time of
Cardinal Mazarin. It is very large, and flanked with Eight great Towers. Here
are kept the Chains of the Streets of Paris; which Charles VI. took away after
he had chastised that City for her Rebellion.

Fountainbleau, is another Royal Seat, so called from the great number of
Springs in that place. It lies about Twelve Leagues from Paris: and in regard
it is a Country proper for Hunting, the Court spends a great part of the Autumn
in this Place. This Castle is very large, as being said to contain Nine hundred
Chambers, Halls, Cabinets or Galleries; where Art has quite exhausted her self
to render every thing worthy the Residence of our Monarchs. At Fontainbleau it
was where Marshal Biron was disarmed by the King's Order; and where Cardinal
Perron and the Sieur du Plessis-Mornai met in the Presence of Hen. 4. to
Dispute upon Matters of Religion; which drew thither the most Learned of both
Parties: and it is said, that when the two Disputants could not agree, the King
addressing himself to the Cardinal, asked him, Whether all those that were
separated from the Roman Church were damned? His Eminency and the rest of the
Catholic Doctors, assured him, That there was nothing more certain. After
which, the K. demanding from those of the Protestant Party, whether it were a
Point of their Doctrine, that there was no Salvation for those that were not of
their Communion? They made answer, 'Twas none of their Opinion; for that they
thought the Mercy of God might extend to all Men. That being so, replied the
King, ' it is my Judgment to choose the Certainty before the Uncertainty: and so
turned Roman Catholic.

Chantilli is a fair Seat belonging to Monsieur the Prince, whither the Court
often goes for the Recreation of Hunting. It is an Epitome of Art and Nature.
It Is observed, that Hen. IV. being to Answer a Letter which he had received
from the K. of Spain, crammed full of Titles, not only of the Kingdoms which
the Kings of Spain, and their Ancestors possessed, but of those they never had;
as also of Territories in the New World, not yet discovered; took upon him no
other Titles, but only Citizen of Paris, and Lord of Chantilli. And there is
much the same Story of Francis I. who writeing to Charles V. filled the first
Page with only these words repeated, King of France, King of France; adding
only at the lower end, Lord of Vauvre and Gonesse.

I shall say nothing of an Infinite Number of other Beautiful Seats and Houses
of Pleasure in the Parts adjoining to Paris, as Ruel, Meudon, Conflans, Seaux,
etc. which are all fit for the Entertainment of Kings, whether in respect of
their Bigness or Magnificence. It remains that I now say something of St.
Denis, the Burying-place of our Monarchs; for which I design a particular
Chapter. Only before I conclude this, I must not omit to tell ye, that there
is at Alincourt near Paris, the Tomb of a Mother and her Children that gave
Occasion to this Epitaph.

Here lies the Son, here lies the Mother,
Here lies the Daughter with the Father,
Here lies the Sister and the Brother,
Here lies the Husband, here the Wife;
All but Three Body's, on my Life.
To Expound this Riddle, you must know, That a certain Young Stripling
importuned his Mothers Maid to grant him you may guess what; who told her
Mistress, the Mother of the Young Man and a Widow. She ordered the Servant to
give him a Meeting in her Chamber, where the Mother put her self in place of
the Maid; and having had the Company of her Son without discovering who she
was, at Nine Months end was brought to Bed of a Daughter; which she put out
till she came to such an Age, and then sent for her home. The Son in the mean
time had been Traveling for several Years, but then returning Home and finding
the Young Virgin, which his Mother said was an Orphan, to be very pretty,
Married her; and so of his Daughter and his Sister made her his Wife. The Young
Couple died before the Mother, who then discovered the Secret, and would needs
be Interred in the same Tomb.

CHAP. XXII. Of St. Denis.
ST. Denis is a small City in the Island of France, Six Miles from Paris. It
was formerly called Catuliaca; but was called St. Denis, from St. Denis the
Areopagite, who being Beheaded at Montmartre, carried his Head in his Hands as
far as Catuliaque; that is to say, about a League and a half. King Dagobert
Erected a very stately Church in this place, Three hundred Foot in Length, Two
hundred Broad, and Fourscore Foot High, supported by Sixty Pillars. It Is now a
Royal Abbey of the Benedictin Order; wherein are kept all the Ornaments for the
Coronation of our Kings; which do not a little augment the Luster and Riches of
the Treasury of this Abbey. The Church is also Famous for being the
Burying-Place of our Monarchs, and of all the Royal Family. Here follows a
Catalogue of the Kings and Queens whose Tombs are to be seen in the Church of
St. Denis.

Dagobert, who died in the Year 638 Clovis the Second. 656 Clotaire III. 664
Thieri I. 690 Clotaire IV. 720 Childeric III. a Monk. Pepin the Short. 768
Charles the Bald. 877 Lewis III. 882 Charlemane 884 Eudes. 898 Hugh Capet. 997
Robert. 1033 Henry I. 1060 Philip I. 1131 Lewis VI. 1137 Philip II. 1223 Lewis
VIII. 1226 Lewis IX. Sirnam'd the Saint. 1270 Philip III. 1285 Philip IV. 1314
Lewis X. 1316 John I. 1316 Philip V. 1322 Charles IV. 1328 Philip VI. de
Valois. 1350 John II. 1364 Charles V. 1380 Charles VI. 1422 Charles VII. 1461
Charles VIII. 1498 Lewis XII. 1515 Francis I. 1547 Henry II. 1559 Francis II.
1560 Charles IX. 1574 Henry III. 1589 Henry IV. 1610 Lewis XIII. 1643
A Catalogue of the Queens that lie Buried at St. Denis's.
Nantild, the Wife of Dagobert. Bertha, the Wife of Pepin. Hermintrude, the
Wife of Charles the Bald. Constance, the Wife of Robert. Margaret, the Wife of
St. Lewis. Isabel, the Wife of Philip III. Joane of Eureux, the Wife of Charles
IV. Joane, the Wife of Philip VI. Joane, Queen of Navarre. Joane, Wife of
Charles VI. Marie, Wife of Charles VII. Clandia, Wife of Francis I. Blanch,
Second Wife of Philip VI. Ann of Bretaigne, Wife of Lewis XII. Catherine de
Medicis, Wife of Hen. II. Margaret, Queen of Navarre. Mary de Medicis, Wife of
Hen. IV. Ann of Austria, Wife of Lewis XIII. Henrietta Maria, Queen of England.
Mary Teresa of Austria, Wife of Lewis XIV. And, Marie Ann, Christina, Victoria,
Dauphiness of France, who deceased in 1690.
I do not here insert the Tombs of the Children of France, nor those of the
Princes and Princesses of the Blood, nor of those of the Bodies of the Saints
that lie in this Church, for fear of being too tedious; believing moreover,
that the Reader will take more delight to peruse the following Inventory of the
most remarkable things that are to be seen in the Treasury of St. Denis's,
which makes so great a noise in the World, and which alone draws thither such
an infinite number of Foreigners.

Before I ascend into the Room wherein this Treasure is locked up, there is to
be seen above the Chief Altar, a Cross of Gold seven foot high, enriched with
Precious Stones and Oriental Pearl.

A Table of Gold five foot long, and three foot high, in the middle of which is
to be seen our Savior in Relief, together with six Apostles and four Angels,
the whole of Gold, enriched with Precious Stones and Oriental Pearls, a Sea
Agate, a Topaze, and two admirable Grenates.

Another Cross of Gold six foot high, adorned with Precious Stones.

So soon as you come into the Great Room, entering in upon the Right, you meet
with in the first Cup-board or Press,

A great Cross of massy Gold covered with Rubies, Saphirs, Emeraulds, and
Oriental Pearls; and under the Croison, a piece of Wood, which as they say, is
a piece of the Real Cross, about a foot and a half long.

A Shrine of Gold enclosing a Crucifix made of the same Wood, by the hands of
Clement III.

The Oratory of Philip the August, enriched with an Infinite Number of Precious
Stones, which encloses Thirty four sorts of Relics; among which are reck'nd
one of the Thorns of our Savior's Crown* The Sponge, with which they gave him
Vinegar and Gall; A piece of his Garment; A Viol full of the Blood and Water
which issued from his Side; and some of the Myrrh which the Magi offered.

One of the Nails, with which our Savior was fastened to the Cross.

And Image of the Holy Virgin* gilt and enameled, which holds in one hand a
Shrine containing her own Hair, and some pieces of her Garments.

Another of the same, holding another Casket, wherein are preserved the Linen
made use of in Burying our Savior.

An Image of the same Metal of St. John the Evangelist, with one of his Teeth.

A Shrine of Gold, containing as they assure us, the Bones of several Saints.

An Arm-bone of St. Eustachius.

Such another Bone of St. Simeon in a Shrine of Gold enchac'd with Precious
Stone.

One of the Pitchers of Cana in Galilee.

The two Crowns made use of at the Coronation of Hen. IV. one of which is of
Gold, the other enameled.

The Scepter, and the Hand of Justice in Silver, of the same King.

This Hand of Justice, is a hand at the top of a Rod, held by the King as a
Mark of Sovereignty.

Two costly Mitres of Abbots; one of which is adorned with an Embellishment of
Precious Stones upon a Ground of Pearls.

A fair Crosier, once an Abbots, and a Battoon of Silver gilt, enriched with
Precious Stones.

In the Second Press or Ambrie.
An enameled Image of St. Hilary, enriched with Precious Stones and Pearls.

A great Cross of massy Gold, enriched with Grenates, Saphirs and Pearls.

A Shrine of Silver gilt, with a Finger Flesh and Bone, of St. Bartholomew.

Another of the same, with the Shoulder Bone, as they say, of John the Baptist.

A Cross silver gilt, with a piece of the real Cross.

An Image silver gilt of St. Denis of Areopagus.

Another of the same of St. Nicholas.

Another of the same of St. Katherine.

An Eye of St. Ledger, Bishop of Autun.

A Shrine silver gilt, enclosing the Relics of the Prophet Isaiah.

Another of the same, with a Bone of St. Pantaleon.

Another of Crystal, with the Hair and Garments of St. Margerie.

Another of Silver, containing the Leprosy which Christ took from the Leper
mentioned in the Gospel.

An Eagle of Gold enriched with Precious Stones, which served for a Clasp for
K. Dagobert's Cloak.

Dagobert's Scepter of Gold enameled.

An Oriental Jacinth.

The two Crowns of Lewis XIII. the one of Gold, the other enameled.

An enameled Crown made use of at the Funeral Pomp of Ann of Austria.

An Image of our Lady in Ivory, enriched with Precious Stones.

A Missal in Manuscript, the Cover of which is enriched with Plates of Gold.

A Manuscript of the Four Evangelists, written above Eleven hundred Years ago,
in Letters of Gold and Silver, upon Purple Vellum.

In the Third Ambrie.
The Head of St. Denis enriched with Precious Stones: His Cross of Wood all
covered with Gold and Precious Stones, as also his Traveling Stick.

The right Hand, Flesh and Bone, of the Apostle St. Thomas, in a Shrine of
Gold, enriched with Pearls, Rubies, and great Pearls.

An enameled Shrine, where through a Crystal you see the Lower Chap of St.
Lewis.

The Crown of the same St. Lewis, of massy Gold, beset with Precious Stones.

A Seal of Gold with a Saphir Stone, wherein his Image is engraved with these
Letters, S. L.

A Sword which he brought in his first Expedition from the Holy Land.

A wooden Cup of Tamarisk wherein he drank.

A Shrine which he carried along with him in his Expeditions, with a Bone of
St. Denis.

His Hand of Justice, of Silver gilt.

The Clasp of his Cloak of the same, beset with Precious Stones.

A Chalice of Oriental Agate, with a great number of Precious Stones.

The Effigies of the Queen of Sheba upon a Brouch of Agate.

A Gondola of Agate and Onyx.

The two Crowns of Lewis XIV. the one of Gold, the other enameled.

In the Fourth Ambrie.
A great Image, Silver gilt of St. Benedict, extremely Rich.

A great Cross of massy Gold, covered with Pearl, and enriched with large
Saphirs.

The Oratory of Charlemain, all of Gold, where the multitudes of Saphirs,
Emraulds, Agates, and Oriental Pearls that glitter in it, vastly enhaunce the
Price of it. This Oratory preserves an Arm of St. George.

The Crown of Charlemain, all of Gold, and embellished like the Oratory. This
Crown is carried to Reims, at the Coronation of our Kings; with the Scepter,
the Hand of Justice, the Spurs, the Clasp for the Mantle* the Book of
Ceremonies, and Prayers for the Coronation. All the Ornaments are of that
Richness as befits the Use which is made of 'em.

The Crown of Gold that Joane of Eureux were, enriched with Rubies, Saphirs and
Pearl, serves for the Coronation of the Queens that is Performed at St. Denis.

Several Vessels of Gold, Crystal, and other Materials very Rich.

The Portraiture of Nero upon an Agate; which is looked upon as one of the
Noblest Pieces of Curiosity in the Treasury.

In other Cupboards in General.
There are moreover Four other Ambries, which do not contain such vast Wealth,
but only Relics or Antiquities; of which these are the most considerable.

An enameled Shrine, embellished with Precious Stones, wherein lies the Body
of St. Lewis.

Judas's Lanthorn; the Sword of the Maid of Orlean's; a Unicorn's Horn, seven
foot long; and a Stool of Copper, which, as they say, was Dagobert's Throne.

Beside all these things of which I have given you a Catalogue, there are
several other things very remarkable, which I insert not here, for fear of
being Tedious; and therefore to conclude this Chapter, I shall only inform the
Reader, that the Monks who show the Treasury, very distinctly give an account
of every thing, and tell you the time and the occasion that all these
Curiosities were brought to this Place.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Normandy, and the Country of Maine.
NOrmandy is a very fair large Province of France, with the Title of a Dukedom,
bounded Eastward by the Island of France and Picardy; by the Ocean to the
North; by Bretagne to the West, and Beausse and le Maine to the South. The
length of it is Seventy two Leagues (de la Croix says 73. from Aumale to the
Coast of Courantin) and Thirty in breadth (37. says de la Croix from Alenson to
the City of Eu). The Name of it is absolutely German; for Noort-Man, signifies
a Man of the North: so that the Name it bears was given it by the People of the
North, that Pipirated upon the Seas, and afterward settled themselves in
Normandy, and ravaged the Country to the very Walls of Paris. William the
Norman laid Claim to England, and Invading it under Pretense of Title, his
Successors Kings of England, became Masters of Normandy. But Philip the August
united it to the Crown of France, and Charles the Seventh expelled the English.

This Province being the most Northern part of the Kingdom is also the Goldest.
It is divided into Upper and Lower. It abounds in all sorts of Fruit,
especially Pears and Apples, of which they make Cider, and which serves 'em
instead of Wine; for Wine they have none but what they fetch from the
Neighboring Provinces. As for Corn, it produces more then suffices the
Inhabitants. The Dyers also have their Madder and Woad from thence. The Humor
of the Common People does 'em no great Credit: They are looked upon to have
more defects then Perfections.

The Normans are accused to be very choleric, litigious upon every Trifle, and
not to be too great Slaves to their words, when their Interest is concerned. So
then, when you deal with a Norman, the first Question is, whether he will
insist upon the Privileges of the Country; that is to say, whether he will go
from his word, when the Bargain is concluded. And therefore when a Man has
failed of his word, it is a common thing to say, He is a Norman. But the Gentry
and Persons well educated, who have a share of Honor, are to be excepted out
of this Number. Moreover, they have as great an Antipathy against the Bretons,
as the Bretons have against them.

Rouen is the Principal City of Normandy, dignified with an Archbishop's See,
and the Seat of a Parliament, a Chamber of Accounts, an Audit of the Treasurers
of France, a Chamber of Money and a Presidial Court. The Parliament had that
Name given it first of all by Francis I. in 1515. whereas before it was called
the Court of Exchequer, founded by Philip the Fair in 1286. This City is seated
upon the Banks of the River Seine, on the one side, on the other in a Valley
environed with Hills thick spread with Wood. From the East come little Rivers,
which run through the Town, keep the Streets clean, and after they have turned
several Mills, fall into the Seine. But the nearness of it to the Sea, is that
which makes it a Town of great Trade when Commerce is open. Among those things
which it has most remarkable, we are to admire the Bridge of Boats over the
Seine, Two hundred and seventy Paces in length. For though it be all Paved, and
appear as firm as a Bridge of Stone; yet it rises and sinks according to the
Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea. This Bridge was made to supply the want of
another Stone Bridge of 15 Arches that was ruined, and was accounted one of the
Fairest Bridges in France.

The Castle is fortified with Eleven great Towers, which all Vessels outward or
inward bound, are engaged to salute with Three Guns at a time. The
Fortifications are Regular and of good defense.

The Cathedral is consecrated to the Holy Virgin; wherein are to be seen
several Mausoleum's of the Dukes of Normandy, with a Treasury in the Vestry;
which was much more considerable before the Huguenots plunder's it during the
Civil Wars of the last Age. There are three Towers that serve instead of a
Steeple; one of which is so high, that you must ascend Five hundred and fifty
Steps, before you come at the great Bell, which is called George d' Amboise, by
reason it was made by the Order of the Cardinal d' Amboise. Over the Portal of
this Cathedral is to be seen a Triumphal Arch, where Henry IV. is represented
chasing the Lions and the Wolves out of his Sheepfold; the League enchain'd
and gnawing her Chains; and the King of Spain beholding all these Trophies with
a Pensive and Melancholy look.

There are very fair Structures at Rouen, as well Sacred as Profane, which are
marks of her Antiquity, and Strangers always go to see the Place where the
English burnt the Maid of Orleance.

Normandy is blessed with several other good Ports; as that of St. Valeri, which
is a very Commodious Haven. But Diepe is much the Stronger. This City is seated
at the Foot of the Mountains from whence the River of Arques takes its rise;
which separates the Suburbs from the City. The Castle of Pollet Commands the
Haven, and a Citadel defends the other side of the Town. The Streets are
large, adorned with several Churches and Marketplaces. The Haven brings it a
good Trade, and the Seamen have gained a Reputation in the World; for that the
Best Sea-Compasses, and the most Exact Quadrants, are there said to be made.
The Inhabitants also were the first that wrought in Ivory and Tortoise-Shell.
They are also Excellent and very quick at the Riming Exercises, called Jeux
Floraux, where the best doer is rewarded with an Eglantine, the Second with a
Marigold in Silver; which Sports are usual in this Town at Christmas, and the
Festival of the Assumption.

Havre de Grace is also a considerable Sea Town, situated at the Mouth of the
River Seine, and is looked upon to be one of the Havens in France, upon St.
George's Channel. Francis I. began to fortify it; but the Huguenots having
seized it, delivered it up to the English in 1562. from whom Charles IX. retook
it; Lewis XIII. added a Citadel to it, flanked with four Bastions: But Lewis
XIV. completed the Work, and has made it impregnable by regular
Fortifications. In times of Peace with England and Holland, it drives a great
Trade.

Evreux is a very ancient City, dignified with a Bishop's See, a Bailliage and
a Presidial Court, and adorned with a good number of Churches and Religious
Houses; among which, the Abbeys of St. Thurin, and St. Savior are very
remarkable. Several Princes of the Blood, and other great Lords, have been
Counts of Evreux; and it is said, that Walter and Robert d' Evreux Earls of
Essex in England, came originally from this place.

Caen, seated upon the River Orne, is not so famous for the Antiquity of it, as
for the Privileges and Variety of Tribunals that it enjoys. For it is dignified
with a Presidial Court, a Bailliage, an Election, a Generality, an Audit of the
Finances, and a University for the Civil and Canon Law there founded in 1411.
by Hen. VI. King of England. It has had the same Fate with other Cities of
Normandy, as having suffered very much during the Troubles that shook the
French Monarchy in the 16th Age. However the Townhouse built upon St. Peter's
Bridge is a noble Structure adorned with four large Towers. The People boast of
their Fidelity to their Prince, for which reason they are permitted to bear the
Three Flower-de-Luces in their Arms. William the Norman King of England, lies
Buried in St. Stephen's Abbey, which was one of his own Foundations.

Mount St. Michael, is a Town built at the Foot of a Mountain, on the top of
which stands a Church and an Abbey consecrated to St. Michael the Archangel.
For the Story goes, that in the Year 708. St. Michael appeared to Aubert Bishop
of Avranches, and told him, 'Twas the Will of God that a Church should be built
upon the Hill, and dedicated to him in particular. Upon the same Mount stands
also a very fair Castle. The flowing in of the Sea makes a perfect Island of
it, covering for near a League together all the Land between the Mount and the
firm Land; which the Ebb soon after leaves dry again. Nevertheless, they who
Travel thither, must be very exact in observing the Time of the Motion of the
Water; for if they should be surpised in that sandy Plain, they would run the
risque of being Drowned; which many times falls out. This place is famous for
the resort of Pilgrims to St. Michael; and for the Sand of which they make
Salt, by straining the Seawater through it. In 966, Richard I founded the Abbey
of the Benedictins, and his Son Richard II. finished the Church.

Maine is a Province dignified with the Title of a Duchy, bordered by Normandy
to the North; by Perch, Vendomois and La Beausse to the East; Bretagne to the
West; and by Tourain and Anjou to the South. This Province is fruitful in Wine,
Corn, Fruit and Cattle; and has some Iron Mines. The same defects are
attributed to the Manceaux, as to the Normans: and as to their exactness in
keeping their words, it is become a Proverb, That a Manceau is worth a Norman
and a half.

The Capital City of this Province is Man's, seated upon the Banks of the River
Sarte, dignified with a Presidial Court and a Bishop's See. This City is very
Ancient, and is thought to have been one of the most considerable Cities of the
Gauls in the time of Charlemagne. It is said to have been built by Sarthon,
Grandchild to Samothes King of the Gauls; but being destroyed by the Druids and
the Sarrhonides, it was repaired by Le Mant, K. of the Gauls; who gave it his
own Name. But however it were, there is nothing now remaining but only some few
Ruins of what formerly rendered it so famous.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Picardy.
PIcardy is a very large Province, having Champagne to the East; the Island of
France to the South; Normandy and part of Mance or the Ocean to the West;
Artois and Flanders to the North. It is fertile in Corn and Fruits. But as for
the People, it is said they are generally hotheaded, and being apt to take
Snuff upon every Trifle, Men are willing to avoid their Company for fear of
running themselves into Quarrels that are often attended with fatal
Consequences.

Amiens upon the Sum dignified with a Bishopric, a Presidial Court, a
Bailliage and a Generality, is the Capital City of Picardy, and has been taken
several times in the preceding Wars: among the rest, the Spaniards took it with
a Bag of Nuts in the Month of March 1597. as the Learned M. Hardouin, formerly
Tutor to the King, informs us in his History of Henry the Great: For the
Spaniards, then Masters of Artois, understanding that Amiens was only guarded
by the Citizens, laid a Design to surprise it. To which purpose, by the favor
of the Night, they laid a Party of Soldiers in Ambuscado near the City; and so
soon as the Gates were opened, they ordered other Soldiers, in the Habit of
Peasants, to drive several Carts to Market; of which one being laden with Nuts,
they let a Sack fall, as if it had been by Accident, in the Gate; upon which
the Nuts tumbling out, and the Guards being no less busy upon the Scramble,
the supposed Peasants stopped up the Gate with their Carts, while the Spaniards
that lay in Ambush advanced and seized upon the City. But they did not keep it
long; for Hen. IV. retook it by main force within a few Months after; and built
a Citadel to secure it for the future from the like Mischances. There is now
to be seen upon one of the Gates this Distich.

Amiens was taken by Fox-like Craft, and retaken by Lion-like Force. The
Cathedral is a Noble Structure; the Body of the Church being looked upon to be
the most beautiful in the whole Kingdom. It is dedicated to the Holy Virgin;
and the Treasury that belongs to it is very Rich; where among other things is
preserved the Head of John the Baptist in a Shrine set all with Precious
Stones, and brought from Constantinople by one Vallon de Sarton, a Gentleman of
Picardy. The Pillars, the Quire, the Chapels, the Tombs, the Paintings, the
Place for the Singing Men, the Portal, over which are two great Towers adorned
with above a Thousand Statues, are all admired by Travelers. In ancient time,
Caesar made it a Magazine for his Army; and held an Assembly of the Gauls in
this City. The Emperor Antoninus and M* Aurelius, his Son, much enlarged it;
and the Emperors Constantine, Constans, Julian, Valentinian, Valens, Gratian
and Theodosius made choice of it for the Place of their Residence among the
Gauls. Queen Isabel of Bavaria, settled a Parliament in this City; but now the
Bishop, the Vidame and the Bailli are Chief in Authority next the King.

The other Principal Cities of Picardy are Soissons, Laon and Noyen, all three
Episcopal Sees. For the last of which the Huguenots have a great Veneration, as
being the place of Calvin's Nativity.

Corbie, is a place of strength surpised by the Spaniards in 1636. but soon
after regained by the French. And the Story goes, That being pressed by the K.
of France's Army, the Spaniards wrote to Prince Thomas, then General of the
Spanish Army in these words, Fiat misericordia tua, Domine, super nos,
quemadmodum speravimus in te, Let thy Mercy be shown us, Lord, as we have, put
our Trust in thee.

Senlis is also an Episcopal City, with a Presidial Court. In the Parts
adjoining to it, stand several stately Houses of Pleasure; as Vernueil,
Chantilli, Dreux and Anet; which is a Palace becoming the Residence of a King,
and whither the Dauphin often retires for the Pastime of Hunting* Among the
Wonders of this Castle, great Observation is to be taken of the Clock. For when
it is ready to strike, you shall see about Fifteen or Eighteen Hounds of Brass
come out and open with a full Cry; after which, follows a Stag of the same
Metal, bigger then the life, and strikes the Hour with his Foot.

Usually Bourbonnois and the County of Oie is joined to Picardy. The first owns
Boulogne for the Capital City; the other Calais.

Boulogne is seated upon the Straight of Calais; being a Bishop's See, with a
County and a Bailliage. The Cathedral Church is consecrated to our Lady; and to
which the Kings of France, at their first coming to the Crown, are by Custom
obliged to offer a Heart of massy Gold, weighing 2000 Crowns. Lewis XI. was so
devoted to the Holy Virgin, that he would needs have the Count of Artois hold
of our Lady of Boulogne and not of him. In 1544. the English besieged and took
it, but it was restored again to the French, by the Peace concluded in 1550.

Calais is a Town seated upon the Narrowest part of the Straight between
England and France, built in a Triangular Form, defended by a good Castle,
having no access to it from the Land, but over a Causey that crosses a great
Marsh or Fenn; and you must have the Permission of the Garrison of Risban to
enter the Port. The most remarkable things in this Town are the two Towers, the
Altar of the great Church, the rich Tabernacle, and the stately Domo. It was
taken by Edward III. of England, and remained in Possession of the English 210
Years, till the Reign of Queen Mary. History observes, that when the French had
expelled the English, one of the Duke of Guise's Officers cried to an English
Man in a jeering manner, When will you come again? To whom the other replied,
When the Measure of your Sins is full, and that we are less Wicked then you.
Intimating thereby, that the English would never set foot there again, so long
as the French Nation* continued well united to their Head.

Abbeville, seated upon the River Sum, is one of the strongest and most
Important Places of France. She has all along preserved her Privileges, and is
called the Faithful and the Maiden; because she was never taken. The Sum
brings up Barks to the very Middle of the Town.

CHAP. XXV.
CHampaigne, dignified with the Title of an Earldom, is bounded by Lorrain and
part of Franche Conte; to the West it has Picardy and the Island of France;
Burgundy to the South, and Hainault and Luxemburgh to the North. The Extent of
it from North to South is 70 Leagues (67 says de la Croix) that is to say, from
Ravieres to Rocroy; and from West to South-East 47 Leagues. It abounds in Corn
and Cattle; and the Wine which it produces, is extremely desired at the Tables
of Princes and great Lords. The Champenois are somewhat Opinionated;
nevertheless, they are irreconcilable Enemies of Libertinism and Impiety.

Rheimes, the Capital City of this fair Province may vaunt it self to be one of
the fairest and most famous in the Kingdom. For her Archbishop has the
Advantage of being the First Duke and Peer of France. The Cathedral of this
City is dedicated to our Lady, adorned with the most noble Front of any
Cathedral in France, and the most admired for the Architecture, the Figures and
Base Reliefs that render it so Gorgeous. In this Church it is that the
Archbishop of Rheims Crowns the Kings of France with the Holy Oil, sent from
Heaven to Crown Clovis I. the First King of France. The Antiquity of it appears
by the Inscriptions of the Names of the Pagan Deities upon the Gates, and
Caesar's Fort close by the City; which is also the seat of a Presidial Court, a
Bailliage, and a University founded by Charles of Lorrain, Archbishop of the
City by the Permission of Hen. II. and the Approbation of Paul III.

Chalon's may pass for the second City of Champaigne for the beauty of the
Streets, Marketplaces, and Buildings, and the Antiquity of it; for that in the
time of Julian the Apostate, it was looked upon as one of the Principal Cities
of Belgic Gaul. The Cathedral is remarkable for the Tower that adorns it very
large and very high. There is also in this City a Generality and a Presidial
Court.

Troyes is another very fair City, and very Ancient, with a Presidial Seat and
a Bailliage. The Cathedral is consecrated to St. Peter, wherein are preserved
many precious Curiosities. Among the rest, they pretend to show ye some Locks
of Christ's Hair; one of the Dishes made use of at the Last Supper; a Tooth of
St. Peter's; and the Body of St. Helena, which still appears to be fresh.

Charleville has this peculiar to it, that though the Duke of Mantua be
Sovereign Lord of the City; yet the Gates, the Walls, and the Castle of Mount
Olympus belong to the King of France.

Sens, seated upon the Confluence of the Seine and the Yonne, is the Seat of an
Archbishop; and a City both large, beautiful and very ancient. The Cathedral of
St. Stephens is very remarkable for the Front of it, adorned with variety of
Figures, and two Stately Towers; for the Largeness of the Body of the Church,
for the Richness of the Chapels, the Antiquity of the Tombs, the Base of the
Chief Altar; where is to be seen upon a Table of Gold, enriched with a great
Number of Precious Stones, a Representation of the Four Evangelists; and in the
middle, a St. Steven kneeling. To this City also belongs a Presidial Court, and
a Bailliage.

There are several other Cities in this Province of Champaign, as Langres,
Auxerre, etc. of which I omit to say any thing in particular, in regard I never
proposed to my self to make a particular Description of all the Cities of
France, designing only an account of what is most worthy the Curious View of a
Traveller.

CHAP. XXVI.
IN regard our Monarch has United the Duchy of Lorrain to his Crown, whether
by right of Conquest, or by virtue of a Donation and Resignation which Charles
III. made to His Majesty in 1662, I find my self bound to add in this place a
short Description of it. It is bounded by Champaigne to the West, by Luxemburgh
to the North, by the Rhine to the East, and by Burgundy to the South. It
extends it self Forty Leagues from East to West, and as many from South to
North. It was the Allotment that fell to Lothair, who gave it his Name, and the
Germans still call it Luttheringe. The People have been always accounted
Warlike, and at this day the Lorrainers are looked upon to be good Soldiers.

Nanci, seated in the Middle of a Plain, with a Chamber of Accounts, and a
Seneschalship, is the Chief City of Lorrain; where formerly the Dukes kept
their Courts.

The City of Metz is very Ancient, as being formerly the Capital of the
Medromatrices; it is the Seat of a Bishop, and Lewis XIII. honored it with a
Parliament in 1633, which renders it the most Considerable of any in the whole
Province. The Cathedral is Consecrated to St. Stephen, where there is to be
seen a Vessel of Red Porphyrie, all of one piece, above Ten foot long, wherein
the Holy Water is put.

This Province abounds in all sorts of Cattle; and is furnished with Salt Pits.
It affords also Mines of Iron and Lead; and at the foot of the Mountain Volege,
the People find Pearls, Azure Stones, and Materials for good Looking-Glasses.
Toul and Verdune are also both Bishoprics. And this is all I have at present
to say of Lorrain. For as for the Conquered Countries, I have a design, God
willing, to treat of 'em in a Particular Volume, under the Title of The
Conquests of Lewis the Great. I shall only observe, that under the Conquered
Countries, I Comprehend Artois, Luxemburg, Hainault, the County of Namur, and
part of Flanders; of which the Principal Cities are Arras, Cambrai, Tournai,
Douai, Valenciennes, Lisle, Dunkirk, Luxemburgh, Mons and Namur; all which
Impregnanable Places are in the hands of the French.

The End of the First Tome.
Books Printed for Henry Rhodes, next Bride Lane in Fleet Street.
1. LEtters writ by a Turkish Spy, who lived Five and forty years undiscovered
at Paris: Giving an Impartial Account to the Divan at Constantinople, of the
most remarkable Transactions of Europe, and discovering several Intrigues, and
Secrets of the Christian Courts, especially that of France, from the Year 1637,
to the Year 1682. Written Originally in Arabic, first translated into Italian,
afterward into French, and now into English: Five Volumes already done in
Twelves.

2. THe Comical History of the States and Empires of the Worlds of the Moon and
Sun* Written in French by Cyrano Bergerac, newly done into English: in Octavo.

3. THesaurus Chirurgiae: The Chirurgical and Anatomical Works of Paul
Barbette, M. D composed according to the Circulation of the Blood; with a
Treatise of the Plague. Illustrated with Observations, done into English; the
Fourth (...) To which is added. The Chirurgion's Chest, with Instruments, and
Medicines. Illustrated with Copper Plates (...) a Treatise of Diseases,
attending (...) Fleets: in Octavo.

4. THe whole Duty of a Communicant, being Rules and Directions for the worthy
Receiving the most Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. With Meditations and
Prayers for every Morning and Evening throughout the Week: Also some useful
Directions (...) Considerations in Order to a Holy Life, after (...) have
Received the Blessed Communion. By the Reverend John Gauden, late Bishop of
Exeter. The Fifth Edition, in Twelves; Price 1 s.

Books Printed for H Rhodes in Fleet street, and J. Harris in the Poultry.
1. MEmoirs for the Ingenious: Containing several Curious Observations in
Philosophy, Mathematics, Physic, History, Philology, and other Arts and
Sciences; in Miscellaneous Letters. By J. De la Crose. E. A. P. January, 1693.
To be continued Monthly. Vol. 1st. Price 6 d.

2. The Present Court of Spain: Or, Modern Gallantry of the Spanish Nobility
unfolded. In several Histories and Seventy five Letters from the enamored
Teresa, to her Beloved the Marquis of Mansera. By the Ingenious Lady -- Author
of The Memoirs and Travels into Spain. Done into English, by J. P.

(...) Triumph Royal: Containing, a short (...) the most remarkable Battles,
Sieges, Sea Fights, Treaties, and famous Achievements of the Princes of the
House of Nassau, etc. Described in the Triumphal Arches, Pyramids, Pictures,
Inscriptions and Devices; erected at the Hague, in Honor of William III. K. of
England, etc. Curiously engraven in 62 Figures, on Copper Plates, with their
History; an Elaborate Piece of Curiosity. First done in Dutch, then into
French, and now into English. Dedicated to Her Majesty, in Octavo. Price 4 s.

4. The present Condition of France, in reference to her Revenues; comparing
them with the infinite Expenses she is forced to be at; Demonstrating thereby,
that it is impossible for her to support her self, if the War with the
Confederates continues. Done out of French. Price 6 d.

Books Printed for John Harris at the Harrow in the Poultry.
1. MEdicina Practica: Or, Practical Physic. Showing the Method of Curing the
most Usual Diseases happening to Humane Bodies, etc. To which is added, The
Philosophic Works of Hermes Trismegistus, Kalid Persicus, Geber Arabs,
Artefius Longaevus, Nicholas Flammel, Roger Bachon, and George Ripley. All
Translated out of the best Latin Editions into English; and carefully Claused,
or divided into Chapters, and Sections, for the more Pleasant Reading, and
Easier Understanding of those Authors. Together with a singular Comment upon
the First Book of Hermes, the most Ancient of Philosophers. The whole
completed in Three Books. By William Salmon, Professor of Physic. Price 5 s.

2. Angliae Metropolis: Or, The Present State of London: With Memorials
comprehending a full and succinct Account of the Ancient and Modern State
thereof. Its Original, Government, Rights, Liberties, Charters, Trade, Customs,
Privileges, and other Remarkables, etc. First Written by the late Ingenious
Tho. Delaune Gent. and continued to this present Year by a Careful Hand. Price
2 s. 6 d.

3. The Treasury of Drugs Unlooked: Or, A full and true Description of all
sorts of Drugs, and Chemical Preparations, sold by Druggists. Whereby you may
know the place of their Growth, and from whence they come, and how to
distinguish the Good from the Bad. Very useful for all Gentlemen, Merchants,
Druggists, Doctors, Apothecaries, Surgeons, and their Apprentices. As also
for all Travelers, Seamen, Custom-House Officers, and all others that either
Traffic in them, or make any use of them, or those that Import or Deliver any
of 'em at the Waterside. Giving a true Account of all those that are
Prohibited, and those that are not, whereby many needless Disputes and Law
Suits may be prevented. The whole Work Alphabetically digested, with a complete
Catalogue of all Drugs, etc. By Jo. Jacob Berlu of London, Merchant in Drugs.
Price 1 s.

4. The Revelation Vnveiled: Or, An Essay discovering, 1. When many Scripture
Prophesies had their Accomplishment, and turned into History. 2. What are now
Fulfilling. 3. What rest still to be Fulfilled, with a guess at the time of
them. With an Appendix, proving, That Pagan Rome was not Babylon, Rev. 17. and
that the Jews shall be Converted. By Samuel Petto, Minister of the Gospel at
Sudbury in Suffolk. Price 1 s. 6 d.

THE Third Volume OF Historical Travels OVER EUROPE, Containing the most Select
Curiosities of ITALY, THE Various Constitutions of Government under several
Sovereign Princes and States; their Strength, their Riches and Revenues; the
sundry Customs, Manners, Coyns, and Trade of the People. Together with A
Particular Description of the City of ROME, the Conclave, the Election of the
Pope, and Promotion of the Cardinals. Accompanied with a Great Number of
Remarks never yet before imparted to the World.

Done out of French.

LONDON, Printed for Hen. Rhodes, at the Star, the Corner of Bride-Lane in
Fleetstreet. 1694.

TO THE READER.
IT IS very true that several have set forth Descriptions of Italy; but it is no
wonder that all Geographers should be Ambitious of making their Court to a
Country that was once the Mistress of the World. The Author is also very brief,
I must confess; but many timas succinct Manuals are better Companions for a
Gentleman, then large Volumes: They will go by Water with him, and ride in his
Coach, where weighty Folio's would be too cumbersomo and unweildy. Besides, the
Author himself assures ye, that though he has not been so tedious as others,
yet that you shall meet in the succeeding few Chapters, not only with
Novelties, which are pleasing to all Men, but with an infinite number of most
curious Remarks, which never yet before were committed to the Press; and which
were the Observations of a Great and Learned Cardinal in some particulars, and
as to others of an Eminent Person, who by means of his Public Employments, and
his long Residence in the Courts of several Princes of Italy, had gained a
peculiar and perfect knowledge of the Country: a great Argument of the Truth of
what is offered to your View; that there is much in a little, and all clean
from Fabulous Report: Now then, after these Encouragements to heighten your
Curiosity, I think it not convenient to add any more, for fear of putting a
long Epistle before a little Book.

HISTORICAL TRAVELS OVER EUROPE.
ITALY.
CHAP. I. Of Italy in General.
Although above fourscore Authors have wrote the Description of Italy,
nevertheless it is not known from whence it derives its Name. Some deduce it
from Oxen or Bulls, which in the ancient obsolete Greek were called Itali; and
for the feeding of which, Italy was then in high repute Others will have it so
called from one Italus, one of the first Kings of the Country. It formerly bore
the Names of Saturnia, Ausonia, Oenopia, and Hesperia, which it received from
several Princes and renowned Captains that regin'd therein at several times.

This part of Europe is seated in the middle of the Temperate Zone, between the
28th Degree and a half and the 42d and a half of Longitude, and between the
37th Degree and a half and 48th and a half of Latitude.

It is bounded to the North by a ridge of Mountains called the Alps, which
separate it from Germany and Switzerland; to the West, by the Alps also and
the River Var, which divides it from France and Savoy; to the East, by the
Mediterranean Sea, otherwise called the Adriatic Sea, or the Golph of Venice;
and to the South, by the Tyrrhene or Tuscan Sea. Where it is longest, to take
it from the Frontiers of Savoy, to the farthest extremity of the Kingdom of
Naples, it extends it self about 280 French Leagues, or 450 Italian Miles. But
the breadth of it is not all alike, sometimes 30, in other places 40, 60, 80,
and 100 French Leagues, resembling a Boot, that seems to kick at Sicily, to
force it into Africa.

Most Geographers divide Italy into four parts; the first comprehends the
ancient Lombardy, wherein are contained, the States or Dominions of the Dukes
of Savoy, Mantua, Parma, Modena, Milanois, the Republic of Venice, Genoa, and
some other Petty Principalities. The second includes the Ecclesiastical State,
and Tuscany. The third, the Kingdom of Naples. And the fourth, the Islands of
Sardigna, Sicily, Corsica, etc.

The Air is very wholesome and very temperate over all Italy, except in the
Ecclesiastical State, where certain malignant Fevers are very rife, and were
much more frequent before the use of Ice in Summer to cool their Drink.

Italy produces in great plenty whatever is necessary for the support of Human
Life; as Corn, Oil, Oranges, Citrons, Pomegranates, with all sorts of Fruits
and Flowers. There is to be found both Sugar and Cotton in the Kingdom of
Naples; besides great store of Silkworms, very good Horses and Bufalo's. The
Mountains afford Mines of Sulphur, and several Quarries of Alablaster, and all
sorts of Marble.

The principal Rivers that water it, are the Po, the Adige, Adda, Arno, and
Tiber, which contribute not a little to the Fertility of it, from whence it is
called, The Garden of Europe. The highest Mountains are the Alps, the
Apennine, which runs quite through the whole length of Italy, Mount Masso,
Mount Barboro, Vesuvius, and Mount Gibello.

It Is said, the Italians are very wicked, or very honest and virtuous. The
People are generally polite, obliging, quick of apprehension, ingenious,
crafty, eloquent, politic, and want not worth, when they have once rid
themselves of a certain Reservedness, which frequently begets 'em the Epithete
of Knaves. These good Qualities are accompanied with some bad ones, to which
they are a little too much inclined: For they are jealous, quick of their
promises, slow to perform; but above all, revengeful; insomuch that many times
Revenge descends from Family to Family.

The Italian Language is a kind of adulterated Latin, which the Goths, Huns,
Vandals, Lombards, and other People inhabiting Italy, have much corrupted: Nor
do they speak it equally polite in all parts of the Kingdom. It is more refined
in Tuscany then any where else: but the Tuscans do not pronounce it so well as
the Romans; which is the reason of the Italian Proverb, Lingua Tuscana in Bucca
Romana. And it is observed, that the Italians speak in the throat, the
Venetians in the roof of the mouth, the Neapolitans between the teeth, and the
Genoeses between the Lips.

The Roman Apostolic Religion, is the only Religion allowed over all the States
of Italy, wherein, for the preservation of it, there are several Tribunals of
the Inquisition erected; not but that there are great numbers of Lutherans and
Calvenists settled upon the Seacoasts, drawn thither by the convenience of
Trade: And tho the Magistrates know that they are departed from the Church, yet
it is their interest to take no cognizance of it. The Jews enjoy much more
freedom, and have their Synagogues even in Rome it self, upon the Payment of an
Annual Tribute. There are also Greeks and Armenians in some Cities, who perform
their Church Worship according to the customs of their Country.

History informs us, that after the Foundation of Rome, Italy was governed by
Kings for the space of 245 Years, and that Tarquin the Proud was the last of
her Kings. That afterward the Romans erected themselves into a Commonwealth,
which, under the conduct of Consuls and Senarors, acquired Immortal Honor, as
well for their Policy, as for an infinite number of Victories which they
obtained over their Enemies. That Commonwealth lasted till the 706th Year of
Rome, at what time Julius Caesar was proclaimed Emperor, and extended the Roman
Empire in all the three parts of the World which were then known; for America
was not discovered in those days. After this Empire had mounted to the highest
period of its Grandeur, it declined in such a manner, that it has left us a
memorable Example of the instability and fleeting condition of all Earthly
Grandeur. This formidable Empire being fallen to decay, was dismembered in the
Reign of Honorius, who died in the year of Christ 423, and 4176th after the
Foundation of Rome.

Italy after this fell under the Dominion of the Emperors of Constantinople,
who sent thither their Viceroys or Governors under the Title of Exarchs, who
kept their Court at Ravenna. But that Government, which began in the year of
Christ 568, lasted not above 184 years, at what time those Emperors were
expelled by the Kings of Lombardy. Afterward, the Emperors of the West
conquered Italy; and the Kingdom of Lombardy was quite extinguished in 774, by
Charlemain, who made great Presents to the Holy See: that Monarch, and the
Kings of France, his Successors, being the only Princes who raised the Temporal
Power of the Pope to that degree wherein we now behold it.

This part of Europe is at this day divided among several Potentates. That is
to say, the Pope in the Ecclesiastical State: The King of Spain, who is of the
House of Austria, of the Branch of Burgundy, possesses the Kingdoms of Naples
and Sicily, the State of Milan, and the Island of Sardigna. These two
Potentates are the most considerable in Italy; the next to them are, The
Republic of Venice. The Republic of Genoa. The Republic of Luca. The Grand Duke
of Tuscany of the House of Medici. The Duke of Savoy of the House of Saxony.
The Duke of Mantua of the House of Gonzaga. The Duke of Parma of the House of
Farneze. The Duke of Modena of the House of d'Este.


There are many other Sovereign Princes who have power of Life and Death over
their Subjects, with absolute authority to make War and Peace, and to coin
Money; but by reason of the small Extent of their Territories, are called the
Petty Princes of Italy. Such are, The Republic of St. Marin. The Bishop of
Trent. The Duke of Guastalla. The Duke of Sabionetta. The Count of Novelare.
The Prince of Bozzolo. The Duke of Mirandola. The Prince of Monaco. The Prince
of Massera. The Prince of Piombino. The Duke of Bracciano: And several others.


All the States of these Princes hold of the Church, or of the Emperor of
Germany. Only the Territories of the Pope and the Republic of Venice are
independent. It Is to be observed, that the States that hold of the Church,
devolve to it again, if the Proprietors happen to die without Issue Male; the
Daughters not being admitted to succeed their Fathers.

There are reckoned to be in Italy 68 Principalities; 95 Dukedoms; an infinite
number of Archbishoprics and Bishoprics, and great store of Universities; of
which the most famous are those of Padua, Venice, Turin, Pavia, Siena, Pisa,
Bologna, Rome, Ferrara, Fermo, Macerata, Salerno, Naples.

The Principal Cities of Italy, are Rome, which is the Metropolis of the whole
Country, termed the Holy; next to that, Naples the Noble, Florence the Fair,
Genoa the Proud, Milan the Great, Ravenna the Ancient, Venice the Rich, Padua
the Learned, and Bologna the Fat.

It remains that I should speak of some Customs that are general in Italy. In
regard the Coasts of Italy upon the Mediterranean Sea are much infested by the
Pirates of Barbary, who often Land there, and carry away the Inhabitants in the
Country with the best of their Goods, there are little Forts built all along
the Coasts, about a mile distance one from another; more especially upon the
Riviera di Genoa, and upon the Coasts of Naples and Sicily, where six men keep
Garrison with two Pieces of Cannon to prevent Descents. These Guards every
night kindle one or two Fires upon the neighboring Mountains. When there is
but one, it is called a Fire of Assurance, as being a sign that no Turkish
Brigantine has appeared all that day. But if they kindle two some Paces off one
from another, it is to give notice to the Inhabitants to stand upon their
Guards, and that they have seen some Pirates sounding where to get ashore.
Those Fires they call Fires of Mistrust.

The Italians never tell the Clock as other People of Europe do. They begin to
tell One at the close of the Day; so that the Hours of Noon and Midnight alter
higher or lower according to the Seasons. For Example, the 12th of August which
we reckon to be Noon in France, the Italians count it 17 a clock, and 24 when
the Sun disappears. They keep a man at their principal Clocks, who, when the
Clock has struck, with a Hammer strikes as many times upon the same Bell as the
Clock struck; that if any one were mistaken in telling the first time, he may
not fail to tell right the second.

It Is also a usual thing to be robbed upon the High way, more especially near
any Garrison Towns; but most of all in the Territories of the King of Spain.
Nor is there any trusting to the Guards which are granted to those that desire
'em, because those Guards many times share the Booty with the Thieves, who for
the most part disguise themselves in the Habit of Pilgrims or Hermits.

Neither Wives nor Maids stir out of Doors unless it be to Church, or at least
very seldom; and when they do, they are attended by some Spy which their
jealous Parents or Husbands send along with 'em to watch 'em. That Sex never
appears either in Shops or Markets; for the Men drive all the Trade. Marriages
are usually celebrated by Proxies; and many times the Man and the Woman never
see one another till they come before the Priest to be married. When Mass is
said in Italy, only the Men rise up at the Gospel.

I could relate many more things of Italy in General; but I reserve 'em for the
several Chapters of each particular State, to which they more properly belong.

CHAP. II. Of the States of the Duke of Savoy.
THE Dukes of Savoy descend from the House of Saxony, one of the most ancient
and most illustrious Families of Germany. It Is above a thousand years since
that they have been in Sovereign Possession of Piemont and Savoy, and no less
then five Emperors and four Kings have descended from it. The Duke of Savoy
bears a Crown fastened over his Arms, ever since Charlote de Lusignan Queen of
Jerusalem, Cyprus and Armenia, being driven out of her Kingdom by her Bastard
Brother, and flying for Refuge to Rome under the Pontificate of Sixtus IV.
where she died in 1489, bequeathed all her Pretensions to Cyprus, in the
presence of the Pope and several Cardinals, to Charles Duke of Savoy her
Nephew. Nevertheless, he is not addressed to by the Title of Majesty, but only
of His Royal Highness, and Perpetual Vicar of the Holy Empire in Italy.

The Duke of Savoy, upon a stress of necessity, may be able to bring into the
Field about 30000 Foot, and 5000 Horse. His fixed Revenue in time of Peace
amounts to Six millions fourscore and eighteen thousand Livres of Piemont. But
that Livre not being worth above five French Sols, that Sum amounts to no more
then to Four millions five hundred forty three thousand six hundred Livres of
our money.

Although the Duke of Savoy coins Pistols, Ducatoons, Pieces of Six Sols, and
other small Money, however the Pieces of France and Spain go current in his
Country. The French Crowns go there for-seventy two Sols, and the other Pieces
proportionably. But nothing is so much talked if in Piemont as Florins; which
is a chimerical sort of money like our Livres of France, the Florin not being
worth above twelve Sols, and the Ducatoon goes in Piemont for 84 Sols.

As for the manners of the Savoyards and Piemontois, the Nobility are endowed
with all the Qualities required in Persons of their Rank. The People are
laborious, and naturally very affable, good Husbands, sober, and fit to undergo
any sort of Hardship; but they have no great inclination to War.

The Dukes of Savoy have always appeared very zealous for the Catholic
Religion, which has often induced 'em to make use of their Power to constrain
their Subjects in the Valleys of Vaudois to return to the Bosom of the Church,
from whence they departed in the last Age. The Duke now reigning is the only
person that brought his design to pass, by forcing the most obstinate in their
Religion to leave their Habitations, and to retire into Switzerland and
Germany. But two years after, in 1689. he recalled 'em to serve in his War
against France, and permits 'em the free Exercise of their Religion.

The Government of Savoy is purely Monarchical; and the Salic Law takes place
there as well as in France, for the Daughters never inherit the Sovereignty.
For want of Male Issue, the Succession appertains to the next of kin to the
Duke, of the Masculine Line.

Savoy was erected into a Dukedom by the Emperor Sigismund, in favor of
Amadeus, the 8th Count of Savoy. Tho the Country be altogether Mountainous, yet
it abounds in very fertile Valleys. The principal Cities in it are Chamberi,
Nice. and Villa Franca, which are now reduced under the Dominion of France,
together with all the rest of the Province, which is bounded to the North by
the River Rhine and the Lake of Geneva; to the East, by Switzerland and
Piemont; to the South, by the Dauphinate; and to the West, by the Rhine, which
separates it from La Bress and Burgundy.

Piemont is another Province of the States of Savoy, so called from the
situation of it at the foot of the Alps. The eldest Sons of the Princes of
Piemont bear the Title of Dukes of Piemont. This Province is much more fertile
then Savoy; being bounded to the East by Milanois and Montferrat; to the South,
by the Republic of Genoa, and the County of Nice; by Savoy and the Dauphinate
to the West; and Le Velais to the North.

Turin is not only the Capital City of Piemont, but of all the Duke's
Territories, where he also keops his Court. It is seated in a fertile Plain,
between the Rivers Po, and Doire. It is secured by a Citadel with five good
Bastions, furnished with all things necessary for the defense of it.
Nevertheless the French took it, with an Army far inferior to that of the
Spaniards who defended it. During the Siege, the Spaniards threw in Powder,
Letters, etc. by the assistance of a Mortar, invented by a Fleming, which for
that reason was called, The Courier Cannon.

The City of Turin is adorned with an Archbishopric and a University, wherein
all Sciences are professed, and it boasts it self to be the first City of Italy
where Printing was made use of. The chiefest Curiosity in Turin most worthy the
Observation of a Traveller is the Citadel, wherein there is a Well to be
admired for the largeness of it, and the convenience of watering a great number
of Horses without any trouble; for they ascend one way, and descend another.

The Ducal Palace is magnificent for the Furniture of it, as well for the
Winter as for the Summer. Among the Rarities which are shown to Strangers,
there is a Chariot of Massy Gold, having six Horses of the same Metal spang'd
to it, and enchas'd all over with precious Stones. There is also a little
Castle of Gold, with Artillery and Fortifications of the same Metal. There is
besides an Engine, that carries her Royal Highness from her Chamber to her
Baths, with a single Pulley, by the favor of a Counterpoise, and that with all
the safety and ease imaginable.

The Cathedral Church of Turin is very stately; wherein is kept the sacred
Sudary, in which the Face and part of the Body of our Savior are imprinted.
They assure ye, that is the same wherein the Savior of the World was shrouded
before he was laid in the Sepulcher of Arimathea, and that it was brought into
Savoy by the Daughter of John King of Cyprus and Jerusalem, who married Lewis
of Savoy. But that which raises a greater Contest is this, that they show ye
such another Sudary at Besanton, the Capital of Franche Conte.

They whose Curiosity leads 'em to see the Tomb of Clement Marot, the famous
Poet and Valet de Chamber to Francis the First, will find it at Turin. For that
having been banished for his irregular Life from the Court of France, he went
to Geneva, from whence he was also expelled for his loose Living, and retiring
to Turin, died in 1544, in the 60th year of his Age. Although he understood
neither Hebrew, Greek, nor Latin, nevertheless he Translated one part of
David's Psalms into French Verse, which are sung by the Protestants at this
day, both in Holland, Germany, and Switzerland. And notwithstanding that the
more Learned among them agree, that he observed little exactness, and that
there are many Versions much better, both for the Sense and the Poetry, yet
Marot's are still preferred before all others, perhaps because he was censured
by the Sorbon in the Reign of Francis the First. Marot was born at Cahors in
Querci, and after his death the following EPITAPH was made upon him:

Querci, the Court, Piemont and all the Earth,
Bred, Fed, Enterr'd me, knew my Worth.
Querci my Love, the Court had all my Time,
Piemont my Bones, and all the Earth my Rhyme.
The Duke has also several Houses of Pleasure in the parts adjoining to Turin,
of which the chiefest are Parc, Valentin, and Mill fleurs; but they have all
suffered very much through the Violences of the War, as well as the rest of
Piemont.

Suza is one of the principal Cities of Piemont, by the Romans called Segusium,
which was one of Pompey's Colonies, who was the first that opened the passage
of Mount Genevre. It has undergone however several Calamities upon several
occasions. History informs us that Constantine the Great caused it to be
plundered and then burnt. In a second Conflagration which it suffered through
the provoked fury of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, all the Records and
Rolls of the House of Savoy were consumed. This City is considerable for the
situation of it, in regard it shuts up one of the principal Inlets of France
into Italy However the French have forced it several times; more especially at
the beginning of this Age, though the Duke of Savoy had raised a dozen
Barricado's in the Defiles, which defended one another; and in our time the
King's Armies cleared their way through it, and are still in possession of it.
There are still to be seen at Suza very fair Remains of a Triumphal Arch, which
some say was erected by the Goths, others by the Romans; though others are of
Opinion that they are the Ruins of the Trophies reared by the Emperor Augustus
740 years after the building of Rome, and 14 before the Birth of our Savior.

Nice is the Capital City of a County of the same name, which was formerly
included within Provence, and which Amadeus the Seventh usurped from Joan
Countess of Provence, at the same time that she was busi'd in pacifying the
Troubles of Naples. To palliate which Usurpation, the Dukes of Savoy allege,
that Ioland, the Mother and Nurse of Lewis the Third, Count of Provence, and
King of Naples, surrendered that County to Amadeus of Savoy in 1419, in
compensation for the Sum of 160000 Livres, which he pretended to be due to him
from his Pupil. But besides that that Sum was never due, nor a sufficient
Equivalent given for that County, Ioland had no power to grant away the
Territories of her Son, tho the Duke's Pretensions had been just. However it
were, both the City and the County are now in the hands of the French; Catinat
making himself Master of the Cities of Nice and Villa Franca at the beginning
of the year 1691.

The City of Nice was founded by the Inhabitants of Marseilles, who made it one
of their Colonies: And it was enlarged out of the Ruins of Cemella, the
Bishopric of which place was translated to Nice, It is a Town of great Trade,
wherein are still to be seen some Remainders of an Amphitheatre erected in
Honor of the Romans, and some Footsteps of a Temple of Pluto, and another
dedicated to Juno. The Citadel is built upon a steep Rock, and is looked upon
as one of the strongest Forts in Europe. The Turks besieged it in the year
1543, but were forced to leave it. The Cathedral Church is dedicated to St.
Repareus.

The Cities of Chamberi, Montmelian, and Villa Franca, together with the Cities
of Casal and Pignerol, are already described in the Sixth Chapter of the First
Volume of these Voyages.

CHAP. III. The State of Milan.
MIlanois is a Province of Italy with the Title of a Dukedom, seated in the
most beautiful Country of all Lombardy. The Soil is so fertile in Corn, Wine,
and all manner of Fruits, that it bears twice a year. The Highways are all
drawn in a Line, with a Canal of Running Water on each side, which, besides the
Ornament of it, serves for the Transportation of Goods and Merchandise from the
adjoining Countries. The Goodness and Fertility of the Country procured it
formerly the Envy of many, and made it the Seat of cruel Wars. The Revenues of
it in time of Peace may amount to Two Millions and Four hundred thousand
Crowns; which Sum is advanced a third part in time of War. This State is so
numerously Peopled, that in case of necessity it is able to bring above 50000
men into the Field. Nevertheless, the King of Spain is so ill served, that the
Officers only make the benefit of the Revenue, and his Catholic Majesty is
constrained to send considerable Sums for the payment of 20000 Men which he
maintains in the Country.

Besides the Spanish Money, and the Genoese Coin that goes current in Milanois,
the Mint sends forth also Philipins, Ducatoons, Creusons, Parbayolles, and
Sesins. A Philipin contains the value of 6 Livres 6 Sols of the Country; the
Ducatoon, 7 Livres; the Creuson, 5 Livres 10 Sols; the Parbayolle, 2 Sols and a
half, or 5 Sesins, which is a small Copper Coin, two of which make a Sol. The
Milanois Livre is worth about 10 Sols of France.

Milan, an Archiepiscopal City, is the Metropolis of the Duchy, built by the
Gauls when they settled in Italy about the year 170, after the building of
Rome. The Romans expelled 'em thence 462 years after. This Country was often
exposed to the Incursions of the Barbarians, the Goths, and Huns; and after
that, was subdued by the Lombards, who possessed it till the Reign of
Charlemain, who made it a part of the Empire. By degrees this City became so
powerful, that she commanded all her Neighbors; and her Pride swelled to that
height, that she several times rebelled against her Sovereigns. The Emperor
Frederic the First was constrained to make use of Force to reduce her to
Obedience, which he brought to pass in 1160; and soon after the Empress his
Wife going to Milan, the People rose, out the throats of the Imperial Garrison,
and seizing upon the Empress, set her upon an Ass with her face toward the
Tail, which they gave her in her hand in stead of a Bridle, and so led her
through the whole City. The Emperor justly incensed at such a piece of
Insolence, besieged the City, and forced it to surrender at Discretion the 3d
of March, 1162. Which done, he levelled it with the Earth all but three
Churches, drew a Plough over the whole, and sowed it with Salt, as an Eternal
Memorial of Reproach and Infamy upon the People, who had no way to redeem their
Lives, but by drawing with their Teeth a Fig out of the Fundament of the Ass
upon which they had set the Empress; and they that refused to do it were put to
the Sword.

Nine years after the City was rebuilt, and rose by degrees in such a manner,
that now it is called the Great. The Duchy of Milan is claimed by the Kings of
France, upon account that John Galeazzo, first Duke of Milan, having given his
Daughter Valentina in marriage to Lewis of France Duke of Orleans, Second Son
of Charles the Fifth, surnamed the Wise, it was covenanted by the Articles of
the Contract, That if the said John happened to dye without Male Issue, the
Duchy of Milan should descend to Lewis his Son-in-Law, and his Successors. So
that John-Maria and Philip-Maria dying without Legitimate Offspring, the
Succession belonged without dispute to Charles Duke of Orleans, the Son of
Lewis. Charles the Fifth was not ignorant of this Pretension, when he promised
Francis the First, King of France, to give him the Investiture of it for one of
his Sons, at the Solicitation of the Electors of the Empire. But taking the
advantage of his Power, and the disorders of France, the Emperor was so far
from standing to his word, that he gave the Investiture to Philip the Second,
his own Son; and ever since the Kings of Spain have possessed that Duchy.

It is observed, that the City of Milan has been besieged 40 times, taken 22;
that it has 22 Gates, including those belonging to the Suburbs; 230 Churches,
96 Parishes, and that it is 10 miles in circuit. It has a Senate, consisting of
a President and twelve Senators, of which three must be natural Spaniards.
There is in it so great a number of Handicraft Tradesmen, that it is commonly
said, That Milan ought to be ruined to accommodate Italy. This City is defended
by a Castle fortified with six Bastions lined with Brick, and environed with
Moats of running Waters. There are three different Enclosures able to make
great Resistance; for which reason it is looked upon to be one of the best
Fortresses of Europe. It is about a mile in compass, containing whole Streets,
wherein all manner of Artificers keep their shops. It also includes large
Palaces, where the Officers lodge; and several Piazza's, in one of which 6000
men may be drawn up in Battel-array. There are in it likewise four Wells or
Fountains, which are never empty; one Mill, above 200 Pieces of Cannon mounted
upon the Bastions, not counting in those which are in the Arsenal, which is
furnished with all manner of Arms. In one Hall of the Castle is to be seen the
Cannon that killed Marshal Crequi when he besieged Breme, which is laid upon
the Ground, to the end it may never be made use of again.

The Cathedral Church, which is called the Domo, is the largest and most superb
in all Italy, except St. Peter's in Rome; being lined with Marble within and
without, sustained with 60 Columns of white Marble, which three men can hardly
fathom, the least of which cost 1000 Crowns; those of Adam and St. Bartholomew
are the best esteemed: The whole Church is about 250 Paces long. In St.
Anthony's Church is to be seen a Brazen Serpent, which they would make you
believe to be the same that Moses lifted up in the Desert; and that the Emperor
Theodosius brought it to Milan.

Strangers go to see the Great Hospital at Milan, considerable for the
largeness and magnificence of it, the convenience of the Building, and the good
order of the Government. It is endowed with a Revenue for the maintenance of
above 4000 Persons. The Chambers of the Sick are built in form of a Cross, with
an Altar open on four sides in the middle, where the sick People go to say Mass
at their going to bed. Besides this Hospital, there is another upon the Moat of
the City, wherein there are as many Chambers as there are Days in the Year.

There are to be seen at Milan the Ruins of Triumphal Arches, Baths, and other
Roman Edifices; and the Church of St. Lanrence, built after the Model of the
Roman Pantheon, was a Temple dedicated to Hercules. In former times the
Emperors were crowned at Milan with an Iron Crown, and at Alexandria in the
same Province with a Crown of Straw.

The other Cities belonging to this Duchy are Coma, Cremona, Tortona, Lodi,
Novara, Valencia, Pavia, etc. which are all considerable in some respect or
other; but my purpose is to speak of Milan and Pavia only, which are the
principal.

Pavia, regularle fortified, is seated in a Plain upon the River Tecino. In the
Cathedral is to be seen a small Mast of a Ship, which the People believe to be
Rowland's Lance, who was Nephew to Charlemain. St, Austin's is remarkable for
the Tomb where that Saint lies Enterr'd. In the Grand Piazza stands a Statue of
the Emperor Constantine, though some will rather have it to be the Statue of
the Emperor Antoninus. It stood formerly at Ravenna, from whence it was removed
to Pavia. And History observes upon this Subject, that Laurec the French
General having taken that City by storm in 1527, a Soldier of Ravenna, who
entered first, desired of his General that Statue for his Reward, to the end he
might send it back to Ravenna. But the Inhabitants being more afflicted with
that loss, then the loss of their Estates which the Soldiers were just going to
plunder from 'em, or the Lives of their Countrymen, made such lamentable
Outcries, that they moved the Victor to let 'em have their Statue for a Crown
of Gold, which he engaged 'em to give the Soldier. The City of Pavia is adorned
with a University, founded by Charlemain, who, in 734, took the City, and
Didier, the last King of the Lombards, Prisoner. In 1525, Francis the First
having laid Siege to Pavia, and sent a part of his Army to Naples, Charles the
Fifth taking advantage of that Diversion, gave him Battle, which proved so
fatal to France, that the King was taken Prisoner, and carried into Spain. It Is
observed, that this happened upon St. Matthias's day, a day always fortunate to
that Emperor. For he was born upon that day, and received the Imperial Crown
upon that day.

CHAP. IV. Of the Republic of Genoa.
THE State of Genoa, is a Fief of the Empire which possesses that part of the
Mediterranean Coast, which we call La Riviera di Genoa, and which was
heretofore the Country of the ancient Ligurians. This Republic carries the Name
of The Capital City, which some will have to derive the Name of it from Janus.
At this day it is divided into the Western and the Eastern Riviera; being
bounded by the River Magro to the East, by the Principality of Monaco to the
West, the Mountains of Piemont and Milanois to the North, and the Ligustic Sea
to the South.

The Maritime Force of this Commonwealth consists in Armed Galleys, and two Men
of War carrying between 60 and 70 Guns apiece, for the security of Trade. Upon
a case of Extremity they can bring into the Field 30000 Foot. There are about
69000 Souls in the City of Genoa, 80000 in the Eastern Riviera, and about
113000 in the Western Riviera. The Revenues of this Republic amount to 1200000
Crowns, but in regard the most part of it is engaged for the Debts of the
State, there remains not above 150000 Livres, as I have learnt from the most
exact Memoirs drawn up by a Person, who by reason of his Employment was
perfectly well acquainted with the Finances of the Republic.

The Money stamped with the Arms of Spain goes current in the State of Genoa,
when it is Weight. Nevertheless, the Republic coins Pistolets, Genoeses,
Piasters, Reals, and some other small Money. The Spanish Pistole is worth 17
Livres 16 Sols, which is as much as 3 Piasters; one Genoese goes for 3 Piasters
and a half. The Piaster of Perou, which weighs a French Crown, is worth 4
Livres 16 Sols: So that a French Livre amounts to 32 Sols of Genoa.

The Genoeses are very expert in Sea-Affairs, and have contributed very much
toward all the Enterprises that have been undertaken for the Conquest of the
Holy Land. In former times they won from the Infidels the Kingdoms of Corfu,
Sardinia, and Cyprus; as also the Islands of Metelite and Chio; and have been
Masters of the Cities of Coffa and Pera. It Is true, that at present they are
despoiled of all these Countries except Corse, from whence they have no other
advantage but that of a Royal Crown affixed over the Arms of the Republic, and
the Title of Most Serene. The Genoeses are proud and inconstant; of which, the
sundry sorts of Government which they have admitted within these few years are
an uncontrollable Proof. At present they keep much to the humor of the
Spaniards, even to an Affection of their Habit. Nor are they beloved by the
rest of the People of Italy, among whom these Characters of the Genoeses are
very common. Gente senza Fide, Mare senza Pesce, Monte senza Legno, and Donna
senza Veregogna. A people without Faith, a Sea without Fish, Mountains without
Wood, and Women without Modesty.

The Genoeses differ from the Spaniards in this, that they are much addicted to
Trade and Labor. The Gentlemen drive a Trade in all manner of Stuffs, which
they sell by Wholesale; for they are not permitted to sell by Retail, nor to
keep Shops. It Is a custom in Genoa, That the Parties never sign the Acts which
are passed before the Public Notary, who by this means are the Masters of the
Estates and Tranquillity of Families. Nor do the Witnesses sign their
Depositions, neither are they brought Face to Face with the Parties accused.
The Nobility are not to have either directly or indirectly any private
Communication with any Foreign Ministers.

When a Stranger arrives at Genoa, he is obliged to give in his Name to the
Commissioners appointed, from whom they have leave to remain four days in the
City, without which they would not be admitted into any Inn. And it is
observable, that if a Man be not very careful to carry this Permission about
him, and to renew it in case he intends to stay any longer, he is in danger to
be seized by the Sbirri, and condemned to a Forfeiture of 5 Pistoles.

When they proceed to the Election of Senators, several persons put Money into
that which is called the Seminary, as into a Lottery: And they who have the
good fortune to divine who will be the five Senators, whose Names are first
drawn, among a hundred and twenty, out of a small Box by a little Boy, such is
the multiplication of the Money at that sort of Play, that a Man who has
ventured 10 Pistoles, may win between 7 and 800. Which tho it rarely falls out,
yet the Accident is not without Example.

The Genoeses wear Fardingales, which is the reason that they frequently
embarrass one another when they meet in the Streets, which are very narrow. One
day, a Lady made use of her Fardingale to get her Son out of Prison: He was
about 18 years of Age, and was condemned to die. His Mother having leave to
visit him in order to the taking of her last Leave of him, put him under her
Petticoat, which was born up by a circle of Steel in stead of Whalebone, and
two Women leading her as she went along, according to the custom of Italy, she
got home, and was delivered without the help of a Midwife, and the same day
sent away her Child as far as Marseilles to Nurse. The most part of the Houses
in Genoa are built with Terrasses at the top, where the Women go to dry their
Hair after they have washed 'em, to make 'em look yellow.

There is no State in Europe that has submitted to so many sorts of Government,
as that of Genoa. Not to make an exact Enumeration of 'em, I shall only
acquaint ye, That they were first subjected to the Romans, afterward to the
Lombards, and then to the Emperors. It Is observed, that from the year 1454, to
1528, Genoa has been under twelve sorts of Government. She has been ruled by
Consuls, Podesta's, Captains, Governors, Lieutenants, Rectors of the People,
Abbots of the People, Reformers, Dukes both Noble and Popular, etc.

The Kings of France have been in possession of Genoa at several different
times. In 1396, this City was surrendered to Charles VI. and in 1409, the
Inhabitants massacred the French, and put themselves under the Marquess of
Montferrat. Four years after they chose Dukes. In 1421, they submitted to the
Duke of Milan. But in 1436, being weary of that Government, they made choice of
Dukes again, who governed 'em till 1458, at what time they gave themselves into
the Hands of Charles VII. King of France. In 1461, the French were expelled to
make way for the Popular Dukes, of whom there were five sorts in three years.
After which the City surrendered it self to Francis Forza Duke of Milan, who
was expelled in 1478, after which they had Dukes till 1488* and then the Duke
of Milan took possession of it again.

History informs us, that the Genoeses having sent Ambassadors to Lewis XI.
King of France, with Offers to surrender themselves into his hands; that
Monarch, who foresaw how little reason they had to rely upon the Faith of a
People so inconstant and subject to rebel, returned 'em for Answer, That if
they gave their City to him, he would give it to the Devil. However it were in
1499, Lewis XII. took Genoa by Assault, and had resolved to ruin it by Fire and
Sword. But the Inhabitants having laid about four thousand small Children in
the Grand Piazza that cried out for Mercy, The King touched with compassion,
pardoned the Parents in favor of the innocent Children. But the People growing
never the better for it, revolted in 1506; the French retook it in 1507, and
were expelled again in 1512. The next year they got possession of it once more,
and remained Masters of it till 1522, at what time the City was taken and
pillaged by the Army of Charles V. Francis I. reconquer'd it in 1527; but the
next year Andrew Doria, a Genoese, who commanded the French Fleet, revolted,
and betraying his King and his own Honor, made use of the Forces of the French
Crown to deliver Genoa from the Dominion of France; and since that time it has
been governed by a Senate, of which the chief, who is called the Duke, is
changed every two years.

This new Government is Aristocratical: The Duke is assisted with eight
Senator-Governors, and four Procurators; two of which, in their turns, lodge
with him in the Ducal Palace four months in the year: And this is that which is
called the Senate. But the Basis and Foundation of the Republic resides in the
Grand Council, composed out of 400 Gentlemen chosen out of the ancient and new
Nobility. This Council deliberates jointly with the Duke and the Senators of
whatever concerns Peace or War. There are also two sorts of Noble Families,
which are dist^nguish'd by Antiquity and new Creation; the number of the first
is no more then 28, the others are in all 437; and the Duke and the Senators
are chosen alternatively out of these two sorts of Nobility.

Philip II. King of Spain, and his Successors, out of a Prospect purely
politic, have insensibly fastened the Genoeses to their Interests, by borrowing
vast Sums of Money. Philip II. borrowed two Millions of this Republic, which
was never repaid: Quite the contrary this Sum has been so multiplied, as well
by new Loans, as by the Interests added to the Principal, that it has
occasioned a common Saying, That the King of Spain holds the Genoeses faster
chained to his Yoke, then if he were in possession of the City; In regard these
Republicans must be either Slaves to his Catholic Majesty, or lose their Debt.

The Duke must be at least 50 years of Age before he can be Elected; and after
his two years Regency, he cannot obtain the same Employment till after the
expiration of 12 years. He can admit no Visits, give no Audiences, open no
Letters that are directed to him, but in the presence of the Senators that are
lodged with him in his Palace. His Robe of Ceremony is of Red Velvet or Damask,
made after the old fashion, ruffled below, with a pointed Cap of the same Stuff
with the Robe. When the term of his Regency is expired, which falls out to be
upon the 13th of August, at 14 a Clock and half an hour after, he repairs to
the Assembly of the Colleges, where the Secretary of the Assembly returns him
Thanks in these terms: Vostra Serenita ha fornito il suo tempo, vostra
Eccellenza seen vadi a casa. Your Serenity has completed your Time, you may
return home again. Which he does at the same time, and being come to his own
door, he returns Thanks to the Senators and Gentlemen that attended him; which
done, he puts off his Red Robe, and puts on his Senators Gown, which he wears
all the rest of his Life.

Three Days after, they proceed to the Election of a new Duke, the Dean of the
Senators performing the Function. Presently the Grand Council is called
together, which names Fifteen Persons proper for that Dignity: out of these
Fifteen the Little Council chooses Six, who being communicated back to the Grand
Council, they choose One, who, nevertheless is not Crowned till Three Months
after, tho some have been Crowned sooner; and among others, Francesco Maria
Sercaro, who was Elected, and Crowned the same day. The Ceremony is performed
by the Archbishop of Genoa in the Cathedral Church. Moreover, the Duke and the
Senators are obliged to take the Communion twice a year, at Christmas and
Easter.

The Lesser Council is composed of the Duke, the Senators, the Colleges, and
200 Gentlemen, none under Seven and twenty years of Age. This Council is
Summoned together by the sound of a Bell; and as every Gentleman enters into
the Chamber, an Usher in a long Red Robe presents him with a little wooden Ball
Silvered over, which he throws into a Basin over against the Duke. When all the
Noblemen are entered, the Door is shut, and the Chancellor counts the Balls,
that he may know the number of those that compose the Assembly; and after the
Duke has made known the occasion of their Assembling, the Suffrages are
gathered after this manner: A Sub-Chancellor distributes to every one a white
Woollen or Linen Ball; and another Sub-Chancellor gives about a Black Ball; and
a Third presents 'em with an Urn, which they call a Pix, where are Two Pipes
the One for the Negative, the Other for the Affirmative, which close together
at the top in such a manner, that the hand of him that throws in the Ball,
covering all the entrance, it cannot be discerned into which Pipe he puts in
the Black or the White. It is also to be observed, that the Decrees of this
Council must be rendered Authentic by a Hunderd thirty four Voices at least,
which are Two Thirds of the Two hundred.

The Grand Council is composed of the Duke, the Senate, and all the Colleges,
the lesser Council, and all the Nobility of the City. It is summoned together
after the same manner as the Lesser Council, and the Duke also Declares the
occasion of their coming. It is then chiefly called together when any Law is to
be abolished, or any new ones to be made; or when Plebean is to be admitted
into the Nobility; or for the laying new Taxes or Impositions. In short, in
this Assembly it is that all the Power and Authority of the State resides. But
these Matters are all prepared in the Lesser Council, before they are proposed
in the Grand ones.

The City of Genoa, adorned with an Archbishopric, is the Capital City of the
State; Surnamed the Superb, as well by reason of the Humor of the Inhabitants,
as the Magnificence of the Buildings; being seated by the Sea side upon the
Ascent of a Hill, in the Form of an Amphi-Theater. It is surrounded with good
Walls on that side next the Land, and well fortified in all parts where it lies
liable to be attackt. It is about Six Italian Miles in Circuit, but the Streets
are very narrow and dark, by reason of the height of the Houses. Four Gates
belong to it, a great number of Magnificent Palaces, and a good Harbor, though
the entrance into it be somewhat difficult, by reason of several Rocks that lie
round about it under water. It is defended by a Mole which the Genoeses built
since they revolted from France. At the end of the Mole stands a Phanal, fot
the direction of Ships that Sail along the Coast in the night time; and by the
situation of the Lanthorn, they in the City understand what Course the Vessels
steer, which they perceive. This Phanal is built in that part where Lewis XII
K. of France built a Fort to bridle the City.

There is to be seen in Genoa an Aquaeduct, which carries the Water from one to
the other end of the City, and which supplies an infinite number of Fountains;
some of which furnish the Vessels before they put to Sea, with fresh Water. If
they who Sail from Genoa to Legorne should happen to want Water, they will meet
with a Spring of fresh Water in the middle of the Golph de l'Esprece, that
bubbles up through the Salt Water, to the surface of the Sea, and still
preserves its sweetness.

The Domo (for so are all the Cathedrals called in Italy) is consecrated to St.
Laurence. It is all lined without side with Black and White Marble, having
Three Doors in the Front, sustained with fair Columns of Marble. The Riches
within-side also, is exactly correspondent to the outside Imbellishments. But
they who are desirous to see the Relics, are obliged under a forfeiture, to
leave their Weapons at the Door. An Iron Gate with Four Locks opens into the
Treasury, of which, the Senators keep the Keys. Among other things, they show
ye a Dish all of one Emrauld, which they would make ye believe was presented to
Solomon by the Queen of Sheba, and that Christ made use of it at his last
Supper with his Disciples; adding withal, that when Antioch was taken, the
Genoeses made choice of it for their share of the Booty. Nevertheless, some
Authors say, That Christ Eat the Paschal Lamb in a Silver Dish, as Richard
Lassels the Famous English Traveller has observed. Moreover, they will have the
Ashes of John the Baptist to be preserved in this Cathedral.

There are also other very fair Churches in Genoa, of which I forbear to say
any thing, for fear of Prolixity; I shall also say nothing of the Palaces, of
which there are almost as many as there are Houses. Which Magnificence has
occasioned this Remark, that the Genoeses are the Richest Private Persons in
Italy, and the poorest State, and that the People took as much care of their
Private Estates, as the Venetians of their Republic. But of all the Palaces,
Prince Doria's is, without all contradiction, the most Superb. For among other
Rooms, there is in it a long Gallery paved with Black and White Marble,
Sixscore Paces long, and Six and Twenty Broad, from whence you may behold all
the Vessels and Ships that enter the Port of Genoa. The Apartments are so
richly furnished, that a Governor of Milan, not being able to believe that they
could all belong to Doria, told the Queen of Spain, who was to take Shipping at
Genoa, that She should Lodge in one of the most Noble Palaces of the World, but
that the sumptuous Furniture, was borrowed out of all the most wealthy Houses
in the City.

Doria being told of this, before the Queens arrival, caused to be Engraved
upon the Gate of his Palace, By the Grace of God and the King, the Whole
belongs to the Master of the House. In his Garden is to be seen a large Statue
of a Giant, under which is to be read the Epitaph of a Dog, that while he
lived, had Five hundred Crowns a year allowed him for his Maintenance.

There are few States of Europe where the Civil Policy is better established
then at Genoa. There are certain Magistrates who are called the Magistrates of
Abundance, whose Care it is to see that the City be provided with Corn, Meal,
Wine and Oil for a whole Year (how Dear soever it be) besides what comes daily
to the Market, and to regulate and set the price of Provision, according to the
Fertility or Scarcity of the Year. And to prevent mis-management, there are in
all the Quarters of the City, more especially, near the Courts of Judicature,
certain Holes in the Wall, into which all People have the liberty to throw in
Accusations against those whom they suspect to have mis-manag'd themselves in
their Employments or Commissions; and sometimes without any other Conviction it
happens to be the misfortune of an innocent Person to be punished.

I must not conclude this Chapter, without speaking a word of that which gave
the occasion to the Bombing of Genoa in 1684. by the French Fleet.

The King having make several complaints to this Republic, by Mr. S. Olon, his
Envoy Extraordinary, of the proceeding of this City, in opposition to the
Interests of that Crown, and the injuries done his Subjects, that Minister
could obtain no reasonable satisfaction. In the Second place, his Majesty
demanded of the Republic, free passage by Land through their Territories, for
his Salt to Cazal, and that he might erect a Magazine at Savona, of which the
Magistrates of Genoa had one Key, to secure 'em from any suspicion that it was
vended in the City of Savona; which the Republic refused; and not so
contented, they made a private Treaty with Spain against France, by which the
Republic obliged themselves to maintain Four thousand Men in the State of
Genoa, which were to be raised in the name of the Count de Melgar, and at the
charges of the Republic; As also to add Six more Galleys to the Six already
prepared, to join with the Spanish Fleet. The most Christian King therefore,
informed of their Design, commanded his Minister to know their Reason, and
offered at the same time his Mediation, or his Forces if they had occasion.

But the Genoeses were so far from accepting the King's Proposals, that they
returned haughty and ambiguous Answers, which enforced the King to send a Fleet
thither, to the end, that the appearance of it might scare 'em into their Duty.
To that purpose M. de Signeley, Minister and Secretary of State, who was aboard
the Fleet, being arrived in the Port of Genoa, sent for some of the Senators,
to whom he made known the Causes of Resentment which the Republic had given
the King, and that he was come to demand Satisfaction: that in the mean time
they might prevent the mischief that threatened 'em, if they unrigg'd the four
new Galleys that were already fitted for Sea, and sent to Paris four Senators
to excuse their Miscarriages to his Majesty. But they refused to accept of this
Expedient; and were so bold as to let fly first of all upon the King's Galleys,
which had not as yet committed any Act of Hostility; which drew upon 'em a
shower of Bombs for some days, that ruined a good part of their Palaces.

There is also some reason to believe, that the King would not have stopped
there, had not the Genoeses besought Pope Innocent XI. to intercede with his
Majesty in their behalf, offering to give his Majesty such satisfaction as he
should desire. The King therefore, consented to an Accommodation, which was
Mediated by Ranuccio, Bishop of Fano, his Holiness's Nuncio, with M. Colbert,
Minister and Secretary of State, whom his Majesty had appointed his
Plenipotentiary (...) the Marquis de Marini, Envoy Extraordin^^^ from the
Republic.

The Treaty was Signed at Versailles the 12th of February, 1685. Ratified by
the Republic the 25th of the same Month, and by his Majesty the 3d. of March
following, the substance of which was,

I. That the Duke then Governing, and Four of the Senators should repair to the
King in their Ceremonial Habit, and that the Duke, speaking in behalf of the
rest, should in the name of the Republic, acknowledge their extreme Sorrow for
having displeased his Majesty, and that he should in his Speech, make use of
most submissive and respectful Expressions, and such as should manifest the
sincere desire they had to merit his Majesty's Good Will for the future, and
carefully to study the preservation of it.

II. That the Duke and the Four Senators, at their return to Genoa, should
exercise their Employments, and retain their Dignities, and that no others
should be chosen into their Places during their absence.

III. That the Republic of Genoa, within a Months time, should dismiss all the
Spanish Forces* that had been admitted into the strong Holds and Country
belonging to the State, and should renounce from henceforth, by virtue of this
Treaty, all other Leagues and Associations by them entered into, since the
First of January 1683.

IV. That the Genoeses might refit at the same time, the same number of Galleys
which they had three years ago, and should lay up those that they had since
Equipped.

V. That the Republic should restore to the French all that they could recover
of the Effects that had been taken from 'em in the City and Territories of
Genoa, the King consenting, out of his Royal Compassion, that instead of
Reparation of Damages, to which his Subjects might pretend, for such of their
Effects as could not be found, that the Republic should engage themselves, as
they did by this Article, to contribute toward the Repair of the Churches and
Sacred Places endamag'd by the Bombs; the King referring it to the Pope to
settle the Sum that should be thought convenient for that purpose, and to limit
the time for bringing those Repairs to perfection.

VI. That the Republic should pay a Hundred thousand Crowns to the Count de
Fiesque, in deduction of his ancient Pretensions, upon the sole consideration
that the said Count is under the King's Protection; and upon condition that the
payment of this Money should no way prejudice the Reasons which the Republic
has to allege against the said Pretensions.

VII. That the King being content with the satisfactions above-nam^d, will
vouchsafe the Honor of his Favors to the Republic of Genoa.

VIII. That all Acts of Hostility shall cease by Land, from the day of this
Treaty, and by Sea within a Month; and the Prisoners on both sides to be set at
liberty.

IX. That this Treaty shall be Ratified, and the Ratifications exchanged, at
farthest within Three weeks, etc.

By virtue of this Treaty, the Republic sent the Duke Francis-Maria-Imperiale
Lercaro, then ruling, together with four Senators, Marcellino Durazzo, Paris
Maria Salvago, Giovanni Garibaldo, and Agostino Lomellino; who departed from
Genoa the 29th of March, 1685. attended by six young Gentlemen appointed by the
Republic.

They arrived the 10th of April at Lions, and the 18th at Paris; where the Duke
spent about five and twenty days in preparing his Equipage, and the 4th of May
had his Audience of the King at Versailles, to which he was conducted by M.
Bonnueil Introductor of Ambassadors. Some days before, he had caused the Nails
that fastened the Cloth of State of his Coach to be taken away, as being a
distinction that belongs to none but Royal Persons, and Sovereign Princes. The
King was seated upon a Throne raised ten or twelve steps at the end of the
Great Gallery. The King had on each side of him, the Dauphin, Monsieur the
King's Brother, the Duke of Bourbon, the Duke of Main, and the Count of
Tholouze, and upon the Duke of Genoa's approach he rose up and put off his Hat:
Then he caused the Duke to be covered, but the four Senators remained uncovered.

The Duke made an elegant Harangue which I shall insert at the end of the
Chapter. Which done, the Senators also made their Compliments, and it was
observed that the Duke was uncovered all the while the Senators spoke. The
Audience being over, they were Treated at Dinner by the King's Order with all
the Profusion and Magnificence imaginable; and after Dinner resuming their
Ceremonial Habits, which they put off before they sat down to Dinner, they
were conducted to wait upon Monseigneur, the Dauphiness, the Dukes of Burgundy
and Anjou, Monsieur, Madame, and all the Princes and Princesses of the Royal
Family. And it was observable that the Senators did not cover till they came to
the Duke of Chartres's Apartment. They returned that Evening to Paris, but the
18th and 23d they went back to Versailles in the Habit of Gentlemen to view the
Apartments, the Waterworks, the place where the great Horses are managed, and
the Castles of Trianon and Marli. The 26th the Duke and three Senators, Salvago
being sick, had their Audience of leave of the King, and departed within a few
days for Genoa, where they continued in their Employments, till the usual time
of a new choice.

The Duke of Genoa's Speech to the King at Versailles, May 14th. 1685.
SIR,
MY Republic has always held it for one of the fundamental Maxims of their
Government, to signalize themselves by a profound Veneration for this great
Crown, which being transmitted to your Majesty by your August Progenitors, you
have exalted to so high a degree of Power and Glory, by such prodigious and
unheard of Achievements, that Fame, upon other occasions accustomed to
multiply, proves deficient in this, not being able should she lessen 'em, to
render your Great Actions credible to Posterity.

Prerogatives so sublime, that they enforce all States to look upon 'em with a
most profound Obsequiousness, and have particularly induced my Republic to
distinguish her self above all others, to manifest it in such a manner, that
all the World may be apparently convinced of it: And the most terrible and
fatal Accident that ever befell her is this of incurring your Majesty's high
displeasure. I cannot therefore proportionably display her extreme Sorrow to
have offended your Majesty; though she is apt to flatter her self that this is
befallen through an effect of pure Misfortune, nevertheless she is desirous
that whatever may have dissatisfied your Majesty, may be cancelled at any rate,
not only from your Memory, but from the Remembrance of all Men; she not knowing
any way to alleviate her Afflictions till she beholds her self restored to your
Majesty's inestimable Favor.

Therefore, that she may become worthy of obtaining it, she assures your
Majesty, that all her most intent Applications, and most sollicitous Cares
shall be employed to procure not only the preservation of it, but also to
habituate her self to increase it. In order to which, not content with
expressions the most proper and most obsequious, she resolved to make use of
unusual and singular forms, sending her Duke and four Senators, in hopes that
by such special Demonstrations your Majesty will be fully convinced of the most
high esteem which my Republic has of your Favor and Good Will.

As for my own part, Sir, I acknowledge it for my greatest good fortune, to
have the Honor of declaring these my most sincere and most respectful
Sentiments, and prize above all things this Opportunity of appearing in the
presence of so great a Monarch, who invincible for his Valor, and reverenced
for his unparalled Magnanimity and Grandeur, as you have surmounted all
others in Ages Past, so you secure the same Prosperity to your Progeny. From so
happy an Augury, I assume the Confidence, that your Majesty, to make known to
the Universe the singularity of your most Generous Soul, will incline your
Heart to look upon these Remonstrances no less just then sincere, as
Testimonies not only of the Integrity of my Heart, as of the Minds of these
Illustrious Senators, and Citizens of my Country, who with Impatience attend
the reciprocal Marks that your Majesty will vouchsafe to grant 'em of your
Benignity and Kindness.

CHAP. V. Of the States of the Dukes of Parma and Modena.
THE Duke of Parma is a Vassal to the Holy See; to which he pays a Tribute of
Ten Thousand Crowns for his Dutchies of Parma and Piacenza. This State has
undergone several Revolutions since the Decay of the Empire, till the Church
being in peaceable Possession of it, Alexander Farneze being advanced to the
Pontificate, under the name of Paul III. erected Parma into a Dukedom, and gave
it his Son Peter Farneze, in the year 1545. But the Emperor Charles V. disputed
the Possession of it with him, till the death of the said Duke, who died Two
years after. However, Octavio Farneze his Son, being powerfully protected by
the King of France, secured that State to his Successors, by the Marriage of
Margaret of Austria, natural Daughter of the same Emperor.

The Country adjoining is very Ferril in Corn, Wine, Fruit, but more especially
in Cheese, the excellency of which is sufficiently known. It Is sufficient to
say that they make some of these Cheeses that weigh a Hundred and fifty pound,
and that they are esteemed for so great Delicacies among the Turks, that they
are usually served up to the Great Turk and his Visiers at their Banquets.
There are likewise several Wells of Salt Water in the adjacent parts, out of
which they draw White Salt; and some Iron and Copper Mines.

The Revenue of the Duke of Parma amounts to Five hundred thousand Roman Crowns
a year, which make Seventeen hundred and fifty Livres of France; and at a pinch
of necessity, he is able to bring into the Field Eighteen thousand Foot of his
own Subjects.

The City of Parma, Capital of the Dntchy, and where the Duke keeps his Court,
is divided into three Parts by the River Parma, over which are built Three
Bridges that join the whole together. It is adorned with a Bishopric, under
the Archbishop of Bologna, and a Famous University, Founded in the year 1599,
by Ranuccio Farneze. The Citadel consisting of Five Bastions, is one of the
strongest and best fortified in Italy. Foreigners always visit the Dukes
Palace, which is a most Magnificent Structure, wherein there was no spare made
of Marble, Jasper or Porphyrie. The Gardens belonging to the Palace and the
Cathedral Church, are the Rarities which next the Palace are worthy Observation.

Piacenza is the Second City in the Duke of Parma's Territories; bearing the
Title of a a Duchy, with a Bishopric Suffragan to Bologna. It Is thought that
it derived the name of it from the Situation, which is in a Plain extremely
Fertile. It stands not far from the River Po, being about Five Miles in
circuit. Near the City to the West, they show ye the Place where St. Anthony
called down Fire from Heaven upon the Soldiers that derided his Name. Tho what
is more considerable, is the Fountain in the great Piazza of Piacenza, which
Augustus caused to be brought to the City; and the Statue of Alexander Farneze
the First, a Horseback, in Brass.

MOdenois, or the State of Medena, lies to the East of Parma. It was erected
into a Dukedom by the Emperor Frederick III. in 1452. in favor of Borso
d'Este. The Country abounds with Plenty of all things. As for the Duchy it
self, it holds of the Emperor, to whom the Duke of Modena pays a yearly Tribute
of 4000 Crowns. The Revenue of it amounts to about a Million of Italian Livres,
which make Seven hundred and fifty thousand Livres of France: and in a time of
Need, the Duke is able to Arm Five and twenty thousand Men.

Modena the Capital of the Duchy, is the usual Residence of the Duke. It is
seated between the Rivers of Sechia and Panaro; and although the Streets are
somewhat narrow, yet it is a very pleasant Habitation. Foreigners go to see the
Duke's and the Bishop's Palaces, the Cathedral and the Citadel, where there is
nothing, however very remarkable. History informs us, that Modena was formerly
a Roman Colony, and that after the death of Julius Caesar, Brutus was there in
vain Besieged by Marc Antonie, in the year of Rome 710. That the City was
afterward ruined by the Goths and Lombards, and rebuilt under the Reign of the
Sons Charlemain: and that it was near Modena, that in the year of Rome 711,
Hirtius and Pansa were defeated by Marc Antonie. The Steeple of Modena is one
of the Highest Towers in Italy.

CHAP. VI. Of the Territories of the Duke of Mantua.
THE Duke of Mantua holds the Fee of his Territories from the Emperor, by whom
he is invested. Mantua was formerly no more then a Marquisate, till by Charles
V. erected into a Dukedom in 1530. The Duke in present Possession, is of the
Illustrious House of Gonzaga, He assumes the Titles of Duke of Mantua,
Montferrat and Guastalla, Perpetual Vicar of the Empire, etc. The Country is
seated between the Territories of the Church, the States of Modena, Venice and
Milancis, in length about Fifty Miles, and Forty broad. The Po that runs
through it, makes it one of the most fertile Countries in Italy, especially in
Corn; seeing that one good Harvest is sufficient to supply the Inhabitants for
Five Years. It Is true, that by reason of the Inundations of the Po, the Wine's
a little Green and Sour.

His Highness may be able to bring into the Field, an Army of Twelve thousand
Foot, and Eight hundred Horse, and his Revenue amounts to 300000 Crowns a Year,
the chiefest part of which is raised either by his Mills, or upon the Jews, who
give considerable Sums for liberty of Free Trade; but they are obliged to wear
Yellow Ribonds in their Hats, to distinguish 'em from the Christians.

The City of Mantua is the Metropolis of the Duchy. It is seated in a Lake
Twenty Miles in compass, that fills the River Mincius, so that there is no way
to approach it, but over two Causeys, with two Draw-Bridges at the ends. Upon
this Lake, there are a prodigious quantity of Mills; and it is remarkable that
there are Three in one House that serve to Spin, Wind, Double and Twist Silk,
which are managed by one single Man.

This City is very Ancient: The Poets Virgil and Fass were both born in Mantua;
nor is it less remarkable for the Manufacture of Tabbies, and other rich Silks.
The Streets are broad, Straight, and very neat. It contains about Four miles in
compass, having Eight Gates, Eighteen Parishes, Forty Convents, and one
particular Quarter for the Jews. There is the same Custom observed here as in
most of the other Cities of Italy; that is, that at your entrance into the City
you are obliged to leave your Fire Arms at the Gate, which are returned to you
again upon your departure at the Gate, which you go forth at. But you must be
careful to mark 'em that you may know 'em again.

Travelers take great delight to visit the Manufactures, the Townhouse, the
Cathedral, the Roof of which is all over Gold and Azure, but more especially
the Duke's Palace, which without Question is the fairest Ornament of the City:
Nor is it without good reason, that this Palace is said to be able to lodge
five Kings with all their Retinue; there being no less then five hundred and
fifty Chambers in it richly furnished every one (though formerly there were
seven hundred. The Apartments designed for the Lodging of Princes, Ambassadors,
and Cardinals, are proportionable in Magnificence to the Grandeur of the Person
that is to be entertained in 'em. There are Beds embroidered with Gold and
Pearls, Silk Tapestries embossed with Gold. Six Tables about three foot long,
of which the one is all composed of Emraulds so well joined together, that you
would swear it to be all one stone, as well as the rest, which are one composed
of Turquoises, a third of Violet Saphirs, one of Amber, and another of Jasper.
There is also to be seen a Noble Organ of Alabaster; After which I think it
needless to give a description of the Gold, Silver and precious Stones that
glister in all the Cabinets, nor of the Silver, Brass, and Marble Statues that
adorn the Chambers and the Galleries; for there is no question but that every
thing else is correspondent to the Magnificence of the Palace, and the Grandeur
of the Prince who is the Lord of it. Give me leave to say this by the by, that
there are Harnesses for Horses all covered with Pearls and Diamonds, a great
number of Arms enriched in the same manner: Chalices of Gold, Crosses Basins
and other Ornaments of the Chapels belonging to the Cardinals of the same
House, all enriched with Pearls, Rubies, Emraulds and other precious Stones. To
which I shall add, that all this Wealth was much more considerable before the
Palace was pillaged by the Emperor Ferdinand the Second's Forces, under the
Conduct of Colalto; who made himself Master of it in 1630. at what time the
Barbarism of the Soldiers, not being satiated with the Plunder, was such, that
they broke and spoiled an infinite number of Statues, and rare pieces of
Workmanship.

CHAP. VII. Of the State and Republic of Venice.
WE call the State of Venice the whole Extent of Territory that the Republic
possesses in Italy, which was part of the lower Lombardy. Venice is likewise
Mistress of Istria, Dalmatia, the Morea, and part of the Islands of the
Archipelago. This Republic is the only Sovereign State in Italy, the rest
being Feudataries either to the Church or to the Empire. The Air of Venice is
not wholesome, as being annoyed byt he stench of the Canalls, which together
with the little Society that Strangers find there for the reasons which I shall
hereafter mention, is the occasion that Travelers care not to reside long in
the City, when they have once seen the Curiosities that beautify it.

This Republic is addressed to by the Title of most Serene, as being the most
Potent State of Italy. The Revenue of it amounts to about Fifteen Millions; and
the City of Venice alone pays about Two Millions and Five hundred Thousand
Ducats; nor is it less true that she alone contributes as much as all the
demeans which she possesses upon the firm Land. She is very sparing, and lays
up vastly in time of Peace, of which, her famous Treasury of St. Mark is an
undeniable Proof.

In a time of need, she is able to set out to Sea Two hundred sail of Ships and
Galleys, and to Arm 400000 of her own Subjects. In times of Peace she always
keeps Forty Galleys in pay, to clear the Golph of the Pirates of Barbary. When
the Republic is at War with the Turk, she always makes use of Foreign Forces,
which she hires out of Germany and other places; reserving her own Subjects to
People her Cities and her Conquests; which nevertheless does no way diminish
her Treasure, for that the Money which she lays out, is all spent again in her
own Territories.

Almost all the Money current in Italy goes at Venice, proportionably to their
weight and Alloy. Nevertheless the Republic Coins Pistols, Sequins, Ducats,
Crowns, Pieces of Twenty four Sols, Twenty Sols, and Gazettes, etc. The Sequin
is worth Seventeen Livres or Two Ducats; the Pistole Eight and twenty Livres;
the Ducatoon Six Livres Four Sols; the Crown Nine Livres, Twelve Sols, and the
Gazette, Two Sols. The Ducatoon is not worth above Fifty French Sols; and
between Forty Eight and Fifty Sols of Venice, make a Livre of France.

It Is not without reason that Venice is counted one of the richest Cities in
the World, in regard it was never yet taken or plundered by her Enemies; which
makes it a common Saying, That it is as impossible that Money should be wanting
in the Treasury of St. Mark, as Soldiers in France.

The City of Venice is the Metropolis of the whole State: and I have already
said that she is very potent, and I may add, That if she had but plenty of
Fresh Water, she would want nothing. But that defect proceeds from her being
built upon Seventy two Fenny Islands. Most Authors agree, that Venice was
Founded in the year 421. of Christ; to which others more precisely add, That
the Building was begun upon the 25th of March; which day is principally
observed, for that it was the day when the World was Created, and of the
Incarnation of Christ. The Inhabitants of Padua were they who Founded this
City, at what time Attila King of the Hunns, after he had laid Aquileia in
Ashes, undertook to subdue and ruin all Italy. His Cruelties enforced the
Paduans and other People that inhabited between the Alps and the Golph, now
called The Golph of Venice, to shelter themselves in certain unwholesome Fenns.
And in the year 421. they began to build some Houses in the Island of Rialto,
which was proclaimed to be the Place of Sancturay and Refuge; and so in process
of time those Buildings multiplied in such a manner, that Venice now takes in
Seventy two Islands, joined together with 450 Bridges: and because the Soil
would not admit of any solid Foundations, they built upon Piles, as they do at
Amsterdam in Holland. The Bridge of Rialto, over the Great Canal, is the most
beautiful in Venice, and indeed in all Europe. It has but one Arch, all of
Marble, built upon 6328 Piles, and bordered with two rows of Shops. The
situation of the City in this manner, is the reason that there is no use of
Coaches in Venice, so that when they go from one place to another, they take
Water in Shallops or Boats called Gondola's, with which the Canals are covered.
The Canals and the Bridges are Lined with a White shining Stone, and in regard
the Women are handsome, and the Gown-men very severe, this has occasioned a
Proverb, which admonishes Travelers to have a care of the Women, the White
Stones, and the Men of the long Robe.

At first the Government of Venice was Democratical, under Consuls and
Tribunes. Every Island had their particular Consuls, that assumed to themselves
a Petty Sovereignty. But the Jealousies that arose among 'em, were the occasion
that in the year 709. the Tribunes of the Twelve Principal Islands, resolved to
set up a Republic, and to elect a Chieftain to Command 'em; and first of all
they cast their Eyes upon Paolo Lucio Anafesto, to whom they gave the Title of
Duke or Doge. This First Duke and his Successors Ruled with Absolute Authority
till the year 1172. because that in their Life time they caused their Sons or
their Brothers to be chosen to succeed 'em; and went about in that manner to
perpetuate the Ducal Dignity in their Families. But the Principal Citizens
abolished the Election which was made till then by the People, and set up an
Independent and Sovereign Council, out of which they elected their Duke. This
Tribunal was composed of 240 Citizens, indifferently chosen out of the
Nobility, the Burgesses and Artificers; and at the same time they created
Twelve Tribunes,, who were to oppose the Decrees of the Prince, if they
appeared to be unjust. This Form of Government lasted till the year 1289. at
what time Duke Peter Gradenigo changed it into a Real Aristocracy, such as it
is at this day; all the Authority being devolved into the hands of a certain
number of Families, writ down in a Golden Book, which is the Register of the
Venetian Nobility.

There are four different Councils in Venice; the first which is called the
Grand Council, composed of 2000 Noblemen; out of which they choose all the
Magistrates, Podesta's, Generals of their Armies, Proveditors, Ambassadors,
etc. and they make all the Laws which are deemed necessary for the Welfare of
the State. The second is called the Council of Pregati, which determines all
things that relate to Peace or War, Alliances or Leagues; and this is that
which we call the Senate of Venice. The third is the Council called the
College, composed of 26 Noblemen, that gives Audience to Ambassadors, and
carries their Demands to the Senate. The fourth is the Council of Ten, which
judges all Crimes against the State, and is the most redoubted Council in
Europe. This Council is renewed every Year. This Council every Month chooses
three Inquisitors of State, who are always taken out of the Ten, to the end
that every one may serve in his Turn, and the Authority of this Triumvirate is
such, that they have as much Power over the Duke's Life, as over the Life of
the meanest Subject, without acquainting the Senate. This Council has cavs'd
several Heads of Marble to be placed against the Walls of the Palace with
gaping Mouths, upon which these words are to be read, Secret Denunciations,
into which they who have any accusation against any Magistrate, or other person
holding Criminal Correspondence, throw in little Notes. And upon these
Accusations it is, and sometimes upon the least suspicion that they put People
to Death, who are sometimes guilty of no other Crime then not to please their
Enemies. For such is the Policy of Venice rather to take away the Lives of the
Innocent, then to let the Guilty go unpunished. We must not forget that all the
Nobility, when they betake themselves to the Church, are excluded from all
their Councils, and from all Employments in the State to prevent the Court of
Rome from having any knowledge of the Secrets of the State.

As to Spirituals, Venice is governed by a Patriarch, who by a particular
Rubric, at the beginning of his Commands and Orders never sets any other
Titles, than N. divina misericordia Venetiarum Patriarcha, without ever adding,
like the Prelates of the Roman Church, Et Sanctae sedis Apostolicae gratia, as
if he were no Member of it. He is Primate of Dalmatia, and Metropolitan of the
Archbishopricks of Candy and Corfu. Venice has also another Patriarch within
her Territories, that is to say, the Patriarch of Aquileia, who resides at
Vdena in Friuli, And in regard the City of Aquileia now belongs to the
Emperor, he pretends to have a Right to appoint the Patriarch. But the
Venetians, to the end the Patriarchate may never become vacant, have empowr'd
the Patriarch to nominate a Coadjutor and Successor, so soon as he is advanced
to that Dignity, which the Senate presently confirms, if they deem him worthy
of it.

The Employment of Duke of Venice is for life, and generally they choose to
that Dignity an Old Man, who has been Ambassador in the principal Courts of
Europe, and who is perfectly acquainted with Foreign Countries. He cannot stir
out of the Laguna without leave, and can do nothing without the Advice of his
Counselors which are allotted him, chosen out of the most considerable
Gentlemen of the Republic. When the Duke gives his Opinion in the Senate, he
has but one Voice; but his suffrage goes for two in the Grand Council. The Duke
is clad in a Purple Robe with hanging Sleeves; and when he parades upon any
public Ceremony, he walks under a Canopy of Cloth of Gold, eight Silver
Trumpets marching before him, and a Youth carrying a Torch of white Wax; a
Sword is also carried before him as a mark of his dependency. All Declarations
and Letters of State are written in his Name, and the Money is also stamped
with his Portraiture, though there is always on the Reverse a Lion and the
Image of St. Mark, with the Duke kneeling before him.

The Duke is Elected after the following manner: The Grand Council being
assembled at the hour prefixed, the Door is shut; and after they have counted
the number of those in the Hall, they throw into a Basin an equal number of
little Balls, among which there are thirty guilt; and when they are well
jumbl'd and mixed, every Gentleman goes and takes one. Then the Thirty that
have the Golden Balls, assemble together in another Room, where there are ready
prepared as many little Balls, of which there are but Nine guilt. These Nine
Gentlemen whose chance it is to light upon the Nine guilt Balls, choose out
forty Gentlemen of the Assembly, which forty are reduced to Twelve by means of
the guilt Balls; and those Twelve elect Five and twenty, which are reduced to
Nine. Those Nine choose out Forty five, who are reduced at length to Eleven,
who choose out One and forty Gentlemen, and they Elect the Duke. This Tedious
Ballating prevents the Effects of Canvossing. Now when these Electors are
approved by the Grand Council, they are shut up in the Palace of St, Mark, out
of which they never stir till they have Elected the Duke. And it is to be
observed, that though the Election be authentic, it must be corroborated by
Five and twenty Suffrages; and while the Electors are thus shut up, they are
carefully guarded, and diligently looked after, almost in the same manner as the
Cardinals in the Conclave.

The Venetian Nobility is distinguished into four Classes: The first
comprehends the Families descended from the Tribunes, who in the Year 709. were
the Electors of the first Duke of Venice, and which have continued by a kind of
Miracle to this present time. Those Twelve Electoral Families are the
Contarini, the Morosini, Badouari, Ziopoli, Micheli, Sanudi, Gradenighi,
Meonni, Falieri, Dandoli, Polani, and Barozzi. There are also other four Noble
Families that have continued in a Lineal Succession ever since the Year 800,
viz. The Justiniani, Cornari, Bragadini and Bembi. For which reason the first
are vulgarly called the Twelve Apostles, and the latter the four Evangelists.
The second Classis of Noblemen, are they that began to be enregister'd in the
Golden Book* when Gradenigo the Duke settled the Aristocracy in 1289. The third
comprehends about fourscore and ten or a hundred Families, who purchased their
Nobility for a Thousand Ducats apiece. These Noblemen are never employed in the
high Preferments of the Republic. The fourth Order of Nobility is that which
the Republic confers upon Foreign Princes and other Illustrious Personages.
Thus Hen. III. and Hen. IV. of France were admitted into the Body of the
Nobility of Venice.

The Noble Venetians walk the Streets in a long Black Robe, and a Bonnet of
black Tissue, bordered with a Fringe that hangs round about, and falls down
over their Hair; for they are not suffered to wear Perriwigs; their Gowns are
open before, and discover a rich Cassock; their Shoes are all of black Spanish
Leather; and for their Gate and Air, they are very Grave and Majestic. But
this Nobility of theirs deprives 'em of the freedom of conversing with
Foreigners: Nor will their Jealousy of all other Nations, permit 'em so much
as to give Strangers a Visit, or to pay the least Civility to Ambassadors,
their Wives, nor any other person belonging to their Retinue, without express
leave from the Senate. Nor dare they speak to a Venetian Merchant, if he be
known to frequent a Foreign Minister's House.

Having thus discoursed of the Government, both Politic and Ecclesiastic of
Venice, I shall only speak one word of what is most worthy the Curious
Observation of Travelers. If they happen to be there at the Festival of the
Ascension, they will see the Ceremony, which is annually performed upon that
Day, of the Duke's Espousing the Sea. At what time the Duke and the Senators in
their Purple Robes, accompanied by the Patriarch, the Pope's Nuncio, and the
Ambassadors go aboard the Bucentaure, which is a sort of Galley with several
Decks, gilded down to the Water, and covered with Crimson Velvet with broad
Gold Fringes; and attended by all the Nobility and the People in four or five
Thousand Gondola's and other Vessels, rows forward within a Mile of the Main
Sea. And then it is that the Duke Espouses the Golf of the Adriatic Sea, in
Testimony that the Republic is the Mistress of it. The Ceremony of this
Espousal is performed by casting a Gold Ring into the Sea, and saying these
words, We Espouse Thee our Sea, as a Mark of real and perpetual Superiority.
After which the Patriarch gives his Benediction, accompanied with the roaring
of the Canon. Thence they go to hear Mass upon the Lido, and so return to the
Palace, where the Duke treats all the Senators and Great Lords. Alexander III.
instituted this Ceremony as a Mark of Gratitude to the Republic, who had so
strenuously upheld him against the Prosecutions, of the Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa. But it is an Error to believe upon the Credit of some Historians,
ill informed, that the Republic of Venice held the Sovereignty of the
Adriatic, by Donation from that Pope; for besides that it was never disputed
with the Venetians, the Holy See never had, nor ever pretended to any Right
over the Adriatic; so that that same Pontiff could never bestow upon the
Republic a thing that never was in his power to give. And there needs no more
then to read the Pope's own words to the Duke Ziani, while he acknowledged the
Republick's Right, and instituted the Ceremony of Espousing the Sea. Receive
(said he) this Ring, to give it every Year upon the same Day to the Sea, as to
your lawful Spouse, so that your Posterity may know that the Sea belongs to You
by Right of Arms.

The Cathedral Church was formerly dedicated to St. Theodore; but after the
Body of St. Mark was brought thither from Alexandria, the City made choice of
that Saint for her Patron, and the Church is Consecrated under his Name; being
one of the most Beautiful Edifices in the World; and what is more surprising
is, that such a weighty Bulk should have no other Foundation then Piles. The
Tower which serves for a Steeple, is one of the highest in Italy. The Church is
built of nothing else but Marble of all Colors, the finest in all Italy; and
the Floor is paved with Jasper and Porphyrie wrought in Mosaic work. The chief
Altar is sustained by four large Pillars, upon which in Releif you see engraved
the History of the Old and New Testament; and over it stands a Globe of Gold
and Silver, enriched with Pearls and Diamonds. The Chapel of the Holy
Sacrament is supported by four Columns of Alablaster, which, as they say, had
been Pillars in the Temple of Solomon. The Church divided into five Domes, is
covered with Lead, and has four Brass Gates; over the Principal of which stand
four Horses of the same Metal guilt, made formerly on purpose for the
Triumphal Arch erected at Rome in Honor of Nero, after he had vanquished the
Parthians, and afterward carried to Constantinople, to adorn Constantine's
Triumphal Arch, and afterward brought away by the Venetians when they sacked
that great City. This wonderful Structure is supported by thirty six Columns of
Marble two foot in Diameter: and the ascent to the Steeple which is 246 Foot
high, and 40 broad, is so made as to be very easy, and without Stairs.

The Treasury of this Church encloses a vast heap of immense Riches. Among
other things Twelve Regal Crowns, and Twelve Corslets of Massy Gold, enriched
with Pearls and Diamonds. Ten Rubies of eight Ounces each. One Saphir of ten
Ounces: A Vessel all of one single Emrauld: A Dish of one single Turquoise: A
Pail to take up water, the whole but one Granate: The Duke's horned Bonnet set
with large Diamonds and Oriental Pearls, with an infinite number of other
costly Rarities: not to speak of the Ornaments of the Church, as a great number
of Pixe, Candlesticks, Silver and Crystal, together with an infinite number of
Relics, among which the chiefest are the Body of St. Mark and his Gospel,
written by his own hand.

They who have a mind to visit St. Luke's Church, may there see Peter Aretimes
Tomb, who lived in the Fifteenth Age, famous for his Satirical Writings, which
acquired him Presents and Pensions from several great Men, and among others
from Charles V. and Francis I. King of France; whither they feared his Satyrs,
or liked his manner of Writing; which occasioned the following Epitaph to be
made upon him.

Qui giace L'Aretin, Poeta Tosco,
Chi d'ognun disse mal, che di dio,
Scusandosi col dir, Jo no'l conosco.
Here Aretin lies, reduced to Earthy Clod,
Who wrote in Tuscan Language many a Poem,
And railed at all Mankind, yet spared his God;
But his Excuse was this, He did not know Him.
The Palace of St. Mark's is admired by all Foreigners. It has two Fronts,
lined with red and white Marble, and covered with Plates of Brass, since the
Conflagration in 1514. which melted down the Lead with which it was overlaid
before. There is nothing but Gold and Azure to be seen in all the Apartments,
with an infinite number of very fair Statues, all curious pieces of
Workmanship. The Grand Council Chamger is 150 Foot long, and 73 broad,
surrounded with other Chambers full of Fire Arms; of which the greatest part
are always charged. Among others are to be seen the Arms which Henry IV. made
use of to reduce his Kingdom to Obedience, and which he presented to the
Republic. One Piece of Canon and the Carriage all of Massy Silver: A Coffer,
at the opening of which four Pistols discharge, and would kill the Person that
opens it if they were charged: A large Canon that discharges thrice at one
time; and a small Piece that discharges seven times at once. In this Armory
there are Muskets, Pikes and Swords to arm a Thousand Men in an Instant, for
the security of the Senate: And all things are disposed in such a manner, that
by pulling a Cord at one end, the Arms fall into the Hands of those that have
occasion for 'em. The Muskets are always charged; and they who are possessed of
'em, as they go out of the Armory, will find a large Globe boar'd thorough with
as many holes as there are Muskets, in every one of which there sticks a Match
ready to be drawn out lighted; in regard that by means of an Engine, and the
Powder which is scattered in those Concavities, they can set fire to all those
Matches in a Moment.

The Piazza of St. Mark is environed with beautiful Houses, of which the
Symmetry is very gracefully ordered. The Mint is one of the fairest, and so
built, that there is no danger of Fire, because that all the Gates and Windows
are of Iron, and for that there is no Wood made use of in the whole Structure.
In the midst of the Piazza, three large Masts of a Ship are fixed upright in
the Ground, upon which the Republick's Standards of Gold and Silk are hung out
upon solemn days, and at the end toward the Sea side, stand two Marble Pillars
all of one piece about sixty fathom high, and eight in compass; upon one of
which is erected St. Mark's winged Lion, and upon the other the Statue of St.
Theodore.

The Arsenal of Venice is one of the most beautiful, and one of the best
supplied with all sorts of Arms of any in Europe. There they show to the
Curious the Arms of Bajamonte Theopoli, who at the Head of Eight Ragamuffins
had resolved to murder the Senate in the Council Chamber, and to have seized
upon the Sovereignty. They carried all their Weapons concealed under their
Clothes: But as they were hastening to the Palace, a Flower-pot fell out of a
Window upon the Head of their Captain, and beat out his Brains; which so
dismayed the rest of his Accomplices, that believing their design discovered,
they all dispersed, and the Senate by that means escaped. They also show ye the
Sword of Scanderbeg, Prince of Albania, who won no less then seven Battles from
the Turks, with which he cleft a Man quite through at one blow. There is also a
great number of other Arms and Weapons very curious, and among the rest a
Coffer, which they call the Devils Organs, because that if you open it, it
discharges several Pistols, that scattering their Shot about the Room, make a
great havoc of all that are in it.

After you have seen the City of Venice, Travelers always visit the
Glass-house at Mirano, where they make admirable pieces of Workmanship of that
brittle Metal, which are transported over all Europe.

But in regard I do not undertake to write the History of Venice, I forbear to
speak of all the Places which that Republic possesses in Italy. I shall
therefore only say something of Padua which is one of the Ancientest Cities in
the Venetian Territories, being about 2300 Paces in Circuit. It Is said, that
Antenor was the Founder of it, and that it is much more ancient then either
Rome or Venice. The Church of St. Anthony of Lisbonne is famous, because that
St. Anthony, now called St. Anthony of Padua, lies there interred: And they
say, that the Stone that covers his Tomb, smells of Musk: However certain it
is, that it is the most beautiful Church in the City. The Palace where Justice
is administered, is covered with Lead, and there is an Ascent of four large
Marble Steps up to it. The Great Hall is 256 Foot long, and 86 broad, where are
to be seen the Twelve Celestial Signs and great number of other very Beautiful
Paintings. Every Night at a certain hour they make the Great Clock strike 32
times, in memory of so many Traitors who would have delivered up the City into
the Enemies hands. Padua still retains several Footsteps of Antiquity, as the
Remains of an Amphitheater, called the Arenae, near the Austin Friars Church.

And the Ruins of such another are also to be seen at Veronas another City
under the Dominion of the Venetians; but there is much more of the Structure
standing, which is said to have been erected by order of the Consul Flaminius,
380 Foot in length, and 200 broad. There is also a Circus where above Fourscore
Thousand People may sit upon Seats of Marble.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Republics of Luca and St. Marino.
LVCA is a small Republican State almost enclosed within the Territories of
Tuscany, having preserved its Freedom ever since the Year 1430, under the
Protection of the Emperor. This Republic is governed by a Gonfaloniere, who
is Elected every two Months out of the Nobility, and has for his Assistants
nine Ancients, who bear the Title of Excellentissimo's. However they can
determine nothing that is not approved in the Grand Conncil, composed of 120
Burgesses. Though the Extent of the Territories belonging to this Republic be
very small, yet they are very well Peopled; so that they can easily bring 20000
Men into the Field to defend themselves, besides that their Revenue amounts to
above 500000 Livres a Year. Their Arsenals are always provided with all things
necessary to hold out a long Siege. The Gonfaloniere, who during his Regency
lodges in the Palace of the Signiory, and has a hundred Soldiers for his Guard,
is clad in a Robe of Crimson Velvet or Damask, with a Bonnet of the same Stuff.
Nor are there but few States wherein the Civil Government is better Regulated
then in this Republic.

The City of Luca, the Metropolis of the Territory is seated upon the River
Serchio, defended by eleven Bastions lined with Brick, and as regular as can be
imagined. Nor is it less considerable for the Antiquity of it, then the
Fortifications that secure it, Several Silk Stuffs are made in this City,
wherein the Inhabitants drive a very great Trade, which has acquired to the
City the Epithet of Luca the Industrious.

The Churches are very beautiful, especially the Cathedral Consecrated to St.
Martin, where they show a Picture, upon which they would make ye believe that
the Angels painted our Savior's Face. It is Crowned with a Crown of Gold,
having over it the two Letters Alpha and Omega; that is to say, the Beginning
and the End; or he that is, was and shall be. In the Austin-Fryars Church they
show ye a kind of an Abyss, which as they say, opened to swallow up a Gamester
that Blasphemed the Name of his Creator.

The Territories of the Republic of St. Marino are of a smaller extent then
those belonging to Luca, because they include only the City of Sancto Marino,
and some few Castles that serve to defend it, the whole containing not above
six Thousand Inhabitants. It settled it self in the Year of Christ 600, and has
all along supported it self under the Protection of the Pope, being almost
enclosed within the Territories of the Church. It is governed by two Captains
that are new chosen every year. She still preserves her Gravity, especially in
respect of other Republics; so that when she writes to the Republic of
Venice, she calls her Dear Sister.

The City of Sancto Marino is very strong, not only by reason of the situation
of it, which is upon the top of a Mountain in the Duchy of Vrbin, but also
because of the Fortifications, which are very regular, and certain Castles that
defend it. The Name of it was derived from one Sancto Marino, a Stone-Cutter,
born in Dalmatia; who coming into Italy in the Third Age, and being addicted to
Piety, preached the Gospel to the Pagans, and Converted several to the Faith.
He Died in a kind of Hermitage where he had his Oratory upon the top of the
Mountain where now the City of Sancto Marino stands.

CHAP. IX. Of TUSCANY.
THE State of Tuscany Is purely Monarchical and Despotick. It is composed of
three Estates, which were formerly as many Republics; the Florentin, Pisan and
Sienese, which derive their Names from their Capital City, where the Grand Duke
has built good Citadels. This is one of the most considerable States of Italy,
and wants nothing but the Title of a Kingdom, which a Pope of that Family had a
design once to have conferred upon it. In the mean time according to the
Italian Proverb, the Grand Duke wants nothing but Luca and Sarzana to be King
of Tuscany.

This Prince is one of the Richest in Italy: his ordinary Revenue amounts to
two Millions and a half of Crowns, and it is said that he has above Five and
Twenty Millions of Gold in his Treasury, besides his Movables and Jewels which
are of an Inestimable value. He is able to bring into the Field 30000 Foot, and
3000 Horse; and as to his strength by Sea, in a case of necessity he can set
out Twenty Men of War, a Dozen Galleys, and some Galeasses.

As to the Money, Spanish Pistoles, Piasters and Reals of Peru go current all
over the Dukedom, provided they be weight. The Money which the Grand Duke Coyns
are Pistoles, Ducatoons, Julio's and Gratie. The Pistole of Spain goes for
Forty two Livres of the Country; but the Tuscan Pistole goes but for Forty. A
Ducatoon is worth seven Livres. A Julio is worth eight Gratie, which is a small
piece of Money, part Copper, part Silver. A Livre is worth a Julio and a half,
and every Gratia is worth Eleven Deneers of France; so that the Tuscan Livre is
not worth above Eleven French Sols.

Florence is the Metropolis of the Dukedom, with an Archbishobprick Erected in
the Year 1421. by Pope Martin V. Surnamed the Fair, because that without all
contradiction it surpasses in Beauty and Magnificence all the Cities round
about it; to which the situation of it contributes not a little, being built
upon the River Arno, which divides it into two unequal parts, joined together
by Four Stone Bridges; and it is about Six Miles in circuit, with very neat
Streets and well kept. Some Authors will have Sylla's Soldiers to be the
Founders of Florence, to whom he gave the Land as a Reward of their Services:
That it was at first called Fluentia, by reason of the Confluence of the Rivers
Arno and the Main, but that the Fertility of the Soil gave it afterward the
Name of Florentia.

The ordinary Residence of the Grand Signior's Court contributes not a little
to the Magnificence of it. For assuredly the Grand Duke's Palace deserves to be
the Mansion of an Emperor. It is adorned with Statues of Marble and Brass much
more noble then are to be found in any other place. The Painting, Sculpture and
Guilding appear to be the Effects of Profusion. And therefore not to engage in
an exact description of this Palace, I shall only take notice of some Pieces
the most Magnificent.

There is to be seen a Candlestick or Luster all of Amber; a Domo of Mother of
Pearl, and Gold Enameled with red; a Table where you see the City and Harbor
of Leghorn, represented by several Stones of Jasper, Marble, Lapis Lazuli,
Topazes and Emraulds most artificially enchas'd; another Table of Calcedon
Enameled with Flowers, Empal'd with Agates, Lapis Lazuli, and Emraulds,
supported with Enameled Pillars: a Cabinet of Jet Inlay'd with several Gold
Plates, with Seven Doors where as many Organs play; and withinside the Passion
of our Savior figured in Marble: A Loadstone that sustains about Sixty pound
weight of Iron, but it has lost much of the Virtue of it since the last Fire
that happened in the Palace. A Nail half Iron half Gold, which was thought to
be an effect of Chimical Operation, but some years since it was found out that
the two Metals were only soder'd together, but so imperceptibly, that it was
not possible to be discerned: An Agate Table, a Statue of Lewis XIII. on
Horseback of Massy Gold; an entire Service of Massy Gold Plate; and a
prodigious quantity of Silver Enameled Plate. In short all the Apartments of
the Palace, and the Equipage of the Grand Duke are proportionable to this
Immense Treasure.

Nor are these the only Rarities which this Palace encloses, the only Objects
worthy a Travelers Curiosity. The Gallery wherein are the Portraitures of the
Family of the Medicis, and of all the Famous Men of this Age, as well for
Learning as for Arms, delightfully allures a Travelers Eye for some Hours, The
Great Captains are placed upon the Right Hand, among whom is Hannibal the
Terror of Rome; Scipio who took Carthage and vanquished Hannibal: Pyrrhus who
rejoiced Rome by declaring War against it: Scanderbeg the Scourge of the Turks.
Alexander Farneze, who never lost a Battle. Cortesius, who discovered the
Straight of Magellan. Andrew Doria, who recovered Genoa from the French. Gaston
de Foix, whose Memory is still Terrible to the Spaniard. Duke d' Alva, who
though Bloody and Cruel performed many great Exploits, and who lamented at his
Death not the Mischiefs he had committed, but that he had never fought against
the Turks. Custruccio, of whom no Body ever spoke ill. Eccellino, of whom no
body ever spoke any thing that was good; and Madam de Momorancy, who was well
contented to die in a Battle against the Religionaries of France.

In an Armory adjoining are to be seen several curious Arms: A Harquebuse, the
Barrel of which is Gold, and which carries much farther then a Barrel of Iron:
A Pistol which is called the Good Night, that discharges five times with once
pulling the Trigger. Also another with Ten Barrels, that discharges as many
times at once.

In one of the Cabinets stands a Mirror, into which if a Man looks, he seems
to be a Woman; and if a Woman looks into it, she seems to be a Man. I forgot to
tell ye, that among the Grand Duke's Jewels, there is a Diamond as thick as a
Man's Finger, that weighs a Hundred thirty eight Carrats, and is looked upon to
be one of the fairest in Europe, being valued at 150000 Crowns.

The Church of St. Mary of the Flower, is the Cathedral of Florence. It is
lined without-side with great square Panes of Marble, White, Red and Black
intermixed. The Inside is answerable to the Outside, and the Steeple is of
Marble though of a prodigious height.

St. Laurence's also is a very Beautiful Church; but that which renders it more
remarkable, is the Chapel wherein the Dukes of Florence lie Buried. This
Chapel is built all of Marble, lined with Jasper, Alablaster, and other rare
Stones, so well polished and wrought, that the Workmanship is more esteemed
then the Materials. The Vault is lined with Lapis Lazuli of Persia, which is a
Precious Stone of a Blue Color interlac'd with Veins of Gold, and which
perfectly resembles the Color of the Sky in a clear and serene Season. Round
about this Chapel are placed the Statues of all the Dukes of Florence, all of
Copper gilded in their Ducal Habits; and between two Tombs one of the Cities
of the State of Florence, which takes up the whole void space. In a word the
Magnificence of that Mausoleum is so great that it is enough to make those who
are wrapped up with the Pride and Vanity of this World wish for Death, if they
might be assured of such Glorious Monuments after their Decease.

Having thus viewed the Magnificence of the Palace and Mausoleums of the Great
Duke, we come to the Curiosities of the City; where there are to be seen upon
the Bridge that leads to the Grand Piazza, four Statues of White Marble
representing the four Seasons; and in the Piazza stands a Brass Statue upon a
Pedestal of the same Metal, representing Como de Medicis, the first Duke of
Florence, together with his most remarkable Exploits, in Relief. This Piazza
lies before the old Palace, on both sides of which are to be seen the Statues
of David and Hercules. To this Palace belongs a Tower which is a Hundred and
Fifty Fathom high, without any other Foundations then those of the Palace it
self, which gave an occasion to the saying of the Florentines, that they have
one Tower in the Air, another in the Water, meaning the Pharo of Livorn, and
another in the Earth, which is the Steeple of Florence. Near the River is to be
seen a large Column, upon which is placed the Statue of Justice in Porphyrie;
upon which the Critics have made two Burlesque Remarks; the one is that
Justice is placed so high, that the poor cannot reach it; the other is, that
she turns her Back to those places where Justice is usually administered.

It would be a great oversight not to visit the Houses of pleasure belonging to
the Grand Duke, of which the most considerable are Poggio Imperiale, Pratolino,
aad Lampeggio; where the Arbours, the Alleys, the Labyrinths, Grotto's,
Waterworks, and whatever can make any place delightful, are in their highest
perfection. Strangers are often trickt near Cupid's Grotto in the Garden of
Pratolino. For before they come at it, they are led a great way about; so that
coming to the Seats that are not far off, they are willing to sit down and rest
themselves: But no sooner are they sat down, but the pillars of the Seat
giving way to the weight of their Bodies, out flies the Water all of a sndden,
and washes 'em from Head to Foot.

Siena, with an Archbishopric and a University, was formerly much more
considerable then now it is, as having once contained above seventy five
thousand Inhabitants, whereas now there are not above Four and twenty Thousand
in the City. The Streets are broad and all paved with Brick. Formerly the
Sienois, who had a great many Children were exempted from all manner of
Impositions, in regard they had supplied the Republic with several Members;
and they who had no Children bare the Burden of the Taxes.

The Cathedral is paved with spotted Marble, upon which is engraved the
Sacrifice of Abraham, and several other Histories of the Old Testament. The
Roof is all of Azure, spangl'd with Stars of Gold: There are also to be seen
the Marble Statues of several Popes and Emperors, together with Twelve Angels
of Brass, every one holding a Wax Taper in their hands. The Piazza of Siena is
round, and the Houses built exactly according to the Rules of Symmetry,
supported by Arches like those in the Royal Piazza in Paris, where you may walk
Winter and Summer without being annoyed either by Rain, or Sunshine. The middle
of the Piazza is hollowed like a Scallop Shell, and may be filled with Water
from a Fountain adjoining, for the Lanching of several Shallops into it,
wherewith to imitate a Naval Engagement. And near to the Roman Gate, upon two
high Pillars, stands a Wolf giving suck to Rhemus and Romulus.

But is Siena has lost her ancient Splendor, Pisa* is no less unfortunate. For
she was once the most potent City of all Tuscany; as having been Mistress of
the Islands of Corse and Sardigna, as also of the City of Carthage, at what
time above 50 Galleys might have been seen in her Harbor all belonging to her;
but now she is no longer remarkable for any thing else but her Archbishopprick,
her University, and the House of the Knights of St. Stephen; where several who
prefer Celibacy before a Married Life, are maintained at the Charges of the
Order. They wear a Cross of Red Satin upon their Habits; and in St. Stephen's
Church are to be seen several Flags, Ship-Lanthorns and Colors taken from the
Turks by those Knights.

The Steeple of the Domo is admired for the height of it, because it seems to
lean on one side, though in the judgment of skilful Workmen, it stands as
upright as it is possible. This Church is supported by Seventy six Columns of
Marble of all Colors, and has three Gates of Brass* which they say belonged to
the Temple of Solomon. The Great Piazza is called Campo Santo, by reason it was
filled up with a vast quantity of earth which the Galleys brought from
Jerusalem, in 1224.

Livorno or Ligorno. is a Seaport Town within the Territories of Tuscany, of
which the Haven is accounted one of the safest and most convenient on that
side, Now in regard the City is but new built, the Streets are large and
straight, and the Houses very convenient, Here it is that the Duke's Galleys
and Men of War lie. The Pharos, or Tower of Livorn is looked upon to be one of
the most beautiful, and most necessary in all Italy. One of the most
Remarkable. Things in this City is the Marble Statue of Ferdinand. I. having
under his Feet four Slaves of Brass, in allusion to the four Turkish Slaves who
seized one Night upon a Galley, with a design to have made their Escapes into
Barbary, but were taken in the Act. Some say 'twas the Father and his Three
Sons who came on purpose from Turkey by the Sultan's Order, to have Massaker'd
the Grand Duke; but that their Design being discovered, they were taken and
punished according to their Deserts.

CHAP. X. Of the Ecclesiastical State.
THIS State is called the Ecclesiastical State, because the Pope is both the
Spiritual and Temporal Sovereign of it. It is composed of Twelve Provinces; La
Campagna di Roma, St. Peter's Patrimony, La Terra Sabina, Ombria, or the Duchy
of Spoleto, Orvietano, Perugia, the Earldom of the City of Castello, La Marca
d' Ancona, the Dukedom of Vrbin, La Romagna, the Territories of Bologna and
Ferrara. This State is bounded to the North by the Republic of Venice; to the
South by the Dukedomes of Mantua and Modena; to the West by the Grand Dukedom
of Tuscany; and to the East by the Kingdom of Naples.

The Pope is able to bring into the Field an Army of 50000 Foot and 10000
Horse, and ought to have Twelve Galleys for the security of his Coasts. The
Revenues of the Holy See, amount to about Two Millions of God. But the Popes
have a blessed and easy way to augment it when they please; and therefore
Sixtus IV. had good reason to say, that he could never want Money so long as he
had a Hand and a Pen. This easy way of filling the Apostolic Treasuries with
Money, has been the cause several Popes not having Children of their own to
enrich, as Paul III. had, have solely applied themselves to raise the Fortunes
of their Nephews. Paul V. left the Prince of Salmone, his Nephew, a Revenue of
a Thousand Crowns a Day. And others have done well for Theirs, proportionably
to the Times that they enjoyed the Papal Chair; and by this means it was that
the Number of Petty Princes multiplied so greatly in Italy.

Besides the Spanish Pistoles, Piasters, Sequins, and some other Foreign Pieces
that are current in the Ecclesiastical State, the Pope Coyns several sorts of
Money, viz. Pistoles, Piasters, Testons, Giulios, Gros, half Baioques, and
Quatrini. The Popes Pistole goes at 30 Giulio's, and the Spanish at 31: Three
Giulio's make a Teston; the Giulio is worth 5 Baioques, and one Baioque worth 5
Quatrini. One Baioque is worth 8 Deneers of France, the Giulio 3 Sols 4
Deneers; so that by that account the Ecclesiastical Pistole is not worth above
100 Sols, Money of France.

Now in regard I intend a particular Chapter for the City of Rome, I shall in
this Chapter mention only the other principal Cities of the Ecclesiastical
State, and begin with Bologna, called, The Fat, because of the Excellency and
Fertility of the Soil. It is so delightfully built, that in the most part of
the Streets you walk under Portico's secured from Rain and Sun: It is not above
5 Miles in Circuit; but if the Air were not so unwholesome, it would be one of
the most pleasant Abodes in Italy. Though it be under the Jurisdiction of the
Holy See, yet is it looked upon at Rome, rather as a Sister then a Subject; in
regard that by voluntarily surrendering her self to the Church, she has
preserved to her self the freedom of sending Ambassadors to Rome, from whence
she has Coadjurors; which is a kind of Bridle to curb the Power and Pride of
the Legates.

The Bolognese's also have this farther considerable Privilege, that if one
Citizen kills another, and that he can make his Escape, his Goods cannot be
Confiscated. There is also a Tower at Bologna, which by reason of the height of
it, seems to lean on one side, like that of Pisa; which some assert to be an
effect of Art; others that it was occasioned by an Earthquake. In the Treasury
of the Dominicans Church is to be seen a Manuscript Bible in Parchment, which
as they say was written by Esdras with his own Hand. They who have a mind to
visit the Churches of Bologna, will see the Body of Katherine de Vigri, a Nun
of the Order of Santa Clara, who though she Died in 1463, looks still as fresh
as if she were but newly Dead. But that which is more wonderful is this, that
every Month they pair her Nails, and cut her Hair once a Year before a great
Number of Credible Persons; nevertheless both the Hair and the Nails still grow
as if she were Alive.

There are an infinite number of Country Seats in the parts adjacent to
Bologna, but that of the Senator Volta surpasses all the rest in Magnificence.
There is an Inscription there to be seen, which has puzzled the most Learned
Wits of several Nations, For my part, I cannot aspire to that Excellency; and
therefore I shall only mention here the Interpretations of others. This
Enigmatick Inscription is in Latin, and it is said to have been made by a person
that was neither Man nor Woman, nor Hermaphrodite; that she Died neither of
Hunger, nor Thirst, nor by the Sword, nor by Poison, yet by all together; That
she was neither in the Water, nor in the Air, nor in the Earth, but in all at
once; and that this Inscription was made by Lycus Agatho Priscus, who was
neither her Husband, nor her Gallant, nor her Kinsman, but all three at one
time. Many People have thought they could expound this Riddle; Some saying that
it was Rain Water; Another Materia Prima; Another Chemical Mercury; And a
Fourth ascribed it to Love.

Since my Remarques have not led me out of Bologna, I cannot leave it without
observing, that there is frequently seen in the Parts adjoining to the City, a
certain Meteor, toward the Appennine Mountain, when the weather is obscure and
dark, which is a Light almost as round as a Globe, by the Country People,
called Bocca d'Inferno, the Mouth of Hell, because it has so fallen out, that
Traveliers, having lost their way in the Night, and following this Light at a
distance, have been led into Precipices.

Ancona the Metropolis of Marca d'Ancona, is one of the strongest places in the
Ecclesiastical State, where the Magazines are always abundantly Stored with all
things necessary for the defense of it. The Harbor was formerly in great
request, insomuch that it was a Proverb, Porto d'Ancona, Torre di Cremona, e
Petro di Roma; The Port of Ancona; The Tower of Cremona; And Peter of Rome. The
Port was formerly lined with Marble, and the Ships were Moored to Pillars of
Marble, set up all along the Haven at a certain distance one from the other.
But Time and the Wars have ruined the greatest part, and the Trade is gone off
to other places. However, it still preserves a very fair Triumphal Arch, which
the Romans erected in Honor of the Emperor Trajan.

Loretto is another City of Marca d'Ancona, Built upon a Hill, and well
Fortified. This City has been Famous for some Ages, as being the Repository of
the Chamber where the Holy Virgin conceived the Divine Word. This Chamber is
about Four Fathom long, Two Broad, and as many in height. It is built of a
Stone inclining to a Red color, resembling Brick, but much bigger and harder.
There is also a little Chimney against one of the Walls on the Right side, with
an old Cupboard, where they still preserve some Earthen Platters and Dishes,
which being found there when the Building was removed, make People believe that
it was the Plate wherein the Holy Virgin was served. Some years since they made
a Silver Door to the Cupboard; and at the end of the Chamber is a Window,
through whch the Angel entered when he brought her the Mysterious Tidings of
the Incarnation. There is also the Portraicture of our Savior, and of the
Happy Virgin, which they would have the World believe was Drawn by St. Luke.

This Chamber is now enclosed within a Chapel of the Church of Loretio,
consecrated to the Holy Virgin; and by the help of a Candle you may perceive
that this Chamber stands upon no Foundation. There is a World of Riches in that
Church, which has often tempted the Pirates of Barbary to try whither they
could be so fortunate as carry it away, but without any success. Among the rest
of the Wealth, for it would be too tedious to give an Inventory of it all,
there is to be seen two Crowns and a Dolphin of Massy Gold, which Ann of
Austria Queen of France, gave that Church upon the Birth of Lewis XIV. an
infinite number of Crowns, Lamps, Gold and Silver Candlesticks set with
precious Stones. In the Treasury of the Church are to be seen several sumptuous
Altar-Services; and among others, one made of Crystal; Candlesticks, Crevets,
a Basin and Eure, and the Foot of a Chalice, all of Amber. Another Service of
Agate, another of Crystal of the Rock; another of Engraved or Carved Silver. I
forbear to mention any more, that I may have room to say something of the
miraculous removal of this Chamber.

The Story is Engraved upon the Pillars of the Great Church in Thirteen sorts
of Languages, for the Information of Pilgrims; by which they are given to
understand, That the Turks having begun to invade the Holy Land, GOD, unwilling
that the Place where his Son received his Incarnation, should be polluted by
the Infidels, ordered the Angels to take this poor Domicil, and carry it the
9th of May 1291. from Nazareth in Galilee, where then it was, into Dalmatia, or
as others say, into Slavonia: That Three or Four years after it was removed by
those Blessed Spirits into the Diocese of Reconati in Marca d'Ancona, upon the
Lands belonging to a Pious Lady, whose Name was Loretta; but that the little
House being seated in a Wood, where often Robbers set upon the Pilgrims, it was
afterward removed half a League from thence upon a Hill, and then a little
further to the Place where this Magnificent and Wealthy Church stands, and
wherein this Chamber is now enclosed, Before the Great Church stands a very
fair Brass Statue of Sixtus V. one of its Benefactors. Several Strangers visit
the Apartments of the Chapter House, which are very Superb, and sufficient to
Lodge the Courts of several Princes at a time. The Cellars are always
replenished with excellent Wine, not only for the Provision of the Governor,
the Canons, and all the Ecclesiastics, but also for the Entertainment of the
Princes, Cardinals, Bishops, Ambassadors, and generally all the Pilgrims that
resort thither, of which there are an infinite number. The Storehouse for Drugs
and Medicines where the Pilgrims are supplied with Physic gratis, is worth a
Travsller's Observation. Among other things there are in that Infirmatory, Four
Earthen Pots, upon which, Raphael Vrbin Painted the Four Evangelists, for which
the King of France's Ambassador offered in exchange, in his Master's Name, Four
Vessels of Gold of the same bigness and thickness, but could not obtain his
Request, which caused a Saying, That Raphael' s Fingers had a greater Virtue in
'em than Midas' s, to change all things into Gold which they touched.

Ferrara, the Capital City of that Province, seated upon one of the Arms of the
Po, has appertained to the Holy See, ever since the year 1597. at what time
Alphonso II. Duke of Ferrara, of the House of D' Este, dying without Issue, the
Apostolic Chamber seized it into her hands, pretending it to be devolved to
her; which could not be done without Revolutions, that did not a little
contribute to the Ruin of the Inhabitants. This City bears the Title of a
Duchy, and is Adorned with a Bishopric: the Streets are also Fair, and the
Palaces Magnificent. The Cathedral is the most Ancient in Italy. Pope Clement
VIII. caused a Citadel to be built, consisting of Six Bastions, which cost him
above Two Millions of Gold, and set up his Statue in the middle of the Piazza.
Near the Gate of the new Piazza stand Two Brass Statues of the Two Princes of
the House of d'Este, the one a Horseback the other Sitting. Strangers must take
notice, that before they can Lodge in the Inns of Ferrara, they must have a
Ticket from the Townhouse.

Civita Vecchia is one of the best Seaport Towns in the Ecclesiastical State,
where the Pope's Galleys generally ride. But it now begins to grow more
considerable then ever, in regard the present Pope has Declared it a Free Port,
and Granted Franchises and Privileges, not only to Christians, but also to the
Jews that will settle there.

In the Province of Vmbria, near a place called Terni, there is a wonderful
sort of Earth, which in a time of Drowth, turns into Mudd, and in Rainy weather
turns into Dust. In the same Province is to be seen the Lake called Pie di
Luco, of which, the Water, as they say, in a little time petrifies pieces of
Wood that are thrown into it. The Lake of Norcia, of Norcera is no less
remarkable, in the vulgar Opinion, who believe that the Devil walks there, and
that the Magicians and Witches keep their Rendezvous upon the Banks of it. Nor
is it less certain that the Inhabitants of the neighboring Villages are often
upon their Guards to interrupt those sorts of Meeting. The Sybils Cave is in
that Quarter, the Subterraneal Concavity of which leads, as they report, into a
very far Kingdom, where the Men and Women sport all Day, and are turned into
Serpents in the Night.

Visiting the parts about Rome, you come to see Nariri an Episcopal City,
anciently called The Wicked City, for that the Inhabitants finding themselves
constrained to Surrender, resolved rather all of 'em to Die, and kill one
another, then to be Spectators of their Enemies Victory. They began with
cutting their Children's, their Sister's and their Mother's Throats, soon after
they did the same to their Wives, and then setting Fire to the Four corners of
the City, fell a Massakring one another, till not one was left alive.

Before I conclude this Chapter, I must inform the Reader, that near Tivoli, an
Episcopal City of La Campagna di Roma, there is a very deep Lake, in which
there are several floating Islands, which when the Wind blows, are driven to
the sides of the Lake, by the motion of the Water. This Lake is about 500 paces
in length, and in regard the Water is very Sulphury, it is thought that the
boiling of the Water forces up the Mudd to the surface of the Lake, which
sticking to the Reeds and other Herbage, forms those Islands, that in time grow
bigger and bigger.

CHAP. XII. Of the City of Rome, and the Curiosities therein contained.
ROME, formerly the Metropolis of a Famous Empire, and now the Chief City of
Christendom, is-without contradiction the most Famous City of the Universe. Her
Fame is spread abroad to all the most distant parts of the World, where she has
manifestly made appear the puissance of her Arms, and the Prowess of her
Governors. Men may easily judge of the Strength and Power of the Ancient
Romans, when they find that their Armies consisted of between Two hundred and
fifty and Three hundred thousand Men; when they had about 1500 Galleys, and an
infinite number of other Vessels: And Lastly, That the bounds of their Empire
were Euphrates, Mount Taurus, and Armenia Eastward; Aethiopia Southward; the
Danaw to the North; and the Ocean to the West. She has now acquired the
Epithet of Holy, not only because she has been Died with the Blood of an
infinite number of Martyrs, but because She is now the usual Residence of the
Popes, accounted the visible Heads of the Roman Apostolical Church.

This Famous City was Founded in the Year of the World 3301. by Remus and
Romulus, who were the Grandchildren by Rhea Sylvia their Mother (for their
Father is not known) of Numitor King of Albania: which has given an occasion to
the Historians, to publish 'em to posterity for the Sons of Mars, because their
Mother was found to be big with Child, tho She were in the number of the Vestal
Virgins. These Two Founders could not agree about the Name, which they should
give their City: For some Authors will have it, that at first it was called
Valencia; but the Disputes between the Two Brothers being reconciled, or rather
determined in favor of Romulus, he gave it the Name of Rome, and was the First
of the Seven Kings that Governed it. After which, she had Consuls till Julius
Caesar, who was the First Emperor of Rome.

Tho this City has been Sacked and Burnt an infinite number of times, as well by
Foreigners as by her own Citizens, yet has she been so fortunate, as still to
preserve some Lovely Remains of her Antiquity and Magnificence. However, She is
neither so potent, nor so spacious as formerly She was; since History assutes
us, That once She was above Thirty Miles in compass, whereas now She incloses
no more then 23050 common Paces, and 360 Towers within the Circuit of her Walls
and Suburbs. She had formerly thirty Gates, which occasioned as many High Roads
that lead to 'em, which are still paved with great Stones, and in many places
adorned with Marble Pillars set up at every Miles end. And it was in those
Highways, all along, that they Enterr'd their Dead; there being a Law which
forbids Burials in the City. Now there are not above Nineteen Gates; of which
we shall give you both the Ancient and Modern Names.

1. La Porta del Popolo, formerly Flaminia

2. Sancta Merodia' s Gate, formerly Gabiosa.

3. La Porta Piciana, formerly Colatina.

4. The Latin Gate, formerly Terentia.

5. La Porta Agonia, formerly Quirinalis.

6. St. Sebastian's Gate, formerly Capena.

7. St. Agnes's Gate formerly Viminalis.

8. St. Paul's, or Ostia-Gate, formerly Trigemina.

9. La Porta Ripa, formerly Portuensis.

10. St. Laurence's Gate, formerly Esquilina.

11. St. Pancrace's Gate, formerly Aurelia and Septima.

12. The Porta Maggiore, formerly Nevia.

13. La Porta Septimiana, formerly Fontinalis.

14. St. John's Gate, or Coeliomontana.

15. The Vatican Gate near Tiber.

16. La Porta Fabricia.

17. La Porta Pertusa.

18. La Porta Angelica.

19. The Castle Gate.

Rome is Peopled with about 300000 Christians, and about 8 or 10000 Jews, who
are obliged every Saturday to hear a Friar Preach upon their Incredulity. The
whole Circuit of Rome encloses seven Hills; but generally they never reckon
above seven which are the biggest.

1. Monte Capitolino, where formerly stood the Temples of above Sixty Deities.

2. Monte Palatino, formerly the Mansion of the Ancient Kings, where still are
to be seen a great number of Subterraneal Vaults, and the Garden Farnaise, one
of the most Lovely Gardens for Pleasure in Italy.

3. Monte Aventino, where now stands Santa Sabina.

4. Monte Celio, which extends from St. Gregory's to St. John de Laterano.

5. Monte Esquelino, so called from the Watch that stood there.

6. Monte Vioninale, so called from the Oziers with which it was formerly
overgrown. And

7. Monte Quirinale, now Monte Cavallo, ever since the setting up in that place
of the two Marble Bucephalus's which Tiridates King of Armenia presented to
Nero. The Popes also have built upon it a Magnificent Palace for their Summer
Habitation.

They reck'n fourscore Parishes in Rome, and above Three hundred Churches: Of
which the Seven principal, whither the People repair to obtain Indulgences, are
St. Peter's in Vaticano, St. Paul's without the City, St. Maria Maggiore, St.
Sebastians, St. John di Laterano, of the Holy Cross of Jerusalem, and St.
Laurences. But in extreme hot Weather they go to Sancta Maria del Popola,
instead of St. Sebastians.

There are two sorts of Government in Rome; that of the City, and that of the
Church; and both the one and the other is in the hands of some Ecclesiastic
upon whom the Pope confers it. The first has under him a Captain of a Hunderd
Men, to be ready upon all occasions to execute the Orders of the Civil
Government. This Captain is called Bargello, and his Soldiers Sbirri.

It may be said that there is no City in the World wherein the Civil Government
is better settled then at Rome. All sorts of Provisions are rated in the
Markets, in the Shops and in the Inns, where no body can sell any thing but
according to the Rate set. There are Bills set up in all Inns containing the
Price of Bread, Wine and Meat, etc. and-for the Information of Strangers, and
to the end that the Innkeepers may not deceive those who are ignorant of the
Language, or who cannot read, the Sbirri many times stop Strangers in the
Streets, to know of 'em where they Lodge, and what they pay a Meal, to the end
that they who offend against the Orders of the Civil Government may be soundly
fined; and the better to take the Innkeepers napping, many times the Sbirri go
and Lodge in the Inns, in the Disguise of Foreigners, especially where they
have any suspicion.

As to the Ecclesiastical Government, it resides in the Person of the Pope, or
the Cardinal Patron under the Character of his Vicar General. When there is any
thing to be regulated, the Pope calls a Congregation, where not only the
Cardinals are present, but the Bishops and Doctors; and if any Important
Affairs of the Church are in Agitation, they are proposed in a Consistory,
which the Pope usually holds every 15 Days, where all the Cardinals that are in
Rome must be present.

None but the Cardinals, whose Assembly is called the Sacred College, have any
Right in the Election of the New Pope. This Name of Cardinal was formerly given
to all the Curates of Parishes in Rome. Nor was it till after the Famous
Council held at Rome, in the Pontificare of Nicholas II. in 1053. that the
Cardinals assumed to themselves the only Right of choosing the Sovereign
Pontiff. Their number is fixed to Seventy, viz. Fifty Priest Cardinals,
Fourteen Deacon Cardinals, and Six Bishop Cardinals, which are the Bishops of
Porto, Ostia, Sabina, Palestrina, Frescari, and Albano. For these Bishopprick
Suffragans to the Pope, as their Metropolitain are always enjoyed by a Cardinal.

At the Council of Lion held in 1243. Pope Innocent IV. gave the Red Cap to the
Cardinals. Paul II. in 1464. allowed 'em Red Habits; Gregory XIV. gave a Red
Bonnet to the Regular Cardinals, who before that time wore only a Hat, and
Urban VIII. allowed 'em the Title of Eminency, till then addressed to by no other
Title than that of Illustrissimo.

At the Time of the Promotion of Cardinals, the Pope being then in the
Consistory, tells the Cardinals that are present, You have for your Brethren,
N. N. and then he causes the List of their Names and Qualities to be read.
Which done the Cardinal Patron sends for those who are at Rome, and carries 'em
to the Pope to receive the Red Bonnet at his Hands I and in the next first
Consistory, His Holiness gives 'em the Hat, and this Ceremony is called the
Opening and Shuting the Mouths of the New Cardinals. As for those that are
absent, the Pope dispatches away an Express to carry 'em the Bonnet; but they
are obliged to go to Rome, to receive the Hat from His Holinesses Hands. The
Cardinals Habits, are a Cassock, a Rochet, a Mantelet, the Mozette, and the
Papal Cope upon Solemn Days. The Color of their Habit varies according to the
Season, sometimes Light Crimson, sometimes Violet, sometimes Murrey, or a very
dark Crimson, The Cardinals are in great Reputation at Rome, and have great
Privileges: Among which one of the most considerable is, that if a Cardinal
chances to pass through any place where any Criminal is led to Punishment, the
Cardinals presence gives a full Pardon for his Crime.

The place where the Cardinals meet in order to the Election of a new Pope when
the Sea is vacant, is called the Conclave. This Conclave is not fixed to any
place, but is in the power of the Cardinals to make choice of any place which
they shall deem convenient. However in regard the Vatican is the most
commodious for many Reasons, this Assembly has been held there for a long time;
so that the Deliberation of the Cardinals about the Choice of a place for the
Conclave is no more then a bare Formality.

There are so many Cells as there are Cardinals, erected in a spacious
Apartment of the Palace; which Cells are made of Deal-Boards, every Cardinals
Conclavist having his Partition also, who is a Person shut up with the Cardinal
to wait upon him. When the Cells are ready, they are drawn by Lot, and every
Cardinal furnishes his own, and sets up his Arms over the Door. The Cells are
finished in Nine Days, by which time the Pope's Funeral Obsequies being over,
upon the Tenth, the Cardinals that are at Rome, enter the Conclave; and without
staying for the Arriual of the Absent Cardinals, labor Morning and Evening in
the Election of the Pope. When the absent Cardinals arrive at Rome, they spend
some Days in Visits, and reposing themselves, and then they enter the Conclave
also.

So soon as the Pope is Dead, the Public is informed of it by the ringing of a
Bell that hangs in the Capitol, and which is never towl'd upon any other
occasion. At the same time Courriers are dispatched to all the Sovereign
Princes of Europe that profess the Roman Catholic Religion, to inform 'em of
the Pope's Death, The Cardinal Chamberlain removes to the Palace, and takes
possession of the Fishermans Ring, which was the Deceased Pope's Signet, and
breaks it to pieces, because all Dispatches of Bulls cease during the Vacancy
of the Sea. Afterward he gives out all necessary Orders for the Pope's
Funeral, whose Body is Embaulm'd and carried into a Chapel of St. Peter's
Church, and exposed upon a Bed of State, for the People to come and kiss his
Feet through a Grate. The Funeral Obsequies last Nine Days, and the Ceremony is
performed by the Sacred College. During the Vacancies of the Holy See, the
Three Chiefs of the Orders of the College, viz. the Dean of the Cardinal
Bishops, the first Cardinal Priest, and the first Cardinal Deacon, have in
their hands the whole Government of the City and Ecclesiastical State, and
before they shut themselves up in the Conclave, they issue forth all necessary
Orders for the Public Security as well in Rome as in all the Cities of the
State.

I shall not enter into a particular description of the manner of Electing
Popes since Linus's time, who was the first that succeeded St. Peter till this
present time, as well for that it would carry me too far, as for that the
Ecclesiastical History has amply satisfied that piece of Curiosity. It Is
observable in that History, that the People and the Clergy jointly, and
sometimes the Clergy alone proceeded to this Election; that at other times the
Princes and Emperors have assumed to themselves the power of appointing whom
they pleased to be Popes, and reserved the Confirmation also to themselves:
That Lewis the Debonaire, and his Successors Lotharre I. and Lewis II. restored
the Liberty of Election to the Church in the Ninth Age: That it was again taken
from her in the Reign of Otho I. and not restored to her again till in the
Twelfth Age. But now briefly to the manner of Election in use at this day.

The Cardinals that compose the Conclave repair Morning and Evening to the
Chapel, to make the Scrutiny; to which purpose they carry every one of 'em a
little Ticket, wherein is written the Name of the Cardinal for whom they give
their Suffrage for the Pontificate: This Billet also contains the Name of the
Cardinal Elector, which nevertheless is enclosed in a Cover and sealed up, and
instead of a Superscription such a Motto or short saying as the Person thinks
of; as for example, God is my Help. -- The Holy Ghost be my Guide. Every
Cardinal throws his Billet into a Chalice that stands upon the Altar of the
Chapel of the Conclave; and after all the Tickets are in, two Cardinals are
appointed to open the first Fould of the Ticket, and read aloud the Persons
Named to the Pontificate which are writ down in a Register, yet not breaking
open the Seal that encloses the Name of him that gives his Suffrage, unless it
be found that two Thirds of the Suffrages are for one and the same Person,
which is the number requisite to render the Election Authentic; but then the
Seals are broke open, and the New Pope has the satisfaction to know who were
the Persons that contributed to his Election. This Scrutiny also continues till
two Thirds of the Voices meet; and after reading of the Scrutiny, if the two
Thirds of the Suffrages do not agree upon the same Person, then they have
recourse to that which they call Anough; that is to say, that every one is at
Liberty to give his Voice for him who had the most by the Scrutiny, with this
Reservation, that the Person is not permitted to give his Voice, by the Anough,
for him to whom they had given it by the Scrutiny. But if at length, neither
the Scrutiny, nor the Anough determine the Election, all the Tickets are burnt,
to the end the Names of the Electors may be kept secret. Sometimes the Election
is carried by way of Inspiration, as they call it, which is as it were an open
Declaration, several Cardinals crying out at the same time, such a one Pope.
But this is never used, but when They who make that Exclamation are assured
that they shall be upheld by the Suffrages of two Thirds of the Assembly.

When any one of the Cardinals is Elected. Pope, the Masters of the Ceremonies
repairs to his Cell, to carry him the Tidings of his Exaltatation; after which
he is conducted to the Chapel, and Robbed with the Pontifical Habit: Which done
he receives the Adoration of the Cardinals; that is to say, the Respects which
they are accustomed to pay the Sovereign Pontiff. That done, they seat him in
the Pontifical Chair, and set him upon the Altar of the Apostles in St. Peter's
Church* where the Cardinals perform the Ceremony of Adoration a second time.
From thence his Holiness is reconducted to his Apartment, and some Days after
they proceed to the Ceremony of his Coronation, as of a Temporal Prince. And
here are to be observed the two Qualifications of a Pope; the one is as he is
the Sovereign Pontiff and Head of the Church; the other, as he is a Temporal
Prince, and Sovereign of a considerable State.

The Ceremony of the Coronation is performed in St. Peter's Church, where there
is a Throne erected, to which the new Pope ascends, and being seated* his Miter
is taken off, and the Crown set upon his Head before all the People. And then
begins the Cavalcade from St. Peter's to St. John di Laterano, at what time all
the Cardinals, Princes, and Ambassadors accompany him on Horseback. Being
arrived at St. John di Laterano, the Archbishop of that Church presents the
Pope with two Keys, the one of Gold, the other of Silver; and after he has
given the Canons leave to kiss his Feet, his Holiness is attended back to his
Palace with the same Ceremony.

In the Account which I am going to give of the Curiosities in Rome most worthy
the observation of a Traveller, I shall endeavor to omit nothing considerable
of what came to my knowledge, and begin with a Description of the Churches,
which are the fairest and best adorned of any in the World.

The Church of St. Peter is deservedly looked upon to be the most beautiful, the
largest and the most Superb in Europe. It is built in the Form of a Cross, 840
Geometrical Paces in length, 725 in breadth, 300 high, and 1465 in Circuit. The
Roof of it is guilt, and it is covered with Lead and Copper guilt. The whole
Structure is lined with Marble within and without side; and it is paved with
square panes of Marble: Above one hundred Pillars support the Roof. of which
the ancient Emperors despoyl'd Asia: Among the rest there are Twelve that
Vespatian brought away from the Temple of Solomon. I say nothing of the Riches
that glister in all the Chapels of the Church, nor of the infinite number of
Relics which are there preserved. Those for which the People have the greatest
Veneration are the Vail of St. Veronica, with the Picture of our Savior's
Face; the Lance that was run into his Body; St. Peter's Wooden Pulpit, with the
Bodies of several Saints. The Portico of this Church is 289 Foot long, 40
broad, and 133 in height; and it has five Doors that answer to the five Doors
of the Church; of which one is called the Holy Door, as being never opened but
in time of Jubilee.

Over the Domo of the Church stands a Cupola, or Globe of Copper guilt, which
below seems not to be a Foot in Diameter, nevertheless it will hold above
Twenty Men. After you have ascended a great number of Steps, you come to a
Ladder of Eighteen Rounds which joins to the Foot that sustains the Globe, so
that you must get up with great trouble by the help of a Rope that is fastened
above, and hangs down by the side of the Ladder. This Globe is about a Fingers
breadth in thickness, having no more than four small Clefts, two Inches broad,
and six high to let in the Light, and two Iron Bars run across it for People
to sit upon. It Is observable that no Body is permitted to go into it in the
heat of Summer, for fear of being stifled. It Is said that St. Peter's Church
cost Forty Three Millions of Gold, and was the Work of Twenty three Popes.

The Church of St. John, di Laterano, is very considerable, as well for the
Antiquity of it, as for that it is the Episcopal Church of Rome; and because
there it is, that the Pope takes Possession of his Dignity. There it was also
where the Emperors received a Crown of Gold: It is all Paved with Marble, and
supported with Four rows of Gilded Pillars. Before the Church stands an
Obelisk, a Hundred and fifteen Foot high, erected by Sixtus V. This Church was
built by Constantine the Great, after his Conversion, in the year 318. and
enriched with several Crowns of Massy Gold and Silver. The Kings of France
have a Right to present Two Canons of this Church to his Holiness, in
consideration of the Great Benefits this Church has received from His Most
Christian Majesty; and there is a Solemn Service said in it every year in
Memory of Henry IV. of France.

There is to be seen enchac'd in the Great Altar, another little Altar, upon
which they say, that St. Peter and some of his Successors said Mass, before
they could be admitted the Public exercise of Divine Worship. However, it
were, no body must say Mass upon this Altar but the Pope himself, or a Cardinal
that represents his Person, and he must have an Apostolic Brief for that too.
A Chair of Porphyrie is also shown to Foreigners, wherein the Pope Seats
himself at the Door of the Church, when he takes Possession of the Papacy.
There are a World of Relics in this Church, as the Ark of the Old Testament,
Moses's Rod, the Heads of St. Peter, St. Paul, and St. Zachary, etc. too
tedious to be here repeated.

Upon one side you ascend to St. John de Laterano, by the Scala Santa, or Holy
Ladder, which are Twelve Steps of White Marble, the same by which Christ
ascended into Pilates Palace, and which Helena sent from Jerusalem to her Son
Constantine, then at Rome. People creep up these Stairs upon their Knees out of
Devotion.

St. Anastasius's Church was formerly the Temple of Neptune.

The Church of St. Theodore was formerly the Temple of Romulus and Remus; and
as it is said, it is built in the very same place where the Two Founders of Rome
were Suckl'd by the Wolf. The Hospital of Nostra Madonna of Consolation, was
the Temple of Vesta, where the Vestal Virgins kept the Sacred Fire.

St. Agnes's Church was formerly the Temple of Bacchus; That of St. Alexis upon
Mount Aventine, was the Temple of Hercules. Upon St. Anthony of Padua's Day,
the People bring all manner of Beasts to his Church in the Martian Valley, in
hopes that Saint will preserve 'em from all Sickness, and from the devouring
Jaws of the Wolf. Sta. Barba's in the Quarter of Pigna, was the Temple of
Venus. St. Bartholomews in the Island, was the Temple of Jupiter and
Escubapius. St. Blase's in the Field of Mars, was another Temple of Neptune.
St. Cosmo and St. Damian was another Temple, formerly Dedicated to Romulus and
Remus. St. Laurences by Janicola was the Temple of Juno-Lucina. St. Lucius near
the Palace, was the Temple of Apollo. St. Mary's upon the Capitoline Hill was
the Temple of Jupiter Feretrius. St. Nerea's was the Temple of Isis. Sta.
Sabina up the Aventine Mount was the Temple of Diana.

St. Martin's Church in the Mount, is remarkable for the Vault, which, as they
say, was the Place wherein the Christian Religion was First exercised, and
where St. Sylvester held Two Councils, during the persecution of the Church.
The Church of the Holy Cross in Jerusalem, which is one of the Seven
Consecrated to the Cross, was built by Constantine, out of the ruins of the
Temple of Venus and Jupiter; and because the Infidels had erected the Statue of
Venus upon Mount Calvarie, and had given the Name of that Goddess to the Mount.
Sta. Helena caused the Superficies of the Mountain to be pared off, and sent
the Earth to the Emperor Constantine her Son, who put it into the Chapel of
that Church, where it is kept among the rest of the Relics.

St. Paul's Church, a Mile without the City, was also founded by Constantine, in
Honor of that Apostle, who lies there Enterr'd. It is 477 Foot Long, 258
Broad, and is supported by 100 Pillars of White Marble, in Four Rows. The
Church of St. Mary's de la Rotonda, formerly the Pantheon, is a considerable
Structure, as well for that Agrippa, who was the Founder of it, set up the
Statues of all the Ancient Deities therein, in that order of Dignity which the
Heathens ascribed to 'em; as for that the Model of several new Churches has
been taken from the round Form of it. This same Structure is a Hundred and
forty Foot high, and as many Broad, without Pillars, having no other support
then that of the Walls; which makes it looked upon, as one of the boldest pieces
of Architecture that is in Italy. There is no Light but what comes in at the
Door, and at an Overture, about Eight Fathom in circumference, it the top of
the Church. This Building was formerly covered with Plates of Silver,
afterward of Copper, and since that with Lead; but now Lastly, at this day
with Large Stones.

There are a great many Hospitals in Rome, every Nation having one particularly
belonging to it. But the Hospital of the Trinity, erected by Clement VIII.
actually maintains Five thousand Persons; not to mention such as come by
chance. In the Apostles Church, there is to be seen every year an Election of
Twelve Gentlemen and one Prelate, for the distribution of Alms to such as are
ashamed to make known their Necessities; and to the end they may be the more
easily discovered, there are several Boxes Locked up, and set up in Public
Places, having little Grates at the top, wherein they who are in want, may put
in little Notes containing the Places of their Abode.

There are also Houses for young Girls of Ten or Twelve years of Age, when
their Parents are not able to provide for 'em, for fear lest Poverty should
tempt 'em to prostitute themselves. There is another House, over the Gate of
which is to be read this Inscription, Per le Done mal maritate. For the Women
ill Married; Where they put such Women as are unfortunately Married, or cannot
agree with their Husbands: and where they stay till their differences are
reconciled, and that the one or the other testifies a desire to live peaceably
together.

All sorts of lewd Strumpets that signify a desire to Repent and Reform their
Lives, are admitted into St. Mary Magdalains in Corse, and are there maintained
all the rest of their Lives: Nor are they Locked up by force, as in the
Spinning-House, in Amsterdam; but they must see no Men, unless it be their
Confessor and their Physician.

They who report that Brothel-houses are permitted in Rome, say true; but not
when they add that the Pope approves 'em, and receives a Tribute from 'em. For
there is a great difference between approving and conniving. Judaism is no more
approved in Italy, then in England and Holland, tho the Jews are suffered in
all these places, and have their Public Synagogues. And the Popes are so far
from laying any Tribute upon the infamous Traffic of the Daughters of Joy,
that they have been the Founders of several Hospitals for the maintenance of
young Girls, whose Fathers and Mothers are not able to keep 'em, lest Poverty
should tempt them to Libertinism: and they are maintained in those Houses, till
they are of an Age to Marry, or enter into a Religious House; and they that are
disposed to Marry, have a reasonable Portion allowed 'em, proportionable to the
Match that offers it self, and every Annunciation Day, there is a considerable
Sum of Money distributed in the Dominicans Church to 300 young Virgins that are
in those Hospitals.

The Laws in respect of common Prostitutes are very rigorous: they are forbid
to come into the Assemblies of Honest Women, or to frequent the places where
they walk to take the Air: they must not go in a Coach in the Day time; nor
stir out of their Houses in the Night; nor may they converse together, to the
end they may have no opportunity to encourage one another to debaucherie. They
are forbid upon pain of exemplary Punishment, to admit any company into their
Houses during Lent, nor during the Advent. They are bound to Register their
Names in the Public Registers, kept on purpose for the Curtisans; who by that
means are looked upon as infamous for ever. They are not admitted to the Holy
Communion, nor Buried in Holy Ground, but in the nasty places along by the
Walls of the City. Lastly, they cannot make a Will, so that if they leave any
Estate behind 'em, which is very rarely, it is all confiscated for the Benefit
of the Hospitals for young Virgins.

Those Places which they call Catacombs, are certain Subterraneal Walks, or
Caverns. where the Primitive Christians performed the Exercises of their
Religion, during the Persecutions of the Pagan Emperors, and where they
privately also held some Councils. The Catacombs, most known in Rome, are those
that open into the Churches St. Pancras, St. Sebastian, St. Agnes, and St.
Laurence. They who have gone through 'em report, That they run almost quite
under the City, even under the River Tiber. These Vaults are for the most part
about Five Foot High, and Three in Breadth. By the sides of which lie the
Bodies of several Saints and Martyrs, from whence the Pope causes the Holy
Bodies to be taken up, and Presents 'em to Princes and Ambassadors, by such
Names as his Holiness thinks proper to give 'em. There are some Places in these
Catacombs, where People are forced to crawl along upon their Bellies, for
Twenty or Thirty Paces: and several Persons that have gone thither to visit the
Tombs of the Ancient Christians have laid their own Bones in the same place.
For being engaged too far without good Guides, they have lost themselves;
either their light failing 'em before they can find the way out again. or else
being stifled with the smoke of the Torches.

The Palace of St. Peter's of the Vatican, where the Popes usually reside in
Winter, is seated in the Borough, the best fortified place in all the City.
This Palace is of a very vast extent, in regard it contains above 5000 Rooms
and Chambers. It has three rows of Galleries adorned with Pictures,
representing the Principal Histories of the Old and New Testament. In the
Chambers also are an infinite Number of Marble and Alablaster Statues; more
especially there is a Stone to be admired in the Imperial Chamber, upon which
Nature has formed the Image of Pius V. more exactly then any Pencil could have
drawn it upon Cloth. This Palace so called from the Name of the Hill upon which
it is seated, was begun in the Pontificate of Nicholas V. and finished under
Leo V. but was embellished with Painting and Statues by Sixtus V. Clement VIII.
Urban VIII. and their Successors, who have made it a Palace fit for the
Residence of the Severeign Pontiffs. In the midst of the Gallery that leads to
Belvedere, stands the Vatican Library, which is looked upon to be the fairest
and the most famous for Number and Curiosity of Books in the World. There are
an infinite Variety of Manuscripts in Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Arabic, etc.
Writings upon Leaves of Wood, and Tablets of Wax, of which they made use before
the invention of Paper. There is a large Manuscript Hebrew Bible, and another
Hebrew Bible written upon pieces of Parchment rolled up, from whence the Latin
word Volumen, with another Manuscript written upon the Leaves of a Tree, as the
Custom was in those days, whence the Latin word Folium for the Leaf of a Book.
Lastly, There is a Greek Bible, which as they assure us, was one of the Seventy
Copies of the Seventy Interpreters who Translated the Old Testament by the
Command of Ptolomy Philadelphus, being shut up every one apart by themselves.

Before they leave the Vatican, Travelers go to see the Garden of Belvedere,
so called because from that place you have a prospect over the whole City. It Is
to be observed that what we call a Garden of Pleasure, in Italy they call a
Vinyard. This Vinyard of Belvedcre is remarkable for an infinite number of
Marble. Brass, and Alablaster Statues; among which is the Statue of the River
Tiber, resting upon a Wolf that gives suck to Romulus and Rhemus; and on the
other side Nilus with Seventeen Children, every one about a fathom in height,
denoting the Seventeen various measures to which the Waters of that River
increase. There is also to be seen a Cleopatra expiring after her being bitten
by a Serpent twisted about her Arm; a Venus Ericina coming out of a Bath; the
Statues of Bacchus, Mercury, Apollo, and Laocoon and his Children folded about
with two Surpents.

The Piazza of the Vatican, commonly called St. Peter's Piazza, is one of the
fairest in Rome, adorned with a Fountain that spouts up the Water, as big about
as a Man's Middle, and as high as a Half-Pike; and an Obelisk, which is called
the Needle by reason of the shape and height of it. This is a Stone that was
brought from Egypt, by the Command of Caligula, at an incredible charge, and
was set up in Nero's Circus; but Sixtus V. caused it to be removed into the
Vatioan Piazza. It is 217 Foot high, comprehending the Basis about 12 Foot in
circumference below, and 8 at the top. It is supported by four Lions of Brass
guilt, that stand upon a large Pedestal of Marble.

The Castle of St. Angelo is one of the best Fortresses in Italy, and has been
the Sanctuary of several Popes in the Troubles of Italy. Alexander VI. built a
private Coridor, or Gallery, which leads from the Palace of St. Peter, to the
Castle, to the end the Popes might retire in a Time of necessity without being
seen. Prisoners of State are committed thither; and the Treasure of the Church,
the Records and Rolls, the Triple Crown, with the five Millions which Sixtus V.
laid up there, with a prohibition upon pain of Excommunication to all his
Successors, forbiding 'em to touch it, but upon a most urgent necessity for the
defense of the City, to which end that Sum was only designed. As to the Name of
the Castle, it was so called, as they say, from the Statue of an Angel that
stands at the top of the Frontispiece with a Sword in his Hand, in memory of
St. Gregory's Vision, in which an Angel appeared to him sheathing his Sword, to
let him understand that the Wrath of God was appeasd toward the Romans, who had
been very much afflicted with War, Pestilence and Famine.

Near the Castle is a Bridge over the Tiber, called St. Angelo's Bridge, built
almost in the same place where formerly stood the Triumphal Bridge, by reason
that all the Triumphs that were decreed in Rome, passed that way. But now we
see no more remaining but only the sad Ruins of that Pompous Vanity, it being
the Will of God, that that piece of solemn Luxury should be quite extinct, by
reason the Excess of those Triumphs was grown to that degree of Exorbitancy,
that had the use of 'em continued, Men would have been made use of instead of
Beasts to draw the Victors Chariot. Camillus's was drawn by four White Horses;
Pompey's by four Elephants; Mark-Antony's by four Lions; and Nero's by four
Hermophradites; Aurelian's by six Hearts, and Firmius's by six Ostriches.

The Capitol is one of the most ancient Buildings in Rome, so called from the
Head of a Man that was found when the Foundations of it were laid by the Orders
of Tarquin the Proud. The Structure was finished and covered with Brass guilt
in the Consulship of Pulvillus. Catulus consecrated it to Jupiter Capitolinus;
and it was adorned with a great number of Statues of Massy Gold and Silver,
which represented the Ancient Roman Magistrates and Consuls, and it had 3000
Brass Tables when one part of it was consumed by Fire. Nor was that the only
Fire which defaced this Building, for it was again burnt down in Sylla's time:
A third time in the Reign of Domitian; and a fourth under Commodus. So that it
wants that Wealth and Magnificence which formerly rendered it so famous. An
Ascent of 128 Steps led up to it, and there are still remarkable in it for
curious pieces of Workmanship two Statues of Constantine upon two Horses of
Marble, and in the Grand piazza stands a Brass Statue of Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus on Horseback. The Palace of the Conservators, which is also a part
of the Capitol, is adorned with an infinite number very curious Statues.

Upon the Quirinal Hill are to be seen the Ruins of Constantine's Bathing
Places. These sorts of Buildings were very large and sumptuous in every
respect; and there are also to be seen at Rome some Ruins of the Emperors
Alexander, Severus, Nero, Titus, Trajan, Philippus, and Caracalla's Baths.

They that are very curious are easily led to see upon the Palatin Hill, the
Lake or Gulf of Curtius, a kind of an Abyss whence formerly issued forth a
Stench that caused the Pestilence in Rome, upon which the Oracle being
consulted, returned for Answer, that the Contagion should not cease, till they
had thrown into the Gulf whatever Rome had of most precious. Presently the
Roman Ladies threw in all their Jewels; but that not availing Curtius, a Roman
Knight, imagining there was nothing more precious than a Brave and a Valiant
Man, and willing to signalize his Presumption and his Zeal for his Country,
threw himself headlong Horse and Man into the Abyss, and then the Plague ceased.

In that Quarter which is called the Field of Mars, stands Antoninus's Pillar,
upon which are represented in half Relief the Glorious Actions of that Emperor
against the Armenians, the Parthians, the Germans, etc. Two hundred and seven
Marble Steps lead up to the top of it, the Light coming in at six little
Windows. It consists of no more then Eight and twenty Marble Stones, which
being joined together, make a Hundred seventy five Foot in height. Of late
they have placed upon the top of it a Statue of St. Paul of guilt Brass.

Trajan's Column in the Piazza of the same Name consists of no more then four
Stones that rise to 140 Foot in height; to the top of which there is an Ascent
of 185 Steps, enlightened by 44 Windows. Formerly they had set upon the top of
this Column an Urn with Trajan's Ashes in it; but that is since taken down, and
the Statue of St. Peter in Brass erected in the room of it.

Nor must I bury in silence the Statues of Pasquin and Manforio; for they that
talk so often of others, must not be themselves forgotten. It is called the
Statue of Pasquin, because that all the Satyrs which are made in Rome, called
Pasquinades are always fixed upon it. Some say this Statue was erected in
Honor of one of Alexander's Soldiers who had done him many signal Services.
Others reject this Opinion, and tell us that the Word Pasquin is derived from a
Tailor who made Clothes for Persons of Quality in Rome; and in regard he was a
very great Droll, he observed their blind sides, to make Lampoons upon 'em in
his Shop, which always gained him good Company. They add that sometime after
his Decease the Paviers digging before his Door found a Statue, to which they
presently gave the Name of Pasquin, and set it up in the next Quarter to his
House. However it were, it was proposed to one of the Popes, that it might be
thrown into Tiber, to take away all Opportunities of Libelling and Lampoons
that were fixed upon it. But the Holy Father made answer that he was afraid it
would turn to a Frog that would be croaking Day and Night: intimating thereby,
that instead of stopping the Course of Satyrs, the Lampooners would fix 'em
upon all the Statues in the City.

Not far from the Capitol stands another Statue called Manforio, where
generally are hung up the Answers made to the Lampoons which are fixed upon
Pasquin. Some say this Statue was erected in honor or Jupiter Panarius; others
that it is a Statue of the Rhine. because that formerly the Emperot Domitian's
Brazen Horse set his Foot upon the Head of it.

There is no City in the World wherein there are more Magnificent Palaces. The
Learned Mr. Spon, in his Travels into the East has given us a Catalogue of 'em,
which has saved me the trouble. I shall only say, that the Palace of the
Farnezi is one of the most sumptuous. It has four Fronts with a large Gate
belonging to every one that leads into the Court, and is surrounded with
Pillars forming Portico's that support an open Gallery that leads to every
Apartment, In this Court stand two Statues of Hercules leaning upon his Club;
one of which was found in Caracalla's Baths; the other is an Imitation of That.
In the Palace Hall stands the Statue of Alexander Farneze, Duke of Parma, who
tramples under foot two Statues representing Heresy and Rebellion, while Fame
sets a Crown upon his Head. This Piece is so much the more esteemed, because
all the four Pieces are all of one single Stone of White Marble. There are an
infinite number of other Lovely Statues and Pictures in the Apartments
belonging to this Palace: More particularly there is to be seen a Marble Statue
in a small Back-Court, representing the Figure of a Bull, all of one Stone,
having one of the Horns tied with a Woman's Hair, while two Men endeavor to
throw 'em into the Sea. It Is the History of Amphion and Zethes, who in revenge
of the injury done their Mother, whom Lycus King of Thebes had repudiated, upon
the Importunity of Dirce, tied Dirce to the Horns of a Bull, and cast 'em both
Headlong into the Sea.

One of the Curiosities of Rome, which Strangers always visit, is to be found
in Prince Ludovisio's Palace; that is to say, the Body of a Man petrefy'd and
laid in a Velvet Box, with one Leg broken, to convince the Incredulity of the
Curious, who will not believe that the Skeleton was covered with Stone, because
they say it was a Garment made on purpose. This justifies what Ortelius
affirms, That upon certain Mountains of Tartary, there are to be found Men,
Camels, Sheep, ande. changed into Stones for above Three Hundred Years past:
And* Aristotle reports that there is a Cave near Bergamo, where are to be seen
the Petrified Bodies of several Men.

When I enumerated the Churches of Rome, I forgot to tell ye, that in the
Church called La Bocca di Verita, there is a piece of Marble representing a
Head with the Mouth open; And the Good Women do say, that if a Woman Unfaithful
to her Husband's Bed, lays her Hand upon it, the Mouth will shut. The Roman
Women who have Jealous and Credulous Husbands, frequently justify their
Chastity by this means, wherein they run far less hazard then they who formerly
were constrained to walk barefoot over red hot Coals, and Ploughshares.

This is what I purposed to say of the Famous City of Rome, wherein though I
have omitted many things, yet there is sufficient to give an Advantageous Idea
of it to those who have never seen it; and to breed in others a desire of
seeing it.

CHAP. XII. Of the Kingdom of Naples.
THERE is not any State in Italy of that vast Extent as the Kingdom of Naples.
Some Italian Authors have called it Sicily on this side the Pharos, which is
the reason that the Kings of Spain have assumed the Title of Kings of both
Sicilies. Generally this Kingdom is divided into Twelve Provinces; viz. La
Terra di Lavore, Principato Giteriore, Principato Vlteriore, Calabria
Vlteriore, La Terra d' Otranto, La Terra di Bari, La Capitanata, the County of
Molisso, the hithermost Abruzzo, and the furthermost Abruzzo: It is reckoned to
contain 24 Archbishopricks, 60 Principalities, 100 Dukedoms, as many
Marquisates, 66 Earldoms, and above 1000 Baronies. Which shows us, that the
Nobility multiplies in that Kingdom, more then any where else; which is the
reason that Naples is called Naples the Noble. The Air is very wholesome, and
the Country very fruitful in Corn, Wine, and all sorts of Fruits, This Kingdom
has not been free from Revolutions that have turmoyl'd the Repose of Italy upon
several Occasions. It has been in the Possession of the Romans, Goths,
Lombards, Normans, Suabians, French and Spaniards. Which latter Usurped it from
the French who have an undoubted claim to it, as well by the Investiture given
by Clement IV. both of that Kingdom, as also of Sicily, to Charles of France,
Duke of Anjou and Provence, Brother of St. Lewis in 1265. as for that Queen
Joan I. by her last Will and Testament, dated June 29, 1480. adopted Lewis of
France I. of that Name: Jane II. who possessed the Throne from the Year 1414.
till the Year 1434. adopted Rene of France, Sirnam'd, The Good; which acquired
him a double Right. But Ferdinand King of Spain, contrary to the Treaty made
with Lewis XII. King of France, sent a Puissant Army into Italy, under the
leading of the Famous Gonsalvo, who drove the French out of Naples and Sicily;
since which time the Spaniards have been in possession of 'em, and keep a
Viceroy there, who is changed every three Years. The Kingdom of Naples holds of
the Holy See; and the King of Spain pays every year to the Pope upon St.
Peter's Day a Tribute of a White Nag, and a Purse of 7000 Ducats. But the
Neapolitans do not willingly brook the Spanish Yoke: And therefore they have
endeavored to cast it off several Times: But their last Insurrection was in
the years 1646. and 1647. tho they failed in the success, because the Design
was ill laid, and 'for that the Malcontents had no body to head em but a
sorry Fisherman, vulgarly known by the Name of Masaniello, who for above 15
Days Commanded above 200000 Men, who paid him a blind Obedience.

This Kidgdom that stretches it self forth in Form of a Peninsula, is bounded
to the East by the Ionian Sea; to the North by the Gulf of Venice, by the
Tuscan Sea to the South; and by the Ecclesiastical Territories to the West. It
is about 500 Miles Broad, and 1500 in Circuit.

The City of Naples, the Metropolitan of this flourishing Kingdom, is seated
upon the Seashore; formerly called Parthenopea, and is defended by three
Citadels provided with all things necessary to keep the Neapolitans under the
Spanish Yoke; of which one is called the Norman Castle, as being founded by
William III. Duke of Normandy and King of Naples: The Second called the New
Castle, was built by Charles I. Brothrr to St. Lewis; but Ferdinand King of
Arragon, who understood the importance of it, caused it to be fortified after
an extraordinary manner; and it has always a Garrison in it of 500 Natural
Spaniards. The Castle of St. Elmo which cemmands one part of the City, was
built by Robert I. the Son of Charles II. and the Emperor Charles V. after he
had caused it to be well fortified, called it the Bridle of Naples. Besides
these Castles there are also some Towers and other Buildings, which are called
by the Name of Fortresses, as the Capuan Castle, which however are of no other
use then for the Councils of Justice and the Civil Government to Assemble in.

The Viceroy's Palace is very spacious, richly Furnished, and incloses several
Curiosities, among others, a Plant about Two Fingers in breadth, and about a
Foot and a half long, upon which the Ancients wrote before the use of Paper
was invented. A Stone, which being scraped, yields a kind of Cotton, of which
the Pagans made a certain sort of Cloth to wrap the Dead Bodies, which they
burnt, by reason that this Cloth being incombustible, preserved the Ashes of
the Corpse entire, This sort of Cloth is in use among some People in India; the
nature of it being such, thar when it is Foul, it is but throwing it into the
Fire, and it becomes as white as Snow.

The Port of Naples would be one of the best Ports in Italy* were it but
sheltered from the South-East Wind. The City is very neatly Built; The Streets
are Broad, Long, and as Straight as a Line, and so ordered* that there runs a
Canal through every Street, as in the Cities of Holland, which receive the
Filth and Nastiness through Iron Grates, so that the Streets are always clean.
It may be about Six Miles in compass, comprehending the Seven Suburbs; and it
has been all along the Residence of Illustrious Men, by reason of the mild and
temperate Air which it enjoys; in the number of which we may reckon Virgil,
Livie, Horace, Seneca, etc.

The Cathedral Church is Dedicated to St. Januarius formerly Bishop of
Beneventum, who is the Fourteenth Patron that the Neapolitans have made choice
of: and they keep the Blood of this Saint as a Sacred Relic, which is
congealed in Vessels: but if they lay it to the Saints Head, such is the Story
which they tell, it presently turns Liquid, and rowls up into little Bubbles.

As for the Neapolitan Money, they reckon all by Carolino's; every Carolino
being worth about Ten Sols of France: the Spanish Pistol goes for Three and
thirty Carolino's; a Sequin for Twenty Carolino's; a Piaster weighs Nine
Carolino's; besides which, they have some small Copper-Money, that goes in the
Markets.

After that Strangers have seen the Curiosities of Naples, rhey visit the
Wonders in the parts adjoining: for an infinite number of surprising Things
that are to be met with in the Kingdom of Naples, may well be called by that
Name.

The Mountain Vesuvius may well deserve to be placed in the First rank of these
Wonders, as being so frequently all in a Flame. Not to mention that Inundation
of Fire which happened in Titus's Reign, wherein Pliny was a little too far
engaged, out of Curiosity; nor of several others; I shall only say, that this
Mountain, which is above Seven Leagues from Naples, continually vomits forth
Fire, sometimes more, sometimes less violently; which has many times laid wast
the Country, and very much annoyed the City of Naples. There was formerly upon
this Hill, the Loveliest Vineyards in the Country, and a very beautiful
Village, containing above 2500 Inhabitants; but in the year 1631. this Infernal
Chimney, as Tertullian calls it, vomited forth such a Deluge of Flames,
accompanied with a Torrent of Sulphur, and a Shower of Stones, that all the
poor People were either burnt of stifled, and their Town was buried in the
Cinders, that lay more then Ten Foot thick above the Steeple of the Church.
Stones are also there to be seen, of a prodigious igness, and there are People
still living, that beheld a Torrent of Sulphur, Alome and Saltpeter fall from
the Top of the Mountain. Some time before this dismal Ravage, the Smoke, that
issued continually forth, increased, and was intermixed with Flames and Ashes;
soon after, it was accompanied with a noise so dreadful, that you would have
thought that nature was about to have been swallowed up: this noise was
attended with an Earthquake that swelled up the Sea; and at length the Mountain
bursting, pieces of Rock, all of a light Fire, flew out, and the Sulphur that
ran down, floated upon the Sea no less then Three Miles from the Shore; and
it is thought that if the Wind had not proved favorable to the City of Naples,
it had been buried in the Cinders that flew from the Mountain. This terrible
accident is engraved upon a Marble Stone, that stands in the High way which
leads from Naples to Vesuvius, Several People out of Curiosity, have gone up to
the top of the Mountain, by a way cut out of the Ashes for above Two Miles
together, and found at the top of the Mountain, a wide Abyss, about Two Miles
in circumference, and as many deep; wherein there appeared another, no less
wide then the First, from whence issued out a thick Smoke that smelt of Sulphur.

The Mountain Pausilipus is remarkable for the Subterraneal way cut through the
Mountain for above a Mile together, tho it be all of Free Stone; This Cavern is
called The Grotto of Naples, and was made to shorten the Passage from Naples to
Puzzuolo. For in regard that Mountain stretches out into the Sea, like a
Promontory there is no passage left upon the Shore: So that before that Way was
made, the Ascent and Descent of the Mountain was very painful and laborious.
There are some who averr it to be the Work of Lucullus; others ascribe it to
Cocceius Nerva: But however it were, the way is about a Mile in length, and
between Twelve and Thirteen Foot high, and so broad that Two Coaches may go a
Breast, There is no Light comes into it but by the two Entrances, and by two
small Overtures, which Alphonso VII. King of Naples caused to be boar'd through
the top of the Grotto, much about the middle of it, where there is a Lamp
continually burning before the Image of the Virgin; but notwithstanding the
Darkness of the Place, you are never pestered, by reason that they who come
from Naples, always keep the Right hand, and they who Travel thither take the
Left.

Virgil's Tomb stands in the Garden of Severino, shaded with Laurels, almost at
the entrance into the Grotto.

After this you must see the Lake Avernus, which Virgil calls The Lake of Hell,
because the Birds that fly over it, are poisoned with the stench that exhales
from the Water. It may be above Two thousand Paces long, and half as broad. The
Ancients faign'd that Charon plied there with his Boat, in regard the River
Acheron forms this Lake, upon the Banks of which are to be seen the Ruins of
the Temple of Apollo.

Nor is the Lake d'Agnano far from it, environn'd with Mountains, and thought
to be bottomless in the middle. Tho the Water be full of Serpents, yet has it
the good Quality to Cure such Beasts, as entering into such a venomous Grotto
adjoining, called The Dogs Grotto, are dragged, half stifled with the
Sulphurie Steam, that in an hours time would kill 'em quite.

The Lake Lucrinus, the most abounding in Fish of any in the Kingdom, formerly
intermixed with Avernus, by means of a Canal: But in 1538. or as others say,
upon Michaelmas Night in 1636. an Earthquake, not only filled up the Canal, but
set a Mountain above Four Miles in compass, between the Two Lakes.

The Alome Mountain yields a great Revenue to the King of Spain. The Ancients
made an Infernal Mansion of it, and placed Vulcan's Workhouse there; because
they saw nothing but Flames all Night upon it, and Smoke all Day; and for that
the Sulphurie Vapor infected the Air for above a League round; The Trench,
from which this Smoke arises, being a Thousand Foot wide, and Fifteen hundred
in length. All the Land about Puzzuolo is nothing but Sulphurie Earth, so that
you shall see the Smoke rise under your Feet through the Clefts in the High
way, occasioned by the Drowth of the Weather.

Not far from the Mountain of Brimstone, lies the Usurers Lake, because it
never restores any thing that is plunged into the Water, which is very black,
thick, and bolls all day long. If you throw Meat into it, it comes out half
boiled, and the one half of it consumed: And if you put into it Three Eggs in
a close Basket, it is said, that be as cautious as you can, you shall pull out
but Two, the Lake taking the Third as due for Tribute.

Near Puzzuolo, is a Subterraneal Labyrinth, into which you must not enter
without lighted Torches, and a Skein of Thread, which you must be very careful
to preserve from breaking, unless you will run the hazard of losing your way.
This Labyrinth is composed of an infinite number of Rooms, one within another:
And there are likewise to be seen in the same place, some Ruins of the Temples
of Diana and Neptune: Nero's Stoves, that yield a very great Heat; Four
Chambers furnished with Stone Beds, and Boulsters of the same Materials, would
entice a Man to take his Rest there, were they not a little of the hardest:
Cicero's Baths are in a large Room, where the Letters are scraped out that were
written upon the Roof, because that Sick People were so vain as to believe they
should be Cured so soon as they had read 'em. Others affirm, that those
Inscriptions were only the Names of such sick People as those Baths had Cured,
but that the Physicians caused 'em to be razed out, under pretense that they
were Magical Characters.

The Baths of Tirtola lie not far distant; being a very long Grotto, into which
you are no sooner entered but you begin to sweat; but when you are at the end
of the Grotto, you feel less heat: And if you feel it too hot, you need no more
then stoop to the Ground, and there comes up a coolness very refreshing. It Is
said that at the farther end of this Grotto there are Baths that are qualified
with excellent Virtues; but that they are but very little frequented, by reason
the Access to 'em is so frightful.

About a 100 Paces from the Lake Lucrinus, you meet with other Baths, some
cold, others hot. These are Caverns in the Rock, wherein they have cut out
certain Receptacles to Bath in. When you enter into the cold Baths, there are
several Chambers hewed out of the Rock, where there are a great number of those
Receptacles, some full, others empty. It Is said that every Receptacle had a
peculiar virtue to cure several Distempers; and they know 'em by the Statues
erected near the Receptacles, laying a hand upon the part affected.

When you leave these Baths, you ascend some Steps that are cut out of the Rock
which lead to the hot Baths; and when you have gone forward about 20 or 30
Paces, there is a deep place full of Water almost boiling hot; on the side of
which there is a Grotto.; but the Descent into it is so hot, that it fetches
out the Sweat by very great drops, because the Vapors and Exhalations are so
violent.

Near to Cumae, which is looked upon to be the Mother of Naples, is to be seen
the Grotto of the Cumaean Sybil, which though a Pagan, foretold the Birth of
Christ, and the Mysteries of the Incarnation. You enter into it through a long
and wide Walk cut out of the Rock, which formerly led to the City of Cumae.
After you have gone 450 Paces, upon the right hand you meet with a very low
Door, which leads into a Chamber 14 Foot long, and 8 wide, the Roof of which is
painted with Gold and Azure, and the Walls inlay'd with Coral, and Mother of
Pearl. On the left hand of that Chamber, is another Door which leads into a
Walk cut out of the Rock also, 4 Foot high, and 40 long. At the end of it is a
Chamber that leads into two other Chambers, in the one of which is a kind of a
small Lake: Now in regard the Room is very hot, and for that you cannot tarry
long in it without Sweating, it is conjectured that it was the Sybil's Bath. And
because that all these Apartments are under ground, and for that no Light comes
into 'em, you must take care to be well furnished with Flambeaus, or
Wax-Candles, and to be no less cautious that they do not go out. Now because
all the Rocks in this part of the Kingdom of Naples are full of these Grotto's,
it is thought that the Ancient Inhabitants lived under ground.

After you have taken a view of all the Rarities about Puzzuolo, you take Boat
and slip over to Baiae, which lies not above 4 Miles distant, and where there
are also several Remarkable Curiosities. More especially some Ruins of
Caligula's famous Bridge, who to fulfill the Prophecy of an Astrologer, that in
the time of Tiberius foretold that Caligula should be Emperor when he should
ride on Horseback over the Golph between Puzzuolo and Baiae, joined to the
Bridge which the Romans had then already begun, two rows of Ships stayed by
huge Anchors, over which he laid a great number of Planks, and so rode over
both on Horseback, and in his Chariot. There are some who believe that Caligula
did not only design the fulfilling of that Prophecy, but that he was at that
vast expense, to imitate Xerxes, and to terrisie the People of Europe that were
unsubdu'd at that time. The Sand all along that Coast has two peculiar
Qualities; that although the Water be cold, the Sand at the bottom of the Sea
is so hot that you can scarce endure to touch it, and when it comes out of the
Water, it becomes as hard as Marble.

It was at Baiae where Agrippina was stabbed by the Command of Nero her Son,
who was so cruel as to rip open her Body, that he might inspect the place where
he had lain Nine Months. This Misfortune was foretold that Princess long
before. For having consulted the Oracle concerning the Destiny of the Fruit
which she bare in her Womb; answer was returned her, Thou shall bring forth a
Son who shall be Emperor, but he shall put Thee to Death. To which she replied.
Let him put me to Death, provided that he Reign. Her Tomb is in a Grotto, where
there is a Cave cut out of the Rock, adorned with some Sculptures which
represent the Empress surrounded with some Birds of Prey.

There is also a certain Subterraneal Structure to be seen at Baiae, which is
called Piscina Mirabile, or, The Wonderful Fish Pond. It is supported with
about 45 or 50 Pillars, and lined with Ciment; which makes People believe that
it is a Cistern wherein the Ancients preserved Rainwater for their Drink, in
regard that all the Water thereabout tastes strong of the Minerals.

There is another Subterraneal Structure, called the hundred Little Chambers,
all built of Brick, wherein they formerly put their Slaves belonging to the
Galleys that always Wintered at Baiae. There are an infinite number of
Curiosities more in the parts about Puzzuolo and Baiae: and without question,
there is no part of Europe where there are to be seen the Ruins of so many
Pagan Temples, Tombs, Amphitheaters, Aqueducts, Grotto's, Palaces, etc. So that
in regard it would take up above six Months for a Traveller to take up an exact
view of all those Rarities, it would require a Volume in Folio to make a
faithful Enumeration and Description of 'em.

But though I am leaving the Parts adjoining to Puzzuolo, yet I am not quitting
the Kingdom of Naples, before I have made some other Remarks worthy the
Reader's Curiosity.

In the Province of Tarentum, there are a sort of Lizards, by which if a Man be
bitten, he cannot be cured but by Dancing, and the sound of Instruments. They
add further, that these Animals never bite any but the People of the Country,
and that it was a Punishment which befell 'em, because that being Dancing one
Day, they would not quit their Jollity but for so long time till the Host past
by 'em.

The Territory of Otranto is a kind of Peninsula, environed with the Adriatic
and Ionick Seas, and much infested with Locusts, that are pursued and hunted
after by a sort of Birds not to be seen in other Parts. The City of Otranto,
the Metropolis of the Province is considerable for being an Archbishopric, and
for the Haven from whence they generally take Shipping for Greece. In former
time Pyrrhus had a design to have joined Greece to Italy with a Bridge of
Ships, in that part where Otranto stands, though the two Coasts are above 60
Miles, or 25 French Leagues asunder. Otranto had the Misfortune to be plundered
by the Turks in 1481. but it was nothing near so strong then, as it is now.

Brindisi, or Brundusium: another Archbishopprick and Haven, famous for the
Passage of Julius Caesar into Greece, in pursuit of Pompey, whom he Besieged,
and forced to retire into Epirus.

The Extrrordinary Devotion that obliged several Emperors and Kings to visit
Mount St. Angelo, especially the Emperor Otho, who Traveled Barefoot to Rome
with all his Court, engages me to say something of it. It Is reported that St,
Michael having had a Vision in those parts. made choice of it for the Place of
his Abode, and dug a Grotto in the Rock. A Marble Portal leads into this
Subterraneal Cavern, and you go down a descent of 55 Marble Steps into it.
There is to be seen the little Altar consecrated by St. Michael himself,
together with several other Chapels under Ground: Besides, there is a Fountain
of Water of Sovereign Virtue for the Cure of several Distempers. The Devotion
paid to this Place, and the Resort of People to it, has occasioned the building
of a City and several Churches.

Rossano is another Archiepiscopal City of Calabria, for nothing considerable
but for the Church of St. Mary's. into which the Women are not admitted to
enter: For which the People of the Country give this Reason. The Holy Virgin,
say they, having showed St. Bartholomew the Place where he should build that
Church, she still appeared to him at a distance from the Enclosure of the
Walls, while the Church was building, and commanded that Saint not to let any
Woman enter into it but to order 'em to stand without and hear Mass. They
further add, that some Women happening to go in, either out of Curiosity, or
Devotion, there arose such a violent Storm of Rain, Hail and Thunder, that
never ceased till the Women were gone out, and had given Testimonies of their
Repentance for their Rashness; and they pretend that their Ancestors have seen
several Trials in Confirmation of the Truth of this Story.

Salerno, the Metropolis of the hithermost Principato, derives its Name from
the little Rivers of Salo and Erno, that water the Territory belonging to it.
When Naples was Governed by particular Kings of their own, their eldest Sons
bore the Title of Princes of Salerno. In the Convent of Jacobins, there is a
Bell that sometimes Towls alone of it self; and they pretend that such a
spontaneous Towling, presages the approaching death of some Friar in the
Convent.

Amalfi in the same Province is famous for the invention of the Needle and
Compass, and for being the First place that contributed to the Order of the
Knights of St. John of Jerusalem.

Capoua. An Archiepiscopal City in the Terra di Lavoro, was formerly accounted
the third City in the World; Rome and Carthage being the other two. It is now
seated about two Miles distant from the place, where ancient Capua stood: nor
is considerable for any thing but the Name of it, and some deplorable Ruins of
her Ancient Theaters, Aqueducts, Portico's, Temples and Subterraneal Vaults. It
was formerly called the Mansion of Pride and Pleasure, as well by reason of the
Magnificence of it; as for that Hannibal in one Winter Quarter of a year, was
so softened and effeminated with the Pleasures and Delights of that City, that
he was no longer able to withstand the Romans, whom he had so often defeated
before.

Gaeta is another City in the same Province, built by Aeneas's Nurse in honor
of his Nurse Caieta The Castle belonging to it, is considerable for the
strength of it, and is well provided of all things necessary for the defense of
it. The Statue of Charles of Bourbon, Constable of France, is also there to be
seen, who being in the Service of Charles V. was slain at the Siege of Rome,
and lies buried at Caieta. Upon his Tomb are written the four following Verses
in Spanish.

Francia me clio la leche,
Espagna suerte y ventura.
Roma me clio la muerte
Y Caieta la Sepultura.
My Infant Milk I Sucked in France,
Spain did my Lot and Fame advance;
Death snatched me from the Walls of Rome,
And now Caieta has my Tomb.
The Dolphins that appear upon this Coast are very large, which gives an
occasion to conclude this Chapter with a report of an accident that befell a
Seaman of Caieta. That a Seaman having caught one of these Fish, preserved it
alive in a small Pond, and tamed him to that degree, that he would often get
upon his Back, and managing him with his Voice only, accustomed the willing
fish, proud of his burden, to carry him for his Pleasure to and fro upon the
wide Sea. Some time after it happened, that the Seaman embarking for Spain,
the Fish made his escape to follow the Vessel in which he heard his Masters
Voice: and it so fell out, that the Ship being cast away, the faithful Fish
distinguished his Master from among all the rest that cried out for Help, and
having taken him upon his Back, returned with him to the Port from whence he
set out.

CHAP. XIII. Os the Islands and Kingdoms of Sicily and Sardigna.
SOme Authors have written, that Sicily which is the biggest Island in the
Mediterranean, with the Title of a Kingdom, was formerly joined to Italy, and
that a storm of Wind occasioned the separation; others assert, that it was
divided from it by an Earthquake. It was first inhabited by Giants, by
Listrigons and Cyclops; it was likewise called The Island of the Sun, and
Trinacrea, by reason of the Three Promontories of Faro, Passaro and Boco, which
are so placed. that the whole Island resembles a Greek Delta. It is seated
between 36 and 40 Degree of Longitude, and the Latiude extends from the 35 to
88 Degree. The circuit of the Seacoast takes up a Hundred Fourscore and Ten
Leagues; where it is longest; Sixty Leagues in length, and Fifty, where it is
broadest. It Is but Seven Miles from Cape Faro to Seiglio in the Kingdom, of
Naples. Some will have this Island to hang in the Seas, being supported only by
Three Pillars that are under the Three Promontories, and to justify their
Opinion, assert, That the River Salso, that rises out of a Hole in the middle
of the Island, comes from the Sea, by reason the Water is Salt.

The Air is very wholesome, tho somewhat of the hottest for Strangers. The Soil
is so fertile in Corn, Wine, and all sorts of Fruits, that Sicily was called
the Granary of Italy. The Honey, Oil, Wax, Sugar, Saffron, etc. which are all
the Products of that Island, draw a great Trade to it. Besides, there are found
in this Island, great store of Agates, Emraulds, Jasper, Porphyrie, Salt, and
several Mineral Mines: and all the Seacoasts abound in Fish.

When the Roman Empire fell to decay, Sicily was plundered and Usurped by the
Vandals. After that the Saracins settled in it, till they were expelled by the
Normans in 1070. Charles of France, Duke of Anjou, Count of Provence, and
Brother of St. Lewis. was invested in the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, and
the French remained Masters of it till the year 1282, or as others say, 1283.
at what time, upon an Easter day, at the Hour of Vespers, the Sicilians,
solicited by the Arragonians, Massacred all the French in the Churches, little
dreaming of such a fatal surprise: and this was the Massacre which still
carries the Name of the Sicilian Vespers. Since that, the Spaniards settled
themselves there. and are still in possession of it, sending a Viceroy thither
to Govern it.

Spanish Pistoles, Piasters and Reals, as also Sequins of Venice go current in
Sicilie, provided the Pieces be weight; for they Coin no other Money but
Tarins. A Spanish Pistole is worth Forty Tarins; and the Venetian Sequin,
Twenty four: Every Tarin is worth about Five Sols of France. When they make any
Payment, they reckon all by Ounces; and by an Ounce they mean 30 Tarins, which
make Seven Livres, Ten Sols of France.

One of the Customs observed in Sicily, and which appears very ridiculous in
France, is, that neither Women nor Men, if they have no Beards upon their
Chins, can Lodge in the Inns, unless they be particularly acquainted with some
Person of Worth in the place, or without very sufficient and Authentic
Certificates. There are also Guards appointed to visit the Inns in the Night
time, and to look into the Beds, and see whether there be any Chins without
Beards. They likewise seize upon all that are abroad in the Streets Two Hours
after Night is shut in, and they who are so apprehended, are Fined, if the
cause of their being late out be not sufficient to excuse 'em. This Island is
infested with so many Robbers, that it is a difficult thing for a Man to stir
half a League out of the City, without losing his Cloak-bag, if he escape with
his Throat. So that the People never Travel by Land but in Caravans, or without
good Convoys, and you must take a great care too, lest the Convoys allowed ye
be not Thieves themselves. There is nothing exposed to Sale in Sicily, either
in the Shops or in the Markets, till the Commissaries of the Civil Government
have set the price: and it would be an unpardonable Crime for any Merchant or
Countryman to sell his Wares or Provision dearer then the set Rate.

The Sicilians for the most part, and they that inhabit the Coasts of Calabria,
wear a Bonnet of Goats-Skin undrest, their Hair being matted or plaited flat
behind; A Doublet with great Skirts, neither Band nor Cravatt, their Breeches
very strait, a Cloak of the same Stuff which the Chimney-Sweepers in Savoy
wear, which they fling under their Left Arm, with a Sword and Pistol by their
sides. Their Shoes are made of the Rind of Bacon well Curry'd, which lasts a
long time: But the Poor have no more then a bare Sole made of the Bark of a
Tree, tied about their Feet with Packthread: And as for People of Quality, they
wear Pumps after the Spanish fashion.

Palermo is the Metropolis of the Kingdom, an Archiepiscopal See, and the
Residence of the Viceroy, whose Train is more splendid then the King of
Spain's. The Air is temperate, the Haven, the Fountains, and the Magnificence
of the Buildings, contribute not a little to render Palermo a pleasant
Habitation; and therefore the Chiefest of the Nobility reside there. In the
Great Piazza that faces the Palace, stands the Statue of Philip IV. upon a
Pedestal, upon which are represented the Victories of that Monarch, supported
by Four Figures representing the Four Virtues, the whole of White Marble. In
another Piazza stands a Brass Statue of Charles V. upon a Pedestal of Marble.
In the meeting of the new Street and Cassaron street, which are two of the
fairest Streets in Palermo, is to be seen the Palace, a noble Fountain; and
Four Statues of the King's of Spain, Charles V. Philip II. III. IV. which are
the most beautiful Ornaments of the City.

In the Piazza right against the Palace of Justice stands a Fountain, which
deservedly is looked upon to be the most beautiful in Europe. It consists of
several hollow Receptacles, one above another, separated by Galeries, whither
you ascend to admire the variety of large Animals that spout forth Water after
different manners. The whole is of Marble, with a great number of Figures of
the same Stone.

After that you have seen all that is curious in Palermo, Travelers go to
visit Mount Peregrin, at the top of which, after an ascent of Three Miles, you
meet with a Cave, almost like that of St. Beaume in Provence, which was the
retirement of Sta Rasalia, and it is reported that the Fountain within that
Grotto has a peculiar Quality to Heal several Distempers.

Tho the City of Mont Real be not above Four Miles distant from Palermo,
however it is an Archiepiscopal See. From thence there is a Prospect of Nine
Islands, called by the Name of Lipari, which is the name of the most
considerable among 'em. Of which two, Vulcano and Stromboli, are not inhabited,
because of their continual vomiting forth Flames and Smoke; for which reason
they are called the Burning Islands of Sicily.

However, these Islands are not to be taken confusedly for Mount Aetna,
commonly called Mount Gibello, the highest Mountain in Sicily; which tho almost
covered with Snow, yet continually vomits forth flames of Fire, like a
Glass-house Furnace; and spreads the Ashes of the consumed Materials with that
impetuosity, that the Country is frequently much endamaged thereby: tho if the
same Ashes are but moderately scattered over the Ground, they enfertilize the
Earth. The City of Catanea, lying under this Mountain, has suffered many
Conflagrations, occasioned by the sparkles of this Infernal Gulf. Several
Persons that have been so curious as to climb to the Top of Mount Gibello, have
been either lost in the Snow, or buried in the Ashes, and many times the Flames
enforce their way through Chawns and Rifts never known before, with such an
amazing noise, as alarms all the Island. Not far from Mount Gibello is the
place where some will have it, that Ceres first began to sow Wheat; and they
will undertake to show ye the Meadows where Hercules fed his Oxen.

The Lake Naphtica is noted for this, that the stench of the Water is so
noisome, that it poisons the adjacent Air, and very much impairs the Health of
the neighboring Inhabitants.

There is another Lake near Castro Giovanni, which is said to have no bottom;
It Is called the Lake of Proserpina, upon a suspicion that it was the place
where Proserpina was Ravished, and carried to the Infernal Regions by her
Ravisher.

Messina is an Archiepiscopal City, famous for the Haven that belongs to it,
near Cape Faro, which makes it a Town of Great Trade, and much frequented by
Foreigners. In the Grand Piazza stands a Brass Statue of Philip IV. upon a
Horse of the same Metal; the whole Adorned with Base-Reliefs, representing his
most famous Actions. Over the Door of a Tower near the Metropolitan Church,
stands a French Inscription. Grand-merci a Messina, in remembrance, as they
say, that the French began with Messina, when they made themselves Masters of
the Island.

There are several other Whirlpools, or Abysses of Water in the Sea adjoining
to Messina, among the rest, Charybdis, Famous among the Latin Poets. This
Whirlpool is about Thirty Paces in Diameter; which compass of the Surface is
usually covered with Froth, Bulrushes, and other foul excrescencies of the Sea,
which throw themselves into it, and are swallowed up by it. Nevertheless, the
Mariners of Messina, Sail over in flat bottomed Barks, where after several
times being whirled and turned about, they row themselves back.

The Tides of Ebb and Flood are so rapid in the Channel that separates Sicily
from Italy, that they many times force the Vessels riding there, from their
Anchors, let 'em be never so strong; which is the loss of many a Ship.

Saragossa or Syracuse was formerly looked upon as the largest and most
Magnificent City in the Universe. Athens beheld her self abandoned by the
Greatest part of her Inhabitants, who betook themselves to settle at Syracuse:
And the most sumptuous Edifices in Rome, derive their chiefest Ornaments from
the Spoils of her Structures. The most beautiful Ruin of her Antiquity
remaining is the Aqueduct, cut out of a Rock, that carries the Water over the
Haven, about Ten Miles in length. Without the City is to be seen Arethusa's
Fountain that rises in great abundance, out of a Rock by the Seaside; and they
report, that this Water comes from the Holy Land, by a conveyance that runs
under the Abysses of the Sea. But the greatest Evidence that they allege for
it is this, That a Pilgrim one day taking up Water, out of the River Alpheus,
by chance let his Dish fall into the River, and lost it to his incredible
Grief; for that he had hid within it Seven Pistoles for unforeseen occasions.
That embarking to return for Europe, he landed in Sicily, and going to the
Fountain Arethusa to Drink, he found his Dish floating upon the Water, which he
knew again, not only by the Seven Pistoles, but by several other marks.

Dionysius, the Tyrants Grotto, lies not far distant from Saragossa, much more
considerable than any of those about Puzzuolo, For there you may see a whole
City cut out of a Rock, with subterraneal Streets, Palaces, Piazza's, and other
admirable Structures. But you must have some notable Antiquarie for your guide,
that knows all the Turnings and Windings, and be well provided with Matches and
Torches.

There are several other Islands between Sicily and Barbary, as Maltha, Gozes,
Limosa, Lampadousa, etc. but in regard they rather belong to Africa then
Europe, I shall say nothing of 'em here. Nevertheless, I cannot forbear
observing, that in the last there is a Chapel, where you shall meet with all
sorts of Refreshments for Sea faring People, and all that is necessary for
Navigation, as Biscuit, Cordage, Anchors, Sails, Oil, Wood, Fish, Stuffs, etc.
And all that Sail near that Island, and have occasion for any of those things,
go and fetch 'em from that Chapel, leaving the value in other Commodities,
with which their Vessel is best provided. All Nations, even the Turks
themselves, go thither for what they want; and it is said, that if they fail to
leave a Compensation, their Ships can stir no farther, let the Wind be never so
favorable. We are assured, that several have known this to be true by many
Trials. However it be, that Chapel is hewn out of a Rock; and some Paces from
thence, there is a Spring of excellent fresh Water, which will keep sweet a
long time at Sea.

As for Sardigna, there are not so many Remarks to be made upon that Island.
All that I can say of it is, that it is an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, with
the Title of a Kingdom, belonging to the King of Spain, who Governs it by a
Viceroy. The Air is so thick, that formerly such persons were banished thither,
as the State had a mind to be rid of; that there is a Breed of Great Dogs
there, bigger then the Dogs in England; and such an infinite number of Rats,
that the King of Spain has enjoined all the Owners of Houses, to keep as many
Cats as they have Rooms.

The Ancient Sardignians had a Law, which ordained, that the Sons should knock
out their Parents Brains, when once they came to be Superannuated, for fear the
Infirmity of their Minds should incline 'em to commit Faults prejudicial to
their Families or the Government.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Island of Corse.
THis Island is seated to the North of Sardigna from whence it is separated by
a Channel that may be Sailed over in an hour, and lies between the 40 and 42
Degree of Latitude, and between the 31 and 32 of Longitude. The largest extent
of it from South to North, is about 40 Leagues, 20 Broad, and in Circuit about
Fourscore and Ten. It is said to have been so called from a Woman of Liguria,
whose Name was Corsa Bubulca, who carried thither a Colonie out of her own
Country.

The Island of Corse has belonged to the Genoeses ever since the year 1559. at
what time Henry II. Granted it to 'em, at the request of the Spaniards, after
the Battle of St. Quintin. Nevertheless, the People are not pleased with their
Government; and the Genoeses on the other side, who are afraid of their
Revolting, or lest some Foreign Power should make themselves Masters of it, do
as much as in them lies to lay it waste; and give out, that the Air is too
unwholesome for People that are not bred there; Besides that, the Soil is so
ungrateful, that it will hardly return the Seed that is sown in it. However,
it is certain that this is spoken, either out of Malice or Sloth; for that it
brings forth Corn, Wine, and all sorts of Fruits, more then sufficient the
Inhabitants; that it produces good Horses, and Timber for Shipping; and that
there are in it several Mines of Copper, Lead, etc. Baths and Mineral
Fountains; among which, that of Povera in the Province of Ampugnano, cures the
Dropsy; Besides that, they fish for Coral upon the Coasts.

Moreover, this Island might be made a place of great Trade; for that there is
no want of good and convenient Havens; of which, the chiefest are San Fiorenzo,
Ajacho, and Porto Vecchio, big enough to contain whole Fleets. The First was
formerly Fortified by the French; but the Genoeses have demolished the best
Works, having left nothing but the Foundations, which are of Freestone.

The Corses are good Soldiers, very strong, but very slothful, and no less
revengeful; so that upon their Deathbeds they recommend the revenge of
Injuries done 'em to their Kindred. Tho there be Five Bishoprics in the
Island, yet there is but one considerable City, which is Bastia, the Metropolis
of the Country and Residence of the Governor. There are but Five hundred Men in
the Pay of the Republic for security of the whole Island; so that it might be
an easy thing to surprise it, especially for those that are stronger at Sea
then the Genoeses are.

The END.

