THE LATE PROCEEDINGS AND VOTES OF THE PARLIAMEMT of SCOTLAND; Contained in an
ADDRESS Delivered to the KING, Signed by the Plurality of the Members thereof,
Stated and Uindicated.

Scilicet res ipsa aspira est, at vos non timetis; sed inertia and mollitia
animi, alius alium expectantes cunctamini; videlicet diis immortalibus confisi,
qui hanc rempubl. in maximis saepe periculis servavere. At non votis neque
suppliciis muliebribus auxilia deorum parantur, Vigilando, agendo, been
consulendo, prospere omnia cedunt: ubi socordiae tete atque ignaviae
tradideris, nequicquam deos implores; irati infestique sunt.

Cato apud Salust. GLASGOW, Printed by Andrew Hepburn, Anno Dom. 1689.

THE LATE Proceedings and VOTES OF THE PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND, etc.
TO remain silent under the Aspersions which some busy, but either weak or ill
Men, are endeavoring to fasten, not only upon the Proceedings, but upon diverse
of the most Honorable and Loyal Members of Parliament, were to be no less
treacherous to his Majesty, than careless of the Reputation of that whole
Illustrious Body; as well as of the Integrity of those Persons who are said to
have so much influenced the Transactions of it; and whose chief Crime (with
those that Malign and Traduce them) is their having expressed so much Affection
and Zeal for His Majesty's Person and Service: And as the representing their
Actions in a true Light, is all that is needful, both to justify and commend
them; so whosoever will be at the pains to examine them, will find them
adjusted to all the Rules of Law, Religion, and Policy. And as it is not to be
doubted, but that whenever the Parliament Assembles, they will both vindicate
their Proceedings, in Customary and Legal Methods, and exert that Authority
which is essential to them, over those of their own Members, by whom they have
been slandered; so all that is now to be endeavored in their behalf, is to
vouchsafe unto the English Nation (to whom they have been misrepresented) such
a brief Account of their Transactions, with the Occasions, Reasons, and Motives
of them; as may not only manifest the Wisdom and Loyalty of that Parliament,
but demonstrate beyond all contradiction, that the only design they have been
pursuing, was to preserve and maintain His Majesty's Honor, secure and
establish him an Interest in the Love and Hearts of his People, and make His
Throne firm and durable.

It is too evident, either to be denied or Apologized for, that all the Laws,
Privileges, and Rights of the Kingdom of Scotland, have under the Late Reigns,
been not only Usurped upon and Invaded, but Subverted and Overthrown. For by
gradual Inlargements of the Prerogative, beyond what was allowed by the Rules
of the Constitution, and the Statutes of the Realm, the legal and regular
Monarchy of the Nation, was swelled into an Arbitrary and Despotick Power. So
that all the Franchises and Rights, which by Original Contracts and Subsequent
Laws had been reserved unto the People, were either overthrown, or enjoyed
precariously. And we are compelled to say, that the Coalition of Scotland with
England, under one Monarch, without a Union between the Two Nations into one
Legislative Body and Civil Government, has given great advantages to our Late
Princes of treating us with a Rigor and Loftiness, that our Ancestors were not
accustomed unto: And though a small Acquaintance with the Politics might have
instructed the English, that whatsoever received a first Impression amongst us,
would sooner or later obtain a second Edition amongst them; yet they seemed
either not to have foreseen, or at least not to have resented it, until the
Original of King James' Absolute Power in Scotland (which all Men were bound to
obey without reserve) was copied over in England, in his Claim of Sovereignty,
in dispensing with those Laws, that were the Fence about their Safety. It was
from the unconcernedness, which the English have too often testified; not to
say the countenance they have given, in Relation to the Usurpation of our late
Kings over the Laws and Liberties of Scotland, that those Princes have despised
the Applications made unto them, as well by Parliaments, as by the Nobility and
Gentry, for redressing, their Grievances; and that the Nation remained so long
discouraged from relieving it self in those Methods that were left it. And as
the Scots did for many Years sadly feel and experience, into what Excess their
Kings grew up in Usurping upon their Laws and Liberties; from a hope and
confidence of being justified and supported in those Invasions by the Strength
and Treasure of England: So the English cannot be altogether insensible, how
Charles the Second not only confronted their Bill of Exclusion in England, with
an Act in Scotland for the Hereditary Succession of his Brother, but what large
Breaches he was encouraged to make upon their Rights and Privileges, after his
having obtained an Assistance of 22000 Men, to be enacted and granted unto him
by Law in Scotland, and those to be used in what places and upon what occasions
he should please to employ them. Nor are we able sufficiently to express our
Obligations to His Present Majesty, who being extremly sensible, that our
remaining disunited in our Governments, and two distinct Monarchies, though
linked together under one Monarch, has been one of the great Occasions and
chief Sources of our common Miseries and Oppressions; and being desirous both
to redeem us from the illegal Sufferings we have already felt, and to obviate
those which might break in upon us under future Reigns, has therefore invited
the Nations to such an Union of strength, Councils and Legislative Authority,
as may render them a Defense to each other; and not Instruments and Tools of
enslaving one another, and a mutual Prey. Which as all wise and good Men do
earnestly long for, so the common Interest of the two Nations obliges them
speedily to endeavor.

But we are forced to add, that besides the Encouragement which our late
Princes have assumed unto themselves, of Usurping upon the Rights and Liberties
of Scotland, from an expectation of being supported in it by the Power and
Wealth of England; There is another Cause, unto which much of their Invasion
upon the Scot's Privileges is to be ascribed, and unto which we are forced to
resolve many of our Miseries, as the Spring whence they have flowed. For upon
the Succession of our Kings to the Crown of England, and their fixing their
Royal Abode and Regal Seat in that Kingdom* they are thereupon fallen into a
Method of deriving their knowledge of Scottish Laws and Customs, of being
informed of the Grievances of that Nation, and of receiving Impressions of
Persons and Things from one or two Ministers chosen to reside about them, and
in order thereunto advanced into Places of Honor and Trust; and who too often
have been found to want either the Honesty, Wisdom, or Courage requisite in
those upon whom so much comes to be devolved. Surely the World has had
sufficient Evidence in the Ministry of the late Duke Lauderdale, what Mischiefs
a Person in his Post about the King may be instrumental in bringing upon the
Kingdom of Scotland: For tho he was endowed with too much Wit and Courage, to
be either hectored or wheedl'd, to be any Man's Tool and Property; yet through
lack of Probity on the one hand, and excess of Ambition on the other, he was
easily prevailed upon to become an Instrument of ruining and enslaving his
Country. What may Scotland then dread, if a Person should be honored with the
Character and Trust of Secretary for that Kingdom, in whom all the
Qualifications for so considerable a Station, were the sighing decently, the
entertaining one with a grave Nod, or if you please, a Grimace instead of a
sold Reason; the making those whom he judges Court-Favourites, his unerring
Oracles; and learning the Customs, Rights and Laws of his Nation, from them
that never did, nor were obliged to know them; the recommending those to be
Privy-Councellors to the King, who withstood his being so; the favoring those
in obtaining the Office of prosecuting Nocents, who stand accused for
endeavoring to subborn Witnesses for destroying the Innocent; and, as an
Addition to all those Accomplishments, should be so swallowed up in the
immoderate Love of the World, that instead of having his Thoughts exercised
about the Service, Grandeur, and Safety of his Master, should be wholly
employed how to ingross the considerable Places of the Kingdom, for enriching
his Family. Into what Inconveniences may the best Prince be easily drawn, if
his Secretary be unable to advise him what he may legally do, and what he may
not? With what Facility is a weak and easy Person in that Post, misled by an
English Minister of State, who has a mind to be revenged upon Scotland for
rejecting Episcopacy? How may a Crafty and Treacherous Courtier, that has a
purpose to play an after-game for the late King, influence a Scots Secretary,
unskilled in the Politics, to imbroil his present Majesty with his People in
Scotland; and all for this, that the Abdicated Monarch may have a new Throw for
his Crowns again? Suppose but one Person in Office about the King for the
Affairs of Scotland, and him to be extremely timorous, What fatal Councils,
under the fear of the Whip, may he be prevailed upon to suggest and give? Hence
it is evident what Disadvantages those of that Nation lie under, of having both
their Persons and Actions misrepresented, and their Rights and Liberties
undermined and invaded; and that as well by reason of the King's residing
constantly at so great a distance from them, as because of his having no more
Counselors usually about him, in reference to their Affairs, than who (as a
French King was pleased to express it) may all ride upon one Horse.

Now as it was the Oppression and Slavery under which we had been brought, that
rendered His Majesty's Undertaking in coming into these Kingdoms with an armed
Force, in order to redeem them, both honorable and just: So it was the hope of
being delivered by him from Misery and Bondage, that encouraged us first to
invite, and then to cooperate with him in the Prosecution and Accomplishment
of his glorious Design. It was the Invasions upon our Laws that we complained
of, and from which we desired and endeavored to be relieved; nor had we any
Quarrel with the late King's Counselors, save as they were Advisers unto, and
Instruments of overthrowing them. So that if what the Parliament of Scotland
desires to have redressed, be not something wherein their Laws have been
invaded, and their Rights violated, they are to blame for insisting upon it as
a Claim of Right; and should rather crave it as an Act of Grace, if they find
the want of it prejudicial to the Nation. But if what is required do either
appear to have been wrested from the Nation, or that through their not
obtaining it, they will be upon all occasions obnoxious to be oppressed and
inthralled, we may then assure our selves, that His Majesty is too just, as
well as good, to deny them. For as His Majesty does generously acknowledge in
his Declaration emitted at the Hague, for the restoring of the Laws and
Liberties of the Kingdom of Scotland, That they who are concerned in the Laws,
Liberties and Customs established by Lawful Authority in a Nation, are
indispensibly bound to endeavor to preserve and maintain the said Laws,
Liberties, and Customs; so he does in the same Declaration, sacredly promise,
that upon being prosper'd in what he was then undertaking, he will not only
free that Kingdom from all hazard of Popery and Arbitrary Power for the future,
and deliver it from what at that time did expose it to both, but settle it by
Parliament upon such a solid Basis, as to its Religious and Civil Concers, as
should most effectually redress all the Grievances under which it had groaned.
And therefore as we are not to imagine, that a Parliament, which in the whole
course of its Proceedings has testified so much Love, Loyalty and Zeal for His
Majesty, both in advancing Him unto, and maintaining Him in the Throne, will
abridg and lessen any of the just and legal Prerogatives of His Crown; or
challenge any Privilege, Right or Immunity, which their Ancestors have not been
possessed of under the best and most Glorious as well as Ancient Reigns; so it
were unpardonable to think, that a Prince of so much Wisdom, Goodness, Honor,
Justice and Truch, as His Majesty is known to be, should either insist upon the
detaining from His People, what some of his Predecessors have by Fraud and
Violence ravished from them* or should so far depart from His Princely and
Sacred Word, as to frustrate the Expectations of His Leiges of having those
Grievances redressed, which His Parliament have condescended upon as necessary
to be remedied.

But as His Majesty's delaying to gratify the desires of His People, is not the
effect of Choice and Inclination, but the result of a Force put upon him
through the sinistrous Representations given him of their Demands, both as
illegal, and as encroachments upon the Royal Authority: So we do not wonder
that the same Person should misreport the Actions of a Parliament, and
insinuate into his Master unjust and false glosses of their Votes, who has had
both the Impudence and Treachery to endeavor to Possess the King with Disloyal
Characters of his most dutiful, best and useful Subjects. And seeing his
Capacity both as a Lawyer, and His Majesty's Advocate, has not served to
instruct him of the danger, nor to restrain him from Leasing-making (which is
Treason by the Law of Scotland) it is to be hoped that the Persons whom he has
criminally slandered, will have the courage to Impeach him; and that the
Parliament will have the Justice to condemn him to the Punishment that the Law
adjudgeth him unto. Nor can it be matter of Astonishment to any, to find a
Person imposing upon His Majesty in reference to the Laws, Rights, and Castoms
of His Country, who has had the Impudence as well as Malice, to brand those for
Republicans, by whose Power, Zeal, and Interest, the Crown came to be conferred
upon the present King. But they must be Persons of a very short Prospect, who
do not perceive, that they who are endeavoring to restore King James, account
it expedient to blast those in his present Majesty's Esteem, under the
reproachful name of Republicans, who have the Loyalty and Courage to venture
their whole for his Crown and Dignity, and to withstand those ill Men in what
they are about. And I will venture to say it freely, that as it is not Names,
but Things which wise Men seek and pursue: So there is no more required to the
freeing both Scotland and England from the Commonwealths Men, and from all
Republican Principles, but that His Majesty persevere in preserving unto his
People their Rights and Liberties; Esteem Parliaments as well his great Council
in Arduous Affairs, as the Suppliers of him in his Necessities with Money; and
that he make the known Laws the Measure and Standard of his Government. While
on the contrary it is in the Power of ill Ministers (if His Majesty hearken
unto them) to withdraw nine parts of ten of the People in six Months from their
Love of Monarchy, and to force them upon wishing for a Commonwealth. And had
it not been for the view which the Nations under the last Reign had of their
Royal Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Orange, and the assurance they
entertained of enjoying their Laws and Privileges, under their Government and
Authority, the Methods which the late King took, and the Counsels he followed,
would instead of the Translation of the Crown to Their present Majesty's, have
put an end to the Monarchy. Nor can any thing so affright considering Persons
from addictedness to Monarchy, as the leaving the Nations under the Power,
Conduct and Authority, of those very Men, by whose Counsels and Management the
late King came to forefault His Crown; seeing some will be so peremptory as to
imagine, that it cannot be upon personal liking that they come to be used, but
because the nature of the Government requires them, or at least Persons of
their Principle, and Political Complexions.

But forasmuch as the present Embarrass of His Majesty with his Parliament of
Scotland is wholly caused by the Advocate's abusing His Majesty in the Account
he has given him, both of the Rights and Jurisdictions of the Estates in
Parliament Assembled, and of the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom; I shall
therefore in Order to the disparaging of him, with all the Wise and Loyal part
of Mankind, and the debarring him the King's Ear, and attracting upon him the
Royal Indignation; Publish the Principle upon which he builds all the Advices
he communicates to his Master, and with which he seeks* to poison and corrupt
His Royal Mind. And this is, That the King has a separate Interest from his
People, which he ought to pursue in distinction from theirs: And this we may be
sure he does not fail of insinuating, either immediately unto his Majesty, or
at least to those about him; seeing he had the Folly, as well as the Impudence,
both to assert and to seek to justify it in open and full Parliament. Now
whosoever gives himself the trouble of examining the tendency of this
Principle, will find the natural Consequences of it to be, That the Prince and
People must not only Live in a constant jealousy and dread of one another; but
must always be embarked in an intestine War. Nor is it to be avoided, unless
either by the King's arriving at the height of Tyranny, and the Peoples sinking
into the Abyss of Slavery, or by the Subjects grasping the whole Power and
Authority, and leaving unto the King an empty Name. Yea, it is a destroying of
the very end for which Government was ordained of God, and submitted unto by
Men; seeing that was nothing else, but that the whole Society, comprehending
Ruler and Ruled, might have but one Common Political Interest; for the Defense
and Security whereof each of them were to have their respective Duties allo^ted
unto them: Nay, the very Prerogative acknowledged to belong unto the King, is
nothing save a Power* trusted with him, in Relation to some Cases that may
emerge, by which he may be the better enabled to preserve the safety of the
Community, and to provide for the benefit of the Public. Nor could Sir J -- D
-- le take a more effectual Course to supplant the King in the Hearts of his
People, and to possess them with a Horror of, and an Alienation from his
Government, than by his Proclaiming within the Parliament Walls, That the King
has a separate Interest from that of his People, and by Consequence that he is
to promote and maintain it, with the Neglect if not the Ruin of theirs;
neither is there any thing more propable than that the Advocate vented it in
Treachery to his Majesty, whom out of a Love to the late King, and a Desire to
have him restored, he seeks to undermine and betray. For he has hereby so
alarmed the People in reference to His Majesty's Government, and filled them
with those dismal Apprehensions of what they are to expect, in case the King
have a separate Interest from Theirs, that it will be difficult either: to
allay their Fears, or to recover them to an entire Trust in his Majesty's
Justice and Goodness, without removing that Man both from about his Majesty's
Person, and out of his Councils, who has given them that frightful Idea of his
ensuing Reign.

However from this of the Advocate, as well as from innumerable Observations to
be made from the present Behavior and Conduct of those who are received into
his Majesty's Councils and Service; after they had not only ministered to King
James through the whole Course of his Reign, but co-operated with him in most,
if not all the Methods of his Tyranny; we may rationally venture at this
Reflection, (to wit) That they are either endeavoring to justify the former
Reign, by seeking to expose and disgrace this, Or that they are studying to
cover themselves from what they are obnoxious unto, for their Crimes under the
last Government, by reacting and repeating the same under the Connivance and
Indulgence of the present.

And as by the First, they evidently shake his Majesty's Throne; so by the
Second, they not only abuse the Mercy of the Government, but despise its
Justice: By the Last, they render the Government Vile and Cheap; and by the
former they pursue its Subversion: It must with all lay a great Prejudice upon
the Opinion of those that dissuade his Majesty from gratifying his People in
these Demands, about which so much noise has been made here, as well as there,
that they were judged necessary for his Interest as well as the Kingdoms
Safety, by, in a manner, the Unanimous Vote of the whole Parliament; and of
which it may be modestly said, that it is not only one of the wisest, but
constituted of the most considerable Persons for Quality, Estate, and Esteem in
their Country, that ever Scotland had: For even the Vote about the Lords of the
Session, which is most censured and stumbled at, passed the whole House without
any more dissenting Voices than barely four; and of those Sir J. D -- ple, who
was the leading Man amongst them, sensibly biassed by the Consideration, that,
if the Vote obtained, his Father would have been excluded from the Honorable,
and to him Beneficial Place of President, to which he is now advanced. Is it
not more likely that these few should act without regard to the King and
Kingdom's Interest, and depart from the Laws, Rights and Customs of the Realm,
th^n that the whole Body of the Parliament should be unacquainted with what the
Constitution, as well as the common Safety of Prince and People, authorize them
to claim? And that they should exceed the measures of Law, Justice, and Equity,
in what they demand? Nor was the Parliament under the Influence of such Motives
for encroaching upon the King's Prerogative, as these Gentlemen were for
betraying both the Jurisdiction of Parliament, and the Privileges of the
Nation. For having sacrificed all the Laws and Rights of the Kingdom, under the
late Reign, to the Lust and Will of one Arbitrary and Despotical Monarch; they
could do no less, both by the Rules of Policy and Uniformity, than endeavor to
vest his present Majesty in the Robberies of former Princes; there being no
such way for Thieves to escape at the Bar, as to prevail with the Judge to
receive and harbor their stolen Goods. And for the King to rely upon being
informed by Sir J. D -- pie, what is the Prerogative of the Crown? and what are
Rights and Jurisdictions of Parliament? is as if King James's Attorney General
were to be made the Oracle of the Court, in reference to what Crimes and
Offenses Peers and Gentlemen were to be condemned and executed for; and for
what Failures and Miscarriages Cities and Corporations were to Forefault their
Charters, and to be deprived of their Franchises. Could the Parliament have
been guilty of so Impudent, as well as Criminal a Thing, as to incroach upon
the just Prerogatives of the Crown, and to rob his Majesty of his legal Rights,
it would have been more for their Profit and Interest to have effectuated it in
relation to the disposal of Offices of state, and of Military Commands, than to
claim merely a right of interposing; and that only in the Case of a total
Vacancy of the Session, about the approving of Persons nominated by His Majesty
to judicial Places* For whereas the former would look like the putting
themselves into a condition of giving check to their Prince, whenever a
Caprici^ should take them, and they should fancy themselves agrieved; all that
can be aimed at, or possibly compassed by the latter, is to have Justice
equally administered according to the known Laws, which is no less his Majesty's
Interest than his Duty, to make wise and careful Provision for. In a word, it
would seem to command as well as to bespeak belief that a whole Parliament, who
in all other Proceedings, have acted with the highest Prudence, Temperance and
Justice; and where there are so many Persons of Virtue, Honor, Probity, and
Knowledge of the Laws and Customs of the Nation, should be more regardful of
voting justly, and challenging nothing but their legal Rights, than that only
four Men should be found insisting upon what is Right; and they, such as most
of them, have been Tools and Instruments in the Breaches made upon the Rights
and Liberties of the Nation.

And as the whole Blame is to be entirely lodged upon a few Ministers about his
Majesty, both as to the delay that has been given to redress any of the Scots
Grievances, and as to the disputing of the Equity and Justice of actually
relieving them from some; so besides the Confidence that all Good Men are
possessed with, from the Consideration of his Majesty's Wisdom and Goodness,
that all will be at last accommodated to the King's Honor, and the Peoples
universal Satisfaction; the Concessions his Majesty has lately granted, with
reference to the Articles, even against the Opinion of his Ministers, is as an
Earnest and Pledge what his People may exspect in reference to the rest, if it
can be made appear, that what is further insisted upon, and humbly desired of
him, is the relieving of his Subjects, and not the robbing of himself; the
being kind to his People, and not unjust to the Crown; and the exercising Mercy
to all, without being cruel and unrighteous to any. So that we are become
obliged, in point of Duty to his Majesty, before whom our Demands and Claims
lie, and from the Respect we owe to the English Nation, among whom these
Matters are both publicly discoursed, and differently represented and
censured: And finally, by the Justice we account due to the Parliament of
Scotland, whose Moderation is not only questioned by reason of their Demands,
but also their Loyalty: I say, we are become obliged, by all these Motives and
Inducements, to enter into a detail of the several Particulars in Controversy,
between some of his Majesty's Ministers, and the Parliament of Scotland; and
not only to state with what distinctness we are able, the several heads
subjected to debate, but to give all that support and enforcement from Reason,
Law and Custom, to the Expediency, as well as Equity of them, that we judge to
be requisite; and that we can dispatch in the narrow room which we have
confined our selves unto.

In pursuance of which undertaking, We will begin with the Vote to which the
Royal Assent is not given; that refers to the disabling and precluding
Persons from public Trusts and Employments. And this we the rather do, both
because we can discharge our Hands the soonest of it, and because it is the
most censured by some of the English, from an apprehension that what of this
Nature passes into an Act at Edinburgh, may be drawn into President at
Westminster. But that every one may judge of it, and what shall be offered in
the Vindication of the Necessity and Justice thereof, I shall present the
Reader with a Transcript of the Vote: The King and Queens Majesty's considering
that the Estates of this Kingdom, have by their Vote, declared their Sense and
Opinion, That such as have in the former Evil Government been grievous to the
Nation, or have showed Disaffection to the happy Change, by the Blessing of God
now brought about, or have been Retarders and Obstructers of the good Designs
of the said Estates in their Meeting, are not fit to be employed in the
Management of the Affairs of this Kingdom; Do with Advice and Consent of the
Estates of Parliament now Assembled, Statute and Ordain, That no Person of
whatsomever Rank or Degree, who in the former Evil Government have been
grievous to the Nation, by Acting in the Encroachments, mentioned in the
Articles of the Claim of Right, which are declared to be contrary to Law, or
who have showed Disaffection to the happy Change, by the Blessing of God now
brought about, by acting in Opposition thereunto, since the time that the King
and Queen now Reigning were Proclaimed, or who has been a Retarder or
Obstructer of the good Designs of the said Estates; viz. The securing the
Protestant Religion, the settling the Crown, the establishing the Rights of the
Leiges, and the redressing their Grievances, by Acting contrary to these good
Designs, since the time that they became public by Votes, and Acts of the
Meeting, be allowed to possess, or be admitted into any Public Trust, Place,
or Employment, under Their Majesty's in this Kingdom.

I suppose the Reader by this time surprised at the unreasonableness of the Age
we live in, that there should be Men found so void of Sense and Understanding,
as to spy out any thing here, that deserves to be clamoured against, or which
is worthy to be complained of: Every Line breathes of that Lenity and
Moderation, that it savours rather of a defect of Justice, than of any excess
of it; and the utmost hereby designed, is only a disabling a few wicked Men
from ruining us for the future, and not a punishing of them for what they have
done; for as there are none excepted as to Life, so the few designed to be
debarred from Offices, are described and charactered after such a manner, that
the very employing them will Dishonor His Majesty, and Disgrace his
Government. There is no abridging His Majesty's Mercy, only an endeavor to
maintain the Justice of his Undertaking in coming to Deliver us. For having
charged the late King's Evil Counselors, and them only, with the Crimes upon
which he grounded both the Righteousness and the Necessity of his Expedition:
Whosoever is so villainous as to advise him to use them, can design no less than
deriving an Aspersion upon his Wisdom, Justice and Sincerity. And if the
Nations be not delivered from those against whom he declared, how shall we be
able to answer his Enemies, who accuse his coming hither, to have been upon
another Motive? For what his Friends affirm to have been bestowed upon him as
the Reward only of his Expedition, and of the Deliverance he wrought out for
us; his Adversaries will be encouraged both to believe and say, was the
Principal, if not sole end of it: Nor is it merely needful in order to the
Vindication of His Majesty's glorious Undertataking in coming into Britain,
That they who were the Instruments of our Slavery and Oppression under the
former Government, should be precluded from all share of the Administration
under this; but it is also necessary for the reconciling the Love and Obedience
of the People to His Majesty's Person and Authority. Courtiers may fancy, that
if one be able, he is qualified, without other Ingredients, to be a Minister of
State: But the most part of Mankind do always look for some degrees of Honesty
in those advanced into the chief Offices in the Government. Nor will People
easily believe, that they who betrayed their Laws, Rights and Privileges,
under one Reign, will ever Administer Justice equally, or defend them in their
Properties under another. Men may have present ease* but they will be always in
fear whilst they remain in the hands of their old Oppressors. It is impossible
to keep up in the minds of the Vulgar, honorable Thoughts of King William's
Government, if he will choose to work with King James's Tools. Whosoever
Counsels His Majesty to employ those that were the Instruments of the former
Tyranny, must intend to bring him under a Suspicion, both of approving that,
and of designing the like. No man envieth his Majesty's pardoning the worst of
his and the Kingdoms Enemies; but we cannot avoid pitying him, and bewailing
our selves, that he is persuaded to use them; yea the Royal forgiveness ought
to confine it self to limits; and much more should a Prince set Bounds to
himself in the Honors and Preferments which he is pleased to bestow. Now
having mentioned his Majesty's Grace, I Will venture to say, That after all the
Mercy he has exercised toward his own and his Peoples Enemies, there is not
one either Converted to his Interest by it, or that reckons himself obliged to
him for it. But instead of attributing their impunity to His Majesty's Grace,
they ascribe it to the Pusillanimity of the Government; and in the room of
being brought over to serve him, they are emboldened to go on in their
Conspiracies against His Person and Dignity. Nor will they ever account
themselves indebted to his Mercy, till he has made some of them the Objects of
his Justice. But to return to what I am upon; should not such an easy
Animadversion be inflicted upon those who have oppressed us, as the being shut
out from Trusts and Imploys in the Government, We should both tempt them and
others to repeat the same Crimes upon the first opportunity that is offered
unto them. Yea, if instead of falling under such a gentle Mortification, they
should be preferred to the chief places of Honor and Profit in the Kingdom,
Villainy will be committed in order to Merit; and Men of brutal and Profligate
Principles, will seek to exceed in Unjustice and Treachery, that they may be
thought to excel in Desert. And though through the Moderation, Goodness, Wisdom
and Justice of Their Majesty's, we may escape the Consequences of such a Method
during Their Reign, (which I pray God may be long) yet Posterity will lose most
of the benefit of this Revolution, for want of adjudging those to punishment,
that have been Traitors to Societies, and Cannibals to Mankind in this Age,
whereby to deter others from being such in the next. The Counsel given to
Princes by the Supreme Sovereign by whom they Reign, is, That they should
punish exorbitant Offenders, to instruct others to fear and forbear doing
wickedly: But the Advice thrust upon His Majesty by some ill Men about him, is,
That he should cherish and advance them without regard to the effects that may
attend it. What a strange Idea will it give the World of our Government, if the
rewards of Virtue be made the recompenses of Crimes? And how shall we lift up
our Faces to God or Men, if the Malefactors under the last Reign, not only
escape under this without Chastisements, but inherit the Preferments and
Emoluments of it. If what I have said be not sufficient to justify both the
expediency and equity of the forementioned Vote, I hope the Experience the King
has had of that sort of People, since he received them into his particular
Favor, and Principal Service, will reconcile him unto a better Opinion of it,
and show him the necessity of turning those out of Office whom his Parliament
would have prevented his taking in. Both the Nations are sensible of His
Majesty's being betrayed, both in his Councils, and in his Affairs; and it is
very easy to guess by whom it is done. For none so likely to undermine his
Throne, as they who endeavored to hinder and obstruct his Ascending to it: Nor
can any Man be Traitors to this King, but they who were the Instruments of the
last King's Tyranny. The Cobler's Auls and Ends are unsuitable Furniture in the
Painter's Shop. Neither will they ever serve this King with faithfulness in his
vindicating the Kingdoms into Liberty, who were the Sworn Vassals to his
Predecessors Despotical Will, and his Tools for oppressing and enslaving the
Nations. Besides the damage they have brought upon the Nations, and the
Treasure they have unprofitably wasted, They have been the Occasion of losing
His Majesty more Honor in one Year, than all his Foreign Campaigns ever did
since he first Commanded Armies, and presided in Councils; and should he be
prevailed upon by the Adulation and Artifice of any about him to trust the
Conduct and Management of his Affairs in the same Hands for one other Year, it
may be easily foretold, without Consulting the Stars, that we shall not be in a
Condition on the third to save either him or our selves. And as we have no
distinct Interest from His Majesty's, so all we desire is, That he would
vigorously Espouse and Assert his own, upon which we shall both believe and
Proclaim our selves happy. For the Vipers durst not hiss but for the warmth
they receive through being lodged in his Bosom. But to conclude this head; I am
extremely mistaken, if they who have occasioned and promoted the Quarrelling at
the forementioned Vote, do not find that they have consulted worse for
themselves, than was designed or intended by those who they account for their
Enemies For this Parliament will undoubtedly at their next Assembling, be so
far from departing from what they have Voted, that instead of acquiescing
there, and being contented with the having the betrayers of their Laws, the
Oppressors and Murderers of the Leiges, and the Obstructors of the King and
Kingdoms Establishment, only debarred and excluded from Places of Preferments,
Profit and Trust in the Government; that they will be justly provoked, and see
it to be indispensibly necessary to Impeach and Proceed capitally against some
of them. Their despising as well as refusing of Lenity, will derive upon them
the severities their Crimes at first deserved, but which that Prudent,
Temperate, and Indulgent Senate, were will^ng to have mitigated by exchange of
them into milder. And as we are fully assured, that so wise and good a Prince
as His Majesty, can never entertain either mean or distrustful thoughts of a
Parliament, that has given him so many and eminent Testimonies of their
Loyalty, much less be prevailed upon to Dissolve them, while the Nation is in
so Distressed and Unsettled a Condition; an Armed Enemy in its Bowels, and the
ferment every where so high, that nothing can allay it, but their being
continued, and being allowed to meet at the appointed day to which they are
Adjourned; so we are no less assured, that they who are said to be the Zealots
in this Parliament, and to have the chief Conduct of, and the prevailing sway
in all Business and Affairs that come before it, can neither miss being chosen
into, nor have less Interest and Esteem in another. So long as Persons of
Fortune, Quality, and Interest, continue to assert the Laws and Rights of their
Country, and to pursue the joint Interest of the King and Kingdom; the
Obloquies cast upon them by such as dread and dislike their Courage and
Integrity, will only increase their Reputation, and Oblige all those Senators
and Members of Parliament, that are honest, to put the more value upon them.
But to Supersede all fear of this Parliaments being D^ssolved, without both
Assembling, and Dispatching business, the King by a Law, to which the Royal
Assent was given the last Session, abridged himself of all Power in that
Matter. For in the Act that past the first of July, whereby Prelacy and the
Superiority of any Office in the Church above Presbyters, is abolished, it is
declared, That the King and Queen's Majesty's, with the Advice and Consent of
the Estates of this Parliament, will settle by Law, that Church Government in
the Kingdom, which is most agreeable to the Inclinations of the People. So that
whosoever shall have the Impudence to advise His Majesty to Dissolve this
Parliament, before there be by Law some Government erected in the Church, Does
both tempt him to violate his Faith, and to trample upon one Express Statute,
to which himself has given the Royal Assent.

The next contested Vote that we are to Address our selves unto, and whereof we
are to demonstrate the Legality, Reasonableness, and Necessity, is that which
relates unto the Privilege of the Estates of Parliament, in nominating and
appointing Committees, of which I do here subjoin an Authentic Copy. Forasmuch
as the meeting of the Estates of this Kingdom, did by their Vote of the
Eleventh of April last, represent among other Grievances, That the Committee of
Parliament called the Articles, is a great Grievance to the Nation, and that
there ought to be no Committees of Parliament, but such as are freely Chosen by
the Estates, to prepare Motions and Overtures that are first Tabled in the
House: Therefore Their Majesty's with the Advice and Consent of the Estates of
Parliament, do Enact and Declare, That it is the undoubted Privilege of the
Three Estates of Parliament, to Nominate and Appoint Committees of Parliament
of what Number of Members they please, being equal of every Estate* and Chosen
by the respective Estates; viz. the Noblemen by the Estate of the Noblemen, the
Barons by the Estate of the Barons; and the Buroughs by the Estate of the
Buroughs, for preparing Motions and Overtures that are first made in the
House, or that the House may Treat, Vote, and Conclude upon matters brought in
plain Parliament, without remitting them to any Committee, if they think fit:
Or that the House may appoint Plurality of Committees for any Motions or
Overtures that need to be prepared or digested for them: Declaring hereby, That
no Officers of State are to be Members, except they be Chosen. And hereby
rescinds the first Act of the Third Session of the first Parliament of King
Charles the Second, and all other Laws and Customs, establishing the manner of
Election, and Power of any Committees of Parliament, in so far as they are not
conform to this Act. So sensible was the Meeting of the Estates, that the
Committee of Articles was according to late Custom, Regulation, and Practice,
an intolerable Grievance to the Kingdom, and a high Incroachment upon the
Liberty and Jurisdiction of Parliament; that before the disposal of the Crown
to Their present Majesty's, they made their being relieved from it, one of the
Stipulations, and an Article of Contract, upon which Their Majesty's had the
Crown conferred upon them, and upon which the People agreed to yield them
Obedience and Subjection. For among several things which they covenanted as
well as provided, for the redressing of, when in the Name both of themselves,
and of the whole People of Scotland, whom they represented, they yielded up,
and conveyed over the Crown of that Kingdom to William and Mary: This was the
first Grievance that they mentioned, and made it a matter of Bargain and
Compact, as well as of Petition and Desire to be eased from it. The words that
were proposed and read to Their Majesty's in the Banqueting House, upon that
Solemn Occasion of presenting Them with the Instrument of Government, are as
follows. The Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland do represent, That the
Committee of Parliament, called the Articles, is a great Grievance to the
Nation, and that there ought to be no Committees of Parliament, but such as are
freely chosen by the Estates to prepare Motions and Overtures that are first
made in the House. What ill Men must they now be, that durst advise a Prince of
that Honor, Veracity, and inviolable Faith, as His Majesty is universally
known and acknowledged to be, to delay or clog the satisfying of His People in
the foregoing particular: Seeing the mere procrastinating and adjourning the
giving them contentment in it, has a visible and natural tendency, if
possible, to the weakening their Faith and Confidence both in his Truth and
Goodness. It would appear, that some have a mind to make their Master seem
faithless, to justify their being truly such themselves^ Or else they have a
design to vindicate King James's breach of all Stipulations and Promises, by
persuading King William to do the same. Or, which is extreme likely, they would
by His present Majesty's departure from that seeming Compact, upon which he
received the Crown, reflect folly and injustice upon the Parliaments Deposing
the Late King, for his violating the Original Contract.

But that we may discourse intelligibly of that Committee called the Articles,
it will be needful to give some brief account both of what it originally was,
and what by degrees it grew up, or rather degenerated into, till it became at
last an insupportable Grievance to the Nation, and rendered Parliaments either
wholly useless, or mere Instruments for pursuing and executing the King's Will.
Now by what appears either from our History, Records or Statute-Books, there
was no such thing anciently as a Committee, or Lords of Articles, but every
thing was as well originally moved as debated and concluded in full Parliament.
For the first mention we meet with in our Records, of Lords of the Articles, is
in the Year 1466. Under the Reign of King James the Third: Where we find, that
upon the Convention of the Estates of Parliament, they not only chose so many
from among themselves, to be Judges in Civil and Criminal Causes, who are
styled Domini ad querelas, there being then no Judicial Court, save what the
Parliament constituted from time to time out of their own Body: But that they
also elected three Persons for the Clergy, three for the Barons, and three for
the Burgesses, to consider of, and prepare matters fit and needful for the
House to bring into debate, and to come to Votes and Resolutions about. By
which it seems that this Committee of the Articles had no auspicious beginning,
having its rise under one of the worst of all our Kings, and who came to the
most unhappy and unfortunate end: However there appears no such thing here, as
that the Officers of State were to be supernumerary to those chosen by the
Parliament; or that the King, either by himself, or by one representing him,
chose any of them; but it is evident from the Record, that they were wholly and
entirely elected by the States themselves in Parliament assembled. And though
the being an Officer of State, was never esteemed a ground disabling and
incapacitating a Person from being a Member of the Committee of Articles; yet
upon a perusal of the Records, I do not find that any Officers of State made a
part of the Lords of the Articles, until the year 1567. and their being then of
that number was not ratione Officii, but by reason of the Parliament's having
elected them into that Station. For whosoever consults the Records of
Parliament of the years, 1467. 1475. 1524. 1526. 1528. 1537. 1542. 1543. will
find that the Officers of State were so far from being supernumerary in the
Committees of the Articles, that they were not so much as elected into that
Trust, nor had any room or place allowed them there; though it appears by the
Records of all those Parliaments, that there were Members chosen by, and out of
the respective Estates, sometimes in larger, and sometimes in lesser numbers to
make up and constitute such Committees. Yea, I cannot but add, That our not
meeting with any mention of the Lords of Articles of the Parliaments Assembled,
and held 1469. 1471. 1474. 1481. 1483. 1488. 1489. 1491. 1493. 1505. 1515.
1522. 1535. 1540. 1546. 1551. is an undoubted Evidence, that the having
Committees of the Articles was not a thing of indispensible necessity, or to
which Parliaments were legally obliged; but that it was a matter of Arbitrary
Pleasure, and that they were chosen or omitted, as the House thought to be most
useful and convenient for the management and dispatch of their Affairs. And
though it cannot be denied, but that after the year 1567. some of the Officers
of State were now and then thought worthy by reason of their moral and
intellectual abilities to be chosen among others for Lords of the Articles, as
in the Parliaments held in the years 1581. and 1593. yet it is most evident,
that they were not elected into that Committee by virtue and reason of their
Offices, much less sat there as supernumerary to those chosen by the Estates;
forasmuch as in other Parliaments, particularly in those held in the years
1587. 1592. and 1594. there is no intelligence, report or remembrance of them,
in the Registers and Lists of those of whom the forementioned Committees were
made up and constituted. And that which puts it beyond all possibility of being
controuled (save either by ignorant, or by impudent and self-condemned Men)
that no Officers of State had right anciently to be of the Committee of
Articles, unless previously chosen by the Estates of Parliament, is the 37. Act
of Parl. 11. of James the Sixth: Where Provision being made by Law about the
number whereof that Committee should be constituted; It is, without the least
mention or suggestion of those Officers of State, enacted and ordained, that
the number of the Lords of Articles be equal in each Estate, and that the
'fewest number of every Estate be Six, and the greatest number Ten. Yea so far
were those, styled Lords of Articles, from having originally the sole power of
preparing matters, and of bringing in Motions and Overtures, to be considered
and debated in Parliament* exclusive of other Members of the House, who were
not of that Committee; that both at first, and for a long tract of time
afterward, they were not so much as a Committee of Articles of, and to that
Parliament by which they were chosen, and of which they were Sitting and actual
Members; but were only so in reference to the next Parliament that should
succeed; against whose meeting they were to prepare such things as they should
judge to be most fit and expedient to be then taken into consideration; but
still with a right as well as with a liberty reserved to that future
Parliament, not only to receive or reject what should be thus maturated and
offered unto them; but to admit whatsoever Overtures they pleased, that should
be made unto any of the Members of their own House. It was the Ancient Custom
and Practice of Scotland, that the Sitting Parliament antecedently to its
Dissolution and Separating, elected so many from among themselves, who were in
the interval betwixt that and the next Parliament, to make inquiry into the
necessities of the Lieges, and into the State of the Kingdom; and accordingly
to draw up and prepare such Overtures, as should carry that relief and remedy
in them, which might give a redress unto Grievances, be a mean^ of preserving
the Nation in safety, and of promoting the prosperity of the Subjects. Now from
this harmless beginning of the Committee of Articles, it has, through the
Usurpation of our Kings, especially after their Succession to the Crown of
England, and the remove of their Royal Abode thither, and through the
officiousness of public Ministers to the Prince, and treachery to their
Country, grown up at last to that exorbitancy, that it is not only become
burdensome, but intolerable. For by reason of the Parliaments coming at last
to commit the inspection into all Affairs, and preparing all remedies unto
Grievances, into a few hands, and those to be unchangeable during a whole
Session; Our Late Monarchs obtained such a handle whereby they might incroach
upon the Jurisdiction of Parliaments, and the Liberties of the People, that
they soon improved it to the eluding of all the good that the Kingdom was to
expect from Parliaments, and to the making those who were designed to be the
means of our safety, become the Instruments of our Ruin. For the accomplishment
whereof, and the more effectual rendering the Lords of Articles, Vassals unto
the Monarch's Will, and Tools for executing his Pleasure, they first prevailed
to have the Officers of State admitted into that Committee as Supernumeraries,
and that, without being Nominated and Elected by the Estates in Parliament,
they should have a right to sit there Ratione Officii, by virtue of the
Employments they held in the Government. For King James the Sixth, being by the
adulation of the English Bishops, brought entirely over to their Interest, as
well as to their Opinions, about Church Discipline and Worship, and having a
mind in requital to the Church of Scotland, for all the kindness they had
expressed to him, both in his Infancy and riper years, to obtrude upon them the
English Ceremonies, he did in order to the more easy effectuating of it,
flatter, cajole, and bribe, as well as huff, and awe the Parliament Anno 1621.
to allow the Officers of State to Sit as Supernumeraries, without being chosen
in the Committee of Articles. And thus he forced those Innovations, commonly
known by the Name of the Five Articles of Perth, upon the poor Church of
Scotland, having by those Supernumerary Officers, not only so molded the
Committee of Articles, as to pass and present them, but thereby laid the
Foundation of their being ordained and enacted in the House. And to make the
Lords of Articles yet more grievous and intolerable. King Charles the First,
(whose invasions upon the Rights and Liberties of his People, proved Fatal both
to him and them) overthrew the Ancient Method of their Elections, and brought
the choice of them into such a Channel, as could issue in no less than Tyranny
in the Sovereign, and Slavery in the Subjects. For whereas by Law and Custom,
the Lords were to choose the Lords, and the Barons to choose the Barons, etc
Charles the First did in his Parliament held Anno 1633. when he was in the
height of his Greatness, change and innovate this Method, and having divested
the whole respective Estates, of choosing severally their respective
Commissioners he assumed a Power to himself, with a right of consigning it over
to his Commissioner in Parliament, for choosing Eight Bishops consigning to the
said Eight Bishops, a Power of choosing Eight Noblemen, and restraining to the
said Eight Noblemen, together with the aforesaid Eight Bishops, a Power of
choosing Eight Barons, and Eight Burgesses; and that these in conjunction with
the Officers of State as Supernumeraries, should be the whole and sole Lords of
Articles, exclusive of all others. Finally, to render that Committee yet more
insupportable, the sole Right as well as Liberty of bringing in Motions, of
making overtures for redressing Wrongs; and of proposing means and expedients,
either for the relief or the safety and benefit of the Subject, is entirely
restrained unto, and lodged wholly in this Committee: Neither is it by our late
Practice lawful for any Member or Members, that are not of that packt Club and
Society, to make the least proposal or motion, either for the repealing of an
ill Law, or for the enacting of a good. So that I would now hope, that the mere
representing of this Committee of Articles, as it is now transformed and
degenerated from what it formerly was, is enough to justify the Vote of the
present Parliament, about the having that grievance redressed, and to vindicate
them from the Obloquie they have lain under, for insisting upon having
Parliaments loosened from those Fetters. For where is the Liberty of Speech,
and Voting, essential to a Legislative Body, if Parliaments must be thus
muzled? How-is a Kingdom eluded out of all the good that they expect from any
Parliament, if their Representatives may neither lay open their Sores, nor
offer Plasters in order to their Cure? How miserably would things have
proceeded in the late Meeting of Estates, if nothing was to have been before
them, but what a Committee, where Eight Scotch Bishops were to have the
Electing of Eight Noblemen, and they together the choosing of the rest, with
King James's Officers of State Supernumerary, that should have prepared
Overtures for that Great and Illustrious Assembly? I dare say, That the being
bound up to such a Method, would have more effectually secured the Throne to
King James, than all the Swords of his Partisans. Nor can Parliaments be
designed for any thing, under such a Constitution of a constant Committee, with
the Officers of State Supernumerary, but to enlarge the Prerogative of the
Crown, and to levy Money from the People. But Blessed be God, His Majesty wants
not Inclination to deliver his People from this, and from all other Grievances,
but only wants Persons about him, to set them in that Light that he may discern
them. Therefore we complain not of His Majesty for the delaying the
Satisfaction that his People waited for; but we complain of those ill Men, who
told him, That to part with the Lords of the Articles, was to throw away the
brightest Jewel of his Crown. Whereas it appears from what has been said, that
there is nothing desired, whereby His Majesty's Legal Prerogative can be
diminished and lessened, but that all which is humbly craved, is the redeeming
his Parliament and People from an ignominious and burthensom Yoke; and their
being relieved from the Invasion and Usurpations made upon their Laws and
Customs, by the Craft and Violence of some of their Monarchs. Nay, the very
contending for the continuing the Officers of State as Supernumerary in their
Committees, without the being Elected unto them by the Estates in Parliament,
in both an Aspersion upon the Wisdom of the Parliament, as if they knew not how
to pay the respect and deference due to those Officers, till compelled unto it;
and a Reflection upon their Loyalty, as if no Persons could be tender or
regardful of His Majesty's Interest among the Committees of Parliament, unless
received into the King's immediate Service, and brought under the Influence of
Honors and Emoluments. But whosoever suggests this unto the King, must be one
that is accustomed to draw other Men's Pictures by his own Original; and who by
acting in all things himself as a Mercenary, strives to represent the rest of
Mankind, as equally Base and Villainous. Nor can that Advice insinuated into His
Majesty, of having the Officers of State Supernumerary in the Committees of
Parliament, be supported by any reason, but what borders upon Treason; which is
the King's having and being obliged to pursue a separate interest from that of
his People; and as nothing would more Universally lose His Majesty the Hearts
of his People, than the being wrought into a belief of it; so whatsoever is
likely to tempt them into such a persuasion, is at all times, but especially at
this, to be industriously avoided by the King.

The only thing remaining, wherein His Majesty's Parliament of Scotland seems
to be misunderstood by him, is their Vote concerning the Nomination of the
ordinary Lords of the Session, and the Election of the President. For that
which they propose, both as required by, and agreeable unto their Laws, and as
necessary in order to the equal Administration of Justice, is, That the
ordinary Lords being in a total Vacation nominated by the King, they are to be
Tried, and Admitted or Rejected by Parliament; and that in a particular
Vacation, being likewise nominated by the King, they are to be Tried and
Admitted or Rejected by the other Lords of Session; and that in both cases the
President be chosen by the Lords of Session themselves. Now this being the
great Matter wherein His Parliament is represented unto him, as endeavoring to
encroach upon, and subvert His Royal Prerogative; and it being the particular,
in reference unto which he has been prevailed upon to exert an Authority to
that height and degree, that there seems no room left for any expedient, but
that either the Parliament must depart from their Vote, or that His Majesty
would be pleased to part with those, who through abusing his Goodness, have
misled him into an exercise of Royal Power which the Laws cannot justify. It
will be absolutely needful, that the Reader, in order to his being enabled to
form a Right and impartial Judgment of this perplexed and entangled Affair,
should be first made acquainted with the Vote it self, as well as afterward be
informed of what is to be said in the Vindication of it. The Words therefore of
the Vote are as follows; The King and Queen's Majesty's considering, That by
the Laws of the Kingdom, when the place of an Ordinary Lord of the Session does
Vacate, it is to be supplied by the King's Nomination of a fit and qualified
Person for the said Office, and presenting him to the rest of the Lords to be
tried, and admitted or rejected by them: And that there is now a total Vacancy
of the Lords of the Session, by the happy change through the Blessing of God
now brought about, so that there can be no such Trial by the Lords; and that
when such total Vacancies have fallen out, the Lords were either nominated by
King and Parliament jointly; or if they were nominated by the King, the
nomination was approved, and the Lords so nominated, were admitted by the
Parliament; Therefore Their Majesty's do Declare, That they will nominate fit
and qualified Persons to the said Offices, and present them to the Parliament
to be tried and admitted or rejected by them: Like as Their Majesty's with the
advice and consent of the Estates in Parliament, Statute and Ordain, that in
all time hereafter, when any such total Vacancy shall occur, the nomination of
the Lords of the Session shall be by the King or Queen for the time being; and
in case of their minority, by their Regent, they nominating fit and qualifiad
Persons to the said Offices, and presenting them to the Parliament to be tried,
and admitted or rejected in manner aforesaid. Like as Their Majesty's with the
advice and consent aforesaid, ratify and approve the 93 d Act of the Sixth
Parliament of King James the Sixth, anent the admission of the Ordinary Lords
of Session, and Reformation of certain Abuses therein: And the 132 d Act of the
Twelfth Parliament of King James the Sixth anent the Jurisdiction,
Presentation, Qualities and Age of the Lords of the Session, in the whole
Heads, Clauses and Articles thereof, and particularly the Clause contained in
the said two Acts, Declaring that in all times thereafter, when any place
should be vacant in the Session, that His Majesty should nominate and present
thereunto a Man fearing God, of good Literature, Practick Judgment and
Understanding in the Laws, of good Fame, having s^fficient Living of his own,
worth Twenty Chalders of Victual of yearly Rent, and who can make good
expedition and dispatch in matters touching the Lieges of the Realm; and
likewise that Clause contained in the 93 d Act of the Sixth Parliament of King
James the Sixth, Declaring that the President of the College of Justice shall
be elected by the whole Senate thereof, being a Man of the Conditions and
Qualities above-written, for choosing and electing of whom the King's Majesty
and Estates dispense with that first part of the Institution of the College of
Justice anent the Election of the President, Declaring that in case of the
absence of the Chancellor and President for the time, it shall be lawful for
the Lords to choose and elect any one of their own number, whom they think
qualified and worthiest, who shall be called Vice President for using of the
said Office, ay and while the Return of the said Chancellor and President. Like
as Their Majesty's, with advice and consent aforesaid, Statute and Ordain, that
the whole Qualifications abovementioned, be duly observed in the admission of
the Lords of the Session, in all time coming, and that as well in the case of a
total, as of a single Vacancy. This being the Vote so declaimed against, and in
contempt whereof, and in opposition whereunto, some Persons having
surreptitiously and fraudulently obtained Warrant, Countenance and Authority
from the King, are so venurous as to dare to act: We shall, both with all the
Loyalty and Modesty that becomes a Subject, and an honest Man, and yet with
that freedom and plainness, which one who has no other design, save to serve
God, his King, and his Country, with uprightness and integrity should value
himself upon, endeavor to vindicate the Wisdom, as well as the Justice of the
Parliament in the forementioned Vote. In the performing whereof, with all that
exactness which brevity will allow, I shall begin with an account of the first
Administration of Civil Justice in the Kingdom of Scotland that we meet with in
our Records. For the College of Justice consisting of those called the Lords of
the Session, not having been institute till the Reign of King James the Fifth,
Anno 1537. The Administration of Justice was before that time, not only
ambulatory and itinerant, but was discharged and executed by such Members of
Parliament as the Estates of the Kingdom, in their several Sessions elected
from among themselves, and authorized thereunto. Nor had they only their whole
Authority from the Estates in Parliament, but to speak properly, they were
Committees of Parliament Authorized to such a Work and Office, and accountable
to Parliaments for the discharge of the Trusts committed unto them; for the
Domini electi ad causas, whom we so often meet with in the Records of
Parliament, particularly in those of the Years 1524. 1526. 1528. were such
Members as every respective Parliament elected from within their own Walls, for
the Administration of Justice between the King and his Lieges, and between one
Subject and another. From whence it appears, that it not only appertained unto
the Parliament to see that Justice was duly administered, but that the Right was
originally in them of nominating and ordaining the Administrators of it. Which
makes it very improbable, that after rheir having been possessed of such a
Right, Authority and Jurisdiction for so long time, they should so wholly part
from, and entirely surrender it as upon no Occasion or Emergency whatsoever to
leave unto themselves a share, or reserve a concern in it. Let us add to this,
That when the College of Justice came to be instituted, Anno 1^37. Parl. 5 King
James the 5 th. Act 36. though it was Established and Ordained by the
Legislative Authority of the King and Estates jointly, and not by an exertion
of mere Royal Prerogative, yet the Estates in Parliament then Assembled, both
took upon them* and were allowed the Nomination and Choice of the President, as
well as of all that were then called forth and advanced to be Lords of the
Session, or College of Justice, as appears by the 39. and 41. Acts of the
aforementioned Parliament. Yea it is further evident from the Records of
Parliament, that the Estates of the Kingdom did often in succeeding Parliaments
Nominate, Choose and Empower, those very Lords that were actually of the
Session, to continue in the Administration of Justice, which shows beyond all
rational contradiction, that they could much less ^nter upon the Office at
first without their being Chosen and Approved by the Estates (...) ^arliament.
Thus Anno 1542. being the first of Mary, we find the President with the rest of
the Lords of Session Chosen and Empowered a new, as Auditores ad causas, for
the hearing and deciding Civil and Criminal Causes. And again we find the
Parliament of the Second of Mary, Anno 1543. not only ratifying by the
Legislative Authority of the Queen and Estates, the Institution of the College
of Justice, but we find the Estates alone nominating and choosing ad causas,
the President cum caeteris Dominis Sessionis and Collegii Justitiae. But
forasmuch as there was a change given afterward by Laws to this Course and
Method, and a new Regulation ordained by subsequent Statutes of the College of
Justice, wherein both the qualifications of those that are to be Chosen Lords
of the Session, and the manner of their Approbation are required and appointed:
We are therefore obliged in the next place to look into those Laws, and to
examine whether they detract from the Prudence, and weaken the Justice of the
Parliament, in their forementioned Vote; or whether they not only Countenance
and Suppport, but Justify and Vindicate them. And We'll begin with the 93 Act
6 Parliament James 6* where it being acknowledged, That the Nomination of the
Lords of the Session belongs unto the King, and that he ought to name such as
have the Qualifications there required, which are already specified in the
aforesaid Vote; It is further added, That in all time coming, when an ordinary
Place becomes vacant in the Session, the Person nominated thereunto by the
King, shall be sufficiently tried and examined, by a sufficient number of the
Ordinary Lords of the College of Justice, for whom it shall be Lawful to refuse
the Person presented unto them, and that the King in that Case shall present
another, and that so often until the Person presented be found qualified. But
seeing this Act may be said to have passed in the minority of King James, and
the force of it be thereupon endeavored to be eluded, We will therefore
consult Act 134. Parl. 12. James 6. wherein, besides a Repetition and a
Confirmation of all that is mentioned and ordained in the former Act, there is
further added, That none shall be received to any Place of Senator in the
College of Justice, unless he be sufficiently tried by the whole College of
Justice. Now as those are the Laws relating unto, and regulating the
Nomination, Examination and Approbation of the Ordinary Lords of the College of
Justice, the Practice has been in all Times conformable thereunto. So that the
First Parliament of King Charles the Second, which through the prevailing of
the like Folly and Madness in Scotland, which then reigned in England, robbed
the Kingdom of many of its Rights and Privileges, to increase and enlarge the
Prerogative of the Crown; yet they were so ^ender of making any Innovations in
his particular, that by their Second Act of that Parliament they Ordain, The
Nomination of the Lords of Session to remain as in former Times, preceding the
Year 1637. And accordingly we find, as there have been several, who upon single
Vacancies in Former Reigns had been rejected by the Lords of the College of
Justice, though nominated by our Kings: So there was one Sir William Ballanden,
whom Charles the Second had nominated and recommended, who upon examination by
the rest of the Lords was refused and rejected, as a Person not Qualified
according to the Statutes of the Realm. Is it not therefore unreasonable to be
imagined, That the King, who upon a single Vacancy cannot constitute one Judge,
till he be examined and approved, should nevertheless be esteemed empowered to
constitute the whole Bench of the College of Justice, without a previous
Examination and Approbation? How improvident were our Parliaments, and how weak
and ridiculous are our Laws, if all that is provided for, be only the
restraining the King from making one Judge that is unqualified; and at the same
time to allow him a Power and Authority of making Fifteen that are unqualified,
for such they are to be esteemed, till they have been tried and approved? There
can be nothing more unquestionable, than that they who are nominated by the
King to be Judges, ought, according to the Laws of Scotland, to be tried and
approved before they be accounted or authorized to sit and act; and therefore,
there being upon a total Vacancy, no Lords of the College of Justice to try,
examine and approve those whom the King has nominated and recommended, it
would seem to be uncontrollable by all Persons pretending to reason, and
acquainted with our Laws and Customs, That the Right of examining, and of
admitting or rejecting them, comes to be devolved upon the Parliament; which is
the whole that is desired in the forementioned Vote. Nor is there any mean, but
that they either must ascend the Bench without undergoing a Trial, or receiving
an Approbation, which is openly to Affront the Laws; or else the Power and
Right of approving, and of accepting, or rejecting, must be acknowledged to
reside in the Estates of Parliament. Nor was this ever denied them in the Case
of a total Vacancy under the worst of the foregoing Reigns. Which makes it the
more doleful as well as Amazing, that through the Subornation and Crafty, but
false insinuations of Evil Men, there should be an endeavor of wresting it
from them under the Reign of so Gracious and Temperate a Prince, whom they with
so much Affection and Zeal called and invited to the Throne; not only in
gratitude for his having delivered them from Popery, but out of a hope and
prospect of his relieving them from all their other Grievances. It has been
already proved beyond the p^ssib^lity of a Reply, That the first Institution of
the College of Justice, and the Nomination as well as Approbation of those that
were then advanced to be Lords of Session, was by the Estates Assembled in
Parliament. And I do now fur^her affirm, That in the two total Vacancies, which
are all that have since occurred, besides this that has now fallen out upon
the late happy Revolution, the Estates in Parliament were indisputably allowed
the Right of admitting, or rejecting those of whom the College of Justice was
to be freshly ^onstituted; for upon the total Vacancy in the year 1641, which
was the first that had been from the Institution of the Lords of the Session,
the Parliament not only Challenged the Approving, but they took upon them the
joint Nomination with the King, of all the Persons that were to be admitted
into, and created Members of the College of Justice. But this Example and
P^esident, I will not insist upon, seeing there was something unjust and
illegal in it, as well as something just and legal. For not being satisfied
with the Right of admitting, to which Law and Reason gave them an
unquestionable Title, they usurped upon the Crown, and took upon them the Power
of nominating, which had been granted by former Laws unto the King. Let us
therefore see what was done upon that other total Vacancy, which occurred at
the Restoration of Charles II. when nothing would have been departed from by
the King, that he could have with held without the highest Injustice; nor any
thing either claimed or accepted by the Parliament that they could have
sacrificed or surrendered without becoming obnoxious to eminent dangers; and yet
even then the King having nominated those whom he designed for the Lords of
Session, the Approbation of them was submitted unto the Parliament; and the
Esta^es having in full Parliament considered them, they admitted and received
them. It is true that the Parliament did not bring them single before them, and
there Try and Examine them, not because they might not have done it, but
because there was no need of it, being all of them of that Eminency, as to be
Universally and Notoriously known to have all the Qualifications required by
the Statutes. Yea though that Parliament was abundantly officious toward the
Crown, and Loyal to that excess to the King, as to be Disloyal to their
Country* and unfaithful to their Constituents; Yet in the Second Act of their
first Session, by which they restore to the King what had been wrested from him
in the Parliament 164^, they allow him no more in reference to the Lords of the
College of Justice, but the right of nomination as the Crown had enjoyed it,
preceding the Year 16^7. But I hear there are some, who finding His Majesty
unalterably resolved not to depart from the known and just Laws of the Land in
the Governing of his People, have therefore, to elude the force of what has
been here Represented, and to divert His Majesty from harkening to the humble
desir^s of his Parliament in this matter, been guilty of the Treachery as well
as the Impudence to suggest unto His Majesty, That there is not now a total
Vacancy, there being of the fift^en nominate by His Majesty for Lords of the
Session, three that were antecedently such; and that it belongs unto them
Three to try and approve the others; and that what the Parliament pretends
unto, being only in the Case of a total Vacancy, is here wholly Superceded; and
that for any to insist upon it, is an incroachment upon the Prerogative of the
King, and a robbing of the Lords of Session, of a Privilege vested in them by
Law. Now tho all that is here insinuated, be rather the Offering an Affront to
our Understandings, than the Accosting us with a reasonable Objection; yet we
will so far condescend to the weakness of those that are ignorant of the Laws
and Customs of Scotland, as to return such a Reply unto it, which may not only
convince all Mankind of the im^ertinency of it, but expose those that are the
Authors of it, to be either loathed as ill men, or ridiculed as silly. For
First, Supposing that S --, N --, and M --, who are all that can be referred
unto in the pretended Objection, did still remain Lords of the College of
Justice, by Reason of their having formerly been so: Yet they are too few to
constitute a Session, which they ought to be, before they take upon them to Try
and Approve such as are recommended unto them by the Kings nomination. The
Quorum of which a Session ought to consist, before it can Exercise any Legal
Authority, should be Nine, which I think no Arithmetic will make Three to be.
Nor will my Lord S --, and his Son Sir J. D --, find that Success in their
Attempts against the first and self-evident Principles of natural Sciences, and
of the Mathematics, that they have had in Undermining and Subverting the Laws
of their Country. Secondly, for any Person named by the King in order to the
being received as a Lord of the Session to be examined and approved by Three,
tho granted to be Actual and Sitting Lords of the College of Justice, is
expressly repugnant to an Act of the Session it self, confirmed by the King's
Letter, An. 1674. It being provided by that Act, That when any new Lords of
Session shall be presented by His Majesty for Trial of their Qualifications,
that they shall be present one day in the Outer-House, where they are to
inspect a Process that shall be carried to interloquitor, and from thence make
Report of all the Points therein contained, to the whole Lords of Session; and
then for completing their Trial, shall sit another day in the Inner-House; and
after the bringing the dispute of some point of Law to a Period, shall give
their Opinion about it in presence of all those Lords of which that House does
then consist. Now as this Order and Rule is appointed to be observed constantly
in all time coming, about the Trial of Lords nominate by the King, and to be
admitted, and has been accordingly observed and practiced ever since, till the
present Vacancy; so it is evident to all who have not renounced common sense,
that the Regulation, Order, and Method of Trial, prescribed by the foregoing
Act, is altogether impracticable, where the Lords that are to be the Tryers,
and Examinants, are to be three. But then thirdly, It is the most absurd thing
imaginable to fancy, That because Three of the Lords now nominated by the King,
were heretofore Lords of Session, that therefore there has not been a total
Vacancy upon this late and happy Revolution. I am sure that in the parallel
Case, Anno 1661. the Parliament in the Preface unto the Statute, by which they
admitted those to be Lords of the Session whom the King had then named, they
call it a new and entire nomination, which they neither could nor would have
done, if they had not judged the Vacancy to be total, and yet three of the
Lords then nominated by Charles the Second, viz. H -- C -- and L -- had been
Lords of Session, and had sat in the College of Justice before that
nomination. Fourthly, If S -- N -- and M -- 's having been once Lords of
Session be enough to hinder the late Vacation of the Session from being total;
then I challenge all the World to tell me what can either make a single, or a
total Vacancy; yea, if those Gentlemen's Places were not voided after what had
befallen them, and the placing others for several years in their room, I do
much question whether their death can make their Places Vacant, and whether
they may not be as well said ^o remain Lords of the Session, when they are
rotting in their Graves, as to have continued so in the State they were, before
HIs Majesty's late nomination of them. For as they all had their Commissions
during pleasure, so S -- 's and N -- 's were recalled and reassumed by King
Charles, of whom they had received them. And I take it for an undoubted Maxim,
that he who has Power and Authority to give, and gives not during life, may
by the same Authority take away at Pleasure, what he has given. And as for M
-- who had his Commission from King James, if his Place be not rendered Vacant
by his Masters having forefaulted the Crown, nothing will or can render it so.

Fifthly, If these Gentlemen's having been heretofore Lords of the College of
Justice, hinders the late Vacancy from being accounted total; then His
Majesty's nominating them afresh, was not only superfluous in it self, but an
injury unto them. For it was the bringing them to hold that by a new Title,
which they had a claim unto, and ought to have been accounted possessed of by
an ancient Right. Nor are they obliged for their Places to His Majesty's Grace
and Bounty, but to his Justice. Sixthly, The very form of the presentation by
which their nomination is signified, shows that the Vacancy was taken to be
total. For it being the constant Custom in all single vacancies, that the name
of the Person succeeded unto, as well as his who is to succeed, be equally
expressed in the Presentation, and there being no such form, but the contrary
observed in these Gentlemen's Case, it is an Argument that His Majesty took the
Vacancy to be total, whatsoever his President, Secretary and Advocate do.
Seventhly, In all Cases where the Vacancy is not Universal, the Presentation of
those named by the King, is directed to tho College of Justice, or the Actual
Lords of Session, and so our Laws ordain and provide it should be. But the
Presentation of those now named to be received and advanced unto the
Administration of Justice, or at least of most of them, was directed to the
Earl of C -- who never was a Lord of the Session, nor yet is: Which is an
Evidence, that the holding the late Vacancy not to have been total, was not an
Opinion they were led into by truth, but by necessity, and that they have only
espoused it to justify what has been illegally done. It is yet further
alleged by these cunning Men, that have first endeavored to mislead His
Majesty, and now seek by what pretenses they may best defend that which they
have done; That though, by the Ancient Laws, the King was only trusted with the
nomination of the Lords of the Session, and the trial and approbation of them
was lodged elsewhere; Yet that by Act, 11. Parl. 1. Charles the Second, the
sole choice and appointment of the Lords of the College of Justice is given
unto and settled upon the King. But surely they who make the exception must be
Men either of very weak understandings, or of very bad consciences, and they
must think they have to do with a very credulous sort of People, whom they may
bubble into the belief of any thing, though never so false and unreasonable,
otherwise they would never talk at so ridiculous and impertinent a Rate. For,
First, there is nothing granted unto the Crown by that Act, but what was its
ancient and undoubted right: instead of settling any new Prerogative upon the
King, the Parliament does only there declare what was anciently the Inherent
Privilege of the Crown, and an undoubted part of the Royal Prerogative of the
Kings of that Kingdom: Which I am sure that the trying, approving, and
accepting or rejecting those nominated for Lords of Session never was, that
having been by so many preceding Acts of Parliament, which we have mentioned,
settled and vested in other hands. Secondly, Whatsoever can be supposed to be
granted unto the Crown by Act 11. Parl. 1. Charles the Second, it does as much
affect a single Vacancy as a total; the words being, That it is an inherent
Privilege of the Crown, and an undoubted part of the Royal Prerogative of the
Kings of Scotland to have the sole choice of the Lords of Session. Which can
import no more, save that they have the sole nomination of them, but not the
trial of their qualifications, seeing all along since, both in that Reign, and
in the next that ensued, the examination and acceptance or refusal of those
that were recommended by the two last Kings upon emergent Vacancies to be Lords
of the College of Justice, were always certified to the Actual and Sitting
Lords of Session, to be by them tried, and admitted or rejected as they should
see cause. Thirdly, What the Gentlemen who make this Exception would give the
Crown with one hand, they take away with the other. For while they would
Preclude the Parliament from taking notice of the qualifications of those, who
upon a total vacancy are nominated by the King, under a pretense that the sole
choice of the Lords of Session, is by the forementioned Statute Declared to be
an Inherent Privilege of the Crown: They at the same time seek to skreen and
vindicate themselves from the Violation of the other Laws that prescribe the
method of trying and approving those who are nominated now by His Majesty for
Lords of the College of Justice, by alleging, that S -- N -- and M -- are both
in a capacity through having been formerly Judges, and are commissionated to
try and approve them. Fourthly, All that some apprehend to be contained in the
11 Act Parl. 1. Charles the Second, is wholly Narratory, and no part of it
Statutory, at least so far as our concernment lies in it, and as we are therein
referred unto other Acts for the knowledge of what is Statuted and Ordained: So
upon our application unto, and consulting of Act 2. Parl. 1. Charles 2. all we
find there enacted is, That it is an inherent Privilege of the Crown, and an
undoubted part of the Royal Prerogative of the King, to have the sole Choice
and Appointment of the Officers of State and Privy Counselors, but that he
has only the Nomination of the Lords of Session, as in former times preceding
the year 1637. and what that was we have already showed, and do find it to be
so far from interfering with, or derogating from what the Parliament does now
insist upon and demand, that it both warrants and justifies it. I may fifthly
subjoyn, That upon supposition that the Act 11. Par. 1 Charles the Second were
Statutory, which it no ways is; yet there is a later Act passed in the said
first Parliament of King Charles the Second, though unprinted, yet upon Record
in our Registers of Parliament, and which was purposely made for the Regulation
of the College of Justice, and about the admission of the Lords of Session, as
the very title and rubric bears; wherein all that we find Enacted, is, That
the King, instead of having the sole choice of the Lords of Session, shall only
have the Nomination of them, as the Crown stood possessed of it in times before
the year 1637. and that their admission in all times to come shall be according
to the Laws and Acts which were in being before the year which we have already
mentioned. So that fancy what they will beyond this, granted unto the King by
Act 11. yet it is all withdrawn, and reassumed from him by this later Act of
April the 5 th.

All that now remains to be further added on this Subject, so far as concerns
the controversial part, is to inquire whether the King has at all times the
sole Power and Right of choosing and appointing the President of the Session?
And we presume with all humility to say, that by the Laws of the Kingdom, and
according to ancient Practice and Custom, he has it not, nor can he legally
lay claim unto it, seeing by Act 93. Parl. 6. James 6. Anno 1579. It is
Statuted and Ordained, That the President of the College of Justice shall be
always chosen by the whole Senators of the said College. Which Statute is
confirmed by Act 134. Parl. 12. James 6. wherein it is expressly declared, That
the King with advice of the Estates, does ratify and approve all the Acts made
either by his Majesty's Predecessors, or by his Highness himself before, upon
the Institution of the College of Justice, and the Reformation of the abuses
thereof. Nor can it be denied, but the appointing that the President should be
chosen by the whole Senators, was designed as the Reformation of an Abuse in
the College of Justice, which either had not been provided against, and
obviated in the first Institution of the Session, or which had crept in
afterward. And as this was the Law about the Election of the President, so the
Practice was always conformable thereunto, until that my Lord S -- came to be
constituted President by King Charles the Second, and was illegally obtruded
upon the Lords of Session, without the being either chosen or approved by them.
For from the time of the making the Act until then, there was not one that had
ever sat President, but who had been chosen by the Lords of the College of
Justice, except Sir John G --, who upon being nominated and recommended by the
King in the Case of the total Vacancy Anno 1661. was approved and confirmed by
the Estates in Parliament. But for the Lord P --, the Lord U --, the Lord C --,
Sir Robert S --, and the Lord D --, who were all that had been Presidents from
1579. until 1661. they were every one of them chosen and admitted by the Lords
of Session. Nor is it unworthy of Remark, that the Lords of Session, upon every
Election they made of a President, declared that they did it in conformity
unto, and in pursuance of the Act of Parliament. And as King Charles's
departing from the Law in this particular, was one of the first steps toward
Arbitrary Power, so it was both in order to farther Encroachments upon our Laws
and Rights, and prepared the way for most of the Tyranny that he exercised
afterward. And as S -- assuming the Office of President, upon the illegal
choice of the aforementioned King, was both an Affronting, and Betraying of the
known Laws of the Kingdom; so his whole Behavior in that Station was of one
piece and complexion with his entering upon it, being a continued Series of
Oppression and Treachery to his Country. For besides that all his Verdicts
between Subject and Subject, were more ambiguous than the Delphick Oracles, and
the occasion of the Commencement of innumerable Suits in place of the
determining of any; he was the principal Minister of all L -- 's Arbitrariness,
and of King Charles's Usurpations. Nor was there a Rapine or Murder committed
in the Kingdom under the countenance of Royal Authority, but what he was either
the Author of, the Assister in, or ready to justify. And from his having been
a Military Commander, for asserting and vindicating the Laws, Rights, and
Liberties of the Kingdom against the little pretended Invasions of Charles I.
he came to overthrow and trample upon them all in the quality of a Civil
Officer under Charles II. Nor is there a Man in the whole Kingdom of Scotland,
who has been more accessory to the Robberies and Spoils, and who is more
stained and died with the Bloody Measures of the Times, than this Lord S --,
who his Majesty has been imposed upon to constitute again President of the
College of Justice. And as an aggravation of his Crimes, he has perpetrated
them under the vail of Religion, and by forms of Law; which is the bringing the
Holy and Righteous God to be an Authorizer and Approver of his Villainies, and
the making the Shield of our Protection to be the Sword of our Ruin. But there
being some hopes that the World will be speedily furnished with the History of
his Life, I shall say no more of him, but shall leave him unto the expectation
and dread of what the famous Mr. Robert D -- foretold would befall them him in
his Person and Family, and of which having tasted the first Fruits in so many
astonishing Instances, he may the more assuredly reckon upon the full Harvest
of it. And the Method he has lately begun to steeer is the most likely way
imaginable to hasten upon him and his, what that Holy, and, I might say,
Prophetical Man denounced against them. For whereas the Nation would have been
willing upon his mere withdrawing from Business, and not provoking their
Justice by crouding into the Place in which he had so heinously offended, to
have left him to stand or fall at the great Tribunal, and to have i^^^mpnify'd
him as to Life, Honor and Fortune here, upon the consideration of his having
co-operated in the late Revolution, and of his having attended upon his Majesty
in his coming over to rescue and deliver the Kingdoms from Popery and Slavery:
He seems resolved to hasten his own Fate, and through putting himself by new
Crimes out of the Capacity of Mercy, to force the Estates of the Kingdom to a
punishing of him, both for them and for the old. But to return to what we are
upon, about the Right of Electing a President of the College of Justice: It is
excepted, to what has been said, in proof that the Power is by Law in the
Lords of Session to choose their own President; that Sir John G --, was, upon
King Charles the Second's nomination, approved and confirmed in Parliament,
Anno 1661. which was a divesting of the Lords of Session of it, and a vertual
rescinding all the Laws by which that Power had been settled upon them: To
which I have several things to reply, that will discover both the Impertinency
of the Objection, and the Treachery of those who have insinuated it to the King.

First, It is acknowledged in the very Exception, that the sole Choice of Sir
John G -- as President, was not in King Charles, seeing the Parliament had the
Approving, Allowing and Admitting of him, which makes that case to differ very
much from the Present In which the choosing of the President is not only taken
away from the Lords of the Session, but the approving and admitting of him is
denied to the Estates of the Nation in Parliament assembled.

Secondly, What was done in Ordaining Sir John G -- President, was not a
repealing of the Laws, by which the Choosing of the President is vested in the
Lords of the Session, but was at most only a dispensing with them in that
extraordinary case of a total Vacancy, and in reference unto a Person of a most
unspotted Integrity, and unpa^allelled Knowledge in the Laws. Nor will any Man,
pretending to acquaintance with Parliamentary Customs and Proceedings, reckon
that a Law is therefore rescinded and abrogated because the Parliament has
seen reason to supersede it in a single Instance, and in a particular case.
Laws once Enacted and established are never accounted to be abrogated, unless
by particular future Laws formally repealing them, or by posterior general
Statutes inconsistent with, and destructive of them. Nor do Two or Three
particular Instances, varying from, and repugnant unto them, bring them so much
as into disuse and desuetude; but even in order to that, there must be
immemorial Prescription against them, and that without being disallowed or
complained of in Parliament.

Thirdly, What the Parliament did, Anno 1661. in the Case of Sir John G --, it
was not properly done by them in their Legislative capacity, but as a part of
the Supreme Authority of the Kingdom, concurring with the King in an Act and
Deed of the Supremum imperium, and illimited Power of the Government, which the
appointing of Judges for the equal administration of Justice came to be at that
season and conjuncture, by reason of the total Vacancy* and the impossibility
that thereupon ensued of Choosing and Ordaining the Lords of Session, whereof
the President is always one, in the ordinary Legal and Established Methods.
What the King and the Estates of Parliament did in the case of that Vacancy of
the College of Justice, was much of the Nature of, and parallel unto, what the
Estates alone have done upon the late Vacancy of the Throne; wherein they acted
not in the way of a Legislative Body, but in the Virtue of that illimited Power
which resided in them, as Representatives of the whole People, and who knew no
other Measures whereby to act, but what lay most in a tendency to the Public
Safety.

Fourthly, The King's having a Right to choose the President of the Session, is
disclaimed and ridiculed by those very Persons that have advised him to
challenge it: For my Lord S --, in whose Favor, and in pursuance of whose
Advice, his Majesty has claimed a Right, and exerted an Authority of
appointing a President, has, by the Method of his entering upon that Office and
Station, renounced the Legality of his Majesty's acting in that particular, and
declared that he holds not his Place by virtue of the King's Choice and
Designation. For after he had prevailed upon the King to elect and send him
down President of the Session, the first thing he did at their Meeting, and
that in order to the throwiag the blame upon his Majesty of all that had been
transacted before, was to wheedle that over-awed and packed Bench, to choose
him for President of the College of Justice: which as it shows the Disloyalty
and Treachery of the Man, so it testifies and publishes his Folly. For how
could they be in a capacity as Lords of Session to choose him for a President,
that were not antecedently, legally, tried and approved themselves? And who
knowing their own unqualifiedness, both as to Literature and good Fame, made
his Majesty's having nominated them, an excuse from their undergoing a Trial.
For though it be both required by the Laws, and was accordingly given out all
along here, that they should be tried; yet Five of them being conscious unto
themselves how little they answered the Qualifications prescribed in the
Statutes, refused to submit to be examined, under a Pretense that they would
not thereby weaken his Majesty's Right and Authority in his having elected
them. And thus the King's Authority is doubly exposed, by those who call
themselves the Ordinary Lords of Session, in excusing themselves from a Trial,
which was never designed they should do, seeing S --, M -- and N --, were both
appointed, and said to be in a capacity to examine them: And then by him who is
styled President, through its being made a Stale for his obtaining the Name,
and renounced for the Choice of the Bench, as that which alone must give him a
Legal Title. Whereas if the King's Choice of him be not according to Law, and
sufficient to justify his entrance upon his Office, Why did he abuse his
Majesty in telling him that it was? And if it be the King's Right, and a part
of his Prerogative, to elect the President, Why has he sacrificed his
Majesty's Honor, and given away his Legal Power, in the submitting to hold the
Office by any other Tenure? Howsoever we are come to be Gainers by this
Carriage of S --, how much soever the King is a looser by it. For his
surendring from the King the Right of choosing a President, is a Vindication of
the Justice of the Parliaments Vote and Demand. Besides, here is an end put to
that Pretense which they have been endeavoring to sham upon the World, viz.
That S -- was only restored to the Presidency of which he was violently
dispossessed, and that he was not chosen unto it as unto a Place whereunto he
had not a Right. So that either the Choice made at Edinburgh overthrows the
Plea used at London, about his being merely restored; or else that whereby
they do here seek to justify his Majesty's Proceedings in reference to S -- 's
being President, condemns what the Proteus has there betaken himself unto, of
being elected by those called the Lords of the College of Justice. To which I
shall only add, That as he was never legally President before, so he is as
little President now. His assuming the Office then, when he was not chosen by
the Bench, as the Law ordains, made him an Usurper; and his entering upon the
Place again, upon the Choice of those that are not Judges, by reason of their
not being tried as the Statutes appoint, leaves him under the same Crime and
Imputation.

So that having now dispatched, all that is either Historical or Argumentative
about the several Heads in difference between the Parliament of Scotland, and a
few unadvised or ill designing Men about His Majesty: I shall shut up this
Discourse with some Political Reflections upon the whole. Whereof the first is,
That it is not the having barely a good King that renders a People happy, but
much of it must arise from his having good Ministers about him. For no Nation
had ever a better Prince than we at present have, and yet we find there is
cause of complaint, by reason of the Ill Counselors that possess his ear. We
do not think that he entertains them out of choice, yet that will not give his
People ease, though it may for a while suppress their Murmurings. His Majesty's
being so little acquainted with Men at his first coming over, might lay him
open to be misled in the choice of His Officers: But to continue to use them
after he has had sufficient means as well as opportunity of knowing their
Characters, will leave an imputation not only upon his Goodness, but upon his
Wisdom. For as the People have no other way of judging of the goodness of their
Prince, but by finding his Officers and chief Ministers to be such: so if these
be not, they may possibly acknowledge William to be a good Man, but they will
never believe that the King is so. And Machiavel's observation, That a wise
King will always find wise Ministers, is no more than what every Man is
persuaded of upon the first Principles of Reason, and of common sense* I do
acknowledge, that ill Men have ways of thrusting themselves upon Princes, which
they that are virtuous think too unworthy and below them to use. For whereas
the later are always modest, and seek no recommendations but from their own
Merit; the former are importunate, and can both flatter and bribe Favorites to
speak well of them. It was a severe Prediction as well as Observation, which
the late Prince of Conde made upon the News of King Charles the Second's Death,
and of his Brothers succeeding him, viz. That he was like to be well served,
through having none about him, but his own Fools, and his Predecessors Knaves.
How many Wise Men then imagine his Present Majesty is like to be served, who
though he has not the Fools of the last Reign about him, yet he has both the
Knaves of that and of the former? Nor is it of any great advantage at least to
Scotland to be delivered from the Fools of the last Government, seeing there
are weak Men enough besides those, and some of them trusted with the chief
conduct of the Scotch Affairs. For how else could it be, that of all the
Public Orders remitted thither, there has not been one, which either the
meeting of Estates, the Parliament, or the Privy Council have not voted to be
illegal? In reference unto which, as we do acquit the King from all blame,
seeing he cannot be supposed to be acquainted yet, either with the Scotch Laws,
or with their Forms, and does only sign what others pepare for, and offer unto
him; so we are not willing to ascribe it so much to the Treachery and Malice of
his Minister, as to his simplicity and weakness: Who though he may possibly be
an honest Man, and indifferently versed in common Affairs, yet he has no great
knowledge of the Laws, and is but a Puny in the Politics, by reason of which
he comes to rely upon other Men's advice, who instead of instructing and
assisting him to serve the King, make him a Tool for promoting ends and designs
directly opposite to His Majesty's Service and Interest. But then I should
observe, Secondly, That one illegal stop does lead to many: Nor is one
Arbitrary thing to be supported but by another. It has been hitherto taken for
an undoubted Truth, That though the Estates Assembled in Parliament have not
alone a Legislative Power, so as to enact Laws without the King, yet that they
have the Supreme and Uncontrovertible Power of declaring the Meaning, and Sense
of those Laws that are already Enacted and Established. So that when the
Parliament has once declared the Sense and Meaning of any Law, all Courts of
Judicature, as well as particular Persons, are bound to acquiesce in their
explanation of that Law. And to divest the Parliament of this, is to strip them
of one of their chiefest Privileges, and to detract from and diminish their
Authority, which is Treason by the Law of Scotland. For it is expressly declared
by Act 130. Parl. 8. James 6. That whosoever in time coming shall take upon
him, to impung the Dignity and Authority of the three Estates, or shall seek or
procure the innovation or diminution of the Power and Authority of the Three
Estates, or of any of them, shall be guilty of Treason. Yet when the Present
Parliament had declared the sense of the ancient Laws to be, that the King in a
total Vacancy could not appoint Judges without their being admitted by
Parliament, the advance that had been made against our Laws, in His Majesty's
assuming a Right of Electing and Authorizing them, has been seconded with an
impugning, despising, and subverting that Authority of Parliament which we have
been speaking of. Nor has the Invasion upon Parliamentary Rights and
Privileges terminated here, but there has been a further assault made upon
them, both by the Councils assuming the Cognizance of that, which was lodged
before the Parliament, and by their Actings determining in it contrary to the
Vote, and Declaration of the Estates, who are the Supreme Judicature, and in
conjunction with the King, the one Legislative body of the Kingdom. For it is
an unquestioned Maxim, That when a matter is once brought and tabled before the
Parliament, so as they have laid their hands upon it, it is not afterward to
fall under the Cognizance, or Determination of the Council, or of any inferior
Judicature, unless remitted expressly unto them by the Parliament it self. And
therefore the Parliament having given a stop to the opening of the Signet, and
to the sitting of the Session, till the King's further pleasure was made known
to them, and until that matter should be brought to such an Accommodation, as
was consistent with the preservation of the Laws of the Kingdom, it was a high
Invasion upon the Authority and Jurisdiction of the Parliament, for the Council
to meddle in it. But this they were awed unto by those who had given the King
advice to choose the Lords of Session and President, and who knew no way to
justify one illegality but by another. Yea, our Ministers, in order to make
the first Act of Invasion upon the Laws which they had thrust the King upon
successful, and to prevent their receiving a baffle upon their first setting
out on the road of Arbitrariness, sent menacing Letters to those that were
nominated Lords of Session, threatening them with ruin if they did not sit at
the time that they were appointed; and had it not been for those Letters,
several had forborne to act, as knowing they could not lawfully do it. And as
the sending those Letters shows that the Ministers here were convinced that
they had counseled the King to an illegal Thing, but which was to be supported
in the same manner: So these Gentlemen of the long Robe, who contrary to their
own Judgment, were influenced to sit, and to transgress known Laws, have
declared how Unworthy and Unqualified they are to be received and approved by
Parliament, as Lords of the College of Justice. And to Crown all these
Miscarriages in Government with one more, his Majesty's Ministers being fully
sensible, that they whom they call Lords of Session, were neither legally
appointed, nor could legally meet and sit, they therefore resolved forcibly to
support what they had unjustly begun and done; and accordingly, against the day
and time those Gentlemen were to sit, they ordered all the Forces, which were
drawn in unusual Numbers about Edinburgh, to be in a readiness upon beat of
Drum, that what they had Arbitrarily begun, might be Violently maintained.
Which as it was an applying, and using of his Majesty's Troops, upon a much
differing Design, than that for which the Parliament had consented to their
being raised and paid: So it had been much more for his Majesty's Honor, and
the Benefit of his Kingdom, that they had been all employed against Cannon, who
is still making Inroads, and committing Robberies upon several of his Majesty's
Loyal Subjects; and who by the ill Conduct and treasonable Counsel of some of
his Majesty's Ministers, seems to have been connived at and forborne, since the
last defeat that was given him, for no other reason, but that there may be a
stand for other Rebels in due time to go unto. But that which I would observe,
Thirdly, and in the last place, is, That his Majesty for his own Honor and
Safety, and for the Peace and Welfare of his People, ought to make some Change
and Alteration of his Ministers. For it is evident, That they who are employed
as Instruments of Oppression, Rapine and Murder, under an ill Government, can
never be of use unto, nor for the reputation of a good. It is evident, That he
is betrayed, nor is it so difficult to know by whom, and how. For Things speak,
when Men either dare not, or will not. And Advices are not to be judged of by
the Quality and Profession of the Persons that give them, but by the tendency
of the Counsels that are given. For example, They cannot design well unto his
Majesty, who tell him, That he must not make haste to conquer his Enemies,
until he have first screwed up his Prerogative; and that he is to improve the
dread his People are under of King James, for wresting from them what he can,
before he attack him. Again, they cannot intend his Majesty's Interest, who
would have him overlook the Crimes and Treasons that are daily committed
against him, seeing the conniving at Rebels can only be to encourage Rebellion.
Again, they who advise him to be King only of a Party, and not of the whole
People, have a mind he should be King of none. And to counsel him either not to
use those in his Service who are both willing to serve him, and would do it
with the utmost Fidedelity; or to use those whose Carriage speaks them to be in
the Interest of his Enemies, it is to have him betrayed instead of being
served. Nor can they be for his Continuing upon the Throne, who would have
hindered his Ascent unto it. And whosoever embarrasseth him with his
Parliaments, and by it retards Succors for the Support of the War, can mean no
less than that his Majesty and his Kingdom should become a Prey to King James,
and to his Brother of France. And they who counsel him to go on where his
Predecessor left off, have a mind to see a new Abdication, though they were not
for the Old. But what might be said upon this Head, requires rather an entire
Discourse, than to be confined unto a short Remark. And therefore all I shall
add is, That as his Majesty must be infallibly lost, without a speedy Change as
to some of his Ministers, so he needs not to fear them, if they be but once
thrust out of his Councils; seeing all the hurt that they are able to do him,
is through their being there. And if he will but own himself, and assert his
own Interest, he will have enough of those to stand by him, who have no
Interest but what is his.

FINIS
AN ADDRESS Signed by the greatest Part of the MEMBERS of the Parliament OF
SCOTLAND, AND Delivered to His MAJESTY at Hampton Court, the 15 th. day of
October, 1689.
TO THE KING'S Most Excellent Majesty: The Humble Representation of the Lords
and Commissioners of Shires and Buroughs of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND, Under
subscribers, and Members of this Current Parliament, now Adjourned till the
Eight of October next.
NOthing save the great and general Surprise of this long distressed and at
present unsettled Kingdom, upon the late Adjournment of Your most Loyal
Parliament for so long a time, and in so critical a season, with the deep
Concern of Your Royal Interest therein, could possibly have induced us to this
so necessary a Petition. But the visible Consternation and Discouragement of
thousands of Your good Subjects, delayed in the Relief and Comfort which at
this time they assuredly expected, with the Advantages that We apprehend Your
Majesty's Enemies, both within and without the Kingdom, may think to reap by
such an Interruption, being our only Motives, We cannot, We dare not be silent.
And therefore to prevent these evil Consequences, We in the first place most
solemnly Protest and Declare, in the Presence of God and Men, Our constant and
inviolable Fidelity and Adherence to Your Majesty's Royal Title, Right and
Interest, so frankly and cheerfully recognosced by Us in this Current
Parliament, wishing and praying for nothing more under the Sun than Your long
and prosperous Reign, as that wherein the Security of all our Lives and
Liberties, and also of our Holy Religion, more dear to Us than both, is
infallibly included. It was the Persuasion we had of the Justice, as well as
the Necessity, of Your Majesty's Heroic Undertaking for the Delivery of these
Kingdoms, with the Conviction of the Divine Confirmation that appeared in its
Glorious Success, that moved most, if not all of Us, to endeavor and concur
most heartily in the late Meeting of Estates, for the Advancement and
Establishment of Your Majesty upon the Throne, when some discovered their
Disaffection, and were too open Retarders and Obstructers of that good Design:
And it is from the same true Affection and Zeal, that we do now most heartily
make the abovementioned Protestation, to obviate all the Misconstructions Your
Enemies may make in this Juncture.

Nor are we less assured of Your Majesty's most sincere and gracious
Intentions, to perform for us to the utmost, all that the Estates of the
Kingdom have either demanded, or represented as necessary and expedient for
securing the Protestant Religion, restoring their Laws and Liberties, and
redressing of their Grievances, according to Your Majesty's Declaration for
this Kingdom. Neither can it be imagined, that so wise and just a King as Your
Majesty, will ever be persuaded, that so Loyal a Parliament as this, can be
induced either to wish or design any Prejudice to, or Diminution of Your true
Interest and Prerogative; but such as have slavishly served and flattered
Arbitrary Power and Tyranny, will be always studying for their own sinister
Ends, to state a separate Interest betwixt King and People, a Practice which we
are confident Your Majesty abhors.

But that we may clear our selves upon this present occasion to Your Majesty's
full satisfaction, and refuting of all Misrepresentations we can incur on any
hand, we shall briefly rehearse to Your Majesty, the Votes passed in this
present Parliament, to which the Royal assent is not given, with such short
Reflections, as we hope may tend to the better Vindication of all concerned.

The First Act upon which the Vote of Parliament has passed, is, That declaring
the Privilege of the Estates of Parliament to Nominate and Appoint Committees,
as they shall think fit; and excluding therefrom the Officers of State, unless
they be chosen: And omitting what the Parliament has already represented to
Your Majesty as reasons of their Vote; it is humbly conceived, that this Act is
exactly framed to the extent of that Grievance, which together with the rest,
is desired in the Instrument of Government, to be redressed unto us in
Parliament.

The Second, was an Act Abrogating the Act of Parliament 1669, asserting the
Kings Supremacy over all Persons, and in all Causes Ecclesiastical; and this
Act is so exactly conform to the Second Article of the abovementioned
Grievances; and the foresaid Act of Supremacy in it self is so dangerous to the
Protestant Religion, as well as inconsistent with the Establishment of any
Church Government, that we doubt not Your Majesty will ever approve all that
voted to it.

The Third, is an Act anent Persons not to employed in public Trusts; and all
the Ruins and Distresses of this Kingdom, have so certainly flowed from the
Persons therein noted, especially, such as by their contriving of, and
concurring in the Dispensing Power, have thereby eminently endangered our
Religion, and overturned all the Fences of our Liberties and Properties (which
we have good Ground to believe the Parliament would have extended but to few
Persons) And your Majesty in Your Declaration, has so justly charged the same
upon evil and wicked Counselors (the only Persons pointed at in this Act) that
we are persuaded that You will find it absolutely necessary for attaining all
the Ends of Your Majesty's glorious Undertaking for our Relief.

The Fourth, is an Act concerning the Nomination of the ordinary Lords of
Session, and the Election of the President, To wit, that in a total Vacation
they be tried, and admitted or rejected by Parliament, and in a particular
Vacation they be tried and admitted, or rejected by the other Lords: And that
the President be chosen by the Lords themselves, conform to our old Practique
and express Statute. And this Act is so agreeable to Practique Laws and Acts of
Parliament, and so necessair for the true and equal Administration of Justice
(the great security of all Kingdoms) that Your Majesty will unquestionably
approve it.

The Fifth and last is an Act Ordaining the Presbyterian Ministers yet alive,
who were thrust out since the First of January 1661, for not Conforming to
Prelacy, and not complying with the Courses of the Time, to be restored. And
this Act is in it self so just and so consequential from the Claim of Right,
and agreeable to Your Majesty's Declaration, that less in common Equity could
not be done. And here Your Majesty may be pleased to consider, That though
Prelacy be now by Law abolished, yet these few Ministers, not exceeding Sixty,
(though restored, as they are not, for want of the Royal Assent to the foresaid
Act) would be all the Presbyterian Ministers legally established and provided
for in Scotland.

It is not unknown to Your Majesty what have been the sad Confusions and
Disorders of this distressed Country under Prelacy, and for want of its ancient
Presbyterian Government; and now the whole West, and many other Parts of
Scotland, are at present desolate and destitute, having only Ministers called
by the People upon the late Liberty, without any Benefice or Living, or
convenient Place to Preach in. It is also certain, that there are many Hundreds
of forefaulted and sined Persons who are yet waiting to be restored and
refounded, according to the Claim of Right, and Your Majesty's Gracious
Instructions thereanent.

It is true, the last Thing proposed by Your Majesty's Commissioner in
Parliament, was a Supply of Money for Maintenance of the Forces so necessary
for our present Defense; and We should have proven our selves ungrateful to
Your Majesty, and false to our own Interest and Security, if We had absolutely
refused it: But there being a sufficient and certain Fund to maintain all the
Forces, and support all other incident Charges of the Government for some
Months; all that we demanded was, That some things visibly necessair for
Satisfaction of the Country, and the better enabling and disposing them to pay
the said Supply, might be first expeded. We are confident that the Vote of
Parliament, which was only for a short Delay, will not give Your Majesty the
least ground of Offense.

And now having presumed to lay these Things before Your Majesty with all
humble Submission, purely out of Duty for preventing the evil Constructions of
Your Majesty's Enemies, and for our own just Vindication; We most humbly
beseech Your Sacred Majesty Graciously to Consider what is here represented;
and in Prosecution of Your Majesty's Acceptance of the Claim of Right, and Your
Declaration emitted for this Kingdom, to take such Courses as You in Your Royal
Wisdom shall think fit, for Passing the foresaid Acts of Parliament, and
Redressing all our other Grievances. And We Your Majesty's most humble
Petitioners and faithful Subjects, shall, as in Duty bound, every Pray for Your
long and prosperous Reign over Us.

FINIS.

