AN ACCOUNT OF Mr. FERGUSON HIS Common-Place-Book, IN TWO LETTERS.



LONDON:

Printed by Andrew Clark, for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1675.

Mr. GLANVILL HIS LETTER TO Mr. SHERLOCK.
SIR,
I Lately met with Mr. Ferguson's Book, and was a little surprised to find my
self by name concerned in it, as one of those that had been the occasion of his
writing about the Interest of Reason in Religion. I had in my Discourse of
Reason accused the Dissenters of decrying the sober use of our Faculties under
the misapplied names of vain Philosophy, carnal Reason, and the wisdom of this
World; and some others whom he mentions, had spoke to the like purpose: He
therefore thought it necessary that they should vindicate themselves from those
aspersions, and endeavor to give a stop to those groundless, and unjust
clamours, page 9.

Now whether those Accusations are just or not, I appeal to any one that can
remember but twenty years past, and has been in the least acquainted with the
Preaching, Writings, and Discourses of those men in their times: How far they
are reformed since, I do not know; but I have never heard of their
Recantations, nor have they taken any care to convince the world that their
private Desks are more sober then their public Pulpits were. On this occasion,
Sir, I cannot but take notice, how hard it is to deal with the people of this
sort, when we speak or write against their Opinions, Practices, and
Declarations, and those that have been most public and notorious: If there
happen to be two, or three, or some very few unknown persons, of a little
different temper, they will be ready to fly upon us as false accusers, and
such as traduce the whole Party for the Extravagancies of a few. Thus you know
it has happened to some excellent late Books, that have given the most just, and
lively descriptions of the humor of Non-conformists, which have been vilified
and rayl'd at as slanderous Invectives and Abuses; because some few that go
with them, are somewhat less foolish, and extravagant then the rest: According
to which Rule, it will be untrue to say, that Lions and Bears are wild and
dangerous creatures, because some of them have been tamed and made gentle: and
a man may not affirm the Crow is black, because some are greyish: and now and
then a Bird of that species by extraordinary accident may be white. If among
the Dissenters there are so many sober Assertors of the necessity, and
usefulness of Reason in the affairs of Religion, it is very much that they have
not all this while stood up, and reproved the dangerous Follies, and
Extravagancies of their Brethren that have opened the door to Atheism, and
Enthusiasm by their ignorant Railings against it. And since they have thought
fit to be silent in this matter, how should we know that there are men of such
sober principles among them. The Declamations and violent Outcries against
Reason we have heard till our ears have tingled: but the justifications of the
judgments of Reason in Religion have been such private whispers, that hitherto
we have heard little, or nothing of them from these men: and I might ask Mr. F.
how it comes about, that persons so zealous against error, who were still
pelting each other both from Press and Pulpit upon every petty difference in
opinion, should let pass so many rude Defamations of our Faculties, as they
needs must frequently hear, without the least reproof, or opposition of them,
if so many have been so very Orthodox in this point, as he would have us to
believe? But I say no more of that.

The Author has a double justification of his Party against our Charge. We
have the first, page 7. They are a people, so far as I know, innocent of all
undue reflections upon Reason. The other is, I Robert Ferguson do acknowledge
the use of Reason in Religion in 274 pages; ergo, Our late pretended Rational
Divines do traduce the Non-conformists in suggesting that they are defamers of
Reason, page 62. This is the sum and strength of the whole Discourse, to which
a short answer will suffice.

For my part, though I have been drawn into some Philosophical Controversies,
yet I never begun any; and though I have received some public Provocations to
engage in the Disputes of Religion, yet hitherto my disinclination to them has
kept me unconcerned: But notwithstanding this indisposition, Mr. Ferguson's
title, and the mention he made of me, as one of the occasions of his Book,
inclined me to look into his Discourse with design of further Vindication of
our Faculties, if that Essay had given me any reason for it: But I soon
perceived that this supposed Adversary was a Friend, and one that liked my Book
so well, as to borrow the main things of his from it; though as he is pleased
to say of Des Carts, He was not so ingenious to confess at whose Breasts he
had sucked, nor out of whose Garden he had gathered his best Flowers: And 'twas
a little unkindly done of him to mention my Name where he supposed I had erred;
and to take no notice of it, when he thought I had done so well as to deserve
to be transcribed. Indeed he has enlarged in the proof of some Principles of
Religion by Reason, in which he has been more beholden to other men: But in
the Notions that strictly appertain to the main state of the matter, he has
been pleased to credit and enforce my Observations by the addition of his
Suffrage and Authority. When I saw how Affairs went, I left the close perusal
of his Book, and only cursorily skim'd over his Pages, casting my eye here and
there, as it happened; and in that running reading I observed these following
things and Expressions, in which the Gentleman very kindly, and to my great
honor has concurred with me.

M. Ferguson.

Knowledge then ( viz. in the state of Innocence) inhabited our minds in no
less plenty than Light does in the universal Luminary. p. 18.

Jos. Glanvill.

Knowledge dwelt in our undepraved natures as Light in the Sun, in as great
Plenty as Purity. Vanity of Dogmatizing. p. 13.

M. F.

It was wonderfully advantaged by a delicate and apt disposure of bodily
Organs. ibid.

J. G.

Depending on the delicacy and apt disposure of the Organs. Van. Dogm. p. 5.

M. F.

There was no Jarring in our humors till the Fall caused them. p. 19.

J. G.

There was no jarring or disharmony in the faculties till sin untuned them.
Van. Dogm. p. 4.

M. F.

Hindered by the Distemperature of indisposed Organs. ibid.

J. G.

Hindered in its actings by the Distemperature of indisposed Organs. Van. Dogm.
ibid.

M. F. takes the whole substance of his Discourse about the Understanding in
the state of Innocence, and after, under the Fall. p. 18, 19. out of*

I. G. in his Vanity of Dogmatizing. p. 4, 5, etc.

M. F.

The vast Volumes of the Schoolmen are stuffed with Peripatetical Depravations.
p. 246.

J. G.

The Volumes of the Schoolmen are deplorable evidence of Peripatetical
Depravations. Van. Dogm. p. 166.

M. F.

Their Scholastic Controversies are resolved into the Subtilties of his (
Aristotle's) Philosophy. ibid.

J. G.

These Scholastic Controversies are ultimately resolved into the Subtilties of
his ( Aristotle's) Philosophy. V. D p. 167

M. F.

Speaking of the Union of the Soul and Body says, -- How this can be is a Knot
too hard for Human Reason to untie. p. 490.

J. G.

Says of the same, -- It is a Knot too hard for our degraded Intellects to
untie. Van. Dog. Ed. 2. p. 15.

M. F.

How a pure Spirit should be cemented to an earthly clod, -- is a Riddle that
no Hypothesis of Philosophy can resolve us about. p. 490.

J. G.

How the purer Spirit is united to this Clod, -- is a Riddle that must be left
to the coming of Elias. Van. Dog. Ed. 2. ibid.

M. F.

To affirm it, viz. the uniter of Soul and Body to be of a middle nature
partaking of the affections and adjuncts of both, is that which our reasonable
Faculties will never allow us to subscribe to. ibid.

J. G.

To suppose an uniter of middle constitution that should partake of some of the
qualities of both is unwarranted by any of our faculties. Van. Dogm. p. 21.

M. F.

How that which penetrates a Body without giving a jog to, or receiving any
from it, should either impress a motion upon, or receive an impression from it,
is unconceivable. p. 496.

J. G.

How that which penetrates all Bodies without the least jog or obstruction,
should impress a motion on any is by his own confession alike unconceivable.
Van. Dogm. Ed. 2. p. 17.

M. F. treats of the incomprehensibility of the union of the parts of matter.
p. 483, 484, etc. the substance of all which is taken out of

I. G. in his Scepsis Scientifica, p. 37, 38, 39. and his Answer to White, p.
41, 42, etc.

M. F. endeavors to show the unconceivableness of the union of the Soul and
Body, p. 489, 490, 491, etc. and again p. 495, 496. all out of

I. G. in his Scepsis Scientifica. p. 15, 16.

M. F.

The reproach which Julian slanderously fastened upon the Primitive Christians,
that they had no ground for their Faith, but that their wisdom was only to
believe, (...). p. 62.

J. G.

The charge of Julian the Apostate against the Primitive Christians, (...) That
their wisdom was to believe; as if they had no ground for their Faith. Of
Reason, p. 218.

M. F.

He is worse than an Enthusiast, who affirms, that the way to be a Christian is
first to be a Brute. p. 20.

J. G.

Says, that in the Enthusiastic Divinity, -- The way to be a Christian is
first to be a Brute. Of Reason, p. 223.

M. F.

Men being misled by their senses, affections, interests and imaginations do
many times mingle errors and false conceits with the genuine Dictates of their
minds, and then appeal to them as the principles of truth and reason, when they
are indeed nothing else but the vain images of our Fancies, and the conclusions
of ignorance and mistake. p. 241.

J. G.

Liable to be misled by our senses, and affections, and interests, and
imaginations, so that we many times mingle errors and false conceits with the
genuine dictates of our minds, and appeal to them as the principles of truth
and reason, when they are but the vain images of our Fancies, or the false
conclusions of ignorance and mistake. Of Reason, p. 196, 197.

M. F.

Whatsoever is proved by reason we are firmly to believe it, though there be
many things in the theory of it, that are wholly unconceivable. p. 198.

J. G.

What is -- clearly proved by reason ought to be believed, though there are
many things in the theory and manner of it unconceivable. Philosoph. Pia, p. 82.

Thus, Sir, I have given you some Instances among many, of the faithfulness of
M. Ferguson's Memory, or of his Phrase-Book: There is no doubt but they have
furnished him as well out of other Writers, but I have neither the humor nor
the leisure to make further search after stolen Goods: Only I cannot but take
notice to you that this is the Man that diverse of his Party glory in, as their
elegant and rational Writer, and urge him as a great proof of the partiality
and injustice of those who will not allow Non-Conformists to write either good
Sense or good Language; If either of these be in his Book, you may ghess by
this Specimen how little Honor is reflected upon them from it: And if others
would claim their Feathers, as I have called for some of mine, I believe, he
would have scarce enough left to cover theirs or his own nakedness.

I remember such Discoveries were once made upon another Champion of the Cause,
M. Hickman; who had also furnished his Pack with Lace and Ribband borrowed from
his Neighbors Shops. It Is pity but these men had Judgments to choose, for then
they would put better Books into the hands of their Admirers. But when they
take this Liberty, I would advise them not to fall foul upon the Owners, while
they have their Goods in their hands; nor to pick their Pockets then when they
are confidently pleading their own Truth and Honesty against them: If this
Gentleman had let me alone, I had likely never known this quality of his; but
unluckily he has detected himself, as he did that warned his Chapman, to whom
he had sold a stolen Horse, not to let him drink of such a Water, which was in a
Ground out of which he had taken him.

Upon the whole matter, Sir, I desire you to deal gently with this Adversary,
lest unawares you should smite some of your Friends, and among the rest,

Your affectionate Friend and Servant, Ios. Glanvill.

Mr. SHERLOCK HIS ANSWER TO Mr. GLANVILL HIS LETTER.
SIR,
I Have received your Letter, and thank you very heartily for it. I was much
puzzled before to give an account of the inequality of M. Ferguson's Style and
Reasoning: for his Words are sometimes proper and elegant, his Arguments strong
and weighty, at other times his Phrase is barbarous and pedantick, and his
Reasonings childish: and I always observed that he writ best upon some trite
and beaten Argument, where he had no Adversary; but take him out of the road of
Common Places and Phrase-Books, and he could neither write consistently with
himself, nor any thing to the purpose. This gave me a great suspicion of the
man, that he was a mere Collector, and that his Book was made just as the
Epicuraeans fancy the World was, by the accidental Concourse of Atoms, and may
serve for a Confutation of that wild Hypothesis; it being a plain
Demonstration, how impossible it is to make a good Book out of the best
Common-Places and Collections, unless a wise man have the composing of it.

Upon the receipt of your Letter, which made so pleasant a discovery of the
man, I had the Curiosity to enquire a little further, and in requital of your
kindness, I have here sent you some of his gleanings from other Authors, though
so changed and transformed, and found in such ill Company, that I fear those
worthy persons will be ashamed to own them.

And because M. Ferg. with the usual confidence of a bold Scot, pretends a very
particular Friendship with that excellent Person, Sir Charles Wolseley, I shall
first take notice how bold he has made with him; which I suppose he did upon
the Authority of that old Saying, All things are common among Friends; and
therefore he might challenge as good a right to Sir Charles his Writings, as
himself.

M. Ferg. among other things shows the Use and Serviceableness of Reason in
proving the Divinity of the Scripture, p. 56, etc. Sir Charles had done this
before him, and had managed that Argument like a Scholar and a Gentleman, in
his Book entitled, The Reasonableness of Scripture-Belief; from whence our
Author has borrowed most of his best Arguments, and many times his Words and
Phrases.

M. Ferguson premises, that the Testimony of the Holy Ghost in the Souls and
Consciences of men is the most convincing evidence, that such men can have of
its (the Scriptures) Divinity, but yet rejects it from being a proof of the
Scriptures Divinity to others. Interest of Reason, p. 57

Sir Charles likewise tells us, the Testimony of the Holy Ghost in the minds
and consciences of men to the truth of the Scriptures (though it be the most
convincing evidence that can be given to them, etc.) it is not to be urged in
proof of the Scriptures against its professed Adversaries. Scripture belief, p.
79

Sir Charles assigns two reasons for this; Mr. Ferguson has divided the second
Reason into two, and set the first Reason in the third place.

M. F.

1. The Holy Ghost convinces no man as to the belief of the Scripture, without
enlightening his mind in the grounds and reasons upon which its proceeding from
God is evidenced and established. There is no conviction begot by the Holy
Ghost in the hearts of men, otherwise than by rational evidence, satisfying our
understanding, through discovering the motives and inducements that ascertain
the truth of what he would convince us of, Ibid. p. 57

Sir Chapter Wols.

Second Argument the latter part*

The Illuminations of the Holy Ghost in the minds of men are no other way to be
conceived of, than that he is pleased to propose the right grounds and reasons
upon which things are to be believed, and to convince and satisfy the
understanding, that they are so, and to bring men to acquiesce in conclusions
by ascertaining them of the truth of the premises.

M. F.

2. No man's particular assurance obtained thus in way of Illumination by the
Holy Ghost, is otherwise urged as an argument of conviction to another, than by
proposing the reasons, which our Faith is erected on. The way of such men's
evidence is communicable to none, unless they could kindle the same rays in the
breasts of others, which have irradiated their own, and therefore they must
deal with others by producing the grounds of their conviction, not pleading the
manner of it, Ibid.

Sir Chapter Wols.

The beginning of the second Argument.

Whatever evidence the Holy Ghost gives to any man to assure him of the truth
of any proposition, that evidence, as such, can never go beyond his own breast,
nor can I ever prove any thing by it, as it is a Divine and infallible
Evidence, because such evidence is no way communicable to another but in an
ordinary way: Nothing is visible to another in such cases, but the reasons I
can produce, the Divine Illumination I have within my self to convince me, that
such Reasons are cogent and prevailing can never be so demonstrated, as to
convince another that has no such Illumination, Ibid. p. 81

I am now Sir perfectly satisfied of what great use that trick is of varying
phrases, which we learned at School; for this has made Mr. Ferguson a famous
Author, who by the little arts of transplacing words, of turning Nouns into
Verbs, or Verbs into Participles, or converting a single word, such as
Illumination, into the phrase of kindling Rays, can make other men's Writings
his own. But to proceed,

M. F.

3. The Holy Ghost, as a distinct person in the Deity is not a Principle
demonstrable by reason, etc. to prove the Divine Authority of the Scripture by
the Testimony of the Holy Ghost, when we cannot otherwise prove a Holy Ghost,
but by the Testimony of the Scripture, is to argue circularly and absurdly,
Ibid.

Sir Chapter Wols.

1 Argument, Because the Blessed Spirit it self is not a common demonstrable
principle amongst mankind, etc. to go about to prove the Scriptures by any
evidence arising from the Holy Ghost must needs be visibly absurd, because
there is no other way to prove that there is any such being as the Holy Ghost,
but by the Scriptures themselves, Ibid.

Master Ferguson having premised this, proceeds to prove the Divine Authority
of the Scriptures; and

First, To justify the necessity of some supernatural Revelation in order to
the conducting us in Religion, Ibid. p. 62

Sir Chapter Wols.

First, I will endeavor to render it a thing reasonable to be believed that
there should be some supernatural law revealed from God, and given to mankind,
etc. Ibid. p. 86

M. F.

His first argument is taken from the imperfection of natural light, p. 64

This is largely managed by Sir Charles, p. 87, etc.

His second Argument, That the Religion of men at present toward God is the
Religion of sinners, etc. but natural light cannot instruct the world how God
will be atoned, Ibid.

Sir Chapter

Mankind in every age have applied to God in a sense of sin, and of guilt
contracted by it, and upon that account have adjudged it necessary to make some
further offering to God for their sins, etc. Now the reason of the world does
not issue it self into any positive certainly about such things, etc. Ibid. p.
133, and p. 145, etc.

Argument 3. All mankind has universally consented in this, that besides the
light of reason, there ought to be some supernatural Revelation from God, etc.

Sir Chapter

Discourses this at large, p. 123. etc. to which M. Ferguson indeed refers his
Reader: as also to Camero de verbo Dei: for which he is beholden to Sir
Charles's citation of him in the same place.

Master Ferguson's next undertaking is to make it appear, that it is expedient,
that this Revelation should be some where or other consigned to writing, ibid.
p. 68. This is but just mentioned by Sir Charles Wolseley, and therefore he is
forced to have recourse to some other; and he has made a very good choice, no
less person than the Reverend Dean of Canterbury, Dr. Tillotson, in his Rule of
Faith: where you may find the sum of all Master Ferguson's arguments upon this
head, which are of any force; only sometimes to avoid those particular
instances, which the Dean gives, he chooses others with so little judgment,
that it would puzzle a very wise man to defend them: And it is pretty to
observe how sometimes he varies phrases, and sometimes retains the very same
expressions; as to give an instance of each.

M. F. p. 69.

I readily acknowledge, that the Articles and Precepts of Religion, may in some
cases and circumstances be safely preserved and securely conveyed down from age
to age by oral Tradition; namely when the things themselves to be preserved and
reported are few, the number of the persons to be instructed in them small; the
age of those to whom the successive communication is given, lengthened out to
several hundreds of years, etc.

Dr. Tillotson, Rule of Faith, p. 33.

We grant that oral Tradition in some circumstances may be a sufficient way of
conveying a Doctrine, etc. in the first ages of the world, when the credenda or
Articles of Religion, and the agenda or precepts of it were but few, and such
as had the evidence of natural light; when the world was contracted into a few
Families in comparison, and the age of man was ordinarily extended to six or
seven hundred years, etc.

M. F. p. 71.

I shall only add, that the tradition of the one true God, though most easy to
have been preserved, being not only short and plain, but having foundation and
evidence in the light of Nature, was nevertheless soon corrupted and defaced by
the worlds lapsing into Polytheism.

Dr. T. Ibid. p. 187.

The tradition of the one true God, which was the easiest to be preserved of
any Doctrine in the world, being short and plain; planted in every man's nature,
and perfectly suited to the reason of mankind; and yet this tradition not
having past through many hands, etc. was so defaced and corrupted, that the
world did lapse into Polytheism and Idolatry.

Where it is pleasant to observe, how Master Ferguson by altering the
expression a little, unawares falls into nonsense; that the tradition of the
one true God was corrupted and defaced by the worlds lapsing into Polytheism:
as if men first lapsed into Polytheism, and this corrupted the tradition of one
God: which is as much as to say, that men worshipped a great many Gods, while
they believed there was but one; and by this means in time forgot that there
was but one God. And indeed our Author is oftentimes very unhappy at varying
phrases, and makes either wretched English, or wretched sense of them.

Master Ferguson's next undertaking is, thirdly to prove, that no written
Records besides the Bible can lay claim to the privilege of being (...) of
Divine Inspiration: and here he considers the Ethnic Legislators, Poets, and
Philosophers; and especially the Alcoran, page 76, etc. all which is done at
large by Sir Charles Worsely, page 164, etc. of which Master Ferguson has only
given us a short and imperfect abstract.

The same may be truly affirmed of those positive media (as he calls them) by
which the Divine authority of the Scripture may be rationally demonstrated,
which indeed he has cast into a different method; but as far as I observe, has
nothing but what is particularly discoursed by Sir Charles from page 179. to
the end of the Book.

In one thing indeed Master Ferguson takes the confidence to differ from Sir
Charles, whether Miracles be always a certain demonstration of the truth of any
Doctrine? or whether God may* not sometimes permit Impostors to work Miracles
for the trial of our Faith? This latter Sir Charles affirms, Mr. Ferguson
denies; which is not civilly done to dispute such a nice point with his friend,
which he confesses is not very material, when he had borrowed from him all his
substantial and material notions. But the best of it is, Sir Charles has no
need to stand to his Courtesy in this matter, and it is well for him he has
not.

And upon this occasion I cannot but take notice, how Master Ferguson deals
with Des Carts; he charges him with affirming, Deum posse fallere, si velit,
that God can deceive, if he please. Now Sir you know very well upon what
occasion Des Carts said this; it was when in order to free his mind from the
prejudices of sense and education, and popular opinions, he set himself to
doubt, as far as possibly he could, as long as there was the least imaginable
pretense for doubting; and therefore doubts whether there be a God, or any
thing else: and whether this God be not a deceiver, etc. And Master Ferguson
might as well challenge Des Carts with denying that he himself had any body,
or that there were any external objects, such as the Sun, Moon, and Stars; as
with affirming, that God might deceive, if he pleased; for he says the one as
much as the other, while he was in this doubting humor, and only upon a design
to come to some first Principle, which he could not doubt of; and to lay the
foundations of a more certain knowledge: and therefore he immediately adds* Et
certe cum nullam occasionem habeam existimandi aliquem Deum esse deceptorent,
neo quidem adhuc satis sciam, utrum sit aliquis Deus, valde tenuis, and, ut ita
loquar, metaphysica dubitandi ratio est, quae tantum ex ea opinione dependet;
ut autem etiam illa tolletur, quamprimum occurret occasio, examinare debeo, an
sit Deus, and si sit, an possit esse deceptor, hac enim re ignorata, non videor
de ulla alia plane certus esse unquam posse, Medit. Tertia. i. e. Since I have
no occasion at all to think, that God is a deceiver; nor as yet am certain,
whether there be a God, or not, this opinion (of Gods power to deceive) is but
a very slender and metaphysical reason of doubting: However that we may remove
this too, as soon as things are ripe for that inquiry, we must examine whether
there be a God? and if there be one, whether he can be a deceiver? for while we
are ignorant of this, I cannot see how we can be thoroughly certain of an thing.
And accordingly, when in his method he had proved the being of God, he proves
too, that he cannot deceive us, and founds the truth and certainty of our
faculties upon it. And in the second objections he is charged with asserting
Deum non posse mentiri aut decipere, that God cannot lie or deceive; which they
say is contrary to the opinion of many Schoolmen. And in his Answer to these
Objections, to which Master Ferguson refers us, he owns the charge, and defends
himself from their exceptions. By this we may see, how well skilled Mr.
Ferguson is in Des Carts his Philosophy, or what a brow he has, to charge that
upon Des Carts as his professed opinion; the contrary of which he makes the
ground of all certainty.

Such another wise discourse he has, page 123. of Infallibility; the result of
which is, that our Faith is infallible, though we are not infallibly assured:
but this is beyond my first design, only I could not but take this occasion to
show you, what a man of reason this is, when he argues at his own natural rate,
and dares forsake his Masters: and it were very easy to make it appear, that
he has not one good argument, but what he has borrowed from some late Modern
Authors, who are far enough from being Fanatics; which is an excellent way of
proving, that Fanatics are great friends to Reason.

But to give you some few instances more of Mr. Ferguson's transcribing from
Modern Authors.

M. F. p. 48.

If all things be the result of matter, how comes a principle of reason to be
conveyed into us, by that which had it not inherent in it self.

Sir C. W. The unreasonableness of Atheism, page 92. The casual conjunction of
these atoms could not make the world, because it is made with a principle of
Reason; and they could not have induced such a principle by chance, unless some
way or other they had it inherent in themselves before.

M. F.

This Hypothesis supposes, that to have been the effect of chance which
carries in it the characters of a wise contrivance. Ibid.

Dr. Til. Sermon. 1. p. 40.

Nothing can be more unreasonable than obstinately to impute an effect to
chance, which carries in the very face of it all the arguments and characters
of a wise design and contrivance.

M. F.

If the fabric of the world be nothing but the result of the casual meeting,
and concatenation of Atoms, how comes it to pass, that by their daily motion
and justling one another, they do not dance themselves into more worlds. Ibid.

Sir Chapter Ibid. p. 91.

If the dancing motion of these Atoms in this fancied space did by chance first
dance the world into this form, etc. what is the reason these Atoms never
danced themselves into any thing else.

You may see Sir, what a youthful fancy Mr. Ferguson has to be so pleased with
this metaphor of dancing, which much better becomes a Gentleman than a Divine;
but yet I perceive Mr. Ferguson has so little skill in the thing, that he
spoils all these Metaphors, if he attempts to vary the least word; for I
remember I have heard some say, that justling is no very gentile way of dancing.

M. F. p. 50.

To the fortuitous jumbles of blind matter.

Dr. More's Antidote, p. 42.

From a blind fortuitous jumbling of the parts of matter.

And in the next words some body or other has put a trick on him: for thus he
proceeds. The consideration of the Fabric of things made Plato say, (...),
which I may english in the words of the Holy Ghost, that all things are made in
number, weight, and measure, which are not the words of the Holy Ghost, unless
he will acknowledge the book of Wisdom to be Canonical Scripture: for there it
is, 2 Wisdom 20.

M. F. p. 51.

What convictions are we furnished with of the Being of God, from the innate
harmony that is in the several parts of the Creation, and the convenient
disposure of all the Creatures to a subserviency to one another in mutual
offices; chance cannot have linkt one thing to another, nor can contraries
combine into a mutual coalition without the influence of a supreme Being, who
overrules them.

Sir Charles ibid. p. 42.

The natural rectitude and innate harmony of the world, and the due
subordination of things one to another, and to the whole of the world.

Direct contraries are overruled to a perfect harmony and coalition in the
propagation of the world, p. 87.

Here Mr. Ferg. has a little altered the phrase, but much for the worse; for to
combine into a coalition, I doubt is not good sense.

M. F. p. 52.

Men have rather chosen to worship any thing for a God, than wholly to be
without one.

Dr. Till. Sermon. p. 55.

Men will rather have any God than none; and rather than want a Deity will
worship any thing.

M. F. p. 53.

For not only Cicero tells us, that there is nothing so absurd, which some of
the Philosophers have not maintained: But Aristotle informs us, that there have
been some who have held, That a thing might at the same time be, and not be.

Sir Charles ibid. p. 74.

Aristotle tells us, that there were some that affirmed, A thing might be, and
might not be at the same time; and Cicero has long since told us, that nothing
could be so absurd, that had not some Philosopher for its Patron.

Now though these are very familiar sayings, yet I have reason to think that
Mr. Ferg. transcribed them out of Sir Charles, because he has not given us the
Latin and Greek of these sayings, as Sir Charles has not; which Mr. Ferg.
never fails to do, when he can come easily by it, of which we have an instance
or two in the same page.

Ferg. ibid.

Reason becomes (...), infected with those evil opinions that proceed from
lust; when men are once sunk into the greatest sensualities, their reason
becomes (...), compliant with their sensual appetites.

Mr. Smith's select Discourses, p. 15.

That reason that is within us, as Plotinus has well expressed it, becomes
more and more (...), it will be infected with those evil opinions that arise
from our corporeal life. Their highest reason is (...), complying with their
senses.

M. F. ibid.

Besides men living as if there were no God, can make no apology to the world,
but by espousing such notions, as may justify them in their courses.

Dr. Till. Sermon. p. 104.

For when men live as if there were no God, it becomes expedient for them, that
there should be none. -- Besides, that men think it some kind of apology for
their vices, that they do not act contrary to any principle they profess.

M. F. p. 63.

There has been no Nation so savage, nor people so barbarous, who have not
acknowledged some kind of external Performances necessary for the expressing of
the inward Sentiments of Devotion and Honor, which they bear to the Deity.

Amyrald of Religion, p. 2.

There is no Nation so savage -- no people who do not essay by some kind of
Performances to express the Sentiments of Devotion and Honor they bear toward
him.

M. F. p. 132.

Words that are intelligible, when they are spoken, are as intelligible when
they are written. -- Now as God can speak as plainly as any of his Creatures
can; and as words are at least as easy to be understood when they are written,
as when they are spoken; so we have no reason to think, that God affects
obscurity, or envies, that men should understand him.

Dr. Till. Rule of Faith, p. 66.

First, Whatever can be spoken in plain and intelligible words, and such as
have a certain sense may be written in the same words.

Secondly, That the same words are as intelligible, when they are written, as
when they are spoken.

Thirdly, That God if he please can indite a Book in as plain words as any of
his Creatures.

Fourthly, That we have no reason to think that God affects obscurity, and
envies, that men should understand him, etc.

M. F. p. 140.

Nor is it any argument, that these Texts of Scripture are not easy to be
understood, because some out of prejudice or perverseness have wrested them to
a corrupt sense; seeing God did not endite the Bible for the froward or
captious, but for such who will read it with a free and unprejudiced mind, and
are willing to come to the knowledge of the truth.

Dr. Till. ibid. p. 87.

And what if some out of prejudice do mistake, or out of perverseness do wrest
the plainest Texts of Scripture, etc. Is this any argument that those Texts are
not sufficiently plain? Can any thing be spoken or written in words so clear,
which a perverse or prejudiced mind shall not be able to vex and force to
another meaning? God did not write the Scriptures for the froward and the
captious, but for those who will read them with a free and unprejudiced mind,
and are willing to come to the knowledge of the truth.

M. F. p. 148.

We have the attestation of Reason, which tells us, that nothing is well known,
but by that, which has a just analogy to it, (...), every thing is best
understood by that which bears a resemblance of it; things of sense and life
are only known by vital and sentient faculties.

As the eye cannot behold the Sun (...), unless it have some resemblance of the
Sun in it self; no more can any man understand the things of God in a due
manner, (...), unless he be made to partake of the Divine Image.

Mr. Smith's select Discourses, p. 2.

All things of sense and life are best known by sentient and vital faculties,
(...), every thing is best known by that which bears a just resemblance and
analogy with it.

And as the eye cannot behold the Sun (...), unless it be Sun-like, and has
the form and resemblance of the Sun drawn in it; so neither can the Soul of man
behold God (...), unless it be God-like, has God formed in it, and be made
partaker of the Divine Nature.

Where by the change of one little word he has spoiled all; for it is true as
Mr. Smith says, that things of life and sense are best known by sentient and
vital faculties; but it is false to say as Mr. Ferguson does, that they are
only known this way: for there is a Philosophical Knowledge of Sounds and
Colors, as well as a Sensitive Knowledge of them: And Mr. Ferguson
acknowledges, that a bad man may have a true knowledge of the meaning of
Scripture, though he have not a vital sense of Religion. So easily may an
ignorant Scribler spoil the best Sayings of Wise men.

Thus, Sir, it is pleasant to observe how Mr. Ferguson has borrowed all his
Arguments, that are worth any thing, against Descartes his Philosophy, from
Dr. More, with a little variation, that I have reason to think, that he never
read ten lines in Descartes.

M. F.

The Anonymous Author of Philosophia Scripturae interpres after all his operose
and impertinent wrangling -- Only instead of Reason, we have Philosophy
advanced to a Dictatorship over the Word of God, and Descartes made Master of
the Chair. 158.

Dr. More's divine Dialogues 1 part, in the Preface.

The learned Author of Philosophia Scripturae Interpres after an operose,
subtle and copious endeavor of evincing, that Philosophy is the best
interpreter of Scripture, as if all that pains had been intended in the behalf
of Descartes, to set him in the infallible Chair. --

M. F. p. 249.

Nor will I press his ( Descartes) discharging all spirits from place, though
that seems consequentially to discharge them from being.

See Dr. More's first Dialogue, p. 136. etc.

M. F.

Nor will I dwell upon his disbanding all Final Causes out of the precincts of
Natural Philosophy.

Dr. More ibid. Preface.

A third property of his Philosophy is a seeming modesty in declining all
search into the final causes of the Phenomenon of the World. --

M. F. ibid. p. 250.

His attempting to prove, that all the Phenomenon of the Universe might arise
out of matter by mere mechanical motion, and that matter alone, supposing such
a degree of motion communicated to it -- could have produced the Sun, Moon,
Stars, Planets, Animals, and the Bodies of Men in such Organization, Order,
Beauty and Harmony, as now they are.

Dr. More ibid.

It is a confessed principle with him, that matter alone with such a degree of
motion, as is supposed now in the Universe, will produce all the Phenomenon of
the World, Sun, Moon, and Stars, Air, Water, Earth, Planets, Animals, and the
Bodies of men, in such order and orginazation, as they are found.

M. F. ibid

Neither will I dwell upon his notion of the Conflict between the Flesh and the
Spirit, which the Scripture so emphatically mentions; namely, that it is
nothing but the repugnancy of those motions, which the Body by its Spirits, and
the Soul by her Will endeavor to excite at the same time in the glandula
pinealis, or little Kernel, where he supposes the Soul to be harbored and
seated: as if the whole conflict which the Holy Ghost so solemnly describes
under the notion of a war betwixt the law of our members, etc. were nothing
else, but that the Kernel in the midst of the Brain being driven on one side by
the Soul, and on the other by the animal Spirits -- when the corporeal Spirits
by their rude joggings of the glandulous button, endeavor to excite in the
Soul a desire of any thing, and the Soul repels it by the Will she has to
avoid the same thing, this constitutes the war, etc.

Dr. More ibid.

The Combat betwixt the superior and inferior part of the Soul, the Flesh and
the Spirit, as they are termed in Scripture and Divinity, is at last resolved
into the ridiculous noddings and joggings of a small glandulous button in the
midst of the Brain, encountered by the animal Spirits rudely flurting against
it. This little sprunt Champion called the Conarion, within which the Soul is
entirely cooped up, acts the part of the Spirit, and the animal Spirits of the
Flesh; and thus by the Soul thus ingarrisoned in this Pine-kernel, and bearing
her self against the arietations and jurrings of the Spirits in the Ventricles
of the Brain, must that solemn Combat be performed which the Holy Ghost calls
the war, etc.

Sometimes, Sir, our Author pretends to ancient Learning, and to give an
account of the original of Heresies from the Pagan Philosophy; and for this he
is beholden to Mr. Gale, in his Preface to the Court of the Gentiles, part 2.
which I shall give you a short view of.

M. F. p. 242.

And not to insist on the ill influence that the Phoenician and Chaldaick
Philosophy had on the Iudaick Theology, though it be of easy proof, that their
Planetary Deities and Teraphims sprung from thence; not to do any more but
mention, that the chief errors of the Pharisees, Sadducees, and Esseans took
their rise from the Grecian Philosophy, their Dogms being a mixture of
Pythagorean, Platonic, Stoic, and Epicurean Notions.

Mr. Gale Pref.

We shall begin with the malignant contagion, which the Judaick Church received
from vain Philosophy: So long as the Judaick Theology continuod under its own
native habit -- it retained its primitive Purity -- But whence sprung this
(declension) but from the Phaenician and Chaldaick Philosophy, touching
Planetary Deities, and Demons, called by the Phaenicians Baalim. We no way
doubt but to demonstrate, that the main errors of the Pharisees, Sadducees,
and other Judaick Heretics received their first formation, etc. from Grecian
Philosophy, especially the Pythagorean.

M. F. ibid.

Both Irenaeus and Tertullian affirm the errors of the Gnostics to have
sprung from the Platonic Idea's, though I think it not improbable, that both
their (...) and (...) took their birth from Pythagoreanism.

Gale.

From whence borrowed they (the Gnostics) their (...) -- but from the
Mythologick and Symbolick Philosophy of the Pythagoreans.

M. F. 243.

Hierom assures us, that Pelagius sucked all his Doctrines from the Philosophy
of Pythagoras and Zeno, and Iansenius fully proves it.

Gale.

Had not the Pelagian Heresy the same pestiferous root: this is incomparably
well demonstrated by Jansenius, etc.

M. F. ibid.

Nor did Samosatenus and Arrius derive their blasphemous opinions concerning
the Deity of Christ, save from the Platonic Philosophy.

Gale.

Where had Paulus Samosatenus his blasphemous infusions but from Plotinus? And
did not Arrius in like manner derive his blasphemous persuasions touching
Christ, from the same poisoned fountain?

M. F.

It was not therefore without cause, that Tertullian styled the Philosophers
the Patriarks of Heretics.

Gale.

This Tertullian was greatly sensible of, and therefore styles the Philosophers
the Patriarks of Heretics.

M. F. 245.

The Platonic School at Alexandria was the Seminary of the chiefest and most
pestilent errors vented in the Church during the four first Centuries.

Gale.

Vain Philosophy was the chief Seminary of Errors broached in the four first
Centuries after Christ. -- Samosatenus learnt his blasphemies from Plotinus,
successor to Ammonius in his School of Alexandria, -- Origin Scholar to
Ammonius in his School of Alexandria.

M. F. p. 243.

Holstenius has shown us, how the Manichean Principles were framed from the
Pythagorean.

Dr. Parker Plat. Theology, p. 89.

Holstenius has made a parallel between the Pythagorean and Manichean
Principles.

M. F. 245.

Ioannes Baptista Crispus has wrote a Discourse of Plato's Opinions, and has
at the end of every Chapter shown, what Heresies sprung from each.

Dr. Parker ibid.

Johannes Baptista Crispus in his discussing of Plato's opinions, has at the
end of every Chapter shown, what Heresies sprung from each opinion.

M. F. p. 244.

The Popish (...), or Saint-worship, is nothing but an imitation of the (...),
or Daemon-worship of the Pagan Philosophers.

Gale ibid.

The whole Papal (...), or Saint-worship, is but an imitation of the Pagan
(...), or Daemon-worship.

M. F. p. 245.

The purity and simplicity of the Gospel was no less corrupted by blending the
Dogms of Aristotle with the Articles of Faith, than it had been by mingling the
Philosophy of Pythagoras and Plato with the Doctrines of Christ.

Dr. Parker ibid.

They have in the same manner corrupted the simplicity and purity of Christian
Religion by blending the Placits of Aristotle with the Articles of Faith, as
Manes and Valentinus did by mingling with the Christian Faith the Philosophy of
Plato and Pythagoras.

M. F. 247.

Corrupted into an artificial kind of wrangling, and degererated into
contentions and unprofitable altercations.

Gale ibid.

Corrupted into an artificial kind of contentious disputation -- and wrangling
dispute.

I doubt, Sir, you already censure me for a very idle person, who can spend my
time in such an unprofitable pursuit of this Author; and therefore though I can
scarce open an English Author of any account, without making some new
discoveries of Mr. Ferguson's pilfering humor, I shall now for a conclusion
principally confine my self to his discourse of Metaphors, Chap 2. which he has
almost entirely stole from Vossius and Glassius, not excepting his Greek and
Latin Citations, with which he makes such a flourish and boast of Learning.

M. F. p. 283.

Origin especially seems to have made it his business to find out Mystical and
Cabbalistical Senses in the plainest parts of Scripture, which made one of the
Ancients themselves say of him, Ingenii lusus pro Dei mysteriis venditat; he
obtrudes the sportings of his fancy for religious and sacred Mysteries: and as
another expresses it, Ingenii sui acumina putat esse Ecclesiae. Sacramenta.
This practice of some Primitive Writers in and about the Scripture influenced
Porphyrius to deride the Gospel, as containing nothing* certain in it.

Glass. Philologia sacra, p. 298.

Intolerabilis est Origenis -- audacia, qui omnia omnino quantumlibet
simpliciter dicta in allegorias mutavit, unde Hieronimus justisfime de eo
conqueritur, Ingenium suum facit Ecclesiae Sacramentum; and alius haud
ignobilis pater, Origines sui ingenii lusus pro Dei mysteriis venditar.

At que haec Scripturas interpretandi, vel torquendi potius ratio* Porphyrium
induxit olim, ut irrideret Christianam doctrinam, and scriberet eam nihil
habere certi.

M. F. 298.

This may serve as an apology for Aristotle's confounding Synechdoches and
Allegories with Metaphors: (...). Which occasioned Cicero to observe, that
Aristotle* used the term Metaphor in a larger acceptance than
after-Rhetoricians are wont to take it.

Which account of Cicero and Aristotle, together with the Greek Quotation, you
have in Vossius Instir. Orat. lib. 4. p. 84.

M. F. Ibid.

Terms thus applied are called by Hermogenes (...)

Glass. lib. 5. p. 1045.

Unde Hermogeni, (...)

M. F. p. 301.

In every Metaphor three things are carefully to be attended to, the original
and proper signification of the word, the signification to which it is
transferred, and the similitude, analogy, and proportion, etc.

Voss. ibid. lib. 4. p. 85.

In omni metaphora tria requiruntur, significatio propria, aliena, and
similitudo aut proportio.

M. F. Ibid.

Christ is not only metaphorically styled a Lion, but Tyrants are likewise so
denominated, whereas cruelty and salvageness are the reason of transferring the
term to the latter, so fortitude and victoriousness are the grounds of applying
it to the other.

Glass. ibid. p. 1113.

Leo ad Christum significandum transfertur, and ad impios and tyrannos,
Christus Leo dicitur ob fortitudinem and victoriam, tyranni ob atrocitatem and
rapacitatem.

His distinctions between a Metaphor and other Tropes and Parables are all
taken out of Glassius and Vossius.

M. F. p. 305.

By a Parable I mean a Symbolick form of speech, where by a well appropriated
similitude from some feigned story, some moral truth is insinuated to the minds
of men to make it the better apprehended and understood.

Gale Court of the Gentiles, part 2. p. 97. cited from Diodate.

This was a fashion of teaching used among the Jews, followed by our Lord, and
very profitable to make the truth understood, and to insinuate the apprehension
thereof into the minds of the auditors, by a well appropriated similitude,
taken from a feigned story.

His discourse of Allegories, which immediately follows, is principally owing
to Glassius, p. 1395. and whether he has not taken not only his Notions, but
his Greek words and sayings concerning those descriptions of God which we call
Anthropopathies, from the same Author, I will leave any man to judge who will
compare them.

M. F. p. 315.

Under Metaphors are comprehended (...), in which humane parts, etc. are
ascribed to God; in such forms of speech God by a (...) or condescension,
declares the infinite properties of his nature. -- (...), He decyphers what
himself is, and does by things that fall under our apprehension; and what is
thus said of God (...) and (...), after the manner of men, must be understood
of him (...), in a way suitable to the Divine Nature.

Glassius p. 1116.

(...) est metaphora, qua quod creaturis and praesertim homini proprie
competit, ad Deum transfertur, vocatur and (...) condescensio -- v -- (...) and
(...) quae de Deo dicuntur, (...), h. est, convenienter Deo intelligenda sunt.

I confess, Sir, I am very sick of this undertaking; for it is so far from
being pleasant, that it is grievous to me, to write one line merely to expose
any man: but I thought it necessary to take down the confidence of this Author,
who makes a great show of ancient and modern Learning, by transcribing out of
some late Writers, whose credit and reputation at the same time he endeavors
to undermine. I am glad to find, that he reads so good Books, which I doubt
not, but would make him wiser in time, if he would consider, as well as read:
It is no fault indeed to use those arguments, which have been used by other
men, and it is possible sometimes to hit upon the very same expressions, or
some very like; but when a man shall run through a book, and take the whole
Series of Arguments, without owning his Masters; when he shall take out whole
Sentences and Paragraphs out of so many Authors, of so vastly different styles,
it plainly discovers an empty Head, a barren Fancy, and a vainglorious Mind*

It were easy to transcribe a great part of Glassius and Vossius, concerning
the nature and use of Metaphors and Allegories, and the rules of expounding
them, which Mr. Ferguson has only translated, and from whence he has borrowed
his Greek and Latin Citations, out of ancient and modern Authors, but I
consider this would too much swell a Letter, and you may do it your self if you
have the curiosity: And therefore I shall only farther observe, that whereas
this Author falls upon Dr. Parker at every turn, and challenges, and provokes
and scorns him; there is no Person whom he does so much Ape, as the Doctor: He
borrows diverse of his expressions from him, gaudy Metaphors, fantastic
Allegories* thwacking Contradictions, rampant and empty Schemes of Speech, and
the like; and many times transcribes whole Sentences and Paragraphs from him,
of which I have given some instances above, and shall add but two or three
more here.

M. F. p. 133.

Heraclitus grew famous by the only obscurity of his writings. It is said of
Aristotle* that being reproved by Alexander for publishing his Acroamaticks, he
should make this reply, that they were (...)* made public, yet they were
(...), not published.

Dr. Parker Plat. Theol. p. 70.

Neither is Heraclitus his name (...) because of the obscurity of his writings,
less famous; and no less common is Aristotle's Epistle (...). Plut. in Alex.
to Alexander, that though he had made his books public, yet he had not
published them.

Where because he would not say the very same thing that the Dr. did, he runs
into a very ridiculous mistake. For though Heraclitus* his name (...) was
famous, because of the obscurity of his writings, yet it is a wild conceit,
that the obscurity of his writings was the only thing that made him famous.

M. F. p. 321.

When any thing is manifested by a Metaphor, the thing it self is not fully
expressed, but only some similitude between it and another.

Dr. Parker ibid. p. 75.

When any is expressed by a Metaphor, the thing it self is not expressed, but
only some similitude observed or made by fancy.

M. F. p. 323.

For men to discourse in metaphorical terms of things, whose nature and
properties they are wholly ignorant of, is plainly to trifle; seeing while we
know not the true Idea's of things, we can only imagine some resemblances.

Dr. Parker ibid.

To discourse of the nature of things in metaphorical terms, is to sport and
trifle; but it is still more fantastic, to talk metaphorically of those
things, of whose Idea's we are utterly ignorant.

Nay, Sir, it is still more pleasant to observe, that our Author cannot
complement his Patron without imitating Dr. Parker: For whoever reads Mr.
Ferguson's Dedication to Mr. Papilion, and Dr. Parkers to Dr. Bathurst, will*
find that the manner of Address, the Composition, Complement, and Fancy is Dr
Parkers, though Mr. Ferguson has a little varied the words.

M. F. Ep. dedic.

Sir, it cost me no long deliberation to whom I should direct these discourses,
the obligations I am under to you, and your Family, rendering them yours by the
title of a just debt, the interest you have in me by an entail of peculiar
kindnesses, gives you a right to my Studies, and the fruits of them.

Dr. P. Ded. of his Plat. Theol.

Reverend Sir,

I shall not need to argue the decency and fitness of this address -- because
your absolute and unalienable right to all the fruits of my Studies, has made
it due and necessary.

M. F.

The declining the imputation of ingratitude is my plea for prefixing your name
to these Papers.

Dr. Parker.

I cannot alienate any thing that is theirs from being yours, without being
guilty at once of the greatest injustice and ingratitude

M. F.

Though the concerning you in their behalf may seem an injury, yet not to have
done it, would have been a crime.

Dr. Parker.

So that if to present you with so mean a trifle be unhandsome, yet not to have
done it would have been unjust.

M. F.

You must be content to forgive such offenses, as your self have made the
result and effects of duty.

Dr. Parker.

Though I do but injure your name by concerning its Authority in behalf of so
worthless a trifle, yet an injury, that is the result of duty and gratitude,
may hope for not only your pardon, but (Sir, such is your candor) your
acceptance too.

M. F.

Were there any indecency in this address, yet the laws of gratitude supersede
those of congruity.

Dr. Parker.

The obligations of duty cancel all the laws of indecency.

This, Sir, I hope is enough to satisfy the world of Mr. Ferguson's great
Learning, and how he came by it: It had been very easy to have given many more
instances of this nature, but I took those which came first to hand: I need
make no reflections upon the whole* since you have done it so well already; and
therefore have no more to do, but to subscribe my self

Your very affectionate Friend and Brother, VV. Sherlock.


