Their HIGHNESS the Prince and Princess OF ORANGE's OPINION About a GENERAL
Liberty of Conscience, etc. Being a Collection of FOUR SELECT PAPERS, VIZ. I.
Mijn Here Fagel' s First Letter to Mr. Stewart. II. Reflections on Monsieur
Fagel's Letter. III. Fagel's Second Letter to Mr. Stewart. IV. Some Extracts,
out of Mr. Stewart's Letters, which were communicated to Mijn Here Fagel.
Together with some References to Mr. Stewart's Printed Letter.


LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Richard Janeway, in Queens-head-alley
in Paternoster Row. 1689.

A LETTER, Writ by Mijn Here FAGEL, Pensioner of Holland, to Mr. James Stewart,
Advocate; Giving an Account of the Prince and Princess of Orange's thoughts
concerning the Repeal of the Test, and the Penal Laws.
SIR,
I Am extreme sorry, that my ill health has so long hindered me from Answering
those Letters, in which you so earnestly desired to know of me, what their
Highnesses thoughts are, concerning the Repeal of the Penal Laws, and more
particularly of that concerning the Test: I beg you to assure your self, that I
will deal very plainly with you in this matter, and without Reserve, since you
say that your Letters was writ by the King's knowledge and allowance. I must
then first of all assure you very positively, that their Highnesses have often
declared, as They did more particularly to the Marquis of Albeville, His
Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary to the States, that it is their Opinion, That no
Christian ought to be persecuted for his Conscience, or be ill used because he
differs from the public and and established Religion: And therefore, they can
consent, that the Papists in England, Scotland and Ireland be suffered to
continue in their Religion, with as much Liberty as is allowed them by the
States in these Provinces; in which it cannot be denied, that they en^^y a full
Liberty of Conscience. And as for the Dissenters, Their Highnesses do not only
consent, but do heartily approve of their having an entire Liberty, for the
full Exercise of their Religion, without any trouble or hindrance; so that none
may be able to give them the least disturbance upon that account.

And their Highnesses are very ready, in case His Majesty shall think fit to
desire it, to declare their willingness to concur in the settling, and
confirming this Liberty, and as far as it lies in them, they will protect and
defend it, and according to the Language of Treaties, They will confirm it with
their Guarranty, of which you made mention in yours.

And if His Majesty shall think fit fuether to desire their concurrence in the
Repealing of the Penal Laws, They are ready to give it; provided always that
those Laws remain still in their full vigor, by which the R. Catholics are
shut out of both Houses of Parliament, and out of all public Employments,
Ecclesiastical, Civil and Military; as likewise all those other Laws, which
confirm the Protestant Religion, and which secures it against all the attempts
of the Roman Catholics.

But Their Highnesses cannot agree to the Repeal of the Test, or of those other
Penal Laws last mentioned, that tend to the security of the Protestant
Religion; since the R. Catholics receive no other prejudice from these, than
the being excluded from Parliaments, or from public Employments. And that by
them the Protestant Religion is covered from all the Designs of the R.
Catholics against it, or against the public safety; And neither the Test nor
these other Laws can be said to carry in them any severity against the Roman
Catholics upon account of their Consciences: They are only Provisions
qualifying men to be Members of Parliament, or to be capable of bearing Office;
by which they must declare before God and Men, that they are for the Protestant
Religion. So that indeed, all this amounts to no more than a securing the
Protestant Religion from any Prejudices that it may receive from the R.
Catholics.

Their Highnesses have thought and do still think, that more than this ought
not to be asked, or expected from Them: since by this means, the R. Catholics
and their Posterity will be for ever secured from all trouble in their Persons
or Estates, or in the Exercise of their Religion; and that the Roman Catholics
ought to be satisfied with this, and not to disquiet the Kingdom because they
cannot be admitted to sit in Parliament, or to be in Employments; or because
those Laws, in which the security of the Protestant Religion does chiefly
consist, are not repealed, by which they may be put in a condition to overturn
it.

Their Highnesses do also believe, that the Dissenters will be fully satisfied
when they shall be for ever covered from all danger of being disturbed, or
punished for the free Exercise of their Religion, upon any sort of pretense
whatsoever.

Their Highnesses having declared themselves so positively in these matters, it
seems very plain to me, that They are far from being any hindrance to the
Freeing the Dissenters from the severity of the Penal Laws; since they are
ready to use their utmost endeavors for the establishing of it; nor do they at
all press the denying to the Roman Catholics the exercise of their Religion,
provided it be managed modestly, and without Pomp or Ostentation. As for my own
part, I ever was and still am very much against all those, who would persecute
any Christian because he differs from the public and established Religion: And
I hope by the Grace of God to continue still in the same mind; for since that
Light, with which Religion illuminates our mind, is according to my sense of
things, purely an effect of the Mercy of God to us, we ought then, as I think,
to render to God all possible Thanks for his Goodness to us: and to have Pity
for those who are still shut up in Error, even as God has pitied us, and to put
up most earnest prayers to God, for bringing those into the way of Truth, who
stray from it, and to use all gentle and friendly methods for reducing them to
it.

But I confess, I could never comprehend how any that profess themselves
Christians, and that may enjoy their Religion freely and without any
disturbance, can judge it lawful for them to go about to disturb the Quiet of
any Kingdom or State, or to overturn Constitutions, that so they themselves may
be admitted to Employments, and that those Laws in which the Security and Quiet
of the Established Religion consists, should be shaken.

It is plain, that the Reformed Religion is by the Grace of God and by the Laws
of the Land, enacted by both King and Parliament, the public and established
Religion both in England, Scotland and Ireland and that it is provided by those
Laws, that none can be admitted either to a place in Parliament, or to any
public Employment except those that do openly declare, that they are of the
Protestant Religion, and not Roman Catholics; and it is also provided by those
Laws, that the Protestant Religion shall be in all time coming secured from the
Designs of the Roman Catholics against it; in all which I do not see, that
these Laws contain any Severity, either against the Persons or Estates of those
who cannot take those Tests, that are contrary to the Roman Catholic Religion;
all the inconveniences that can redound to them from thence, is, that their
Persons, their Estates, and even the Exercise of their Religion being assured
to them, only they can have no share in the Government, nor in Offices of
^rust, as long as their Consciences do not allow them to take these Tests: and
they are not suffered to do any thing that is to the prejudice of the Reformed
Religion.

Since, as I have already told you, Their Highnesses are ready to concur with
his Majesty for the Repeal of those Penal Laws, by which men are made liable to
fines or other Punishments.

So I see there Remains no difficulty concerning the Repealing the Penal Laws,
but only this, that some would have the Roman Catholics, rendered capable of
all public Trusts and Employments, and that by consequence, all those should
be repealed that have secured the Protestane Religion against the designs of
the R. Catholics, where others at the same time are not less earnest to have
those Laws maintained in their full and due vigor; and think, that the chief
security of the established Religion consists in the preserving of them sacred
and unshaken.

It is certain, that there is no Kingdom, Commonwealth, or any constituted body
or Assembly whatsoever, in which there are not Laws made for the safety
thereof; and that provide against all Attempts whatsoever, that disturb their
Peace, and that prescribe the Conditions and Qualities that they judge
necessary for all that shall bear Employments in that Kingdom, State or
Corporation: And no man can pretend, that there is any Injury done him, that he
is not admitted to Employments when he does not satisfy the Conditions and
Qualities required.

Nor can it be denied, that there is a great difference to be observed in the
conduct of those of the Reformed Religion, and of the Roman Catholics toward
one another: The Roma Catholics not being satisfied to exclude the Reformed
from all places of profit or of Trust, they do absolutely suppress the whole
Exercise of that Religion, and severely persecute all that profess it; and this
they do in all those places where it is safe and without danger, to carry on
that rigor. And I am sorry that we have at this present so many deplorable
Instances of this severity before our eyes, that is at the same time put in
practice in so many different places.

I would therefore gladly see one single good reason to move a Protestant that
fears God, and that is concerned for his Religion, to consent to the Repealing
of those Laws that have been enacted by the Authority of King and Parliament,
which have no other tendency but to the security of the Reformed Religion, and
to the restraining of the Roman Catholics from a capacity of overturning it;
these Laws inflict neither Fines nor Punishments, and do only exclude the Roman
Catholics from a share in the Government, who by being in Employments must
needs study to increase their Party, and to gain to it more Credit and Power,
which by what we see every day, we must conclude, will be extremely dangerous
to the Reformed Religion, and must turn to its great prejudice: since in all
places, those that are in public Employments, do naturally Favor that
Religion of which they are, either more or less. And who would go about to
persuade me or any man else to endeavor to move Their Highnesses, whom God
has honored so far as to make them the Protectors of his Church, to approve
of, or to consent to things so hurtful, both to the Reformed Religion and to
the public safety. Nor can I, Sir, with your good leave, in any way grant what
you apprehend, That no prejudice will thereby redound to the Reformed Religion.

I know it is commonly said the number of the Roman Catholics in England and
Scotland is very inconsiderable; and that they are possessed only of a very
small number of the places of Trust: tho even as to this, the case is quite
different in Ireland: yet this you must of necessity grant me, that if their
numbers are small, then it is not reasonable that the public Peace should be
disturbed on the account of so few persons, especially when so great a favor
may be offered to them; such as the free Exercise of their Religion would be:
and if their numbers are greater, then there is so much the more reason to be
afraid of them; I do indeed believe that Roman Catholics, as things at
present stand, will not be very desirous to be in public Offices and
Employments, nor that they will make any attempts upon the Reformed Religion,
both because this contrary to Law, and because of the great Inconveniences that
this may bring at some other time both on their Persons, and their Estates: yet
if the Restraints of the Law were once taken off, you would see them brought
into the Government, and the chief Offices and Places of Trust would be put in
thnir hands; no will it be easy to His Majesty to resist them in this, how
steadfast soever he may be; for they will certainly press him hard in it, and
they will represent this to the King, as a matter in which His Conscience will
be concerned; and when they are possessed of the Public Offices, what will be
left for the Protestants to do, who will find no more the support of the Law,
and can expect little Encouragement from such Magistrates? and on the other
hand, the Advantages that the R. Catholics would find in being thus set loose
from all Restraints, are so plain, that it were a loss of time to go about the
proving it. I neither can or will doubt of the sincerity of His Majesty's
intentions, and that He has no other design before Him in this matter, but that
all his Subjects may enjoy in all things the same Rights and Freedoms.

But plain Reason, as well as the Experience of all Ages, the present as well
as the past shows, that it will be impossible for R. Catholics and
Protestants, when they are mixed together in places of Trust and public
Employments, to live together peaceably, or to maintain a good Correspondence
together. They will be certainly always jealous of one another; For the
Principles and the Maxims of both Religions are so opposite to one another,
that in my opinion I do not see how it will be in the power of any Prince or
King whatsoever, to keep down those Suspicions and Animosities, which will be
apt to arise upon all occasions.

As for that which you apprehend, that the Dissenters shall not be delivered
from the Penal Laws that are made against them, unless at the same time the
Test be likewise repealed: This will be indeed a great unhappiness to them; but
the Roman Catholics are only to blame for it, who will rather be content that
they and their Posterity should lie still under the weight of the Penal Laws,
and exposed to the hatred of the whole Nation, than be still restrained from a
capacity of attempting any thing against the Peace and the Security of the
Protestans Religion, And be deprived of that small advantage (if it is at all
to be reckoned one) of having a share in the Government and public
Employments; since in all places of the World his has been always the
privilege of the Religion that is established by Law; and indeed these
Attempts of the Roman Catholics ought to be so much the more suspected and
guarded against by Protestants, in that they see that Roman Catholics, even
when liable to the Severity of Penal Laws, do yet endeavor to persuade his
Majesty, to make the Protestants, whether they will or not, dissolve that
Security which they have for their Religion: and to clear a way for bringing in
the Roman Catholics to the Government, and to public Employments: in which
case there would remain no relief for them but what were to be expected from a
Roman Catholic Government.

Such then will be very unjust to their Highnesses, who shall blame them for
any Inconveniency that may arise from thence; since they have declared
themselves so freely on this subject, and that so much to the advantage even of
the Roman Catholics. And since the Settlement of matters sticks at this single
point, that Their Highnesses cannot be brought to consent to things that are so
contrary to Laws already in being, and that are so dangerous and so hurtful to
the Protestant Religion, as the admitting of Roman Catholics to a share in the
Government, and to places of Trust, and the Repealing of those Laws, that can
have no other effect but the securing of the Protestant Religion from all the
Attempts of the Roman Catholics against it would be.

You write, That the Roman Catholics in these provinces are not shut out from
the Employments and places of Trust; But in this you are much mistaken. For our
Laws are express, excluding them by name from all share in the Government, and
from all Employments either of the Policy or Justice of our Country. It is
true, I do not know of any express Law, that shuts them out of Military
Employments; that had indeed been hard, since in the first Formation of our
State they joined with us in defending our public Liberty, and did us eminent
service during the Wars; therefore they were not shut out from those Military
Employments; for the public safety was no way endangered by this, both because
their numbers that served in our Troops were not great, and because the States
could easily prevent any Inconvenience that might arise out of that; which
could not have been done so easily, if the Roman Catholics had been admitted
to a Share in the Government, and in the Policy or Justice of our State

I am very certain of this, of which I could give very good proofs, that there
is nothing which Their Highnesses desire so much, as that His Majesty may Reign
happily, and in an entire Confidence with his Subjects; and that His subjects
being persuaded of His Majesty's fatherly affection to them, may be ready to
make him all the returns of Duty that are in th^^^ Power. But their Highnesses
are convinced in their Consciences, that both the Protestant Religion, and the
safety of the Nation, will be exposed to most certain Dangers, if either the
Test, or those other Penal Laws, of which I have made frequent mention, should
be Repealed; Therefore they cannot consent to this, nor concur with His
Majesty's Will; for they believe, they should have much to Answer for to God,
if the consideration of any present advantages should carry them to consent and
concur in things which they believe would be not only dangerous, but
mischievous to the Protestant Religion.

Their Highnesses have ever paid a most profound Duty to His Majesty whcih
they will always continue to do; for they consider themselves bound to it, both
by the Laws of God, and of Nature: But since the matter that is now in hand,
relates not to the making of new Laws, but to the total Repealing of those
already made both by King and Parliament: They do not see how it can be
expected of them, that they should consent to such a Repeal, to which they have
so just an aversion, as being a thing that is contrary to the Laws and Customs
of all Christian States, whether Protestants or Papists, who receive ^one to a
share in the Government, or to public Employments, but those who profess the
public and established Religion, and that take care to secure it against all
attempts whatsoever.

I do not think it necessary to demonstrate to you how much their Highnesses
are devoted to His Majesty, of which they have given such real Evidences as are
beyond all verbal ones; and they are resolved still to continue in the same
Duty and Affection; or rather to increase it, if that is possible.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
November. 4. 1687. Amsterdam, Printed in the Year 168^
Reflections on Monsieur Fagel's Letter.
SIR,
I Shall endeavor to answer yours as fully and briefly as possible.

1. You desire to know whether the Letter I sent you be truly Monsieur Fagel's
or not.

2. Whether their Highnesses gave him Commission to write it.

3. How far the Dissenters may rely on their Highnesses word.

4. What effects it has on all sorts of People.

Sir, Roman Catholics may be pardoned if they endeavor to make that Letter
pass for an Imposture, it is their Interest so to do, and they are seldom
wanting to promote that, let the methods be never so indirect which they are
forced to make use of: It does indeed spoil many hopeful projects of theirs.
But how any Protestant among us can really doubt the truth of it, is strange to
me. Some things carry their own evidence along with them: I take this Letter to
be one of that kind. I do not desire you to believe me upon my bare affirmation
that I know it to be genuine, (tho this be most true) but shall offer my
Reasons to convince you that it cannot be otherways.

First, The Letter is like its Author, the Matter is weighty, the Reasoning
solid, the Style grave, full and clear, like that of a Lawyer: It has an Air
all over, which as well shows the Religion and Temper of its Writer, as the
Matter and Method of it do his Capacity and Judgment. Now all these Qualities
make up the Character of Monsieur Fagel.

Secondly, There are the same grounds to believe this Letter to be M. Fagel's,
as there are to believe any thing you have not seen, viz. The constant
Asseverations of Persons of undoubted Credit that come from Holland, who all
agree in it, and assure us of it. M. Fagel owned it to several English
Gentlemen, and many both here and in Holland knew two months ago that such a
Letter was written; a Forgery would before this time have been detected,
esecially such a one as ruins the Designs of the Triumphing Party.

Thirdly, It was written by M. Fagel in Answer to Letters from Mr. Stewart,
sent by His Majesty's special Orders, and Mr. Stewart has both an English and
Latin Copy sent him: Therefore the English Copy is not called a Translation,
but it is a sort of Original; for you are not to doubt but the matter was
ordered so, that her Royal Highness might peruse it as well as his Majesty.

In the next place you would know whether their Highnesses gave Order to
Monsieur Fagel to write it.

I wish Sir, you would take the pains to read the Letter over again, and
consider who this Monsieur Fagel is; He is Pensionary of Holland, and first
Ministor of State, raised to that Dignity by the Prince's Favor, he Answers
Letters written to him, which are ordered by His Majesty to be communicated to
their Highnesses. In his Answer, he gives an Aceount of their Highnesses
Opinions about the Repeal of the Penal Laws and Test; Matters of a National
Concern, and of the greatest Importance. Now you must have a strange Opinion of
Monsieur Fagel, if you think him capable of so great an indiscretion (or rather
Imposture) as to write such a Letter of his own Head. The Letter it self
Demonstrates, that whoever writ it is no Fool, and the Circumstances I have
marked show that he is no Knave. And indeed the substance of it is not new, it
only repeats to His Majesty the same Answer which the Prince and Princess had
formerly given to His Majesty's Envoy there.

In short, you may leave the whole Matter to this plain issue: if this Letter
be a false one it will be disowned, if a true one it will be owned. Their
Highnesses love not to do things that will not bear the Light. It is Evident,
they did not intend the Matter of it should be a Secret, having told it to
Monsieur d'Albeville, as often as he (in his Discreet Way) necessitated them to
do it. But how it came to be Printed, I cannot inform you justly; however you
shall have my conjecture.

I remember as soon as it was noised about Town, that Mr. Stewart had received
a Letter of such a Nature from Monsieur Fagel, care was taken that the Writer
of the Common News Letters which are dispersed over the Kingdom, should insert
in them that their Highnesses had declared, themselves for the Repeal of the
Test. This Pias Fraus might, I suppose, give Occasion to the Printing of the
Letter, as the Wisdom and Policy of our Statesmen (in putting Mr. Stewart on
Writing such Letters) had procured it: I say Letters, for Monsieur Fagel had
five or six on that subject before he answered, so unwilling were they in
Holland to return an Answer, since they could not give one that was pleasing,
or do any thing that looked like meddling.

The third Thing you desired to be satisfied in, is, Whether the Dissenters may
rely on their Highnesses Word. I am as apt to mistrust Princes Promises as you
are. But shall now give you my reasons, why I think the Dissenters may safely
do it. And at the same time, because of the Affinity of the matter, I will tell
you why I think we may all rely on their Highnesses for our Civil Liberties, as
well as the Dissenters may do for Liberty of Conscience. Much of what I have to
say is equally applicable to them both, yet because I know you have had an
Account of Her Royal Highness, better than I can give you, I shall for the most
part, speak only of the Prince.

My first Reason is the certainest of all Reasons, That it will be His
Highnesses interest to settle matters at Home, which only can be done by a
Legal Toleration or Comprehension in Matters of Religion; and by restoring the
Civil Liberties of the Nation, so much invaded of late. That this will be his
interest is Evident, if his Designs lie abroad, as it is certain they do.
Designs at home and abroad at the same time are so inconsistent, that we see
His Majesty, though raised above his Fears at home by His late Victory; and
invited abroad, by all that can excite his Appetite for Glory, cannot reconcile
them: The truth is, one that would undertake it, is in the same Condition with
Officers that beat their men, to make them fight, they have Enemies before and
behind.

But you may happily Object, that Princes do not always follow their true
Interests, of which it is not difficult in this Age to give several Fatal
Instances. I Answer, That it is to be presumed that Princes, as well as other
men, will follow their Interests till the contrary appear; and if they be of an
Age to have taken their Fold, and have till such Age kept firm to their
Interests, the Presumption grows strong; but if their Inclinations, the Maxims
of their Families, the Impressions of their Education, and all their other
Circumstances do side with their Interest, and lead them the same way, it is
hardly Credible they should ever quit it. Now this being the present Case, we
have all the certainty that can be had in such matters.

The Prince of Orange has above these 15 years given so great proofs of his
Firmness and Resolution, as well as of his Capacity and conduct in opposing the
Grand Ravisher (I may add the Betrayers too) of Liberty and Religion, that he
is deservedly (by all Impartial Men) owned to be the Head of the Protestant
Interest: A Headship, which no Princes but the Kings of England should have,
and none but they would be without it.

Now one may rationally conclude, That when the Prince shall join to his
present possession of this Headship, a more Natural Title, by being in a
greater capacity to Act, he will not degrade himself, nor lay aside Designs and
Interests which ought to be the Glory of England, as they are indeed the Glory
of his Family, acquired and derived to him by the Blood of his Ancestors, and
carried on and maintained by himself with so much Honor and Reputation.

I might add here, That the Prince is a Man of a sedate even Temper, full of
Thoughts and Reflection: one that precipitates neither in Thinking, Speaking,
nor Acting; is cautious in Resolving and Promising, but firm to his Resolutions
and exact in observing his Word: inform your self, and you will find this a part
of his Character, and conclude from hence what may be presumed from his
Inclinations.

Now as to the Maxims of his Family, let us compare them a little where it may
be decently done.

The French King broke his Faith to his Protestant Subjects, upon this single
point of Vain Glory, that he might show the World he was greater than most of
his Predecessors, who though they had the same Inclinations, were not Potent
enough to pursue them effectually, as he has done, to the everlasting Infamy of
his Name and Reign. The maxims of the French Kings have been to outvie each
other, in Robbing their Neighbors, and Oppressing their Subjects by
perfidiousness and cruelty. But those of the Family of Orange on the contrary,
have been to Rescue Europe from its Oppressors, and maintain the Protestant
Interest, by Virtue, Truth, Honor and Resolution; knowing that such methods
are as necessary to make Protestant Princes and States flourish, as Vice and
Oppression are to maintain Popish Government.

No Popish Prince in Europe can pretend to have kept his Word to his Protestant
Subjects, as the Princes of Orange have always done to their Popish subjects at
Orange, and elsewhere; and the Papists have often broke their Word to that
Family, and have been, and are its declared Enemies; and though the Princes two
great Grandfathers, Admiral Coligni, and Prince William, were Assassinated by
the Authority, and with the Approbation of that whole party, yet it cannot be
made appear, that ever the Princes of that Family failed in keeping their Word,
even to such Enemies, or used their own Popish subjects the worse for it, in
making distinction between them and their other subjects, or influenced the
States to use theirs so: I say the States, who allow their R. C. subjects all
the privileges of their other subjects, only they are kept by a Test from
having any share in the Government, which is truly a kindness done them,
considering that ill-natured Humor of destroying all those that differ from
them, which is apt to break out when that Religion is in power.

Now the Church of England may justly expect all sort of protection and
countenance from the successors, when it is their turn to give it, they have a
legal right to it, and Impartial Dissenters must acknowledge, that of late they
have deserved it.

But as for the Protestant Dissenters, I think no honest man amongst them will
Apprehend, that their Highnesses who keep their Word to their Popish Enemies,
will break it to Protestant subject, tho differing from the public
Establishment.

The next thing I am to make good, is, That His Highnesses Education must have
infused such principles as side with his Interest: There must be a fatal
Infection in the English Crown, if matters miscarry in his Highnesses Hands,
his Veins are full of the best Protestant Blood in the World: The Reformation
in France grew up under the Conduct and Influence of Coligni. Prince William
founded the Government of the United Netherlands on the Basis of property and
liberty of Conscience. His Highness was bred and lives in that State which
subsists and flourishes by adhering steadily to the Maxims of its Founder.

He himself, both in his public and private concerns, as well in the
Government of his Family, and of such principalities as belong to him, as in
that of the Army, and in the Dispensing of that great power which the States
have given him, has as great regard to Justice, Virtue and true Religion, as
may complete the character of a Prince, qualified to make those he Governs
happy.

It does not indeed appear, that their Highnesses have any share of that
devouring Zeal which has so long set the World on fire, and tempted thinking
men to have a notion of Religion it self, like that we have of the Ancient
Paradise, as if it had never been more than an intended Blessing, but all who
have the honor to know their Highnesses and their Inclinations in matters of
Religion, are fully satisfied they have a truly Christian Zeal, and as much as
is consistent with Knowledge and Charity.

As to his Highnesses circumstances, they will be such when his Stars make way
for him, as may convince our Scepticks, that certain persons, times and things,
are prepared for one another. I know not why we may not hope, that as his
predecessors broke the Yoke of the House of Austria from off the Neck of
Europe; The honor of breakin^ that of the House of Bourbon is reserved for
him. I am confident the Nation will heartily join with him in his Just
Resentments. Resentments which they have with so much Impatience longed to
find, and have missed with the greatest indignation in the Hearts of their
Monarchs.

His Highness has at present, a greater influence on the Councils of the most
part of the Princes of Christendom, than possibly any King of England ever had.
And this acquired by the weight of his own personal merit, which will no doubt
grow up to a glorious Authority when it is clothed with Sovereign power. May I
here mention (to ^ay the Jealousies of the most unreasonable of your Friends)
that his Highness will have only a borrowed Title, which he may suppose will
make him more catious in having designs at home, and his wanting Children (to
our great misfortune) will make him less solicitous to have such Designs.

But after all, it must be acknowledged, that in matters of this Nature, the
premises may seem very strong, and yet the conclusion not follow. Humane
infirmities are great, Temptations to Arbitrariness are strong, and often both
the Spirit and Flesh weak. Such fatal mistakes have been made of late, that the
Successors themselves may justly pardon men's Jealousies, A Widow that has had a
bad Husband, will cry on her Wedding Day, though she would be married with all
her heart. But I am confident you will grant to me, that in the case of the
present Successors, the possibilities are as remote, and the Jealousies as ill
grounded, and that there is as much to balance them, as ever there was to be
found in the prospect of any Successors to the Crown of England. Now may I add,
To conclude the Reasons that I have given you, why we may depend on their
Highnesses, that I know considerable men, who after great Enquiry and
Observation, do hope that their Highesses (being every way so well qualified
for such an end) are predestined (if I may speak so) to make us happy in
putting an end to our Differences, and in fixing the Prerogative, and in
recovering the Glory of the Nation, which is so much sunk, and which now (when
we were big with Expectations) we find Sacrificed to unhappy partialities in
matters of Religion.

The last thing you desire to know, is, What Effects this Letter has had. But
it is not yet old enough for me to judge of that, I can better tell you what
Effects it ought to have. I find the moderate wise men of all Persuasions are
much pleased with it.

I know Roman Catholics that wish to God matters were settled on the model
given in it; they see the great difficulty of getting the Test Repealed: And
withal, they doubt whether it is their Interest that it should be Repealed or
not: They fear needy violent men might get into Employments who would put His
Majesty on doing things that might ruin them and their Posterity. They are
certainly in the right of it. It is good to provide for the worst. A Revolution
will come with a Witness; and it is like it may come before the Prince of Wales
be of Age to manage an unruly Spirit, that I fear will accompany it. Humane
Nature can hardly digest what it is already necessitated to swallow, such
provocations even alters men's Judgments. I find that men who otherways hate
severity, begin to be of opinion that Queen Elizabeth's Lenity to the R. C's
proves now cruelty to the Protestants. The whole Body of Protestants in the
Nation was lately afraid of a Popish Successor, and when they Reflected on
Queen Mary's Reign, thought we had already sufficient Experience of the Spirit
of that Religion; and took Self-preservation to be a good Argument, for
preventing a second Trial. But now a handful of Roman Catholics, perhaps
reflecting on Queen Elizabeth's Reign, are not it seems afraid of Protestant
Successors. But if some Protestants at that time from an Aversion to the
Remedy, hoped that the Disease was not so dangerous as it proves, I am
confident at present, all Protestants are agreed, that henceforward the Nation
must be saved, not by Faith. And therefore I would advise the R. C's to
consider that Protestants are still men, that late Experiences at home, and the
Cruelties of Popish Princes abroad, has given us a very terrible Idea of their
Religion. That opportunity is precious and very slippery, and if they let the
present occasion pass by, they can hardly ever hope that it will be possible
for them to recover it. That their Fathers and Grandfathers would have thought
themselves in Heaven to have had such an offer as this is, in any of the four
last Reigns, and therefore, that they had better be contented with Half a Loaf,
than no Bread. I mean it will be their Wisdom to embrace this Golden Occasion
of putting themselves on a level with all other Englishmen; at least as to
their private Capacity; and to disarm once for all, the Severity of those Laws;
which if ever they should come to be in good earnest Executed by a Protestant
Suceessor, will make England too hot for them: And therefore I should
particularly advise those among them, who have the Honor to approach His
Majesty, to use their Credit, to prevail with him to make this so necessary a
step in favor of the Nation; since the Successors have advanced two thirds of
the way for effecting so good and pious a work. Then, and not till then, the R.
C's may think themselves secured, and His Majesty may hope to be great by
Translating Fear and Anger from the Breasts of His Subjects, to the Hearts of
His Own and the Nations Enemies.

But if an Evil Genius (which seems to have hovered over us now a long time)
will have it otherwise; if I were a R. C. I would meddle no more, but live
quiet at home, and Caress my Protestant Neighbors; and in so doing, I should
think my self better secured against the Resentments of the Nation, than by all
the Forces, Forts, Leagues, Garranties, and even Men Children that His Majesty
may hope to leave behind him.

As for the Protestant Dissenters, I am confident the Body of them will
continue to behave themselves like men, who to their great Honor have ever
preferred the Love of their Country and Religion to all Dangers and Favors
whatsoever, but there are both Weak and Interested men among all great numbers;
I would have them consider how much the state of things is altered, upon the
coming out of this Letter, for if hitherto they have been too forward in giving
Ear to Proposals on this mistake, that they could never have such a favorable
Juncture for getting the Laws against them Repealed; I hope now they are
undeceived, since the Successors have pawned their Faith and Honor for it,
which I take to be a better security (as matters go at present) than the so
much talked of Magna Charta for Liberty of Conscience would be, though got in a
legal way; for our Judges have declared, That Princes can dispense with the
Obligation of Laws, but they have not yet given their Opinion, that they can
dispense with the Honor of their Word; nor have their Highnesses any Confessor
to supply such an Omission.

However it is not to be charged on their Highnesses, if such a Magna Charta be
not at present given them, provided the Test be let alone; but I fear the Roman
Catholics Zeal will have all or nothing; and the Test too must be Repealed, by
wheedling the Dissenters to join with willing Sheriffs in violating the Rights
of Elections, which are the Root of the Liberties of England; a prudent way of
recommending their Religion to all true Englishmen.

But if any of the Dissenters be so destitute of Sense and Honesty, as to
prefer a Magna Charta, so obtained, Void and Null in it self, to their own
Honor and Conscience, to the Love and Liberties of their Country, to the
present Kindness of all good Men, and their Countenance at another time, and
above all, to the Favor and Word of the Successors, who have now so generously
declared themselves for them; We may pronounce, that they are men abandoned to
a Reprobate sense, who will justly deserve Infamy, and the Hatred of the Nation
at present, and its Resentments hereafter. Is it possible, that any Dissenter,
who either deserves or loves the Reputation of an Honest Man, can be prevailed
with by any pretenses of Insinuations how plausible soever, to make so Odious
and pernicious a bargain, as that of buying a precarious pretended Liberty of
Conscience, at the price of the Civil Liberties of the Country, and at the
price of removing that which under God is the most effectual Bar to keep us
from the Dominion of a Religion, that wouldas soon as it could, force us to
abandon our own, or reduce us to the Miserable Condition of those of our
Neighbors, who are glad to forsake all they have in the World, that they may
have their Souls and Lives for prey.

As for the Church of England, their Clergy have of late opposed themselves to
Popery, with so much Learning, Vigor, Danger and Success, that I think all
honest Dissenters will lay down their Resentments against them, and look on
that Church, as the present Bulwark and Honor of the Protestant Religion. I
wish those high men among them, who have so long appropriated to themselves,
the name and Authority of the Church of England, and have been made Instruments
to bring about Designs, of which their present Behavior convinces me, they
were ignorant, as I suppose many of the Dissenters are, whose turn it is now to
be the Tools.

I say, I wish such men would consider, to what a pass they have brought
Matters by their Violences, or rather the Violences of these whose Property
they were, and at length be wise; They cannot but be sensible of the Advantages
they receive by this Letter. I suppose they apprehend (I am sure they ought to
do it) that the Ruin of their Church is resolved on: But if the Dissenters
upon this Letter withdraw themselves, the R. C's have neither Hearts to keep
firm to such a Resolution, nor Hands to Execute it.

Since therefore, They themselves, have unhappily brought their Church into
such Pre^pices by provoking the Dissenters, it is in a particular manner their
Duty, as well as their laterest, to endeavor to soften them, by assisting the
Letter, and promoting the Design of it.

But if the old leaven still remain, they continue to argue as formerly, if the
Surplice be parted with, the Church of England is lost; if the Penal Laws be
repealed, the Test will follow: and comfort themselves with this most Christian
reflection, that the R. C. will not accept of what is offered them; such men
deserve all the misery that is preparing for them, and will perish without
Pity, and give thinking Men occasion to remember the Proverb, Beat a Fool (or a
Zealot) in a Mortar, yet his Foolishness will not depart from him. But the
Dissenters ought not to be much concerned at this, they have their own Bigots,
and the Church of England theirs; there will be Tools whilst there are Workmen.

This a time for Wisdom to be justified of her Children, when honest men ought
to leave off minding the lesser Interests of this or that particular Church,
and join in securing the common Interest of the Protestant Religion. And to
conclude, I would particularly beg of the Dissenters to make use of their best
Judgment on this so critical an occasion, which they will do in my opinion, in
keeping close to the contents of this Letter, by endeavoring to obtain in a
fair and legal way such a Liberty to all Persuasions, as is the Natural Right
of Freemen, and as our Protestant Successors declare themselves willing to join
in; and if those who have an equal, nay a greater Interest than themselves,
will not agree to such a Liberty, because they will be Masters or nothing; the
Dissenters will have the comfort of having discharged their own Consciences, as
prudent Men and good Christians ought to do, and may safely trust God with the
Event.

Sir, I thought I had made an end, but looking your Letter over again, I find I
have forgot to answer a reason or two you give, why you doubt whether the
Letter be truly M. Fagels: You are informed (you say) that such and such Great
Men doubted of it; but some might as well pretend to doubt of the Truth of that
Letter, (tho they knew it to be true) as believe Her Majesty to be with Child,
almost before she knew it Her self; and that she was quick, when the Embryo, as
Anatomists say, is not much above an Inch long; I don't think that Popish
Successors, like certain weeds, grow faster than others: The Persons you name
may Trim, and presume on their Merit, least they might be thought capable of
Resentment. A dangerous Reflection. I say their Merit; you have seen a long
relation of the great services some (when they were in power) did their
Highnesses; it is bound up with a relation of the true causes of their
sufferings for their (or rather their Highnesses) Religion. You know even how
one of them the last Summer paid them his reverence with all the Respect and
Humility of a due distance, and with the same caution with which the Invincible
Monarch fights out of Cannon shot. But, Sir, though the character of a Trimmer
be ordinarily the character of a Prudent Man, there are times and seasons when
it is not the Character of an Honest Man.

I acknowledge that since their Highnesses Marriage, nothing has happened so much
for the good of the Protestant Interest as this Letter of M. Fagels, and if I
had been either the Writer or Adviser of it, I should be very proud of it, and
think the Nation much in my debt. But Sir, that was not a very good reason to
make you doubt of it; for a good cause will have its time, tho not so often as
a bad one, which has ordinarily the Majority on its side.

I am confident at present we have all the reason in the world to expect it,
for my own part, though I am neither young nor strong, I hope to live to see a
day of Jubilee in England for all that deserve it; when honest men shall have
the same pleasure in thinking on these times, that a Woman happily delivered
has in reflecting on the pain and danger she was in. But Knaves shall remember
them, as I am told the damned do their sins, Cursing both them and themselves.

Sir, I am Yours.
January 12, 1688.
A Letter Writ by Mijn Here Fagel, Pensioner to the Great and Mighty Lords, the
States of Holland and Westfriesland. Writ in French on the 9th of April, N.
Style 1688. To the Marquess of Albeville, Envoy Extraordinary of His Majesty of
Great Britain, to the High and Mighty the States General of the United
Provinces. To which is prefixed an Account in Dutch of the Letter Writ by Mijn
Here Fagel, on the 4th of November, in the year 1687. to Mr. Stewart, written
by the said Pensioner, and Published by his Order.
Printed at the Hague by James Scheltus, Printer to the States of Holland and
Westfriesland.
Translated out of the French and Dutch into English.
READER,
I Gaspar Fagel, having the honor to serve the Great and Mighty States of
Holland and Westfriesland, in the Quality of their Pensioner, cannot any longer
delay the giving the Public this account, that in the month of July last 1687.
I was very earnestly desired by Mr. James Stewart Advocate, to write to him
what were the Prince and Princess of Orange's Thoughts concerning the repealing
the Test and the Penal Laws: but I was not easily brought to put Pen to Paper
on this subject, because I knew that their Highnesses Thoughts did not agree
with his Majesty's; so that the writing in such matters was extreme tender:
therefore I delayed it till I was more earnestly pressed to it: and it was
Intimated to me, that those pressing desires were made by His Majesty's
Knowledge and Allowance: at last I did according to the mind of their
Highnesses, draw the Letter which I writ to Mr. Stewart on the 4th of November:
I transmitted the draught of my Letter to their Highnesses, and received upon
it their order to send it, after that their Highnesses had read and examined
the draught in Dutch, together with the Translation of it into English: upon
all this I sent my Letter to Mr. Stewart in the beginning of November; and
received an answer from him, by which he signified, that he had showed my
Letter, both to the Earl of Melfort and to the Earl of Sunderland, and that it
was also showed to the King himself; nor did he in the least intimate to me
that it was desired that I should make any great secret of it; or take care
that it should not become public: That Letter, was afterward about the middle
of January, Printed in England; and upon its coming over into this Country, it
has occasioned a great deal of noise; yet I have not hitherto concerned my self
in all those discourses, or in all that has been writ and printed upon it, but
have let all people reason or write concerning it as they pleased: But I have
lately seen an English Book, entitled, Parliamentum Pacificum, printed in
London, in this present year, by virtue of a License signed by the Earl of
Sunderland; in which that Letter writ by me, is not only called a Pretended
Piece, but it is said, that which I had set forth in my Letter, concerning the
Prince and Princesses Thoughts, relating to the repeal of the Test and the
Penal Laws was advanced by me without the knowledge of their Highnesses, at
least of her Royal Highness: and by this the Reader may be perhaps wrought on
to believe either that my Letter was a Pretended Piece, and Forgery, or that I
writ it without Order from their Highnesses; since it may indeed seem scarce
probable, that the Author could have obtained a License for the printing of a
paper that contains such falsehoods in it, which the Court and in particular the
Earl of Sunderland could not but know to be such: for they know well both that
the Letter was writ by me, and that I was ordered to write it by their
Highnesses: therefore I could not delay any longer to undeceive the World. Thus
I am obliged to publish this account of the matter. I have still in my
possession, those Letters by which I was earnestly pressed to write the
forementioned Letter, in which it is expressly said, that they were writ by His
Majesty's Knowledge and Allowance: I have also that Letter in which notice is
given that my Letter had come to hand, and that it was showed not only to the
Earls of Melf^rt and Sunderland, but to his Majesty himself, so that they know
well that it is no Pretended Piece. I have also by me the Letter, by which His
Highneses desired me to send ^^ ^^^ter to Mr. Stewart, together with the
English Translation of it: all which I will print, if I find it necessary. So
that it is a gross abuse put on the World, to say that my Letter is a forgery,
since as it was truly writ by me, so it has been avowed by me ever since it
first appeared: And it is a base Calumny and Slander, to say, that I writ that
account of their Highnesses thoughts concerning the Repeal of the Test and the
Penal Laws without their knowledge: which appears so much the more evident,
since it cannot be imagined, that their Highnesses would not have expressed
their just resentments, at so high and extravagant a presumption as I should
have committed, if I had written any account of their thoughts, without their
knowledge: All this has obliged me for my own Vindication to write the following
Letter, to the Marquess of Albeville, His Majesty's Envoy to the States:
because I have had much discourse with him concerning the writing of that
Letter, long before this book called Parliamentum Pacificum was published: but
I will not engage my self any further to examine the reasonings of the Author
of that Phmphlet: for I know well, that in those matters the world is divided
into very different sentiments, and that men are apt to approve or censure such
things, according to their preconceived Opinions: Of all this I thought it
necessary to advertise my Reader, and to order this account of my Letter to be
printed by a known Printer, from a Copy signed by my hand.

At the Hague the 10th. of April, 1688. GASPAR FAGEL.

A Copy of the Letter Writ by Mijn Here Fagel, to the Marquis of Albeville,
bearing date the 9th. of April, 1688.
SIR,
THere has appeared here an English book, Printed at London this year, entitled
Parliamentum Pacificum with an Im^rimatur before it signed by the Earl of
Sunderland: ^f which I cannot but complain to you how averse soever I am (...)
things of that kind. It is affirmed in that book, that the Letter which I writ
to Mr. Stewart the 4th. of November last year, concerning the Test and the
Penal Laws is a Pretended Piece, or at least that I writ it without order; and
without the consent of their Highnesses, and more particularly of her Royal
Highness the PRINCESS of ORANGE: I will not engage my self to examine and refute
the particulars that are in that Book, for that were as unsuteable to the
Character I bear, as it is to my own Inclinations; which do both concur in
making it unfit for me to enter upon a public dispute in things of this
nature: But you cannot think it strange, if I desire you to call to mind, that
it was not of my own head that I was engaged to write that Letter which is now
called in question: it was far from that. I was pressed by earnest and often
repeated Instances for the space of four months, that were made to me in His
Majesty's name, to write upon that subject; which at last prevailed with me;
yet I went about it with all the caution that a matter of such Importance
required; and I took care not to write one single period in that whole Letter,
that I apprehended might give His Majesty the least offense: yet after all I
see this Letter is treated as an Imposture, in a Book published by Authority:
tho both his Majesty and the whole Court know the truth of this matter; which
Sir, I have in particular owned to your self, as being the Kings Minister here:
as I have also owned it to all that have spoke to me upon the Subject. But that
which troubles more is, that I am accused for having made use of their
Highnesses name, and in particular of her Royal Highnesses without their Order,
as if I were capable of so Infamous a Forgery, and of an Imposture so unworthy
of any man of honor, and that chiefly in a matter of so great Consequence.
Sir, you must not think it strange, if in this I appeal to your self, to that
which you know, and which you have often owned to me your self: that their
Highnesses, and particularly Her Royal Highness have often expre^sed to you
their thoughts concerning the Test and the Penal Laws, conform to that which I
writ in their names: which you owned to me, that you had writ to the Court of
England, long before I writ that Letter, and that therefore you could not
imagine upon what reason the Court could press me so much as they did to write
to Mr. Stewart. I do assure you, I find my self very little concerned in what
is said in this late Book, or in any other of that kind: I foresaw well enough
from the beginning that I should be attackt upon the account of my Letter: in
which it was Indifferent to me what any man thought of it. But this Book being
published by the authoaity of a License granted by the Earl of Sunderland,
President of His Majesty's Privy Council and Secretary of State, I find my
honor is so touched in it, that I am obliged to undeceive the world, of the
false accusation with which I am charged in it. And I thought Sir, that I could
not do this better, than by writing to you, that are His Majestys Minister, and
who know perfectly the truth of the matter that is now called in question: and
therefore I desire you will write concerning it, to the Earl of Sunderland: I
believe he has not seen or at least that he has not considered the passages of
that Book that do concern me. For I am sure if he had done that, he would never
have Licensed it: for my Lord Sunderland knows, as well as any man alive does,
that my Letter to Mr. Stewart is no Pretended Piece: he himself saw the Letter,
or at least the English Translation of it that I sent along with it: And he
could not but know likewise, both by your Letters, and by what you told by word
of mouth, that their Highnesses, and in particular Her Royal Highness, have
often owned to you, their sense of the Test and the Penal Laws, conform to that
which I writ in their name to Mr. Stewart. So I do persuade my self, that My
Lord Sunderland will have the Justice and Goodness to recall this License,
which has been obtained of him by a surprise: and that the Author of so
manifest and so Injurious a Calumny, shall be punished as he deserves. I will
not likewise conceal from you, the design I have of publishing an account of
all that has passed in this matter, as well as of this Letter, which I take the
liberty now to write to you, in which my design is not to enter into any
dispute concerning the matter it self, much less to offend any person
whatsoever, but only to cover my Honor which is struck at by this attrocious
Calumny. I am Sir your most humble and most obedient Servant

GASPAR FAGEL.

To all which this Attestation of the Printer is added.
I the under subscribing James Scheltus Printer in Ordinary to the Great and
Mighty Lords the States of Holland and Westfriesland, dwelling in the Hague, do
declare and attest by these presents, that the Writing here published, together
with the Copy of the Letter writ in French to the Marquis of Albeville, Envoy
Extraordinary of His Majesty of Great Britain to the States, were delivered
into my hands in order to their being Printed, by Mijn Here Gasper Fagel,
Pesioner to the above named Lords and States of Holland and Westfriesland, and
that I have printed them by his express Order.

At the Hague the 10th of April 1688. J. SCHELTUS.

Some Extracts, out of Mr. James Stewart's Letters, which were communicated to
Mijn Here Fagel, the States Pensionary of the Province of Holland. Together
with some References to Mr. Stewart's Printed Letter.
MR. Stewart staid about seven Months, after he had received the Pensionary's
Letter, before he thought fit to write any Answer to it: and then instead of
sending one in writing to the Pensioner, or in a Language understood by him, he
has thought fit, by a Civility peculiar to himself, to Print an Answer in
English, and to send it abroad into the World, before the Pensioner had so much
as seen it. The many and great Affairs that press had upon that Eminent
Minister, together with a sad want of Health, by which he has been long
afflicted, have made that he had not the leisure to procure Mr. Stewart's
Letter to be translated to him, and to compare the Matters of Fact related to
in it, with the Letters that were writ the last year by Mr. Stwatr, which are
in his Possession; nor did he think it necessary, to make too much haste: And
therefore if he has let as many Weeks pass, without ordering an Answer to be
prepared, as the other had done Months, he thought that even this Slowness,
might look like one that despised this indecent Attempt upon his Honor, that
Mr. Stewart has made in giving so unjust a Representation of the matter of
Fact. He hopes he is too well known to the World, to apprehend that any Persons
would entertain the hard Thoughts of him, which Mr. Stewart's late Print may
have offered to them; and therefore he has proceeded in this matter, with the
Slowness that he thought became his Integrity, since a greater Haste might have
looked like one that was uneasy, because he knew himself to be in Fault. As for
the reasoning part of Mr. Stewart's Paper, he has already expressed himself in
his Letter to Mr. d' Albeville, that he will not enter into any Arguing upon
those Points, but will leave the Matter to the Judgment of every Reader;
therefore he has given order only to examine those Matters of Fact, that are
set forth in the beginning of Mr. Stewart's Letters, that that so the World may
have a true Account of the Motives that induced him to write his Letter to Mr.
Stewart, from the words of Mr. Stewart's own Letters: And then he will leave it
to the Judgment of every Reader, whether Mr. Stewart has given the Matter of
Fact fairly or not. It is true, the Pensioner has not thought fit to print all
Mr. Stewart's Letters, at their full length; there are many Particulars in them
for which he is not willing to expose him: And in this he has showed a greater
Regard to Mr. Stewart, than the Usage that he has met with from him deserves:
If Mr. Stewart has kept Copies of his own Letters, he must see that the
Pensioners Reservedness is rather grounded on what he thought became himself,
than on what Mr. Stewart has deserved of him. But if Mr. Stewart, or any in his
name, will take Advantages from this, that the Letters themselves are not
published, and that here there are only Extracts of them offered to the World,
then the Pensioner will be excused, if he Prints them all to a Tittle: The
Truth is, it is scarce conceivable how Mr. Stewart could assume the Confidence
that appears in his printed Letter, if he have kept Copies of the Letters that
he writ last-Year: And if he engaged himself in Affairs of such Importance
without keeping. Copies of what he writ, it was somewhat extraordinary: And yet
this Censure is that which falls the softest on him: But I will avoid every
thing that looks like a sharpness of Expression; for the Pensioner expects,
that he who is to give this Account to the English Nation, should rather
consider the Dignity of the Post in which he is, than the Advantages that Mr.
Stewart may have given for replying sharply on him. And in this whole matter
the Pensioner's chief Concern is, to offer to the World such a Relation of the
Occasions that drew his Letter to Mr. Stewart from him, as may justify him
against the false Insinuations that are given: He owed this likewise as an
Expression of his Respect and Duty to their Highnesses, in whose Name he wrote
his Letter, and at whom all those false Representations are levelled, though
they fall first and immediately upon himself.

The Sum of the Matter of Fact, as it is represented by Mr. Stewart, amounts to
this, That he was so surprised to see in January last, the Pensioner's Letter
to him in Print, that he was inclined to disbelieve his own Eyes, considering
the remoteness of the Occasion that was given for that Letter: That he had
never writ to the Pensioner, but was expressly cautioned against it: but that
seeing the Sincerity of the King's Intentions, he was desirous to contribute
his small Endeavors for the advancing so good a Work, and for that end he
obtained leave to write to a private Friend, who, he judged might have
Opportunity to represent any thing he could say to the best Advantage: But that
of the Letters which he writ to his Friend, there were only two intended for
Communication, in which he studied to evince the Equity and Expediency, of
repealing the Tests and the Penal Laws: And that with a peculiar regard, to the
Prince and Princess Orange's Interest; and he desired that this might be
imparted to Friends, but chiefly to those at the Hague. And that this was the
Substance of all that he writ on that Occasion. But finding that the Prince had
already declared himself in those Matters, he resolved to insist no further:
Yet his F^ind insinuating, That he had still Hopes to get a more distinct and
satisfying Answer, from a better Hand, tho without naming the Person, he
attended the Issue; and about the beginning of November, almost Three Months
after his first writing, he received the Pensioners Letter, though he had not
writ to him (which is repeated again and again) and in it an Account of the
Prince and Princess of Orange's Thoughts about the Repeal of the Tests and
Penal Laws (which he had not desired) upon which he took some care to prevent
the publishing of it: Put when he saw it in Print, he clearly perceived that it
was printed in Holland; and so wonders how the Pensioner could say, that it was
printed in England, which he found in his printed Letter to Mr. d' Albeville;
he knows not upon what Provocation the Pensioner writ that Letter; but in it he
finds that he writ, that he was desired by himself to give him an Account of
the Prince and Princess of Orange' s Thoughts, and that these pressing Desires
were made to him by His Majesty's Knowledge and allowance; this being so
different from the Letters he had writ, of which he is sure that the Account he
has given is true in every point, he was forced to vindicate the the King's
Honor and his own Duty. He writ not out of any curiosity to know their
Highnesses Though's, which were already known, they having been signified to
the Marquis of Albeville, and therefore he had no Orders from the King for
writing on that Subject, but only a Permission to use his little Endeavors for
the advancing of his Service; but it was never moved to him to write, either in
the King's Name or in the Name of any of his Secretaries. This is Mr. Stewart's
Account in the first Nince Pages of his Letter, and is set down In his own
Words.

Now in opposition to all this, it will appear from the following Extracts,
that Mr. Stewart writ to his Friend, as the most proper Interpreter for
addressing himself to the Pensioner; that he repeated his Proposition
frequently, finding his Friend unwilling to engage in so critical a matter. He
gives great ^^surances of his Majesty's Resolutions never to al^^r the
Succession (which is plainly the Language of a Treaty) he presses over and over
again to know the Prince's Mind, whose concurrence in the matter would be the
best Guarentee of the^ ^iberty. He by name desires his Letters may be showed to
the Prince and Princess of Orange (though he says, he only ^rder^d them to be
showed to Friends at the Hague: so it seems he has the modesty to reckon them
among the number of his Friends; but it is a question whether their Highnesses
do so or not.) He says in one Leteer, That what he writ was from his Majesty
himself, and enlarges more fully on this in two other Letters; and he desires,
that the Prince's Answers, with his Reasons, might be understood; which very
probably gave the Occasion to all the reasoning part of the Pensioner's Letter.
And it appears by that Letter, that the Return to all this was expected by the
King, and in almost every Letter he presses for a Return. And in conclusion,
upon his receiving the Pensioner's Letter, he expresses likewise a great sense
of the Honor done him in it; that he had so far complied with his
insignificant Endeavors, he mentions his acquainting both the King and the
Earls of Sunderland and Melfort with it; and in another Letter, after new
Thanks for the Pensioner's Letter, he laments that it was so long delayed. But
all these things will appear more evident to the Reader from the Passages drawn
out of Mr. Stewart's own Letters, which follow. Mr. Stewart seems not to know
upon what Provocation the Pensioner writ to Mr. d' Albeville, and yet the
Ponsioner had set that forth in the Letter it self; for the Pamphlet entitled
Parliamentum Pacificum, that was Licensed by the Earl of Sunderland, contained
such Reflections on his Letter to Mr. Stewart, either as a Forgery, or as a
thing done without the Princess of Orange' s Knowledge, that the Pensioner
judged himself bound in Honor to do himself right. As for Mr. Stewart's
criticalness, in knowing that the Pensioner's Letter was first Printed in
Holland, and his Reflection on the Pensioner for insinuating that the Letter
was first Printed in England; it is very like that Mr. Stewart, after so long a
Practice in Libels, knows how to distinguish between the Prints of the several
Nations better than the Pensioner, whose course of Life has raised him above
all such Practices. But it is certain, that wheresoever it was first Printed,
the Pensioner writ sincerely, and believed really it was first Printed in
England. This is all that seemed necessary to be said for an Introduction to
the following Extracts.

July 12. 1687.
AND I assure you by all I can find here, the establishment of this equal
Liberty is his Majesty's utmost Design -- I wish your people at the Hague do
not mistake too far both his Majesty and the Dissenters; for as I have already
told you his Majesty's utmost Design, and have ground to believe, That his
Majesty will preserve and observe the True Right of Succession, as a thing most
sacred; so I must entreat you to remark, That the Offense that some of the
Church of England Men take at Addressing, seems to me unaccountable, and is
apprehended by the Dissenters to proceed so certainly from their former and
wonted Spirit, that they begin to think themselves in large more Hazard from
the Church of England's Re-exaltation than all the Papists their Advantages.
And next, that the Prince is thought to be abused by some there to a too great
Mislike of that which can never wrong him, but will in probability in the event
be wholly in his own power -- I hope you will consider and make your best use
of these things -- I expect an Account of this per first, I mean, an Answer to
this Letter, and pray improve it to the best Advantage.

The Second Letter, without a Date.
THat it is a thing most certain, that his Majesty is resolved to observe the
Succession to the Crown as a thing most sacred, and is far from all Thoughts of
altering the same; and that his Majesty is very desirous to have the Prince and
Princess of Orange to consent to and concur with him in establishing this
Liberty -- So that upon the whole it may be feared, that if the Prince continue
obstinate in refusing his Majesty, he may fall under Suspicions of the greatest
part of England and of all Scotland, to be too great a Favourer of the Church
of England, and consequently a person whom they have reason to dread -- And
many think that this Compliance in the Prince, might be further a wise part,
both as to the Conciliating of his Majesty's greater Favor, and the begetting
of an Understanding betwixt the King and the States; and the Parliament will
consent to the Liberty so much the rather, that they have a Protestant
Successor in prospect -- I cannot on these things make any conclusion, but
simply leave them to your Reflection, and the best use you please to make of
them -- I will expect your Answer per first.

Windsor, July. 18. 1687.
THE Hints that I gave you in my two former Letters I shall now explain more
fully in this -- And therefore I heartily wish, that the Prince and Princess
may understand all that you think needful on this Subject. It troubles his
Majesty to find them so averse from approving this Liebrty, and concurring for
its Establishment -- so that in truth I cannot see why their Highnesses should
not embrace cheerfully so fair an Opportunity to gratify both his Majesty and
the far greater and better part of the Nation -- Now upon the whole; I expect
that you will make all I have written fully known at the Hague, especially with
the Prince -- But the main thing I expect from you, is to have your mind,
whether or not his Highness may be so disposed, as that a well Chosen Informer
sent to himself might perfect the Work. And this Answer I will expect per
first; where ever the Prince be, you know who are to be spoken and how -- I
again entreat your Care and Dispatch in this, with your Return.

London, July 29. 1687.
MIne of the 19 July, with my last of the 26th July, V. St. will I am sure
satisfy you fully; for therein I have indeed answered all can be objected, and
have given you such an Account of the Confirmation of all I have writ from his
Majesty himself, that I must think it a Fatality if your people remain
obstinate. -- And I again assure you, if your people be obstinate, it will be
fatal to the poor Dissenters, and I fear productive of Ills yet unheard of; and
therefore pray consider my Letters, and let me know if there be any place to
receive Information by a good Hand -- but however, let us endeavor Good all we
can, and I assure you I have my Warrant. -- Haste your Answer.

Windsor, Aug. 5. 1687.
AND in a word, believe me, if the Prince will do what is desired, it is the
best service to the Protestants, the highest Obligation on his Majesty, and the
greatest Advancement of his own Interest that he can think on; but if not, then
all is contrary -- But pray haste an Answer.

Windsor, Aug. 12. 1687.
I Have yours of the 15. Instant, long looked for; you remark, that you have
received mine of the 26 of July, but say nothing of that of the 19. which was
my fullest, and which I assure you was writ, not only with permission, but
according to his Majesty's Mind sufficiently expressed; our Religion ought
certainly to be dearer to us than all earthly Concerns. It is very true what
you say, that mistakes about its Concerns (especially in such a time) may be of
the greatest Importance, which no doubt should persuade to a very scrupulous
Caution: But yet I am satisfied, That the simple Representing of what was wrote
to you (which was all I required) was no such difficult Task -- But to be plain
with you, as my Friend, your return was not only long delayed, but I observe
such a Coldness in it, different from the strain of your former, that I think I
mistake not when I understand by your Letter more than you express -- I wish
the P. may see or hear this from end to end.

London, Aug. 22. 1687.
I Have yours of the 16th Instant; when I said your last was more Cool, I meant
not as your Affection, but as to your diligence in that Affair -- for I am
persuaded, that the establishing of this Liberty by Law, is not only the
Interest of Protestant Dissenters above all others, but that his Highness s
consenting to it, would be its secure Guarantee both against Changes and Abuses
-- As you love the Quiet of good Men and me, leave off Complements and
Ceremonies, and discourse his Highness of all I have written -- I am now
hastening to Scotland -- but may return shortly; for the Kings is most desirous
to gain the Prince and he will be undoubtedly the best Guarantee to us of this
Liberty, and also to hinder all your Fears about Popery.

Newwark, Aug. 26. 1687.
BUT now I must tell you, that though -- I know -- to be my very good Friend,
yet he has not answered my Expectation; for you see that to seven of mine, he
gave me not one Word of Answer; although I told him, that the substance of them
was writ by the King's Allowance, and a Return expected by him -- besides, the
Answers he makes are either Generals or Complements, whereas my desire was,
that the Prince should know things, and that his Answer with his Reasons might
be understood, -- but my Friend has delayed and scruffed things.

From Scotland, September. 24. 1687.
I Have yours of the 30th of Aug. but have delayed so long to answer, because I
had written other Letters to you whereof I yet expect the Return -- my most
humble Duty to my Friend at the Hague.

Edinburg, October. 28. 1687.
AS for that more important Affair, wherewith I have long troubled you, I need
add no more; my Conscience bears me Witness, I have dealt sincerely for the
Freedom of the Gospel -- I had certainly long e're now written to the Pensioner
Fagel, were it not that I judged you were a better Interpreter of any thing I
could say: I know his real Concern for the Protestant Religion; and shall never
forget his undeserved Respect to me; but alas! that Providence should be so
ill understood.

London, November. 8. 1687.
I Have yours of the 1st of November -- the enclosed from the L. Pensionary
surprise me with a Testimony of his Favor and Friendship, and also of his
sincere Love to the Truth, and fair and candid Reasoning upon the present
Subject of Liberty, beyond what I can express; he has seriously done too much
for me; but the more be has done in complience with my insignificant
Endeavors, the more I judge and esteem his noble and zealous Concern for
Religion and Peace, which I am certain could only in this Matter be his just
Motive: I hope you will testify to him my deep Sense of his Favor and most
serious Profession of Duty with all Diligence, until I be in (...) to make his
L. a direct Return. I showed the Letter to my Lord Melfort, who was satisfied
with it.

London, November. 6. 1687. Which it seems is by a mistake of the Date.
I Have your last, but have been so harassed and toiled, that I have not had
time to write to you, much less to my L. Pensionary; yet since my last, I
acquainted the Earl of Sunderland with his Answer, as the King ordered me; but
I see all Hope from your Side is given quite over, and Men are become as cold
in it here as you are positive there.

London, November. 19. 1687.
By my last of the 8th. Instant, I gave you notice of the Receipt of my Lord
Pensionary' s Letter, and what was and is my Sense of his extraordinary
Kindness and Concern in that Affair. Since that time I have had the Oppertunity
to show them to the King, and at his Command did read to him distinctly out of
the English Copy all the Account given of her Highnesses mind touching the
Penal Statutes and the Test; and withal, signified the Sum of what was
subjoyned, especially the Respect and Difference therein Expressed to his
Majesty' s Person and Government; but to my own Regret, I find that this Answer
has been too long delayed, and that now the King is quite over that Matter,
being no ways-satisfied with the Distinction made of the Tests from the Penal
Laws; and no less positive, that his Highness is neither to be prevailed upon,
nor so much as to be further treated with in this Matter.

The Conclusion.
AND thus all that relates to the Occasion that drew the Pensioners Letter from
him, appears in its true light. If this Discovery is uneasy to Mr. Stewart, he
has none to blame for it but himself. It is very likely the first Article of
his merit, for the defacing of all that was past, was the Pains he took to work
on their Highnesses, by the Pensioners means: But that having failed him, the
abusive Letter that he has published upon it may come in for a second Article:
And now the Reproaches to which this Discovery must needs expose him, must
complete his Merit. If upon all this he is not highly rewarded, he has ill
Luck, and small Encouragement will be given to others to serve the Court as he
has done. But if he has great Rewards, it must be acknowledged that he has paid
dear for them; the printing and distributing 15000 Copies of his Letter, is
only the publishing his Shame to 15000 persons, though it is to be doubted if
so many could be found in the Nation who would give themselves the Trouble to
read so ill a Paper.

FINIS.

