SCIRE / I tuum nihil est: OR, The AUTHORS DEFENSE OF The Vanity of
DOGMATIZING; Against the EXCEPTIONS OF The Learned THO. ALBIUS In his Late
SCIRI.

No doubt but ye are the Men, and Wisdom shall dye with you! Job.

LONDON, Printed by E. C. for Henry Eversden at the Greyhound in St.
Pauls-Church-Yard, 1665.

The AUTHORS APOLOGY FOR HIS STYLE.
IT may perhaps seem to some incongruous, that my Reply is not written in the
language of the Objections; and I should have thought so too, had the
Objections spoke the Language of my Discourse. But since my Assailant takes the
Liberty to recede from my Style, I know no reason obliges me to humor his.
And it is less improper for a Book to differ in fashion from another that
opposes it; than from that of which it is a part and vindication. And this
Answer were sufficient for the seeming impropriety: But yet I have Reasons more
considerable to excuse it. I must confess then, that by that time Sciri was
extant, I was grown so indifferent to those matters, that I had much ado to
persuade my self to a Review of what I had written; and could have been content
to have left it without any other vindication, then what it could it self
obtain from the good nature and ingenuity, of impartial perusers. And in this
coldness of humor had without doubt deserved it, but that my Bookseller
importuned me for another Edition: which request of his having consented to, I
saw my self under a necessity of decorum to return something on an occasion, in
which silence perhaps might have been illmanners to an ingenious and learned
Adversary. But though the constraint of these circumstances overcame my
aversness to writing any more on a subject, with which I thought I had done for
ever; yet could it not prevail against the humor I had of troubling my self no
more then needs in a business, to which I was driven, rather then inclined or
persuaded. So that after I had resolved an Answer; it had been more difficult
to have drawn my self to put it into any other drss, then what is most easy
and familiar. Which yet was not the effect only of the indisposition and
laziness of my humor; but a dictate of my discretion. For the truth is, I
foresaw the occasion would not engage me in any thing, that I could think
worthy of the universal Language; except I should have written a Discourse, and
not an Answer. Besides which, had I used another style I must have been more
diffuse in reiterating what I had said in the opposed Essay; otherwise those
that understood not English, had been incapable of my justification; and my
self, and those that do, nauseated by the repetition. These then were the chief
reasons of my continuing the Language I began with; which I confess I was the
more easily persuaded by, because there are late great examples of like
practice, whose fashions it is no discredit to imitate. And to all I might add,
that I love not that my Discourse should wear Linsy-Woolsy.

SCIRI,
Remarques on the Title.
I Should never have thought my self concerned in a Book, that wears such a
Title; but that I found my Name in the first page made an ungrateful adjunct:
and the opposing a discourse I had published, professed the occasion, and mark it
aimed at. How unjust it is to suggest that I am a Sceptick, is I think clear
enough from what I have said already, and shall make more fully appear in the
process. And how little kindness I have for the disputing way of procedure, I
have publicly declared. How proper then that part of the Title is in this
application, any one may pass an easy judgment. But to what purpose old Cato
stands there, with that instructive oracle in his mouth, which I remember ever
since I cap't verses, Contra verbosos: I was posed to conjecture. Especially
since the insignificant prattle, and endless garrulity of the Philosophy of the
Schools, which this Gentleman seems to vindicate, is none of the least offenses
to those whom, whither they will or no, he will have be Scepticks. In
consideration of this, and some such other misapplyed appellations, I thought
that this learned Man had an other notion of Sceptick then was usual; and
casting mine eye over his late Purgation, presented to the Cardinals of the
inquisition, I found that his Scepticks were some of the modern voluminous
^^sputing Peripateticks, whom in that part of my Discourse where I deal with
the Aristotelian Philosophy, I bestow a particular Reflection on. These it
seems by the solicitation of their complaints against his Writings had obtained
a general condemnation of them from the Pope and Consistory of Cardinals; whom
therefore in his Appeal to the said Cardinals he accuses of ignorance,
corruption of the Aristotelian Doctrines, and tendency to Heresy and Atheism.
And that these are the Scepticks of our Philosopher, appears also from several
passages both of the Praeface and Body of the Discourse I am rejoyning to. But
then upon what account the celebrated Gassendus and the Author of the Vanity of
Dogmatizing should be comprised under a common name with these, with whom they
have so little confederacy either in Doctrine or Design; I cannot yet find the
least ground for conjecture.


ETsi non dubitem validioribus and magis opportunis auxiliis obviam itum esse
exitiali illi Pyrrhonicae contagio, quod nova audere non ita pridem occaepit;
tamen, quia nil publici cauterii adactum ad ulous Glanvillanum jam biennio
integro aestuofum audiveram, visum est filentibus potioribus ad meam
infirmitatem devolutum esse onus, iniquitatem indisciplinatae illius calumniae
Universo Philosophantium choro impositae, si non avertere, certe aperire, and
plumis disertioribus lacerandam exponere. -- Page 1.
UPon the supposal then that I am a Sceptick, the learned harmless and
peaceable Essay as a deadly Pyrrhonical contagion, and an enemy to Science. But
with what ingenuity I am charged, with what I have so frequently disclaimed, I
appeal to the professions of the Discourse it self to evidence: which whether
they are arguments of a Skeptical aim and temper, let the Dogmatist judge
between us. And though my Apology for Philosophy may perhaps be defective in
point of Judgment and Argument, for the clearing of what I undertook to
vindicate; yet both the design and menage of it, one would think, should have
secured me from suspicion of endeavoring to discourage Philosophical
enquiries, by introducing a despair of Science. For on the contrary, one of my
chief designs was, to remove that sloth and laziness which in these later ages
has cramp't endeavor, and made men content to sit down with their slender
acquists, as Certainties and Demonstrations which are scarce Probabilities. I
desire it may be taken notice of once for all then, that I have naught to do
with that shuffling Sect, that love to doubt eternally, and to question all
things. My profession is freedom of enquiry, and I own no more Skepticism then
what is concluded in the Motto which the ROYAL SOCIETY have now adopted for
theirs, NULLIUS IN VERBA.

So that there was no need of so solemn a warning to the Universities against
my innocent discourse; whose greatest fault is, that 'tas been so unhappy as to
be mistaken. For the Ulcus Glanvillanum (as my learned Assailant is pleased to
call it) contains none of the supposed venom. Nor will it inspire any but
supine and passive tempers with any other spirit then that of more diligent
research, and careful pursuits of nature. I am not therefore concerned in the
Question our Author propounds to his junior Academicks to this purpose: Whether
they would be severely wise for the conduct of their Manners and Religion, or
enticingly Rhetorical, pleading for Ignorance and Uncertainty, and whistling
their dependants into apparent precipices? Since one of the greatest quarrels I
have against Confident Opinion, is, that it renders the Dogmatist conceited,
not wise. And is so far from being serviceable to good manners, that it
mischievously corrupts them, sowring Men's spirits with Envy, ill Nature, and
Moroseness; and mingling their Religion with Schism, bitrer Zeal, and Sedition:
And these are worse precipices then a modest and reserved belief can betray Men
into. To what follows within this period, I Will say no more, then that there is a
Medium between being Blind and Infallible. And vanitas Dogmatizandi, is not
well explained by vera pollicendi.

page 3.
certainty in Faith, and hopes of Science from experiment; neither of which can
consist with a criminal and dangerous Skepticism: which yet he seems not
willing to have me free from, adding, that I point at one, as the ground of my
expectation, whom this learned Man will have believed a Favourer of the
Pyrrhonian Nihil Sciri: The person aimed at in this Reflection, I conceive, is
Descartes; though I confess, I remember not that sentence mentioned in his
writings; for after the proposal of what might be expected from experiment and
the progress of enquiry, I add, That those that are acquainted with the
fecundity of the Cartesian Principles will despair of nothing. And if that
great Man, possibly one of the greatest that ever was, must be believed a
Sceptick, who would not ambitiously affect the title? And to give the
Pyrrhonians one of the noblest and happiest wits that has shone upon the
world, is to yield a greater advantage to their Cause, then would be done by a
thousand professed assertions of it So that had I been guilty of such a
Concession, I might thence more reasonably have been judged a Favourer of the
Scepticks, then by any thing I have writ against the Dogmatists. For I am apt
to think, that Mankind is like to reap more advantage from the Ignorance of Des
Carts, then perhaps from the greatest part of the science was before him, and
I cannot forbear pronouncing him the Phosphoros of that clear and useful light,
that begins to spring in plentifully upon an awakened world. So that though the
following expostulations are proper and seasonable in reference to our Authors
Peripatetical Scepticks, yet are they most improper and injurious, if they have
any aspect on Descartes, or those that endeavor to promote that free and
useful way of Philosophizing which he has insisted in. But I add no more on
this occasion, because it is possible I have mistaken the person intended by my
Assailant. However, if the Reflection be not directed to him, it is to the
excellent Gassendus, who is presently after introduced, under the Title of the
Great Interpreter of Epicurus; who has as little reason to be suspected of
Criminal Skepticism, as the other. It is well known that these great men were
Inquirers, and it becomes not such to be swearers, nor is it therefore
reasonable to conclude them Scepticks.

Aristotelem -- page 7.
Aristotelians; only he accuses them of one fault which I seldom find among
them, viz. modesty in proposing their opinions; which our Author inveighs
against as a criminal diffidence. But for my part I think the greatest number
of that spirit can plead Not guilty to the accusation. And for those of them
that are less assured in their sentiments, I should not reckon it among their
crimes, to be wary and sparing of assent in notions so lubricous and uncertain,
as are those they deal in. Though I confess, to keep such voluminous ado about
acknowledged uncertainties, is a very reprehensible vanity. And doubtless the
unprofitable toys of these later Peripateticks, have offended many against
that Philosophy. But whether most of them are not the genuine derivations of
the Hypothesis they claim to, may without difficulty be determined by any that
will consider the natural flatulency of that aerie scheam of notions. And I
think they have no great reason to pretend to ingenuity or judgment, that
accuse Aristotle for the faults of his Sectators. But from this last period of
sense, I desire chiefly it may be noted, that our learned Author pleads not for
the Modern Aristotelianism, which yet obtains in most of the Schools of
Christendom: All the advantage I shall make of which at present is to question,
Whether the reseuing men from an over fond value of such small wares, and the
preventing the expense of time and pains upon such solemn trifles, as our
Philosopher deservedly calls them, be like to be a prejudice to their persuits
of more useful Knowledge, and the Furtherance of Science?

Vos modo novi palmites surgentes in Vinum quod page 9.
THough I confess I have not so great a value for the Aristotelian learning, as
some others; yet I am none of those, that would dissuade junior Academicks from
the study of that Philosophy. Especially, I think Aristotle's Logic and
Rhetoric are to be acknowledged; though, I am not of the opinion of Averroes
that he was the inventer of either. And doubtless that reverence and observance
is due to the Statutes of those Universities that recommend this Author; yea
and the Antiquity of that Philosophy (though it be far from being the
antientest) will commend it to the Students of universal learning. Besides, I
would have nothing avoided or condemned till it be understood: And were I more
an enemy to that Philosophy then my Assailant can suppose I am, yet should I
not dissuade the learning It; since primus sapientiae gradus, est falsa
intelligere. Only, I think, 'twould be very injurious to Knowledge, if
Aristotle should ingross men, and should his Placits be all received as the
dictates of universal Reason. There are other Hypotheseis more ancient, and
possiby more useful, that deserve to be enquired into. And it is an enlargement
and enobling the minds of men to acquaint them with the various Scheams in
which things have been represented. My design was not then to discourage any
from inquiring into the Aristotelian Doctrines, especially as they are in their
original: But to prevent men's sitting down for ever on his Composures, and
making his Placits the infallible measures of Truth and Nature. Let Aristotle
be studied then, but not adored. Let him have the first of our Time, but not
all; the advantage of prepossession is great, which yet Free Philosophers I
presume will grant him; only let Pythagoras, Democritus, Plato, and the more
ancient Chaldaean wisdom, have their turns to be inquired into, and let the
great and illustrious Moderns have theirs. It Is an unaccountable vanity, to
spend all our time in raking into the scraps and imperfct remains of former
ages, and to neglect the knowledge and clearer notices of our own, which (my
Lord Bacon makes the third, but reckoning in the Egyptian) is the Fourth, and
perhaps greatest enquiry of Learning. For many have gone to and fro, and
Science is increased.

Methinks it is pity that so many improveable wits as frequent the Universities,
should be hindered from enquiry; and tied up to the writings of a single
Author, from the knowledge of the Sentiments of the Philosophic world, and
studying the more instructive volumn of the Universe. Doubtless, since the
days of Aristotle, the face of things is altered, and new Phenomenon are
disclosed, which his Hypotheseis will no more suit, then the Coats of Children
will a body that is at full and advanced stature. Besides, the greatest spirits
of our days, proceed in another way of enquiry, which, if there were nothing
in it but the fashion of the learning of the Age, it were however fit to be
known by those that lay any claim to ingenuity, and have leisure for such
researches. And it seems to me an unpardonable kind of sloth, (especially in
youth that uses to be busy and inquisitive) to be contentedly ignorant of
those great Theories that make such noise in the Age they live in; and to spend
all their time in that which will signify little without the walls of a
College. For the wiser world is of a differing opinion from our Philosopher in
the assertion of this Paragraph, viz. that no progress can be made in Sciences
without the Aristotelian Grounds; and I think will hardly be brought to
believe, That those that have quitted those foundations must be always to seek
for Principles, and necessarily come short of Science. For to think that the
Principles of any Man should be the only and infallible measures of things,
seems a fond overvaluing credulity that has nothing to warrant it. And he that
phancies that all succeeding mankind cannot light upon Principles as happy and
likely, as those of Aristotle, but must eternally despair of Science, if they
proceed in any other way, then he has prescribed them; has no pretense for so
bold a judgment of Possibilities.

ACTIO PRIMA.
SCepsin infaelici naturae aborsu antiquitus natam,

2. Illius exemplo, apud nos lingua vernacula eandem exornatam produxit
Vanitatis Dogmatizandi Author; ipse quoque and ingenio pollens and Eloquio.
Neque enim a vulgaribus mentibus timenda sunt grandia infortunia. Haec mei
laboris est occasio; propositum vero, si lumen caelitus affluat and vires
calamo ministret, hanc cadaveream scientiae aemulam in sua sepulcreta
compellere, and inominatis dentibus rodendam tradere. Agedum igitur, quaesiti
nodum evolvamus.

Skepticism which the constancy of Christianity laid in it is Grave, I dare say
the Illustrious Gassendus would never have redeemed from thence. The Skepticism
which consists in Freedom of inquiry, that noble pen recommended, and adorned;
but did not restore: for Campanella and the great Verulam were before him; yet,
Avicenna and others of his spirit among the Ancient Peripateticks, were Free
Philosophers. But what that Skepticism should be, that is consistent with so
sharp a wit, so neat and copious an Eloquence, such sweet manners, and
admirable diligence, such firmness and fledfastness in the Faith, and so
unsuspected an Orthodoxie, as are ascribed, and deservedly, to that great
person: And yet be the source of infinite Errorus and Heresies, that seducing
Philosophy and vain deceit, against which we have the Caveat of an Apostle; is
beyond the reach of my conjecture. And I am the more confounded when I am told,
That this Mother of Heresy, this vain deceit, is nothing but an endeavor to
lessen the imposing Authority of a vainglorious Heathen, whom some excellent
persons, both Fathers and Philosophers, have accused, as one impious in
Manners, and worse in Doctrine and Belief. A suppressor of the more ancient and
more valuable Wisdom: And one, that from a proud and insolent Tassus contemned,
and continually quarreled with his betters: Yea, and who grew so far into this
humor and contradiction that he would frequently unsay and contradict his own
Assertions. One, whose credit grew up in the night of Barbarism and Ignorance;
and whose Principles are repugnant, many of them, to the nature of things, and
the Fundamentals of Faith: I say, that an attempt to redeem the free*born
spirits of Men, from an unworthy vassallage to so stigmatized an Authority,
should be to this Learned Man so criminal and dangerous a business, is, I
confess, to me, occasion of some surprise and wonder And if this be the faulty
Skepticism Gassendus, and the Author of the Vanity of Dogmatizing, are accused
of; let those that have a mind to pass their censure, make the worst they can
of the Imputation. That Gassendus was no Sceptick in the old and common notion,
is apparent from the voluminous pains he has taken in the building up a Body
of Philosophy upon the Principles of Democritus and Epicurus; and if he was not
so fond of the Principles he undertook to illustrate, as to boast their
certainty; proposing them not in a confident and assertive form, but as
probabilities and Hypotheseis: I see no reason why his modesty should be made
his crime, and be so severely animadverted on.

Nor does the Author of the impugned Essay yet see any cause to be ashamed of
having followed his example in an affair so innocent; to say no more on it. And
he cannot yet decern how that discourse could yield an occasion to this learned
Man of opposing Skepticism, which he may lay in the dust without concernment to
the Vanity of Dogmatizing, or it is Author: who is no otherwise interested in
the Paragraphs that follow for the asserting Science, and opposition of the
Scepticks, but only to wish our Author his desired success in the undertaking.
I am not therefore concerned to take notice of any thing further, till the
Second Section of the Fourth Action. For though possibly in the intermediate
discourse, some things are said, which are not so cogent, and othersome which
might appear obnoxious to one that would be quarrelsome; yet because I wish
well to the design, and attend not an assault, but defense, I shall pass all
that without any other Remarque; but; that if this learned Gentleman had
thought Gassendus and my self Scepticks in good earnest, his proof which must
suppose the certainty of some principles, had been precarious; or, if not,
needless.

Sect. 2.
Ipsae jam loquantur querelae, illae nempe quibus quatuor a tertio Capitula,
cumulavit -- page 51.
Sea, and Magnetic Attractions; since in my discourse I gave him none, having
only mentioned them as things I would not insist on, and confessed them better
accounted for then less acknowledged Mysteries. Whether the reason of these
dark Phenomenon be well assigned by this Philosopher; I Will not put my self
upon the occasion of inquiring. That they are the certain and infallible
causes, I suppose this learned Man's modesty will not permit him to affirm; and
if they are but confessed probabilities, here is no opposition to the Skepticism
of the Author; which allows ingenious and hopeful conjecture in resolving the
appearances of Nature: though he fears, few Accounts will amount to Certainties
and Demonstrations. So that though for mine own part I acquiesce in the
Cartesian solution of these Magnalia, as an Hypothesis that may content one,
that is not restlesly and unreasonably inquisitive: Yet even in that, when I
would look deep, I descern objections which perhaps will very difficulty be
satisfied: And which speak those ingenious offers to be but attempts, no
absolute performances. And if this acute Philosopher think the impulse of the
external Winds a sufficient cause of the Flux and Reflux; I shall not go about
to disturb him in his satisfactions. That will ease one Man's mind, that will
leave an others restless. Only I cannot well apprehend how so constant and
regular an effect as the motion of the Sea, should depend upon so uncertain and
proverbially inconstant a cause as the winds are. Or, if there were no
difficulty in that, yet the learned Author may please to consider, that this is
but the next cause of the Phenomenon, the cause of which, perhaps, is more
hardly assigneable then the other. And the nature and original of the winds,
is, it may be, as abstruse a Theory as any in Philosophy. For in assigning
Causes, in the second or third, commonly we are lost and nonplust, which is no
inconsiderable evidence of humane Ignorance and Deficiency.

ACTIO QUINTA. Sect. I.
Tertio itaque eloquentissimae dissertationis capite objicit ignorantiam illius
rei quae notissima -- page 57.
MY learned Assailant is now descended to the difficulties not yet been
sufficiently explained, or explicable by any yet extant Hypothesis; a sad
argument of intellectual deficience, that after so much talk and endeavor
after Science, the whole world should yet be to seek in matters they have the
greatest advantages of being acquainted with. I am not therefore an enemy to
any Essays can be made toward the explication of the difficulties proposed;
but should heartily embrace any hopeful offers for the clearing of those
mysterious Theories. So that if this learned man propose any thing that may be
probable; though it come not near the title of certainty or science: I have so
great a kindness for Ingenuity, and such a desire for the quieting my anxious
and inquiring mind, that I shall give it an entertainment not like the usual
ones of angry Disputants, who cannot endure any thing that proceeds from an
Antagonist; but such a one as may evidence, that Truth is welcome to me, though
it comes in a way of opposition to the petty interest of mine opinions. To the
business then,

If to suppose the soul a distinct substance from the body and extrinsically
advenient, be a great Error in Philosophy, almost all the world has hitherto
been mistaken: so that if this Gentleman's opinion be true, he has confirmed
the Skepticism I endeavor to promote. But if we enquire into the Philosophy of
the Soul, as high as any accounts are given of it, we shall find It Is
distinction from the body to have been the current belief of all the wiser
Ages. For,

(1.) The highest times of whose Doctrines we have any History, believed it is
Praeexistence, and therefore certainly asserted it is diversity and substantial
distinction from the body it informs. Of which briefly. We have Praeexistence
among the Chaldean Oracles, (...),
(...).
And afterward more clearly (...)
(...).
And Psellus in his Exposition of the Chaldean Theology, tells us, that
according to their Doctrine Souls descended hither; (...). And again Zoroaster,
speaking of souls, (...).


Besides which (2.) Trismegistus is express in the assertion of the same
Doctrine; of which a testimony or two perhaps will not be impertinent. In his
Minerva Mundi, he brings in God threatening those he had placed in an happy
condition of life and enjoyment, with bonds and imprisonment in case of
disobedience. (...). And they transgressing, he adds, (...). And in another
place, assigns this for the cause of their incarceration; (...).

(3.) It was also the opinion of the ancient Jews, that Souls were first
created together, and resided in a place they call Golph, a Celestial region.
Ad therefore it is said in the Mishna, Non aderit Filius David priusquam
exhaustae fuerint universae animae quae sunt in Golph. So that they believed
all generations on earth to be supplied from that Promptuary and element of
Souls in Heaven; whence they supposed them to descend by the North Pole, and
to ascend by the South. Hence the saying of the Cabbalists, Magnus Aquilo
scaturigo Animarum. And probably that other Omne malum nobis ex Aquilone. From
which tradition it is likely also Homer had this notion,

-- (...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(4.) What was the opinion of Pythagoras, Plato, and the greatest of the Greek
Philosophers in this particular, is notoriously known to all men that know any
thing of these matters. And I need no testimonies in so clear a business. It
appears then from the allegations I have produced, that the most valuable
wisdom of the ancient world asserted a Doctrine which necessarily inferres and
supposes their opinion of the Souls being a distinct substance from the body.
Which also

(2) Must be supposed by all that believe it is natural Immortality. For
separability is the greatest argument of real distinction; especially that,
which the Schools call mutual. Now the Souls immortality is a truth that has
had an unanimous reception from the better and wiser world. The Egyptians,
Chaldaeans, Assyrians, Indians, Jews, Greeks, and universally all that ever had
a name for wisdom among the Ancients, believed it. And what has been the
apprehension of latter ages, I need inform no body that is capable of judging
in such inquiries. A Council of the Church of Rome it self has determined it,
and recommended it is proof and demonstration to all Christian Philosophers. But
what need of more? it is the belief of Sir K. Digby, and our Authors own. And
how real separability can consist with identity and indistinction, I know no
possibility of apprehending. For that a thing can be separated from it self,
can never be believed by any, but those that make a Religion of absurdities.

(3.) The Sacred and Mosaical Philosophy supposes the like real distinction;
of which the expression of God's breathing into Adams nostrils the breath of
life, is sufficient evidence. Yea, and all the Arguments that are alleged to
prove it is immediate creation, do strongly conclude it an other substance from
the body. Yea

(4) Aristotle himself affirms it; for says he, (...). And again, (...).
Elsewhere, (...). And yet more clearly, (...). And once more, (...). Other
testimonies I could bring to like purpose, but these are sufficient to evince
that if Aristotle be consistent with himself, he believed the real distinction
I contend for; And his Peripateticks I Am sure unanimously affirm it. To all
which if I can add Sir K. Digby's opinion, I shall bid fair for our Authors
assent to my conclusion, that 'twas Aristotle's, and the Truth.

(5) Then, That noble and celebrated friend of our Authors, affirms in his
Immortality [that the soul is a substance, and a substance besides the body.]
Yea, almost all that discourse of his leans upon that supposal. Yea

(6) Our Philosopher himself in his Peripatetical Institutions, affirms as much
as ever I supposed. For he says that ['Tis most evident that the mind is
something of an other kind from Quantity and Matter, that it is noble and wholly
opposite to the nature of Quantity, that it is a substantial Principle of Man,
and no mode or determination of divisibility, and that there is nothing common
to Body and Spirit.] Besides which, in the Fifth Book of the same Institutions,
he discourses of the Souls separation from the body, and asserts it to be
evident, that it perishes not with it; because it has actions that belong not
to a body, but has of it self the virtue of a being. And that it is power of
existence is not taken away when the body fails, the soul being apart from and
besides it. And that matter is not necessary to the Souls existence. Many other
expressions there are in that discourse to like purpose, which seem to speak
the Souls real distinction from the Body in as great variety of phrase as
diversity and distinction can be spoken. So that how such passages consist with
the doctrine of it is Identity with the body, I confess I am not Metaphysical
enough to comprehend. And I believe very few else can perceive the consistency
besides this Philosopher; whose Metaphysics of whole and part, have yet been
entertained by none that I know of; and therefore though this should be
acknowledged a good account, yet it is an Argument of the weakness of humane
understanding that it has not yet comprehended it.

I think by this time it is clear then, that the supposition of my procedure,
the Souls distinction from the Body, is not peccant; except all the world, both
Ancient and Modern, has been mistaken, and our Author also: which if it be
granted, it is an instance of what I plead for. If not, my supposition is good,
and the emergent doubt unanswered. And if our learned Author yet thinks it
plain, that either Man is no being, or that the soul and body are not two, I
must acknowledge such Palams to be the Dogmatizing I suppose. And I am willing
to put it upon the issue, whether it be so to any body else but this
Philosopher.

But (2) besides all this, it seems to me very clear from the nature of the
Things themselves abstracting from Authority; That the Soul is a substance
distinct from the body. For I think,

(1) It Is strongly concluded by the common Arguments that prove it immaterial;
for perception, perception of spirituals, universals and other abstracts from
sense, as Mathematical lines, points, superficies, congenit notions, Logical,
Metaphysical, and Moral* self-reflection, Freedom, indifferency and
universality of action: these, I say, are properties not at all competible to
body or matter, though of never so pure a mixture. Nor is it conceiveable how
any of these should arise from modificaiions of quantity being of a diverse
kind from all the Phenomenon of motion But

(2) If the soul be not a distinct substance from the body, it is then a certain
disposition and modification of it; which this Gentteman in the 10 Lesson of
his Institutions seems to intimate, saying, [That since the soul is a certain
affection -- which is introduced and expelled by corporeal action -- ] he
thence inferrs some thing that is not to our purpose to relate. And if so*
since all diversities in matter arise from motion and position of parts, every
different preception will require a different order and position of the parts
of the matter perceiving, which must be obtained by motion. I demand then, when
we pass from one conception to another, is the motion, the cause of this
diversity, merely casual; or directed by some act of knowledge? The former, I
suppose, no Man in his wits will affirm; since then all our conceptions will be
nonsense and confusion; chance being the cause of nothing that is orderly and
regular. If therefore there be a knowledge in us that directs the motions that
form every distinct conception: I demand concerning that knowledge, Whether it
be in like manner directed by some other, or is it the effect of mere casual
motions? If the former, we must run up in infinitum in our inquiry: and the
latter admits the alleged absurdities. There is no way then of defending the
assertion of the souls being matter, or any modification of it: but by
affirming with Master Hobbs a certain connection between all our thoughts, and a
necessary fate in all things: which who ever affirms, will find difficulties
enough in his assertion to bring him to mine, That there is a Vanity in
Dogmatizing, and Confidence is unreasonable.

But of this I have had occasion to discourse more in an other Treatise, and I
shall not repeat what I have there written, or what others have said on the
subject. Especially since perhaps this learned Gentleman will not think himself
concerned in the Proof of this Conclusion, he having in his writings asserted
it. But whether he have not unsaid it again in this, I appeal to any equal
Decerner. And that the soul should be a substance of another kind from matter,
that has nothing common with it; a substance separable from all body, to which
matter is not necessary, and actually in the other state divided from it: (all
which and more to like purpose our Author has in some of his Books affirmed;)
and yet not be a distinct substance, but really the same with the body to which
it is united; which he asserts in this; I say* how these so opposite
affirmations can be reconciled, I have either not wit, or not charity enough to
help me to imagine. I know this Authors doctrine is, that there are no parts
before separation and division, and therefore no real distinction. But whether
things in their natures so diverse as body and spirit, which almost in nothing,
even according to this Philosophy, communicate; are not essentially divided,
though not locally distant, I am willing to leave to the Readers judgment. And
I would fain know whereupon the separability of the soul and body is founded,
if not upon the real distinction of their natures: so that though this notion
may be less obnoxious when it relates only to substances of the same kind, and
quality; yet when it concerns those that are so essentially distinct, as body
and spirit, it seems most strangely liable. Yea though it should be supposed a
Truth, yet it must be acknowledged unconceiveable; which suffices to satisfy
my Conclusion.

page 58.
THe distinction of the Schools of a Being perfect and imperfect, is not I
think so childish and impertinent as our Author would have believed. For though
Ens Imperfectum in the Metaphysical sense, be nonsense and a contradiction;
yet in genere Physico, as they speak, it is no absurdity: since a being may want
some circumstances of natural compleatness and perfection; and yet be
Metaphysically complete and perfect: so that to affirm the soul an imperfect
Being nakedly in it self, is to say no more, then that 'twas made with a
natural aptitude, and congruity to a body by union with which it is perfected
and completed, being then furnished with the requisites of its nature; which
in like manner may be said of a body in humane form, viz. that it is defective
and incomplete till it be furnished with the principle of Humane actions, for
which it was designed. So that there is no absurdity in affirming, That a thing
may be one in a Physiological and natural sense; and two in a Metaphysical; And
so out Philosopher's inference is no sequel.

2. Quando itaque petit, Unde Anima veniat? Reponendum est, An dubitet unde
Homo veniat? -- page 59.
THe Foundation of our learned Authors Answers to the proposed difficulties
being overthrown; and it being made secure enough, That the soul is a distinct
substance from the body; it is a pertinent and material enquiry to ask, whence
the Soul is? And if our Philosopher will call this the Man according to the
Maxim, let the question be proposed in his own phrase, and there is no danger of
an absurdity.

page 59.
Church asserting the Souls Creation to his main conclusion, that it is no
distinct substance from the body; and to his inference thereupon, that it is
improper and impertinent, to inquire whence It came. But whether what is said
be a clear salve or a shuffle, let it be determined by any equal judgment. For
either by Homo quatenus intellectivus, our Author means something that is the
same with the body; or really distinct and diverse. If the former, he has not
satisfied the Authority of the Church, which affirms, the Soul as a distinct
substance, to be the immediate subject of Creation; founded upon that clear
distinction in the inspired writings [The body to the dust, and the Soul to God
that gave it.] But if he mean the latter, he has not provided for his own
assertion and hypothesis. Besides (2.) If man as intellective be created, then
either he means the whole man, or only that by which he is intellective; the
former is against all sense and experience. And the latter overthrows all our
Author's Answers, with the Proposition upon which they are erected. For if
there be some thing in man which is the subject of divine power and action; and
some other thing that is the subject of natural production and generation; it
seems to me apparent that these must be two things really distinguished. For
the same thing cannot be created and naturally produced. For Creation supposes
the production of the whole ex nihilo, both sui and subjecti (as the Schools
phrase it) without the cooperation of any thing with the divine superlative
power: whereas all generation, according to truth and the same Hypothesis, at
least supposes one of them, and is performed by natural agents. And I think
the case is plain enough when it is brought to this, Whether the same thing can
be produced of something and nothing, with created assistance, and without it?
Since the Actions then are so infinitely diverse, I think I shall not be
reprehensibly Dogmatical, in affirming the terms distinct. What the Gentleman
says more, seems to be involved, and looks like a designed evasion. And if [one
action produces a man, a Creature equivalent to a Beast and Angel] I demand,
Whether this one action be divine or natural, from God or the generant? If the
former, every man is as immediately created as the first. And the latter quite
excludes crea ion, and supposes God no otherwise to act in giving being to our
Souls, then in each common production. It Is necessary therefore that the terms
produced be distinct, when the Actions whereby they are produced are so vastly
diverse; and that the Soul have an Origination different from the Formation of
the body, of which it is more pertinent to inquire, then easy to return an
Answer.

3. Ex hac Veritate derivamur ad sequentes duos page 60.
IN this and the following Paragraphs our Author supposes identity of the soul
and body for an Answer; And I think after what has been said, I have as good
reason to suppose mine of the diversity for a reply. But how the definition of
a Part enervates my enquiry, I cannot imagine, since if [Parts are, out of
which by composition are made one] And the body and soul be supposed parts of
the Man (which may well enough be allowed upon the account of what has been
said) I see not but why we may inquire, how these parts, whose natures are so
different, can be compounded and united.

page 61.
supposal be an Error, we have seen already; if it be not, our Philosophers
Answer is so. And whither the employed assertion that the Soul moves not the
body be not one, I appeal to any man, that understands he has any claim to
such a being. For though many of our actions, and possibly more then are
suspected, may be allowed to be mere Mechanic motions; yet the experience of
all the World attests, that our wills determine and excite not a few of our
corporeal motions. What else means the distinction of the Schools of actions
imperate and elicit? And how is it that we can speak and move at pleasure, and
in spite of all corporeal impulse, desist from external action! And if Man be
a mere Mechanics Engine, farewell Free Will, Virtue, Vice, Laws, Religion,
rewards and punishments. A clock were as capable of these, according to our
Philosopher's Hypothesis, as an humane Automaton.

page 61.
*It Is true, one animate member moves another, but the motion must somewhere
begin. And though those which are purely corporeal in us are excited by
material agents; yet others we find, which derive from an higher Principle,
viz. a free and unconstrained will. And it seem strange to me that men should
be so much in love with their private speculations, as for their sakes to
confront their own, and all the worlds experience. What follows, no body that I
know, affirms, viz. [That a substance which is a pure Soul moves a member
wherein there is none].

But to what concerns other Animals, the learned Author knows, that the
Platonists assign them Souls independent on their Bodies; and the
Peripateticks, substantial Forms distinct from matter, which are the source and
Principle of their Actions. So that according to either of these Hypotheseis,
the question may as pertinently be proposed concerning their kind, as our own,
and will be as difficultly answered. Indeed the excellent Monsieur Descartes,
and his followers that affirm, all bruit Actions to be Mechanical, are not
concerned in the inquiry. And if this be the belief of our Philosopher, I Will
not endeavor to disturb his Hypothesis. Only this I Will add to our purpose,
That though we suppose the Actions of Beasts to be fatal and material, yet
there is no reason to infer the same of ours, since we feel it otherwise. And
it is no very reasonable method of arguing, to conclude from an opinion of
things we can but conjecture, to the denial of things we certainly feel, and
know. So that though, as our Author insinuates, there may perhaps be no kind of
corporeal Actions in our selves, which are not in bruits; yet it is not
therefore necessary to infer, that they proceed from a like principle in both:
much less that we should conclude, that none of our own actions are begun by a
principle distinct from the body and immaterial; because we believe that theirs
are not so. On the other side methinks the Argument will be stronger to infer,
That because we feel a substance distinct from matter to be the cause of some
of our motions; that therefore there may likely be an incorporeal substance
that is the principle and spring of some of theirs: And it is better to conclude
from certainty to conjecture, then from conjecture against certainty.

4. Ultimae, quas in hoc capitulo plangit, tenebrae collocatae sunt in
ignorantia illius motus, -- page 62.
direction of the Spirits concern not only Man, but all other Animals,
supposing them to do any thing by a principle of Knowledge and Animadversion.
Or, though we judge all their actions M chanical, yet the Account will be more
difficultly rendered that way, then by supposing them to act by an animadversive
principle. For how such an infinite variety of motions should be regularly
menaged, and conducted in such a Wilderness of passages and distinct avennues
by mere blind impellents and material conveyances, I have not the least shadow
of conjecture. And though Descartes has made the best attempts in this kind
of any has yet appeared in the Theory, yet there are Mechanical difficulties
in the way of his Solutions, which perhaps will never be well satisfied. But
our Philosopher confesses here the defect of his Anatomy; and though he thinks
himself secure of the general Cause, yet the particular Direction he
acknowledges wonderful, and not yet sufficiently discovered.

Verum Author casum proprium Homini constituere videtur, page 63.
TO prove that the Will is not always moved by some passion, and consequently
that the Soul is the immediate principle of some of our actions, I make this
double offer:

(1.) It Is clear from experience, that, though many of our volitions are
motions from the Passion, yet some of our Determinations are from the
Understanding and immaterial Faculties. And sometimes we set our Wills to
determine in things that are purely indifferent, to make trial of our Liberty;
when we find not the least provocation or incitement to the action from any
emotion of the body. And indeed to suppose every action of the Will to depend
upon a previous Appetite or Passion, is to destroy our Liberty, and to infer a
Stoical Fatality with all the dangerous consequences of that Doctrine*

(2.) Our Author's proof that there is no dispassionate volition, is an
insinuation, that there is no Knowledge without an impulse from the Phantasms;
a Conclusion which may be easily disproved, by those highly abstract
Speculations which the mind of Man sometimes entertains it self with, when it
puts off all the clothing of the Imagination, and raises it self to a temper
for those noble enquiries about God and Immaterials: And if there be no
Intellect (...), as Aristotle speaks, for ought I know, we lose one of our
chiefest Arguments for our Immortality: Besides which, I suppose our learned
Author will not think it for his credit, to be told, that he is in the very
rode of the Hobbian Hypothesis; which will clearly enough appear, if we
consider these his Assertions; [That the Soul is no distinct substance from the
Body, that it contributes nothing toward its motion; that our Wills are moved
by precedent or present Passion, which doubtless is excited by something that
is not in our power; that all our Intellections are from Phantasms, and
consequently, nothing else but elevated sense, and that all both natural and
free actions are performed by motions derived from the heart] I say, who ever
considers, how these symbolize, yea, and are one with the main Principles of
that irreligious Philosophy, must without an excess of Charity, suppose our
Philosopher to have shaken hands with the Leviathan.

Briefly then, it is confessed, that the Mechanical way of conveyance and
direction of the Spirits in Animal performances is yet undiscovered, and that
the channels and particular passages of Mechanical motions (which all ours are
supposed to be) is yet occult and manifest. And though this Gentleman affirms,
the Heart to be the Fountain of animate Operations, yet it is but an unapproved
presumption; and the greatest Master of Mechanics that ever was, the
Illustrious Descartes has derived all these motions from the brain, in which
he is followed by the greatest part of profoundest Speculators; so that it seems
we are not certain of the first spring of the motions we enquire of; much less
can we certainly determine the minutes and particularities of direction: and if
any of our actions are derived from our Souls, which our Author seems unwilling
to hear of, though I think I have made it sufficiently evident, the
difficulties I urged upon that supposal have not had the least offer toward
solution.

5. Caput quartum Sensationis and Memoriae inexplicabiles esse naturas objicit.
-- page 64.
I Am no further concerned in the beginning of this Section, his apprehension
of Descartes his Hypothesis of the manner of Sense, is, from that of his
ingenuous and applauded friend Sir K. Digby; who calls not his opinion a
fanstatical conjecture, but thus Prefaces to the recital of his Hypothesis.
[Monsieur Descartes, (who by his great and heroic attempts, and by showing
mankind how to steer and husband theit reason to the best advantage, has left
us no excuse of being ignorant of any thing that is worth the knowing)
explicating the nature of Sense -- and then goes on to declare his opinion of
this matter, which he concludes with this character; of a color very diverse
from our Author's [This then is the sum of Monsieur Des-Cartes's Opinion, which
he has very finely expressed with all the advantages that opposite examples,
significant words and clear method, can give unto a witty Discourse; which yet,
is but a part of the commendations he deserves, for what he has done on this
particular: he is over and above all this, the first I ever met with who has
published any conceptions of this nature, whereby to make the Operations of
Sense intelligible, Certainly, this praise will ever belong unto him that he
has given the first hint of speaking groundedly, and to the purpose upon this
Subject; and whosoever shall carry it any further (as what important mystery
was ever born and perfected at one?) must acknowledge to have derived his light
from him.] This is the censure that excellent person gives of Descartes, and
his Opinion, which his dear Friend our Author, has with so much severity
reflected on. And the learned Knight professes himself of Des-Cartes's mind in
all the other circumstances of this Hypothesis, except the Subject of this
Motion. So that I wonder that our Philosopher should so far forget himself, as
to put such a slurre upon the judgment of his admired Friend, by speaking so
contemptuously of a Notion that learned Man had so much, and so deservedly,
applauded. What follows is already answered.

page 65.
Assertion, and I wonder as much at his wonder; which is not occasioned by any
affirmation of mine, but by a mistake of his own: for my doubt (as plain as I
could express it) is, How, since there is nothing in the Brain, the seat of
Sense, to represent external objects but motion, (for which I have the suffrage
of his noble friend, whose method he professes to follow) how, I say, we
should by that know figures, distances, magnitudes, and colors, things of
another kind from motion; which therefore cannot represent them, but by some
knowledge in the Soul, which we are not aware of; and how the scant and narrow
images in the Brain should notify the vastest objects, in their large
dimensions, without some secret Inference and Geometry in the Soul, is
unconceiveable: But what this Knowledge is, we know not. This is the sense of
the difficulty proposed, which, how it is explicated by the Optical
demonstrations the Gentleman talks of, the Optics of my understanding cannot
discover. For the rest I dare venture it without an Answer.

6. Proximus in Memoriam labor expenditur. Illius page 66.
7. Imprimis, decidi a moventibus sensum quasdam exuvias and corporis
delibamenta, quoad tactum, -- page 68.
I Take not upon me to determine of Possibilities; and therefore Memory I infer
not, that it will never be explained hereafter: Only I affirm, that no
Hypothesis extant has yet made it manifest; which is sufficient for my
conclusion of the present narrowness of our Knowledge, though not of my
Assailants of the impossibility of enlarging it.

But our Philosopher thinks the nature of Memory sufficiently explained
already, and the account he gives is that of Sir K. Digby, which was one of the
four that I examined in the Discourse impugn'd. This is the Hypothesis which
our Author has adopted, and undertook the defense of; with what success, we
shall discover when we have examined the Answer he makes to my Impugnations.
Which after a large recital of the Hypothesis he descends to in the ninth
Section.

9. Attamen, perturbat novum Naturae miratorem page 72.
THe difficulty I urged against the Digbaean account of Memory, was, that it is
inconceiveable how those active particles, which are the images and
representations of things remembered, should keep their distinct and orderly
Situations without confusion or dissipation in a substance wherein there is
continual motion? to which the learned Gentleman returns; That it is as
conceivable as how the Rays of Light should come in a direct line to the Eye;
or how the Atomical Effluvia that continually flow from all bodies, especially
the Magnetical and Sympathetick, should find their way to the place they tend
to. To this I rejoyn briefly, (1) what the Gentleman himself suggests, were
answer sufficient, that the multiplying of difficulty does not solve it: For
supposing the direction of the corpuscles of light, and those mentioned
Effluvia, to be of a difficult apprehension, as the continuance and regularity
of those images in the Brain: yet this only argues another defect in our
Knowledge, and so is a new evidence of the truth of my General Conclusion. But
(2) the proposed Instances are far more accountable then this before us. For,
as to what concerns the light, supposing with Des Carts (as is most probable)
that the action of Light consists in nothing but the conamen of the Ethereal
matter, receding from the center of its motion: The direct tendency of it to
the Eye, is no difficulty worth considering, but as clear as the Light it self
the subject of the enquiry; or, if the rays be Atomical streams, and effluxes
of the Sun, there is no more difficulty in this Hypothesis neither, then in the
direct spouting of water out of a Pipe; yea no more, then in the beating of the
waves against the sides of a Ship, when it swims in the Ocean. For there is an
whole Sea of Atoms which derive from the Fountain illuminant, whose course can
no more be diverted, by those little bodies that swim up and down in the air;
then that of the Ocean can by those Sands, Pebles, Fishes, and Rocks, that are
mingled with the waters. And as for the other Instances of corporeal Emissions,
it would require to be proved that they perform all those feats that are
ascribed to them: whereas perhaps it is more likely, that those strange
operations are not Mechanical but Magical, being effected by the continuity of
the great Spirit of Nature, which runs through all things: or however, to
suppose this act of the Memory to be as clear as Magnetisme and Sympathies,
will be no great advantage to the belief of its certain Intelligibility.

At ego ipsum sic nodum scindo. In majoribus ubi facilior page 73.
THat what our Author has answered in this Period, wonder, as the Mystery we
are discoursing of. And if the knot be cut, it is certainly by some occult and
sympathetick Instrument, for the gross of his Answer comes not near it. The
difficulty was; How the Images of such an infinite of Objects, as we remember,
should be kept distinct without confusion, be brought forth when we have
occasion, and remanded back again into their own cells when they have done the
errant they were sent for. To which our Author says no more, but to this
purpose (if I understand him) That if the Object stays not on the Sense, it
makes not impression enough to be remembered, but if it be repeated there, it
leaves plenty enough of those Images behind it to confirm and strengthen the
Knowledge of the Object: In which radicated Knowledge, if the Memory consist,
there would be no need of reserving those Atoms in the Brain, or calling them
forth upon occasion, as the Hypothesis supposes; or, if there be, the
difficulty is untouched.

Besides all which, I might add, that if these material Images are a
sufficient account of the Memory, how will our remembrance of Distances,
Magnitudes, Relations, Words, Metaphysical Notions, and those of Immaterials,
which leave no such Idola, in the Brain, be accounted for? Let this Gentleman
tell me how -- Et erit mihi Magnus --

10. Palam est me in hac Responsione Digbaeanam Methodum caeteris praetulisse.
Ipsius enim -- page 74.
Aristotle in this matter, (1.) I err with the great body of his Commentators
and followers; yea, and all the Schools in Christendom, who unanimously concur
in the assignment of the Doctrine of Intentional Species to their Master
Aristotle; So that if all the Peripateticks hitherto have been so grossly out
in imposing an Opinion he never taught upon their adored Philosopher, for ought
I know, there is no such thing as the Aristotelean Philosophy in the
Universities of Europe: For the taking in, or denying these Intentional Species
will make material and mighty alterations in the whole frame of the Hypothesis;
and I see not how the denial of them is consistent with the Aristotelean
Doctrine of Qualities and Forms. But (2.) If Aristotle taught the Digbaean
Philosophy, as our Author says, he taught the Atomical, which is notoriously
known to have been the way of Democritus and Epicurus, which Aristotle
frequently and professedly opposes. That Democritus taught the Atomical
Hypothesis, we have the affirmative of Aristotle to justify, (...) (speaking
of Leucippus and Democritus) (...), (...). And nearer to our purpose, that
these solved the way of Sensation, by material Images, we have from Plutarch;
(...). This Hypothesis Aristotle endeavors to confute; (...), says he, (...).
And again, (...). Aristotle then thought the Doctrine of Sensation by corporeal
Images absurd in Democritus and Epicurus; and therefore certainly would not
himself affirm it; as he must do on the supposal of his having taught the same
Hypothesis with Sir K. Digby about the Memory, which is exactly the same with
that of these Sages: For that learned Knight affirms, Sensation to be performed
[by driving of solid material bodies, exceeding little ones, that come from the
Objects themselves, (they are his own words) against that part of the brain
where Knowledge resideth, which same bodies rebounding thence into certain
cells of the Brain, perform the offices of the Memory] as he has largely
discourst upon the Subject. Sir K. Digby then proceeds in the Corpuscularian
method which Aristotle opposes, and particularly in the business of Sensation;
and consequently cannot be of his belief in his Hypothesis of the Memory, which
the learned Knight gives account of by the same material Idola, which Aristotle
laughed at. And doubtless the Memory is excited to action by the like
Instruments as are the external Senses, consonantly to that of Plato in his
Phaedo, speaking of the Senses, (...). And Aristotle himself (...). I think
it is clear then that Aristotle's Doctrine of the Memory is not the same with
Sir K. Digby's. And if I have been out in intitling the Opinion of Intentional
Species to Aristotle, my mistake is the more venial, because the whole Army of
his most devoted Sectators are deceived with me. But our Author is more
reprehensible in his mistake, if it be one; because he is alone in his opinion.
And an Error has by so much the more of guilt, as it has of singularity and
self-assurance. But whether this were Aristotle's Doctrine or not, I think it is
not very material, since I make this none of the charges against him. If it be
not his, it is the general Opinion of his Schools; and I have proved it an
insufficient Account of the Faculty we are discoursing of.

ACTIO SEXTA.
1. Capite quinto formationis Corporum naturalium, Viventium praesertim,
obscuritatem intentat: -- page 76.
Formation of Animals; neither of which seems to me a sufficient solution of
the doubt attempted. For first, he that supposes all the vastly differing
parts of a Worm or Insect to be actually contained, though in myriate and
indivisible proportions, in a drop of dew out of which they are sometimes
generated, believes gratis, without any ground of his supposal; and therefore
will be very bold to assert this the certain account of the Phenomenon. (2.)
If the Seed contain, though invisibly, all the parts of the Animal; then either
in the same Site, and Position, that they are found in in the completed Body;
or they lie there in a confused huddle and mixture; the former, is contrary to
all experience, which assures us, that the immediate matter of all generations
is a certain fluid, and, as far as can be discerned, an homogeneous substance.
Now fluidity consisting in the motion of the parts of the fluid body, as is
testified by Experience and the best Philosophy, the Seminal Parts can be of no
settled Form or Consistence. And if the second be supposed, which doubtless is
the truth, the difficulty under debate will be unanswered, (viz.) how such an
Infinite of distinct Parts should be brought into their regular and orderly
Positions without the guidance and conduct of some knowing Agent; to fly to a
first Cause is Unphilosophical; and he that pretends a second, let him show it.
And fortuitously it cannot be: for Chance is the cause of no constant and
regular Effect; and to suppose an undirected Motion to shuffle these fluid
parts into the wonderful and exact form of an Animal, or any other regular
body; is as likely, as that the divided Letters of an Alphabet should be
accidentally jumbled into an elegant and polite Discourse; which when once I
see effected, I Will believe, that there wants nothing to the formation of the
World and all bodies therein, but Matter and Motion. Some intelligent Principle
then must be supposed to guide these Elementary parts into their orderly
situations. But what that is, who is it will determine?

(2.) The Second Account also is too general, and flies very wide of my
particular enquiry. For my Quaery is concerning the principle of the conduct of
the parts of the various matter in those rare and methodical Composures; and
our Philosopher's Answer concerns only the gross and material parts of the
Composition. And therefore little can be collected from the Chemical Processes
he speaks of, for our purpose; and the Elementary Solutions mentioned, signify
nothing toward the accounting for the unerring exactness we find in Animal
Formations. For all these being supposed, the matter is in the same
circumstances of difficulty as before; and this Gentleman's Solution seems to
me to signify no more, then if a man should answer to one that that desires an
account of the art and method of the motions of a Watch, or any other ingenious
Automaton; that they are performed by Steel, Iron, Brass, or Silver, wherein
the matter indeed of the work is declared, but not the artifice. And in the
case before us, I inquire of the principle of direction of those intricate and
methodical motions, and am answered with an account of the gross and material
Ingredients. Nor is what follows of any whit more avail to the Solution
pretended; for let the matter resolve into parts dry, subtle, and liquid* Let
the dryer dispose themselves into diverse figures, and constitute what Vessels
our Philosopher is pleased to fancy; yet how from hence forward the infinite
variety of the parts of an Animal will result, will require something more to
help us to conjecture.

2. Haec qui mente comprehenderit, non plorabit Plasticam vanum nomen esse and
vocem sine re. -- page 78.
Seminalities of Plants, and Vegetables, the future processes may be judged, as
our Philosopher assures us; yet this only argues, that the grown parts were all
contained pack't up in their Seeds and Berries; so that in the growth and
progress Nature did only display and unfold, what before was in the minute
proportions more closely laid together; Supposing which, the main doubt still
remains unsatisfied, viz. How these SMALLER SEMINAL parts were so ordered, and
framed? And this Brachygraphy of Nature cannot be thought less difficult then
it is Text. And, secondly, what relates to Animals we have seen already; for
it is not likely, that the formed parts were ever actually contained in the
seed, out of which they were produced.

Neque quemquam terreant artificum dicta, admirantium page 79.
I Might well wonder at the specifical uniformity of things, if unguided matter
were the only principle of their formation, against which Hypothesis this doubt
was raised; and the variation from the kind which happens in some regions,
would not be so observable, as an identity in any.

3. Eodem capitulo duas alias quaestiones movet quas page 80.
IF the doubts I propose of the union of the Parts, and composition quantity,
contain scarce any difficulty at all; our Philosopher is more lucky in his
enquiries, then others that have dealt in those Theories; most men confessing
the perplexity of the mentioned Phenomenon, especially of the latter. And the
vast diversity of Philosophers about it, testifies, that the speculation of
them is not of so facile an explication. And it is strange that the Ancients
should keep such ado about an easy Problem, and the Moderns despair of a
solution, so pretendedly obvious.

I will not differ with the learned Gentleman about the order of the questions,
and grant, that they both suppose actual parts in Quantity; which because our
Author denies, and makes this the foundation of his Answer to these, and some
of my former proposed difficulties, I must be fain to prove it; which I attempt
(1.) By giving some evidence of my Affirmative, and (2.) by showing the
weakness and insufficiency of the grounds of the contrary Assertion.

For the first then, That there are Actual parts in Quantity, I evince it by
these considerations. (1.) The formal nature of Quantity is Extension in the
notion of Aristotle's Schools; and Divisibility in the Philosophy of Sir Kenelm
Digby, and our Author; Both which suppose parts, and parts actual: for to be
extended, in the School phrase, is to have parts extrapartes; and if the
extension be actual, the parts must be so: for it is not conceiveable how a
thing can be extended, but by parts which are really distinct one from another,
though not separate: which seems to me so evident, that nothing can be spoken
plainer; and I appeal in this matter to the common sense of all men. Nor can a
thing be divided, except we suppose the parts praeexistent in the divisible:
for divisibility is founded upon real distinction, and it is impossible to
divide what is one without diversity. (2.) Except there are parts in quantity
before division, there are none at all: for after they are divided they are no
parts, but have a compleatness and integrality of their own, especially if the
subject were homogeneous. (3.) Except there are parts actually in quantity,
contradictions may be verified de eodem, with all the other circumstances,
which the Metaphysics teach impossible. For the same body may be black and
white, cold and hot, seen and not seen, and partake of all other most contrary
qualities. Which contradictions, and inconsistences cannot be accommodated in
the same subject, without supposal of the contended-for diversity. Nor will the
answer, which Sir K. Digby has provided for such Objections help the
Hypothesis, viz. [that it is not one part of the thing that shows it self, and
another that does not, one that is hot, and another cold, etc. But it is the
same thing, showing it self according to one possibility of division, and not
another.] For first, these distinct possibilities are founded upon distinct
actualities, which are the parts I would have acknowledged. And such a capacity
of receiving things so different, cannot be in the same subject, without the
supposal of parts actually distinct and diverse. (2.) The subjects of these
contrary qualities are things actual: whereas possibilities are but
Metaphysical notions. And these subjects are distinct, or contradictions will
be reconciled de eodem; from which the inference seems necessary, that quantity
has parts, and parts actual, and distinct possibilities will not salve the
business. And (3.) why must the common speech of all mankind be altered, and
what all the world calls parts, be called possibilities of division? which yet
if our Philosopher will needs name so, they being acknowledged distinct, and
proved actual, or at least founded immediately upon things that are so; my
question will as well proceed this way as in the common one, viz. How the
things that answer to these distinct possibilities are united, and of what
compounded?

There is another Answer which I find in our Authors Peripatetical
Institutions, the sum of which is, [That the contradictions have only a
notional repugnance in the subject as it is in our understandings: and since the
parts have a distinct being in our understanding, from thence it is that they
are capable to sustain contradictions] which Answer, if I understand, I have
reason to wonder at: for certainly the Subject sustains the Contradictories as
it is in re. And, I never heard of a notion black or white, but in a Metaphor;
it is the real substance is the subject of these contrarieties; which were
impossible, if it had not diverse realities answering to the qualities so
denominating. And therefore it is not the Understanding that makes the diverse
subjects of these Accidents, as our Author suggests: but there being such is
the ground that we so apprehend them. I hope I need say no more then to
establish the supposal of the difficulty under consideration, That there are
parts actually in Quantity: only I am obliged by my proposed method to add
further,

(2.) That the grounds of the excellent Sir K. Digby, and our Author, on which
they built their asserted Paradox, seem to me very insufficient to sustain so
great a weight as leans upon them. The Reasons are (1.) Quantity is
Divisibility. (2.) Divisibility is capacity of Division. (3) What is only
capable of division, is not actually divided. (4.) Quantity is not actually
divided, and therefore has no parts actually, To which in short,

(1.) That Quantity is Divisibility, is presumed; but extension is before it,
in nature, and our conception, and is the received notion, though perhaps
Impenetrability is the truest. However (2.) even this supposes parts, and
those actual: For Division is but Solution of Union. And Union supposes Parts
to be united. (3.) What is only capable of division in a Physiological and
Mechanical lense; may, yea and ought, to be divided in a Metaphysical. That is,
they ought to be diverse in their being, before they can be separate and
distinct in their material bulk and quantity. For separability must presuppose
diversity. (4.) Though Quantity be not actually divided in one sense, it is in
another: Every part having a distinct place and being of its own, though it
does not yet enjoy it separately and apart from others.

But (2.) it is pleaded against actual parts in Quantity, that if we admit
them, we cannot stop till we come down to Indivisibles; of which to suppose
Quantity composed, is said to be absurd and impossible. In return to which, I
grant the Inference, and have acknowledged the Hypothesis of Indivisibles to be
full of seeming inconsistencies; as is the other also: And therefore reckon
both among the Unconceiveables; of which there can be no greater Argument then
their having driven so great and sagacious wits upon such an Assertion, (to
which out of reverence to these celebrated persons, I shall not affix an
Epithete) against the evidence of our Senses, and the apprehension of all the
world: That there are no parts in quantity. But (2.) it is no good method of
reasoning, to deny what is plain and obvious, because we cannot conceive what
is abstruse and difficult. And I think the Assertor cannot answer it to his
severer faculties, who affirms, there are no parts actually in quantity,
against all his Senses and the universal suffrage of Mankind; because he
cannot untie the difficulties that emerge from the supposal, that Bodies are
compounded of Indivisibles; a nice and in tricate Theory. Yea how will our
Author answer for the Assertion to his Master Aristotle? who says (...).

Argumenta asserentium parts actu vel Sensum page 81.
I Believe the Assertors of Actual parts may well appeal Senses,
notwithstanding what our Author, and the learned Knight have alleged to
invalidate their evidence. For what though the sense discovers not the distinct
term of the hand or finger; Can it not therefore discern them to be distant and
distinguished from the foot and toes? And is not this enough to ground the
belief of their diversity? Cannot we distinguish the motions of our parts;
though we know not their first springs and exact beginnings? or discern a
difference between the apple and the twig it grows on; except we could see the
point where one begins and the other ends? And whether an Hypothesis is like
to stand, that is put to such poor shifts to defend it self against the
grossest of our faculties, I leave to be conjectured?

The supposition then of my doubts, being thus asserted and proved, we see yet
but small hope to expect their Solution. Or, if this be an aenswer, it is an
evidence of our intellectual weakness, that all the world has all this while
been confounded about a plain Problem upon a false supposal.

The Answer to my other difficulty about the union of the parts of quantity, is
grounded also upon the presumption that there are actually none; which I think
I have sufficiently disproved.

5. Caput sextum totum motui Rotarum dedicatum est, neque si credimus Authori
de cujus -- page 83.
part can move, but the whole must; but also that in the circular motion of a
wheel, it seems that the motion of every part must be praerequired to it self,
which I think is clear enough in the inference, though the proposition
inferred, be impossible and absurd. And what inconvenience there is in this
conclusion, that all the parts change their place at once, I have made
sufficiently evident, in the place where the difficulty is urged. I confess in
our Authors Hypothesis that there are actually no parts in bodies, the doubt is
none; and the whole matter will pass into words and air: but supposing that in
quantity there are distinct realities, I think 'twill be hard to dis-incumber
this trite Phenomenon from the perplexities I mentioned.

page 84.
remote parts, moving swifter then the central ones, in the speculative notion,
it is hard to conceive, but that the Line drawn from the Center to the
Circumference, should be inflected; since one point of the line rests while the
other moves, which in the Theory seems to argue a disunion, and consequently an
incurvation. So that though it be true in the experiment and event, yea and
while we look upon the reason of the thing, in one position; that the line
would be made crooked, were it not for the unequal velocity of the parts; yet
it appears as clear to reason, in another posture, that this inequality should
infer it. For if B move swifter then A. A rests some instant while B is in
motion. There Is no motion, but where there is change of place, viz. of that
place, in respect of which the body is said to move: The place in respect of
which the body is said to move, is the next superficies that is considered as
quiescen'. And consequently it seems if B move any instant, in which A does
not: it is proportionably to its motion removed from that of A to which it was
adjacent, and by consequence one would expect it should be disjoined, or
inflected.

6. Jactatum tandem experimentum capite alto ingreditur page 85.
SInce the publishing my Discourse; I have met an ingenious Geometricians of
this Problem, which perhaps may satisfy the difficulty. The Account briefly
is, That in volutation the whole circumference moves by a motion both
progressive and circular: But the center by the progressive only. And
consequently by how much the nearer the parts are to the center the more they
have of the progressive motion, and the less of circulation. So that the little
wheel in our experiment draws, and has so much more progression then the
greater, as makes amends for it is defect of parts. Which solution I Will
acknowledge perfect, if two things answer experiment, which I have not yet had
occasion to make trial of; viz. (1.) Supposing both wheels to be denticulated,
the little wheel will with it is teeth describe lines; and the great one with
it is make points. And (2.) the disproportion being augmented, suppose to an
hundred to one, the drawing of the lesser wheel will be exceeding palpable, and
discoverable by the dullest sense. I say, if these circumstances answer
experiment; this difficulty is for ought I know well accounted for. And I need
add no more to this confession: For our Authors Answer is either materially the
same with this, or much less to purpose.

ACTIO SEPTIMA.
1. In sequentibus aliquot Capitulis satis exquisite investigat causas Errorum
and Ignorantiae -- page 90.
prattling Ignorance, and vain shows of Science falsely so called, will not be
denied by one, who has directed some endeavors against them. And did I not
deeply apprehend how much bold affirmers, and lazy Inquisitors have prejudiced
the advance of true and substantial knowledge, I had never engaged against
Dogmatizing and Peripatetick Philosophy. I wonder therefore that my learned
Assailant should object my omission of these causes of Ignorance, which had the
greatest interest in drawing from me the Discourse he opposes; in which, I
have largely insisted on those reasons of the defect of Knowledge, viz. the
depth of Truth, the praecipitancy of men's understandings, and aversness to deep
search, and close engagement of their minds. Besides which, I have professedly
attacqued the disputing way of Inquiry, and the verbal emptiness of the
Philosophy of the Schools; which how guilty it is of laying a foundation for
sloth and loquacity, is particularly made appear in the Discourse I directed
against it. And while the Schools of Learning are under the regency of that
kind of Spirit, I fear little is to be expected from Philosophy but bold talk;
and endless disputes and quarrels. For what else can be the fruit of a
Philosophy made up of occult Qualities, Sympathies, Entelechia's, Elements,
Celestial Influences, and abundance other hard words and lazy generalities, but
an arrest of all ingenious and practical endeavor; and a Wilderness of
Opinions instead of certainty and Science? But thanks be to Providence, the
World begins to emerge from this state of things, and to employ it self in more
deep and concerning Disquisitions; the issue of which, we hope, will be a
Philosophy fruitful in works, not in words, and such as may accommodate the use
of Life, both natural and moral.

Testis mihi esto Author qui sub finem prioris Capitis page 90.
HOw justly the Author is made an instance and witness that, which, in the very
Discourse, by which only, I suppose, he is known to our Philosopher, he has so
earnestly witnest against, which his spirit is so averse unto, which gave the
occasion of the Dispute between us; I say, with what justice I am made an
instance of that I have so professedly opposed, let it be judged by any, that
is not unreasonably partial. It Is true, I complain of the obscurity of Motion,
Gravity, Light, Colors, Vision, and Sounds; and yet am not ignorant of the
Accounts Sir K. Digby, and other Philosophers both Ancient and Modern, have
given of these Phenomenon. My mind is anxious in speculation, and has engaged
me to look as far, as my capacity could reach, into these Theories; I could
never content my self with superficial put*offs; nor am I apt immediately to
despair, if I find not present satisfaction in my first enquiries. I have with
my best diligence examined the most hopeful accounts are extant of these
appearances, and yet must profess, That though the first sight of their
respective solutions is pleasant and encouraging, and seems to promise my mind
a requiem; yet the longer I view the most likely of these Hypotheses, the more
liable and obnoxious I apprehend them. Like Pictures they will not bear to be
looked upon, but at a distance, and when I come near, I easily detect their
imperfections. So that deep search discovers more ignorance, then it cures; and
confidence of Science seems to be built upon a slight and superficial view of
things; as Aristotle himself has somewhere observed, and every one else may,
that will but take notice, that young talking Sophisters use to be far more
assured of their Assertions, then the deepest and most exercised Philosophers.

I Will not disparage the account given by the learned Sir K. Digby of the
mentioned Phenomenon; they are to be acknowledged pretty, and ingenious: But
yet I cannot think, that it is an argument of shallowness and impatience in
enquiry, not fully to acquiesce in his Hypotheses as infallible Solutions. I
suppose, that ingenious Philosopher's own modesty and justice will not suffer
him to own such a fondness for his notions, which I know he proposes, but as
likely and convenient supposals. I confess the most satisfaction. I any where
meet with, is in the accounts of Descartes, to whom Sir K. Digby himself bears
this Testimony, [That he has shown the World the way to Science,] And yet that
great man, the excellence of whose Philosophic genius and performances, the
most improved spirits acknowledge, propounds his Principles but in the modest
way of Hypotheses, and pretends not to have explained things as they are, but
as they may be. And I believe our Author will not reckon, him among the slight
and talkative Philosophers; which is so far from being true, that such as love
only to skim things, and have not the patience to keep their minds to a deep
and close attention, cannot with any face as much as pretend acquaintance with
his Principles; the comprehension of which, will require the most severe
meditation, and fixed engagement of the mind, of any Philosophy that is
intelligible. Not, that this excellent person affects obscurity either in
Matter, Style, or Method, being indeed very perspicuous in all of them: but
because, his way is unusual, and his Principles so coherent and closely pack't
together, that the letting fall any link of connection, will spoil the
dependence, and hinder the understanding of the sequel. But I return from this
excursion. If all then must be accounted impatient and shallow Philosophers,
who acquiesce not in the Digbaean Hypotheses; all the learned Cartesians,
Platonists, the whole stock of the ingenious recent Philosophers; yea and All,
that follow not the way of Sir K. Digby, must unavoidably fall under the shame
of these appellatives; and perhaps that great person himself, who I dare say
thinks not the light his Philosophy has afforded these perplexing
Speculations, to be so clear, as to admit of no shadow or obscurity. What ever
haste therefore those discover, that will not be fully contented with the
Principles in which our Philosopher is so well satisfied, I am confident that a
little reflection will inform him, that he has betrayed some, in his censure.

2. Altera ab Authore nostro neglecta Ignorantiae causa mihi apparet esse
quidam specialis -- page 91.
is, or can be objected; let them answer for their Assertion, I am not to
account for the mistakes of others: And if there are those who will not admit
of certainty or evidence in a conclusion that any has made a doubt of, as our
Author intimates in the following Paragraph, I have as little to answer for
their Skepticism and incredulity. For I never expect to see the world agree in
any thing; and therefore I assent where I see cause, and proportion the degree
of my belief to that I have of evidence, without expecting the hopeless
encouragement of a universal suffrage. Though I confess, where deep and
enquiring spirits differ, I judge I have reason to be cautious, and to suspect
uncertainty. Our Author concludes with a reprehension of those endless talkers,
the Modern Peripateticks, and their voluminous trifles, in which I dissent not
from him: But pass from them to their Master Aristotle, whom our Philosopher
undertakes to vindicate from my reflections; with what success, will be the
subject of our next enquiry.

ACTIO OCTAVA.
1. Et jam defunctus labor imperato videor, nisi Aristotelem omnibus -- page
95.
OUr Author in this Paragraph is of a very different Aristotelians, if we will
believe Patritius, who says, Tritum vero jam est ac emnium Aristotelicorum
assensu comprobatum, nullam esse in Aristotelicis Libris Scientificam
Demonstrationem. Our Philosopher then denies all Science among the other
Ancients, and the rest of the Aristotelians allow none in Aristotle. And if
either be true, or both, it is an evidence against Dogmatizing, and fond doting
upon Authorities.

But this action is professedly directed against Gassendus; some few of whose
charges against Aristotle our Author endeavors to defeat and disable; which
should he succeed in according to his desires, yet the far greater, and perhaps
the more formidable number stands unanswered. Briefly then (1.) he excepts at
Gassendus's animadverting on Aristotle's manners, which he insinuates, to be
more like a crafty Orator, then a close and severe Philosopher. To which in
behalf of that excellent Neoterick, it may be rejoined, That if Aristotle were
vicious and immoral, there is much the less reason why we should revere his
authority: For truth and virtue use to dwell together; and the fear of the Lord
is the beginning of wisdom. Vice drowns the noble Idea's of the Soul, and fills
the mind with those foul steams of the body, which are prejudicial to deep and
worthy enquiries; so that with all good men and true Philosophers 'twill not a
little detract from the credit of Aristotle's Intellectuals, if his Morals are
acknowledged, or can be proved obnoxious. Whither the charge be just or not,
our Philosopher makes no enquiry, which seems a tacit confession of the truth
of the accusation; and then I think he has no reason to object the
impropriety. After this remark he descends (2.) to some particular instances of
Gassendus's charge, to as many of which, as I am concerned in, I make this
brief rejoinder: (1.) Then Aristotle expressly makes God an Animal in these
words (...). If he says otherwise elsewhere, it is only an argument of the
inconsistency of Aristotle, not of the injustice of Gassendus.

(2.) That God acts by necessity, Aristotle clearly enough insinuates in that
conclusion of his (...), which is testimony sufficient of the truth of my
charge; if Gassendus accused him of more, it is like he was able to make it good.

(3.) That Aristotle made the world eternal, our Author allows me. But that
hereby he proved himself the chief of all the Ethnic Philosophers, I cannot
grant him so easily. For (1.) Aristotle was not the first in this Assertion,
but had it from Ocellus Lucanus; from whom also he transcribed the Arguments he
made use of to enforce it: Which yet (2.) are not such, as do so highly commend
his Philosophy, and faculty of arguing. He proves the World eternal then,
because the Heavens are so; the Assertion of which he attempts by five
Arguments: (viz.) (1.) From the Etymology of ether, viz. ab (...). (2.) From
the silence of History of any change or alteration they have undergone. (3.)
From the Opinion of the Ancients. (4.) From the freedom of the Heavens from
contrarieties. And (5.) from the eternity of the Caelestial motions, which he
proves with the eternity of time by reasons borrowed from Ocellus, who was the
Author of the main Argument. Now whoever affirms that such arguings as these
set Aristotle so much above all the more ancient Philosophers, expresses more
fondness toward him, then justice to his betters. Nor can the comparative
excellency of his wit be any more reasonably concluded from his allowing the
natural inference of that acknowledged Principle, Ex nihilo nihil; which
doubtless the Ancients never meant in the general notion; but in a sense which
restrained it to natural productions; else their Assertion of the Worlds
beginning had been nonsense and a contradiction.

(4.) The learned Gentleman admires that we should charge Aristotle with the
denial of the Resurrection of the dead; which though he acknowledges truly to
be alleged; yet he thinks it unreasonably objected, since he supposes this
doctrine only to be discoverable by supernatural light and revelation. To which
briefly, (1.) Though the Resurrection in the particular circumstances, in which
Christianity has clothed it, be not known by our unassisted faculties: Yet
that the Soul shall live, and live united to a Body in the other State, I think
deducible from the mere principles of Nature: For the Philosophy of the Soul
informs us, that it uses matter in its highest operations, which is fair ground
of conjecture, that it is always united to some body. Besides which, it may be
argued from the analogy of Nature, which uses not in other things, to leap
from one extreme unto another; And therefore it is not likely that the Soul
should pass immediately, from the state of so deep an immersion into the gross
matter, to a condition of pure and absolute immateriality. To which may be
further added, that, even according to the principles of Aristotle, there can
be no Knowledge without Sense, nor Sense without corporeal Motion, which cannot
well be perceived by a being that is perfectly disjoined from matter. Thus the
principles of mere reason suggest, that the Soul is joined to another Body
after its discharge from the present. And (2.) others of the Greek
Philosophers, by the mere conduct of their natural light, believed it. The
Academicks generally assigned Bodies to those in the other state, and such as
were suitable to the regions of the World they resided in; and therefore Plato
calls some of them (...). And to others of more inferior conditon he attributes
Aerial bodies; yea, generally the Greeks appointed corporeal punishments for
the wicked in their Acheron, and Cocytus, as Theocritus, (...).
And Virgil, -- Aliis sub gurgite vasto
Infectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igni.
But the business is so well known that it needs no testimony; and from hence
it is sufficiently evident, that they believed the corporeal state of the Soul
after its separation from this Terrestrial body: So that Aristotle's Assertion
herein, is contrary both to the nature of the thing; and the belief of most of
his contemporaries; nay, and the most venerable wisdom that was before him. And
indeed, what he taught of the Soul, is at the best uncertain, he using the word
(...), for the mind one while, and then for the fancy; applying it now to
Angels, and at another time to Brutes; so that none of his Sectators could ever
tell what was his opinion about it.

ACTIO NONA.
1. A Gassendo ad Authorem Vanitatis Dogmatizandi page 104.
I Think still that the Many are very incompetent Judges worth either in Men or
things, admiring trash, and slighting excellence; And it is my Lord Bacon's
Observation, which signifies much more with me; then all our learned Author has
said in this Paragraph, viz. [I hat the lowest virtues are the subjects of the
Peoples praise; the middle ones of their admiration; but the highest they have
no sense at all of;] which saying holds not only in Morals, but in all things
else which the vulgar use to judge in: for they regard nothing, but what is
like themselves, that is, mean and trivial; which is the reason of that other
Observation of the same great Philosopher; That Time, like a River bears up
what is light and chaffy, while the things that are more weighty and
considerable, are lost at the bottom.

2. Subjicit Author noster Sapientium arbitrio Peripateticam page 105.
THe excellent Lord Verulam is one of the wise men that arbritrariness of
Aristotle's words, particularly in his Instauratio Magna, where he says, [I
cannot a little marvel at the Philosopher Aristotle, that did proceed in such a
spirit of difference and contradiction to all antiquity, not only to frame new
words of Science at pleasure, but to confound and extinguish all ancient
wisdom] and his affected obscurity, Patricius says, All the Greeks confessed;
yea Themistius one of his great Sectators says of him, Se, veluti sepiam
a^ramento suo sese occuluisse. And Simplicius another, writes thus in his
Prolegomena to the Praedicaments: (...), Besides which clear testimony the
Author of the censure prefixed to Aristotle's works cited by Gassendus after
great praises of him, adds, Ingenium viri tectum and callidum and metu^ns
reprehensionis, quod inhibebat eum, ne proferret interdum aperio, quae
sentiret; Inde tam multa per ejus opera obscura and ambigua. And again the
forementioned Themistius, Cum plereque omnia Aristotelis scripta quasi de
composito caligine quadam offusa oppletaque habeantur: like unto which is that,
which Simplicius says of him: In Acroamaticis data opera obscurus esse voluit.
We see then who the wise Men are, that have accused the obscurity of the
Aristotelean processes. And that he was not so clear from aequivocatiens as our
Author suggests; I Will give but a double instance (1.) of his applying the
forementioned (...) to Beasts and Angels, to the Imagination and abstracted
Intellect. And (2.) his calling God, the Quintessence, Form, the Soul, and
Motion, by the common appellative of (...) To all which might be added, that
it is an argument that the Aristotelean method was not so clear and cautious, as
our Author would have it believed; since his Commentators have been infinitely
divided about his meaning: And our Author himself complains, That those of the
latter Schools have quite receded from his genuine doctrine, which either
accuses their ignorance, or his obscurity. It appears then, that the wise Men I
mention to have accused Aristotle's ambiguities and aequivocations were those
that understood the Aristotelean Doctrines, being some of them his most genuine
and ancient Interpreters; and not those who are so little acquainted with the
matters of this Philosophy, as to charge Aristotle with the faults of, I know
not what, apish Peripateticks, and Pyrrhonians.

3. Prosequitur deinde Actionem in Peripateticos per page 107.
IN this Paragraph I can understand nothing proved, but possible to be before
it is; which possibility our Author will have to be neither quid, nor quale,
nor quantum: Though not absolutely nothing. And if this learned Gentleman take
this posse of a thing for Aristotle's materia prima, he mistakes the
Metaphysical, for the Physical matter: Or, if hereby he would only insinuate,
that the first matter may be something, though neither quid, quale, nor quantum;
the instance is too short for his conclusion, since the posse of a thing before
it is, is no real being, but an extrinsecal denomination, and a mode of our
conception.

4. Duae aliae Voces molestae sunt Sceptico nostro. Hae forma, and educi de
potentia materiei* -- page 109.
I Call the Aristotelean form an empty word, because I real that answers it;
All bodies are sufficiently distinguished by figure and position of parts, and
I see no necessity to introduce such an arbitrary being; However, if our Author
pleases, let him call that by which things are distinguished, their form: But
if with Aristotle he will make this a substantial principle of things; I must
be excused in a dissent to which my reason inforces me. And if his Hypothesis
be, that forms are accidents, (as it seems, he supposes, by the instances
alleged) he recedes from his Master Aristotle, who expressly makes his Form a
Substance. (...), And again, (...).

5. Quoad posteriorem vocem, seu educi de potentia, videat Vir ingeniosus an
illud quod -- page 110.
dark, was in it. And Caesar adds nothing to the Marble, but the Figure; which
is but a mode of Matter, and answers not our case. But Forms are not supposed
Praeexistent in the Matter from whence they were educed; and are Substances
really distinguished from it: which I have proved from Aristotle, and it is the
sense of his Commentators, though it seems it is not our Authors. I inquire
then, are these Substantial Forms produced of something, or of nothing? An
Aristotelian will not allow the latter; for this were against the Maxim, Ex
Nihilo Nihil, and a Creation. He affirms it produced of something then, and
this something is Potentia Materia. I enquire further therefore, whether any
thing of the Form did actually Praeexist in this Power of the Matter, or not?
If so, all possible Forms reside in the Subjects out of which they are educed,
which is not consonant to their Hypothesis. If not, the latter part of the
disjunction is confessed; to avoid the shame of which, they fly to subjective
dependence: And this is the Potentia Materiae, they talk of; from which follow
the absurdities I inferred. And this is the Philosophy of the Schools; and this
the Peripateticism I charge: If our Author says, it is not according to
Aristotle's Doctrine, let him dispute it out with Aristotle's followers; I
charge it not on him, but on his Schools, in which all the world can justify
me.

ACTIO DECIMA.
1. Proxime sagittant duas Aristotelis Definitiones, page 112.
LEt (...) signify as our Author would have it, viz. That which remains of an
Action, and is introduced by it. But I enquire then, (1.) Whether this
Interpretation be not arbitrary? I Am sure the word in this sense is so. (2.)
Light is then something that remains of an operation: And this Explication
notably helps the perspicuity of the Definition, which is as good a one as that
was lately given of a Thought in a University Sermon, viz. A Repentine
Prosiliency jumping into Being. And if our Author's Description be all
contained in Actus Perspicui* I shall need no more proof of Aristotle's
obscurity in this* instance.

2. Idem est reliquae Definitionis Vitium. Est autem Motus est Actus entis --
page 113.
Motion signify the Mode, whereby the subject is affected in the end of
Action, according to our Author; with what congruity does Aristotle then apply
it to the Soul? except he thought it a mode of matter, and then our Philosopher
had no reason to suppose he believed its Immortality; But whatever he concluded
of this, he affirmed it to be a Substance, as in that passage, (...). And Galen
of him, (...).

3. Nova calumnia Capite decimo septimo instruitur adversus Aristotelem, tanto
indignius -- page 115.
Aristotle was not so careful in distinguishing the signification of words, as
is pretended, we have evinced already: And it appears clearly enough from the
last instance; In which things are coupled together by a common appellative
that agree in nothing. And for the other mistake this period charge me with,
I answer; That if I take the Scepticks for Peripateticks, I hope our
Philosopher will henceforward absolve me from the so often objected Skepticism.
For according to our Author my Peripateticks are Scepticks, and he knows how
much friendship I have for those. But whether they are Scepticks or not, they
are Aristotle's followers, if he have any in the Schools of Christendom; And I
leave them to justify the title they have assumed. It suffices for me, that
the genuine Aristotelian method is a way of obscurity and dispute; for which,
besides the instances I have given, I have alleged the clear testimonies of
his acknowledged Sectators. And if the modern Peripateticks can prove
themselves Aristotelians, we have a charge of sufficient aggravation from our
Author against them also. For thus he censures them under the name of Scepticks
[Scepticorum conatus esse vanissimos facile agnosco, illos parum de vocum usu
sollicitos esse quo liberum sit iis quaslibet nugas vanitatis aut alterius
lucri causa divendere, oratorculos vel magis rabulas, non Philosophos esse,
Aristotelicorum nomen assumere ut corrumpant juventutem, and Discipulos post
sese abducant; hos omnibus Scientiae sectatoribus veluti pestem vitandos non
inficior, neque quicquam ab iis solidi expectandum esse.]

4. Confirmant fictam adversus Philosophum actionem page 116.
IT seems it was not only the abstractedness of the matter, Aristotle's
Physiology so difficult of comprehension, since our Author confesses that
scarce any understand it, but who are assisted by the Commentaries of the
Ancients. And certainly all the Moderns had never receded so far from his
sense, if his expressions had not been obscure and involved, as well as his
matter difficult. And for that which the learned Gentleman calls a more
grievous and unhappy calumny: He confesses it to be Aristotle's Instruction to
perfect his Scholars in the method of disputing, which is all I charge him
with; And I think ambiguity and obstinate garrulity in Controversies, which the
Philosopher seems to advise them to, is a way of Disputation that will not much
commend the Practisers, or Instructor.

5. Merebatur haec actio instantias ex opere. Premit Author tres (ex fide credo
Gassendi -- page 117.
Aristotle no wrong in the first instance alleged, will appear to any one that
will take the pains to peruse the first Chapter of his first De Celo. For
attempting there the Proof of the perfection of bodies in order to the evincing
that of the World, he does it thus: The magnitude that is one way divisible, is
a line; two, is a superficies; and what may three ways be divided, is a Body.
Besides which there is no other magnitude, for this reason (...), which he
proves by a saying of the Pythagoreans, and this Reason in Nature (if it be
one) viz. because the beginning, end, and middle, (...) which also is confirmed
by that I quoted from him: (...). And concludes, wherefore since All and
perfect, differ not as to their form, Body will be the only perfect magnitude,
and that for the reason I assigned from him, (...). This is the genuine tenor
of Aristotle's argument, and our Authors sense and interpretation seems to me,
(as I suppose 'twill to any one else, who considerately compares it with the
Text) foreign, arbitrary, and unnatural.

As to the second Instance, the learned Gentleman has mistaken the words of my
charge. For if he pleases to look again into my Book, he will find, that I
object no such consequence to Aristotle, as, That if there were more worlds
then one, the Moon would fall to the Earth. But on the contrary, that the Earth
would fall to that other World. So that our Authors justification of
Aristotle's argument, viz. That he fixed the Center of the World in the Earth,
is a strange one, and concludes the quite contrary to what Aristotle would
infer. And why the Moon should fall, upon the suppositions, that the Earth is
the Center, and that there are other Worlds, (as our Author suggests) rather
then as things are at present, I cannot conjecture.

My Third Instance of Aristotle's trifling, and inconsequent arguings, was;
That he inferrs the Heavens to move toward the West, because they move toward
the more Honorable, and before is more honorable then after. Which is clearly
his consequence in the 5. Chapter of his second De Coelo: For thus he argues,
(...), Nature does always what is best. Now says he, as the motion which is
upwards is more excellent then that which is downward, (...); so in like manner
is that which is forward more excellent then that which is backward. Thence he
concludes this the reason why the Heavens move antrorsum. (...). So that this
seems the substance of the Inference; The Heavens move by a motion that is
natural, Nature does what is best, before is better then behind, and
consequently that way the Heavens move. The weakness of which argumentation
consists in supposing, that those variable respects of before, and after, are
realities in Nature, which is a poor vulgar conceit, arising from the mere
prejudice of misapplyed Sensations, and very unbecomming a Philosopher. And
that this was the supposal of Aristotle's Argument, is confirmed by the margin
of Pacius's Edition, in which he has given this account of the contents of
this period, Coelum movetur ad anteriorem partem, quia hujusmodi motus est
praestantior quam motus ad partem posteriorem. Yea, when our Author himself
says in the Account he gives of the Argument, Motum naturalem esse ad
honorabilius, unde clare sequitur occidentem esse nobiliorem orient, he has
given me all I have contended for.

ACTIO UNDECIMA.
page 123.
profitable Doctrines of the Heavens, Meteors, Minerals, and Animals. But his
Skepticism, viz. the present Peripateticism, is the cause. And this is that
which I charge in the place animadverted on. So that I accuse not Aristotle
here; but by name the modern Retainers to the Stagyrite: But whether the
notionality and obscurity of the Aristotelian method it self do not give
occasion to the endless babble of those reprehended Scepticks, I have already
past my conjecture.

2. Capite decimo octavo arguit doctrinam Peripateticam, quasi ad Phenomenon
salvanda -- page 124.
Aristotelian Philosophy is insufficient for the Solution of the Phenomenon;
And yet question not Aristotle's endeavors in that kind, but his success, upon
what Accounts my Discourse declares.

I acknowledge the ingenuity of Sir Kenelm Digbye's Hypotheseis: But cannot yet
understand that to have been Aristotle's method. And I think our Author is one
of the first that asserts Aristotle to have taught the Corpuscularian and
Atomical Philosophy; for all the World has hitherto taken his, to be the way
of Qualities and Forms: Yea Aristotle mentions the Atomical Hypothesis of
Democritus in a way of dissent and professed opposition; (...) which last passage
is the main substance of the Corpuscularian Philosophy. And elsewhere he
recites the same Hypothesis from Leucippus and Democritus, to the same purpose;
(...).

Urget adversarius systema coeli ab Aristotele sequius page 125.
I Cannot see but that Aristotle without Optic Instruments, Motion of the
Earth, and Fluidity of the Heavens, as well as the more ancient wisdom that
believed them. He recites the former as the opinion of the Pythagoreans, but
could not overcome the prejudice of sense against it. (...). And in another
place has a professed redargution of this Pythagorean opinion. As for the
Hypothesis of the Fluidity of the Heavens, It Is said in the Jewish Gemara, Non
orbs sed in Coelo liquido moveri sidera, vetustissima Haebreorum sententia
est. And if Aristotle had owned a wit so much more excellent then others of the
Ancients, as our Author somewhere intimates, I see not why he might not have
received these Theories, as well as some of those, to whom Optic Tubes were as
much strangers as to the Contriver of the Orbs. That the Christian Doctrine
teaches the Motion of the Heavens by Intelligencies* I cannot yet comprehend.
And our Author cannot think it so evident as to be believed without proof. Our
Air according to the best computations can be made of the weight of the
Astmosphear, reaches not much above 50 miles upwards; and the thin Element
there, is nothing to the sphere of Fire supposed under the concave of the Moon.

3. Caput decimum nonum exagitat Aristotelis doctrinam quasi infaecundam and
sterilem. -- page 126.
Philosophers to make Experiments; the noble Lord Bacon, Des Carts, our
Illustrious Royal Society, and all experimental Philosophers, have been
needlessly employed, and out of the way in their inquiries. And if we must use
no Experiments but those that are made by ordinary Mechanics without design of
Science, we shall never make any great progress into the knowledge of the
Magnalia; which are not known by the common methods of action. He that will
erect a lasting and stately Fabric, must have Stones dug from the Quarries,
and not expect that the Highways should furnish him.

What these common Aristotelian Principles are, without which no account can be
given of natural effects, our Author would do well to tell us. Some Principles
indeed are necessary, and without them nothing can be inquired or determined:
But such are common to all Philosophers, and not peculiarly Aristotle's.

Those that admit vacuities, think there can be no action without them; holding
it impossible there should be motion in absolute pleno; And we have but our
Author's bare assertion against their arguments.

The Cartesian vortices will serve to account for the Phenomenon, and teach a
way of Theory not unserviceable to experiment. And for the Salvo of Aristotle's
credit in those contradictory passages we meet in his Writings; viz. that they
are the sayings of others, it seems to me an arbitrary shift and evasion: Since
we find them in his Discourses without mention of any such matter. And if it be
confessed his custom to insert foreign Doctrines and Sayings into his Works,
without any intimation to distinguish them from his own; who then can know when
Aristotle speaks himself, or when he speaks the words and sense of others?

4. Caput vicesimum manifestam reddit eminentiam page 127.
IN that Chapter I impugn not Aristotle's Philosophy, but Reflections in the
former. Causalities are first found out by concomitancy, as I intimated. And
our experience of the dependence of one, and independence of the other shows
which is the Effect, and which the Cause. Definitions cannot discover
Causalities, for they are formed after the Causality is known. So that in our
Authors instance, a man cannot know heat to be the Atoms of Fire, till the
concomitancy be known, and the efficiency first presumed. The question is then,
How heat is known to be the effect of Fire? our Author answers by it is
definition. But how came it to be so defined? The answer must be, by the
concomitancy and dependence; for there is nothing else assignable.

But who is our Authors Peripatetick that concludes heat to be the Atoms of
Fire? And who that adorer of Descartes that professes Skepticism?

5. Nihilo validius est Argumentum a varietate Opinionum Philosophantium ad
impossibilitatem -- page ^^9.
variety of Philosophers Opinions against the possibility of Science, but from
the notion of the Dogmatists; that demonstration supposes certainty, as
Aristotle himself affirms, (...); And certainty, impossibility of being
otherwise; as Aristotle proceeds, (...); I say, from hence I infer it is
scarce modest to conclude any thing so a demonstration, and consequently,
Science in their notion; The reason of my Inference is fully declared in my
Discourse, the least view of which will be evidence enough of the wideness of
this answer.

Sub finem Capitis assumit nihil sciri posse nisi in primas page 131.
WHen I affirm nothing can be known but by a resolution of things into their
first causes, I mean the Mechanical, not Metaphysical: For I am of opinion with
the excellent Lord Verulam; That Natural Theory has been very much hindered,
and corrupted by Metaphysical admixtures; And this is a considerable fault of
Aristotle and his Sectators. Some general notices indeed are necessary to
direct us in particular researches, but then they must be such as are concluded
from induction in particulars; and perhaps the instances our Philosopher
alleges to show the necessity of Metaphysics to Physiology will be better
determined and accounted for in the way of experiment, then notion; and I think
our Author's Metaphysical argument against a Vacuum, (the exploding of which he
thinks so necessary for the establishment of a grounded Philosophy) I think, I
say, his argument is a Sophism, whose greatest force lies in the scarcity of
words and defect in language: For this is the sum of the presumed
demonstration. A Vacuum is imaginary space; Imaginary space is nothing real,
and those bodies are together, that have nothing between them: If the middle of
which Propositions be denied, the argument comes to nothing; and it may without
absurdity be affirmed, that though space have not the nature of any of the
beings that are in our praedicaments, yet it is something real and not merely
imaginary: For the notion of space strikes so close to our minds, that we
cannot conceive, but that it is infinite and eternal, viz. is every where, and
has been always; and therefore has a kind of being, that is no arbitrary
figment; Though such a one, for the expressing of which our words are
defective: We see then, how this pretended Metaphysical impossibility may be
answered; For though supposing a Vacuum there be nihil corporis between the
bodies distant, yet is there aliquid spatii, which is sufficient to avoid the
contradiction; so that there may be a vacuum, notwithstanding our Author's
Metaphysics: Yea, that Aristotle himself asserted it, though I know he has
opposed it also, is affirmed by Aetius in these words, (...). And again, (...);
and there seems a strong necessity that there should be one, since it looks
like an impossibility that there should be motion in pleno, or at least that
any thing should be moved, but that all the World must be moved with it; which
I allege only to show, that Metaphysics may both ways be urged almost for any
thing, and that all matters of notion are double-handed. And if we must
determine nothing in Physiology till Metaphysics have concluded it; for ought
I know we shall be at an eternal loss, and never fix on any thing. And by this
method of mingling Metaphysics with Natural Philosophy, we shall fill plain
Theories with infinite intricacy and dispute. Indeed, the impatient mind of
Man, as my Lord Bacon observes, is too apt to fly to general conclusions; and
more averse to the way of experiment and induction, which he thought the only
method for the establishing of a solid and grounded Theory: In which there is
none has more happily succeeded then the Philosopher Descartes, whose
Philosophy is not a prescribed form how things should be made, as our Author
injuriously suggests, but professes it self only an Hypothesis how they may be,
and how by such Principles the Phenomenon may be salved: And the Mechanics of
Descartes are much more likely methods for the expounding Nature, then the
Metaphysics of Aristotle; Which his own Sectators have confessed a mere rhapsody
and confused ramble of they knew not what: Yea, and it is doubtful whither they
are not the spurious issue of some more modern Author, since Diogenes Laertius,
who uses to give a full and faithful Catalogue of the Writings of Philosophers,
has omitted this out of the Works of Aristotle, and Philoponus affirms that
Book written by Pasicrates Rhodius. And if so, Aristotle will lose the credit
of demonstration in Metaphysics, with which our Author has invested him.

7. Sequens Capitulum laborat illo Errore quem Aristoteles page 132.
IMperfect knowledge, according to the notion of the Dogmatists, Science, but
Opinion. Scire, our Author knows, is per causas Scire; and the conditions of
those Causes are that they be true, immediate, and necessary; This is perfect
Knowledge, this is the Science the Dogmatist pretends to; and to this according
to his own Maxim, every thing that is must contribute, as my Discourse
declares. Nor do our Philosophers Instances weaken my Conclusion; for they
relate to another kind of Knowledge, viz. that of the Existence, not of the
Nature of things; which latter is that which I am treating of; and the
knowledge of the being of a thing, as is its object, is a simple act, and
consequently, to this, a single evidence is sufficient: But the comprehension
of the nature, like the thing it self, is complex, and requires the knowledge
of the things of which it is constituted. What is added within this Paragraph
about two Persons, seeing the same object in the same circumstances of
sentiment, is our Author's bare assertion, against my proof of the contrary:
And the last period is built upon the fore*mentioned mistake of my design and
intentions.

8. Attamen Academicus noster non dubitat generatim dogmatice procedentibus
affingere quaevis -- page 134.
Moral Considerations against Confident Opinion: His reflections on the two
first of which are built upon the supposal of my being a Sceptick, which charge
I think I Have sufficiently disabled. The truth of my Third Accusation is
confessed, but the guilt, not acknowledged; since that which excites men to
endless bawlings, and altercations; Schisms, Heresies, and Rebellions, by the
vehemencies of Dispute, is it seems with our Author no more noxious and
criminal, then the Sun that stirrs men up to their work in the morning, by the
importunity of it is beams. To the Fourth absurdity of Dogmatizing, our
Philosopher also gives a kind reception; and it seems can be content with a
Confidence that accuses all the World of Ignorance. But whether be the more
modest, the Dogmatist that charge all that are not of his mind as Ignorants;
or the Sceptick that involves himself also in the common reproach, let them
dispute it out when they will, I have nothing to do with their Quarrel. In the
last I Am agreed with our Author in the Truth of his assertion, That Science
inlargeth Men's minds; but cannot acknowledge the pertinency. For he could
scarce have named things more opposite then Confidence and Science. Science
indeed inlargeth: But there is a Knowledge that only puffs up. And I Am of
Solomon's Opinion, That it is the Fool that rages and is confident. Our Author
concludes as he began, in the supposition that I am a Sceptick, and in this
I Am certain he is mistaken; And will be Dogmatical in affirming, that I am
none.

THus have I concluded my Reply with a Brevity, that shows I am not fond of an
occasion of Disputing; and a Carelessness, that will witness the little delight
I have in matters that are not of very material speculation. The truth is, I
dropped these Reflections with such a dullness and inactivity of humor: That when
my pen had traced one period, it was indifferent whether it began another. And
I remember not an heat in the whole performance. For I felt no concernment to
defend a Discourse, which perhaps I had less kindness for then one, who has
professedly opposed it. Not to mention the other reasons of my coldness and
indifference in this Action. And though I have still a quick resentment of the
Vanity of confiding in Opinions, and possibly could with an humor brisk enough
have reassailed the spirit of proud and unreasonable presumption; Yet I
hitherto see no necessity of adding more to what I have said on the Subject:
And the Reflections that engaged my Pen, have made me but few new occasions. So
that looking on my impugned Discourse as too inconsiderable for a Subject of
Public Vindication, and meeting but little opportunity for general and
discursive notion in that which opposed it; I was, I profess, sometimes more
inclined to have thrown away these sheets among the rubbish of my Papers, then
to permit them thus to show themselves to the Public. But my Civility to this
Learned Man obliged me to some Answer, and whatever I apprehend of it
otherwise, my laziness or my judgment made me think this sufficient for that
service. What others will judge of it I am ignorant and careless, and am
sufficiently satisfied with this, that I think it pertinent, and that I have
finished it.

FINIS.
A LETTER To a FRIEND CONCERNING ARISTOTLE.
SIR,
I Am very Sensible how bold and adventurous a thing it is, for Men of private
condition to oppose what custom and great names have rendered venerable. And
though I am still of opinion* that a lazy acquiescence in the discoveries of
any Single Author, how great and august soever, be a disadvantage to the
increase of knowledge; yet I think it not wise in every Man that has only a
naked reason to assist him, to confront such celebrated Authorities. Upon which
account I acknowledge some juvenile heat and praecipitancy in those reflections
your friendship has animadverted on. Which, besides the pardon young pens may
expect from those who are not unreasonably severe, has a claim to your candor
upon other considerations, which I intend this Paper shall acquaint you with.
In order to which, I suppose I need not tell you, that 'twas no enmity to the
learning of the Universities, which with all duty I acknowledge, that drew my
pen upon the Sage their constitutions have made textuary. You know me too well,
to think I designed any thing against the appointments and purposes of our
pious Ancestors in those venerable nurseries of Piety and Learning. I too well
apprehend the danger of such Innovations in an Age so prone to fancies and
dissettlements. In which nothing howsoever worthy and sacred, has been able to
defend it self against the rude hands of proud, because Successeful violence
gilded with the plundered titles of Reformation and Religion. I Will assure you
then, though I had been so fond and unwise to engage in a design so unlikely in
the undertaker; I should never have been so disingenious and undutiful as to
form a project so inconvenient and hazardous in the event, as to discourage
young Students from a method of Studies the Constitutions of the place they
live in have enjoined them: Which indeed, considering the circumstances wherein
things stand, it is in a manner necessary they should be versed in; since that
Philosophy is wrought into the current Theology of Europe: which therefore
would not be comprehended without an insight into those Hypotheses. Nor can a
Man make a reasonable choice of his Principles, except he have some knowledge
of all that offer themselves Candidates for his favor: and a Wise Man's belief
is not chance, but election; besides which, it enlarges and ennobles the Minds
of Men to furnish them with variety of conception, and takes them off from
doting on the beloved Conclusions of their private and narrow Principles. I
blame not therefore the use of Aristotle in the Universities among the Junior
Students, though I cannot approve the streightness and sloth of Elder
Dijudicants, from whom more generous temper might be expected, then to sit down
in a contented despair of any further progress into Science, than has been made
by their Idolized Sophy; and depriving themselves and all this World of their
Liberty in Philosophy by a Sacramental adherence to an Heathen Authority. And I
confess, 'twas this pedantry and boyishness of humor that drew from me those
reflections I directed against Aristotle. Which perhaps you will think not so
censurable an action when you consider,

(1.) That whatever fondness these latter ages have expressed toward him, the
pious Fathers of the first and purest times of Christianity, owned for him no
such regard and veneration; but frequently reprehended him with a keen and
impartial severity. And if we may believe the learned and industrious Patricius
[Multos e Patribus habuit oppugnatores, Celebratorem neminem.] Clemens Alex.
Epiphanius, and Nazianzen accuse him of impiety against God and Religion;
Lactantius of Contradiction and inconsistency; Justin Martyr professedly wrote
a Book against him; S. Basil reprehends his Ethics; and Origin set's Epicurus
before him. Theodoret accuses him for denying Providence below the Moon. And
it is notoriously known that Platonism was the Philosophy of the first Christian
Centuries when Aristotle was not much regarded. Yea as the excellent Gassendus
has observed, in the flourishing times of Rome and Athens, the Academicks and
Stoics; and Laertius says in his, the Epicureans, were the only valued Sects
of Philosophers, while the Peripateticks were but little accounted of. Yea
Cicero, Pliny, Quintilian that had otherwise the greatest esteem of Aristotle,
preferred Plato before him. And I find

(2.) Not that Aristotle had such an excess of respect and worship, till after
Barbarism had overrun Rome and Athens. For when the Empire began to emerge from
that black night of Ignorance which had with it is rude Conquerours invaded it;
Averroes and some others of the Arabian Interpreters chanced to light upon the
remains of this Philosopher, which they translated into the language of the
Moors, and as it is usual for Men to dignifie what they have bestowed pains
upon, especially if it be rare and new; these first Interpreters would not fail
to celebrate the Author, that they might reconcile credit to their Writings
upon him, and recommend their own elucubrations. And therefore Aristotle shall
be the prime of Philosophers, that they may be next him. Insomuch that his
Redeemer Averroes arrived to that Vanity in Commendation as to affirm, that
Aristotle invented Logic, Divinity and Physiology; never spoke any thing
without strong reason, and that there was nothing defective or superfluous in
his Writings, but all things in the most full and perfect order; and that no
error had been found in his Composures: which Commendations coming down to the
Latins, with the Books they celebrated, and they having no other Philosopher,
but Aristotle, nor Interpreter, but his Idolater Averroes, greedily swallowed
both the Books and the Character together, making sacred Text of the Writings
of the Author, and Axioms of the Commendations of the Interpreter. For the
mighty cry of the first admirers, assisted by the Ignorance of those times, and
the natural temper that is in Men to revere the first Author that pleases them,
bore down others to an assent to those applauses; and being at last by the
Schoolmen mingled with Divinity, and by others adopted into other faculties,
grew in a manner Sacred and Universal. Aristotle became an Oracle, his placits
were enacted Laws, and his dixit an unquestionable argument; and thus was the
reasoning World despoiled of that freedom which is the privilege of Humane
Nature, and subjected to a foreign Authority, that could lay no reasonable
claim to their respect or observance. So that the esteem of the Aristotelean
Philosophy having been so small in the best and wisest times, and having sprung
up to this bulk by accidental occasions in the latter and less cultivated ages,
I cannot yet think it so piacular to question the dueness of those superlative
praises are bestowed upon him in these, wherein Mankind seems awakened to
enquire into the World of things, not of Words, and is resolved no longer to
court Names, but Nature. And you will see less reason for your displeasure
against that engagement of mine, when I shall have told you

Thirdly, That it is very doubtful whether those Writings that go under his
Name, are Aristotle's or not. For besides that the ancient Greek Interpreters
have always made this Quaery in the beginning of their Expositions, Whether
the Books they were about to expound were Aristotle 's; besides this suspicion
I say, several very learned men have professedly undertook to prove the
uncertainty of all his Writings, among whom are Picus, Patricius, and
Gassendus, and from these Author's I Will give you a brief account of this
matter. (First) then Theophrastus, Aristotle's Scholar, wrote several things
that had the same title with those we presume are his: And who then can tell
whether they were wrote by Aristotle, or Theophrastus? to say Aristotle's Works
are discoverable by their style, is to presume the question, That some are
known to be his: which being supposed, the enquirer may notwithstanding be
deceived in his judgment, since learned Men in the same age are often delighted
with the same mode of writing, especially the Scholars of any great Author use
to imitate the Way and Method of their Masters; yea and diversity of Age and
Matter make's them sometimes differ more in their Styles from themselves, than
others do from them. At least (Secondly) Theophrastus had great advantages of
adding, altering, and mingling Aristotle's Works as he pleased: He himself
putting forth few Books while he lived, but leaving them in the hands of this
his great Scholar and Sectator. And it is the observation of Strabo and Plutarch
that the first Peripateticks had few or none of Aristotle's Writings among
them; upon which account impostures and forgeries might be more securely
practiced. Besides which, (Thirdly) Theophrastus himself did not publish these
Writings, but left them in the hands of Neleus, as is testified by Plutarch and
Athenaeus. Now this Neleus of two Copies which he kept of Aristotle's writings,
sold one to Ptolomy for the famous Library at Alexandria; the other he kept
himself and left with his Posterity; who, as Strabo testifies, diligent search
being made by the Attalick Kings after Books to furnish the Library at
Pergamus, hid them in a pit underground about 160. years till they were almost
spoiled with moths and rotteness, and after sold them to Apellicon Tejus an
Athenian, who got them transcribed and supplied in those places in which they
had been impaired by their concealment, but as Strabo says arbitrarily, and at
a venture; insomuch that the Transcripts were full of error and incurable
defects. At length Sylla taking Athens, this Library of Apellicon, in which
were the Writings of Aristotle, was transported to Rome, as is testified by
Plutarch, and there fell into the hands of Tyrannio Grammaticus under whom they
contracted new and worse errors. From him they pass to Andronicus Rhodius who
distributed them into the order we now find them in, adding and altering as he
pleased. After him, Picus says the contending Peripateticks still mended what
they understood not; and every man as he fancyed. All which circumstances are
more than suspicions of much forgery and corruption in Aristotle's Composures.
Yea, if that be true which Marius Nizolius asserts, and largely endeavors to
prove, that most of the Books of Aristotle that are extant are but Epitomes and
Compendiums drawn up by Nicomachus of his Father's writings, 'twill be another
evidence against their Authority. To which I add (4.) What has been observed by
the forecited Learned Men, that Diogenes Laertius, who lived when most of the
Ancient Authors might be seen, who was very industrious in the search of
Antiquities, and who perused above two hundred Authors in order to the
compiling of his History, forty of which had professedly wrote the lives of
Philosophers; yet this Diogenes has omitted all we have now extant of
Aristotle's works except nine, viz. duo de Plantis, Physiogn. Categoriae, de
Interpret. Mechan. Contra Xenophanem; Contra Gorgiam and Zenonem. Yea and
Patricius gives sufficient reason why all these but the four last should be
suspected also. Now why so many forged pieces were ascribed to Aristotle, three
reasons are given by Ammonius. viz. (1.) Because there were several others of
his name (Diogenes Laertius says eight) by reason of which 'twas an easy
matter to shelter the mean and contemptible products of others under his name
and authority. (2.) Because several of his Disciples wrote Books on the same
Subjects, and with the same Titles with their Master. (3.) There being great
rewards proposed by Ptolomy to those that brought in any considerable Author's
to his Library, several out of a covetous design to enrich themselves by the
forgery, inscribed other Writings by the Name of this Philosopher, to render
them more current and vendible. So that there were 40. Books of Analyticks
ascribed to Aristotle in Ptolomy's Library, when as he wrote but four; and two
de Categoriis, when he wrote but one. It appears then that the Books of
Aristotle are of very uncertain and suspicious authority. Yea, and though his
Writings were never so unsuspect and certain in the main, yet no man can be
assured in particular what is Aristotle's in them and what not, they having met
with such hard usage as we mentioned. Yea, the Books themselves give notorious
evidence of those abuses in the confusions, inversions, contradictions,
tautologies, defects, abruptness, and other gross imperfections they abound
with. Upon the account of which Gassendus says, he thought Aristotle a greater
Man than to be the Author of such mean and obnoxious writings. But however,
whether these are genuine or not, they contain the Aristotelianism of the
present Peripatetick Schools, and if those works are none of his, there is less
reason why we should fall down before the EPHESIANS of an uncertain Authority.
Besides which, I must confess

Fourthly, That the reverence I have to the more ancient Sages, which Aristotle
frequently traduced, and unworthily abused, animated me to more Severity
against him, than upon another occasion had perhaps been so pardonable and
becoming. And that Aristotle dealt so invidiously with the Philosophers were
before him, will not need much proof to one, that is but indifferently
acquainted with his writings. The great Lord Bacon has particularly charged
him with this unworthiness in his excellent Advancement of Learning, wherein he
says, that [Aristotle as though he had been of the race of the Ottomans,
thought he could not reign, except the first thing he did, he killed all his
Brethren.] And elsewhere in the same Discourse [I cannot a little marvel at the
Philosopher Aristotle, that proceeded in such a spirit of difference and
contradiction to all Antiquity, undertaking not only to frame new words of
Science at pleasure, but to confound and extinguish all the ancient Wisdom,
insomuch that he never names any Ancient Author, but to confute or reprove him]
consonant whereunto are the observations of Patricius that he carpes at the
Ancients by name in more than 250 places, and without name in more than 1000.
he reprehends 46 Philosophers of worth, besides Poets and Rhetoricians, and
most of all spent his spleen upon his excellent and venerable Master Plato,
whom in above 60 places by name he has contradicted. And as Plato opposed all
the Sophisters, and but two Philosophers, viz. Anaxagoras and Heraclitus; so
Aristotle that he might be opposite to him in, this also, opposed all the
Philosophers, and but two Sophisters viz. Protagoras and Gorgias. Yea, and not
only assaulted them with his arguments, but persecuted them by his reproaches,
calling the Philosophy of Empedocles, and all the Ancients Stuttering;
Xenocrates, and Melissus, Rusticks; Anaxagoras, simple and inconsiderate; yea,
and all of them in an heap, as Patricius testifies, gross Ignorants, Fools and
Madmen. How fit then think you is it that the World should now be obliged to so
tender and awful a respect to the Libeller of the most Venerable Sages, as that
it should be a crime next Heresy to endeavor, though never so modestly, to
weaken his textuary and usurped authority? and how just think you is your
charge of my Reflections as a piece of irreverence to Antiquity? when my
veneration of the greater Antiquity extorted from me those strictures against
the proud Antagonist of all the ancient and more valuable Wisdom? of whose
unworthy and disingenuous usage of the Elder Philosophers, I Will present you
among many with some particular instances, that most easily offer themselves to
my pen and memory. Briefly then, he accuses Zeno for making God a Body, because
he called him a Sphere in a Metaphor. He says of Parmenides (...) that he made
hot and cold Principles, and yet in two long Chapters falls upon him as making
all things one. These two Principles of Parmenides Aristotle interprets of Fire
and Earth, when it is clear enough that the Philosophers meant Light and
Darkness.

(...)
(...).
He says of Parmenides and Melissus, that they denied all generation (...). And
yet in another place, having it seems forgot this charge, (...). He accused
Empedocles for constituting the Soul of Elements, for which he took occasion
from that verse of his (...)
When as the Elements he means are not corporeal, as Aristotle would suggest to
force an absurdity on that Philosopher, but Intellectual ones, as Simplicius
one of his own Interpreters expounds Empedocles. He blasphemes Anaxagoras's
Mind in these words (...). And yet after gives excellent attributes to that
Mind of Anaxagoras. He accuses the Pythagoreans of making Numbers the
Principles of things; when as it is evident that Numbers were intended by
Pythagoras, but as Symbolical representations of them, which served him but for
the same purposes the Hieroglyphics did the Egyptians, from whom that Sage
had his Method of Philosophy; as Philoponus himself confessingly affirms,
(...)* But of all the Philosophers he quarreled with, there was none he pursued
with so much gall and animosity, as his incomparable Master Plato, whom he not
only insolently opposed and ingratefully thrust out of his School while he
lived, but with a severe pen persecuted his very ashes, and followed him with
injuries beyond the grave. And all for no other reason, but because that
Venerable old Man reproved his evil life, and preferred the better deserving
Speucippus, Xenocrates, and Amyclas before him. The particular instances of
those ungrateful abuses are too numerous to be insisted on; therefore I shall
only pitch my observation on Plato's Doctrine of Idea's which Aristotle in all
his Books inveigh's against, and has rendered ridiculous among his credulous
Sectators. Concerning which you may please to take notice, that this Opinion
was not originally Plato's, though Aristotle charge him as the Author, but was
the Doctrine of the Pythagoreans, Egyptians and Chaldaeans. We have it in
Timaeus Locrus the Pythagorean, (...). And before him Trismegistus, (...)
(...). But originally this Doctrine of Idea's was Chaldaean, for which I offer
you the ensuing Testimonies which will also clear the ancient sense and nature
of those Idea's. We have them then in the Oracles of Zoroaster, (...)
(...).
And again, (...).
And these Idea's, by which we may understand their natures, he calls (...).
Briefly then, the Chaldaeans by their Idea's understood the forms of things as
they were in their Archetypa Mente, which answers to the eternal (...) in the
Christian Trinity. They called them also (...), as they were in this primaeval
Mind. In the Soul of the World they called them (...), in Nature, they were
Seeds; and in Matter, Forms. Thus therefore; In the Seeds of all things there
is heat; in that, Spirit; in this, Nature which depends on the Universal Soul,
and that on God, in whom it is Jynx or Idea. This was the Chaldaean notion of
Idea's, and this was the Platonical; which how unlike it is the Chimaera of
Universal abstract notions, Aristotle and his Peripateticks falsely affix upon
the Divine Philosopher, is of easy apprehension. So that Aristotle in his
impugnation of the Platonical Idea's, fights against notions of his own
creating, and no assertions of his Venerable Master. And I must confess the
reverence I have for that Excellent Sage and his Philosophy, lessens my esteem
of Aristotle, and his. Which I cannot without some regret behold so Sacred in
Christendom, while the incomparable Prince of Philosophers with his divine
Theories seems to be neglected and forgotten; especially since this latter is
so consonant in his Dogmata to the principles of Christianity, and the other so
opposite to most the articles of our belief in his. Of which Patricius has
presented the World with a large Catalogue of Instances, and I Will offer you a
few of them. Plato affirms God to be one; Aristotle make's one first mover, but
56 other Gods movers of the Orbs. Plato own's God under the notion of the
Father; which Aristotle no where acknowledges. Plato, that God is the Supreme
Wisdom; Aristotle, that he is ignorant of particulars. Plato, that God is
Omnipotent; Aristotle, that he can do nothing, but move the Heavens. Plato,
that God made the World; Aristotle, that the World is uncreated, and eternal.
Plato, that God made the World of nothing; Aristotle, that of nothing is made
nothing. Plato that God is free from all body; Aristotle, that he is tied to the
first Orb. Plato, that Providence is over all things; Aristotle, that it is
confined to the Heavens. Plato, that God governs the Universe; Aristotle, not
God, but Nature, Chance, and Fortune. Plato, that God created the Soul;
Aristotle, that it is the Act of the body. Plato, that the happiness of a Man is
in his likeness to God; Aristotle, that a Man is happy in the goods of Fortune.
Plato, there will come one that shall teach us to pray, a prophecy of our
Savior. Aristotle, prayers are in vain, because God knows not particulars.
Plato, that after death good Men shall enjoy God. Aristotle, no pleasure after
this life. Plato, the Souls of the wicked shall be punished after death;
Aristotle, they shall perish with the body, and suffer nothing. Plato, the dead
shall rise. Aristotle, a privatione ad habitum. Plato that the Soul and Body of
the wicked shall be punished in Hell. Aristotle knew no such matter. These are
some instances among many, of the divine temper of the Platonical Philosophy,
and the impiety of the Aristotelian; for a further account of which I refer
you to the forementioned learned Author. So that I doubt not, but when you
have duly considered the matter, you will judge those Reflections the effects of a
laudable zeal for Antiquity, and what is more sacred, Truth. To which I add

(5.) That the Aristotelian was not the ancient Philosophy, but the
Corpuscularian and Atomical, which to the great hinderance of Science lay long
buried in neglect and oblivion, but has in these latter Ages been again
restored to the light and it is deserved repute and value. And that the Atomical
Hypothesis was the First and most Ancient, of which there is any memory in
Physiology, is notoriously known to all, that know the Age of Democritus; who
was one of those Four Sages that brought the learning of the Egyptians among
the Grecians; Orpheus bringing in Theology; Thales the Mathematics; our
Democritus, natural Philosophy; and Pythagoras all Three, with the Moral. Now
the learning of the Egyptians came from the Chaldaeans, and was conveyed to
them, as some learned Men affirm, by Abraham, who was of kin to Zoroaster the
great Chaldaean Legislatour and Philosopher; which Zoroaster lived 290 years
after the Flood, and as Pliny says, was the Scholar of Azonaces, whom
Antiquaries affirm to have been of the School of Sem and Heber. The Atomical
Philosophy then coming from the Egyptians to the Grecians, and from the
Chaldaeans to them; is without doubt of the most venerable Antiquity; and the
Aristotelian a very novelty in compare with that gray Hypothesis: at the best,
a degeneracy and corruption of the most ancient Wisdom. Yea, and it is the
complaint of several learned Men, which whoever knows any thing of Aristotle's
Sectators will justify, That the Modern Peripateticks have as far receded
from his sense, as from the Truth of Things. For it has been the Fashion of
his Interpreters both Greeks, Latins, and Arabians, to form whole Doctrines
from catches and scraps of sentences, without attending to the analogy and main
scope of his Writings. From which method of interpretation has proceeded a
spurious medly of nice, spinose and useless notions, that is but little of kin
to Aristotle or nature. So that whatever of genuine Aristotelian is in those
works that bare his name; There Is little of Aristotle in his Schools. And it is
no indignity to Antiquity or the Stagyrite, to oppose the corruption and abuse
of both. And to endeavor to restore the Ancients to their just estimation,
which has been usurped from them by a modern and spurious Learning. And though
I grudge not Aristotle's esteem while it is not prejudicial to the respect we
owe his Betters; yet I regret that excessive and undue veneration which fondly
sets him so much above all the more valuable Ancients. And I Will propose it to
your judgment

(6.) Whether 'twas likely that Aristotle was so far beyond other Philosophers
in his Intellectuals, as these latter Ages have presumed, when he came so far
short of most of them in his Morals? I believe there is a near connection
between Truth and Goodness, and there is a taste in the soul whereby it
relisheth Truth, as the Palate Meats; which sense and gusto vice depraves and
vi^iates. So that though Wit may make the Vicious, cunning Sophisters, and
subtle Atheists, yet I doubt seldom the best and most exercised Philosophers.
Now what the Ancients have related of Aristotle's manners, I Will present you in
an Instance or two, and dismiss this displeasing subject. Suidas then accuses
him of Sodomy with Hermias, Aeschriones, Palephatus, and Abydenus; St. Jerome
of Drunkenness: Lycus and Aristocles, two of his own disciples, charge him with
Avarice: Aelian of Cavelling, Loquacity, Scoffing, and Ingratitude; of which
last, there are two notorious instances in his usage of Alexander and Plato.
How he used his venerable Master, I have already noted. And what return he made
to the kindnesses of his Glorious Scholar, you may see in these few words from
Arrian, (...). And to sum up much in one, Timaeus the Historian in Suidas gives
this Account of him, That he was forward, impudent, saucy, unwise, indocile,
and hatefully glutinous, or in the words of Suidas, (...). But to conclude
these ungrateful remarques, Plutarch makes him a Traitor to Alexander; and
Eusebius to his Country. And being at last banished for his impiety, He made
himself away by poison, according to the Testimony of Laertius. Thus then you
see an ill Character of Aristotle's manners from disinteressed Authorities; on
consideration of which, it is to me matter of some wonder, that the memory of
the Vicious should be so blessed, and his authority so irreproveable. Unto all
which may be added.

(Lastly) That there is less reason that Aristotle should be valued beyond all
others that have had a name for wisdom, if we consider, that he borrowed almost
all he writ from the more ancient Philosophers, though he had not the ingenuity
and gratitude to acknowledge it: Particularly from Architas and Ocellus,
transcribing them word for word in many places, especially the latter; and yet
never as much as mentioned him in all his writings. And I think you ascribe
more to Aristotle then is his due when you call him the INVENTOUR of SCIENCES;
for we owe that honor to others of the Ancients; particularly to Zeno the
Invention of Logic, and of Rhetoric to Empedocles, according to his own
Testimony in Laertius, (...) (speaking of Zeno) (...). Perictione a Pythagorean
woman writ Metaphysics* before Aristotle. Stobaeus in his Morals has a
Fragment of her Book de Sapientia, of which she declares the subject in these
words, (...). Besides whom Plato, Parmenides, Xenophanes, Pythagoras, the
Egyptians, Trismegistus, and before all, the Chaldeans writ of this Science,
long before Aristotle was extant. And, Democritus brought natural Philosophy,
as did Pythagoras the Moral, from the Egyptians, before the Stagyrite was an
Infant. And for the Mathematics, they were studied in Egypt, before He was
born in Greece, (...), is his own confession.

Thus then you see Sir, we are not so much beholden to Aristotle, as most men
have presumed. And perhaps by this time you may be convinced that we have no
reason so passionately to revere his Authority. But whither you are, or not, I
am not much concerned, being willing to leave all men to the liberty of their
own sentiments. It suffices for my purpose, that I have given you some of the
grounds of my dissatisfactions in Aristotle and his Hypotheseis. If you are
convinced, at the bar of your judgment, I am justified; if you are not, your
dissent I presume is rational, and when I have seen your reasons, I shall
either be more disposed to your apprehensions, or be more confirmed in the
justice and reasonableness of mine own. To which I Will add no more, but my
desires of your pardon of this voluminous trouble, and acceptance of the
affectionate regards of

SIR, Your Humble Servant J. G.


FINIS.

