A Brief JUSTIFICATION OF THE Prince of Orange's Descent into ENGLAND, And of
the KINGDOMS Late Recourse to ARMS. WITH A Modest Disquisition of what may
Become the Wisdom and Justice OF THE Ensuing Convention IN THEIR Disposal of
the CROWN.

LONDON: Printed for J. S. and Sold by Richard Baldwin near the Black Bull in
the Old Bailey. MDCLXXXIX.

A Brief Justification of the Prince of Oranges Descent into England, etc.
WHatsoever may occur in the ensuing sheets, disagreeable to the Politics of
some late Writers; yet I have not only declined to name the Persons whose
Principles I contradict, but have forborne mentioning any of those Execrable
Doctrines, by which they have endeavored to Betray us into Slavery, and have
both tempted Princes to an exercise of Tyranny, and done what they could to
justify them in it. It Is unsuitable to my Temper, as I do reckon it mean in it
self, to administer occasion, whereby the Reputation of any that can be
supposed reclaimable, may become exposed, or their Persons rendered any ways
abnoxious. For though it would be an abandoning our selves, and Posterity to
worse miseries, than the Nation has either felt, or with much difficulty
escaped, not to fasten in a Parliamentary way, a brand of indelible infamy upon
their Illegal, Treacherous, and Enslaving Tenets; yet I hope, as well as
desire, that the utmost degrees of Mercy, will be exercised toward the highest
Prerogative Autho'sr, which shall be found consistent, with the rendering our
Constitution and Laws for the future safe and inviolable. And as I never
hitherto acted upon other inducements, than those of serving the Glory of God,
and of asserting the Rights, and promoting the Interest of my Country; so the
alone Motive, as well as Prospect, upon which I do now Write, is the
vindicating of the Methods that have been applied unto for our Relief and
Redemption, and the offering such further Measures, as remain to be pursued,
for the Establishing our Peace and Happiness, upon Foundations, that will both
ensure and support them. Nor does he deserve a Name amongst, much less a share
in the Privileges peculiar unto Englishmen, who will not contribute
whatsoever lies within his Circle, both for hindering our relapsing either into
Confusion, or into Thraldom, and for advancing the Tranquillity, Welfare, and
Prosperity of the Kingdom, not only to what they ever were in its most settled
and fortunate state, bu^ beyond the felicity we enjoy any former Presidents of.
Especially seeing his Highness the Prince of Orange, with a Compassion,
Generosity, and Zeal, not to be paralelled on the File of History, has put it
into our own power, to retrieve and Re-establish the Privileges and Liberties
which by Force and Fraud have been wrested from us, to prevent their being
either Invaded or Subverted hereafter, and to make such Additional Provisions,
as shall be reckoned necessary, as well for our own enjoyment of the Reformed
Religion, without fear or danger, and for transmitting it safe and uncorrupted
to our Posterity, as for rendering the Kingdom, by reason of Wealth, Security,
and Renown, the envy of all Nations about us. And as the Condescension,
Self-denial, and Moderation of the Prince of Orange, after so tempting as well
as signal a Success, transcends all Examples conveyed unto us in the Records of
Time; so we should not only be very ill men, should we depart from his
Temperance of Mind, either in the things we have left us to be prosecuted, or
in the manner of promoting them, but we should be that, and withal extremely
unwise, if we be not awakened and provoked to mind and advance his Honor,
Greatness, and Interest the more, by how much we find him through Modesty to
neglect them.

The Consideration of Government in general, is none of my Province at this
time; farther then to observe, that as it derives its Ordination and
Institution from God, so it is circumscribed, and limited by Him, to be
exercised according to the Laws of Nature, (and of plain Revelation where
vouchsafed) in subserviency to the glory of the Creator, and the benefit of
Mankind. All Rulers are thus far under Pact and Confinement, that they are
obliged by the Almighty and Supreme Sovereign, to exert their Governing Power,
for the promoting his Service and Honor, and to exercise their Authority for
the Safety, Welfare, and Prosperity of those over whom they are Established.
There need no previous Compacts, and Agreements, between Princes and People as
to these, forasmuch as they are settled and determined by the Law and
appointment of the Divine Legislator, and of the Universal Sovereign. Whosoever
refuses to Govern in Subordination unto and for God, and in order to the
protection and benefit of the Community, cease to answer the Ends unto which
Magistracy was Instituted, and for which Rectoral Authority is established over
and among Men. Nor is it in the choice or power of any Society, at their
erecting the Forms of Government, under which they are contented to live, and
at their Nominating the Persons, to whom they commit the Right of Administering
Justice toward and over themselves, and of withstanding and avenging injuries
offered them by others, to enlarge and extend the power of those whom they
constitute their Rulers, beyond the Limits and Boundaries, unto which God has
staked and confined Magistrates, in the Charters of Nature and Revelation. Though
people may both then and afterward abridge themselves, as they think meet, in
things under their own disposal, and either narrow or enlarge the Rulers power,
in reference to what they have a Right to retain or depart from, for the real
or imagined benefit of the Community; yet they can no ways interpose in the
disposal of the Rights which belong unto God, and which he has incommunicably
reserved unto himself; nor can they confer those measures and degrees of
Authority unto those whom they Elect and advance to Magistracy, which God has
antecedently precluded the one from bestowing, and the other from receiving.
For example, no Body or Society of men, can transfer a power unto those whom
they select and set apart from among themselves to be Rulers over the
Community, in the virtue whereof, those vested with Magistratical Authority,
can withdraw their Subjects from their Allegiance to God, act arbitrarily in
prescribing and imposing what Religion they please, or destroy the meanest
person, save upon a previous Crime, and a just Demerit.

Now God having in the Institution of Magistracy, confined such as shall be
chosen Rulers, within no other limits in reference unto our civil concerns,
save that they are to Govern for the good of those, over whom they come to be
Established, it remains free and entire to the People at their first Erection
of, and Submission to Government, to prescribe and define what shall be the
measures and boundaries of the public Good, and unto what Rules and Standard
the Magistrate shall be restrained, in order to his defending, and promoting
the benefit of the Society, of which he is created the Civil and Political
Head. And every one being equally Master of his own Property and Liberty,
antecedently to their Agreement with one another, and to the compact of the
Universality, or at least of the Majority, with Him or Those whom they call to
Rule over them; it evidently follows, that those who come to be clothed with
Magistracy, can lay claim to no more Authority over the Liberty, or pretend to
no more Right in and over the Property of that Body Politic, than what the
Community conferred upon them, and does voluntarily divest themselves of, upon
the prospect of the advantages arising unto them from their living in
Societies, and under Magistrates. We must suppose all Mankind to have been
infatuated, and to have become distracted* if they should have submitted
themselves to the Jurisdiction of one who had no antecedent Right to ^ommand
them, merely in order to their being in a worse Condition than they previously
were. And therefore seeing the extent and latitude of the Magistrates Power,
must owe its Original to some Grant of the people, it does from thence lie
incumbent upon him, to prove and justify the several degrees and measures of
Authority and Prerogative which he pretends to claim. And whatsoever he cannot
derive from some Concession of the Society, must be acknowledged to remain
still vested in the People, as their reserved Privilege and Right. And
whatsoever he pretends unto, which he cannot prove their surrendry of from
themselves unto him, argues not only his departing from the Compact betwixt him
and the Community, by virtue whereof he was ordained and created their Ruler,
but it renders him guilty of an Invasion upon the Rights of the whole Society,
and upon those of every individual Member of it. Force and Conquest give no
just nor legal Title over a People by which the Conqueror becomes their
Magistrate, until they by some consent either tacit or explicit, declare their
submission unto and acquiescence in him, upon the best Terms which they can
obtain, and that he is willing to grant. And as no Government is lawful, but
what is founded upon Compact and agreement, between those chosen to govern, and
them who condescend to be governed; so the Articles upon which they stipulate
the one with the other, become the Fundamentals of the respective Constitutions
of Nations, and together with superadded positive Laws, are both the limits of
the Rulers Authority, and the Measures of the Subjects Obedience. To extend the
Governor's Right to Command, and Subjects Duty to Obey, beyond the Laws of
ones Country, is Treason against the Constitution, Treachery to the Society
whereof we are Members, and through dissolving the Ties by which Princes stand
confined, and overthrowing the Hedges by which the reserved Rights,
Privileges, and Properties of the Subjects are fenced about, every Prince is
made a Tyrant, and all Subjects are rendered Slaves. Nor are all previous
Agreements, Stipulations, and Laws, made insignificant and useless by such a
pernicious and adulatory Doctrine as that of Non-resistance, when our Rights
are Arbitrarily invaded, and the Constitution and Government avowedly
subverted, but they are mere Tricks and Cheats for decoying those that were
antecedently free, into a noose and state of Thraldom and Bondage, under the
specious and gilded pretense of rendering their Liberty more secure, and their
Condition more safe.

And as it is by virtue of Compacts, Stipulations, Comprimises, and Agreements,
that all legal Governments have their Original and Establishment, that various
and distinct Forms obtain in different Countries, and that a Title and Right to
Ruling Authority, and the method of arriving at it, is provided for and
procured; so every Subjects Allegiance is first owing to the Constitution, and
to the Ruler only in the Force and Virtue of what every Member of the Political
Society is bound unto, by the Terms of the Original Pact and Settlement.
Abstracting from the Constitution, and the Obligations which it lays us under,
no man can challenge a Right of Commanding us, nor do we owe unto him any Duty
of Subjection and Obedience. Whosoever he be that under a pretense of being
constituted Sovereign, does invade and subvert the Fundamental Laws of the
Society, he does thereby ipso facto annul all the Legal Right he had to Govern,
and Absolves all who were before his Subjects, from the Legal Engagements they
were under of yielding him Obedience. So that the immediate and natural Effect
of a Prince's claiming what the Rules of the Constitution are so far from
entitling him unto, that they preclude him from it, is the depriving himself of
all Right to claim any thing, and a restoring of the People to their State and
Condition of Primitive Freedom, of which as they only divested themselves by,
and upon the Terms of the Constitution, so they neither departed from it any
longer than that should be kept sacred and inviolable, nor any further than was
covenanted and stipulated in and by the Terms and Agreements therein specified
and contained. And seeing it proceeds from the Efficacy of the forementioned
Contracts, that one Person becomes advanced from the common level to the Title
and Authority of a Sovereign, and that all others are by their own consent
reduced and brought down to the condition of Subjects, there does arise from
thence not only a mutual Relation betwixt him that Governs, and them that are
Governed, but the first and highest Treason is that which is committed against
the Constitution; and such and such Crimes against the Person and Dignity of
the Supreme Magistrate, are only made and declared to be so, by reason of the
capacity he is put into by the Constitution, of preserving and defending the
Society, and because it is needful in order to the peace, welfare, and safety
of the Community, that he should be covered from all Danger, and rendered Sacred
in his Person, and inviolable in his Regal Honor, while he answers the
Trust, which the People upon their Assembling and Uniting into a Body Politic,
committed unto him, and does neither depart from the Essential and Fundamental
Terms of the Original Compact, nor from their necessary Provisions afterward
added, and enacted for preserving the Government in its primitive State and
Frame. So that they neither are nor can be Traitors, who endeavor to preserve
and maintain the Constitution; but they are the Traitors who design and pursue
the Subversion of it. They are the Rebels that go about to overthrow the
Government of their Country; whereas such who seek to Support and Defend it,
are the truly Loyal Persons, and do act conformable to the Ties and Obligations
of Fealty. Nor is it merely the first and highest Treason in it self, that a
Member of a Political Society is capable of committing, to go about to subvert
the Constitution; but it is also the greatest Treason he can perpetrate against
the Person, Crown and Dignity of the King; for such an Endeavor both annuls
and vacates all his Title to Superiority over those, above whom he was exalted
from the common level, by virtue of the Constitution, and deprives him of all
rightful and legal Claim of Rectoral Authority over the Society, by destroying
the alone Foundation upon which it was Erected, and by which he became vested
with it. Through cancelling the Charter, from which he deriveth and holds his
Governing Power, they not only make his Title to Sovereignty precarious, but
they do render every Claim of that kind, and every Challenge of Governing the
Community, to be an Invasion and an Usurpation. To all which, I will only
further add under this Head, That as all Legal Government is founded upon a
mutual Stipulation and Compact, so the first and most absolute Obligation
arising from this Agreement, becomes incumbent and lies upon the Prince toward
the People; whereas the Fealty, and Duty which by the said Contract and
Covenant they bind and engage themselves unto toward him, is in order but
Secundary Conditional. Whenever any Person is chosen from the rest of the
Society, and raised to Kingship upon a foregoing and previous Contract with the
Community, he becomes upon the very accepting of it, bound absolutely and
without reserve to govern them according to the Terms and Measures, which they
and he have agreed and stipulated, and to Rule them by the Tenor of the Laws,
unto which they have circumscribed and confined him. Whereas all the Obedience
and Fealty which they who by that Agreement have rendered themselves Subjects,
owe unto their Ordained and Created Severaign, do derive their Obligatory Force
toward them, and become due unto him, upon his governing them according to the
concerted and stipulated Conditions, and his preserving unto them their
reserved Privileges, Liberties, and Rights.

Now as England has been the most provident and careful of all Nations, in
reserving unto its self, upon the first Institution of, and its submission unto
Regal Government, all such Rights, Privileges, and Liberties, as were
necessary to render it either Renowned and Honorable abroad, or Safe, Happy,
and Prosperous at home; so it has with a Courage and Magnanimity peculiar unto
it, maintained its Privileges and Liberties through a large and numerous
Series of Ages, and either reassured and secured them by new and superadded
Laws, when there were endeavors to undermine and supplant them, or else has
vindicated them with a generous, manly, and Military Courage, even to the
Deposition and Abdication of Treacherous Usurping, and Tyrannous Princes, when
more gentle, mild, and Senatorian Methods were found weak and ineffectual to
cover and protect them to themselves, and to convey and transmit them to such
as were to come after. The people of England has the same Title unto, and
security for the enjoyment of their Liberties and Properties, that our Kings
have unto their Crowns, or for defense of the Regal Dignity. For as they can
plead nothing for what they enjoy, or claim, but fundamental and positive Laws;
so the Subjects Interest in his Liberty and Property are conveyed unto him by
the same Terms and Channels, and Fenced about with the same Hedges and Pales.
Horn tells us in his Mirror, Chap. 1. That the Saxons having put an end to the
Heptarchy, by reason of the continual Wars that attended the Reigning of so
many Kings in so narrow a compass of Land, How they chose themselves one King,
to maintain and defend their Persons and Goods in Peace by Rules of Law, and
made him Swear, that he should be Obedient to suffer Right as well as his
People should be. For according to Bracton, lib. 3. c. 9. The whole Power of
the King of England, is to do good, and not to do hurt, nor can he do any thing
as a King, but what he can legally do. And as we know no King, but a King by
Law; so we are assured by Fortescue, lib. 1. c. 8. and lib. 3. c. 9. that he
Governs not his People by a Regal Power, but by a Politic. From thence our
Princes were anciently bound to Swear at their Coronation, That they would
Govern according to Law, and preserve unto them all their Customs and
Franchises: (Stat. of Provis. 25. Ecl. 3.) Nor can we have a clearer evidence
of the Legal extent of the King's Authority, and of the dimension of the
Obedience which the Subject is bound unto, than that which we have in the Oath
of Fealty, which formerly used to be exacted of the Subject: Namely, That he
should be obedient to all the King's Laws, and to every Precept and Process
proceeding from the same. (Wilkins Treat Coron etc. Court Leet, etc. p. 140.)
Nor is that unworthy our observation, which Hen. 1. writ to the Pope, when
attacqu'd by him about the matter of Investitures; viz. That he could not
diminish the Rights either of the Crown or of the Kingdom; and that if he
should be so abject and mean as to attempt it, the Barons and people of England
represented in Parliament, would not allow or permit it: Optimates mei, and
totius Angliae populus, id nullo modo paterentur. It Is upon this account
affirmed of an English King, That he can do no wrong, because he can do nothing
but what the Law impowers him. For though he has all things Subjected to his
Authority, while he acts according to Law, yet there is nothing left to his
Arbitrary Will. The several Charters, especially that styled the Great Charter,
in and by which our Rights stand secured, Sworn, and Entailed unto us and to
our Posterity, were not the Grants and Concessions of our Princes, but
Recognitions of what we had reserved unto our selves in the Original
Institution of our Government, and of what had always appertained unto us by
Common Law, and Immemorial Customs. And though these Privileges and Liberties
came to be more distinctly expressed and signally ratified in the Great
Charter, than they had been before; yet they had not only been acknowledged and
transmitted down in the Laws of Edward the Confessor, as the Birth right of
every Englishman, which also William the first Norman King ratified as such,
but they had long before been collected into a Body by King Edgar the Saxon,
and were only revized, repeated, and confirmed by the Confessor. But among all
the Rights and Privileges appertaining unto us, that of having a share in the
Legislation, and of being to be Governed by such Laws, as we our selves shall
choose, is the most Fundamental and essential, as well as the most advantageous
and beneficial. For thereby we are enabled to make such successive and
continual provisions, as the preservation of the Society, and the promoting
either of the Temporal or Eternal Welfare of the Subject, shall be found to
render needful or expedient. And as through being possessed of so great a
portion of the Legislative Power, and through having a Right by several
positive Laws to Annual Parliaments, we can both relieve our selves from and
against every thing that either threatens, endangereth, or oppresses us, and
furnish and accommodate the whole Community, with all legal Succors, and means
that are necessary for Peace, Preservation, and Prosperity; so herein lies our
signal advantage and felicity, that what we become interested in, by a positive
and Statute Law, it does thereby and from thence become a part of our Right and
Property, and not to be wrested again from us but by our own consent. For as
Bracton says, lib. 1. c. 2. (though it be also one of the first dictates of
Reason and common Sense) Leges non possunt mutari nec destrui, fine communi
consensu and confilio eorum omnium, quorum confilio and consensu fuerunt
promulgatae; Laws can neither be altered nor vacated, save by the consent and
concurrence of the same Authority, by which they were made and Enacted. It Is
true, that the Executive part of the Government, is both by our Common and
Statute Laws, conveyed unto and vested in the King, but at the same time there
is sufficient provision made both in the Terms of our Constitution, and in our
Parliamentary Acts, to prevent this from being hurtful unto us, unless our
Sovereigns become guilty both of the highest Treachery, and withal make an
invasion upon, and endeavor the Subversion of the whole Government. A Right of
overseeing the Execution of the Laws, being a Prerogative inseparable from the
Office of the Supreme Magistrate, because the very Ends unto which he is
clothed with Rectoral Authority, and for which he is designed and established,
are the conservation of the public peace, and the administration of Justice
toward and among the Members of the Body Politic: all to be expected from the
wisdom of the Society, or practicable by them, either upon the first erection
of, and submission to Civil Government, or upon their future improvements and
farther regulations of it, was to direct, limit, and restrain this Executive
power committed unto the Sovereign, and to make him and his Subordinate
Ministers accountable, in case they should deny, delay, or pervert Justice, or
be found chargeable with Mal-administration of the Laws. Nor was ever a people
more provident as to all these, than our Predecessors and Ancestors have been.
For as they have left nothing to the Kings private discretion, much less to his
Arbitrary Will, but have assigned him the Laws as the Rules and Measures he is
to Govern by; so they not only delegated it unto him as a Trust, which he is to
Swear faithfully to perform, but they always reserved a liberty, right, and
power unto themselves, of inspecting his Administration, making him responsable
for it, and of abdicating him from the Sovereignty, upon universal and
egregious faileurs in the Trust that had been credited and consigned unto him.
Of this we have indisputable Evidence, in the Articles advanced in Parliament
against Richard the Second, when he was Deposed from the Throne, and had the
Scepter taken out of his hand. Yea to prevent all dangers which might befall the
Subject, through the Kings being trusted with the Executive power of the
Government, he is not by our Constitution and Laws allowed to do any thing in
his own Person, nay not so much as to draw and seal the Commission of those
that are to act in his name and under him. And as nothing is accounted in our
Government a Commission, but what the Law Authoriseth and warrants; so he is
liable to be proceeded against as the highest Criminal, that presumes to Act
in the virtue of any other. An illegal Commission, is so far from conveying a
power unto any man to Act, that it is a greater Crime to do any thing upon the
Authority of it, than it would be to commit the same fact, without all color
and pretense of power and warrant. Seeing the injury in the one case, does only
affect and terminate in him that receives it; whereas in the other it affects
both the King, the Government, and the whole Body of the People. And as if it
were not enough to preserve us harmless from the Executive power lodged in the
King, that all the Commissions issuable from him are to be Legal, or otherwise
to be accounted null; even they who stand warranted and empowered to Act by
Legal Commissions, are not only to be Sworn to execute them Legally, but are
obnoxious to be punished for every thing they do upon them that deviates from
the Measures of the Law. And as it is the Duty and has been the Practice of
those who have been faithful to the Trust reposed in them, regardful of their
own Honor and Just to the Kingdom, to punish their Officers and Ministers for
Malversation, and for departing in their Administration from the Rules of our
Common and Statute Laws, Witness King Alfred who caused forty four Justices to
be hanged in one year for illegal, false, and corrupt Judgments; so it
belongs unto our Parliaments, as being one of the great Ends as well as
Reasons, for which they ought to be frequently called and Assembled, to inquire
into, and to punish the Crimes of Judges, and of all others, employed by, and
under the King in the Executive part of the Government. From hence it is, that
as the House of Commons among other capacities in which they sit and Act, are
by the Constitution to be the great Inquest of the Kingdom, to search into all
the Oppressions and Injustices of the King's Ministers; so the House of Lords,
among their several other Rights and Privileges stand clothed with the Power
and Authority of the High Court of Judicature of the Nation, who are to punish
those who have misbehaved themselves in all other Courts, as well as those whom
Inferior Courts have either connived at, or have been so wicked as
unrighteously to justify. Of this all Ages afford us Presidents, and nothing
but the supiness of this, in not making so frequent and signal Examples of
Parliamentary Justice among the Ministerial Dispensers of our Laws, and among
the Officers of our late Kings, as our Ancestors used to do, has rendered our
withdrawn Prince's being trusted with the Executive part of the Government, so
mischievous unto the Kingdom, and the Abuse of it so Fatal at last unto himself.

Having with all imaginable brevity declared the Nature, and stated the
Boundaries of our Government, both in what is entrusted with the King, as well
as in what is reserved unto the People, that which in the next place I am to
Address my self unto, is to inquire whether a King of England can so misbehave
himself in his Office, as that according to the Rules of our Constitution, and
the Measures of Justice, he may be either Resisted in his Arbitrary and Illegal
Exercise of it, or Degraded and Deposed from his Regal Dignity. And it ought to
have no small Influence upon our Understandings, toward our assenting unto,
and embracing the Affirmative, that our Predecessors not only managed open War
with a Nolumus Leges Angliae mutari upon their Banners, against King John and
Henry the Third, for Usurpation upon their Laws and Liberties, but that within
the same compass of the Norman Race, they dethroned and abdicated Edward the
Second, and Richard the Second, for their Tyranny and Maladministration. Nor
are there any Authors meriting the least regard among the highest Assertors of
Monarchy and Regal Prerogative, who do not allow various Cases in which Kings
may both abdicate themselves from their Power and Authority, and be renounced
and degraded by others. If the becoming Lunatic and of Unsound Memory, which
are natural Infirmities, be sufficient Reasons in the Judgments of all Men, for
precluding Princes from their Office, as well as from the Exercise of Kingly
Power? There are certainly Moral Distempers which do render them more incapable
of Regal Trust, and less qualified for the Exercise of Rectoral Authority, such
as an implacable Malice to the welfare of the whole Community, or an Attachment
to one party to the Extirpation of all others. It Is generally granted, that the
entering in Religion, which the Law accounts a civil Death, does disable a
person both from the Claim and Exercise of Magistracy; and therefore I know no
reason why one should not be esteemed equally unqualified for Sovereignty, by
having Enrolled himself into the most sanguinary Order of the Papal Church, and
having subjected himself entirely to their Conduct, though in order to the
remaining the more able to Execute their Malice, and to campass their Brutal
Ends, he has declined to assume and take on the Habit. But I shall supercede
whatsoever may be Mustered from these Topics, for the Resisting and Abdicating
of his late Majesty; and shall justify our doing so from Principles which our
Constitution and Laws do Administer, and which no man can contradict without
belying their Sight and Feeling, as well as the being Treacherous to the
Dictates of their Judgments and Understandings, For admitting us to be, as we
really are, a Free and a Protestant Kingdom, who have not only many Privileges
and Rights reserved and secured unto us, and the Reformed Religion made a part
of our Property, but who stand vested with a large share in the Legislation,
through the Power that our Representatives, whom we ought and have a Title
freely to choose, have in the Enacting and Repealing of all Laws; there are
three things whereby our lately departed King has unqualified himself, both
for the Claim and Exercise of the Regal Power, and which made it lawful and
necessary at first to Resist, and does render it now Just and Expedient to
Abdicate him. The first is, That through having dispensed with the Oath of
Supremacy, which precluded all Foreign Jurisdiction, and through having
received the Pope's Nuncio, and Provincial Romish Bishops; he has thereby
robbed the Crown of its brightest Jewel, namely of the having and exercising
Authority and Jurisdiction over all Persons in this Dominion, and has
transferred and aliened the Regal Power of this Kingdom to a Forraigner. The
second is, That being trusted with the Regal Power, and vested with the
Executive part of the Government, for the preservation of the Rights and
Liberties of the People, he has in innumerable ways, methods, and instances,
applied and exerted it to their Ruin and Destruction. The third is, That by
reason of his dispensing with Laws, seizing of Charters, and practicing upon
the Freedom of those who have right of Electing Members to Parliament, he has
overthrown the whole Legislative part of the Government, and subverted the very
Fundamental Constitutions of the Realm. His whole Reign has been a continued
Invasion upon our Laws, Liberties, and Properties. He endeavored to render
Parliaments, and had actually made Courts of Judicature, Ministers of his Will*
Pleasure, and unruly Lusts, instead of their being Assertors and Vindicators of
our National Rights, and Dispensers of Law, Justice, and Equity. There is
nothing Essential, Sacred, or Inviolable in our Constitution, which he has not
subverted as well as shaken. Our Lives, Liberties, and Fortunes have been
subjected to the Will, Power, and Authority of those whom the Laws of the Land
not only make incapable, but declare to be Traitors. We have not only been
without Parliaments beyond the time appointed by the Law, but there have been
means used to prevent our ever-having one that deserved to be held and esteemed
Lawful and Free. The Civil as well as Military Power, which ought to be in no
hands, save in theirs who will maintain our Liberties, and defend our Persons,
have been committed and entrusted to such, who judge it to be both their Duty
and Meritorious to Rob, Destroy and Extirpate us. The Ecclesiastical
Commissioners were not only a Body of Men erected in Opposition unto, and in
Defiance of our Laws; but had both the whole Clergy of England, and our
Religion, prostituted to their Arbitrary Will. No man in England was secure of
his Freehold, after what Wright, Jener, and the Bishop of Chester had done
against the President and Fellows of Mag. College. We could no longer be said
to have Properties or Inheritances, but what we possessed was precarious, and
held by no other Tenure but that of Court pleasure and connivance. The Kings
claiming a Right to dispense with so many Laws, Enacted for our Defense and
Safety; gave him a Title to Dispense with all our Laws, whenever he should
find it seasonable and convenient. So that upon the whole, it was become both
Lawful and Necessary, to recover that by Force, which had been wrested from us
by Usurpation. Nor had we been worthy of the Name of English men, but had shown
ourselves a degenerate Offspring, and proved Traitors to God, our Country,
and our Posterity, had we not been ready to retrieve and vindicate our Rights
upon the first opportunity that should be offered unto us. Our having reserved
Rights and Privileges unto our selves, gave us a Right to defend them in case
they came to be Invaded. And though there were not wanting ignorant and
mercinary men, who would have rivetted the King in his Tyranny, and fettered
the Subject in Slavery, by their Treasonable Doctrines of Passive Obedience,
and Non-Resistance, yet the Rational and ingenious part of Mankind, remained so
far preserved from the infection of those slavish Notions, as to know
themselves to be no farther bound to suffer, than the Law had obliged them, nor
tied up to to any other measures and degrees of Obedience, than what they were
confined unto, by the Rules of the Constitution, and by the Statutes of the
Realm. Yea to the reproach of too many of the Crape, the very Gentlemen of the
Sword, who stood mustered under the Kings Banners, and by whom he expected to
have been supported in his Invasions upon Law and Religion, were not only so
far sensible of his unjust usurpations upon the Rights and Privileges of the
Nation, and of his designing the extirpation of Protestancy and Liberty, but
were also so far convinced of its being the duty of every Protestant and
Englishman, to resist and not to abet him, that upon this inducement, and upon
no other, they turned their Arms against, as well as abandoned him. Nor was
there any thing, whereby the King can be supposed to have been prevailed upon,
to forsake both the Government and the Kingdom, but a sense of his own Guilt,
and an apprehension of his demerit. There was neither Force, nor Menace, used
to drive him from the one or the other; only the Thoughts of a Free Parliament,
and of what he might be found obnoxious unto, by the Fundamental Rules of the
Government, chased him from the Throne and out of the Nation. And as we have
various Presidents in all Free Nations, giving countenance to what we have been
doing; so no Kingdoms afford more examples in Justification of it, than our own.

However, after all the Evils which this late King had done us, we are willing
to acknowledge the kindness we have received from him at last, in his leaving
the Nation and retiring beyond Sea. And that which is now incumbent upon us, as
we would be just both to him and our selves, is to bolt the Door after him, and
so fore-close his Return. Though we were once so foolish as to trust him,
notwithstanding his Religion, as hoping the King would have been two strong for
the Papist; yet it were madness to do it a second time, especially after we
have seen the Monarch all along too weak for the Papal Bigot. The fault is his,
in the deceiving us once; but it would be ours, should we give him an advantage
of deceiving us again. We have provoked him too far, to think of laying our
selves any more at his mercy. Nor is it possible to receive any Security from
him, but what he has already falsified. The whole Kingdom is embarked too far,
to think ever of Retreating; and his Misgovernment during the whole time he was
permitted to Reign, disableth him from being trusted with Authority any more. A
few little and desperate people, may (if they think fit) talk their Necks into
a Noose; but they will soon find, that the Nation is not to be twatled again
into Slavery. His very Retreating into France, is a just bar against the
admitting his return; seeing it is morally impossible he should come back from
thence, but under Confederacies with that Monarch, for the Extirpating the
Reformed Religion every where, and for the Ruining of these Nations, and of all
Europe. Nor will those Provinces and States that lent their Forces to enable us
to vindicate and assert our Rights, ever suffer the King to get into a
condition, of wrecking his malice upon them for their kindness to us. And
should we be so far infatuated, as to reinthral our selves; it will be our fate
to be neither pitied in our miseries, nor relieved from them. Yea God himself
will laugh at our Calamities, when they come to overtake us, through our own
wilfulness and choice.

But though James the Second stand unqualified, and morally disabled from being
any more King, yet it is indispensably necessary we should have One, a King
being no less essential in the Body Politic of England, than the Head is in
the Body Natural. To dream of reducing England to a Democratical Republic, is
incident only to persons of shallow Capacities, and such as are unacquainted
with the Nature of Governments, and the Genius of Nations. For as the Mercurial
and Masculine Temper of the English people, is not to be molded and
accommodated to a Democracy; so it is impracticable to establish such a
Commonwealth, where there is a numerous Nobility and Gentry, unless we should
first destroy and extirpate them. This is demonstrable from all Histories
extant, whether they be Modern or Ancient. And either to hope for, or to
endeavor to do this in England, were the highest folly, as well as the most
prodigious wickedness imaginable. To think of precluding Kingship out of the
Constitution of the English Government, would lay us under a necessity of
Excluding also a House of Peers, which for any one to attempt, would be equally
as imprudent as it would be unjust. Nor is the naturalness of this inference
merely supported by the practice of the late times; but it deriveth its light
and evidence from the nature of the thing itself. For as the very end of a
House of Peers, is to be a skreen between the Monarch and the Commons, to
prevent his Invading the Privileges of the People, and their usurping upon the
Prerogatives of the Crown; so without our having a King, they would become not
only useless but burdensome. Yea, to shut Kingship out of the Constitution,
would draw after it the alteration of the whole Body of our Laws, which would
be of ill consequence to the whole State, as well as to particular Men. There
is nothing more obvious, than that the Style and Authority of King, is so
Incorporated with, and woven into our Laws, that without it, they are neither
intelligible, nor can they be applied to the Uses and Ends for which they were
Enacted and made. This one of Oliver Cromwels Parliaments was sensible of, and
therefore advised him to exchange the Name of Protector, for that of King.
Which he either out of a Capricio of his own, or for fear of disgusting his
Army refusing to comply with, gave first an opportunity and advantage to his
own Creatures for the Deposing his Son; and secondly paved the way and laid it
open for the Restoration of the Royal Family. And as the Government of England
is imperfect without a King; so it is not only needful that we should cure this
defect in the Body Politic, but that it should be done with all the Expedition
that is possible. For until then, the Government can exert it self but in few
of its proper operations; nor can it either Repeal ill Laws, nor Enact such
good ones as we want and need. Besides, this is the first means of rendering us
safe at home, and formidable abroad. Were this once accomplished, Foreign
Enemies would dread us, and Intestine Foes shrink in their Heads. Nor can any
thing less, check the intemperate and seditious Language of some, and
discourage the audacious Caballings and dangerous Machinations of others.

Now the Case that we are to Discourse, falls not within the compass, nor under
the Regulation, of what a King and the Two Houses of Parliament may do in the
disposal of the Crown. The many Statutes by which it has been Entailed, do
plainly show that they have a Right to Settle it. And though they may be
confined from going out of the Royal Line, yet it is evident from those upon
whom it has been conferred, that they are not always obliged to bestow it in
the order and way that common Inheritances descend. For whereas both Queen
Mary, and Queen Elizabeth succeeded to the Crown, yet it could be in the virtue
of nothing but the Act of Settlement, of the 35 Hen. 8. seeing if the one of
them was Legitimate, the other could not, nor as such pretend to any Title or
Claim. Yea our Law does expressly declare, that the Prince Regnant whosoever he
be, may and can with the concurrence of the Two Houses of Parliament, Dispose,
Settle, and Entail the Crown, as shall be thought most needful and convenient.
For this see Rastal's second Vol. 13 Eliz cap. 1. where the words of the
Statute are as follows. Be it Enacted, that if any person, shall in any wise,
hold and affirm, or maintain, that our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, the Queens
Majesty that now is, with and by the Authority of the Parliament of England, is
not able to make Laws and Statutes of sufficient Force and Validity, to Limit
and Bind the Crown of this Realm, and the Descent, Limitation, Inheritance and
Government thereof; or that this present Statute, or any other Statute to be
made by the Authority of the Parliament of England, with the Royal Assent, is
not, or shall not, or ought not to be for ever, of good and sufficient force
and validity to Bind Limit, Restrain* and Govern all persons, their Rights and
Titles, that in any wise may or might claim any interest or possibility, in or
to the Crown of England, in Possession, Remainder, Inheritance, Succession, or
otherwise howsoever; that every such person, so Holding, Affirming, or
Maintaining, during the Life of the Queens Majesty, shall be judged a high
Traitor, and suffer and forfeit as in cases of High Treason is accustomed. And
that every person so holding affirming or maintaining after the decease of our
said Sovereign Lady, shall forfeit all his Goods and Chattels. Nor was the
Power and Authority of Parliament, for conveying and disposing of the Crown,
ever questioned or gainsaid, till a few Mercinary People about ten years ago,
endeavored to obtrude upon us a pretended Divine, and unalterable Right to the
Suc^ession, which was the more irrational, strange, and to be wondered at,
seeing all the Race of the Stewarts after Robert the first had no other Title
to the Crown of Scotland, but what they derived from an Act of Parliament, in
prejudice and preclusion of these of the Ligitimate and right Line. For the
said Robert having had three Sons and one Daughter by a Concubine named
Elizabeth More, whom he afterward married to one Gifford, himself at the same
time taking into Marriage Eufemia the Daughter of the Earl of Ross, by whom he
had Issue Walter and David, Earls of Athol and Strathern, and Eufemia that was
afterward married to James Douglass Son to the Earl of Douglass; The
forementioned Robert did not only upon the Death of his Wife Eufemia, and of
Gifford the Husband of Elizabeth More, take into Wedlock his former Concubine
Elizabeth More, but obtained by an Act of Parliament, that the Children whom he
had begotten upon her in Concubinate should be Entitled unto the Crown, and
that his Lawful and Legitimate Children by his Wife Eufemia should be precluded
and debarred. And it was heretofore the more surprising unto me, to find the
Pensionaries and Advocates of the late Duke of York, plead for a Divine and
unchangeable Right of Succession, seeing all the claim that the Scots Race had
to the Throne of England, through their being descended from the eldest
Daughter of Henry the Seventh, was from and by an Act of Parliament which
vested the said Henry in the Crown of this Realm. For though the forementioned
Henry, by reason of his Marriage to Elizabeth, Daughter to Edward the Fourth of
the House of York, had a Legal Title to the Crown of England by the Common Law,
yet he was so far from insisting upon and allowing it, that he chose to hold
and possess the Crown in the force and virtue of an Act of Parliament. For as
his Title by the House of Lancaster, was both originally unlawful, and had
particular flaws and defects in it, so all the claim he could pretend unto that
way, was in the Right of his Mother, who as she outlived his advancement to the
Throne several years, and so she was never admitted to the Royal Authority, nor
suffered to sway the Scepter.

But that which is more peculiarly my Province at present, is to enquire what
Power and Right the Peers and Commons of England, have in and over the Crown,
for the Conveying, Disposing, and settling of it, in case of a Devolution,
through the Thrones becoming, by one means or another, empty and vacant. And as
to this, we stand provided with many and signal Presidents, of the Crowns
having been Conferred and Bestowed, as the General Councils and Parliaments of
the Kingdom judged most conduceable to the public Safety and Benefit, but
still keeping within the Sphere and Circle of the Royal Family and Line. The
Saxon times afford several Instances and Examples, in proof and confirmation
hereof, if it were either needful to recount them, or if the brevity to which I
am bound up and obliged, would allow me to represent them in their full and due
light, and to adorn them with the circumstances, that do belong unto and
enforce them. But all the Presidents I shall produce from thence, shall be
those of Alfred and Edward the Confessor, of which the latter was last* and the
other the first Universal Saxon Monarch. Horn assures us in his Mirror, that
the People of England after great Wars, Tribulations, and Troubles, suffered
for a long time, by reason of their multiplicity of Kings, did at last Elect
and Choose one King to Reign over them, whom they made to Swear that he should
not only Govern them by Law, but that he should be obedient to suffer Right, as
well as others of his people should be. Accordingly Alfred acknowledges in his
Will* subjoyned unto his Life by Menevensis, that he owed his Crown to the
Bounty of his Princes, and of the Elders of his People: Principes cum
Senioribus populi, misericorditer ac benign dederunt. And for Edward the
Confessor, he could have no Right to the Crown, save by the Grant and Gift of
the People; seeing the Claim by Descent and Common Law, was in his Nephew
Edward the Son of Edmond Ironside. Accordingly all our Historians, lodge the
Confessors whole Title to the Soveaignty, in his being Electus in Regem ab omni
populo. The power which the people of England had in the Disposal of the Crown
during the time of Saxons, is confirmed unto us by that Noble Record, which Sir
Henry Spelman has cited, Council. Vol. 1. page 291. For we do there find, how
that in a Parliament held at Calcuth, An. 787. it was Ordained and Enacted, in
illo conventu pananglico, ad quem convenerunt omnes Principes tam Ecclesiastici
quam seculares, una cum populo Terrae, That Kings should be Elected by the
Parliament, ut Eligantur a Sacerdotibus. and Senioribus populi; and that being
chosen, they should have Prudent Councellers, Fearing God, Confiliarios
prudentes, Deum timentes. And this Right over the Crown, and about the disposal
of it, which our Ancestors challenged and exercised all the time of the Saxons,
they have maintained and exerted with no less courage and vigor in every Age
since the coming in of the Norman Race. William the First (who is unjustly
styled the Conqueror, as having subdued none but Harold and those that abetted
him) did no otherwise obtain the Crown, nor ascend the English Throne, save in
the virtue of an unanimous and free Choice and Submission of the Peers and Body
of the People. Convenientibus Francis and Anglis, illisque omnibus
concedentibus, Coronam Angliae and Dominationem suscepit, says the Anonimous
Author subjoyned to Sylas Tailor's History of Gavelkind* A Clero and populo
susceptus, and ab omnibus Rex acclamatus, say Matthew. Paris and Florilegus. Ab
omnibus proceribus Rex est Electus; says Walsingham. Vniversi, Hilari consensu,
eum sibi in Regem and Dominum coronari consonuerunt, (says Will, Pictav.) when
it had been proposed unto them, whether they would receive and admit him or
not. Nor did the said William only obtain the Crown by the Peoples Choice, but
he was made to Swear before his Coronation, that he should Govern the People
justly, keep and observe unto them all their old Laws, and consent unto the
having such farther Laws Enacted, as should be found needful for the
Preservation and Prosperity of the Realm. Se velle cunctum populum just Regere
rectam legem statuere and tenere, says one, antiquas bonas leges inviolabiter
observare, says another. As for William the Third, and Henry the First, who are
the two next in the Roll and List of our Kings; it is undeniable, that they
became possessed of the Crown by the mere Gift and Choice of the People. For
being advanced to the Throne in prejudice of, and to the preclusion of Robert
their Elder Brother, they could have no other pretense, clam, or right unto it,
but what they derived from the People, and were indebted for unto Parliamentary
Power and Authority. Our Writers do not only give us an account of their
several Elections, and of the Oaths by which they became bound unto the
Kingdom, but of the previous Conditions, Promises, and Terms, by which the
people were influenced and prevailed upon, to raise them unto, and honor them
with the Regal Dignity. For William Rusus having promised, Si Rex foret (say
Eadmer and Brompton) se justitiam, aequitatem, and misericordiam per totum
Regnum, in omni negatio servaturum; That if he could be chosen and admitted
King by the English, he would in all things keep and observe Justice, Equity
and Mercy, throughout the whole Kingdom; he was thereupon in Regem Electus and
Consecratus, first Elected and then Consecrated King. And as Matthew. Paris tells
us, He was in a great Council or Assembly of the Nobility and Wise Men of the
Kingdom, Volentibus omnium animis, with the cheerful consent of them all, in
Regem acceptus, accepted for and admitted to be King. And for Henry the First,
the same Author informs us, how that having called a general Council of the
Nobles and People to meet at London, he promised unto them, provided he might
be chosen King, Emendationem Legum, etc. A reformation of those rigorous Laws
which his Father and Brother had obtruded on the Kingdom, and that he would
frame just Laws, grounded on those of Edward the Confessor, and that he would
likewise not only remit the Taxes, which had been unduely exacted of the
Subject, but punish such persons as had been the Authors of them: and that
thereupon the whole Assembly unanimously chose him, and appointed him to be
Consecrated King. And as he entirely owed his Crown, to the Election and Grant
of the People, so he as freely acknowledged it in his Charter (see Hagulst)
where he says, Sciatis me consilio Baronum Regni Angliae ejusdem Regni Regem
Coronatum esse, Know ye that I am Crowned King of England, by the Common
Council of the Barons of the said Kingdom. But least any should wonder, why
Robert was all this while Excluded, while his two younger Brothers were
preferred before him, and exalted to the Throne; it may not be amiss to take
notice of the reason of it, as it is assigned by Knighton, namely because the
said Robert* semper contrarius. and adeo innaturalis extiterat Baronibus Regni
Angliae had been always harsh, unnatural, and averse to the Barons of England.
'Twere an easy matter to go through all the succeeding Kings, to the very
entrance of the Scots Race, and to show how the People of England have in all
Ages exercised a Right and Power in the Disposal of the Crown; but this is
enough for an Essay, and may serve without an enumeration of more Examples, to
awaken the Peers and the Representatives of the Commons of England, to claim
and exert that Power at this conjuncture, which from the first original of the
Government has belonged inseparably unto them.

That which now remains to be Treated of, is what becomes honest men to desire,
and what all men have reason at this time to expect, from the Wisdom and
Justice of the approaching Convention, in relation to the bestowing, conveying,
and settling of the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And that the Considerations
which are to be here offered, with all Humility as well as Modesty, may both
stand in the clearer light, and have the greater efficacy upon the Minds of
those, for whom they are designed, I shall briefly premise these things. (1,)
That in the circumstances wherein we are, through the Kings having withdrawn
himself, and forsaken the Government, the Crown cannot be said to go by Descent
and in the way of Inheritance; but the Disposal of it falls to the Body of the
People of England in their Representatives, by way of Cess and Devolution.
There being no Death, Resignation, nor Demise, of the foregoing Regent, there
can be no Heir, nor any Plea for the Descent of the Crown to a person under
that notion. Though there may be all the Reason and Justice imaginable, for
granting and conveying it to the person that in another case would have been
so, yet there is neither Common nor Statute Law, in the virtue of which it can
be now said to descend. Proximity in Blood may render a person fit to be taken
notice of, by them who are to Dispose it, and Royal Qualities and Virtues may
make one deserve and merit it to that degree, that it would be the highest
injury to the Nation and to the People themselves, to bestow it elsewhere, but
yet for all this, nothing does Legally Entitle unto it, but the Will, Donation,
and Gift of the People. (2.) That in the present case, nothing can determine,
limit, or restrain those in whom the disposal of the Crown is become lodged,
but their own Will, guided and regulated by the Measures of what is most
conducible to the public good. Many things may serve to indicate and direct,
where it will be most for the safety and honor of the Kingdom to have it
Settled, but it is merely the pleasure of the great Council, and of the
Representative of the Nation, that can authoritatively fix it. Former Acts of
Settlement do only declare the Channel in which the Succession was to run by
the ordinary way of Descent; but they have no Legal Force here, by reason of
the dam and stop that is in the Road and Path of Conveyance. Nor does the
Common Law, which in the want of Acts of Entail, defines the order of
Succession, signify any thing here, farther than to remind us of persons, who
would have had a just and unquestionable Claim, but for the survivance of Him,
after whom only they can by that Law pretend and plead. (3.) That seeing the
Two Houses cannot sit in the nature of a formal Parliament, till after the
Crown is conveyed and fixed, because of the defect of one of the Members of the
Parliamentary Legislative Body; that therefore it seems very disputable,
whether the one of the said Houses, can until then have a Negative upon the
other. And by consequence, as it will become them in prudence not to interfere
in their Resolves about the Conveyance of the Crown; so it will be no departure
in the Lords from their own grandeur, to consider of what force and obligation
to the whole Commons of England, the Declaration of their Representatives in
that matter will be. And whether it be not more than probable, that they will
own the Regal Authority to be in that person, and there to maintain and defend
it, where themselves shall convey and settle it. Now these things being
premised, I shall as one who loves the welfare of my Country, next to the
glory of God, to his interest in the world, and to the happiness of my own
Soul, offer with the profoundest submission, what I Judge to be in this great
Case now depending, most subservient to the Securing Religion here, and to the
vindicating it elsewhere, and to the rendering this Nation Safe, Opulent, and
Happy.

As to her Royal Highness the Princess of Orange, they must be Enemies to the
Kingdom, who would have any thing witheld from, or denied unto her, that the
approaching Convention, can in consistency with their own Wisdom, and with the
Safety of the Nation, grant and bestow. For how great soever she is by her
Quality, she is far greater by her Merit. Had she been of a Rank never to have
stood in a nearness to a Crown; yet all who have the honor to know her, would
have confessed that she deserved one. But alas! though there may be a Partner
in the Royal Style, there can be none in the Regal Power. And as she her self
will undoubtedly acknowledge the Prince her Husband to be the only person fit
at this season for the latter; so she will account it to proceed from no want
of deference to her Person and Virtues, if no more be conferred upon her but
the Royal Title. For seeing the Sovereignty can be but in One, though the Style
be communicable to more, Reason of State obliges to lodge it where it may be
most for the public good. The disposal of the Crown being fallen to the People
by a Cess and Devolution; the Succession unto it is not to be Governed by
proximity of Blood, but by weighing what is most expedient for the benefit of
the Community. To bestow the Sovereign Power unto more than One person at a
time, were to embarass the Execution of it, and to make it impracticable
through the differences which may arise if Two should become equally vested in
it. From thence it was, that upon the Constituting and Creating Phillip King in
conjunction with Mary, the Daughter of Henry the Eighth, it was Ordained and
Enacted, That the Queen might and should solely* and as sole Queen, use, have,
and enjoy the Crown and Sovereignty, of and over all these Realms, Dominions,
and Subjects, with all the Preheminencies, Prerogatives, Dignities,
Authorities, Jurisdictions, Honors, thereunto belonging, etc. and that no
Right or Claim of Sovereignty, should be given, come, or grow unto the said
Phillip, over these Realms and Dominions. But though the Sovereign Power be not
communicable to more than One, and can be lodged no where, save in a single
Person, yet the Royal style may be imparted to more without the least
inconvenience arising thereby to the Nation. And therefore when I say that her
Royal Highness the Princess of Orange ought to have the Royal Style conferred
upon her, I do not thereby mean, that she should enjoy merely the bare and
naked Name of Queen, but that together with the Person to whom the Sovereignty
shall be committed, she shall be named in all Laws, Gifts, Grants, and Patents,
etc. and that all these shall be Enacted, Instituted, set forth, and made in
the Name of her Royal Highness as Queen, as well as in the Name of the Person
in whom the Sovereignty shall be fixed and settled. Nor is this all that her
Highness may in Justice expect, but it does become the People in deference to
her Merit, and in gratitude for the many Obligations which she has heaped upon
them, to settle the whole Sovereignty upon her in Reversion, in case she
outlive the Person to whom that power is first Trusted and Committed. And as
this will testify, that the Disposal of it otherwise for the present, arises
not from Disrespect, but from Motives of Necessity; so we may be assured, that
her Royal Highnesses love to her Country, is so prevalent in her, above all
considerations regarding her self, that she would be loath in the mean time,
and under the great and present exigencies, to intercept between the Nation and
the Blessings and Safety likely to arise unto it, by the coming under the
Governing care, and Sovereign Protection of his Highness the Prince her
Husband. Nay she would account it an injury unto her, and not a favor, to have
the Regal Power settled in her during the Life of the Prince, and to have his
Highness to be precluded from it. And as through being vested in what I have
named, she will enjoy all the honor and glory which accompany a Crown; so she
will be only eased of the Thorny Cares, and the next to insupportable Toils,
that under the present conjuncture of Affairs in the World, are likely to
attend the swaying of the English Scepter. Yea her Virtues will give her an
Empire, that no Parliament can bestow. And while her Husband is vindicating and
defending the Kingdom, by an exercise of the Sovereign Power; she will more
effectually reform it by her Manners, than can be done by a Thousand Laws. Her
Meekness toward all, will even teach our highest Ecclesiastics the duties of
gentleness and lenity; and her steadfastness in the Reformed Faith, together
with an exemplary adorning of it, will prove the most Sovereign means of
recovering back again the perverted from Popery, and the depraved from
Profaneness. And her being the best Woman, as well as the best Wife, that this
or any Age can give us an Example of, does sufficiently assure us, that she
will neither Covet, nor be willing to Accept more, than what I have mentioned,
seeing every thing beyond that, would both be a detracting from the Glory of
her Husband, and to the damage and prejudice of the Community.

That which remains then to be done, is to declare the Prince of Orange King,
and to settle upon him the Sovereignty and Regal Power; allowing in the mean
time unto the Princess, the privilege of being named with him in all Leases,
Patents, and Grants. This we owe him in point of Gratitude; nor is his
delivering the Nation to be otherwise requited, than by calling him to Rule and
Govern it. His vindicating our Liberties and Laws, deserves his being trusted
with the Execution of the one, and with the Defense of both. And by how much he
forbears to challenge it, by so much is his Merit unto it the greater. What he
avoides claiming out of Temperance, we ought to have the Generosity to give.
Nor is there any one so likely to sway the Scepter with Moderation, when
possessed of it; as he who declined to snatch it, when it lay* within his
reach. His unchangeable adherence to what he promised in his Declaration, as a
Prince; shows with what Sacredness, he will observe his Oath as a King. Nor
will he ever invade our Privileges, who has exposed himself to so many
hazards for restoring of them. We owe it unto him also in point of Justice. At
the same time, that it is a Gift and Benevolence, it is a debt due unto his
Virtue. He has all the Wisdom, Moderation and Equity requisite in a King, and
all the Courage and Conduct needful in a General. War and Peace are equally his
Province; and he stands imbued with all qualities, both for swaying the
Scepter, and weilding the Sword. His very Passions plead for him, and in
nothing can we be kinder to our selves, than in putting him into a condition of
gratifying them. The Ambition that Acts him of being the Head of the Protestant
Interest in Europe, tends no less to our benefit and safety, than it does to
his honor and glory. And the Recentment he retains of Injuries done him by the
French King, will lead him not only to avenge himself, but this Kingdom also
upon that common Enemy. And to add one thing more, the Crown ought to be
bestowed upon Him on the score of Wisdom and Interest. Nothing save the doing
thus, will cure the Evils we have felt, and obviate those we fear, or state us
in the possession of all the good we need and desire. For first, we shall
hereby restore the Body of the people of England to their ancient Right, and
reestablish the Government upon its Primitive and Original Foundation. The
pretense of a Divine Right of Succession, which had almost destroyed us of
late, and which after two or three removes, may again hazard our being Ruined,
will by this means stand for ever branded and condemned. Nor will there be any
cause of apprehending a storm hereafter toward the Kingdom from Spain or
Savoy; when once the Nation has in its whole Political Body, exercised the
power belonging unto it, of altering and ordering the Succession, as it is
found convenient for its own safety. 2. We shall hereby shut and bolt the door,
against the return and re-entry of the abdicated and withdrawn King. Neither
himself nor Parizans, will either hope or venture to break open a gate, where
so vigilant, magnanimous, wise, and Martial a person stands Guardian, as his
Highness the Prince of Orange is by all men acknowledged to be. 3. We shall
hereby foreclose all Claim unto the Crown, arising by the plea and pretense of
an immediate Successor and a next Heir, For by the exclusion of all Right to
the Sovereignty in way of Descent, there is no room left for any to challenge a
Title to the Government upon that bottom and foundation. And though it would be
easy to demonstrate the suppositiousness of the pretended Prince of Wales, and
to lay open the unnatural and horrid Imposture of obtruding him upon the Nation
as a Legitimate Son; yet we shall by the Method proposed, both deliver our
selves from the necessity of that Inquiry, and prevent the infamy with which
the King must be eternally covered upon that detection. 4. We shall by this one
thing of bestowing the Sovereign Authority upon the Prince of Orange, more
effectually secure our retrieved Liberties and Privileges, than by all the
Laws with which we Fence and Hedge them. He that scornfully rejected the offer
of Sovereignty over Holland, when made unto him by the French King, as the
price of Betraying and Enslaving his Country; can never become guilty of
invading the Rights and Privileges of England, when trusted with their
preservation and defense. Nor will he ever abuse that power to the Nations
prejudice, which he receives and holds by its kindness and bounty. His using to
say, that he cannot have so unworthy a Conception of God, nor so base thoughts
of Mankind, as to believe that one person should ever be designed by the
Supreme and Almighty King, to trample upon a Society and rule over it by way of
oppression; does not only declare his knowledge of the Nature, End, and
Principles of Government, but how it is repugnant to his Nature, and
inconsistent with his avowed Judgment, to wrong and injure a Society, either by
fraud or violence. 5. We shall by this means become united among our selves,
and great and prosperous at home. For as he can have no Interest either
distinct or divided from that of the whole people; so he can fall under no
temptation, either of quarrelling with the Community, or of wheedling, using
and improving one party, to the inconvenience and prejudice of another. And
though those of the National Communion, may be fully assured of their being
maintained and protetected in every thing which the Laws shall give them a
Right and Title unto; yet no man needs to fear, that he whose glorious aim is
to be the Head of the whole Protestant Interest, will ever become so attached
to one party, as to become an Instrument and Tool, of harassing and persecuting
all others. 6. We shall hereby become strong both in power and Allies abroad.
For besides the addition of the Force and opulency that will accrue unto the
Kingdom during his Life and Reign, by the Hereditary Principalities, Dominions,
States, and Territories, that appertain unto him; all the Princes and States of
Europe, with whom it is our Interest to be Confederated, will be ambitious of
becoming Leagued and Allied with us. His greatness and power, whenever he is
King of England, will make them covet and desire it; and his inviolate
Sincerity in every thing he promises, will make them trust unto and rely upon
it. He that in the station of Statholder of Holland, could make that figure in
the world, as he has done, and be able to bring so many Princes of different
Religions and Interests, into an Union against the common Enemy of Europe; what
will he not be in a capacity to effect, if he were once vested with the Royal
and Sovereign Power of Great Britain, and of the Dominions annexed and
belonging thereunto: And as he will be an infallible mean, both of
extinguishing all Enmity between us and these Provinces that emulate and rival
us in Trade, and of bringing us and them into a happy and indissoluble
Confederacy, so we may easily foresee the Advantages that will unavoidably
attend upon a Conjunction of their and our Marine strength. 7 ly, We shall
hereby become formidable to our foreign Enemies: France will no longer be our
dread, but our scorn and contempt; and we shall there erect the Trophies of our
Liberty, as well as of our Victory; whence the Advice, as well as Pattern came
of Enslaving us. With this Prince at the head of our Government and Armies, in
the quality of King of England, we shall not only break the Chains with which
that false and tyrannous Monarch would fetter Europe, but avenge both our own
quarrels, and those of all Christendom, upon that haughty and usurping Prince,
and reduce him within the limits from whence our late Kings helped to raise
him, contrary to all the Rules of Policy, as well as of Justice. 8 ly, We shall
by this means revive the hopes, and lay a foundation for the Redemption and
Restoration of persecuted and exiled Protestants: As 'twas in order to the
Preservation of the Reformed Religion in Britain, that he undertook this late
Expedition, wherein God has honored him with so great success, so there are
no dangers which he will not cheerfully submit unto, and undergo, for the
vindicating Religion into Freedom elsewhere, and for the settling Protestants in
the quiet possession of those religious and civil Liberties of which they have
been perjuriously and barbarously dispossessed. The eyes of the poor exiled
French, are upon this approaching Convention, and stand prepared to date their
Deliverance and Redemption from the moment, in which that Assembly shall
tranfer and devolve the Sovereign and Royal Power of England upon his Highness
the Prince of Orange; who as he ^^th been already their chief Patron,
Benefactor, Refuge and Sanctua^y, so they look upon him as the only Person
under God, destined by Heaven to be their Savior, and from whose Compassion,
Courage, and Zeal they may expect the Vindication of their Wrongs, and their
Restoration to the free Exercise of their Religion, without let or molestation,
under their own Figg-trees and Vines.

The only Objection that can be advanced against what has been here humbly
proposed and offered, is, That the settling of the Crown, and of the Sovereign
Power upon the Prince of Orange, would be to the prejudice of the Princess Ann,
in case her Royal Highness the Princess Mary should die before her Husband. To
which I briefly answer these six things: (1.) That where there is no Claim by
Descent, as in our present Case, there can be no Injury done to any: For there
can be no Wrong in withholding, what a person has no Right to challenge. (2.)
It Is too probable, and that to our great Grief, that his Highness the Prince
will be the shortest lived of the three. His indefatigable Cares, as well as
the Weakness of his natural Constitution, give us too just and doleful fears of
it. Now should that come to pass, which I pray God to prevent, the Princess Ann
will receive no Injury, seeing all her pretense is posterior to that of the
Princess Mary. (3.) It Is not impossible, but that the Prince and Princess of
Orange may have Children; and then all will confess* that the Princess Ann can
receive no wrong, should she and Prince of Orange outlive the Princess Mary;
seeing if the Crown were to go in the direct order, and in the way of lineal
Descent, it devolveth upon the Children of the Princess Mary, after her death,
and not upon the Princess Ann. (4.) There is no great likelihood, that the
Princess Ann should outlive her Royal Highness the Princess of Orange; and
then by settling the Crown, as has been humbly proposed, no damage will
actually accrue unto her. (5.) There is a Benefit, and not a Prejudice, arising
to the Princess Ann by the Method that has been here offered and chalked out:
for hereby all Claim of the present pretended Prince of Wales, is debarred and
shut out, which I think does more in point of Benefit arising to the Princess
Ann, than countervail all the Damage she is capable of receiving, by the
putting the Prince of Orange first in the Act of Setlement and Entail. (6.)
There is nothing here desired or advised, in favor and behalf of the Prince of
Orange, but what we should be willing to have granted to Prince George in his
turn. Nor do I doubt, but that the Princess Ann is so good a Woman and so
excellent a Wife, that she will be desirous to purchase so great an Honor, and
so real a Benefit to the Prince her Husband, at the cost of a small, and little
more than imaginary Damage to herself.

FINIS.

