Books Writ by John Bellers, and Sold at the Bible in George-Yard, Lombard
Street.
1. PROPOSALS for raising a College of Industry, of all useful Trades and
Husbandry, with Profit for the Rich, a plentiful Living for the Poor, and a
good Education for Youth: Dedicated and presented to the Parliament. 1696.

2. A Supplement to the College of Industry: Dedicated to the Parliament.

3. An Epist. to Friends, concerning the Education of Youth. 1697.

4. Essays about the Poor, Manufactures, Trade, Money, Plantations and Fellons;
with the Excellency and Divinity of Inward Light: Dedicated to the Parliament.
1699.

5. A Caution against all Perturbations of the Mind; but more particularly
against (the Passion of) Anger, as an Enemy to the Soul, by making of it unfit
for the Presence of God, and unable to enter the Kingdom of Heaven. 1702.

6. Watch unto Prayer: Or Considerations for all who profess they believe in
the Light, to see whether they walk in the Light, without which they cannot
become the Children of it, nor be cleansed from their Sins. 1703.

7. To the Lords and others, Commissioners, appointed to take Care of the poor
Palatines. 1709

8. Some Reasons, for an European State, proposed to the Powers of Europe, by
an Universal Gaurantee, and an Annual Congress, Senate, Diet, or Parliament, to
settle any Disputes, about the Bounds and Rights of Princes here after. And
also, for a General Council, of all the different Religions Persuasions in
Christendom, not to dispute what they differ about, but to settle the general
Principles they agree in; by which it will appear, that they may be good
Subjects and Neighbors, though of different Apprehensions of the Way to Heaven:
In order to prevent Broils and War at Home, when Foreign Wars are ended:
Dedicated to the Queen and Parliament. 1710.

9. To the Archbishop, Bishops and Clergy of the Province of Canterbury, met in
Convocation.

10. An Essay toward the Ease of Elections, of Members of Parliament. 1712.

11. An Essay toward Reconciling the Old and New Ministry.

12. Considerations on the Schism Bill.

13. An Essay toward the Improvement of Physic, in twelve Proposals, by which
the Lives of many Thousands of the Rich, as well as of the Poor, may be saved
Yearly: With an Essay for Employing the able Poor, and Improvement of Mechanic
Arts: Dedicated (and presented) to the Parliament: And Part to the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen, the South-Sea-Company, and the Physicians of Great Britain; with
a Postscript to the Men of Wit and Pleasure. 1714.

The QUAKERS Creed concerning the Man Christ Jesus, transcribed verbatim out of
a Treatise entitled, The Way cast up, lately written by George Keith a Quaker,
with Animadversions upon it.
G. Keith PAGE 90. So that as far as the most high Heavens do excel the base
and low Earth, so far does Christ even as Man excel all other Men, and that not
only in accidents as the Popish Schoolmen and Presbyterian Teachers following
them do teach, but in Nature and Substance.

Animad. The Quakers from hence believe that Christ had a Manhood differing in
Nature from the Manhood of all other Men, contrary to Heb. 2. 11. For both be
that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of one, (i. e.) one
common Nature with Adam, ver. 17. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be
made like unto his brethren.

G. K. God created all things by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3. 9. Jesus Christ
signifies properly, the Word made Flesh, or made Man. It is clear that
according to the Apostle, the Word was made Flesh, or Man, even from the
beginning, Page 93.

Animad. They believe from hence, that the Word was made Flesh or Man, before
the creation of this World, contrary to Gal. 4. 4. But when the fullness of the
time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 20. Who
verily was foreordained before the foundation of the World, but was manifest
in these last times for you.

Page 95. And therefore bad Flesh and Blood, to wit, Heavenly and Spiritual,
even from the beginning, on which the Saints in all ages did feed: And seeing
Christ had flesh and blood from the beginning, he was Man from the beginning.
As God simply he cannot have flesh and blood, for God is a Spirit, and
therefore it is the flesh and blood as he is Man, or the Son of Man.

G. K. Anim. They believe that Christ had real flesh and blood before the
creation of the World. The Apostle says in 1 Cor. 15. 39. There is one kind of
flesh of Men, another flesh of Beasts, another of Fishes, another of Birds: but
the Quakers have found out another kind of flesh besides these four sorts, yet
the flesh of a Man, but of a man before Adam, as man excelling all other Men in
Nature, which they call Spiritual and Heavenly. Grotius says, Caro non dicitur
Hebreis nisi de corpore Mortali, They might as well say the Stars have flesh
and blood, or the Angels have flesh and blood.

G. K. Page 97. Christ signifies anointed, and it is the Man Christ that is
anointed with the Holy Spirit, and not the Word, or (...), which is God
himself; for the Godhead anoints not the Godhead, but it is the Godhead that
anoints the Manhood of Christ, which Manhood has been anointed from the
beginning, and therefore the man Christ has been from the beginning.

Animad. From hence they believe, that Christ as man was anointed by God from
the beginning of the World, forgetting that the Prophets frequently speak of
things to come as present. As well might the Author say, that Cyrus had a Soul
and Body, and did exist in flesh and blood 100 years before he was born, for he
is called by Isaiah Gods anointed so many years before his birth, Isa. 45. 1.
The Christian believes that Christ's first anointing as man, was when the
Manhood was united to the Godhead, which began in the first conception in the
Womb of the Virgin: and what was that but an anointing that is spoke of, Mat.
3. 16. And he saw the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon
him, compared with Luke 4. 1. And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost, returned
from Jordan.

G. K. This is the promised Seed which God promised to our Parents after the
fall, and actually gave unto them even the Seed of the Woman that should bruise
the head of the Serpent, and therefore though the outward coming of the man
Chriist was deferred according to the outward birth in the Flesh for many ages,
yet from the begininng, this heavenly man the promised Seed did inwardly come
into the hearts of those that believed in him, and bruised the head of the
Serpent. Page 99.

Animad. Hence they believe there was a twofold coming of the man Christ in the
Flesh, the inward and outward; the last was deferred for many ages, but the
first was actually performed to our first Parents; so that you might properly
say, that the man Christ the Seed of the Woman, came into the Man and Woman
four thousand years before he was made of a Woman. And in the next you will
hear of another mystery beyond this, viz. That this promised Seed the man
Christ came into our Parents before the promise was made.

G. K. Page ibid. And thus Christ is the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
World, namely in that from the beginning, even as soon as our first Parents
fell, the measure of the life of the Lamb which lived in our first Parents in
the innocent state, came as it were to be slain in them by transgression, and
to undergo sore and deep suffering by reason of men's sins.

Animad. From hence they believe, that the man Christ did suffer, was slain,
and crucified when our first Parents sinned, and does suffer, is slain, and
crucified as often as man sins and apostatizes, contrary to the Scripture that
testifies that the man Christ Jesus was personally and really slain,
crucified, and offered for sin but once; the other is but either in decree,
promise, type, or metaphore. Heb. 9. 26. But now once in the end of the World
has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. The Quakers say
it was from the beginning of the World, 1 Pet. 1. 18. For Christ also has once
suffered for sin. The Quakers say he has often suffered.

G. K. Even as the Seed that complained by the Prophet, Amos 3. 13. Behold I am
pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed that is full of Sheaves. This must
needs be understood of the life of Christ as man. Page 100. For as God he
cannot suffer nor be slain, whereas the life of Christ as man is capable of
suffering and being crucified unto us, although that life still lives in itself
unto God, namely that seed or measure of it graffed or imprinted in us.

Animad. They believe from hence that the man Christ did really suffer, when
the Prophet brings in God, speaking in Amos 3. 13. Behold I am pressed under
you, etc. for as God he cannot suffer. As well might they say that God as God,
has now, and had then (when the Prophets writ) such eyes, ears, feet, hands,
as we have, for the Scripture speaks of him frequently in that manner. And take
notice that here they affirm, this man Christ, as man, may be crucified and
slain in a sinner, and yet at the same time may, as man, be alive in that same
sinner.

G. K. Page ibid. Although as man he may and does suffer, yet in due time his
suffering-life will prevail, and be raised up over all its suffering in all Men
where it suffers by reason of sin, etc.

Animad. They believe the man Christ is still suffering by reason of sin, that
he is slain, and not yet completely risen; whereas the Scripture says Romans 6.
9. Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more, death has no
more dominion over him.

G. K. The Author proves, Page 101. Christ to be a real man from the beginning,
by the instance of the man that wrestled with Jacob, Genesis 32. 24. by instancing
in one of the three men that appeared to Abraham, when Sodom was destroyed,
Genesis 18. 2. By the instance of him that Nebuchadnezzar saw in the Furnace. And
says, though it is commonly supposed that it was God that appeared thus, in a
fantastical form or shape of a man, and not that really it was the man Christ
Jesus; yet this is by no means to be granted, otherwise we should give away the
cause to the Manichees, and such as affirm that Christ was never a real and
true man, Page 102. even when born of the Virgin, and crucified on the Cross,
but only that it was a phantasm, or fantastical appearance of man; for indeed,
seeing he is called as really man before his outward birth in the flesh as
afterward, we have as good cause to believe him to be true and real man before
his outward birth in the flesh as after.

Animad. They believe from hence, that when Christ appeared in the times of the
Old Testament, in the shape and form of a man, to have assumed a real Body of
their kind of Spiritual flesh into union with the (...), or Word, and to be as
really man as he was when born of the Virgin: so that the Word was made Flesh
very frequently, for he appeared in the form of a man very frequently. Now let
it be considered, this man that appeared is likewise called an Angel, compare
Heb. 18. 1. with Genesis 18. 2. and Genesis 32. 24. with Hos. 12. 4. and read Dan. 3.
28. so that by the same way of arguing Christ did from the beginning really
take upon him Angelical nature, as well as man's nature. And likewise the two
Angels that were with him, Genesis 18. were really men, for they are called so,
and appeared to Abraham to be so. The Author was aware of this objection, and
therefore prudently has prevented it he thinks, by saying in the same Page
101. Angels are a sort of Heavenly men; so that if Christ had taken on him the
nature of Angels, he had taken on him man's nature, (i. e.) a kind of heavenly
Manhood. But to go on by this way of reasoning, when Zechariah saw a man riding
upon a red Horse, Chap. 1. 8. this Horse and Man was as real as the Man and Ass
which went up to Jerusalem that we read of, Mat. 21. We say of these that God
appeared in the form of Man, and so says the Scripture, Genesis 35. 9. God
appeared to Jacob, he did by his own power create a Body, or form or fashion it
out of some pre-existent matter, and did act and assist it to do that present
work for that present time, and then laid it aside again or annihilated it; and
this the Eternal Word did as a Preludium of his future Incarnation, when he
should assume Man's nature, a real Humane rational Soul, and a real Humane Body,
consisting of earthly Flesh and Blood, in the Womb of the Virgin in the fullness
of time.

G. K. Even from the beginning he was the heavenly Man, and had his Soul and
heavenly Flesh and Blood, by which he reached unto the Saints in all ages, and
did refresh and feed them unto Eternal Life; and forasmuch as he gave them of
his Flesh and Blood from Heaven, he also gave them of his Life and Spirt, as he
is the heavenly man or second Adam; for the Life and Spirit of the second Adam
does extend as far as his heavenly Flesh and Blood. And thus the Word was made
Flesh from the beginning. Page 103.

Animad. They believe from hence, that the Manhood of Christ (which has been
from the beginning) consists of Flesh and Blood, this is the Body; and then of
a Soul, Spirit, or Life, and that this is the food that Saints are fed withal
unto Eternal Life, and calls it the Spirit of the second Adam: believes that
both parts of it, viz. Flesh, Blood, and Soul is extended to, and into every
Saint in Heaven and Earth. I do but query, whether this Life and Spirit of the
Manhood of Christ be not the same with, or differing from the Holy Ghost? If it
be not the same, but a Creature (as afterward he confesses,) how any thing
that is but a Creature can be food for Saints to Eternal Life? and how one Body
of Flesh and Blood can penetrate another? and why this Heavenly man Christ
should be called by the Author, the second Adam, when as he was the first Adam?
for he was a man that had a Body of Flesh and Blood, and a Soul before Adam
was. Thus indeed the last should be first, and the first last.

G. K. For the Saints cannot contain Christ even as Man, they only partake of
some measure, or ray, or emanation of him; they have not the center or spring
of his Soul and Life in them, but only an emanation or stream of it; the center
and spring it self was for most part in Heaven, until it descended and clothed
it self with the likeness of our sinful flesh in the Virgins Womb. Page ibid.

Animad. We query whether this Manhood of Christ that is in every one, be not
the same with that Light the Quakers have so much talked of? and if so, then
see how much they differ among themselves. Fox the younger, in his Book, Page
53. calls the Light within the true Eternal God. Keith here, but a ray of the
Manhood. They say, the spring of this Soul and Life was for most part in
Heaven. Was the man that appeared so frequently to the Patriarchs without it?
They believe this Center and Spring descended and clothed it self with Flesh
in the Virgins womb. Now let them produce one Scripture, and they shall carry
it, where it is said, the Man or Manhood became Flesh: It says, The Word was
made Flesh, Joh. 1. 1. God was manifested in the Flesh, 1 Timothy 3. ult. Rom 8.
3. God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh. Is this Manhood
God, is it the Word, is it the Son of God? In the next Quotation mark, he
says, As man he was the Son of God.

G. K. Page 104. And therefore let all the Scriptures be searched, and it shall
not be found that Christ became Man, and took to himself the Soul of Man at his
conception in the Womb of the Virgin, but only that he took Flesh, and was the
son of Mary, David, and Abraham according to the Flesh; but according to his
Heavenly nature, even as man he was the Son of God.

Animad. They believe that Christ did not become man when the Virgin conceived
by the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost, but was man before. They believe that
he only took Flesh, Blood, and Bones of the Virgin, and that this Body thus
taken never had such a humane Soul to inform it as ours is, but instead of
that, the heavenly Flesh with the Soul of the Manhood of Christ informed it,
which Manhood is of a different nature and substance from ours. Thus Christ was
never man, had never a humane nature; for as they have said before Page 102.
The Soul most properly is the man, and Christ never had a humane soul according
to Keith; so that he is so far from being like to us in all things, that he is
not like unto us in any thing; for though he had a Body like to ours, yet that
Body is not informed as ours. Herein again he is unlike to us, and how is he
(let them tell us) the son of Mary, David, etc? A son is a real man, consisting
of such a soul, as well as body, as Mary and David had. A son is not a son, if
he has not the same nature with the Father and Mother: Now that Christ had
such a soul as others, let the Scriptures be searched, and it will be found in
Luke 2. ult. Jesus increased in Wisdom, his soul was then subject to some kind
of ignorance, though not sinful; it did not know all present or past things,
and therefore it was not the heavenly Manhood, for that (Keith says) is
omniscient and omnipercipient. The Scripture says, Deuteronomy. 18. I will raise up a
Prophet from among their Brethren, like unto thee. How was Christ like unto
Moses, if he had not a soul of the same nature with Moses his soul? Christ
(according to Keith) when he appeared in Flesh, was more like to the Angels
that appeared in humane shape in the time of the Old Testament, than like to
men. What Spirit was that which Christ committed to his Father when he gave up
the Ghost on the Cross, Luke 23. 46. Was it the soul of the Manhood which Keith
is speaking of, which afterward he says is omnipresent? And if they are for
the pre-existence of the soul of Christ's Manhood, why not for the pre-existence
of the souls of all other men?

G. K. Page 109. The Author proves the man Christ to be in all. When Paul
preached to the Corinthians and Galatians in the time of their Heathenism, he
preached Christ crucified in them. See 1 Cor. 2. 1. Gal. 3. 1. The words in
both places according to the Greek Are [crucified in you.] And it was a great
part of the mystery that Paul preached unto the Gentiles, to wit, Christ in the
Gentiles. -- See Col. 1. 27. What is the riches of the glory of this mystery in
the Gentiles? Ephesians. 1. 8. He preached the unsearchable riches of Christ in the
Gentiles. And 1 Timothy 3. 16. God manifested in the flesh, preached in the
Gentiles. So the Greek in all these places, etc.

Animad. They believe that all the Heathens, in the time of their Heathenism,
had, and now have, this man Christ in them; and that the riches of the glory of
the mystery was in them while they worshipped Devils. I ask, why is not this
man Christ in all the fallen Angels as well as fallen men? As for the Greek
Preposition [(...),] it must necessarily be translated [among] in some places,
else see what sense you you will make, Acts 2. 29. His Sepulcher is [in us]
unto this day. Romans 12. 3. To every one that is [in you] not to think of
himself, etc. 1 Cor. 5. 1. It is reported commonly, that there is fornication
[in you,] and such fornication that one should have his fathers wife, 2 Pet. 2.
1. There were false Prophets [(...)] in the People, even as there shall be
false Teachers [(...) in you,] and if in these places, why not in the other
which Keith quotes.

G. K. Page 128. I shall more particularly prove that the man Jesus, even in
the days of his flesh, did know the thoughts of men, from express testimonies
of Scripture, Matthew. 12. 25. And Jesus knew their thoughts, Luke 6. 8. Joh. 2.
24, 25. And needed, not that any should testify of man, for he knew what was in
man. And surely John understood this of Christ as man, for he is here speaking
of the man Christ, even Jesus that was born of Mary. But to say that he knew
men's thoughts, not immediately, but by revelation, is to contradict the express
words of this Scripture; all which proves, that the man Christ Jesus (to wit)
his soul has a real omnipercipiency, and is really omnipercipient and
omniscient of all things present and past, if not of all things to come: for as
things to come he may well know them by divine revelation from his Father, Page
129. and if Christ as man be omnipercipient, he is also omnipresent.

Animad. They believe this Manhood of Christ perceives and knows all things
past and present of it self, and by it self, considered without any relation
to, or union with the Deity, and that it needs not God as to the knowledge of
any present or past things, but only as to the things to come, and that it is
every where in Heaven, Earth, and Hell; and all this Keith asserts of the man
Jesus as born of the Virgin, of which John speaks, Joh. 2. 24, 25. Let the
Reader see if all this is not in the last Paragraph. We query notwithstanding
what is said to the contrary, whether this is not to constitute a new God in
time? is it not Jehovahs prerogative what is spoken, Psalm. 139. from the first
to the 14. of possessing the Reins, and being omnipresent? Whither can I fly
from thy presence? unless we speak by the figure of the communication of
Properties, and so attribute that to the whole Person which is proper only to
one nature. Christ as God only, not as man, is omniscient and omnipresent. As
to the first he was ignorant of many things as man, otherwise it could not be
said that Jesus grew in Wisdom, Luke 2. ult. As to the second, it is spoke, Now
am I no more in the World, and me you have not always, I go away.

G. K. Page 131. The whole soul or spirit of Christ is not in every place, nor
in every man, for the spring and center, or fountain of it is only in that Body
that was crucified on the Cross at Jerusalem, and is now ascended and glorified
in Heaven, which remains the same in substance that it was on Earth, although
it be wonderfully changed as to the mode and manner of its being, it being no
more a body of Flesh, Blood, and Bones, but a pure ethereal or heavenly body,
like unto which the bodies of the Saints are to be at the Resurrection: for
earthly and heavenly are not so differing, but that remaining one in substance,
they may be changed one into another.

Animad. The Quakers (not to wrong them) believe that besides the heavenly body
of heavenly flesh and blood which was crucified when Adam sinned, Christ has
another body of another kind of flesh and blood taken of the Virgin, and that
was crucified without the gates of Jerusalem. But we query wherefore it was
offered, whether as an expiatory sacrifice for Sin, and whether his soul was
made an offering for Sin according to Isa. 53. 10? and if so, whether you mean
any thing but the soul of the heavenly Manhood which he had before the World
was? They believe this second latter Body is ascended, glorified in Heaven, yet
remains the same in substance, contrary to their former Faith. When the
Question is put to J. Crook, viz. Whether do thou believe that the same body
of man after the departure of the soul from it, does rise to life again?
answers in his late Book called Counter. Convert, Page 68. This Query is
contrary to Scripture, which says, a natural body, etc. yet according to Keith
the Philosopher, though it be the same in substance, it is no more a Body of
Flesh and Blood, but purely ethereal; yet let it be considered, that the first
heavenly Body of the Manhood of Christ which Keith says he had from the
beginning, he allows to have Flesh and Blood, and calls it so, and it has so
now in Heaven, surely according to him; yet the body born of the Virgin is
changed so ethereal, that you must call it no more Flesh and Blood: But this is
contrary to what Christ says of himself after his Resurrection, which is a
state of glory, 1 Cor. 15. 43. It is raised in Glory. Christ says, Luke 24.
39. Handle me and see, for a Spirit has not [flesh and blood] as you see me
have. If the Body of Christ be turned into Air, and yet remain the same in
substance, we ask what it is that identifies and makes it the same in substance
that it was when Flesh and Blood?

G. K. Page 132. The center and spring of Christ's soul remaining in that
glorified body, it extends its precious life, spirit, and light unto the
Saints, and in some manner into all men, even as the light of the Sun that is
centrally in the body of the Sun, and yet emanates and sends forth its light in
most abundant streams and rays into all the World.

Animad. They believe this heavenly Flesh and Blood is in some manner in all
Men. I ask why not in some manner in all Devils? as to the comparison that the
Author uses, as nothing of the body of the Sun is here on Earth but in Heaven
only its light and heat which are qualities in the Air; so now, that light
within that these Quakers have made so much stir about, is nothing else but an
accident and quality from the Manhood of Christ in Heaven adhering in our
souls, as light and heat adheres in the Air.

G. K. Page 135. For it is a more noble creation than all things else, and is
not of this creation as the Apostle declares expressly, Heb. 9. 11 The words
[not of this building] should be translated, not of this creation, (...), and
therefore some think fit rather to call it an emanation from God than a
creation, to speak strictly.

Animad. They believe this heavenly Manhood to be a creature contrary to J.
Crook's Counterfeit Convert, Page 63. That true light which is called the life
of Christ, Joh. 1. 4. 9. and lights every man that comes into the World is
not a Creature: Keith says it is a Creature. I take it for granted that this
Manhood and the Light within are all one and the same. Yet Keith says, though
it is a Creature yet not of this creation: but do we read of any other Creation
before the creation of these Heavens and this Earth, with the Hosts of them.
That Scripture in Heb. 9. 11. Not of this building, is grossly corrupted by the
Author going about to prove the Manhood of Christ not to be created in this
creation. (...) here is rightly translated Building or Structure, it is not
always taken for the act of God in framing something out of nothing, nor the
effect of God's so acting; but it is taken in another sense in some places, as
1 Pet. 2. 13. Magistracy this or that sort that a People may choose to
themselves, is called (...) humane creation. When the Apostle then says not of
this building, it is to be understood of Heaven into which Christ is entered
with his Blood. This Heaven is not of the same make and building with the
Tabernacle which was the figure, for this Tabernacle was made with hands and of
earthly materials, but Heaven by the immediate power of God. Let the Quakers
remember, that this creation of which he says this Manhood is not, but of
another, was not by hands: some of them think fit to call this Manhood an
emanation rather than a Creation. You see they are at a loss what name to give
this Child of their own begetting and breeding in the imagination; can Flesh
and Blood and a humane soul be said to ray and beam from God, who is a free and
simple spirit, as light which rays necessarily from the body of the Sun, which
is a body of light; therefore you shall hear he has denied it again in the
next Quotation.

G. K. For the most blessed and glorious Diety properly has no center or rays
distinct by way of emanation, but rather is all center. -- And therefore the
blessed Deity is as centrally and essentially in us as in the man Christ Jesus,
Page 136.

Animad. According to this they must believe that G. Keith, and J. Crook have
God as essentially in them as the man Christ Jesus, and this then may as fitly
be spoke of them as of the man Christ Jesus, in G. Keith and J. Crook dwells
all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, as it is said of the man Christ Jesus, in
Col. 2. 9. How does the Christian savor this is it not rampant blasphemy? See
Piscator, and he translates the word (...), in Col. 2. 9. Essentialiter,
essentially. And Calvin likewise upon the same Scripture says, God manifests
himself either by Figures, or by Virtue, Power, and Grace; Sed in Christo nobis
essentialiter apparuit (i. e.) but has in Christ appeared essentially to us:
whosoever then has God essentially in him, has the whole Deity in him, for
the essence is the whole Deity, and is as personally united unto God as ever
Jesus Christ, and may as truly and in the same sense be called God, the Son of
God, God-man the Creator of the World, and is the object of divine Worship: Yet
observe the Author will not have the center of the heavenly Manhood of Christ
dwell in us, but allows here the essence of the Deity to dwell in us; is not
this a preferring the Manhood above the Deity?

G. K Page 143. But when I say the soul and spirit of Christ as Man is extended
unto us, I do not understand the Nepheseh of his soul, but the Nechamah or
Nischma, even that divine spirit of life that God breathed into Adam.

Animad. They believe that there is a Nepheseh and a Nischma in this heavenly
Soul of the Manhood of Christ; one more gross, the other more refined. It is
this Nischma that is extended thus into all things, not the Nepheseh, but there
is a secret not yet to be revealed by this Rabbi, whether these two be one soul
or two souls of different kinds, or whether two faculties or parts of one and
the same soul, we will at present have our liberty till they have determined
the controversy to conceive them two real distinct principles, so that Christ
(you will see by that time we come to the end) will have two Bodies and two
Souls; only remember both these two principles Christ had before any thing was
conceived in the womb of the Virgin. It is said before, Page 104. It cannot be
found in Scripture that Christ took to himself the soul of man at his
conception, etc.

G. K. Page ibid. And is that which Solomon calls the Candle of the Lord,
searching all the inward parts of the Belly; and James, the ingrafted Word; and
John, the Word made Flesh, or incarnate Word that dwells in us. By the
Nepheseh I understand that of the soul of Christ common to him with the souls
of other men, as namely the root and life of the animal senses and discursive
parts. By the Neschamah or Nischmah I understand, that substantial dignity, and
excellency of the soul of Christ that it has in its nature, (being a divine
nature so to speak,) above and beyond the souls of all other men and spirits of
the most excellent and holy Angels; but whether his Nepheseh and Neschamah be
two principles really distinct, or two faculties and powers of one only
principle, I shall not in this place determine, nor is it material to the thing
in hand to enquire.

Animad. They believe that this heavenly Manhood, this Flesh and Blood, and one
of the souls at least were breathed into Adam when God breathed into Adam the
breath of life: This I suppose was the beginning of the Light in Man. Now it
was (as the Author has said before) that Christ came to be slain in our first
Parents: I query here whether besides this Nischma Adam had a rational soul,
which was the root of his animal senses and discoursive parts, and whether this
that was breathed into Adam was the center of the soul of Christ, or some ray,
only, it should be the center, in that Nischma is the excellency (the Author
says) of this soul, yet I remember he has said, that as to the center it was
most what in Heaven, it may be this was one of the times it came out of Heaven:
Now if the Nischma of Christ was in Adam, (as this man says,) and yet Adam had
a distinct Nephesh proper to himself, then was Adam a more complete man than
Jesus Christ of Nazareth: Upon this supposition that the Author has suggested,
that Christ's Nepheseh may be but a distinct faculty of the same soul; but if
neither of the two Adams had a rational humane soul distinct from the Nischma,
which is not of this Creation, as Keith says, then neither of the Adams were
complete men, neither had the nature of man, but only bodies acted by a divine
nature, (as here he calls it,) nay it destroys all humane nature, so that there
never was, nor is a complete man, as we have had the notion of a man in the
World: for does not God breath this Nischma into every body formed in the Womb
as he did into Adams body in its creation: and let it be considered, Adams
body, and so every others man's body had and has as an entire personal union
with the God head as the body which Jesus of Nazareth had, for ought I can
learn from Keiths Divinity. It Is true he says, the soul or spirit of the
heavenly Manhood of Christ has an immediate and wonderful manner of union with
the Deity, as no other soul or spirit of men were partakers of, Page 83. but
what union the body of Christ, that was taken of the Virgin, had with the
(...), which any of the Quakers bodies have not, I cannot yet learn; yet Keith
says, the center of the soul of Christ dwells there only since it was taken of
the Virgin; but then I query what difference betwixt the N^schma that is the
excellency and dignity (as he says) of this soul, and the center of it? and is
not this Nischma breathed into every man that is made alive in the womb, as it
was breathed into Adam in his creation? Look into Buxtorfs Lexicon you that are
Scholars, and there you will see that this curious distinction of Nepheseh and
Nischma is groundless. Nischma signifies the very breath as well as the mind
and soul: so Nepheseh the mind and soul as well as breath. It Is true the Hebrew
uses Nischma mostwhat for the rational immortal soul of man, and this is
surely the root of the animal senses, and discursive parts; but that it should
signify something not of this Creation, far excelling the holy Angels spirits,
a divine nature, and yet subjected in man as Keith affirms, I no where find.
Before I leave this, to let you see the vanity of this man's reasoning, from
Gods breathing into Adam the breath of Life, that Adam was made partaker of the
soul of the Manhood of Christ, as well might he say that the excellency of the
soul of the Manhood of Christ was in every animal before the Flood, and is now
in every Beast, Bird: for the same word is used of the Beasts, and Fowls, and
the creeping things that were destroyed by the Flood, Genesis 7. 22. In whose
Nostrils was Nishmah, Ruach, Chaiim, (i. e.) The breath of the spirit of Life
of all that was in the dry Land, died. I desire the Scholars to call to mind
how this notion of the soul of Christ in all, suits with Plato's of the Anima
Mundi.

G. K. Page 145. But the flesh of Christ that the Saints fed upon, is rather
that divine Body, the substance of which is of another kind than the outward
Body, how much soever made glorious or spiritual, but this Body cannot
sanctify us without the soul of Christ extended into it.

Animad. They believe from hence that Christ had and has two Bodies; one they
call divine, the other outward; and those two differ in kind and nature, though
the outward Body be now glorious and spiritual. They believe this divine Body
of Christ is in us, and not alone, but with the soul of Christ's Manhood, and
these both together do sanctify us. I query, whether this soul of Christ be the
Holy Ghost, but how can that be, when the Author has said it is a Creature:
why then, the Christian has a great advantage of a Quaker, in that his
sanctification is of another and better nature than that of the Quakers, in
that it is the Holy Ghost, who is God, who mystically dwells in them: But they
understand the Holy Ghost that is God, is not separated from this Body and Soul
of Christ, but why then did they not expess themselves so? but this is language
that the Scripture is not acquainted with, that the Soul of the Manhood of
Christ is extended into the body of the same Manhood, which soul and body are
both created Beings, and both together are extended into the soul of every
Saint, and there sanctifies together with the Holy Ghost.

G. K. Page 159. Whose nature as man is heavenly and divine, although it be
inferior to the Godhead, for he said My Father is greater than I; nor will his
omnipresence, nor omnipercipiency prove that as Man he is as great as the
Father: for the whole Universe of created Beings of Heaven and Earth, visible
and invisible, are as the dust of the Balance, and drop of the Bucket in
comparison of God.

Animad. They believe this humane nature is divine: Farewell that distinction
then, yet its inferior to the Godhead, yet omnipresent and omniscient; but
this Author thinks, that omnipresency and omnisciency may be attributed to the
Manhood, yet the Manhood not be confounded with or equalized to the Godhead,
contrary to the Doctrine taught by our Christian Divines, viz. That there are
Attributes of God not communicable to the Creature, and among them are these
two, Omnisciency, and Omnipresency; these cannot be communicated to any
Creature, but it immediately becomes God. Let it be considered likewise, there
is thought by judicious Divines, that there is an infinite space beyond this
Globe of the Heaven and Earth: I query, whether this Manhood if omnipresent
must not be there? By the Authors own Argument it must be there, otherwise it
cannot perceive any such space, nor Gods presence there: for he has said, it
perceives nothing but where it is present, Page 129. Parag. 16. and if present
there throughout, this is Immensity, and then the Universe is but as a drop of
the Bucket to the Manhood of Christ; is it not then equal to God, and
confounded with God.

G. K. And therefore that the Heavenly man Christ Jesus, his Spirit, Light, and
Life, does every where extend it self into all things, will not, prove that
Christ as man is equal unto God, nor yet confound his Godhead and Manhood, it
only proves that the man Christ Jesus is a great and mighty, and most
excellent Being, for above all, and excelling all Men and Angels, and all
angelical and heavenly Powers, which is a most certain truth, and therefore do
all the Angels worship him as they are commanded. Page ibid.

Animad. He here speaks of the Manhood of Christ as distinct from the Godhead,
not confounded with it, nor equal to it, yet has omnipresency and
omnipercipiency Attributes of its own, and of it self in its own nature, is a
most excellent Being far above all Angels, and thus lays the ground and
foundation of the Angels Worship upon the excellency of the nature of the
Manhood, barely considered in it self: I query selemnly if it be not grand
Idolatry for Men or Angels to worship any Creature, and that Creature though
never so excellent, be not in personal union with God, and the worship
terminated upon the Godhead: Christ is God and Man, Christians worshipping him
terminates the worship upon the Godhead? See if Keith has not made the Angels
Idolaters.

Take but these two or three things along with thee Reader in perusing Keiths
Book, and all his vain scribbling is answered. 1. That the Prophets spoke of
many things that were to come, as if they were present. 2. That Christ acted in
his Mediatorship in all things before his Incarnation in reference still to his
Incarnation, which was to be in the fullness of time. 3. That many things in
Scripture are spoken of Christ by that figurative speech of the communication
of Properties, when that which is proper to one nature only is attributed to
the other, or to the whole Person, the reason of this is because Christ has
two distinct natures, but yet is but one Person; the Manhood is taken up into
personal union with the Godhead.

The Sum of the whole is this, The Quakers Christ consists, First, Of the
(...), who is God. Secondly, Of a Manhood created, but before the World was.
Now this Creature Manhood consists of two parts, 1. The Body. 2. The Soul. The
Body consists of two parts, (or as Pennington says) of three, viz. Flesh,
Blood, and Bones. The Soul consists of three parts, or else there are two
Souls, (for yet it is not determined,) viz. The Center, Nischma, and the
Nephesch: To these seven add an eighth, an outward Body, or Vessel of Flesh,
and Blood, and Bones that was taken of the Virgin, without any rational soul as
we have, created and infused into the Body in the Womb. The first heavenly body
of Flesh and Blood is extended throughout Heaven, Earth, and Hell, and infinite
imaginary space (for ought I can see) is in all Saints, they in all Ages fed
upon it, and is in all Men, and in all Devils (for ought I can see that is said
to the contrary;) the Soul is extended with it into all Saints, Men, Devils, in
Heaven, Earth, and Hell, for it is omnipresent: It is a Creature, but not of
this Creation, yet rather an emanation, yet no emanation, for there are no
emanations or rays properly from God: It is inferior to the Deity, yet it is
the Word made Flesh, or incarnate Word, Page 143. It is omnipresent and
omniscient: The center of the Soul has been for the most part in Heaven, yet
created who knows how long before the Heaven. The rays from this center are
only in men, not the center it self, yet the very Nischma of it which is the
excellency of it, was breathed into Adam. This man Christ has been every
moment since the fall crucified in every Sinner, is daily slain, dies in this
crucifixion as to the Sinner, but yet lives in the same Sinner as to it self.
The Nephesh of this Nischma, or else as a distinct principle of it self, was
the root of the Animal senses and Discursive parts in that outward Body which
was taken of the Virgin, which outward Body is ascended into Heaven, not
changed as to substance, but is Flesh and Blood no longer, but a heavenly Body,
yet the other first and heavenly Body always had and has Flesh and Blood in
and out of Heaven; so then there belongs to Jesus, 1. The (...), two Bodies of
different kinds. 2. Souls, yet neither of them a rational and humane like to
ours that is formed by Jehovah in us, for it is not of this Creation; thus
there is a Creation before this Creation that we read of that Moses spoke of in
the Book of Genesis, and there was a man of Flesh and Blood in existence before
Adam.

Now let all Christians judge, if this be the Christ of God, if this be not
another Jesus, and then the Quaker (it will follow) brings in another Gospel,
and so is acted by another Spirit, and has therefore a curse from the Apostle
upon him, 1 Gal. 8. 9. (...), The Apostle exhorts the Christians, Heb. 13. 9.
Be not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrine. Now here is a strange
Doctrine. We read of several Heresies touching the Person of Christ, as 1. the
Macedonians and Valentinians said, that Christ brought a heavenly Body from
Heaven with him. There is something of this in this Heresy of the Quakers,
they do acknowledge he took a body of the Virgin, yet he likewise according to
them brought another body from Heaven. 2. Apellis said he had an airy Body and
starry Flesh that passed through the Virgin, and do not these say that Christ
had a heavenly Body, and heavenly Flesh and Blood, and was not this in the womb
of the Virgin, and passed through, it with the outward, and is not the outward
Body now aereal or ethereal? 3. The Manachees, that he had an imaginary Body:
so these, for this heavenly Body and Flesh was never seen, felt, or heard,
neither can be by the outward senses, it has a foundation only in Keith's
imagination. 4. Apollanaris, that instead of the rational Soul the Divinity did
inform the Body, they say the Nischma is the Word incarnate, and the Nephesh of
this Nishma being a part of that one and same faculty, is the root of the
animal senses of that Body that was taken of the Virgin. 5. The Nestorians,
that there were two. Persons as well as two Natures in Christ: The Quakers that
there are three Natures if not sour. The (...) one. The heavenly Manhood two.
The outward Body three. The the Nischma of the Manhood which he calls a Divine
Nature, it is above all humane and angelical Nature, yet not the (...) it self,
so that it may be of a middle nature betwixt both here is the fourth Nature,
let them tell us plainly whether the outward Body belongs to his Person, or is
a distinct Person of it self. 6. The Eutychians gave the divine Attributes to
the Humane Nature, so these, they say it is omniscient. 7. The Ubiquitarians
that ascribed Majesty and Omnipresency to the Humanity, so these they say the
Manhood is in all things. Thus. Quakerism is the common Shore of all the grand
Heresies concerning the Person of Christ, these seven poisonous Streams here
meet and commence into the black dead Sea of the worst and newest Heresy
called Quakerism.

1 John 5. ult. Little Children keep your selves from Idols, Amen.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard.


