A BLOW at Modern SADDUCISM In some Philosophical Considerations ABOUT
Witchcraft. To which is added, The Relation of the Famed Disturbance by the
DRUMMER, In the House of Mr. JOHN MOMPESSON: With some REFLECTIONS on Drollery,
and Atheism.

By a Member of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

London, Printed by E. C. for James Collins, at the Kings Head in
Westminster Hall, 1668.

A Philiosophical Endeavor In the DEFENSE Of the Being of WITCHES AND
APPARITIONS: With some things concerning the Famous GREATREK'S. WRITTEN In a
Letter to the much Honored ROBERT HUNT, Esquire

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1668.

PREFACE.
THERE are a sort of narrow, and confined Spirits, who account all Discourses
needless, that are not for their particular purposes; and judge all the world
to be of the Size, and Genius of those within the Circle of their Knowledge,
and Acquaintance: so that with a pert and pragmatical Insolence, they censure
all the braver Designs, and Notices that lie beyond their Ken, as nice and
impertinent Speculations. An ignorant, and proud Injustice; as if this sort
were the only persons, whose humor, and deeds should be consulted. And hence
it comes to pass, that the greatest and worthiest things that are written, or
said, do always meet with the most general neglect, and scorn; since the
little people for whom they were not intended, are quick to shoot their bolt,
and to condemn what they do not understand, and because they do not. Whereas on
the other side, those that are able to judge, and would encourage, are commonly
reserved and modest, in passing judgments; or, if they should endeavor to do
right to things that are worthy, they are sure to be out-voiced by the rout of
ignorant contemners. Upon which accounts I have often thought, that he that
courts and values popular estimation, takes not the right way, if he endeavor
at any thing that is really excellent; but he must study the little
plausibilities, and accomodate the humor of the MANY, who are active Ministers
of Fame; being zealous, and loud in their applauses, as they are clamorous and
impetuous in their oppositions. As for these, it is one of my chief cares to
make my self as much unconcerned at their censures, as I am at the cacklings of
a Flock of Geese, or at the eager displeasure of those little snarling Animals,
that are angry when I pass by them. And (if that may signify any thing to keep
them from troubling themselves about the following CONSIDERATIONS) I desire
they would take notice from me, that I writ not those things for such as they;
and they will do well to throw up the Book upon this Advertisement, except they
will stay to hear, That though Philosophical Discourses to justify the common
belief about Witches, are nothing at all to them, or those of their measure;
yet they are too seasonable, and necessary for our Age, in which Atheism is
begun in Sadducism. And those that dare not bluntly say, There is NO GOD,
content themselves, (for a fair step, and Introduction) to deny there are
SPIRITS, or WITCHES. Which sort of Infidels, though they are not ordinary among
the mere vulgar, yet are they numerous in a little higher rank of
understandings. And those that know any thing of the world, know, That most of
the looser Gentry, and the little pretenders to Philosophy and Wit, are
generally deriders of the belief of Witches, and Apparitions. And were this a
slight or mere speculative mistake, I should not trouble my self, or them about
it. But I fear this error has a core in it that is worse than Heresy: And
therefore how little soever I care what men believe, or teach in matters of
opinion, I think I have reason to be concerned in an affair, that touches so
near upon the greatest interests of Religion. And really I am astonished
sometimes to think into what a kind of Age we are fallen, in which some of the
greatest impieties are accounted but Buggs, and terrible Names, invisible
Titles, Piccadillo's or Chimera's. The sad and greatest instances, are
SACRILEGE, REBELLION, and VVITCHCRAFT. For the two former, there are a sort of
men (that are far from being professed enemies to Religion) who, I do not know
whether they own any such vices. We find no mention of them in their most
particular Confessions, nor have I observed them in those Sermons that have
contained the largest Catalogues of the Sins of our Age, and Nation. 'Twere
dangerous to speak of them as sins, for fear who should be found guilty. But my
business at present is not with these, but the other, VVITCHCRAFT, which I am
sure was a Sin of elder times; and how comes it about that this Age, which so
much out-does them in all other kinds of wickedness, should be wholly innocent
in this? That there MAY be WITCHES and Apparitions in our days,
notwithstanding the Objections of the Modern Sadduce, I believe I have made
appear in the CONSIDERATIONS following; in which I did not primarily intend
direct proof, but DEFENSE, as the Title of the first Edition, which is restored
in this mentioned. But I have now added the evidence of the Divine Oracles, and
two Relations of Fact, that are clear and unexceptionable. I have no humor nor
delight in telling Stories, and do not publish these, for the gratification of
those that have; but I record them as Arguments for the confirmation of a
Truth, which has indeed been attested by multitudes of the like evidences in
all places, and times: But things REMOTE, or long past, are either not
believed, or forgotten: whereas these being fresh, and near, and attended with
all the circumstances of credibility, it may be expected, they should have the
more success upon the obstinacy of Unbelievers.

ERRATA.
PAge 12. line 25. r. a large, p. 36. l. 12. r. intrigues, p. 44. l. 6. and 7.
r. appetites, p. 79. l. 20. r. tax p. 105. l. 4. r. ludicrous fagaries, p.
111. l. 1. dele is, p. 113. l. 22. dele re, p. 118. l. 26, 27. r. multitudes.
p. 128. l. 4. dele her, p. 134. l. 26. r. scrutiny, p. 144. l. 14. r.
effaeminacies. p. 146. l. 21. r. geninses, p. 148. l. 4. r. aggravated, ibid.
r. herd. p. 154 l. 3. r. he sucks.

Some CONSIDERATIONS About Witchcraft: In a LETTER to Robert Hunt, Esquire.
SIR,
THE FREQUENT and late dealings you have had in the Examination of Witches, and
the regards of one that has a very particular honor for you, have brought you
the trouble of some CONSIDERATIONS on the Subject. And though what I have to
say, be but the careless and hasty product of a sitting or two; yet I hope it
may afford you some, not unreasonable, accounts of the odd phoenomena of
Witchcraft and Fascination, and contribute to the DEFENSE of the Truth, and
certainty of matters, which you know by Experiments that could not deceive; in
spite of the little exceptions of those that are resolved to believe nothing in
affairs of this nature.

AND if any thing were to be much admired in an Age of Wonders, not only of
Nature (which is a constant Prodigy) but of Men and Manners; it would be to me
matter of Astonishment, that Men, otherwise witty and ingenious, are fallen
into the conceit that there is no such thing as a Witch or Apparition, but that
these are the creatures of Melancholy and Superstition, fostered by ignorance
and design; which, comparing the confidence of their disbelief with the
evidence of the things denied, and the weakness of their grounds, would almost
suggest, that themselves are an argument of what they deny; and that so
confident an Opinion could not be held upon such inducements, but by some kind
of Witchcraft and Fascination in the Fancy. And perhaps that evil Spirit, whose
influences they will not allow in Actions ascribed to such Causes, has a
greater hand and interest in their Proposition than they are aware of. For that
subtle enemy of Mankind (since Providence will not permit him to mischief us
without our own concurrence) attempts that by stratagem and artifice, which he
could never effect by open ways of acting; and the success of all wiles
depending upon their secrecy and concealment, his influence is never more
dangerous than when his agency is least suspected. In order therefore to the
carrying on the dark and hidden designs he manageth against our Happiness, and
our Souls, he cannot expect to advantage himself more, than by insinuating a
belief, That there is no such thing as himself, but that fear and fancy make
Devils now, as they did Gods of old. Nor can he ever draw the assent of men to
so dangerous an assertion, while the standing sensible evidences of his
existence in his practices by and upon his instruments are not discredited and
removed.

It Is doubtless therefore the interest of this Agent of darkness to have the
world believe, that the notion they have of him is but a phantome and conceit;
and in order thereunto, That the stories of Witches, Apparitions, and indeed
every thing that brings tidings of another world, are but melancholic Dreams,
and pious Romances. And when men are arrived thus far, to think there are no
diabolical contracts or apparitions, their belief that there are such Spirits,
rests only upon their Faith and Reverence to the Divine Oracles, which we have
little reason to apprehend so great in such assertors, as to command much from
their assent, especially in such things in which they have corrupt interests
against their evidence. So that he that thinks there is no Witch, believes a
Devil gratis, or at least upon such inducements which he is like to find
himself disposed to deny when he pleases. And when men are arrived to this
degree of diffidence and infidelity, we are beholden to them if they believe
either Angel, or Spirit, Resurrection of the Body, or Immortality of Souls.
These things hang together in a Chain of connection, at least in these men's
Hypothesis; and it is but an happy chance if he that has lost one link, holds
another. So that the vitals of Religion being so much interessed in this
subject, it will not be impertinent particularly to discourse it.

AND in order to the proof that there have been, and are unlawful confederacies
with evil spirits, by virtue of which the hellish accomplices perform things
above their natural powers; I must premise, that this being matter of Fact, is
only capable of the evidence of authority and sense: And by both these, the
being of Witches and diabolical contracts, is most abundantly confirmed. All
Histories are full of the exploits of those Instruments of darkness, and the
testimony of all Ages, not only of the rude and barbarous, but of the most
civilized and polished world, brings tidings of their strange performances. We
have the attestation of thousands of eye and ear-witnesses, and those not of
the easily deceivable vulgar only, but of wise and grave discerners, and that
when no interest could oblige them to agree together in a common Lie: I say, we
have the light of all these circumstances to confirm us in the belief of things
done by persons of despicable power and knowledge, beyond the reach of Art and
ordinary Nature; standing public Records have been kept of these well attested
Relations, and Epocha's made of those unwonted events. Laws in many Nations
have been enacted against those vile practices; those among the Jews and our
own are notorious; such cases have been often determined near us, by wise and
reverend Judges, upon clear and convictive evidence: and thousands in our own
Nation have suffered death for their vile compacts with apostate spirits. All
these I might largely prove in their particular instances, but that it is not
needful, since those that deny the being of Witches, do it not out of ignorance
of these Heads of Argument, of which probably they have heard a thousand times;
But from an apprehension that such a belief is absurd, and the things
impossible. And upon these presumptions they contemn all demonstrations of this
nature, and are hardened against conviction. And I think, those that can
believe all Histories are Romances, that all the wiser world have agreed
together to juggle mankind into a common belief of ungrounded fables, that the
sound senses of multitudes together may deceive them, and Laws are built upon
Chymera's; that the gravest and wisest Judges have been Murderers, and the
sagest persons Fools, or designing Impostors: I say, those that can believe
this heap of absurdities, are either more credulous than those whose credulity
they reprehend, or else have some extraordinary evidence of their persuasion,
viz. That it is absurd and impossible there should be a Witch or Apparition. And
I am confident, were those little appearances removed, which men have formed in
their fancies against the belief of such things; their own evidence would make
its way to men's assent, without any more arguments than what they know already
to enforce it. There is nothing then necessary to be done, in order to the
establishing the belief I would reconcile to men's minds; but to endeavor the
removal of those prejudices they have received against it, the chief of which I
shall particularly deal with; and I begin with that bold Assertion, That

I.
( I.) THE NOTION of a Spirit is impossible and contradictious, and
consequently so is that of Witches, the belief of which is founded on that
Doctrine.

TO WHICH OBJECTION I answer, (1) If the notion of a Spirit be so absurd as is
pretended, that of a God, and a Soul distinct from matter, and immortal, is
likewise an absurdity. And then, that the world was jumbled into this elegant
and orderly Fabric by chance; and that our Souls are only parts of Matter,
that came together we know not whence, nor how; and shall again shortly be
dissolved into those loose Atoms that compound them: That all our conceptions
are but the thrusting of one part of matter against another; and the Idea's of
our minds mere blind and casual motions: These and a thousand more the
grossest impossibilities and absurdities (consequents of this Proposition, That
the notion of a Spirit is absurd) will be sad certainties and demonstrations.
And with such Assertors I would cease to discourse about Witches and
Apparitions, and address my self to obtain their assent to truths infinitely
more Sacred.

AND yet (2) though it should be granted them, that a substance immaterial is
as much a contradiction as they can fancy; yet why should they not believe that
the Air and all the Regions above us may have their invisible intellectual
Agents, of nature like unto our Souls, be that what it will; and some of them
at least as much degenerate as the vilest and most mischievous among Men. This
Hypothesis will be enough to secure the possibility of Witches and Apparitions:
and that all the upper Stories of the Universe are furnished with Inhabitants,
it is infinitely reasonable to conclude from the analogy of Nature; Since we see
there is nothing so contemptible and vile in the world we reside in, but has
its living creatures that dwell upon it; the Earth, the Water, the inferior
Air; the Bodies of Animals, the flesh, the skin, the entrails; the leaves, the
roots, the stalks of Vegetables; yea, and all kind of Minerals in the
subterraneous Regions: I say, all these have their proper Inhabitants; yea, I
suppose this Rule may hold in all distinct kinds of bodies in the world, That
they have their peculiar Animals. The certainty of which I believe the
improvement of microscopical observations will discover. From whence I infer,
That since this little spot is so thickly peopled in every Atome of it, it is
weakness to think that all the vast spaces above, and hollows under ground, are
desert and uninhabited. And if both the superior and lower Continents of the
Universe have their inhabitants also, it is exceedingly improbable, arguing from
the same analogy, that they are all of the mere sensible nature, but that there
are at least some of the Rational and Intellectual Orders. Which supposed,
there is good foundation for the belief of Witches and Apparitions, though the
notion of a Spirit should prove as absurd and unphilosophical, as I judge the
denial of it. And so this first Objection comes to nothing. I descend then to
the second Prejudice, which may be thus formed in behalf of the Objectors.

II.
( II.) THERE ARE Actions in most of those Relations ascribed to Witches, which
are ridiculous and impossible in the nature of things; such are (1) their
flying out of windows, after they have anointed themselves, to remote places.
(2) Their transformation into Cats, Hares, and other Creatures. (3) Their
feeling all the hurts in their own bodies, which they have received in these.
(4) Their raising Tempests, by muttering some nonsensical words, or performing
some little ridiculous ceremonies. And (5) their being sucked in a certain
private place of their bodies by a Familiar. These are presumed to be actions
inconsistent with the nature of Spirits, and above the powers of those poor and
miserable Agents. And therefore the Objection supposes them performed only by
the fancy; and that the whole mystery of Witchcraft is but an illusion of
crasie imagination.

BUT to this Objection I return, (1) in the general, The more absurd and
unaccountable these actions seem, the greater confirmations are they to me of
the truth of those Relations, and the reality of what the Objectors would
destroy. For these circumstances being exceeding unlikely, judging by the
measures of common belief, it is the greater probability they are not
fictitious; For the contrivers of Fictions use to form them as near as they can
conformably to the most unsuspected realities, endeavoring to make them look
as like truth as is possible in the main supposals, though withal they make
them strange in the circumstance. None but a fool or madman would relate with a
purpose of having it believed, that he saw in Ireland, Men with hoofs on their
heads, and eyes in their breasts; or, if any should be so ridiculously vain, as
to be serious in such an incredible Romance, it cannot be supposed that all
Travelers that come into those parts after him should tell the same story.
There is large field in fiction; and if all those Relations were arbitrary
compositions, doubtless the first Romancers would have framed them more
agreeable to the common doctrine of Spirits; at least, after these supposed
absurdities had been a thousand times laughed at, people by this time would
have learned to correct those obnoxious extravagancies; and though they have
not yet more veracity than the Ages of Ignorance and Superstition, yet one
would expect they should have got more cunning. This supposed impossibility
then of these performances, seems to me a probable argument that they are not
wilful and designed forgeries. And if they are Fancies, it is somewhat strange
that Imagination which is the most various thing in all the world, should
infinitely repeat the same conceit in all times and places.

BUT again (2) the strange Actions related of Witches, and presumed impossible
are not ascribed to their own powers; but to the Agency of those wicked
Confederates they employ: And to affirm that those evil spirits cannot do that
which we conceit impossible, is boldly to stint the powers of Creatures, whose
natures and faculties we know not; and to measure the world of spirits by the
narrow rules of our own impotent beings. We see among our selves the
performances of some out go the conceits and possibilities of others; and we
know many things may be done by the Mathematics, and Mechanic Artifice, which
common heads think impossible to be effected by the honest ways of Art and
Nature. And doubtless the subtilties and powers of those mischievous Fiends are
as much beyond the reach and activities of the most knowing Agents among us, as
theirs are beyond the wit and ability of the most rustic and illiterate; So
that the utmost that any man's reason in the world can amount to in this
particular, is only this, that he cannot conceive how such things can be
performed; which only argues the weakness and imperfection of our knowledge and
apprehensions, not the impossibility of those performances; and we can no more
from hence form an argument against them, than against the most ordinary
effects in Nature. We cannot conceive how the Foetus is formed in the Womb, nor
as much as how a Plant springs from the Earth we tread on; we know not how our
Souls move the Body, nor how these distant and extreme natures are united: And
if we are ignorant of the most obvious things about us, and the most
considerable within our selves, it is then no wonder that we know not the
constitution and powers of the Creatures, to whom we are such strangers.
Briefly then, matters of fact well proved ought not to be denied, because we
cannot conceive how they can be performed. Nor is it a reasonable method of
inference, first to presume the thing impossible, and thence to conclude that
the fact cannot be proved. On the contrary, we should judge of the action by
the evidence, and not the evidence by the measures of our fancies about the
action. This is proudly to exalt our own opinions above the clearest
testimonies, and most sensible demonstrations of fact: and so to give the Lie
to all Mankind, rather than distrust the little conceits of our bold
imaginations. But yet further,

(3) I THINK there is nothing in the instances mentioned, but what may as well
be accounted for by the Rules of Reason and Philosophy, as the ordinary affairs
of Nature. For in resolving natural Phoenomena, we can only assign the probable
causes, showing how things may be, not presuming how they are. And in the
particulars under our Examen, we may give an account how it is possible, and not
unlikely, that such things (though somewhat varying from the common rode of
Nature) may be acted. And if our narrow and contracted minds can furnish us
with apprehensions of the way and manner of such performances, though perhaps
not the true ones, it is an argument that such things may be effected by
creatures, whose powers and knowledge are so vastly exceeding ours. I shall
endeavor therefore briefly to suggest some things that may render the
possibility of these performances conceivable, in order to the removal of this
Objection, that they are contradictions and impossible.

FOR the First then, That the confederate Spirit should transport the Witch
through the Air to the place of general Rendezvous, there is no difficulty in
conceiving it; and if that be true which great Philosophers affirm concerning
the real separability of the Soul from the Body without death, there is yet
less; for then it is easy to apprehend, that the Soul, having left its gross
and sluggish Body behind it, and being clothed only with its immediate
vehicle of Air, or more subtle matter, may be quickly conducted to any place
it would be at, by those officious Spirits that attend it. And though I
adventure to affirm nothing concerning the truth and certainty of this
supposition, yet I must needs say, it does not seem to me unreasonable. And our
experience of Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Extastes, and the strange things men
report to have seen during those deliquiums, look favorably upon this
conjecture; which seems to me to contradict no principle of Reason or
Philosophy; since Death consists not so much in the actual separation of Soul
and Body, as in the indisposition and unfitness of the Body for vital union, as
an excellent Philosopher has made good. On which Hypothesis, the Witches
anointing her self before she takes her flight, may perhaps serve to keep the
Body tenantable, and in fit disposition to receive the Spirit at its return.
These things, I say, we may conceive, though I affirm nothing about them; and
there is nothing in such conceptions but what has been owned by men of worth
and name, and may seem fair and accountable enough to those who judge not
altogether by the measures of the populace, and customary opinion. And there is
a saying of a great Apostle that seems to countenance this Platonic opinion;
what is the meaning else of that expression: [Whether in the body or out of the
body I cannot tell] except the Soul may be separated from the body without
death; which if it be granted possible, it is sufficient for my purpose. And

(2.) The Transformations of Witches into the shapes of other Animals, upon the
same supposal is very conceivable, since then it is easy enough to imagine,
that the power of imagination may form those passive and pliable vehicles into
those shapes, with more ease than the fancy of the Mother can the stubborn
matter of the Foetus in the womb, as we see it frequently does in the instances
that occur of Signatures and monstrous Singularities; and perhaps sometimes the
confederate Spirit puts tricks upon the senses of the spectators, and those
shapes are only illusions.

BUT then (3.) when they feel the hurts in their gross bodies, that they
receive in their aerie vehicles, they must be supposed to have been really
present, at least in these latter; and it is no more difficult to apprehend how
the hurts of those should be translated upon their other bodies, then how
diseases should be inflicted by the imagination, or how the fancy of the Mother
should wound the Foetus, as several credible relations do attest.

AND (4.) for their raising storms and tempests, they do it not, be sure, by
their own, but by the power of the Prince of the Air, their friend and allie;
and the Ceremonies that are enjoined them, are doubtless nothing else but
entertainments for their imaginations, and are likely designed to persuade
them* that they do these strange things themselves.

AND (lastly) for their being sucked by the Familiar, I say (1) we know so
little of the nature of Doemons and Spirits, that it is no wonder we cannot
certainly divine the reason of so strange an action. And yet (2) we may
conjecture at some things that may render it less improbable. For some have
thought that the Genii (whom both the Platonical and Christian Antiquity
thought embodied) are recreated by the reeks and vapors of humane blood, and
the spirits that derive from them. Which supposal (if we grant them bodies) is
not unlikely, every thing being refreshed and nourished by its like. And that
they are not perfectly abstract from all body and matter, besides the reverence
we owe to the wisest antiquity, there are several considerable arguments I
could allege to render it exceeding probable. Which things supposed, the
Devil's sucking the Sorceress is no great wonder, nor difficult to be accounted
for. Or perhaps (3) this may be only a diabolical Sacrament and Ceremony to
confirm the hellish covenant. To which I added, (4) That which to me seems most
probable, viz That the Familiar does not only suck the Witch, but in the action
infuseth some poisonous ferment into her, which gives her imagination and
spirits a magical tincture, whereby they become mischievously influential: and
the word venefica intimates some such matter. Now that the imagination has a
mighty power in operation, is seen in the just now mentioned Signatures and
Diseases that it causes; and that the fancy is modified by the qualities of
the blood and spirits, is too evident to need proof: which things supposed,
it is plain to conceive that the evil spirit having breathed some vile vapor
into the body of the Witch, it may taint her blood and spirits with a noxious
quality, by which her infected imagination, heightened by melancholy, and this
worse cause, may do much hurt upon bodies that are impressible by such
influences. And it is very likely that this ferment disposes the imagination of
the Sorceress to cause the mentioned (...), or separation of the soul from the
body, and may perhaps keep the body in fit temper for its re-entry; as also it
may facilitate transformation, which, it may be, could not be effected by
ordinary and unassisted imagination.

Thus we see it is not so desperate to form an apprehension of the manner of
these odd performances; and though they are not done the way I have described,
yet what I have said may help us to a conceit of the possibility, which
suffices for my purpose. And though the Hypothesis I have gone upon will seem
as unlikely to some, as the things they attempt to explain are to others, yet I
must desire their leave to suggest, that most things seem unlikely (especially
to the conceited and opinionative) at first proposal; and many great truths are
strange and improbable, till custom and acquaintance have reconciled them to
our fancies. And I Will presume to add on this occasion, (though I love not to
be confident in affirming) that there is none of the Platonical supposals I
have used, but what I could make appear to be fair and reasonable, to the
capable and unprejudiced.

III.
BUT (III.) I come to another prejudice against the being of Witches, which is,
That it is very improbable that the Devil who is a wise and mighty spirit,
should be at the beck of a poor Hag, and have so little to do, as to attend the
errands of the impotent lusts of a silly old woman.

TO WHICH I might answer, (1) That it is much more improbable that all the world
should be deceived in matters of fact; and circumstances of the clearest
evidence and conviction; than that the Devil, who is wicked, should be also
unwise; and that he that persuades all his subjects and accomplices out of
their wits, should himself act like his own temptations and persuasions. In
brief, there is nothing more strange in this objection, than that wickedness is
baseness and servility, and that the Devil is at leisure to serve those he is
at leisure to tempt, and industrious to ruin. And again, (2) I see no
necessity to believe that the Devil is always the Witches confederate; but
perhaps it may fitly be considered, whether the Familiar be not some departed
humane spirit, forsaken of God and goodness, and swallowed up by the unsatiable
desire of mischief and revenge, which ^^^ssibly by the laws and capacity of its
st^^e it cannot execute immediately. And why we should presume that the Devil
should have the liberty of wandering up and down the Earth and Air, when he is
said to be held in the chains of darkness; and yet that the separated souls of
the wicked, of whom no such thing is affirmed in any Sacred Record, should be
thought so imprisoned, that they cannot possibly wag from the place of their
confinement, I know no shadow of conjecture. This conceit I Am confident has
prejudiced many against the belief of Witches and Apparitions; they not being
able to conceive that the Devil should be so ludricous as appearing spirits are
sometimes reported to be in their frolicks; and they presume, that souls
departed never revisit the free and open Regions; which confidence I know
nothing to justify: For since good men in their state of separation are said
to be (...), why the wicked may not be supposed to be (...) in the worst sense
of the word, I know nothing to help me to imagine. And if it be supposed that
the Imps of Witches are sometimes wicked spirits of our own kind and nature,
and possibly the same that have been Sorcerers and Witches in this life: This
supposal may give a fairer and more probable account of many of the actions of
Sorcery and Witchcraft, than the other Hypothesis, that they are always
Devils. And to this conjecture I Will adventure to subjoyn another, which also
has its probability, viz. (3) That it is not impossible but that the Familiars
of Witches are a vile kind of spirits, of a very inferior constitution and
nature, and none of those that were once of the highest Hierarchy, now
degenerated into the spirits we call Devils. And for my part I must confess,
that I think the common division of spirits much too general; conceiving it
likely there may be as great a variety of Intellectual creatures in the
invisible world, as there is of Animals in the visible: and that all the
superior, yea, and inferior Regions, have their several kinds of spirits
differing in their natural perfections, as well as in the kinds and degrees of
their depravities; which being supposed, it is very probable that those of the
basest and meanest Orders are they, who submit to the mentioned servilities.
And thus the sagess and grandeur of the Prince of darkness need not be brought
into question.

IV.
BUT ( IV) the opinion of Witches seems to some, to accuse Providence, and to
suggest that it has exposed Innocents to the fury and malice of revengeful
Fiends; yea, and supposes those most obnoxious, for whom we might most
reasonably expect a more special tutelary care and protection, most of the
cruel practices of those presumed Instruments of Hell, being upon Children, who
as they least deserve to be deserted by that Providence that superintends all
things, so they most need its guardian influence.

TO this so specious an Objection I have these things to answer. (1) Providence
is an unfathomable Depth; and if we should not believe the Phoenomena of our
senses, before we can reconcile them to our notions of Providence, we must be
grosser Scepticks than ever yet was extant. The miseries of the present life,
the unequal distributions of good and evil, the ignorance and barbarity of the
greatest part of mankind, the fatal disadvantages we are all under, and the
hazard we run of being eternally miserable and undone; these, I say, are things
that can hardly be made consistent with that Wisdom and Goodness that we are
sure has made, and mingled it self with all things. And yet we believe there
is a beauty and harmony, and goodness in that Providence, though we cannot
unriddle it in particular instances; nor, by reason of our ignorance and
imperfection, clear it from contradicting appearances; and consequently, we
ought not to deny the being of Witches and Apparitions, because they will
create us some difficulties in our notions of Providence. But to come more
close, (2) Those that believe that Infants are Heirs of Hell, and Children of
the Devil as soon as they are disclosed to the world, cannot certainly offer
such an objection; for what is a little trifling pain of a moment, to those
eternal tortures, to which, if they die as soon as they are born, according to
the tenor of this Doctrine, they are everlastingly exposed? But however the
case stands as to that, it is certain, (3) That Providence has, not secured
them from other violences they are obnoxious to, from cruelty and accident; and
yet we accuse It not when a whole Townful of Innocents fall a Victim to the
rage and ferity of barbarous executioners in wars and Massacres. To which I
add (4) That it is likely the mischief is not so often done by the evil spirit
immediately, but by the malignant influence of the Sorceress, whose power of
hurting consists in the forementioned ferment, which is infused into her by
the Familiar. So that I am apt to think there may be a power of real
fascination in the Witches eyes and imagination, by which for the most part she
acts upon tender bodies. Nescio quis teneros oculus -- For the pestilential
spirits being darted by a sprightful and vigorous imagination from the eye, and
meeting with those that are weak and passive in the bodies which they enter,
will not fail to infect them with a noxious quality, that makes dangerous and
strange alterations in the person invaded by this poisonous influence: which
way of acting by subtle and invisible instruments, is ordinary and familiar in
all natural efficienties. And it is now past question, that nature for the most
part acts by subtle streams and aporhaea's of minute particles, which pass from
one body to another. Or however that be, this kind of agency is as conceivable
as any of those qualities ignorance has called sympathy and antipathy, the
reality of which we doubt not, though the manner of action be unknown. Yea, the
thing I speak of is as easy to be apprehended, as how infection should pass in
certain tenuious streams through the air from one house to another; or, as how
the biting of a mad Dog should fill all the blood and spirits with a venomous
and malign ferment; the application of the virtue doing the same in our case,
as that of contact does in this. Yea, some kinds of fascination are performed
in this grosser and more sensible way, as by striking, giving Apples, and the
like, by which the contagious quality may be transmitted, as we see diseases
often are by the touch. Now in this way of conjecture, a good account may be
given why Witches are most powerful upon Children and timorous persons, viz.
because their spirits and imaginations being weak and passive, are not able to
resist the fatal invasion; whereas men of bold minds, who have plenty of
strong and vigorous spirits are secure from the contagion, as in pestilential
Airs clean bodies are not so liable to infection as are other tempers. Thus
then we see it is likely enough, that very often the Sorceress her self does the
mischief; and we know, de facto, that Providence does not always secure us
from one another injuries. And yet I must confess, that many times also the
evil spirit is the mischievous Agent; though this confession draw on me another
objection, which I next propose.

V.
( V.) THEN it may be said, that if wicked spirits can hurt us by the
direction, and at the desire of a Witch, one would think they should have the
same power to do us injury without instigation or compact; and if this be
granted, it is a wonder that we are not always annoyed and infested by them. To
which

I RETURN, (1) That the laws, liberties, and restraints of the inhabitants of
the other world are to us utterly unknown; and this way we can only argue our
selves into confessions of our ignorance, which every man must acknowledge that
is not as immodest, as ignorant. It must be granted by all that own the being,
power, and malice of evil spirits, that the security we enjoy is wonderful,
whether they act by Witches or not; and by what Laws they are kept from making
us a prey, to speak like Philosophers, we cannot tell: yea, why they should be
permitted to tempt and ruin us in our Souls, and restrained from touching or
hurting us in our Bodies, is a mystery not easily accountable. But yet (2)
though we acknowledge their power to vex and torment us in our bodies also; yet
a reason may be given why they are less frequent in this kind of mischief, viz.
because their main designs are levelled against the interest and happiness of
our Souls, which they can best promote, when their actions are most sly and
secret; whereas did they ordinarily persecute men in their bodies, their agency
and wicked influence would be discovered, and make a mighty noise in the world,
whereby men wonld be awakened to a more suitable and vigorous opposition, by
the use of such means as would engage Providence to rescue them from their rage
and cruelties, and at last defeat them in their great purposes of undoing us
eternally. Thus we may conceive that the security we enjoy may well enough
consist with the power and malice of those evil spirits; and upon this account
we may suppose that Laws of their own may prohibit their unlicenc'd injuries,
not from any goodness there is in their Constitutions, but in order to the more
successful carrying on the projects of the dark Kingdom; as Generals forbid
plunder, not out of love to their Enemies, but in order to their own success.
And hence (3) we may suppose a Law of permission to hurt us at the instance of
the Sorceress, may well stand with the polity of Hell, since by gratifying the
wicked person they encourage her in malice and revenge, and promote thereby the
main ends of their black confederacy, which are to propagate wickedness, and to
ruin us in our eternal interests. And yet (4) it is clear to those that believe
the History of the Gospel, that wicked spirits have vexed the bodies of men,
without any instigation that we read of; and at this day it is very likely that
many of the strange accidents and diseases that befall us, may be the
infliction of evil spirits, prompted to hurt us only by the delight they take
in mischief. So that we cannot argue the improbability of their hurting
Children and others by Witches, from our own security and freedom from the
effects of their malice, which perhaps we feel in more instances than we are
aware of.

VI.
BUT ( VI) another prejudice against the belief of Witches, is, a presumption
upon the enormous force of melancholy and imagination, which without doubt can
do wonderful things, and beget strange persuasions; and to these causes some
ascribe the presumed effects of Sorcery and Witchcraft. To which I reply
briefly, and yet I hope sufficiently,

(1) THAT to resolve all the clear circumstances of Fact, which we find in
well attested and confirmed Relations of this kind, into the power of
deceivable imagination, is to make fancy the greater prodigy, and to suppose,
that it can do stranger feats than are believed of any other kind of
fascination. And to think that Pins and Nails, for instance, can, by the power
of imagination be conveyed within the skin; or that imagination, should deceive
so many as have been witnesses in objects of sense, in all the circumstances of
discovery; this, I say, is to be infinitely more credulous than the assertors
of Sorcery and Demoniack contracts. And by the same reason it may be believed,
that all the Battles and strange events of the world, which our selves have not
seen, are but dreams and fond imaginations, and like those that are fought in
the clouds, when the brains of the deluded spectators are the only Theater of
those fancied transactions. And (2) to deny evidence of fact, because their
imagination may deceive the Relators, when we have no reason to think so but a
bare presumption, that there is no such thing as is related, is quite to
destroy the credit of all humane testimony, and to make all men liars in a
larger sense than the Prophet concluded in his haste. For not only the
melancholic and the fanciful, but the grave and the sober, whose judgments we
have no reason to suspect to be tainted by their imaginations, have from their
own knowledge and experience made reports of this nature. But to this it will
possibly be rejoined, the Reply will be another prejudice against the belief I
contend for, viz.

VII.
(VII) THAT it is a suspicious circumstance that Witchcraft is but a fancy,
since the persons that are accused are commonly poor and miserable old women,
who are overgrown with discontent and melancholy, which are very imaginative;
and the persons said to be bewitched are for the most part Children, or people
very weak, who are easily imposed upon, and are apt to receive strong
impressions from nothing: whereas were there any such thing really, it is not
likely, but that the more cunning and subtle desperado's, who might the more
successfully carry on the mischievous designs of the dark Kingdom, should be
oftener engaged in those black confederacies, and also one would expect effects
of the hellish combination upon others than the innocent and ignorant.

TO WHICH Objection it might perhaps be enough to return (as has been above
suggested) that nothing can be concluded by this and such like arguings, but
that the policy and menages of the instruments of darkness are to us altogether
unknown, and as much in the dark as their natures, mankind being no more
acquainted with the reasons and methods of action in the other world, than poor
Cottagers and Mechanics are with the intriques of Government, and reasons of
State. Yea peradventure (2) it is one of the great designs, as it is certainly
the interest, of those wicked Agents and Machinators, industriously to hide
from us their influences and ways of acting, and to work, as near as is
possible, incognito; upon which supposal it is easy to conceive a reason, why
they most commonly work by, and upon the weak and the ignorant, who can make no
cunning observations, or tell credible tales to detect their artifice. Besides
(3) it is likely a strong imagination, that cannot be weakened or disturbed by a
busy and subtle ratiocination, is a necessary requisite to those wicked
performances; and without doubt an heightened and obstinate fancy has a great
influence upon impressible spirits; yea, and as I have conjectured before, on
the more passive and susceptible bodies. And I am very apt to believe, that
there are as real communications and intercourses between our spirits, as there
are between material agents; which secret influences, though they are unknown
in their nature, and ways of acting, yet they are sufficiently felt in their
effects: for experience attests, that some by the very majesty and greatness of
their spirits, discovered by nothing but a certain noble air that accompanies
them, will bear down others less great and generous, and make them sneak before
them; and some, by I know not what stupifying virtue, will tie up the tongue,
and confine the spirits of those who are otherwise brisk and voluble. Which
thing supposed, the influences of a spirit possessed of an active and enormous
imagination, may be malign and fatal where they cannot be resisted, especially
when they are accompanied by those poisonous reaks that the evil spirit
breathes into the Sorceress, which likely are shot out, and applied by a fancy
heightened and prepared by melancholy and discontent. And thus we may conceive
why the melancholic and envious are used upon such occasions, and for the same
reason the ignorant, since knowledge checks and controuls imagination; and
those that abound much in the imaginative faculties do not usually exceed in
the rational. And perhaps (4) the Demon himself uses the imagination of the
Witch so qualified for his purpose, even in those actions of mischief which are
more properly his; for it is most probable, that spirits act not upon bodies
immediately, and by their naked essence, but by means proportionate and
suitable instruments that they use; upon which account likely it is so strictly
required, that the Sorceress should believe, that so her imagination might be
more at the devotion of the mischievous Agent. And for the same reason also
Ceremonies are used in Enchantments, viz. for the begetting this diabolical
faith, and heightning the fancy to a degree of strength and vigor sufficient
to make it a fit instrument for the designed performance. And these I think are
reasons of likelihood and probability, why the hellish confederates are mostly
the ignorant and the melancholic. To pass then to another prejudice.

VIII.
( VIII) THE frequent impostures that are met with in this kind, beget in some
a belief, that all such relations are forgeries and tales; and if we urge the
evidence of a story for the belief of Witches or Apparitions, they will produce
two as seemingly strong and plausible, which shall conclude in mistake or
design; inferring thence, that all others are of the same quality and credit.
But such arguers may please to consider,

(1) THAT a single relation for an Affirmative, sufficiently confirmed and
attested, is worth a thousand tales of forgery and imposture, from whence
cannot be concluded an universal Negative. So that, though all the Objectors
stories be true, and an hundred times as many more such deceptions; yet one
relation, wherein no fallacy or fraud could be suspected for our Affirmative,
would spoil any Conclusion could be erected on them. And

(2) IT seems to me a belief sufficiently bold and precarious, that all these
relations of forgery and mistake should be certain, and not one among all those
which attest the Affirmative reality, with circumstances as good as could be
expected, or wished, should be true, but all fabulous and vain. And they have
no reason to object credulity to the assertors of Sorcery and Witchcraft, that
can swallow so large a morsel. And I desire such Objectors to consider.

(3) WHETHER it be fair to infer, that because there are some Cheats and
Impostures, that therefore there are no Realities. Indeed frequency of deceit
and fallacy will warrant a greater care and caution in examining; and
scrupulosity and shiness of assent to things wherein fraud has been practiced,
or may in the least degree be suspected. But, to conclude, because that an old
woman's fancy abused her, or some knavish fellows put tricks upon the ignorant
and timorous, that therefore whole Assizes have been a thousand times deceived
in judgments upon matters of fact, and numbers of sober persons have been
forsworn in things wherein perjury could not advantage them; I say, such
inferences are as void of reason, as they are of charity and good manners.

IX.
BUT ( IX) It may be suggested further, That it cannot be imagined what design
the Devil should have in making those solemn compacts, since persons of such
debauched and irreclaimable dispositions as those with whom he is supposed to
confederate, are pretty securely his, antecedently to the bargain, and cannot
be more so by it, since they cannot put their souls out of possibility of the
Divine Grace, but by the Sin that is unpardonable; or if they could so dispose
and give away themselves, it will to some seem very unlikely, that a great and
mighty Spirit should oblige himself to such observances, and keep such a-do to
secure the soul of a silly body, which 'twere odds but it would be His, though
He put himself to no further trouble than that of his ordinary temptations.

TO WHICH suggestions 'twere enough to say, that it is sufficient if the thing
be well proved, though the design be not known. And to argue negatively a fine,
is very unconclusive in such matters. The Laws and affairs of the other world
(as has been intimated) are vastly differing from those of our Regions, and
therefore it is no wonder we cannot judge of their designs, when we know nothing
of their menages, and so little of their natures. The ignorant looker-on cannot
imagine what the Limner means by those seemingly rude lines and scrawls which
he intends for the rudiments of a Picture; and the Figures of Mathematick
Operation are nonsense, and dashes at a venture to one un-instructed in
Mechanics. We are in the dark to one another purposes and intendments; and
there are a thousand intrigues in our little matters, which will not presently
confess their design even to sagacious inquisitors. And therefore it is folly
and incogitancy to argue any thing one way or other from the designs of a sort
of Beings, with whom we so little communicate; and possibly we can take no more
aim, or guess at their projects and designments, than the gazing Beasts can do
at ours, when they see the Traps and Gins that are laid for them, but
understand nothing what they mean. Thus in general.

BUT I attempt something more particularly, in order to which I must premise
that the Devil is a name for a Body Politic, in which there are very different
Orders and Degrees of Spirits, and perhaps in as much variety of place and
state, as among our selves; so that it is not one and the same person that makes
all the compacts with those abused and seduced Souls, but they are diverse, and
those it is like of the meanest and basest quality in the Kingdom of darkness;
which being supposed, I offer this account of the probable design of those
wicked Agents, viz. That having none to rule or tyrannize over within the
Circle of their own nature and government, they affect a proud Empire over us
(the desire of Dominion and Authority being largely spread through the whole
circumference of degenerated nature, especially among those, whose pride was
their original transgression) every one of these then desires to get him
Vassals to pay him homage, and to be employed like Slaves in the services of
his lusts and aptetites; to gratify which desire, it is like enough to be
provided and allowed by the constitution of their State and Government, that
every wicked spirit shall have those Souls as his property, and particular
servants and attendants, whom he can catch in such compacts; as those wild
Beasts that we can take in hunting, are by the allowance of the Law our own;
and those Slaves that a man has purchased, are his peculiar goods, and the
vassals of his will. Or rather those deluding Fiends are like the seducing
fellows we call Spirits, who inveigle Children by their false and flattering
promises, and carry them away to the Plantations of America, to be servilly
employed there in the works of their profit and advantage. And as those base
Agents will humor and flatter the simple unwary Youth, till they are on
Shipboard, and without the reach of those that might rescue them from their
hands: In like manner the more mischievous Tempter studies to gratify, please,
and accommodate those he deals with in this kind, till death has lanch'd them
into the Deep, and they are past the danger of Prayers, Repentance, and
Endeavors; and then He uses them as pleases Him. This account I think is not
unreasonable, and 'twill fully answer the Objection. For though the matter be
not as I have conjectured, yet 'twill suggest a way how it may be conceived,
which nulls the pretense, That the Design is inconceiveable.

X.
BUT then ( X.) We are still liable to be questioned, how it comes about, that
those proud and insolent Designers practice in this kind upon so few, when one
would expect, that they should be still trading this way, and every where be
driving on the project, which the vileness of men makes so feisable, and would
so much serve the interest of their lusts.

TO WHICH, among other things that might be suggested, I return, (1) That we
are never liable to be so betrayed and abused, till by our vile dispositions
and tendencies we have forfeited the tutelary care and oversight of the better
Spirits; which, though generally they are our guard and defense against the
malice and violence of evil Angels, yet it may well enough be thought that
sometimes they may take their leave of such as are swallowed up by malice,
envy, and desire of revenge, qualities most contrary to their Life and Nature,
and leave them exposed to the invasion and solicitations of those wicked
Spirits, to whom such hateful Attributes make them very suitable. And if there
be particular guardian Angels, as it is not absurd to fancy, it may then well be
supposed, that no man is obnoxious to those projects and attempts, but only
such whose vile and mischievous natures have driven from them their protecting
Genius. And against this dereliction to the power of evil spirits, it is likely
enough what some affirm, that the Royal Psalmist directs that Prayer, Psalm.
LXXI. ix, x. Cast me not off in the time of old age, forsake me not when my
strength fails. For -- They that keep my soul [(...), as the LXX and the
Vulgar Latin, Qui custodiunt animam meam] they take counsel together, saying,
God has forsaken him, persecute him and take him, for there is none to deliver
him. But I add, (2) That it is very improbable, that the state wherein they
are, will not easily permit palpable intercourses between the bad Genii and our
nature, since it is like enough that their own Laws and Government do not allow
their frequent excursions into this world. Or, it may with as great probability
be supposed, that it is a very hard and painful thing for them, to force their
thin and tenuious bodies into a visible consistence, and such shapes as are
necessary for their designs in their correspondencies with Witches. For in this
action their bodies must needs be exceedingly compressed, which cannot be well
supposed without a painful sense. And this is perhaps a reason why there are so
few Apparitions, and why appearing spirits are commonly in such haste to be
gone, viz. that they may be delivered from the unnatural pressure of their
tender vehicles, which I confess holds more, in the apparitions of good than of
evil Spirits; most Relations of this kind, describing their discoveries of
themselves, as very transient, (though for those the Holy Scripture records,
there may be peculiar reason, why they are not so) whereas the wicked ones are
not altogether so quick and hasty in their Visits: The reason of which probably
is, the great subtilty and tenuity of the bodies of the former, which will
require far greater degrees of compression, and consequently of pain, to make
them visible; whereas the latter, are more foeculent and gross, and so nearer
allied to palpable consistencies, and more easily reduceable to appearance and
visibility.

AT this turn, Sir, you may perceive that I have again made use of the
Platonic Hypothesis, That Spirits are embodied, upon which indeed a great part
of my Discourse is grounded: And therefore I hold my self obliged to a short
account of that supposal. It seems then to me very probable from the Nature of
Sense, and Analogy of Nature. For (1.) We perceive in our selves, that all
Sense is caused and excited by motion made in matter; and when those motions
which convey sensible impressions to the Brain, the Seat of Sense, are
intercepted, Sense is lost: So that, if we suppose Spirits perfectly to be
disjoined from all matter, it is not conceivable how they can have the sense of
any thing; For how material Objects should any way be perceived, or felt
without vital union with matter, it is not possible to imagine. Nor does it (2.)
seem suitable to the Analogy of Nature, which uses not to make precipitious
leaps from one thing to another, but usually proceeds by orderly steps and
gradations: whereas were there no order of Beings between us, who are so deeply
plunged into the grossest matter, and pure unbodied Spirits, 'twere a mighty
jump in Nature. Since then the greatest part of the world consists of the finer
portions of matter, and our own Souls are immediately united unto these, it is
infinitely probable to conjecture, that the nearer orders of Spirits are
vitally joined to such Bodies. And so Nature by Degrees ascending still by the
more refined and subtle matter, gets at last to the pure (...) or immaterial
minds, which the Platonists made the highest Order of created Beings. But of
this I have discoursed elsewhere, and have said thus much of it at present,
because it will enable me to add another Reason of the unfrequency of
Apparitions and Compacts, viz.

(3.) BECAUSE it is very likely, that these Regions are very unsuitable, and
disproportioned to the frame and temper of their Senses and Bodies; so that
perhaps, the Courser Spirits can no more bear the Air of our World, than Bats
and Owls can the brightest beams of Day. Nor can the Purer and Better any more
endure the noysom steams, and poisonous reeks of this Dunghill Earth, than the
Delicate can bear a confinement in nasty Dungeons, and the foul squallid
Caverns of uncomfortable Darkness. So that it is no more wonder, that the better
Spirits no oftener appear, than that men are not more frequently in the Dark
Hollows under ground. Nor is it any more strange that evil Spirits so rarely
visit us, than that Fishes do not ordinarily fly in the Air, as it is said one
sort of them does; or that we see not the Batt daily fluttering in the beams of
the Sun. And now by the help of what I have spoken under this Head, I am
provided with some things wherewith to disable another Objection, which I thus
propose:

XI.
( XI.) IF THERE be such an intercourse between Evil Spirits and the Wicked,
how comes it about that there is no correspondence between Good Spirits and the
Virtuous? since without doubt, these are as desirous to propagate the Spirit
and Designs of the upper and better World, as those are to promote the Interest
of the Kingdom of Darkness.

WHICH way of arguing is still from our Ignorance of the State and Government
of the other World, which must be confessed, and may, without prejudice to the
Proposition I defend. But particularly, I say, (1) That we have ground enough
to believe, that Good Spirits do interpose in, yea, and govern our Affairs. For
that there is a Providence reaching from Heaven to Earth, is generally
acknowledged; but that this supposes all things to be ordered by the immediate
influence, and interposal of the Supreme Deity, is not very Philosophical to
suppose; since if we judge by the Analogy of the Natural World, all things we
see are carried on by the Ministry of Second Causes, and intermediate Agents.
And it does not seem so Magnificent and Becoming an apprehension of the Supreme
Numen, to fancy His immediate Hand in every trivial Management. But it is
exceeding likely to conjecture, that much of the Government of us, and our
Affairs, is committed to the better Spirits, with a due subordination and
subserviency to the Will of the chief Rector of the Universe. And it is not
absurd to believe, that there is a Government runs from Highest to Lowest, the
better and more perfect orders of Being, still ruling the inferior and less
perfect. So that some one would fancy that perhaps the Angels may manage us, as
we do the Creatures that God and Nature have placed under our Empire and
Dominion. But however that is, That God rules the lower World by the Ministry
of Angels, is very consonant to the sacred Oracles. Thus, Deuteronomy. XXXII. viii,
ix. When the most High divided the Nations their inheritance, when he separated
the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people, (...), according to the
number of the Angels of God, as the Septuagint renders it; the Authority of
which Translation, is abundantly credited and asserted, by its being quoted in
the New Testament, without notice of the H^brew Text, even there where it
differs from it, as learned men have observed. We know also, that Angels were
very familiar with the Patriarchs of old; and Jacob's Ladder is a Mystery,
which imports their ministering in the affairs of the Lower World. Thus Origin
and others understand, that to be spoken by the Presidential Angels. Jer: LI.
ix We would have healed BABYLON, but she is not healed, forsake her, and let us
go. Like the Voice heard in the Temple before the taking of Jerusalem by Titus,
(...). And before Nebuchadnezzar was sent to learn Wisdom and Religion among
the Beasts, He sees a Watcher, according to the 70. an Angel, and an holy One
come down from heaven, Dan. IV. xiii. who pronounces the sad Decree against
Him, and calls it the Decree of the Watchers, who very probably were the
Guardian Genii of Himself and his Kingdom. And that there are particular Angels
that have the special Rule and Government of particular Kingdoms, Provinces,
Cities, yea and of Persons, I know nothing that can make improbable: The
instance is notorious in Daniel, of the Angels of Fersia and Graecia, that
hindered the other that was engaged for the concerns of Judaea; yea, our Savior
himself tells us, that Children have their Angels, and the Congregation of
Disciples supposed that St. Peter had his. Which things, if they be granted,
the good Spirits have not so little to do with us, and our matters, as is
generally believed. And perhaps it would not be absurd, if we referred many of
the strange thwarts, and unexpected events, the disappointments and lucky
coincidences that befall us, the unaccountable fortunes and successes that
attend some lucky men, and the unhappy fates that dog others that seem born to
be miserable; the Fame and Favor that still waits on some without any
conceivable motive to allure it, and the general neglect of others more
deserving, whose worth is not acknowledged, I say, these and such like odd
things, may with the greatest probability be resolved into the Conduct and
Menages of those invisible supervisors, that preside over, and govern our
affairs.

BUT if they so far concern themselves in our matters, how is it that they
appear not to maintain a visible and confessed correspondence with some of the
better Mortals, who are most fitted for their Communications and their
influence? To which I have said some things already, when I accounted for the
unfrequency of Apparitions; and I now add what I intend for another return to
the main Objection, viz.

(2.) THAT the apparition of good Spirits is not needful for the Designs of the
better world, whatever such may be for the interest of the other. For we have
had the Appearance and Cohabitation of the Son of God, we have Moses and the
Prophets, and the continued influence of the Spirit, the greatest Arguments to
strengthen Faith, the most powerful Motives to excite our Love, and the Noblest
Encouragements to quicken and raise our desires and hopes, any of which are
more than the apparition of an Angel; which would indeed be a great
gratification of the Animal Life, but 'twould render our Faith less noble and
less generous, were it frequently so assisted: Blessed are they that believe,
and yet have not seen. Besides which, the good Angels have no such ends to
prosecute, as the gaining any Vassals to serve them, they being ministering
Spirits for our good, and no self-designers for a proud and insolent Dominion
over us. And it may be perhaps not impertinently added, That they are not
always evil Spirits that appear, as is, I know not well upon what grounds,
generally imagined; but that the extraordinary detections of Murders, latent
Treasures, falsified and unfulfill'd Bequests, which are sometimes made by
Apparitions, may be the courteous Discoveries of the better, and more benign
Genii. Yea, it is not unlikely, that those Warnings that the world sometimes
has of approaching Judgments and Calamities by Prodigies, and sundry odd
Phoenomena, are the kind Informations of some of the Inhabitants of the upper
world. Thus, was Jerusalem forewarned before its sacking by Antiochus, by those
Aerie Horsemen that were seen through all the City, for almost forty days
together, 2 Mac. V. ii, iii. And the other Prodigious Portents that fore-ran
its Destruction by Titus: which I mention, because they are notorious
instances. And though, for mine own part, I scorn the ordinary Tales of
Prodigies, which proceed from superstitious fears, and unacquaintance with
Nature, and have been used to bad purposes by the Zealous and the Ignorant; Yet
I think that the Arguments that are brought by a late very ingenious Author, to
conclude against such Warnings and Predictions in the whole kind, are short
and inconsequent, and built upon too narrow Hypotheseis. For if it be supposed,
that there is a sort of Spirits over us, and about us, who can give a probable
guess at the more remarkable futurities, I know not why it may not be
conjectured, that the kindness they have for us, and the appetite of
foretelling strange things, and the putting the world upon expectation, which
we find is very grateful to our own Natures; may not incline them also to give
us some general notice of those uncommon Events which they foresee. And I yet
perceive no reason we have to fancy, that whatever is done in this kind, must
needs be either immediately from Heaven, or from the Angels, by extraordinary
commission and appointment. But it seems to me not unreasonable to believe,
that those officious Spirits that oversee our affairs, perceiving some mighty
and sad alterations at hand, in which their Charge is much concerned, cannot
choose, by reason of their affection to us, but give us some seasonable hints of
those approaching Calamities; to which also their natural desire to foretell
strange things to come, may contribute to incline them. And by this Hypothesis,
the fairest probabilities, and strongest ratiocinations against Prodigies, may
be made unserviceable. But this only by the way. I proceed to the next
objection, which may be made to speak thus.

XII.
( XII.) THE BELIEF of Witches, and the wonderful things they are said to
perform by the help of the Confederate Demon, weakens our Faith, and exposes
the World to Infidelity in the great matters of our Religion. For if They by
Diabolical assistance, can inflict and cure Diseases, and do things so much
beyond the comprehension of our Philosophy, and activity of common Nature; What
assurance can we have, that the Miracles that confirm our Gospel were not the
effects of a Compact of like nature, and that Devils were not cast out by
Beelzebub? If evil Spirits can assume Bodies, and render themselves visible in
humane likeness; What security can we have of the reality of the Resurrection
of Christ? And if, by their help, Witches can enter Chambers invisibly through
Key-holes and little unperceived Crannies, and transform themselves at
pleasure; What Arguments of Divinity are there in our Savior's showing himself
in the midst of his Disciples, when the Doors were shut, and his
Transfiguration in the Mount? Miracles are the great inducements of Belief, and
how shall we distinguish a Miracle from a Lying Wonder; a Testimony from
Heaven, from a Trick of the Angels of Hell; if they can perform things that
astonish and confound our Reasons, and are beyond all the Possibilities of
Humane Nature? This Objection is spiteful and mischievous, but I thus endeavor
to dispatch it.

(1.) THE WONDERS done by Confederacy with wicked Spirits, cannot derive a
suspicion upon the undoubted Miracles that were wrought by the Author and
Promulgers of our Religion, as if they were performed by Diabolical Compact,
since their Spirit, Endeavors, and Designs were notoriously contrary to all
the Tendencies, Aims, and Interests of the Kingdom of Darkness. For, as to the
Life and Temper of the Blessed and adorable JESUS, we know there was an
incomparable sweetness in his Nature, Humility in his Manners, Calmness in his
Temper, Compassion in his Miracles, Modesty in his Expressions, Holiness in all
his Actions, Hatred of Vice and Baseness, and Love to all the World; all which
are essentially contrary to the Nature and Constitution of Apostate Spirits,
who abound in Pride and Rancour, Insolence and Rudeness, Tyranny and Baseness,
universal Malice, and Hatred of Men. And their Designs are as opposite, as
their Spirit and their Genius. And now, Can the Sun borrow its Light from the
bottomless Abyss? Can Heat and Warmth flow in upon the World from the Regions
of Snow and Ice? Can Fire freeze, and Water burn? Can Natures, so infinitely
contrary, communicate, and jump in projects, that are destructive to each
others known Interests? Is there any Balsome in the Cockatrice's Egg? or, Can
the Spirit of Life flow from the Venom of the Asp? Will the Prince of Darkness
strengthen the Arm that is stretched out to pluck his Usurped Scepter, and his
Spoils from him? And will he lend his Legions, to assist the Armies of his
Enemy against him? No, these are impossible Supposals; No intelligent Being
will industriously and knowingly contribute to the Contradiction of its own
Principles, the Defeature of its Purposes, and the Ruin of its own dearest
Interests. There is no fear then, that our Faith should receive prejudice from
the acknowledgement of the Being of Witches, and power of evil Spirits, since
it is not the doing wonderful things that is the only Evidence that the Holy
JESUS was from God, and his Doctrine true; but the conjunction of other
circumstances, the holiness of his Life, the reasonableness of his Religion,
and the excellency of his Designs, added credit to his Works, and strengthened
the great Conclusion, That he could be no other than the Son of God, and
Savior of the world. But besides, I say,

(2.) THAT since infinite Wisdom and Goodness rules the World, it cannot be
conceived, that they should give up the greatest part of men to unavoidable
deception. And if evil Angels, by their Confederates are permitted to perform
such astonishing things, as seem so evidently to carry God's Seal and Power
with them, for the confirmation of Falsehoods, and gaining credit to Impostors,
without any counter-evidence to disabuse the World; Mankind is exposed to sad
and fatal delusion. And to say that Providence will suffer us to be deceived in
things of the greatest concernment, when we use the best of our care and
endeavors to prevent it, is to speak hard things of God; and in effect to
affirm, That He has nothing to do in the Government of the World, or does not
concern himself in the affairs of poor forlorn Men. And if the Providence and
Goodness of God be not a security unto us against such Deceptions, we cannot be
assured, but that we are always abused by those mischievous* Agents, in the
Objects of plain sense, and in all the matters of our daily Converses. If ONE
that pretends he is immediately sent from God, to overthrow the ancient Fabric
of Established Worship, and to erect a New Religion in His Name; shall be born
of a Virgin, and honored by a miraculous Star; proclaimed by a Song of seeming
Angels of Light, and Worshipped by the wise Sages of the World; Revered by
those of the greatest austerity, and admired by all for a miraculous Wisdom,
beyond his Education and his Years: If He shall feed Multitudes with almost
nothing, and fast himself beyond all the possibilities of Nature: If He shall
be transformed into the appearance of extraordinary Glory, and converse with
departed Prophets in their visible Forms: If He shall Cure all Diseases without
Physic or Endeavor, and raise the Dead to Life after they have stunck in
their Graves: If He shall be honored by Voices from Heaven, and attract the
universal Wonder of Princes and People: If he shall allay Tempests with a Beck,
and cast out Devils with a Word: If He shall foretell his own Death
particularly, with its Tragical Circumstances, and his Resurrection after it:
If the Veil of the most famous Temple in the world shall be rent, and the Sun
darkened at his Funeral: If he shall, within the time foretold, break the bonds
of Death, and lift up his Head out of the Grave: If Multitudes of other
departed Souls shall arise with Him, to attend at the Solemnity of his
Resurrection: If he shall after Death, visibly converse, and eat, and drink
with diverse persons, who could not be deceived in a matter of clear sense, and
ascend in Glory in the presence of an astonished and admiring Multitude: I say,
if such a One as this should prove a Diabolical Impostor, and Providence should
permit him to be so credited and acknowledged; What possibility were there then
for us to be assured, that we are not always deceived? yea, that our very
Faculties were not given us only to delude and abuse us? And if so, the next
Conclusion is, That there is no God that judges in the earth; and the best,
and most likely Hypothesis will be, That the world is given up to the
Government of the Devil. But if there be a Providence that superviseth us, (as
nothing is more certain) doubtless, it will never suffer poor helpless
Creatures to be inevitably deceived, by the craft and subtility of their
mischievous Enemy, to their undoing; but will without question take such care,
that the works wrought by Divine Power for the Confirmation of Divine Truth,
shall have such visible Marks and Signatures, if not in their Nature, yet in
their Circumstances, Ends, and Designs, as shall discover whence they are, and
sufficiently distinguish them from all Impostures and Delusions. And though
wicked Spirits may perform some strange things that may excite wonder for a
while, yet He has, and will so provide, that they shall be baffled and
discredited; as we know it was in the case of Moses and the Egyptian Magicians.

NOW, besides what I have directly said to the Objection, I have this to add
to the Objectors, That I could wish they would take care of such Suggestions;
which, if they overthrow not the Opinion they oppose, will dangerously affront
the Religion they would seem to acknowledge. For he that says, That if there
are WITCHES, there is no way to prove that Christ Jesus was not a Magician, and
Diabolical Impostor, puts a deadly Weapon into the hands of the Infidel, and is
himself next door to the SIN AGAINST THE HOLY GHOST: of which, in order to the
persuading greater tenderness and caution in such matters, I give this short
account.

THE SIN against the Holy Ghost is said to be Unpardonable; by which sad
Attribute, and the Discourse of our Savior, Mat. XII. from the xxii. to the
xxxiii. verse, we may understand its Nature: In order to which we consider,
That since the Mercies of God, and the Merits of his Son, are infinite, there
is nothing can make a Sin unpardonab^^, but what makes it incurable; and there
is no Sin but what is curable by a strong Faith, and a vigorous Endeavor: For
all things are possible to him that believes. So that, that which makes a Sin
incurable, must be somewhat that makes Faith impossible, and obstructs all
means of Conviction. In order to the finding which, we must consider the ways
and methods the Divine Goodness has taken, for the begetting Faith, and cure
of Infidelity* which it attempted, first, by the Prophets, and holy men of
ancient times, who, by the excellency of their Doctrine, the greatness of their
Miracles, and the holiness of their Lives, endeavored the conviction and
reformation of a stubborn and unbelieving World. But though Few believed their
report, and men would not be prevailed on by what they did, or what they said,
yet their Infidelity was not hitherto incurable, because further means were
provided in the Ministry of John the Baptist, whose Life was more severe, whose
Doctrines were more plain, pressing and particular; and therefore 'twas
possible that He might have succeeded. Yea, and where He failed, and could not
open men's hearts and their eyes, the Effect was still in possibility, and it
might be expected from Him that came after, to whom the Prophets and John were
but the Twilight and the Dawn. And though His miraculous Birth, the Song of
Angels, the Journey of the Wise Men of the East, and the correspondence of
Prophesies, with the Circumstances of the first appearance of the Wonderful
Infant: I say, though these had not been taken notice of, yet was there a
further provision made for the cure of Infidelity, in his astonishing Wisdom,
and most excellent Doctrines; For, He spoke as never Man did. And when These
were despised and neglected, yet there were other means toward Conviction, and
Cure of Unbelief, in those mighty Works that bore Testimony of Him, and wore
the evident marks of Divine Power in their foreheads. But when after all, these
clear and unquestionable Miracles which were wrought by the Spirit of God, and
had eminently his Superscription on them, shall be ascribed to the Agency of
evil Spirits, and Diabolical Compact, as they were by the malicious and
spightful Pharisees in the periods abovementioned; when those great and last
Testimonies against Infidelity, shall be said to be but the Tricks of Sorcery,
and Complotment with Hellish Confederates, This is Blasphemy in the highest,
against the Power and Spirit of God, and such as cuts off all means of
Conviction, and puts the Unbeliever beyond all possibilities of Cure. For
Miracles are God's Seal, and the great and last evidence of the truth of any
Doctrine. And though, while these are only dis-believed as to the Fact, there
remains a possibility of persuasion; yet, when the Fact shall be acknowledged,
but the Power blasphemed, and the effects of the adorable Spirit maliciously
imputed to the Devils; such a Blasphemy, such an Infidelity is incurable, and
consequently unpardonable. I say, in sum, the Sin against the Holy Ghost
seems to be a malicious imputation of the Miracles wrought by the Spirit of God
in our Savior to Satanical Confederacy, and the power of Apostate Spirits;
Then which, nothing is more blasphemous, and nothing is more like to provoke
the Holy Spirit that is so abused to an Eternal Dereliction of so Vile and so
Incurable an Unbeliever.

THIS account, as it is clear and reasonable in it self, so it is plainly lodged
in the mentioned Discourse of our Savior. And those that speak other things
about it, seem to me to talk at random, and perfectly without Book. But to
leave them to the fondness of their own conceits, I think it now time to draw
up to a Conclusion of the whole.

THEREFORE briefly, Sir, I have endeavored in these Papers, which my respect
and your concernment in the subject have made yours, to remove the main
prejudices I could think of, against the existence of Witches and Apparitions:
and I Am sure I have suggested much more against what I defend, than ever I
heard or saw in any that opposed it; whose Discourses, for the most part, have
seemed to me inspired by a lofty scorn of common belief, and some trivial
Notions of Vulgar Philosophy. And in despising the Common Faith about matters
of Fact, and fondly adhering to it in things of Speculation, they very grossly
and absurdly mistake: For in things of Fact, the People are as much to be
believed, as the most subtle Philosophers and Speculators; since here, Sense
is the Judge. But in matters of Notions and Theory, They are not at all to be
heeded, because Reason is to be Judge of these, and this they know not how to
use. And yet thus it is with those wise Philosophers, that will deny the plain
evidence of the Senses of Mankind, because they cannot reconcile appearances
with the fond Crotchets of a Philosophy, which they lighted on in the Highway
by chance, and will adhere to at adventure. So that I profess, for mine own
part, I never yet heard any of the confident Declaimers against Witchcraft and
Apparitions, speak any thing that might move a mind, in any degree instructed
in the generous kinds of Philosophy, and Nature of things. And for the
Objections I have recited, they are most of them such as rose out of mine own
thoughts, which I obliged to consider what was possible to be said upon this
o^casion. For though I have examined Scot's Discovery, fancying that there I
should find the strong reasons of men's dis-belief in this matter; yet I
profess I met not with the least suggestion in all that Farrago, but what it
had been ridiculous for me to have gone about to answer: For the Author does
little but tell odd Tales, and silly Legends, which he confutes and laughs at,
and pretends this to be a Confutation of the Being of Witches and Apparitions:
In all which, His Reasonings are trifling and Childesh; and when He ventures at
Philosophy, He is little better than absurd: So that 'twill be a wonder to me,
if any but Boys and Buffoons imbibe any Prejudices against a Belief so
infinitely Confirmed, from the Loose and Impotent Suggestions of so weak a
Discourser.

But however observing two things, in that Discourse that would pretend to be
more then ordinary Reasons, I shall do them the civility to examine them. It is
said then,

(1.) That the Gospel is silent, as to the being of WITCHES; and it is not
likely* if there were such, but that our Savior or his Apostles had given
intimations of their existence. The other is.

(2.) Miracles are ceased, and therefore the prodigious things ascribed to
WITCHCRAFT are supposed Dreams and Impostures.

FOR ANSWER to the FIRST in order, I consider (1.) That though the History of
the New Testament were granted to be silent in the Business of Witches, and
Compacts, yet the Records of the Old have a frequent mention of them. The Law,
Exodus XXII. xviii. against permitting them to live (which I mentioned in the
beginning) is famous. And we have another remarkable prohibition of them, Deuteronomy.
XVIII. x, xi. There shall not be found among you any one, that makes his son
or his daughter pass through the Fire, or that uses Divination, or an Observer
of Times, or an Enchanter, or a WITCH, or a Charmer, or a Consulter with
Familiar Spirits, or a Wizard, or a Necromancer. Now this accumulation of
Names, (some of which are of the same sense and import) is a plain indication
that the HEBREW WITCH was one that practiced by compact with evil spirits. And
many of the same expressions are put together in the charge against Manasses.
II Chron. XXXIII. viz. That he caused his Children to pass through the Fire,
observed Times, used Enchantments, and WITCHCRAFT, and dealt with Familiar
Spirits, and with WIZARDS. So that though the original word which we render
WITCH and WITCHCRAFT should, as our Sadduces urge, signify only a CHEAT and a
POYSONER; yet those others mentioned, plainly enough speak the thing, and I
have given an account in the former Considerations, how a WITCH in the common
notion is a Poysoner. But why mere poisoning should have a distinct Law against
it, and not be concluded under the general one against Murder; why mere
Legerdemain, and Cheating should be so severely animadverted on, as to be
reckoned with Enchantments, converse with Devils, and Idolatrous practices: I
believe the denyer of WITCHES will find it hard to give a reason. To which I
may add some other passages of Scripture that yield sufficient evidence in the
case. The Nations are forbid to hearken to the Diviners, Dreamers, Inchanters,
and Sorcerers, Jer. XXVII. ix. The Chaldeans are deeply threatened for their
Sorceries, and Enchantments, Isa. XLVII. ix. And we read that Nebuchadnezzar
called the Magicians, Astrologers, Sorcerers, and Chaldeans, to tell his Dream.
All which, it is like enough, did cheat and delude by their predictions; but
that they did not confederate, and transact with evil Spirits, is an assertion
without a reason, contrary to the express Letter, and to what was generally
believed in those times.

And the story of the WITCH of ENDOR, 1 Samuel XXVIII. is a remarkable
demonstration of the main conclusion, which will appear when we have
considered, and removed the fancy, and glosses of our Author about it, in his
DISCOVERY, where to avoid this evidence, he affirms, This WITCH to be but a
Cozener, and the whole transaction a Cheat and Imposture, managed by her self,
and a Confederate. And in order to the persuading this, he tells a fine Tale,
viz. That she departed from Saul into her Closet, Where doubtless, says he,
she had a Familiar, some lewd crafty Priest, and made Saul stand at the Door
like a Fool, to hear the Cozening Answers. He says, she there used the
ordinary words of Conjuration, and after them, Samuel appears, whom he affirms
to be no other than either the Witch her self, or her Confederate. By this
pretty knack and contrivance he thinks he has disabled the Relation from
signifyfying to our purpose. But the DISCOVERER might have considered, that all
this is an Invention, and without Book. For there is no mention of the Witches
Closet, or her retiring into another Room, or her Confederate, or her Form of
Conjuration: I say nothing of all this, is as much as intimated in the History;
and if we may take this large liberty in the interpretation of Scripture, there
is scarce a story in the Bible, but may be made a Fallacy, and Imposture, or
any thing that we please. Nor is this fancy of his only arbitrary, but indeed
contrary to the circumstances of the Text. For it says, Saul perceived it was
Samuel, and bowed himself, and this Samuel truly foretold his approaching Fate,
viz. that Israel should be delivered with Him into the hands of the
Philistines, and that on the morrow He, and his Sons should be in the state of
the Dead, which doubtless is meant by the expression, that [they should be with
Him] which contingent particulars, how could the Cozener and her confederate
foretell, if there were nothing in it extraordinary and preternatural? It has
indeed been a great dispute among Interpreters, whether the real Samuel was
raised, or the Devil in his likeness? Most later Writers suppose it to have
been an evil Spirit, upon the supposition that good and happy souls can never
return hither from their celestial abodes, and they are not certainly at the
beck, and call of an impious Hagg. But then those of the other ^ide urge, that
the Pi^ty of the words that were spoke, and the seasonable reproof given to
despairing Saul are indications sufficient that they come not from Hell; and
especially they think the Prophecy of circumstances very accidental to be an
argument, that it was not uttered by any of the infernal predictors. And for
the supposal that is the ground of that interpretation, it is judged exceedingly
precarious; for who says that happy departed souls were never employed in any
ministries here below? And those dissenters are ready to ask a reason, why they
may not be sent in messages to Earth, as well as those of the Angelical Order?
They are nearer allied to our Natures, and upon that account more intimately
concerned in our affairs; and the example of returning Lazarus is evidence of
the thing de facto. Besides which, that it was the real Samuel they think made
probable by the opinion of Jesus Syrac, Eccles. XLVI. xix, xx. who says of
him, That after his death he prophesied and showed the King his end: which also
is likely from the circumstance of the woman's astonishment, and crying out when
she saw him, intimating her surprise, in that the power of God had overruled
her enchantments, and sent another than she expected. And they conceive there
is no more incongruity in supposing God should send Samuel to rebuke Saul for
this his last folly, and to predict his instant ruin, than in his interposing
Elias to the messengers of Ahazias when he sent to Beelzebub. Now if it were
the real Samuel, as the Letter expresses, (and the obvious sense is to be
followed when there is no cogent reason to decline it) he was not raised by the
power of the Witches Enchantments, but came on that occasion in a Divine
Errand. But yet attempts and endeavors to raise her Familiar Spirit (though at
that time overruled) are arguments that it had been her custom to do so. Or if
it were as the other side concludes, the Devil in the shape of Samuel, her
Diabolical Confederacy is yet more palpable.

By all this it is evident, that there were WITCHES in ancient times under the
Dispensation of the Law, and that there were such in the Times of the Gospel
also, will not be much more difficult to make good. I had a late occasion to
say something about this, in a Letter to a person of the highest honor, from
which I shall now borrow some things to my present purpose.

I say then (2.) That there were compacts with evil Spirits in those times
also, is methinks intimated strongly in that saying of the Jews concerning our
Savior, That he cast out Devils by Beelzebub; in his return to which, he
denies not the supposition or possibility of the thing in general, but clears
himself by an appeal to the actions of their own children, whom they would not
task so severely. And I cannot very well understand why those times should be
priviledg'd from VVITCHCRAFT, and Diabolical compacts, more than they were from
Possessions, which we know were then more frequent (for ought appears to the
contrary) than ever they were before or since. But besides this, There are
intimations plain enough in the Apostles. Writings of the being of Sorcery and
VVITCHCRAFT. St. Paul reckons Witchcraft next Idolatry, in his Catalogue of the
work^ of the flesh, Gal. V. xx. and the Sorcerers are again joined with
Idolaters in that sad Denunciation, Rev. XXI. viii. and a little after, Rev.
XXII. xv. They are reckoned again among Idolaters, Murderers, and those others
that are without. And methinks the story of Simon Magus, and his Diabolical
Oppositions of the Gospel in its beginnings, should afford clear conviction. To
all which, I add this more general consideration.

(3.) That though the New Testament had mentioned nothing of this matter, yet
its silence in such cases, is not argumentative Our Savior spoke as he had
occasion, and the thousandth part of what he did, and said, is not recorded, as
one of his Historians intimates. He said nothing of those large unknown Tracts
of America, nor gave he any intimations of as much as the ^^^^nce of that
numerous people; much (...) did he leave instructions about their conversion.
He gives no account of the aff^^^s and state of the other world, but only (...)
general one of the happiness of some, and the misery of others. He made no
discovery of the magnalia of Art, or Nature; no, not of those, whereby the
propagation of the Gospel might have been much advanced, viz. the Mystery of
Printing, and the Magnet; and yet no one uses his silence in these instances
as an argument against the being of things, which are evident objects of sense.
I confess, the omission of some of these particulars is pretty strange, and
unaccountable, and concludes our ignorance of the reasons, and menages of
Providence; but I suppose, nothing else.

Thus Sir, to the FIRST. But the other pretense also must be examined.

(2) [Miracles are ceast, therefore the presumed actions of Witchcraft are
tales, and illusions.] To make a due return to this, we must consider a great
and difficult Problem, which is, what is a real Miracle? And for answer to this
weighty Question, I think,

(1.) That it is not the strangeness, or unaccountableness of the thing done
simply, from whence we are to conclude a Miracle. For then, we are so to
account of all the Magnalia of Nature, and all the mysteries of those honest
Arts, which we do not understand. Nor, (2) is this the Criterion of a Miracle
that it is concluded beyond all natural powers; for we are ignorant of the
extent, and bounds of Natures sphere, and possibilities: And if this were the
character, and essential mark of a Miracle, we could not know what was so;
except we could determine the extent of natural causalities, and fix their
bounds, and be able to say to Nature, Hitherto can Thou go, and no further.
And he that makes this his measure whereby to judge a Miracle, is himself the
greatest Miracle of knowledge, or immodesty. Besides, though an effect may
transcend really all the powers of mere nature, yet there is a world of spirits
that must be taken into our account. And as to them also, I say, (3) Every
thing is not a Miracle that is done by Agents supernatural. There is no doubt
but that Evil spirits can make wonderful combinations of natural causes, and
perhaps perform many things immediately which are prodigious, and beyond the
longest line of Nature. But yet These are not therefore to be called Miracles;
for, They are SACRED WONDERS, and suppose the POWER to be DIVINE. But how shall
the power be known to be so, when we so little understand the capacities, and
extent of the abilities of lower Agents? The Answer to this Question will
discover the Criterion of Miracles, which must be supposed to have all the
former particulars; (They are unaccountable beyond the powers of mere nature,
and done by Agents supernatural) and to these must be superadded. (4.) That
they have peculiar circumstances that speak them of a Divine original. Their
mediate Authors declare them to be so, and they are always persons of
Simplicity, Truth, and Holiness, void of Ambition, and all secular Designs.
They seldom use Ceremonies, or natural Applications, and yet surmount all the
activities of known nature. They work those wonders, not to raise admiration,
or out of the vanity to be talked of, but to seal and confirm some divine
Doctrine, or Commission, in which the good, and happiness of the world is
concerned. I say, by such circumstances as these, wonderful actions are known
to be from a Divine cause, and that makes, and distinguishes a Miracle.

And thus I am prepared for an answer to the Objection, to which I make this
brief return, That though WITCHES by their Confederate Spirit do those odd,
and astonishing things we believe of them, yet are they no Miracles, there
being evidence enough from the badness of their lives, and the ridiculous
ceremonies of their performances, from their malice and mischievous designs,
that the POWER that works, and the end for which those things are done, is not
Divine, but Diabolical. And by singular providence they are not ordinarily
permitted, as much as to pretend to any new sacred Discoveries in matters of
Religion, or to act any thing for confirmation of Doctrinal Impostures. So that
whether Miracles are ceased, or not, these are none. And that such Miracles as
are only strange, and unaccountable performances, above the common methods of
art or nature are not ceased, we have a late great evidence in the famous
GREATRAK; concerning whom it will not be impertinent to add the following
account which I had in a Letter from the Reverend Dr. R. Dean of C. a person of
great veracity, and a Philosopher. This learned Gentleman then is pleased thus
to write.

The great discourse now at the Coffee-Houses, and every where, is about Mr. G.
the famous Irish Stroker, concerning whom it is like you expect an account from
me; He undergoes various censures here, some take him to be a Conjurer, and
some an Impostor, but others again adore him as an Apostle. I confess I think
the man is free from all design, of a very agreeable conversation, not addicted
to any Vice, nor to any Sect, or Party, but is, I believe, a sincere
Protestant. I was three weeks together with him at my Lord Conwayes, and saw
him, I think, lay his hands upon a thousand persons; and really there is some
thing in it more then ordinary; but I am convinced it is not miraculous. I have
seen pains strangely fly before his hand till he has chased them out of the
body, dimness cleared, and deafness cured by his touch; twenty persons at
several times in Fits of the Falling Sickness, were in two or three minutes
brought to themselves, so as to tell where their pain was, and then he has
pursued it till he has driven it out at some extreme part; Running Sores of
the Kings Evil dried up, and Kernels brought to a Suppuration by his hand,
grievous Sores of many months date, in few days healed, Obstructions, and
Stoppings removed, Cancerous Knots in the breast dissolved, etc.

But yet I have many reasons to persuade me, that nothing of all this is
miraculous; He pretends not to give Testimony to any Doctrine, the manner of
his operation speaks it to be natural, the cure seldom succeeds without
reiterated touches, his Patients often relapse, he fails frequently, he can do
nothing where there is any Decay in nature, and many Distempers are not at all
obedient to his touch. So that I confess, I refer all his virtue to his
particular temper and complexion, and I take his pirits to be a kind of
Elixir, and universal Ferment, and that he cures (as Dr. M. expresses it) by a
sanative Contagion.

This Sir, was the First Account of the Healer, I had from that Reverend
Person, which with me signifies more, then the attestations of multitudes of
ordinary Reporters; and no doubt but it will do so likewise, with all that know
that excellent man's singular integrity and judgment. But besides this, upon my
inquiry into some other particulars about this matter, I received these further
Informations.

As for Mr. G. what opinion he has of his own Gift, and how he came to know
it? I answer, He has a different apprehension of it from yours, and mine, and
certainly believing it to be an immediate Gift from heaven; and it is no wonder,
for he is no Philosopher. And you will wonder less, when you hear how he came
to know it, as I have often received it from his own mouth. About three or four
years ago he had a strong impulse upon his spirit, that continually persued him
whatever he was about, at his Business, or Devotion, alone, or in company, that
spoke to him by this inward suggestion [I have given thee the gift of curing
the Evil.] This suggestion was so importunate, that he complained to his Wife,
That he thought he was haunted: She apprehended it as an extravagancy of Fancy,
but he told her he believed there was more in it, and was resolved to try. He
did not long want opportunity. There was a neighbor of his grievously
afflicted with the King's Evil, He stroked her, and the effect succeeded. And
for about a twelvemonth together he pretended to cure no other Distemper. But
then the Ague being very rife in the Neighborhood, the same Impulse after the
same manner spoke within him, [I have given thee the gift of curing the Ague;]
and meeting with persons in their Fits, and taking them by the hand, or laying
his hand upon their Breasts, the Ague left them. About half a year after the
accustomed Impulse became more general, and suggested to him [I have given thee
the gift of Healing:] and then he attempted all Diseases indifferently. And
though he saw strange effects, yet he doubted whether the cause were any virtue
that came from him, or the peoples fancy: To convince him of his incredulity,
as he lay one night in bed, one of his hands was struck dead, and the usual
Impulse suggested to him to make trial of his virtue upon himself, which he
did, stroking it with his other hand, and then it immediately returned to its
former liveliness. This was repeated two or three nights (or mornings) together.

This is his Relation, and I believe there is so much sincerity in the person,
that he tells no more than what he believes to be true. To say that this
Impulse too was but a result of his temper, and that it is but like Dreams that
are usually according to men's constitutions, does not seem a probable account
of the Phoenomenon. Perhaps some may think it more likely, that some Genius who
understood the sanative virtue of his Complexion, and the readiness of his
mind, and ability of his body, to put it in execution, might give him notice
of that which otherwise might have been for ever unknown to him, and so the
Gift of God had been to no purpose.

This Sir, is my Learned and Reverend Friends Relation, and I judge his
Reflections as ingenious, as his report is sincere. I shall say no more about
it but this, that many of those matters of Fact, have been since critically
inspected and examined by several sagacious and deep searches of the ROYAL
SOCIETY, whom we may suppose as unlikely to be deceived by a contrived
Imposture, as any persons extant.

And now, Sir, it is fit that I relieve your patience; and I shall do so, when I
have said, that You can abundantly prove, what I have thus attempted to defend:
And that among the many Obligations your Country has to you, for the Wisdom
and Diligence of your Endeavors in its service; your Ingenious Industry for
the Detecting of those Vile Practicers, is not the least considerable. To which
I will add no more, but the Confession who it is that has given you all this
trouble; which I know you are ready to pardon, to the respect and good
Intentions of

SIR, Your Affectionate and Obliged Honourer and Servant, J. G.

PALPABLE EVIDENCE OF SPIRITS AND Witchcraft: In an ACCOUNT of the Famed
Disturbance by the DRUMMER, In the House of M. MOMPESSON. With Another Modern
and Certain Relation. In two LETEERS, One to the Right Honorable William,
Lord Brereton; The other, to the Learned Dr. Henry More, D. D.

London, Printed by E. C. for James Collins, at the Kings Head in
Westminster Hall, 1668.

To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Lord Brereton.
My Lord,
THE ENTERTAINMENTS your Lordships Discourse has often given me in matters of
the best consequence, have left a relish on my mind, which it is a pleasure to
me to remember and acknowledge. And certainly, of all the matters the various,
and busy mind of man imployes it self in, there is nothing more agreeable,
and importing, than the enquiries of the other world, about which your Lordship
is so much, and so affectionately concerned. Indeed, as things are for the
present, the LAND of SPIRITS is a kind of AMERICA, and not well discovered
Region; yea, it stands in the Map of humane Science like unknown Tracts, filled
up with Mountains, Seas, and Monsters: For we meet with little in the
Immaterial Haemisphere, but Doubts, Uncertainties, and Fables; and whether we
owe our ignorance in these matters, to the nature of the things themselves, or
to the mistakes and sloth of those that have enquired about them, I leave to
your Lordships happy sagacity to determine. Only, perhaps more of the supra
mundane light had shone in upon us, but for Superstition, Despair, and the
wranglings of the Schools. And did the SOCIETY of which your Lordship is an
illustrious Member, direct some of its wary, and luciferous enquiries toward
the World of Spirits, I believe we should have other kind of Metaphysics,
than those are taught by men that love to write great Volumns, and to be subtle
about nothing. For we know not any thing of the world we live in, but by
experiment, and the Phoenomena; and there is the same way of speculating
immaterial nature, by extraordinary Events and Apparitions, which possibly
might be improved to notices not contemptible, were there a Cautious, and
Faithful History made of those certain and uncommon appearances. At least it
would be a standing evidence against SADDUCISM, to which the present Age is so
unhappily disposed, and a sensible Argument of our Immortality.

NOW though you, My Lord are in no danger of that cold and desperate Disease,
the Disbelief of Spirits and Apparitions; nor need confirmation in the Article
of our future existence, yet being engaged by my promise, and more by my desire
of serving you, to send your Lordship the Story of the DRUMMER at Mr.
MOMPESSONS house at Tedworth, (one of the most remarkable ones in our time for
the confirmation of that great affair) I have now at length put the most of
those particulars I could obtain, into your hands; which I had sooner done, but
that I have been in a long expectation of additional circumstances, which Mr.
Mompesson promised me. But his occasions it seems have hindered the
performance; and mine by reason of the distance of our abodes, would not permit
personal solicitations, which possibly might have expedited the matter. To
which I might add, My Lord, that a person intimately concerned in it, was
unwilling Mr. M. should meddle any more with Relations, lest thereby the
troublesome guest should be awakened to an unwelcome return; which fear though
perhaps but a panick, had yet an interest in the frustrating my expectations of
the desired Additionals. That which I had from the Gentleman himself, I now
send your Lordship in the subsequent Relation, which you may please to take as
follows.

MASTER JOHN MOMPESSON of Tedworth in Wiltshire, being about the middle of
March, in the year 1661. at a neighboring Town, called Ludgarshal, heard a
Drum beat there, and being concerned as a Commission Officer in the Militia, he
enquired of the Bayliffe of the Town, at whose House he then was, what it
meant. The Bayliffe told him, that they had for some days been troubled by
that Idle Drummer, who demanded money of the Constable by virtue of a pretended
pass, which he thought was counterfeit. Upon this Information Master Mompesson
sent for the fellow, and ask't him, by what Authority he went up and down the
Country in that manner, demanding money, and keeping a clutter with his Drum?
The Drummer answered, he had good Authority, and produced his pass, with a
warrant under the hands of Sir William Cawly, and Colonel Ayliffe of Gretexham.
These papers discovered the knavery, for Mr. Mompesson knowing those Gentlemen's
hands, found that his pass, and warrant were forgeries; and upon the discovery,
commanded the vagrant to put off his Drum, and charged the Constable to carry
him to the next Justice of Peace, to punish him according to the desert of his
Insolence and Roguery. The fellow then confessed the cheat, and begged earnestly
for his Drum. But Mr. Mompesson told him, that if he understood from Colonel
Ayliffe, whose Drummer he pretended to be, that he had been an honest man, he
should have it again; but that in the interim he would secure it. So he left
the Drum with the Bayliffe, and the Drummer in the Constables hands; who it
seems after, upon entreaty, let him go.

About the midst of April following, when Mr. M. was preparing for a Journey to
London, the Bayliffe sent the Drum to his house; and being returned, his Wife
told him, that they had been much affrighted in the night by Thieves, in his
absence, and that the House had like to have been broken up. He had not been at
home above three nights, when the same noise returned that had disturbed his
Family when he was abroad: It was a very great knocking at his Doors, and the
outsides of his House. Mr. M. arose, and with a brace of Pistols in his hands,
went up and down, searching for the cause of the Disturbance. He opened the
door, where the great knocking was, and presently the noise was at another: he
opened that also, and went forth, rounding his House, but could discover
nothing; only he still heard a strange noise, and hollow sound; but could not
perceive what was the occasion of it. When he was returned to his Bed, the
noise was a thumping and Drumming on the top of his House, which continued a
good space, and then by degrees went off into the Air.

After this It would come 5 nights together, and absent it self 3. knocking
very hard on the outsides of the House, which is, most of it of Board. This It
did constantly as they were going to sleep, either early or late. After a
months racket without, It came into the room where the Drum lay, where it would
be 4 or 5 nights in 7, making great hollow sounds, and sensibly shaking the
Beds and Windows. It would come within half an hour after they were in Bed, and
stay almost two. The sign of its approach was an hurling in the Air over the
House; and at its recess they should hear a Drum beat, like the breaking up of
a Guard. It continued in this Room for the space of two months; the Gentleman
himself lying there to observe It: and though it was very troublesome in the
forepart of the night, yet after two hours disturbance, it would desist and
leave all in quietness: At which time perhaps the Laws of the Black Society
required its presence at the general Rendezvous elsewhere.

About this time the Gentleman's Wife was brought to Bed; the noise came a
little that night she was in Travail, but then forbore for three weeks till she
had recovered strength. After this civil cessation, it returned in a ruder
manner than before, applying wholly to the younger Children; whose Bedsteads it
would beat with that violence, that all present would expect, when they would
fall in pieces. Those that laid their hands upon them, could feel no blows, but
perceived them to shake exceedingly. It would for an hour together beat, what
they call ROUNDHEADS and CUCKOLDS -- the TATTOO, and several other Points of
War, and that as dexterously as any Drummer. After which it would get under
the Bed, and scratch there as if it had Iron Tallons. It would lift the
Children up in their Beds, follow them from one room to another, and for a
while applied to none particularly but them.

There was a Cockloft in the House which had been observed hitherto to be
untroubled; thither they removed their children, putting them to bed while it
was fair day: and yet they were no sooner covered, but the unwelcome Visitant
was come, and played his Tricks as before.

On the 5th. of November. 1662. it kept a mighty noise, and one of the Gentleman's
Servants observing two Boards in the Childrens room that seemed to move, he bid
it give him one of them, and presently the Board came within a yard of him. The
Fellow added, Nay, let me have it in my hand: upon which it was shuft quite
home. The man thrust it back, and the Demon returned it to him, and so from
one to another at least 20 times together, till the Gentleman forbad his
Servant such Familiarities. That morning it left a Sulphurous smell behind it,
very displeasant, and offensive; which possibly, My Lord, some would conjecture
to be a smack of the bituminous matter brought from the mediterranious vaults,
to which we may suppose the vehicles of those impure Spirits to be nearly
allied. At night the Minister of the place, one Mr. Cragge, and many of the
Neighbors came to the House, and went to prayer at the Childrens Bedside,
where at that time It was very troublesome, and loud. During the time of Prayer
it withdrew into the Cockloft, but the Service being ended, it returned; and in
the sight and presence of the company, the Chairs walked about the Room, the
Childrens Shoes were thrown over their heads, and every loose thing moved
about the Chamber: Also a Bed-staffe was thrown at the Minister, which hit him
on the Leg, but so favorably, that a lock of Wool could not have fallen more
softly. And a circumstance more was observed, viz. that it never in the least
roul'd, nor moved from the place where it lighted.

The Gentleman perceiving that It so much persecuted the little Children,
lodged them out at a Neighbors House, and took his eldest Daughter, who was
about 10 years of Age, into his own Chamber, where It had not been in a month
before. But no sooner was she in Bed, but the troublesome Guest was with her,
and continued his unquiet visits for the space of three weeks, during which
time it would beat the Drum, and exactly answer any Tune that was knocked, or
called for. The House where the Gentleman had lodged his Children being full of
Strangers, he was forced to take them home again; and because they had never
observed any disturbance in the Parlor, he laid them there, where also their
old Visitant found them; but at this time troubled them no otherwise than by
plucking them by the hair, and night-cloathes.

It would sometimes lift up the Servants with their Beds, and lay them down
again gently without any more prejudice, than the fright of being carried to
the Drummers Quarters. And at other times it would lie like a great weight upon
their Feet.

'Twas observed, that when the noise was loudest, and came with the most
sudden, and surprising violence, yet no Dog would move. The knocking was often
so boisterous and rude, that it has been heard at a considerable distance in
the Fields, and awakened the Neighbors in the Village, none of which live very
near this house.

About the latter end of December. 1662. The Drummings were less frequent, and
the noise the Fiend made, was a gingling as it had been of money; occasioned,
as 'twas thought, by some discourse of an ancient Gentlewoman, Mother to Mr. M.
(who was one day saying to a Neighbor that talked of Fairies leaving money,
That she should like it well, if it would leave them some to make amends for
the trouble it made them) for that night there was a great chinking of money
all the house over; but he that rose earliest next morning, was never a groat
the richer. After this it desisted from its ruder noises, and employed it self
about little apish Tricks, and less troublesome Caprichio's. On Christmas-Eve,
an hour before day, one of the little Boys arising out of his Bed, was hit on
a sore place in his Heel, by the latch of the Door, which the waggish Demon
had plucked out and thrown at him. The Pin that fastened it was so small, that
'twas for the credit of his Optics, that he picked it out without Candle
light. The night after Christmas Day It threw all the old Gentlewomans Clothes
about the Room, and hid her Bible in the Ashes. In such impertinent ludricous
fegaries, it was frequent. And such passages are to me considerable intimations
that the Imps of Witches, and other troublesome appearing Spirits, are not
always Devils, as I have discourse 't in my Considerations about Witchcraft.

After this the Spirit was very troublesome to a Servant of Mr. Mompessons, who
was a stout Fellow, and of sober conversation. In the Relation of whose
vexations, I beg your Lordships leave to be a little less solemn. This gamester
then had the hardiness to lie within during the greatest disturbance. His
Master permitted him to give this proof of his Courage, and lodged him in the
next room to his own. There was John engarison'd, and provided for the assault
with a trusty Sword, and other implements of War. And for some time there was
scarce a night past, without some doubty action and encounter, in which the
success was various. One while John's bag and baggage would be in the Enemies
power, Doublet and Breeches surprised, and his Shoes raised in rebellion
against him; and then lusty John by Dint of Weapon recovers all again,
suppresseth the insurrection of his Shoes, and holds his own in spite of
Satan, and the Drummer. And for the most part our Combatant came off with
honor and advantage, except when his enemy outwatch'd and surprised him, and
then he is made a prisoner, bound hand and foot, and at the mercy of the Goblin;
till he has got the opportunity of recovering his Diabolical Blade, and then
our Champion is in good plight again. Sometimes the Scuffle was so great and
loud, that Mr. M. himself was fain to come in to John's assistance, which he
took in very ill part, as a distrust of his courage; as if he were not singly
able to deal with the Devil, who is a very Coward, and fights with the
disadvantage of a Chain at his Heels. After these contrasts, Sir Tho. Bennet's
Son whose workman the Drummer had sometimes been, came to the house, and told
Mr. M. some words that he had spoken, which it seems was not well resented; for
as soon as they were in bed, the Drum came with a mighty rattle: the Gentleman
arose and called his man to him, who lay with John; and no sooner was Mr.
Bennets Servant gone, but there came a rushing noise as if it had been a
Gentlewoman in Silk, to John's bedside. Our Champion takes the Alarm, and
catches at his Sword to assault the Lady, contrary to all the rules of Knight
errantry. 'Twas with much difficulty and tugging that he got it into his
possession: for it seems the Aerie Damosel was not willing to be courted with
John's Cutting Complements: But being possessed of that dreadful Blade, the
Amazon of the Air withdrew her self from the danger of his provoked ire, and
left the Champion to admire the effects of his courage. But enough of plaisance
upon the occasion of John's Chivalry, and Encounters.

By several instances it has been discovered, that this Spirit was afraid of a
Weapon, or at least pretended to be so; for when they used a Sword, it always
cautiously avoided. And of this my Lord, I have given an account elsewhere.

About the beginning of Jan. 1662. They were wont to hear a singing in the
Chimney, before It came down. And one night about this time, Lights were seen
in the House; one of which came into Mr. Mompessons Chamber, which seemed blue
and glimmering, and caused a great stiffness in their eyes that saw it. An
intimation that this Demon had its vehicle from the bituminous Mines of the
lower Regions. After the light, something was heard coming up the Stairs, as if
it had been some one without Shoes. The light was also 4 or 5 times seen in
the Childrens Chamber; and the Maids confidently affirm, that the doors were at
least ten times opened, and shut in their sight. They heard a noise at the same
time when the Doors were opened, as if half a dozen had entered in together.
After which some were heard to walk about the room, and one rusled as if it had
been in Silk. The like Mr. M. himself once heard.

During the time of the knocking, when many were present, a Gentleman of the
company said, Satan, If the Drummer set thee a work, give three knocks and no
more, which it did very distinctly, and stopped. Then the Gentleman knocked, to
see if it would answer him as it was wont, but it remained quiet. He further
tried it the same way, bidding it, for confirmatton, if it were the Drummer, to
give 5 knocks and no more that night, which it did accordingly, and was silent
all the night after. This was done in the presence of Sir Tho. Chamberlain of
Oxfordshire, and several others.

On Saturday morning, Jan. 10. an hour before day the Drum was beaten upon the
outsides of Mr. Mompessons Chamber, from whence it went to the other end of
the House, where some Gentlemen, Strangers, lay, playing at their door, and
without, 4 or 5 several Tunes, and so went off into the Air.

The next night a Smith of the Village lying with John, they heard a noise in
the room, as if one had been shooing of a Horse there; and somewhat came as it
were with a pair of Pincers, and snipt at the Smiths Nose most part of the
Night,

One morning Mr. Mompesson rising early to go a Journey, heard a great noise
below, where the Children lay, and running down with a Pistol in his hand,
heard this voice, A Witch, a Witch, as they had also heard it once before; but
upon his entrance all was quiet. Having one night played some little pranks at
Mr. Mompesson's Beds feet, it went into another Bed, where lay one of his
Daughters, where It passed from side to side, and lifted her up as it went
under her. At that time there were three kinds of noises in the Bed. They
endeavored to thrust at It with a Sword, but it very carefully avoided them,
still skipping under the Child, when they were ready to thrust. The night
after It came panting, like a Dog out of breath; upon which one took a Bedstaff
to knock, which was taken out of her hand, and thrown away. Upon this company
came up, and presently the room was filled with a bloomy noisome smell, and was
very hot, though without Fire, and in midst of a very sharp and severe Winter.
It continued in the Bed, panting, and scratching and hour and half, and then
went into the next Chamber, where it knocked a little, and seemed to rattle a
chain. Thus it did for two or three nights together.

After this the old Gentlewomans Bible was found in the Ashes open, the paper
side being downwards. Mr. Mompesson took it up, and observed that it lay open
at the third Chapter of S. Mark, in which there mention is of the unclean
spirits falling down before our Savior; of his giving power to the 12 to cast
out Devils, and of the Scribes opinion, that he cast them out through
Beelzebub. The next night they strewed ashes over the Chamber, to see what
impressions it would leave. And in the morning, found in one place the
resemblance of a great Claw, in another of a lesser; some Letters in another,
which they could make nothing of; besides many Circles and Scratches in the
Ashes: all which I suppose were ludicrous devices, by which the sportful Demon
made pastime with humane Ignorance and Credulity.

About this time, as I formerly told your Lordship, my curiosity drew me to the
House, to be a witness of some of those strange passages. It had ceas't from
its pranks of Drumming, and ruder noises before I came; but most of the more
remarkable circumstances before related, were confirmed to me there by several
of the Neighbors together, who had been present at them. At that time it used
to haunt the Children; I heard it scratch very loudly and distinctly in their
Bed, behind the Boulster. I thrust in my hand to the place where the noise
seemed to be, upon which It withdrew to another part of the Bed; and upon the
taking out of my hand, it returned as before. I had heard of its imitating
noises, and therefore made the trial, by scratching certain determinate times
upon the Sheet, as 5. and 7. and 10. which It did also, and still stopped at my
number. After a while It went into the midst of the Bed under the Children, and
there panted like a Dog, very loudly. I put my hand upon the place, and felt
the Bed bear up against it, as if something had thrust it up; but by grasping,
could feel nothing but the Feathers: and there was nothing under it. The motion
It caused by this panting was so strong, that it shook the Room, and Windows.
It continued thus for more than half an hour, while I stayed, and as long
after. I was certain there could be no fallacy nor deceit in these passages,
which I critically examined; and I am sure there was nothing of fear, or
imagination in the case; for I was no more concerned than I am at the Writing
this Relation.

But to proceed with Mr. Mompesson's own particulars.

There came one morning a light into the Childrens Chamber, and the voice,
crying, A Witch, a Witch, for at least an hundred times together. Mr. M. seeing
at a time some Wood move that was in the Chimney, when no one was near,
discharged a Pistol into it; after which they found several drops of Blood on
the Hearth, and in diverse places of the Stairs.

There was a seeming calm in the House for 2 or 3 nights after the discharge of
the Pistol; but then it came again, applying It self to a little child, newly
taken from Nurse; which It so persecuted, that It would not let the poor Infant
rest for two nights together, nor suffer a Candle in the Room, but would carry
them away lighted up the Chimney, or throw them under the Bed. It so scared
this Child, by leaping upon it, that for some hours it could not be recovered
out of the fright. Insomuch as they were enforced again to reremove the
Children out of the House. The next night after they were gone, something about
midnight came up the Stairs, and knocked at Mr. Mompesson's door; but he lying
still, It went up another pair of Stairs, to his man's Chamber, to whom It
appeared, standing at his Beds foot. The exact shape and proportion he could
not discover; but saw a great body, with two red and glaring eyes, which for
some time were fixed steddily upon him, and at length disappeared.

Another night Strangers being present, It purr'd in the Children's Bed like a
Cat; and at that time the Clothes and Children were lift up from the Bed, and
6. men could not keep them down. Upon this they removed them thence, intending
to have ripped up the Bed. But they were no sooner laid in another, but this
second Bed was more troubled than the former. It continued thus 4. hours, and
so beat the Childrens Legs against the Beds-Posts, that they were forced to
arise, and sit up all night. After this it would empty Chamber-pots into their
Beds, and strew them with Ashes; and that though they were never so carefully
watch't. It put a long piked Iron into Mr. Mompesson's Bed, and into his
Mothers a naked Knife upright. It would fill porrengers with Ashes, throw every
thing about, and keep a noise all day.

About the beginning of April, 1663. a Gentleman that lay in the house had all
his money turned black in his Pockets. And Mr. Mompesson, one morning coming
into his Stable, found the Horse he was wont to ride, on the ground, with one
of his hinder Legs in his mouth, and so fastened there, that 'twas difficult
work for several men, with a Leaver, to get it out. After this there were some
other remarkable things; but my account goes no farther: Only Mr. Mompesson
told me, that afterward the house was several nights beset with 7. or 8. in
the shape of men, who as soon as a Gun was discharged, would shufflle away
together into an Arbor.

THE DRUMMER was tried at the Assize at Salisbury, for some petty Fellonies he
had committed; and there these passages also were produced, and urged. He was
condemned to the Islands, and was accordingly sent away: but I know not how,
made a shift to come back again. And it is observable, that during all the time
of his restraint, and absence, the House was in quiet; but as soon as ever he
came back, the disturbance also returned. He had been a Soldier under CROMWELL,
and used to talk much of gallant Books he had of an odd Fellow's, who was
counted a Wizard. And upon this occasion I Will mention to your Lordship a
passage, which I had not from Mr. Mompesson; but yet is not irrelative.

A Gentleman, who was with me at the House, being in company with one who
practices Physic, and pretends to strange matters, was telling the Doctor
this Relation: The Physician told him, he was sure 'twas nothing but a
Rendezvous of Witches, and that for an hundred pounds he would undertake to
clear the house from all disturbance. In consequence of which discourse he
talked many high things; and having got my friend alone in another Room apart
from the company, said, he would show him he could do something more than
ordinary, and asked him who he desired to see. The Gentleman had no great
confidence in his talk, but yet he pressing that he would name some one, said,
He desired to see no one so much as his Wife. Upon this the Doctor took up a
Glass that was in the room, and setting it down again, bid him look in it,
which he did; and professes that he saw the perfect Image of his Wife: which
is the more strange, in that this person was an absolute stranger to her. This
my Lord, my friend averred to me for a certainty; and he is one in whose word
I can repose, being a man very sober, and intelligent. I understand since, that
this Doctor has the name of a very odd person among his Neighbors; and not
only among the credulous, and easy vulgar, but even among those of more sense
and judgment.

THUS MY LORD, I have given your Honor the sum of the Relation, which I
extracted from Mr. Mompesson's own Letters. The same particulars also he writ
to the Doctor of the Chair in Oxford. He is a Gentleman of whose veracity in
this account I know not the least ground of suspicion, he being neither vain,
nor credulous; but a discreet, sagacious, and manly person. You know, my Lord,
the credit of matters of fact depends much upon the consideration of the
Relators; and if They cannot be deceived themselves, nor supposed any ways
interessed to impose upon others, we may, and we ought to acquiesce in their
reports: For upon these circumstances all humane Faith is grounded, and matter
of Fact is not capable of any proof besides, but that of immediate sensible
Evidence. Now this Gentleman cannot be thought ignorant himself of the Truth,
and certainty of what he relates, it having been done in his Family, and
himself a Witness, and that not of a little circumstance, or two, but of a
hundred; not for once, or twice only, but for the space of some years; during
which time he was a concerned, and inquisitive observer. So that it cannot with
any show of reason be supposed that any of his Servants abused him, since in
all that time he must needs have detected the deceit: and what interest could
any of his Family have had (if it had been possible to have managed it without
discovery) to continue so long, so troublesome, and so injurious a fallacy. Nor
can it with any thing of more probability be imagined, that his own melancholy
deluded him; since (besides that, he is no crasie or imaginative person) that
humor could not have been so lasting and pertinacious: or if it were so in
him, can we think he infected his whole Family, and those Multititudes of his
Neighbors and Others, that think themselves as well assured of those actions,
of which they were Witnesses, as himself? These are wild Supposals, and not
like to tempt any but those whose Wills are their Reasons. The main Relator
then knew himself, whether what he said was True, and whether those things
which were acted in his House were Juggles, and contrived Impostures, or
extraordinary realities. And if so, What Interest could he serve in maintaining
such a cheat, if it were one, and he knew it to be so?

He suffered by it in his Name, in his Estate, in his Affairs, and in the
general Peace of his Family. Those that believed not any thing of Spirits, or
Witchcraft in those Transactions, (which were not a few) took him for an
Impostor. Those that did, many of them judged the permission of such an
extraordinary evil, to be the Judgment of God upon him, for some notorious
impiety. Thus his Name was continually exposed to Censure, and his Estate
suffered by the concourse of people from all parts to his house, whom he could
not dismiss without the Civility of an Entertainment. And besides this, he was
hindered, and diverted from the prosecution of his Affairs, and he could hardly
get, or retain any in his Service. To which, if I add the continual hurry that
his Family was in; the affrights, vexations, and tossings up and down of his
Children, and the Watchings and Disturbance of his whole House; in all which
himself must needs be the most concerned person. I say, the putting together of
these Circumstances will be evidence enough, that he could have no interest in
designing to put a cheat upon the world, in which he would most of all have
injured, and abused himself. Or, if he should have designed and managed so
incredible, so unprofitable an Imposture, it is strange he should trouble
himself so long in actuating an abusive Artifice, only to deceive, and to be
talked of. And it is yet more so, that none of those numerous inquisitive
persons, that came thither purposely to Criticize, and examine the truth of
those matters, could make any Discoveries. Especially since many came
prejudiced against the belief of such things in general, and others resolved
beforehand against the belief of this; and all were permitted all possible
freedom of search and inquiry: And after things were weighed and examined,
several that were prejudicated enough before, went away strongly convicted. To
which I add, That there are diverse particulars in the Story, in which no abuse
or deceit could have been practiced; as the motion of Boards and Chairs of
themselves, the beating of a Drum in the midst of a Room, and in the Air, when
nothing was to be seen; the heat that filled a whole Room without Fire in
excessive cold Weather: The Scratching and Panting where nothing ordinary could
be suspected for the cause; and several others such like: All which have
numbers of sober and uninteressed persons to attest them.

IT IS true my Lord, that when the Gentlemen the King sent were there, the House
was quiet, and nothing heard, or seen that night. And this was confidently, and
with triumph reported by many as an evidence of the untruth of the Story. But
certainly 'twas but poor Logic to conclude in matters of Fact from a single
Negative, and such a one against numerous Affirmatives; and to infer that a
thing was never done, because omitted at such a season; and that no body ever
saw, what this man, or that did not. By the same rule of consequence I may say,
that there were never any Robbers upon Salisbury Plains, because I have often
traveled over them, and never met any of those sorts of Violence; and the
Frenchman inferred well, that said, There was no Sun in England, because he
was 6 Weeks here, and never saw it. This my Lord, is the common Argument of
those that deny the being of Apparitions; They have traveled all times of the
night, and never saw any thing worse than themselves; and it may be so:
Therefore Spirits and Apparitions are Bugs and Impostures. But why do not such
Arguers conclude, that there was never a Cutpurse on Ludgate Hill, because
they have past that way a hundred times, and were never met with by any of
those nimble practitioners. Certainly, he that denies Apparitions upon the
confidence of this Negative, against the vast heap of positive Assurances, is
credulous, if he believe there was ever any High-way-man in the world, if he
himself was never robbed. And the Trials of Ass^ses, and Attestations of those
that have, if he will be just, ought to move, his assent no more in this case,
than in that of Witches and Apparitions which have the very same evidence. But
for the particular of the quiet of Mr. Mompesson's House, while the Courtiers
were there, it may be remembered, and considered, that the Disturbances were not
always constant, but interrupted by intervals of Cessation, sometimes for
several days, and sometimes for weeks, as is mentioned in the Relation; some
passages of which, that record those Cessations, were I am sure written in Mr.
Mompesson's Letters, before those Gentlemen had been at Tedworth. So that its
omitting at that time it is like was merely accidental; or possibly the
malicious Spirit was not willing to give so public a testimony of Its being,
and troublesome incursions, for the convincing those, he had rather should
continue in the disbelief of his existence: but however it were, this
circumstance will afford but a very slender inference against the credit of the
Story, except among those who are willing to take any thing for an Argument
against things they have an interest not to acknowledge. There are other
exceptions made against the Truth of this Relation, and Dr. H. More sent me an
account of some particulars that were objected at Cambridge, to which I have
answered in a Letter to him, and have sent it your Lordship in company with
this.

THUS, my Lord, I have given your Honor the sum of this Affair; and I have
taken notice of, and recorded the particulars of the Relation, not to satisfy
curiosity, or feed the humor that delights in wonders, which are but mean
designs, and unbecoming one that pretends to any thing that is generous. But I
consider it as a great evidence against Sadducism, the Disease of our Age. And
though those passages are not so dreadful, tragical, and amazing, as there are
some related in Stories of this kind; yet are they never the less probable, or
true, for being less prodigious, and astonishing. And they are strange enough
to prove themselves the effects of some invisible extraordinary Agent, and to
demonstrate, that there are SPIRITS that sometimes sensibly intermeddle in our
Affairs. And I think they do it with as many clear circumstances of evidence as
any thing that is extant. For these things were not done long ago, or at far
distance, in an ignorant Age, or among a barbarous people; they were not seen
only by 2 or 3 of the melancholic, and Superstitious, and reported by those
that made them serve the advantage, and interest of a Faction. They were not
the passages of a day, or night, nor the vanishing glances of an Apparition.
But those circumstances were near, and late, public, frequent, and of years
continuance; witnessed by multitudes of competent, and unbiast Attestors, and
acted in a searching and incredulous Age; Arguments enough for the conviction
of a modest, and capable reason.

This Relation, my Lord, you perceive proves the being of SPIRITS and
APPARITIONS, but not so directly that of WITCHES and Diabolick Contracts; and
therefore, while I am about it, I shall add the other NARRATIVE which I
promised your Honor, and which I received from the Justice of Peace, who took
the Examination upon Oath: It Is the same Gentleman to whom I directed my Letter
about WITCHCRAFT, and a very judicious, searching, and sagacious person. He was
pleased to give me his own Copy of the Examination; the sum of which is in the
following Relation.

ON SUNDAY, 15. of Nov. 1657. about three of the Clock in the afternoon, Rich,
Jones, then a sprightly youth, about 12* years old, Son of Henry Jones of
Shepton Mallet, in this County of Somerset, being in his Fathers House alone,
and perceiving one looking in at the Window, went to the door, where one Jane
Brooks of the same Town (but then by name unknown to this Boy) came to him. She
desired him to give her a piece of close Bread, and gave him an Apple. After
which she also stroked him down on the right side, shook him by the hand, and
so bid him good night. The Youth returned into the house, where he had been
left well when his Father, and one Gibson went from him: but at their return,
which was within an hour, or thereabout, they found him ill, and complaining of
his right side, in which the pain continued the most part of that night: and on
Monday following in the evening, the Boy roasted the Apple he had of Jane
Brooks; and having eaten about half of it, was extremely ill, and sometimes
speechless; but being recovered, he told his Father, that a Woman of the Town
on the Sunday before, had given him that Apple, and that she stroked him on the
side, as above. He said he knew not her Name, but should her person, if he saw
her. Upon this Jones was advised to invite the Women of Shepton to come to his
house, upon the occasion of his Son's illness; and the Child told him, that in
case the Woman should come in, when he was in his Fit, if he were not able to
speak, he would give him an intimation by a Jogg, and desired that his Father
would then lead him through the Room; for he said he would put his hand upon
her, if she were there. After this he continuing very ill, many Women came
daily to see him: And Jane Brooks the Sunday after, came in with two of her
Sisters, when several other Women of the Neighborhood were there.

Upon her coming in; the Boy was taken so ill, that for some time he could not
see, nor speak; but having recovered his sight, he gave his Father that Item,
and he lead him about the Room. The Boy drew toward Jane Brooks, who was
behind her two Sisters, among the other Women, and put his hand upon her;
which his Father perceiving, immediately scratcheth her her Face, and drew
blood from her. The Youth then presently cried out that he was well, and so he
continued 7. or 8. days. But then meeting with Alice Coward, sister to Jane
Brooks, who passing by, said to him [How do you my Honey?] he presently fell
ill again. And after that, the said Coward, and Brooks often appeared to him:
The Boy would describe the Cloath^s and Habit they were in at the time,
exactly, as the Constable, and others, have found upon repairing to them;
though Brooks's house was at a good distance from Jones's. This they often
tried, and always found the Boy right in his Descriptions.

On a certain Sunday about Noon, the Child being in a Room with his Father,
and one Gibson, and in his Fit, He on the sudden called out, that he saw Jane
Brooks on the Wall, and pointed to the place, where immediately Gibson struck
with a Knife; upon which the Boy cried out, [O Father, Coz. Gibson has cut
Jane Brooks 's hand, and it is Bloody.] The Father, and Gibson immediately
repaired to the Constable, a discreet person, and acquainting him with what had
past, desired him to go with them to Jane Brooks House, which he did. They
found her sitting in her Room on a stool with one hand over the other. The
Constable asked her how she did? she answered, not well. He asked again, why
she sat with one hand over the other? she replied, She was wont to do so. He
enquired if any thing were amiss with her hand? her answer was, It was well
enough. The Constable desired he might see the hand that was under; which she
being unwilling to show him, he drew it out, and found it bloody, according to
what the Boy had said. Being ask't how it came so, she said, 'Twas scratched
with a great Pin.

On the 8. of December, 1657. the Boy, Jane Brooks, and Alice Coward, appeared
at Castle Carry, before the Justices, Mr. Hunt, and Mr. Carry. The Boy having
begun to give his Testimony upon the coming in of the two Women, and their
looking on him, was instantly taken speechless, and so remained till the Women
were removed out of the Room, and then in a short time, upon examination, he
gave a full relation of the mentioned particulars.

On the 11. of January following, the Boy was again examined by the same
Justices at Shepton Mallet, and upon the sight of Jane Brooks was again taken
speechless, but was not so afterward, when Alice Coward came into the room to
him.

On the next appearance at Shepton, which was on the 17. of February, there
were present many Gentlemen, Ministers, and others: The Boy fell into his Fit
upon the sight of Jane Brooks, and lay in a man's Arms like a dead person: the
Woman was then willed to lay her hand on him, which she did, and he thereupon
started, and sprang out in a very strange and unusual manner. One of the
Justices to prevent all possibilities of Legerdemain, caused Gibson, and the
rest to stand off from the Boy, and then that Justice himself held him. The
youth being blindefolded, the Justice called as if Brooks should touch him, but
winked to others to do it, which two or three successively did; but the Boy
appeared not concerned. The Justice then called on the Father to take him, but
had privately before desired one Mr. Geoffery Strode to bring Jane Brooks to
touch him, at such time, as he should call for his Father; which was done, and
the Boy immediately sprang out after a very odd and violent fashion. He was
after touched by several persons, and moved not; but Jane Brooks being again
caused to put her hand upon him, he started and sprang out twice or thrice, as
before. All this while he remained in his Fit, and some time after; and being
then laid, on a Bed in the same Room, the people present could not for a long
time bow either of his Arms, or Legs.

Between the mentioned 15. of Nov. and the 11. of Jan. the two Women appeared
often to the Boy, their Hands cold, their Eyes staring, and their Lips, and
Cheeks looking pale. In this manner on a Thursday about noon, the Boy being
newly laid into his Bed, Jane Brooks, and Alice Coward appeared to him, and
told him, that what they had begun, they could not perform. But if he would say
no more of it, they would give him money, and so put a twopence into his
Pocket. After which they took him out of his Bed, laid him on the ground, and
vanished; and the Boy was found by those that came next into the Room lying on
the floor, as if he had been dead. The twopence was seen by many, and when it
was put into the Fire, and hot, the Boy would fall ill; but as soon as it was
taken out, and cold, he would be again as well as before. This was seen and
observed by a Minister, a discreet person, when the Boy was in one Room, and
the twopence (without his knowledge) put into the Fire in another: and this
was diverse times tried in the presence of several persons.

Between the 8. of December. and the 17. of Feb. in the year mentioned, diverse
persons at sundry times heard in the Boy a noise like the croaking of a Toad,
and a voice within him, saying, Jane Brooks, Alice Coward, twelve times in near
a quarter of an hour. At the same time some held a Candle before the Boys
face, and earnestly looked on him, but could not perceive the least motion of
his Tongue, Teeth, or Lips, while the voice was heard.

On the 25. of Feb. between two and three in the afternoon, the Boy being at
the House of Richard Isles in Shepton Mallet, went out of the Room into the
Garden; Isles his Wife followed him, and was within two yards when she saw him
rise up from the ground before her, and so mounted higher and higher, till he
passed in the Air over the Garden Wall, and was carried so above ground more
then 300. yards, falling at last at one Jordan's door at Shepton, where he was
found as dead for a time. But coming to himself, told Jordan that Jane Brooks
had taken him up by the Arm out of Isles his Garden, and carried him in the
Air, as is related.

The Boy at several other times was gone on the sudden, and upon search after
him, found in another room as dead; and at sometimes strangely hanging above
ground, his hands being flat against a great Beam in the top of the room, and
all his body two or three foot from ground. There he has hung a quarter of an
hour together; and being afterward come to himself, he told those that found
him, that Jane Brooks had carried him to that place, and held him there. Nine
people at a time saw the Boy so strangely hanging by the Beam.

From the 15. of Nov. to the 10. of March following, he was by reason of his
Fits much wasted in his body, and unspirited; but after that time, being the
day the two Women were sent to Goal, he had no more of those Fits.

Jane Brooks was condemned, and executed at Charde Assizes, March 26. 1658.

THIS, MY LORD, is the sum of Mr. Hunts NARRATIVE, which concludes with both
the Justices attestation, thus,

The aforesaid passages were some of them seen by us, and the rest, and some
other remarkable ones not here set down, were, upon the examination of several
credible witnesses, taken upon Oath before us. Subscribed, Rob. Hunt. John Carry.

THIS, I think, my Lord, is good evidence of the being of Witches; and if the
Sadduce be not satisfied with it, I would fain know, what kind of proof he
would expect? Here are the testimony of sense, the Oaths of several credible
Attestors, the nice and deliberate scruteny of quick-sighted and judicious
Examiners, and the judgment of an Assize upon the whole. And now the security
of all our Lives and Fortunes depends upon no greater circumstances of evidence
then these. If such proof may not be credited, no Fact can be proved, no
wickedness can be punished, no right can be determined, Law is at an end, and
blind Justice cannot tell where to strike. All men are liars, and the Long
Sword must settle properties, and resolve all doubts of Truth, and Claim. These
large morsels, my Lord, he that denies such evidences of fact must swallow, and
then let him tell me by what title he holds any thing he possesses? How proves
he his Relation, and consequently Succession to the rights of his presumed
progenitors? and it is no great matter whether he can or no, since when that is
done, how will it appear, that his Bonds, Entails, and Leases are not
Forgeries, and tricks of Cousenage? And how will he clear his own Bargains and
Transactions of business from being Dreams and Illusions? Certainly, he that
runs upon all these Rocks, and lays the train of so many dangerous
absurdities, has some mighty wind that drives him, and some huge necessity
for his conclusion, and nothing else can justify his assertion, That those
things of Witches are not true; but this other, That they are impossible; and
when he has done that, I Will use his arguments to prove all the world is a
great enchanted House, and Nature a grand Imposture, viz. that really there are
no such things as are represented to our gulled and abused senses, but that all
are mere prestigious shows, and fantastical Idaeas. I say, my Lord, I Will prove
this by the same method of arguing that concludes against the possibility of
the actions of Witchcraft, which I know can proceed but to this inference, That
the mode of those performances is not perceived; from whence, if it be just to
infer, that the things are not; I Will set up for a Sceptick, and use the
argument against all the objects of my senses; which I have elsewhere said, and
proved to be really as unconceiveable and unaccountable as the obstrusest
matters of Magic and Fascinations.

But, my Lord, my Pen runs out to your Lordships trouble; I recall it, and must
permit it to add no more, but that I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most obliged Humble Servant, J. G.

A LETTER To the Reverend and Learned Dr. HENRY MORE, About the Drummer OF
TEDWORTH.
Honored Sir,
THe scrupulous care you take in examining the Story of the Disturbance at
TEDWORTH, is no more then becomes a Philosopher, and one that is not willing to
be deceived. And without such a cautious, and particular enquiry, you could not
answer the murmures, and petty evasions of wilful Unbelievers. Those objections
you picked up at Cambridge, have the ill fortune to miscarry in almost every
circumstance; and are in no likelihood of being believed, but at a great
distance. Some of them, I could have answered upon mine own knowledge; and
concerning the rest, I have made a strict inquiry of Mr. Mompesson himself, and
others, when I was last in those parts; and upon certain information, I give
you this account.

To the (1.) that says, The House is rented, and that this is a device to beat
down the value of it. I answer from his mouth, That the House is his own; and
so the foundation of this shift is overturned. The second of those that say, It
is a trick to get money from those that come to see the Prodigy, has as little
truth, but much more malice in the first contrivers than the former. For this
Gentleman being a person of Estate, I Am confident scorns so base, and so
beggarly a policy; and is so far from making any advantage by the Disturbance,
that it has done him very material prejudice in his Fortunes, and Affairs. And
those strangers that come to see the Prodigy, use to leave nothing behind
them, except thanks for the Civility of their Entertainments. It Is true (3.) as
others say, that the House is boarded without, at least a great part of it: But
there are no Cellars (as the objection adds) save only under the Parlour; and
the Disturbance was most inother rooms. And whereas (4) it is objected, that a
Knight that offered to go down, could not be permitted. It Is answered me, that
the Gentleman might have gone down, had he pleased; and his Servant did, who
made a careful search, but could find nothing that might be a cause of the
noise, which he affirmed to be above; and that it proceeded not from the
Cellar. And to disable what other Objectors say, viz. (5) That there was no
Drumming in the midst of any Room, but only a striking on the Boards as it were
with a Hammer, in a corner of the outsides of the House: I say, to null this
pretense, Mr. Mompesson and others assured me, that the noise was often in the
midst of the Room, and often overhead; and he says that there is scarce a Man,
or Child, in the Village, but has heard, and can witness it. And after the
first month it was almost always within. Thus Sir, to the Objections of
others which you have gathered. And to your own Quaeries I make this return.

Whereas you inquire (1.) What part of the Childrens Bed did the Demon beat,
and what noise did it make? It Is answered, that it beat against the Head and
Posts of the Bed, and that when hands were laid on each side of them, at those
times they would shake as if they would fall in pieces; but nothing else could
be perceived, or felt. The noise was like to that of striking with a Hammer.
And then (2.) To that, whether the Drummers Drum was ever looked on while it
beat; or was it only in the Dark? I am assured, that it was seen while the
noise was made upon it, both by the light of Fire, and Candle. (3) To the
Quaery, What were the Boards that moved, by what light was their motion seen,
and by whom? Mr. Mompesson answers, They were seen move forwards, and backwards
in the light of clear day, before the Sun was set, and by a whole house full of
people. And whereas (4.) you ask, In what clearness of light were the Chairs
seen walk about, and by what Witnesses? It Is answered, That they were seen to
do so by Candlelight, and by diverse persons.

As to what I was a witness of my self, I add these circumstances for the
satisfaction of your Quaeries. The Children were in Bed, when the Scratching
and panting was; but I am sure did not contribute to those noises. I saw their
hands above the Clothes, during the Scraping, and searched the place whence
the noise came: To which I might add, That they were little, harmless, modest
Girls, that could not well have been suspected guilty of the confidence of
such a juggle, had it been possible they could have acted in it. For the
panting, I am certain there was no dog in the Bed; for I graspt it with my
hand, and felt it in all parts, especially there where the original motion was.
The Bed also was searched under, but no Dog, nor any creature else could be
found there. The Floor I said shook with the panting sensibly, and yet it was
as strong and substantial an one, as ordinarily is seen. But the Children
indeed did not seem to be much concerned, having been used to those, and ruder
noises, and there was company in the room to assure them.

THUS, Sir, I have briefly answered others OBJECTIONS, and your QUAERIES. And
because I have an humor to say little more, I Will consider (what you know as
well as any man alive) the Reasons men are so apt to cavil at this kind of
Relations, and are rather willing to believe any thing than the truth of such a
Narrative. They are chiefly, I think, an affected humor of Drollery, and
Scoffing, and a worse cause, ATHEISM.

FOR the First, the Subject of Witches, and Apparitions is an apt, and ample
occasion. And the cheats of Impostors, the conceits of Melancholy, the
credulity of ignorance, the tricks of Waggery, the more solemn vanities of
Superstition, and the tales of old Women; these are excellent topics for a
frolic and wanton fancy. And the desire the Humourist has to be some body,
and to have a name above those of common apprehension, will be sure to actuate
the scoffing vein; in the exercise of which, if he have quibled luckily, and
made folks laugh, he is encouraged to take all such occasions to prove himself
a WIT, and to show he had a pretty way to play the Fool. And when he has
wantoned a while, and frolickly toy'd in his affected merriments, his reason
becomes an obedient servant to his fancy. He makes himself believe, by those
arguments, that at first were intended only to make him laugh, and in the end,
concludes in earnest, that there is neither Witch, nor Apparition: and it is
well if he stop there. Now these, Sir, are the WITS (if we will believe them)
and their admirers take every jest for an argument, and a loud laugh upon an
idle tale of a Devil, or a Witch, for a demonstration of the nonexistence of
such beings. And thus the humor propagates, and SADDUCISM is the Fashion. Nor
is this all, but by the same method every thing that is sacred, or serious has
been exposed, and both Government, and Religion made the objects of idle, and
fantastic buffoonry. And must we call this WIT Sir? I confess there are few
things that urge me to more indignation, than to hear that name which deserves
to signify better, to be so injuriously applied. Certainly WIT is not an odd
metaphor, or a lucky simile, a wild fetch, or unexpected inference, a mimick
action, or a pretty knack in telling of a tale. But It is a faculty to profound
into the depth of things, to find out their Causes, and Relatives,
Consonances, and Disagreements, and to make fit, useful, and unobvious
applications of their respective Relations and Dependances; for which great,
and noble exercises of the mind, the Droll is the most unfit and incompetent
person in the World; and those that on this account assume the prerogative of
being the only WITS, are of all men the most incapable of being so. For that
trivial, and pedling way of Fancy, and Humor, to which they are addicted,
emasculates their minds, and makes them superficial, flashy, and fantastical,
by employing them upon effaemancies, and little apish fooleries. And by these
darling entertainments of a too fondly indulged fancy, the mind is made
incapable of serious and deep reflections, which give it the noblest, and most
valuable improvements: so that I have observed, that the Drolling Humorists are
for the most part, remarkably defective, in close ratiocinations, and the worst
in the world at inference; which is no wonder, since fancy is a desultory, and
roving faculty; and when it is not under the conduct of a severe judgment, not
able to keep it self to a steady, and resolved attention; much less, to make
coheherent chains of rational Deduction. So that it is next to impossible for
such Wits as these, to arrive to more than a knack of scoffing at what they
understand not. And they are under almost an invincible temptation of doing so,
by every thing that is too great for their comprehension; for the humor that
acts them is proud, and assuming, and would not have any thing to be valued, of
which it self is incapable; and therefore it depreciates all the nobler and
more generous matters which It has very great reason to despair of; and
endeavors by a ridiculous, and insolent scorn, to lift it self above them. And
yet this presumed wit which raises them to such an elevation in their own
conceit, is but a young and boyish humor; and the very first essays of
Juvenile Inventions are in these exercises of Fancy, which the maturer spirit
out-grows. For you know, Sir, our senses are the first powers we exercise, and
indulge in our greenest years: From them, by degrees our imaginations grow up,
and their actions, and gratifications are the pleasures, and entertainments of
youth; which is easy to observe in the little flirts, quibbles, and tricks of
Fancy, with which the younger Students in the Universities are so much tickled,
and transported. But when age and experience ripens the Judgment (which is the
faculty of slowest growth) we then slight this wantonness, and ioying of our
Fancies, and apply our selves to pursuites that are more manly, and concerning.
And when the Judgment is come to its full exercise, and pitch, and has
overcome, and silenced the futilities and prejudices of imagination; we are
then, and not till then, grown into manhood. And those that never arrive to
this consistence, but spend their age in fooling with their Fancies, They are
yet children, though they have gray hairs, and are still boys, though past
their great climacterical.

I confess, Sir, I am not so cynical, and severe, but that I allow even to the
more improved genuises their relaxations and pleasant Intervals, And sage
Socrates himself sometimes rid the Boys Hobbyhorse. Fancy may be permitted
its plaisance, and in-offensive raileries, so long as they are governed by the
rules of virtue, and a prudent Judgment. And no doubt God himself allows all
our powers, and faculties their innocent gratifications, yea, and I acknowledge
a delightful prettiness in the results of a managed and judicious fancy, while
it is employed in exposing vice, and conceited follies, to deserved scorn, and
laughter. But when Imagination is rampant, loose, and ungoverned, when it knows
no bounds, and observes no Decorums, but shoots at Random, and insolently
flies at all things that are august, and venerable; its sallies are then
vicious, and detestable excesses; and those that are of this humor, are but a
sort of fleering Buffoons, that is, a better kind of Apes, in the judgment of
the Wise, though Wits in their own,

But Sir, I intimated a greater charge against these quibbling debauches,
(viz.) that they are the enemies of GOVERNMENT and RELIGION, and shall prove
it, with this addition, that they are so of all the better sorts of KNOWLEDGE.

For GOVERNMENT you know Sir, its influence depends much upon the reverence its
Rulers have from the people; and while They are men, there will be miscarriages
in public affairs, and managements of State; And if all the slips, and
imperfections, all the mistakes and faults of the supreme Ministers of Rule, be
tattled and aggrevated among the heard, The Government will thereby be exposed
to the scorns of the Rabble, and lose a great part of its force with its
reverence. And in this it suffers infinitely from the drolling phantasticks,
who blow in the sores, till they have rankled them, with their malicious, and
poisonous breath, and shoot Libels at the Government till they have made deep
wounds in its reputation, and Reverence, and turned every tongue into a weapon
of War against it. Thus do these Chams discover their Fathers nakedness, and
rejoice to publish the shame of those, whose failures and infirmities, Loyalty,
Prudence, and regard to the public quiet, should oblige them to conceal.

Nor (2.) is RELIGION more beholden to them. For a mind that uses to whiffle
up and down in the Levities of Fancy, will find a very great indisposition to
the serious and solemn exercises of Piety, and that will grow into an
aversation, which will be sure to prompt the humourist to take all occasions to
expose it: so that he quickly jests at Scripture, and makes a mock of sin,
plays with eternal flames, and scoffs at those that fear them. As if the
sacred Oracles were but a Legend of idle Tales; and sin but a name coined by
Fancy, and vain fears; as if Hell were but a painted fire, and the Religious a
sort of timorous Fools, that are afraid of Buggs, and the Imagery of Dreams:
and if these are not yet the real Articles of their Creed, their extravagant
Fancies, and vile affections are like in a short time to incline these light,
and impure spirits, to make them so,

And this sort of Wits are either Atheists, or as great prodigies of Folly, if
they are not; since to believe a God that made, sees, and will judge them; and
to scoff at that Tremendous Majesty before whom their Brother-WITS below
tremble, to think the Scriptures are the Inspirations of the God of Heaven, the
Laws of Souls, and grand Instruments of Immortal happiness, and yet to droll
upon them, and to jest with the records of eternity, to believe endless
Torments, and everlasting Joys in the state immediately succeeding these our
short and uncertain beings, and yet to sport with the wrath of God, and to make
tricks at eternal terrors; to talk trivially of beatifical enjoyments, and to
make as bold with Heaven, as they do with an imaginary Elisium: These, I say,
are follies, these are degrees of impudence beyond all aggravation, or
possibilities of expression; and did not sad experience show them, one would
scarce believe there were such prodigious Monsters in nature. And to these
things I add.

(3.) These idle Drollists have an utter antipathy to all the braver and more
generous kinds of KNOWLEDGE. For that they are perfectly indisposed for
Philosophy, and all deep researches, I have said some things that may suffice
for proof already. And I add this observation to confirm it, That among the
numerous Youth I have seen bred in a Great School, and in the University, I
have noted, that those of them who were most remarkable for waggishness and
jesting, seldom arrived to any great maturities, or capacity for things of
consequence, and weight, And indeed frolickness of Fancy, and solidity of
Judgment, require dispositions of brain that are very different, and such as
seldom meet in great degrees, but in some very few, extraordinary tempers. But
generally I believe the Droll is very unfit for matters of sublimity and
substance: and therefore (as I intimated) endeavors by his scoffs and
injuries, to make them appear as much below his serious notice, as they are
indeed above his reach: and in this design he has many great advantages for
his abuses, For the pedantry of Disputers that make a loud claim to knowledge;
the vanity of the extravagant sort of Chemists, the fond boasts of some hold
pretenders to Philosophy, and experiment; the strangeness of things that
soberer Inquisitors declare practicable, but have not yet succeeded, the
meanness and seeming contemptibleness of many Subjects, the experimenter is
often obliged to deal in: These afford plausible arguments for Drolling
Harangues, and those advantages are taken to make the most useful Theories, and
endeavors appear ridiculous and vain. And for the encouragement of the
fantastic, in his insolent humor of injustice, and abuse, there is a certain
envy in mankind against those that attempt any thing extraordinary, which
makes men willing to embrace and applaud that which exposes what themselves
cannot act, nor comprehend; by reason of which ill nature in the generality,
yea, even of those that pretend to something: This kind of Wit becomes the
most pestilent enemy to knowledge, and its improvements, especially to
philosophic wisdom. For Philosophy can shame, and disable all the reasons that
can be urged against it; but jests, and loud laughter are not to be confuted:
and yet these are of more force to degrade a thing in the esteem of some sort
of Spirits, than the most potent demonstrations: and the mischief of it is,
that these Quibblers and Buffoons that have some little scraps of Learning
matched with a great proportion of Confidence, have commonly the luck to be
celebrated among the vulgar for men of great parts and knowledge; and that
opinion of them gains credit to their insolences, and abuses.

But, Sir, I perceive my zeal against those pedlars of Wit has transported me
to your trouble, I therefore make an abrupt return to my other reason
mentioned, of men's disbelief of the being of Witches, and Apparitions, and that
is,

(2.) ATHEISM; the Folly of which accursed madness, you, Sir, have so fully
discovered to the world, in your incomparable Works, and so thoroughly
understand the mysteries of that black conspiracy against heaven, that 'twould
be fond for me to think to suggest any notion on the Subject, which you could
not teach. But Sir, I have a Relation about this matter to make you, which I
believe you will not be unwilling to hear. And you shall have it when I have
said something to the purpose of the particular I have mentioned. Concerning
which, it is too sadly certain that there is a latent Atheism at the root of the
SADDUCEAN principle: for too many deny Witches, because they believe there are
no Spirits; and they are so persuaded because they own no being in the world,
but matter, and the results of motion, and consequently, can acknowledge
nothing of a God.

It has indeed been a question, whether it is possible there should be such a
prodigy as a speculative Atheist in nature; and I could wish it were so still:
But alas, our Age and Experience has ended the Dispute; and we need not search
the dark, and barbarous corners of America, nor seek the Monster among the
wild Men of the Desert; we have found him in Times of Light, in a witty and
civilized Region, and in an Age of the greatest knowledge and improvements: he
sculps not among the thickest of the Woods, nor seeks Caverns for concealment,
but braves the Sun, and appears in the clearest day. And the Fool is not so
modest as he was in the days of the Royal Prophet, to say only in his heart,
There is no God: we know a bolder sort of Infidels, and I can say, Sir, from a
particular experience, That there are, who deny the existence of a Deity. I met
with one such some years since in London, who confidently, and without mincing,
denied that there was any such being, and bid me prove it. I wondered at the
boldness, as well as the impiety of his saying; and because I had a great
compassion for one in so deplorable a state, I resolved not to exasperate him
by passion, hard words, or damning Sentences, but calmly, and without seeming
emotion, discoursed the business with him; I granted him all I safely or
reasonably could, and all that might serve my design for his conviction, before
we began the close engagement, that so he might have less prejudice against
what was said by one whom he might see not to be of a narrow, confined
judgment; and that I might not have the disadvantage of being put upon the
impugning of principles which are plausible by the great names, or reasons of
any eminent Philosophers, and that were not absolutely necessary for the
defense of the Proposition, for which I undertook, such were the Platonic
Anima Mundi, the eternity, and immensity of the world; which Sir, though I
should not affirm, yet I would not at that time deny, but quietly granted them
as Hypotheseis; being willing to permit his belief of these, in order to the
convincing and abusing him in his main, and deadly conclusion. And by these
concessions I gained the advantages I expected; for hereby he was disappointed
of all those plausibilities, which I perceived he was wont to urge for those
Doctrines. And I saw, that when he was pressed with the necessity of a cause of
all things, and a First, his refuge was that old Epicurean one, of an eternal,
infinite matter; which when his unwary opposites would attempt to disprove by
endeavoring to demonstrate the beginning, and Finiteness of the world, They
gave him the opportunity of a colorable Defense, and diverted from the main
Thesis, which might be evinced though the Immensity and Eternity of the
universe were granted. And so they let him go from an assertion that is most
impious, and absurd, to another which is tollerably accountable, and specious,
And the Conclusion would be at last, that since the undertaker could not prove
the world was not infinite and eternal, he could not make it appear, There was
a God. By which procedure the arguer falls from a Proposition which is the most
demonstrative one in nature, to an other, which cannot be cleared but by
supposing the main thing in Question.

But besides this shift which my concession made insignificant, when my Atheist
was urged with the Order, Harmony, Contrivance, and Wisdom that is visible in
the Creatures, he would betake him to his Anima Mundi; the existence of which,
when those other Antagonists he had dealt with would endeavor to overthrow,
they undertook a thing of harder profusion, than the main conclusion.

I say therefore, Sir, I permitted him to assume these Principles, and then
proved, That though the world were immense. and eternal, yet, That it is not
possible mere blind, unguided matter should shuffle it self into such regular,
and accurate productions, as we see are the results of every day, without the
manuduction of some knowing Agent, and Contriver, as you have fully made good
in your excellent ANTIDOTE. And when he at this turn took sanctuary in an Anima
Mundi, as the cause of all the art, and exactness in Nature, I granted him the
being, but asked him, Whether he took it for a substance, that was intelligent,
or devoid of reason, and perception? when he seemed to incline to this latter,
I showed him, that such a principle as had no sense, or knowledge, signified no
more to his purpose, than if he had stuck in the Hypothesis of mere matter, and
motion. But when he allowed his great Soul to be an intellectual Being (as he
at last did) and that it was immense and eternal (as he was forced to do by his
assertion, that this soul was diffused through the whole mass of his infinite
and eternal matter.) I showed him, that in effect he was brought by his own
principles to the acknowledgment of a GOD, though he gave him another name.

Thus Sir, I pursued my Infidel into all his starting holes, and retreats, and
drive him from one assertion to another, its contradictory, and then back again
upon the first Thesis, and so up and down till at length he began to be ashamed
of his shuffling, and confessed that I had said to him more then he had heard,
and some things that he would consider. He desired that I would give him the
substance of my discourse in writing, which I prepared for him, and shall
perhaps e're long give an account of these, and other dependent matters to the
public.

After the heat of our engagement was over, I was willing to learn by what
means he came into that desperate Infidelity, and understood from him, that he
had run through the several stages of modern Sects, not stopping till he came
down to that sink of Folly, and madness, Quakerism, and thence made a step into
Atheism; which is no great leap; for East and West at long run meet, and are
the same. And certainly he that places his Religion in opinions, and judges it
now to lie in this form of belief, and then in another; when he comes to
consider the vast variety of Sects, the confidence of each in his own
reasonings, the pretenses of all to Scripture, Reason, and Antiquity; the
antipathy they have one against another, and the doubtfulness, if not falsehood,
of things, that each of them hold sacred, and certain: I say, he that takes
Religion to be an adherence to Sects and Opinions, is upon the accounts
mentioned, when he reflects, in mighty danger of being an Atheist. And except
he fix at last upon the few, plain, acknowledged essentials of belief, and good
life (if he be of an anxious, inquisitive mind, and not obstinately resolved in
the way of his particular Sect.) It Is a miracle if he ends not there at last,
for he having established this, That Religion consists in the way, Or form of
some party, or other; and then having successively deserted those Sects that
had most of his favor and affection; and so past from one to another, through
all the steps of descent, when at length he is fallen out with the last, he
has nothing else to fly to but contempt of all Religion, as a mere juggle and
Imposture. This I took to be this Gentleman's case; and I believe much of the
general Atheism of our days is to be ascribed to this Cause.

Thus, Sir, I have followed the humor of writing, as it lead me, and expect
your pardon of this ramble, upon the account of that liberty which uses to be
allowed in intercourses of this nature; and more from that Friendship with
which you are pleased to honor,

SIR, Your Affectionate Humble Servant, J. G.

FINIS.

