An Excellent DISCOURSE Proving the Divine Original, and Authority OF The Five
BOOKS OF MOSES. Written Originally in French by Monsieur Du Bois de la Cour,
and Approved by six Doctors of the Sorbon. To Which is added a SECOND PART, OR
AN EXAMINATION Of a considerable part of PERE SIMON's Critical History of the
Old Testament, wherein all his Objections, With the Weightiest of Spinosa's,
against Moses's being the Author of the first Five Books of the Bible, are
Answered, and some difficult places of Holy Scripture are Explained.

By W. L.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers Chapel. 1682.

A PREFACE, Opening the true Nature and Reasons of a Saving-Faith.
. 1. THere is no Man that ever heard the Gospel, and has such a care of his
everlasting State, as beseems a reasonable Creature, but must needs perceive
of how great weight it is, to be well assured of the truth of those
supernatural Revelations delivered to us in the Sacred Scriptures. Much may be
known by the well studied Book of Nature: But not enough to quiet the mind of
Man, by assured hopes of future Happiness, and the way thereto: And therefore
almost all the Heathen and Infidel World, have their Augures or Prophets on
whom they depend, as Conscious of the necessity of more than common natural
Light: Besides that, it requires greater helps and longer studies, to
understand the Book of Nature, than the generallity of Mankind can use: whereas
God by his word has made all necessary truth so plain, that Children in a
short time, may grow wiser than the Philosophers.

. 2. No wonder then if it be the great work of the Prince of Darkness, the
Enemy of God and Man, to deprive the World of the benefit of the Sacred
Sacriptures; which he does, First, By keeping most of the Earth from knowing
it, for want of Teachers, mostly kept out by the Persecution of Tyrants and
Idolatrous Priests. Secondly, By keeping those that hear it from believing it.
Thirdly, By keeping those that believe it from the right understanding of it.
Fourthly, By keeping those that partly understand it, from a serious
considering what they understand. Fifthly, By keeping Men from a willing
obedience to what they know and think of.

. 3. Among professed Christians it is the want of a sound Belief, which is the
great cause of all Ungodliness and Misery. And no wonder: For it is an high and
excellent work to live on the joyful belief and hope of an unseen everlasting
Life. And in this dark State, believing must conquer many difficulties, which
slothful Men will rather yield to, than duly strive to overcome.

. 4. First, We have contracted so inordinate a Love to this kind of life in
Flesh, that corrupt Nature is loath to think of any other, because it would not
part with this. And when Men are convinced only of a necessity of looking
forward beyond the Grave, this changes not their love; but still an unwilling
backward heart receives the notices of the Life to come, but as unpleasant
Physic, which nothing but mere necessity will get down: And how ill a Receiver
an unwilling mind is, experience tells all the World. Yea so backward and
senseless is depraved Nature, that even this necessity is seldom seriously
considered, till the Sentence of Death awaken the Soul; and are Men then fit to
begin so hard a study, as must show them the certainty of the Gospel, and the
Life to come; and to get Faith when they must use it.

. 5. Secondly, And (I write it as necessitated, and with Lamentation,) it is
not all Men's Lot to have Teachers that show them the right way, even of
founding their Belief, and discerning the certainty of the Gospel, and the
Immortality of Souls. If I should tell you how many Parishes that have Weekly
Sermons, in which Faith, and Christianity, and Heaven, are mentioned, have
Teachers that cannot confute an Infidel or Sadducee, or teach Men clearly how
to be sure, that their Faith and Hope are not mere Error, and that cannot tell
which way well to prove the truth of their professed Religion, some would be
offended at it, that are not offended at their own sad defect, who are ignorant
of so needful a part of the Catechism, which every Christian should be taught.

. 6. Sad numerous instances are too clear a clear a proof.

First, It is become so great a controversy, whether Faith have any Evidence
or not, and whether we can certainly prove the Gospel to be true, or rather
must merit the more by believing it without proof, that the Papists are
together by the Ears about it; and those Protestants that handle it, differ
among themselves. But the most keep their peace by not daring to decide it. And
how can those Teachers show the people the ascertaining Evidence and Proof, who
hold that there is none to be shown. The objects of Faith are not evident to
Sense, (not seen, not tasted, etc.) but the truth of the Revelation has
ascertaining proof: And nothing is provable but by intelligible Evidence,

Secondly, The whole Papal Church almost holds, That the method of believing
the Gospel, is to believe it on the Authority of the Church's proposal, or
affirmation. As if Men must believe that Christ has a Church, and that it is
thus Authorized, before they believe that he is the Christ, and has Authority
himself, or any Law that gives Authority. A multitude of impossibles are here
supposed, before Man can be a true believer, (which I have fully manifested
elsewhere.)

Thirdly, Some that see how unable the vulgar and unlearned are, to manage a
matter of such weight and difficulty, and fearing least a trial of their Faith
against hard objections, should but overturn it, persuade the weak only to
believe, and not to doubt, but not to ask, why? nor to search for Reasons for
their Faith; least disputing the case, and hearing objections which they cannot
answer, should make them Infidels, or crack their Brains.

Fourthly, Some tell them that it is only the inward witness of the Spirit in
themselves that can assure them that the Scriptures are the word of God. Not
telling them well what that Testimony is, nor how those that yet hear it not
shall be convinced of unbelief.

Fifthly, Some by overdoing, tell us that the Scripture so shines, propria
luce, and contains its own evidence of Divinity so clearly, that a Man that
does but read it, though he found it by the highway, and never before heard of
it, may there see sufficient evidence that it is all of God.

Sixthly, Some by greater overdoing, distinguish not the Essentials of
Religion, from the Integrals or Accidents, nor the words from the matter, nor
the Law and Gospel from the subordinate parts of the Bible, in point of
evidence and necessity. and so would tempt Men to think, that if any sentence
in our Bibles, translation or original be mistaken, we can have no certainty of
the truth of any of the rest.

Seventhly, And these by overdoing would persuade us that every word in the
Bible is as much Divine as the Decalogue, or Lords Prayer, and has nothing in
it of humane imperfection in style or order; but is all such, as God himself
would have written, if he had made no use of Man.

Eighthly, And some are so afraid of Popery, and the name of (Tradition and the
Testimony of the Church,) that they disable their own Faith by rejecting the
necessary use of Tradition, and the Churches Testimony, not being able justly
to distinguish.

Ninthly, And too many distinguish not Historical Evidence from the Churches
pretended Authoritative determination.

Tenthly, And some cannot tell what Historical Evidence is also Physical, and
what makes it so, as differing from Moral uncertain Testimony.

And if Teachers of the Foundation have all these gross defects and more, is it
any wonder if unstudied Laymen are here puzzled in the dark.

. 7. I am not now to write a Treatise to tell Men the true method of Preaching
Faith: I have done that elsewhere, especially in [The Reasons of Christian
Religion,] [The unreasonableness of Infidelity,] [The Life of Faith,] and a
small Book called [The certainty of Christianity without Popery.] But I shall
here give the unfurnished Reader a few necessary Distinctions and Conclusions.

. 8. Conclusion I. Divine Faith is a sort of knowledge with Trust to the credit
of God revealing, and therefore must have evidence, 1. That it is the word of
God that is proposed. 2. And that God does not lie or deceive us.

Conclus. II. It is the matter signified which is the prime necessary object of
our Faith: and the words only as the vehicle or signs of the matter.

Conclus. III. No one particular word in the Bible, or the World is of absolute
necessity to be known; but another may serve that has the same signification.
If any word were absolutely necessary to be known, if it be English, none could
be saved but Englishmen: if Greek or Hebrew, none could be saved but Grecians
or Hebricians, etc.

Conclus. IV. The Gospel is not those same words that Christ spoke, but a
Translation of them. Its supposed that he spoke in the Language then used by
the Jews, which was a mixture of Chaldee and Syriack; but the Gospel is written
in Greek, so that our Original thereof is but a Divine Translation of Christ's
words.

Conclus. V. Christ promised and gave his Spirit to his Apostles and
Evangelists, to bring all things that he had taught them to their remembrance,
and to lead them into all truth, and teach them what to say, so far as to
perform their Commission, To Disciple the Nations, Baptizing them in the name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Teaching them to observe all things that he
had Commanded them. And thus far they were infallible.

Conclus. VI. The words therefore of the several writers are so far Divine, as
to be the true and certain signifiers or expressions of so much of Christ's Life
and Doctrine, as he saw needful for the use of Man, to the end of the World to
be made known.

Conclus. VII. But all the Gospel writers recite not the same matter just in
the same words, nor in the same Order, nor in the same Style: And as all humane
Language savoureth of humane imperfection, and the faculties of Men are not all
of one degree of strength, and custom varyeth wise Men's Style; so the Apostles
were but Men, and the very Words, Style and Order of their writing had the
effects of sinless humane imperfection, and were not such as that God himself
could not have done it better: But its all of God, as suited to its proper use.

Conclus. VIII. The Gospel was God's word Preached by them, before they wrote
it: Eight Years before St. Matthew wrote, and about Sixty Seven, or Sixty Eight
Years before St. John wrote the Gospel: And it is not to be imagined, that in
their Preaching they spoke just all the same words which they wrote, and no
more.

Conclus. IX. All the Miracles that were then wrought, were first to confirm
the Gospel as Preached before the Books were written.

Conclus. X. But God knowing that the Apostles must die, and the Gospel must be
infallibly delivered to the end of the World, inspired them to write, not only
the Essentials, but all that was necessary for the World to know in all
Generations, and leave it as the Sacred Record of his redeeming Work, his
Doctrine, and his universal Law, written infallibly by the Spirit of Jesus
which he sent as his Agent for that work; so that the same Miracles which
confirmed their words, are now equally a Seal of the Divine Authority of their
writings.

Conclus. XI. All the words in the Gospel are not Essential to Christianity,
nor of equal necessity to be explicitly known, the Doctrine of Baptism and the
Lords Supper, with the Decalogue and Lords Prayer, contain all the Essentials
of Christianity truly understood; which Doctrine of Baptism the Church ever
expounded in a few plain Articles called the Creed: And they always took those
Sacraments and that Creed, with the Lords Prayer and the Decalogue expounded by
Christ, as the summaries of our Belief, Desires and Practice, to be the Gospel
and Christian Religion; The Ministry and Church Order instituted by the Spirit
of Christ, being an Integral part: and these they diferenced from the
Subsidiary and Ornamental parts of Scripture, in point of Necessity and
Evidence. And they that believed these were saved, whether it was before the
rest was written, or if they never heard or understood the rest.

Conclus. XII. And before Christ, the Law of Moses must be greatly
distinguished from the other Historical Books and Prophesies. As the Law of
this Land by which all men hold their Lands and Lives, and must be governed,
greatly differ from daily verbal Mandates, or written Commissions which the
King may give to particular Persons; so the Covenant of Grace, and the Law of
Moses much differ from the particular Messages of Prophets, and the words of
Priests about that Law, or the deeds of men. Universal and Common Laws are of
Universal and Common Obligation, and therefore all must be certain of their
Authority: But the Obedience and Salvation of the Land or World, was not laid
on, e. g. the Prophets Message to Saul, to Jeroboam, to Hezekiah, etc.
Therefore, in these Cases, the People are left sometimes to see whether
Predictions come to pass, and its harder for them to know who is a true
Prophet, the necessity being lesser.

Conclus. XIII. It is therefore greatly to be noted, that, 1. The Law of Nature
needed no Miracles to Confirm it, being legible in the Nature of Man and of all
about him. 2. The Law of Moses which that Nation was to be ruled by, had so
full evidence of Divine Authority, that it was scarce possible for the Jews of
that Age to doubt of it: The ten Plagues of Egypt, the opening of the Red Sea,
and the Raining of Quails, and the forty years feeding them with Manna, the
Flaming Mount, the terrible Sight and Voices, the Glory of God and the Cloud
before the Tabernacle, the swallowing up of Thousands by the opened Earth, with
other such signs, must needs convince the Nations of Gods Revelation: And the
Passover, and many other means, were from the first, appointed to be a
practical Tradition of it, uninterrupted. But the Priests that were but to obey
and teach this Law needed no new Miracles, the Law being once so fully sealed.
3. And so when Christ came with a new and more perfect Revelation to settle the
Law of Grace in the last Edition, he sealed it by multitudes of uncontrouled
Miracles, and his own Resurrection, and the miraculous effusion of the Holy
Ghost, by which the Apostles, who were infallibly to Record his Law and
Promises, sealed their Word with the like wonderful works that Christ had done.
But the Law and Promise being thus Sealed and Delivered, the Bishops, or
Ministers, who are but to keep and teach it, need not new Miracles for their
Work. If as some Usurpers pretend, Christ had made Bishops in Councils
Universal Legislators to make new parts of Divine Religion for the World, God
would have given them also the seal of such undoubted Miracles.

Conclus. XIV. I have often said four evidences concur infallibly to prove the
Gospel true: And all are called, The Witness of the Spirit as one. 1. The
Antecedent Prophesies. 2. The Miracles, and Resurrection, and Ascension of
Christ, and the numerous Miracles of the Apostles and first Churches. 3. The
propria Lux, or inherent impressions of God on the Gospel and all the
Scriptures, which greatly differenceth it from all other Books and Doctrines.
4. The sanctifying efficacy of the Gospel on all true Believers in all Nations
and Ages of the Earth; which makes them a holy, peculiar, heavenly, just and
sober sort of Persons, quite differing from all other men, which is certainly
the work of God by the Gospel, and by this his Spirit is a continuing Witness
that God does own it.

Conclus. XV. The Order of Believing as to the Matter, is to believe the first
sealed Gospel. First, even the Essence of Christianity as past doubt. And if
there be a doubt whether the Spirit and Miracles sealed every byword, style or
order, that must not make us doubt of the Gospel which is surely sealed.

Conclus. XVI. It is undeniable that there are multitudes of different Readings
in the Old Testament and the New, in the Copies in the Original Tongues: It is
uncertain to us, of many, which of them is the right: It is certain that when
there was no Printing, but it was the Scriveners Trade to write out Books, many
slips and differences would be among them. How far imperfection of memory or
style might show it self in the first writers in any bywords, may be doubted
without doubting of the Gospel or Word of God: It is treachery to tell men that
they can be no surer of the Gospel, than of the various Readings or Skill of
the Writers, Printers or Translators. But it is certain that no corruption has
altered any necessary point.

Conclus. XVII. The Order of believing as to the Evidence, is first to see the
proof of the Matters of Fact by Historical Evidence: and in that to see the
certainty of the Doctrine, which also shows its own credibility: And this is
a short and sure proof of our Religion: 1. We may be as sure that the main
History is true, as that any History in the World is true, 2. And if the
History be true, the Doctrine must needs be true.

Conclus. XVIII. And this History has more than a moral uncertain Evidence:
For the understanding of which it must be noted, that man's Soul has two sort
of Acts;, some free and mutable, and some necessary by nature and immutable.
All moral acts are free, and changeable: the Belief that is grounded on them
has but a moral certainty, which is strictly no proper certainty: All men are
liars: All belief grounded on man's mere honesty, (though it were a general
Council that pretends a judging Authority) is uncertain. Though some good men's
words give us so great a probability, as that one may venture his life on it.
But the Love of a man's self, and of felicity, and an unwillingness to be
miserable, etc. are acts Naturally necessary. Therefore the belief which is
well founded on these, has a Physical Infallible certainty. Of this sort is
our belief that there is such a City as Rome, Venice, Paris, that there were
such men as K. H. 7. 8. K. James, etc. that the Statutes of the Land are not
Counterfeits; For 1. Men that love themselves, of cross interests, capable of
knowing, have all agreed of the Truth of these, and so do to this day. Argu. 1.
Where the Cause is ofnatural necessity, the Effect is of natural certainty: But
the cause that the willing and unwilling of contrary Interests, have all
knowingly agreed to the things forenamed, must needs be of natural necessity:
Ergo, the said Agreement is of natural certainty. Argu. 2. There can be no
effect without an adequat Cause. But for all knowing Men of contrary Interests
and Wills to agree that there is such a place as Rome, etc. that there was such
a man as King James, that the Statutes are not counterfeit, etc. if these were
false, is an effect that has no Cause in Nature: Ergo, it is naturally
impossible. E. G. For our Statutes; It was easily knowable in the Age that they
were made in, whether they were counterfeit: For men hold their Lands and Lives
by them, and plead them daily at the Tribunals for cross Interests against each
other: Therefore natural necessary Causes would make some discover it, were
they false. And if any had then discovered it, the same Causes would propagate
the Discovery. That this is the Case about the History of the Scripture, and
that Jesus Christ Lived, Taught, wrought Miracles, Dyed, Rose, Ascended, sent
down the Holy Spirit, that the Apostles by untaught Languagues and Miracles
planted the Gospel, and Christ gave the same Spirit by the imposition of their
hands on their ordinary hearers that believed, that they appealed to their own
working Miracles and their Childrens, to their accusers, Gal. 3. 1. 3. 5. Mat.
12, etc. this I have largely proved elsewhere. In all this you may see that to
lay the Faith of Christians on a pretended judging Power of the Church, Pope,
or Councils, and then first to enquire which is the Church that has this
Power, is a cheat of ambitious men to catch the Ignorant. The most universal
agreement including Heretics, and Enemies, and men of contrary Wills and
Interests is the best Historical Evidence of Fact: And the certainty of the
History with the quality of the Doctrine it self, and its effects, is a certain
proof that the Doctrine is of God. And the particular Books and Words must have
their own Historical proof, where there is some difference.

Conclus. XIX. Objective certainty, must still be distinguished from Mental,
Active, Subjective certainty. 1. Every thing true is infallibly true, so far as
whoever believes it to be true is not deceived. 2. Every thing true has not
ascertaining evidence, but some things have. 3. Every thing that has
ascertaining evidence is not certainly known or believed by millions: A
multitude of inward and outward hindrances keep men from discerning such
evidence as ascertaineth others, and might ascertain them. Prepared Souls have
great advantage, by capacity, willingness, diligence, etc. And experienced
Christians on whom the Gospel has made a sanctifying change, have the witness
in themselves, which proves it to be of God. And this witness of the Spirit is
a great and constant Seal on all that are sound believers: but in a different
degree. Yet the unsanctified and unbelievers that are not negligently or
maliciously blind, may much discern the excellent effects of the Gospel on
others though they feel it not in themselves.

Conclus. XX. The Order of Believing as to the Acts, is usually this. Men
usually (though not always) begin with a Belief of men, and perhaps fallible
men, which gives them but a probability that the Gospel is Gods word; And from
thence they pass to a Belief of it as Gods word, which is partly Divine (that
is, for Gods Veracity and Authority) but not effectual, but is only the work
of a common Grace, not sanctifying and saving. And thence they come to a saving
Divine Faith, but in a weak degree, which is to grow stronger till it come to
full assurance.

Conclus. XXI. For the understanding of all this, it is very needful that the
true nature and formal cause of Divine Faith, be better and more distinctly
opened than usually it is Faith, in its ratio formalis must not be confounded
with necessary previous Knowledge. All this Syllogism goes before it.
(Whatsoever God says is true: This God says, Ergo, this is true,) Or (All the
word of God is trne. The Gospel or sacred Scripture is the word of God: Ergo,
it is true) Major, Minor, and conclusion are all but a Knowledge antecedent to
Faith in its formal Act, (though I and others formerly have called the
conclusion, Faith,) Yea further, (whatever is evident truth, is to be believed
and trusted: The Gospel is evident truth, therefore it is to be believed or
trusted) This is yet but Faith's antecedent: pisteuo, credo fido, all signify
to trust: And trust is the formal Act of Faith: But this trust is in all the
three faculties of the Soul. 1. The understanding having first discerned the
credibility, gives over doubting (in that degree) and rests in or trusts
the discerned truth. 2. The Will does with complacency trust to and rest in the
said truth discerned, (with the goodness also discerned as sure and true.) 3.
The e^ecutive imperate Power does practically trust, perform, and venture,
commanded by the Will. So that truly, Divine Faith is an intellectual, willing,
executive, or practical trust. I have often explained it by such similitudes as
these There is but one Physician that can heal a sick man: His Enemies defame
him as a deceiver. He says believe or trust me and I will freely cure thee: He
that truly trusts him now, does it Intellectually, Consentingly, and
Practically, and takes his Medicines; A Foreign Prince tells a poor man or a
Prisoner, I will give thee a Lordship in the East Indies if thou will trust me;
some say he is a deceiver: Others say, the Ship, or Pilot, or Seas are
dangerous: He that so far trusts him now, as to forsake his poor Country, and
go to Sea, and venture his all upon the trust, shall have what is promised.

Conclus. XXII. Here therefore to confute the Errors of a multitude of
Doctors, and to quiet most Souls not otherwise to be justly quieted, it is
necessary to know these things. 1. That the formal Act of Faith may be Divine
and Saving, when the foresaid antecedent knowledge or assent, may have some
mistakes and insufficient media. 2. That Faith may be saving, which reaches
not to a strong subjective certainty, nor excludes always all doubting, even
of the truth of the Gospel and the Life to come. 3. Yea, that no ones Faith is
absolutely perfect. 1. Most Persons begin with a humane belief of their
Parents, and the common estimation of the Country; that Christ is the true
Messiah, and the Scripture is Gods certain word: This is not a certain Proof:
But if Children or unlearned Persons do by such uncertain Arguments believe the
Scripture to be Gods word, and then taste a Divine goodness in the matter, which
makes them most willingly believe it; These Persons may by so weak a
preparation, Practically trust God, and the Gospel, as so far perceived to be
his word, even with a saving Faith.

An Armenian Greek, Abassine, etc. believes fide humana the Gospel to be true,
because their several Teachers tell them so: And they perceive a goodness in
it: These on this fallible ground first taking it for the word of God, knowing
that God is true, may yet savingly trust it as the word of God, and that trust
is a Divine Faith, though the antecedent means was humane; (besides the savor
of Truth and goodness in the Word it self.) 2. How few in the world have true
Faith, if none be true that reaches not to full undoubting subjective
certainty. Certainty may be had: Ascertaining truth and Evidence there is: But
it is not every unlearned person that discerns it A man may trust his life in
the hand of a Physician, though he be not undoubtingly certain he can cure him:
He may trust Life and Estate in a Vessel which he is not undoubtingly certain
will bring him safe to Land. Though an unlearned man is not so well acquainted
with History as to know with what Evidence the Gospel has been brought down to
our Age, nor so good a Logician as to bring an Argument for Christianity and
the Scriptur, which is not faulty; Yet, if he take it to be the word of God,
and though he cannot say [I am undoubtingly certain of it] yet can say [I am
undoubtingly certain there is nothing which is to be trusted in equality with
it: This or nothing must be my hope: therefore, on this I will venture or lay
my life and soul and all my hope, and will obey Christ, and forsake all that
stands against him; For this hope I will live, and in this hope I will die.]
This will prove a saving Faith. 3. Yea, it is certain that there is nothing
absolutely perfect in this World: And therefore no ones faith or certainty is
perfect: even they that feel no actual doubting, have yet but an Imperfect
Faith; else they would have more perfect obedience, patience and joy; The best
have need to pray, Lord increase our faith; and Lord I believe, help thou my
unbeleif. The weakness of all our graces and duty comes from the weakness of
our faith. And it is not the best Logic which is ever accompanied with the
strongest Trust; Though Reason be an excellent and necessary ingredient, some
trust in Christ with victorious confidence, who cannot dispute best for their
Faith.

Conclus. XXIII. Though Peace and holy Joy be a most desirable effect of Faith,
and by which the strength of it may be much tried, yet it is not this, but
Practical consent to the Covenant of Grace, or Christ's terms of Salvation, in
which its saving sincerity consists.

Conclus. XXIV. By all this it appears how ambiguously the Question de
Resolutione fidei is too often disputed: And how fallaciously a man's faith is
said to be unsound, if his reasons be some unsound, and none cogent to prove an
undoubted absolute certainty that the Scripture is Gods word; and that Faith is
not so resolved into the antecedent reasonings as necessarily to be unsound if
some of them are so. That God cannot lie is known by Nature. That the Gospel is
his word, is known by its proper notifying evidence (forenamed), where many
things concur. That therefore the Gospel is true, is known as a rational
Conclusion. But these are by believers apprehanded often with imperfection,
faultyness and disorder. But Practical Trust in God, in Christ, in the Gospel
Promise, is Constituted by its formal object which is Gods Fidelity or
Veracity, grounded in his Perfection, and in the apprehended Truth of his
promises. And this effectual faith is saving. I have Prefaced this much that
the Reader may the easilyer understand and profit by the two following
Treatises, one written and the other translated by Mr. William Lorimer, my
greatly valued Friend, well known by me to be a man of Learning and Judgment
and exemplary faithfulness to God and Conscience, and of a prudent and
peaceable Conversation with men: If the Reader bring not a disposition of
enmity against the Truth. or gross neglect of it, but a mind that has
necessary manly preparation, and a receptive willingness and resolution for an
impartial diligent search, I doubt not but in these two Discourses he will find
enough, though not to remove every difficulty in the Bible, yet to save his
Faith from all such assaults, as would overthrow it, and make it uneffectual to
his Salvation. And verily a man that has well digested the matter of such
Controversies, will find that Pomponatius, Vaninus, Hobbes, Spinosa, etc: were
Ignorant men, that knew not their own Ignorance, nor what they wrote against,
and that Simon says little but what Commentators have often Answered; and
though he and others truly prove the doubtfulness of some Readings, and some
Translations, which may be of man, he says nothing to shake a well-grounded
belief of Moses Law, the Gospel of Christ, and any thing necessary to Holiness
or Salvation.

Richard Baxter.
April 7. 1682.
ERRATA.
Preface, page 6. lin. 2. read (have) In the Epistle to the Reader, page 4.
lin. 11. read (will) page 7. lin. 11. read (adiaphorous) page 16. lin. 7. read
(where) l. 18. r. (be) l. 20. r. (servant) l. 22. r. (and) First part p. 17. l.
1. 1. (uncertain, in so much) ibid. l. 16. r. (parity) p. 28. l. 8. r.
(suppositions) p. 35. l. 7. r. (retro-active) p. 43. l. 7. r. (command) ibid.
l. 13. r. (punishment) p. 47. l. 2. for (Table) r. (Fable) p. 56. l. 14. r.
(proofs of Religion) Second part, p. 67. l. 5, 6. r. (Authoribus) p. 80. l. 13.
r. (preserved) p. 84. l. 24. r. (floating) p. 87. l. 7. r. (afford) p. 91. l.
7. r. (sixth) p. 96. l. 23. r. (your) p. 97. l. 10. r. (named) p. 104. l. 19.
r. (for) p. 109. l. 16. r. (unto) p. 110. l. 4. r. (may) p. 132. l. 16. r.
(hundred) p. 135. l. 8. r. (sense) p. 144. l. 7. and 19. r. (Be eber haijarden)
p. 150. l. 2. r. (land) p. 151. l. 15. r. (mount) p. 164. l. 7. r. (say)

The Epistle to the READER.
Christian Reader,
IF thou weighest things in the Balance of right Reason, thou can not but
see, That Moses being the first Man by whose Ministry Almighty God thought fit
to give a Body of Laws unto a whole Nation, and to as many of the World
besides, as should join in communion with that Nation; it was necessary God
should enable him to make it evidently appear unto all rational Men, that he
was sent and authorized by God to give Laws unto that Nation: and if thou
read'st the Books of Moses, and what thou will find in the following Discourse
concerning him and them, thou can not but likewise see, that the infinitely
Wise and Powerful God did in effect enable him evidently and certainly to prove
his Mission and Commission to be from Heaven. For through God's extraordinary
assistance he gave the highest demonstrations of his being Authorized from
above, that can in reason be desired of any that speaks or writes unto Men in
the name of God; his works and writings hear the manifest signatures of God's
Wisdom, Power and Goodness; his works were such as could never have been done
without the assistance of an invisible Power, far above any thing that falls
under the perceptions of Sense; and it is most evident to Reason, That that
invisible Power could be no other, than the infinitely powerful, wise and good
God, who made, preserves and governs the World, and all things therein. For it
could not possibly be any Evil Spirit.

First, Because Moses in his contest with the Magicians of Egypt, did at the
very first Encounter, far outdo them, and the Evil Spirit by whose assistance
they wrought their wonders, as evidently appears by Aaron's Rods swallowing up
their Rods, (Exodus 7. 12.) and by their not being able to remove the Frogs
again from off the Land of Egypt: and therefore Pharaoh was forced to call for
Moses and Aaron, and desire them to entreat the Lord to take away the Frogs
from him and his people (Exodus 8. ^^8.) and at last he forced them to confess
^^^t they were overcome; for when they ^^^ld not turn the Dust of Egypt into
Lice, (...) Moses and Aaron had done, they then ^^^ved out, and said unto
Pharaoh, [This is the finger of God, Exodus 8. 18, 19.] they ^onfessed that it
was the power of God which ^nabled Moses and Aaron to turn the Dust into Lice,
and which hindered them from doing the like.

Secondly, It could not possibly be any Evil Spirit, because Moses's Miracles
were wrought for the highest, best and excellentest ends, to wit, for the glory
of God, and for the good of his People; they were wrought to convince both
Pharaoh and Israel, That the Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who made,
and governs the World, is the only true God, who is above all to be Feared and
Reverenced, Adored and Worshipped, Loved and Obeyed, Pleased and Glorified; and
that Moses was his Authorized Messenger to be believed and obeyed for his sake,
in all that he said, and commanded in his name: They were wrought also, both to
cause Pharaoh to let go the Israelites, and likewise to make the Israelites
willing to leave Egypt, and to go with Moses, and take possession of the Land
of Canaan, which the Lord God had long before promised unto their Fathers,
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Exodus 5. 1, 2, 3. and 7. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and 3. 14,
15, 16, 17, 18. and 4. from 1, to 9. and 6. from 1, to 8. Deuteronomy. 4. 9, to 24.


Thirdly, It could not possibly be any Evil Spirit, because Moses's Miracles
were wrought to the prejudice of the Devil's interest in the World, and for the
destroying of the Devil's Kingdom, by rooting out Idolatry from among God's
People, and driving Idolaters out of Canaan; and for the setting up of the
Kingdom of God visibly upon Earth. Exodus 20. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, etc. ibid. v. 20,
22, 23. and 23. 13. Deuteronomy. 4. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. and 7. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and
12. 29, 30, 31, 32. and 18. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Deuteronomy. 4. 32, to 41. Exodus
20. 24, latter part of the Verse. Deuteronomy. 4. 7.


Fourthly, It could not possibly be any Evil Spirit, because the Evil Spirit is
the great Enemy of Mankind, and of all humane Society rightly constituted;
whereas Moses's Miracles were wrought for the confirmation of a Doctrine, which
is manifestly for the good of Mankind, of individual Men, and of all Societies
of Men, Deuteronomy. 4. 6, 8.

This wile clearly appear unto any rational Man that shall duly consider these
following Laws of Moses, Concerning Men's Loving their Neighbors as themselves,
and not Coveting any thing belonging to them. Exodus 20. 17. Lev. 19. 17, 18.


Concerning the City's of Refuge appointed for such Persons, as should happen
to kill a Man unwittingly. Exodus 21. 13. Deuteronomy. 19.


Concerning the Redemption of Lands. Levit. 25. 23, etc.


Concerning Goodness, Lenity and Equity to Servants. Exodus 21. 1, 2, etc. Deuteronomy.
15. 12, to 19. and 24. 14, 15.


Mercifulness to the Poor. Deuteronomy. 15. 6, to 12. Exodus 22, 25, 26, 27.


Kindness to Straugers. Exodus 22. 21. Levit. 19. 33. 34.


Justice and Equity to the Widows and Fatherless. Exodus 22. 22, 23, 24.


Reverence and Obedience to Superiors. Exodus 20. 12. and 22. 28. Deuteronomy. 17. 11.


And concerning the Duties of Superiors toward their Inferiors and Subjects.
Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17. and 17. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. and 25. 1.


But not to insist upon these and many other excellent Laws of Moses, which are
manifestly for the good of Mankind, and both evidence themselves to have been
given unto Moses and Israel by an infinitely good God; and also Moses's
Miracles wrought in confirmation of them, to have been from the same cause;
there is one thing which I cannot but touch upon, to wit, That whereas other
Lawgivers have set up, some a Monarchy, some an Aristocracy, and others a
Democracy, Moses was the first that Established a visible Theocracy over the
Israelites, under which form of Government, all things were to be managed by
the counsel and direction of the infinitely wise God; the People of Israel, as
a Kindom of Priests, and a Holy Nation, were to refer all their matters unto
God, and to ask advice and direction of him by VRIM and THVMMIM, in reference
to Peace and War, and all things of any considerable importance, or difficulty,
(Exodus 19. 5, 6. and 20. 24, the latter part, Exodus 28. 30. Deuteronomy. 10. 14, 15,
16, 17. and 12. 11, 12, Levit. 26. 11, 12. etc.)

These things put together (if no more could be said) seem abundantly
sufficient to prove that Moses was Authorized by God to give Laws unto the
Israelites; for no Man could have wrought such Miracles so circumstantiated,
except God had been with him: and such is the weakness of Man's Understanding,
that he could never of his own head have invented such a Law, and such a way of
Government. And if Moses's Miracles and Law could not possibly be of any Evil
Spirit, nor of Man, they must needs have been of a Good Spirit, and that Good
Spirit could be no other but God: for though God used the Ministry of Good and
Holy Angels in giving forth the Law, yet they could not possibly be the Authors
of it; and if any of them had ever pretended unto that Honor, he would by so
doing have degenerated into a proud, arrogant and lying Devil.

God himself then was the alone Author of Moses his Law, and the Holy Angels
with Moses, were but Instruments and Ministers, by whom God gave it unto
Israel; and indeed there is nothing in it, but what well becomes God to be the
Author of; there is nothing in it that does any way contradict the perfections
of his Nature, or destroy the natural notions of Truth and Falsehood, Good and
Evil which he has implanted in the mind of Man: nay many of Moses's Laws are
evidently agreeable unto, and Representative of the transcendent excellencies
of the Divine, and perfective of the humane Nature: and even those of them
which are of a most adiapheros indifferent nature in themselves, and derive all
their morality from the will and pleasure of God, did certainly by Gods
appointment and blessing very much promote the happiness of his People, (Deuteronomy.
10. 12, 13. and 11. 12, to 16. Levit. 26. 3, to 13. Deuteronomy. 32. 16, 17.)

As to what some Atheists Object from Exodus 12. 35, 36. That Moses taught the
Israelites to cheat the Egyptians of their Jewels, under pretense of borrowing
them, and that God himself is brought in as countenancing the Cheat; which
seems to be plainly contrary, both to the perfections of God, and right Reason
of Man.

I Answer, It is false that is Objected, for there was really no borrowing and
lending in the case, but asking and receiving, and carrying away what God had
inclined the hearts of the Egyptians freely to give: and so there could be no
cheat under pretense of borrowing. This Answer is grounded upon the true import
of the Hebrew Word (Shaal) which signifies (to ask,) and accordingly the place
Objected is rendered by Munster, and the Tigurin; in English thus, [The Children
of Israel asked of the Egyptians, Jewels, -- and the Lord gave the People
favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they gave them such thiugs as
they asked, and they carried them away from the Egyptians;] the Egyptians
apprehended themselves to be all dead Men, if the Israelites stayed in Egypt
any longer, and therefore were willing to give them any thing they bad, on
condition that they would be presently gone, Verse. 33.

And thus things were ordered by the wise Providence of God, that the Children
of Israel might be rewarded for the great Service they had done unto the
Egyptians.

Moreover, It is very observable that some of Moses's Laws were such, that it
is impossible to conceive that any Men in their Wits, would either have given
such Laws unto others, or have themselves received and submitted to them;
unless they had been sure that God was the Author of them, and that he would
take care to prevent the great inconveniences that might arise from the
observance of them. I Instance in Two,

First, The Law for the Seventh Year Sabbath, (Exodus 23. 10, 11, and Levit. 25.
4, 5.) The Command not to Plow nor Sow every Seventh Year, was of such
consequence, and might have produced so ill effects, that Moses would never
have attempted to bring the Israelites under such a Law, nor would they have
been such fools as to have received it, and submitted to it, unless he and they
had been both sure, that God had Authorized him to give them that Law, and that
God had undertaken to secure them from the great inconvenience that might arise
from their Observance of it; for if they had not been sure that God had by
promise engaged his Providence to Bless them with extraordinary great abundance
of Corns on the Sixth Year, they could not but foresee that there would have
been a Scarcity and Famine on the Seventh Year, especially when the Year of
Jubilee, which was every Fiftieth Year, succeeded the Seventh Year Sabbath; for
in that case the Law forbade them either to Plow or Sow for Two whole Years
together, (Levit. 25. 8, to 12.) upon which they could not but foresee that a
Famine would certainly follow, unless God had undertaken by an extraordinary
Providence to prevent it. Therefore Moses must have been sure of this,
otherwise he would never have attempted the giving them such a Law; and he must
have made the People sure of it also, otherwise he could not but foresee that
they would never have been so simple as to receive and submit unto such a Law,
as would expose them to the danger of a Famine every Seventh Year, and in the
revolution of Fifty Years, would unavoidably bring a Famine upon them. We read
in the 25th of Leviticus where this Law is Recorded, That God foreseeing the
People would certainly move this Objection against it, he prevented them, and
both moved and answered the Objection himself, Verse. 20, 21. [If ye shall say,
What shall we eat the Seventh Year? behold, we shall not Sow, nor gather in our
Increase. Then I will command my Blessing upon you in the Sixth Year, and it
shall bring forth Fruit for Three Years, etc.] Here they had God's word of
Promise, Sealed with the Broad-Seal of Heaven, Moses's Miracnlous Works for the
ground of their assurance, that God's extraordinary Providence would secure
them from Famine.

And it was upon this so well grounded assurance, that they received and
submitted to that Law. And God never failed them in this, but always fnlfilled
with his hand what he had spoken with his mouth; so that they were never forced
to travel into other Countries to buy Corn for the supply of their necessities,
in those Sabbatical Years.

The other Law I instance in, is, that which obliged all the Males of Israel
Thrice a Year to appear before the Lord, at the place where the Ark of God
should be, (Exodus 23. 17. and 34. 23. Deuteronomy. 16. 16.) this Law was given and
written by Moses for the Generations to come, and he could not but foresee that
the People would be ready to Object against it, That if after they were
possessed of the Land of Canaan, all their Males should Thrice every Year leave
their several Houses and Countries, and meet at one place, as at Jerusalem, or
at any other place where the Ark of God should happen to be; their Land would
be in danger of being frequently invaded, spoiled and wasted by the malicious
and covetous Heathens that lived round about them, and that therefore it was
most unreasonable to desire them to be Governed by such a Law: This Objection,
I say, Moses could not but foresee, and therefore if he had not been certain
that it was God's will and pleasure that he should give them such a Law, he
would never have done it of his own head; and likewise if they had not been
certain that Moses was really Authorized and Commissioned by God to give them
such a Law, they would never have received it, and submitted unto the
observance of it, to the visible hazarding the loss of all that they had in the
World. This God considered to be rational, and therefore for their security he
gave them his promise by Moses, and by Moses's Miracles confirmed his Promise,
That no Man should DESIRE their Land, when they went up to appear before the
Lord their God, Thrice in the Year, (Exodus 34. 24,) as if God had said, Be not
afraid least the Heathen break in upon you, and Burn your Cities, and lay waste
your Country, whilst all your Males are from home, attending npon me at the
place of my Public Worship, for when you are about my Work, I will not only be
with you abroad, but with your Wives and Children likewise at home; and I will
take such care of you and yours, and so secure all your Concerns, that your
envious and Covetous Neighbors and Enemies shall not so much as desire your
Land, much less shall they be able to lay it waste and desolate with Fire and
Sword, as you may be apt to fear. It was by this promise, and the Miracles
wrought by Moses, that both Moses and the People were assured that this Law was
of God, and that God's special Providence would protect his People, and secure
all their concerns, when they were doing the will of God according to this Law;
and without this assurance if Moses had gone about to impose upon them in a
matter of such dangerous consequence, they would certainly have refused to obey
him.

By these Two Instances it manifestly appears, that Moses both knew in himself,
and evidently proved unto Israel, that he was Commissioned by God to give Laws
unto them: for if it had been otherwise, he would neither have attempted to
give them such Laws, nor would they have ever received them and submitted to
them. To draw to an end; Let it be considered that Moses Miracles tended all to
the Glory of God the Author of Nature, and to the advanccment of his Kingdom in
the World, as he is the Author of Grace; and his Writings give us most high,
glorious and excellent, and also most lovely and desirable Idea's and Notions
of God and his Perfections. Witness God's name, [I AM THAT I AM, and I AM,
Exodus 3. 14.] which signifies that he is the first and most perfect Being,
that gives Being to all other things, and consequently implies his eternal and
necessary Existence from everlasting and to everlasting.

And his name, [THE LORD, THE LORD GOD MERCIFUL and GRACIOUS, etc. Exodus 34. 6,
7.] witness also that description of him, Exodus 15. 11. [WHO is like unto thee,
O LORD, -- GLORIOUS IN HOLINESS FEARFUL IN PRAISES, DOING WONDERS,] and that
other description of him, (Deuteronomy. 32. 3, 4. I will publish the name of the Lord:
ascribe ye greatness unto our God, etc.) And what is written of him in Deuteronomy. 4.
35, to 40. and 10. 14, to 19.

These most sublime and excellent Notions of God and his Perfections, with
which Moses's Writings do furnish us, are proper and fit to raise in us a most
high esteem and reverence of God, to make us admire and adore him, to take us
off from the inordinate love of our selves, and of all other Creatures, as mean
and vile, as shadows and nothing; and to draw out our hearts and affections
wholly unto him, to make us love him, and from a principle of Love, careful to
please him, and fearful to offend him, (Deuteronomy. 6. 4, 5, 13, 14, 15. and 10. 12,
to 21.) in fine, to make us hope in him, expect all needful good things from
him, and above all things desire to be united unto him, as the most glorious,
excellent and blessed Being, (which was, and is, and is to come, of whom,
through whom, and to whom, are all things,) that we may be most happy in union
with him, and in the enjoyment of his Love and Favor for evermore. I might here
speak of that account which Moses gives of the Creation of the World, and
especially of Mankind; of the Disobedience and Apostasy of Mankind, and of the
Miseries that came upon the World by reason thereof: And of the restoring of
Man to the favor of God again by the Mediation of the Messiah, who was promised
and Prophesied of, first under the name and notion of the Seed of the Woman,
that was to bruise the Serpents Head, (Genesis 3. 15.) then of the Seed of Abraham
by Isaac, in which Seed all the Nations of the Earth were to be Blesied, (Genesis
22. 18. and 26. 4.) and afterward, of the Seed of Jacob by Judah, and styled
SHILOH, unto whom the gathering of the People was to be, (Genesis 28. 14. compared
with Genesis 49. 10. and Numb. 24. 16, 17, 19.) and lastly, under the name and
notion of a Prophet like nnto Moses, and who by consequence was to be a
Lawgiver and Mediator, (Deuteronomy. 18. 18, 19.)

I might show the Reader that Moses's Writings set forth God as placable and
reconcileahle, (Genesis 3. 15. and 4. 7.) as pleased and reconciled (Genesis 4. 4.
and 8. 20, 21.) and as pleased and reconciled by Faith, (Genesis 15. 6.)

I might demonstrate, that the account which Moses gives of these things, is
highly agreeable to right reason and experience, and that it is most
comfortable and satisfactory to the mind of Man: But all this cannot he done in
the compass of a short Epistle.

The Reader may expect that I should at least say something in behalf of the
Two following Discourses; but if he do, he will be disappointed: for having
said enough in commendation of the First Disconrse in the beginning of the
Second, I will say no more of either, but leave both to speak for themselves.
Only I must advertise the Reader, That the Translation varies from the Original
in some Two or Three things, and this is the reason of the variation; I found
that there were several palpable mistakes in the French Discourse, and I am
resolved through God's Grace to follow no Man in known mistakes: therefore I
mended them. As where the Author says, That the broad Plates for covering the
Altar, made of the Censers of Corah and his Company, were Plates of Gold; I
say, as the truth is, that they were Plates of Brass, (Numb. 16. 39.)

And again, where the Author says, That Moses Condemned Thirty or Forty
Thousand Men, and commanded them all to be presently Executed: I say, that he
did so by several Thousands, which is true, for the number of the Slain was
about Three Thousand, (Exodus 32. 28.) but our Learned Author was certainly
mistaken, for his reckoning neither agrees exactly with the Vulgar Translation,
nor yet with the Hebrew Verity. Christian Reader, I will detain thee no longer
from the perusal of the Discourses themselves, and that the use of them may he
blessed to thee for thy Souls good, is and shall be the earnest desire of

Thy Seavant in all things, wherein he may Serve our Lord Christ, and his
Church, W. L.

A DISCOURSE On the Proofs of the BOOKS of MOSES.
1. THE Christian Religion does freely acknowledge that the wit of Man cannot
reach the the height of the Mysteries which it teaches, and that the humane
understanding is too narrow and limited to discover the grounds of them in the
Eternal springs of Truth, where they would appear to us as clear, as first and
self evident Principles, if our sight could reach so far. Nevertheless, it
pretends not that we should believe them absolutely without proof, and by a
blind Instinct: and God has not given Man Reason and Understanding, to render
so great a present, not only useless, but also hurtful to him, by propounding
unto him such objects of Faith only, against which his Reasoning faculty should
be in a continual mutiny and contradictory opposition. That is the case of
those Sects which are founded only upon Wild Fancies, Groundless Conceits and
Phanatical Visions; and which are Established upon, and Upheld by, no other
Principle than such an extravagant abuse of Reason, as that was by which they
were first hatched: Whereas the Christian Religion is such, that how
impenetrable soever be the depth of its mysteries, yet none can doubt of their
truth, but by such another kind of extravagancy.

2. For the business is not to examine the possibility of those mysteries, nor
to cure the wit of Man, as touching all the difficulties which it finds to
submit unto them, men would be unreasonable to desire to comprehend them, since
they cannot comprehend themselves, and yet doubt not of their own Existence. It
is sufficient that it may be demonstrated to them that all those so
unconceivable Truths are linked, not only with other Truths which they know,
but also with such Truths as of all others are most proportionat to their
understanding, and whereof they may be assured by the most evident and certain
means.

3. If men have a certain knowledge of any thing, it is of matters of Fact; of
all things which they know, there is not any, wherein it is more difficult to
impose upon them, and concerning which there is less occasion of dispute; and
so when it shall be clearly showed them that the Christian Religion is
inseperably linked with matters of Fact, whereof the Truth cannot be questioned
by men of common honesty and integrity, they must either submit unto the belief
of all its Doctrines, or else they must renounce sincerity and reason.

4. For instance, if there was such a Man as Moses, and if he was the Author of
the Books commonly attributed unto him, then the Jewish Religion is true: if
the Jewish Religion be true, then Jesus Christ is the Messiah; and if Jesus
Christ be the Messiah, then all that he said and taught is to be believed, and
consequently the Trinity, the Incarnation, and all the other mysterious
Doctrines of the Christian Religion are to be believed.

5. It is by this Divine concatenation of Truths, that God leads Men unto the
true Faith, and that they are enabled to show that there is nothing more
rational, than their submission unto the most incomprehensible mysteries; so
far are they from deserving to be charged with weakness and imprudence on that
account; and since the great Body of Christian Religion is composed of a very
great number of different Parts which all tend to the same end, and has had a
Being about six thousand years; it cannot be but that it must consist of very
many particular Truths all linked together as in one chain, and that every Age
must have given new proofs thereof: and consequently that wheresoever a Man
begins, to what point soever he applies himself, he will always meet with such
an abundance of light, that it will be impossible for him to resist and stand
out against it.

6. But we are so much the more obliged diligently to apply our selves unto an
accurat search for finding out of these Proofs, by how much it has not pleased
God that they should consist in such gross and palpable Principles, as might be
discovered at first glance, and might be seen equally by all men; they are
rather an heap of circumstances, which all men do not put together, or do not
look upon them the same way; but which are nevertheless sensibly evident unto
the meanest capacities, when their eyes are once opened; and do produce (when
they are gathered up and put together) a certainty if not more full, at least
more intimate and more natural, than that which we have of speculative and
abstractive demonstrations, because the ways and means of attaining unto the
assurance of those matters of Fact are more proportionable and suitable unto the
humane understanding, and there is no man but will find the Principles of them
in himself.

7. It is for this end, to give a Specimen how those matters of Fact are to be
considered, whose certainty necessarily infers the certainty of our
Religion, that we shall choose to discourse of the particular matters of Fact
in Moses his History, and of the Truth of his Books, which are the Foundation
of the Jewish Religion, as the Jewish is the Foundation of the Christian
Religion according to Saint Paul.

8. I think there is no need that I should first prove, before I proceed any
further, That if really there has been a Man affirming that he was sent from
God, and who (not desiring to be believed upon his bare word, or for some
Actions not much above those which we know to be within the compass of humane
power) has for proof of his mission, wrought that astonishing multitude of
Miracles which we find Recorded in the Pentateuch, has evidently showed that
he had power of life and death, has commanded the Elements, and made the whole
frame of Nature to bow at his word and obey his orders, I say, there is no need
that I should prove he ought to be believed, for I doubt not but that upon
supposition that there has been such a Man who has really done such things to
prove his mission from God, all Men in the World will grant that this person
deserves to be believed in all that he has written of that God, in whose name
he has wrought all those Miracles, and that the Religion which he has
instituted ought to be received as true and Divine.

9. The most obstinate Spirits of Men are as it were overwhelmed with the
weight of those Miracles, and find no other means to satisfy their bias to
unbelief, than to seek to find out some frivolous reasons on which to ground
their doubts of the truth of those Miracles, and of the Book that contains them.

10. But if they have any remainder of honesty and sincerity, I defy them to
go far, or continue long in those doubts; for they will find their doubts so
born down and vanquished by the abundance of proofs which accompany this
History, that they will be forced either to acknowledge it to be true, or else
to fall in with the senseless stupidity of those persons who for fear of being
powerfully persuaded to believe the things which Religion teaches them,
resolvedly choose never to think on them at all.

11. For by what suppositions will they pretend to shake the certainty of what
is written in those Books, and dispose their mind to believe that there was
never any such thing? Let them give as much liberty as they will unto their
Fancy, and let it furnish them with all the Chymerical suppositions that
possibly it can, yet they shall never be able to conclude any thing from
thence, which has the least shadow of probability, and which a Man of the
least solid Judgment would not be ashamed to propound.

12. Will they say, there was never such a Man as Moses, and that whatever has
been said of him, are fables invented for delight? But let them consider that
the Jews and Christians are not the only persons who have been known to speak
and write of this Moses, since we find there are even profane Historians who
make mention of him, yet if they deny what is written of him in the Penteatuch,
and affirm all those things to be Fables, then let them also deny all the
Histories in the World, and affirm them all to be fables; since there is none
of them of whose Truth we could be sure, if it were allowed (as any way
rational) to doubt whether there was ever a Man called Moses, who brought the
Jews out of Egypt after a long captivity; for all the Reasons by which Men
judge of the Truth of other Histories, are equally to be found in that of
Moses. For example, no Man doubts but that Alexander and Cyrus have been,
because many Authors have written of them, and it never came into any Man's mind
deliberatly to doubt thereof: and it is evident that neither has any Man upon
serious thoughts ever doubted whether Moses has been; this has been
constantly believed by a very numerous people, and by all who have known, and
have conversed both with him and them; and was never contradicted by any Body
whosoever. But moreover there is this difference, that the Books of Moses have
singular and peculiar proofs of their certain truth, which are not to be met
with in any other; for there was never any Book preserved with so much care and
affection, as that Book which contains his History, and yet never had any men
more sensible and strong Reasons, taken from their own Interest, to disprove
the truth of a Book, if they could have done it with any color of probability,
than the Jews have had to disprove the truth of the Books of Moses; since by so
doing, they should have at once freed themselves from the most uneasy Law that
ever was, from a Law (I say) that was most rigorous and grievous, most dreadful
and burdensome to the observers of it: in so much that there appears no
motive, that could persuade them to submit unto, and endure the whole burden of
it, but a firm persuasion of its infallible Truth and divine Authority.

13. Unbelief then not being able to keep its ground upon this first Chymerical
supposition, it must pass unto, and fix upon some other; and the Infidel must
say, for example, that it is true, there was a man called Moses, and this man
was the head of a great Nation, which he brought out of Egypt, but withal,
that he was a great Impostor, who deceived that people by false Miracles, and
forged all the prodigious things which he mentions in his Books, to the end he
might the better bring them under Subjection to the Law he had devised, and by
that Law to himself, in making them to esteem it as come from Heaven, and to
consider himself as the Interpreter of God's Will, in whose name he spoke, and
as having God's Power in his own hands, to punish those that should resist him.

14. The greatest efforts and endeavors of humane Wit to disprove the truth of
Moses his Books, may be reduced to such imaginations as these, and yet nothing
less rational could be invented; for if men would in this matter make use but
of proofs taken from mere sense, how difficult is it to reconcile the Wisdom
and Virtue which clearly appear in this Moses, with so black an Imposture! how
difficult is it to comprehend, that this man in an Age so remote, so dark and
so rude, and without any help from the Inventions of those that had gone
before, could have been able to contrive of his own head, not only a Law, from
which all other Laws have been obliged to borrow something or other, but
moreover, that he could have been able to have framed the Idea or Notion of a
God, and that an Idea so great and so worthy, that excepting those who have
trodden in his steps, there were never any who have had an Idea of God, but
what was infinitely below it, whereas all other humane Inventions grow up to
perfection successively, and by degrees! in fine, how strange a thing would it
be, that this first born of all Impostors should have hit so right in a matter
so far elevated above the thoughts of men, and should have known so well what
should be due to a God, and what a God should be; that really Men are sensibly
convinced that he must be such a God, if he be at all, and that honest hearts
should be grievously troubled at it, if such a God were not.

15. But to pass from this, unto such things as bear a greater proportion unto
all sorts of Capacities; let us see whether it be possible, that all the
Miracles mentioned in those Books, should be but so many Fables invented by
Moses; if this be possible, then either he must have hoped to make the Jews
believe him, or at least, he must have hoped to persuade them to Authorize them
by their consent, without believing them, and to conspire with him to conceal
the knowledge of this Cheat from posterity, for undoubtedly, none will say that
he invented them upon design to pass for an Impostor, without expecting any
advantage thereby; and withal it must be supposed, either that the Jews
believed them to be true, though they were false; or that allowing them to be
false, they all with one consent agreed in a design, to make them pass for
true, to their Posterity.

16. But what can be imagined more groundless and undefensible than all this?
could Moses promise himself, that he should be able to persuade the Jews to
believe the turning of Rivers into Blood, the thick palpable Darkness which
covered all Egypt, for the space of Three Days, the Israelites only being free
from it; the Death of all the first Born of the Egyptians in one Night,
whilst the Jews in the mean time felt not the least hurt; the division of the
Red Sea, which opened, and on each side stood up in an heap, like two Walls, to
make way for the passage of the Israelites, and then fell down again, and
returned to its ordinary course, to swallow up, and Drown the Army of the
Egyptians; with all the rest of those Miracles which visibly succeeded one
another, before that people went out of the Land of Egypt? could he hope that
none of the Jews would doubt of the truth of all these things (if they were
false) nor have at least the curiosity to enquire concerning them, of the
Egyptians, who in all probability were not combined in the Plot with him?

17. Moreover, could he believe that he should be able easily to persuade them,
to give credit unto what he writes, of the Forty Years which they spent in the
Wilderness, which is no less than another Series of Miracles? that he should be
able to make them believe (though there was no such thing) that he had drawn
out of a Rock, Water enough to quench the Thirst of Five or Six Hundred
Thousand Men: that before their eyes the Earth had swallowed up quick, Corah,
Dathan and Abiram, after he had advertised the people, that they should die of
a strange and extraordinary kind of Death; that they themselves had lived for
the space of Forty Years, only upon Food sent down from Heaven; and last of
all, that he should be able to make them believe that great and dreadful sight
of Mount Sinai, while it appeared all in a Flame, with such a noise of
Lightning and Thunder, that the people who stood by, and heard and saw all that
passed, desired to treat and converse no more, but by Ambassadors with that
God, whose glorious presence they thought they could not bear and live?

18. If Moses had been so senseless and mad, as to flatter himself with this
hope, how unable would he have been even for that very reason alone, to
succeed, and bring to pass any great design! and instead of carrying matters so
far, and bringing them to that Issue as he did, such a mad head would not have
failed to imbroil and confound all its own projects; where is there an example
in all Histories, of any cheat of this nature? these are not the ways and
methods which Deceivers take; they do not lay open their Lies to so great a
light, and they are too wary to choose Judges so hard to be deceived, as the
Eyes and Ears of Six Hundred Thousand Men, and a whole Nation of Enemies; they
feign some obscure blind Mitacle, whereof there have been but few Witnesses,
and cause the Fame of it to be spread abroad by their Partisans; above all they
avoid with great care, the provoking of humane Nature to rise up in
contradictory opposition to them, which they would surely do, if they should
boldly take folks to witness of such things, as wherein they should have so
great cause to fear to be belied: and there is nothing which they shun so much,
as the giving occasion unto Men's minds, to think often upon their Falsehoods,
and the inducing them to make frequent reflections upon their Lies; they
account themselves happy, that they were once suffered to escape without being
punished for their cheating Tricks; and they cannot possibly so far root out of
their natures all sense of Fear and Shame, as to dare set gross Impostures
continually before the eyes of a whole Nation, taking them to witness, and
exciting them by such an unsufferable boldness to enquire into, and consider of
them, with the greater care and wariness.

19. Let Moses be tried by these Rules, to see whether he observes any of these
precautions, and takes any of these measures, which Nature and Interest would
teach the most desperate, yea, and even the most Foolish inconsiderate
Impostors. He speaks upon every occasion, both of the Plagues of Egypt, and of
the Miracles in the Wilderness, and that with a confidence sufficient to
provoke the most unsensible, if their Reason could have suggested to them any
colorable pretense for the contradicting of him; he reports to them things
gross and palpable, which could not be unknown to them. God has given you
(says he) Manna, which was meat unknown to your Fathers; your Clothes were not
worn out, no nor your Shoes, for the space of Forty Years: which of all the
Israelites could be ignorant of the Truth of this matter of fact? he joins to
all this, sharp reproofs, Imprecations against their past unbeleif, and
displeasing Predictions of their disorderly Behavior for the future: in fine,
he omits nothing that might have exasperated their Spirits and moved them to
give him the lie, if the things which he ascribed to himself, had been false or
uncertain In so much, that though they be never so true, yet it is a kind of
Miracle, that in all the Rebellions and Murmurings they were guilty of, there
was not found so much as one of them that ever accused him of Imposture.

20. It is certain then, that Moses could not have a design to deceive the
Jews, and it is as certain, that it was impossible for him to have really
deceived them, and let not men pretend to make these proofs pass for probable
conjectures, and mere likelihoods only; for they are demonstrations in matters
of Fact, since they cannot be rejected by any man, without his being obliged by
purity of Reason, to hold that all matters of Fact, mentioned in any History
whatsoever, are doubtful and uncertain.

21. For the ground of all humane certainty, is this, that Men are not fools,
and that there are certain Rules in Nature, which they always follow in their
Actings, unless they be mad, the contrary could no sooner be supposed, but it
would immediately follow, that there can be nothing firm and certain. Let it be
once granted, that men may feign for sport, or arguments sake, That in the time
of Caesar and Pompey, all Men were struck with a Disease, which caused them to
take the illusions of their Fancy, for real Truths; upon this supposition,
there will remain nothing certain in all the Revolutions, reported to have
fallen out in those times; and the Battles of Pharsalia and Actium may be
reckoned amongst the imaginations of Phanaticks. Thus when matters are brought
to this pass, That for to believe that such a thing is not, it must be supposed
(I do not say that a whole Nation, but) that a very great number of Men are all
really Mad, there is an end of humane certainty, in matters of Fact, there is
no more place for it, no not with respect to things present: Since it is no
less supposable, that the Men of this Age, yea, and that we our selves are Mad,
than that Men of former Ages were all Mad, and so not only all things past,
shall be to us as if they had never been, but also we shall not know what to
believe, even in those things which daily fall under our Senses, and we shall
be no less in the dark, as touching things past and present, than we are as
touching things to come.

22. But now it is past all doubt that the supposition that Moses deceived the
Jews, is properly of this kind; for not to speak of the folly he must have been
guilty of, if he had taken such a way for attaining unto that end; it is clear
that it is to make all this people pass for so many Frantic Fools, to say,
They really believed that themselves passed through the Sea on dry ground,
although it was not true; that they saw a Mountain all in fire, although they
did not see it; that they lived upon Manna, whilst they fed only upon ordinary
Food; that their Clothes did not wear out, although they were often forced to
change them; that they saw Moses with a stroke of his Rod, fetch out of a Rock,
a Spring of Water, sufficient to quench the Thirst of Six Hundred Thousand Men,
although they saw no such thing; to say that they believed all this, though it
were all false, is to say that they were all Mad.

23. Doubtless it would be very difficult to invent either secret ways or
Engines, whereby such effects as these could be produced or imitated; and if
there were any man that could do so, he would be sure to have followers enough,
as well as Moses, and he might make Men believe, almost any thing he pleased.
And yet it must be granted, that the Jews really believed that they saw all
those great wonders, and that they believed thus, even without the least
scruple or doubt remaining in their minds; else they would not have submitted
so blindly to this Man's Law, nor suffered him to domineer over them with so
much Authority, as that he alone should be able, without Guards and Arms, to
condemn several Thousands of Men to Death, and to cause them all to be
presently Executed, Exodus 32. 26, 27, 28.

24. Some persons have endeavored (not indeed to do the like, for no man was
ever so Mad as to attempt it, but) to imagine several ways how Moses might have
deluded the Jews, and yet they have not done any thing to purpose. They
pretend, for example, That to make them pass through the Red Sea, he took his
opportunity of the Ebbing of the Sea, and made them believe it had divided on
purpose; and that when it Flowed again, he persuaded them, it had closed again,
and returned to its ordinary course, that it might swallow up the Egyptians.
They pretend also that the Water he fetched out of the Rock, was nothing else
but an hidden Spring which he found out by means of a Wild Ass, which some Body
followed by his order, as it went thither to drink. This is so pitiful, that it
deserves no Answer, only let it be considered, how a thing so common as the
Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea could have been unknown, not only to the
Israelites, who had lived above Two Hundred Years in Egypt, but likewise to
the Natives of that Country, who rushed into it so inconsiderately; and how
could that Spring have been so little, as to lie hid from so many people, that
were like to die for Thirst, and yet be at the same time abundantly sufficient
to quench their Thirst, and the Thirst of all their Camels and other Beasts;
and finally, by what Enchantment could Moses so dexterously blind the Eyes of
all this people, as to make them believe, that all of a sudden, a stroke of his
Rod had produced that Spring, which cannot be conceived to have been less than
a prodigious Torrent.

25. But it is to little purpose, for any Man to endeavor to give the World an
account how some of those Miracles might have been wrought, without the
immediate power of God, so long as it must be confessed, that no such account
can be given of them all. Men must either yield the cause, or else make the
System entire, and solve all the Phenomenon: for if there remain never so few,
in which the Israelites could not be deceived, that is sufficient to convince
us, and oblige us to believe all the rest; and to look upon Moses as the
Minister of God, who would reveal himself to Men: since the Laws of Nature once
Violated, suffice to teach us, and make us see, that there is something above
Nature; and never Man before Jesus Christ, appeared so visibly to have been
entrusted with the power of that Lord of Nature, as this Man that we speak of.

26. It may be some will rather choose to say, That in truth it is impossible,
that Moses should have deceived the Jews, but, That it may very well be, that
they themselves have helped on the Cheat, and that they may have looked upon
that heap of Miracles (as fabulous as they were) as a thing that might make
them to be admired by other Nations. But in truth there is nothing but the
desire of devising to ones felf some ground of doubting, what ever it be, that
could produce such a Fantastical supposition; for of all the suppositions that
Infidelity could suggest, this certainly is the most undefensible. We shall
show by and by, that this people could not have contributed their help to this
Imposture, by supposing, that presently, or some time after Moses his Death,
and the Law being already established amongst them, some new Upstart devised
such a strange way to make them considerable and famous in the World: and by
proving, that their Love to their Nation would have been so far from inducing
them to consent to it, as that it will appear that that alone would have been
an invincible obstacle thereunto; which is no less true, with respect to Moses,
than it is with respect to any other. But there is yet infinitely less
probability, that the first Jews would consent to any such thing; for who could
imagine that they would have plotted with Moses to bring themselves in
Subjection to a Law, which they believed to be the mere product of his
invention, and that for the same Law (of which they had such an opinion) they
would have suffered themselves to be used so rigorously, as that a mere
omission in Ceremonies should be punished with Death, and that without
murmuring or repining at it? what more can be done or suffered, on the account
of things that are most seriously managed and believed, and that are found to
be established time out of mind? besides, that it would be a rare sight indeed,
to see Five or Six Hundred Thousand Men all agreed, to report a known Falsehood,
and that none of them all, nor of their Posterity, should ever contradict it,
and give the rest the Lie.

27. For there was not one of those Miracles, whereof every particular person
of that numerous people, all encamped together, could not but have known the
Falsity (if they had been false:) and, which yet he was to Authorize, as having
seen it with his own Eyes, or as having been done in his own, or his Fathers
time; what a work then had this been for Moses, to make sure of so many
persons, and especially amongst a people so difficult to be Governed? and how
comes it to pass, that among so many, there should not be either some conceited
Fellow, or some sober understanding man, that set himself to oppose such a
design? whosoever should have undertaken to do so, he must be very ignorant of
the Nature of Man, who cannot see that such an one would quickly have had as
many followers as Moses; or at least, that he would have been desirous to
acquaint Posterity with this Imposture, and that he would have easily
accomplished his desire or purpose to do so.

28. Besides, what could be a more proper and likely means to render the Jews
ridiculous among all Nations; so far was it from being a fit means to make them
be admired, and how blind must they have been, not to have seen this? for
instance, what would the Egyptians have said concerning all those Plagues,
which Moses says he brought upon them, concerning that Death of all their
Firstborn, and that Drowning of Pharaohs Army in the Sea? and how came all
those other Nations (whom they braged to have conquered in so extraordinary a
manner) to be so enchanted, as to let so many fabulous Stories pass in the
World without contradiction, unless they were also in the Plot against
themselves, and were as real Enemies to, and haters of, their own Fame and
Glory in the World, as it is imagined and supposed, that the Israelites were
ridiculously in Love with theirs.

29. Men may invent Fables, I confess, yet they do not carry them to that
excess when they would have them to be believed, and above all, they are very
careful to place the first rise of them in far distant times, and to vail them
with the obscurity and darkness of many remote Ages. But as men never design to
Pass for knaves or fools, so they never invent such fabulous stories as may be
gainsaid and proved false by living Witnesses, yea by whole and much concerned
Nations; as for instance, it had been a pretty project in the Moors, when they
were returned into Africa, after they had been driven out of Spain, if they had
undertaken to make the World believe, that they came out of it voluntarily by
Miracles like to Moses his Miracles, and that after the Mediterranian Sea had
opened it self to make way for their passage, they saw it close again to drown
an Army of (I know not how) many Thousands of Men that pursued them, and yet
the design, we speak of, had been no less extravagant in the Jews: for we must
not represent unto our selves those so remote times, although gross or rude, as
so dark as they may seem to be, in those times Men heard from one another; they
had the same Interests, and the same Passions that we have: they saw what they
saw, and felt what was to be felt as well as we do.

30. These two hypotheses then must be absolutely abandoned, neither was Moses
an Impostor that deceived the Jews; neither were the Jews in confederacy with
him to carry on the Plot. There remains nothing to be objected, but that Moses
was not the Author of the Book that bears his Name, or at least, that it is but
since his death, that all those Miracles which it contains, have been added to
it. This is unbeliefs last Refuge; but Reason will not suffer a Man that has
the least measure of common sense to take up with it.

31. Although we had nothing else to certify us that these are really the
Books of Moses, and that we have them such as they were penned by him, but this
that they bear his Name, as they themselves witness, that they have been always
attributed unto him, and that it came into no man's mind until now, to affirm
the contrary; this should be enough, and because of this, we could not
reasonably doubt of their being his, since we have no other assurance that any
Books written in former Ages at any considerable distance, are the Books of
those Authors whose they are said to be.

32. And let none say that there are Books which, after they had passed for a
time under the Name of certain Authors, have at last been found to be
supposi^icious; for without entering upon the Examination of that matter, I say
that it is absolutely Impossible that this could happen to a Book of the
greatest importance, to which the certainty of the Authors Name is Essential,
and whereof in all Ages, Men have had so much cause, and so great an Interest
to examine the Origination and Truth, for as Truth is of such a Nature, that
all things (except falsehood) agree with it, all things concur to Establish it,
and there is neither care nor labor, that can find out any thing which is able
to overthrow it; so on the contrary, it is impossible, but falsehood will at
last be found out, if we endeavor it: because it cannot be, but there will be
an infinite number of things that are contrary unto it; and how great soever be
the foresight and cunning of Impostors, it is not possible, though the humane
understanding were not so limited as it is, to foresee all inconveniences, or
to suit and accommodate every thing to the preventing of them, when they are
foreseen; for in fine, though there were for that purpose certain effects,
whereof men were Masters, and had the disposal, It is cettain that there is
also an infinite number of things, which they have no power at all to dispose
of; to be able to prevent all things that might discover their forgery, they
must be in a condition to dispose of things present and to come, to change the
order of all things, and in a word to command the Nature, the wits and wills of
men at their pleasure.

33. But besides this, we have yet incomparably more and stronger proofs of the
Books of Moses, than there are of any other Books. Other Books are in few
peoples hands, and there are not many who think themselves concerned in them;
those that are concerned in them, do but seldom mind them, or their Interest in
them, and even that Interest can be but comparatively of small importance. But
the Books we speak of, are of a much different nature; they have always been in
the hands of a whole great Nation; they have been the object of their continual
meditation: and since they were the foundation of their Religion, and that a
Religion which abhors lying and deceiving, how could they have suffered
themselves to be imposed upon in the matter of the Authors name, and the Book
it self to be corrupted by the addition of so many Fables? or could it be done
without their knowledge; yea, and who durst be so bold as ever to attempt it?

34. Let men take a full view of that prodigious Series of Miracles wrought in
Egypt, and in the Wilderness, and then judge impartially, whether these are
things that could be inserted into a Book, and yet that Book be made to pass
for the Original. This is the most that could be done to some inconsiderable
Book which should fall into the hands but of a few persons, and with some
particular Miracle pretended to have been wrought before a few witnesses; and
moreover, we see that such things do not spread far, nor last long; they are
scarcely sooner forged, but they begin to be questioned, in so much that in
time they come to be regarded by none, but the simple people, who believe by
the Faith of the next intruder, and do not so much as think of getting clear
and certain notions of the least thing in the World. But there is nothing upon
Earth clear, if this be not, that such things could not happen to such a Book,
as we have described this to be. I might as well say that it would be no hard
matter to insert now into the New Testament an History as long, and as
considerable, as that of Moses his Miracles in Egypt and the Wilderness: and
how ridiculous soever this supposition appears to be, I know not whither it
was not yet more difficult to insert such fabulous stories into the Books of
Moses; since the Jews had at least as high an esteem for their Sacred Books of
the Law, as we have for ours of the Gospel, and there were none among them
whose most near and natural Interest it was not to know what they contained,
had it been only that they might learn how to save themselves from that death
which they were to suffer without reprieve, upon failure of the performance of
some duties prescribed by their Law.

35. But that which invincibly proves the falsehood of this supposition, is
this, That there are in a manner two Histories of Moses: the one written in the
Book that bears his name, the other as it were Engraven on the Ceremonies and
Laws observed by the Jews, the practice whereof is a living Witness in behalf
of the Book which Instituted them, and even in behalf of the most wonderful
things which it contains; for the greatest part of those most astonishing
Miracles were represented by the Ceremonies, and by the other things which
belonged to the Worship of the Jewish Religion; the Pot of Manna kept in the
Ark, was a standing Monument of the Miraculous Food, wherewith God fed that
People in the Wilderness; Aarons Rod that Budded, was a Monument of the way,
how God confirmed unto him the Office of High Priesthood; and the Tables of the
Covenant, were a Memorial of that which is Recorded in Exodus, concerning the
establishment of the Law; the Sacrifice of the Paschal Lamb, the Ceremony of
Unleavened-Bread, the assigning of the Tribe of Levy unto the Ministry of the
Temple, did represent the destroying Angels passing over the Houses of the
Israelites, the Death of the Firstborn of the Egyptians, and the deliverance
of those of the Israeletes. The brazen Plates which were fastened to, and
covered the Altar, were a memorial of the Death of those audacious Levites, who
wilfully contended with Aarons Race for the Priesthood; in fine, the Ark, the
Tabernacle, all the different Ministries of the Priests and Levites, all the
Ceremonies of the Sacrifices and Purifications, all the Laws, the Assignation
of the Country beyond Jordan to the two Tribes of Reuben and Gad, and to the
half Tribe of Manasse; the Cities of Refuge for such as should happen to slay a
Man unwittingly, all these things, I say, which it would be as Ridiculous to
deny, as to pretend that there never was any Jew in the World, have a necessary
respect unto, and connection with the Books of Moses, and Invincibly prove that
they could not have been written since his time.

36. For otherwise, either all that we have been now discoursing of, must also
have been Established since Moses, and after the Publishing of the Books
ascribed unto him; or else having been Established by Moses by word of Mouth,
and without any Book, some other body must have written those Books, and
accommodated them to the Ceremonies and Laws which were already in use, adding
thereunto those Miracles, the more to engage the People unto the observance of
that Law. But all this is so far void of all probability, that there was never
any till now, that durst in earnest assert it.

37. How could it be said, for example, that the Pentateuch was written and
published long after the Death of Moses, and that it caused the Establishment
of the Law and Worship of the Jewish Religion which it contains? Then it must
be said also, that the Ark and Tabernacle, which are the Foundations of that
Religion, were not made till long after Moses, and till that Book had been
published; but this is a thing absolutely impossible; for all the Jews firmly
believed that their Ark and Tabernacle were made by Moses, as that Book
relates, and it is not conceivable why or on what account they could have taken
up such an opinion, if they had made them both themselves, after they had seen
and recived that Book, which is now supposed not to have appeared in the World,
till a long time after Moses; it would be doubtless one of the prettiest things
in the World, and the most unparalled, either that this Book having been
compiled all at once, and beforehand with that prodigious number of Ceremonies
and Laws, as already in use, they should afterward have been Instituted and
settled; or that being compiled by degrees, and according as all those things
were Instituted and Established, it should always have had (as they say) a
retractive effect or influence, and have wrought backwards, so as to cause each
of those Institutions to be Ascribed unto Moses.

38. Likewise, how could this People, who at their first Embracing of this Law,
must at least have known that it was not true that it had been in use amongst
them ever since Moses his time, and that there had been a continued Succession
of Priests ever since Aaron; how, I say, could this People have been able to
persuade themselves Universally to believe, that what was prescribed by that
Book had always been practiced amongst them; and that the Priests whom it
Ordained had received their Ministry from Aaron by an uninterrupted Succession.
And finally, how upon the same principle could all the other Tribes and
Families have suffered the Tribe of Levy, and Race of Aaron to appropriate unto
themselves all the privileges belonging to the Priesthood, and to the Office
of the High Priest?

39. There is no less absurdity in the other Supposition, to wit, that the Law
having been given by Moses by word of Mouth, was preserved for a time among the
Jews by means of Tradition only, and that afterward those who committed it to
writing added thereunto all those Miracles. For besides that, even this would
be a kind of Miracle, and a thing very hard to conceive, that that People
should have received a Law so strict and severe as that was, from a Man who had
done nothing extraordinary, for proving that he had it from God; how could it
be, that Moses, who doubtless had the use of writing, should have omitted a
thing so necessary, and not have committed to writing a Law that contained so
many Observations, so many Ceremonies, and so many Rules, that it was necessary
to have it always before ones Eyes, for fear of failing in some or other point
of duty prescribed by it.

40. And indeed we learn also from the Book it self, that Moses did not sail to
commit it to writing. Moses (as it is said, Deuteronomy. 31. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.) wrote
this Law, and delivered it unto the Priests the Sons of Levy, -- and unto all
the Elders of Israel, and commanded that it should be read before all Israel,
in their hearing, at the end of every Seventh Year, in the Feast of
Tabernacles. And it is also said in (I do not know how) many places of that
Book, That God commanded Moses to write that which he revealed to him upon the
Mount; if the Jews then had received that Law from him only by word of Mouth,
how could they have ever received a Book which should have contained a Lie so
gross and evident? and which should have carried in it an express order from
God, which their Lawgiver had not obeyed.

41. That very Order, to read the Law every Seventh Year, at the Feast of
Tabernacles, as having been given by Moses, does further clearly show, that it
could not have been changed nor corrupted: for it would have been impossible
for such corruptions not to have been discovered, or that being discovered,
they should have been suffered by a People devoted to that Law, and whose
devout Subjection to it was grounded upon their believing it to be of God, and
written by Moses; besides, that those Miracles being most visible to the Eye,
scattered throughout the Books, repeated in diverse places of them, and linked
with the principal transactions therein Recorded, there had been a necessity of
making a new Book to take them in, and not merely to alter, for that purpose,
an old Book which had been already received.

42. The Infidel then must yet once more return to that pretended vainglorious
humor of the Jewish Nation, and maintain, that the Jews could easily suffer
this falsification: and that they were even glad that all those Miracles were
added to their Law, and that their Chronicles, were filled with them.

43. This might have some probability, if the Question were only about a matter
of Civil or Political concernment; as for example, The Romans could have been
content, that one should have told them, that they were the Offspring of
Aeneas, and it may be the French would be well enough pleased, that one should
derive their Original from the Trojans; these are things which please some Men's
Fancies, and may pass without contradiction, it being no Bodies interest to
oppose them: and they do not interfer with other things that have been
established, and steadfastly believed, time out of mind, and that are looked
upon as the only considerable. But as touching the Jews, a People so devoted to
their Religion, so faithful Observers of the least Traditions, and to whom
lying was so severely forbidden, this supposition is altogether without any
appearance of truth.

44. For I cannot believe, that the Infidels boldness to deny any thing that
makes against them, dare adventure so far, as to dispute all the Evidence we
have of the Jews Zeal for their Religion; since even yet to this day, they have
so great a veneration for that Law, that though they have been dispersed above
these Sixteen Hundred Years, and see no accomplishment of what was promised to
them, notwithstanding they observe it still as far as they can, with the same
strictness, as they did at first, and wait continually for the fulfilling of
those promises; how improbable is it then, that they should have suffered that
which they looked upon as God's own word, to be mixed and blended with such a
fearful multitude of Lies, rendering themselves thereby unworthy of Divine
Protection, and liable to be convicted of Imposture by the Neighboring
Nations? would not this have been a venturing to lose all, for to gain nothing?

45. This might suffice to convince all understanding and sober Men; but if
some would yet insist upon the Jews love for their Nation, and pretend that the
desire of being admired, might have induced them to permit and promote this
Imposture; let us see whether it be not quite contrary, and whether there be
the least probability, that they believed they could advance their own
Reputation by the things contained in that Book, which seem so shameful to the
Nation in general; and though all had been for the public good, let us see
whether it be credible, that particular Persons, and whole Families, would have
willingly Sacrificed themselves, and their Interests unto it: especially
considering, that nothing did constrain them; and that having nothing to do but
to invent, it was in their choice to take what way they pleased, and to secure
the Interests of all, without provoking so many people to discover their Frauds.

46. Had they only mentioned such things as might have contributed to their
Honor, as those great Miracles, which are an Evidence of Gods most special
Protection, it had been abundantly sufficient for their design, without
inventing some things, which it was so many Peoples Interest to oppose, and
other things which do expose that Nation to so great contempt.

47. For instance, what is there more miserably base, than the Fears and
Murmurings of this People, occasioned by the bitter Waters of Marah, by the
want of Food, and by the Thirst they suffered in Rephidim? they are hardly
sooner come out of Egypt, but they forget all those great things, which they
would make the World believe, that their God had there done for them? they
think they are forsaken and betrayed; and complain, that they are treacherously
brought out of a Country, where they lived at ease, (though they were Captives
and Slaves in it) to destroy them in the Wilderness: they Question the Power
and Protection of that God, who had so eminently appeared for them; and are
ready to Rebel against that very Man, who they believed, was chosen by God to
deliver them; now is not this the shamefullest and greatest weakness
imaginable? is not this the highest Ingratitude, both to their God, and to
Moses their Guide and Captain? what could their cruellest Enemies have invented
more dishonorable to them? and who could imagine, that to make themselves
renowned all the World over, and to cause Men to believe, they were the beloved
People of God, it should ever have entered into their thoughts, to paint out
and represent themselves so light and unconstant, so unfaithful and so absured,
that during the space of Forty Years, wherein they Fed (as themselves say) upon
meat sent down from Heaven, there passed hardly a Day on which they were not
heard to cry like little Children, and to wish with Tears, they were yet Slaves
in Egypt, that they might fill their Bellies with Onions and Leeks.

48. The whole Five Books of Moses must be almost copied out, to recount all
the Unfaithfulnesses, and all the Faults of this People, for therein is hardly
any other thing to be seen; one would think they had been resolved to make
their Wickedness keep even pace, with the Grace and Favors of their God; almost
upon all occasions they Rebelled against their Leader; and were scarce
delivered from one Judgment, when they brought upon themselves another: nothing
could hinder this ungovernable People from falling continually into the same
Crimes; not the example of the Three Thousand Men, whom the Sons of Levy slew
by the commond of Moses, to punish them for their Idolatry; nor the Fire and
Plague from the Lord, which in Two Days time destroyed near Fifteen Thousand
Men for their Sedition; nor the dreadful Judgment of the Fiery-Serpents; nor
the Tremendous Punishment inflicted upon them for their mixing with the
Daughters of the Midianites, on which account Moses caused to hang up all the
Heads of them against the Sun, and Twenty Four Thousand of the People died by
the Plague?

49. But to say all in one word, what can be imagined more strange, and more
disgraceful, to their Memory, than that general Apostasy which happened, when
Moses was upon Mount Sinai, and when those Mad People forced Aaron to make them
a Golden-Calf, and to offer Sacrifice unto it, as if it had been unto their
God? Let all the circumstances of this Action be well weighed, and it will
undoubtedly appear; that a People which have declared themselves capable of
falling into such a Crime, have by so doing, Convicted themselves of all Vices
at once, and chiefly of Sottishness and Extravagancy. They tell us that they
were brought out of an Enemies Country, by the greatest and most unconceivable
wonders that can be imagined; insomuch, that there is hardly a moment of time
mentioned in all their History, in which the Almighty Arm of their God does not
visibly appear; this their God Pardons them all their Murmurings, and all their
Unfaithfulnesses, and instead of Punishing their Distrust, he Provides for them
Meat and Drink, in places where there had never been any before, and satisfies
even the lowest and grossest of their desires.

50. Nevertheless, in the time when they knew that their Deliverer and Guide is
on the Mount with that same God, to receive his Orders about the Government of
them, a panick and a ridiculous Fear seases upon them: they cannot patiently
bear Moses his so long absence, and without knowing well wherefore, they demand
of Aaron, a visible God to go before them: they force him to make a
Golden-Calf, which they set up upon an Altar; they call it the God which
brought them out of Egypt, and give to this pretty Deity, made of Earrings,
the same Honors, and the same Thanksgivings, which they owed, and had before so
often given unto the true God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, who had chosen them
out of all Mankind for his special Favorites.

51. Truly, they must have lost the use of their Reason, who can think that
this People have suffered this Narrative of the Golden-Calf to be added to
their History, and that they have done it to make themselves to be admired and
esteemed by other Nations; could they imagine that their Glory and Renown was
imperfect without this, to make up the defects of it; and is it not on the
contrary a disgrace, which can never be rubbed off, and for which, their
Posterity will blame them for ever? And is it not rather, one of the greatest
Miracles in the World, that this Action of theirs could ever come to our
knowledge, and that the whole Jewish Nation have not done their utmost, utterly
to abolish the Memory of it? so far must we suppose the Jews to have been from
inventing it against themselves, or from suffering to be added unto so many
things, which would have made them deservedly enough to be admired and
esteemed, an Historical Narrative, which covers them with perpetual Ignominy.

52. So we see, that Josephus, who was far more tender of the interess of his
Nation, has chosen rather to expose himself unto the reproach of having
violated the Laws of History, by suppressing this public Crime committed by
the Jews in the Wilderness, than to expose them to the contempt and scorn of
the World, by reciting it.

53. Moreover, how could be added to this History, the Rebellion of Corah,
which is a thing so injurious to all his Posterity? was their not cause to
fear, least some one or other of his Family should have discovered the Falsehood
of it, to wash off the stain of it from themselves? why must Corahs Family bear
that Mark of Infamy, rather than any other? did they cast Lots for it? was it a
thing so necessary, that they could not dispense with it? and is it not
manifest, that if it had been a Fiction, the whole Race in one Body, and with
one consent, would have opposed it, and desired the Authors of that Table, to
look out for some other Embellishment to their History.

54. But if the last words of Moses be considered, where he Denounces against
them so many Curses, Threatens them with so many Calamities, and after he had
upbraided them with all their Unfaithfulness, further Declares, That they would
do the same things anew, and for the Punishment thereof, should fall into
remediless Misery and Distress; that they should be run down by their Enemies,
and reduced to the utmost Extremity, even to the eating of their own Children;
that their Cities should be destroyed, their Wives and Daughters should be
Ravished, their Sacrifices should be Abolished, and finally, that they should
be led Captives, and dispersed through all the Earth, to be despised and
abhorred by other Nations: if all this, I say, be considered, I know not what a
Man he must be, who imagins that this People could have Conspired with any Man,
be who he will, that should have so grievously displeased them.

55. But it is above all to be observed, that these are not the Discourses only
of a Man, that would frighten his followers, and bare Threatenings of Miseries
which were to befall the Jews, only in case they should grossly transgress their
Law; for if they seem conditional in some places, they are in others, positive
and absolute Prophesies, foretelling that they should really transgress their
Law, as they have grossly done, and that all those Miseries should light upon
them, as in effect it is come to pass; how improbable then is it, that the Jews
should have been so simple, or rather so senseless, as to suffer Prophesies of
that Nature, to be added to their History; and that for the advancement of the
Glory of their Nation, they should have consented to a thing which could never
but turn to their shame and disgrace? for could not they clearly see, that if
those Prophesies were found to be false, their Religion would be accounted an
Imposture, and they would inevitably lose the Reputation, which they might
otherwise have acquired, by all the rest of the wonderful Events mentioned in
their History? or that if they chanced to fall really into those Miseries
foretold, they would be accounted the worst of Men: and instead of comfort,
could expect nothing but blame, from all the World, for having fallen into
those Calamities which they were warned of, and for having fallen into them for
no other cause, but for breaking the Law and Covenant of their God, whereby
they drew down his Wrath and Indignation upon themselves, and their Posterity.

56. Thus then it appears, that when Men have given the greatest liberty to
their Fancy, it can produce nothing but Chymerical and groundless Suppositions.
Moses did not deceive the Jews, he could have no such design, and though he had
had such a design, yet it was impossible for him to have compassed it by the
ways and measures he took: neither did the Jews combine with him to deceive
their Posterity, and all the other Nations of the World: nor was it any new
Upstart, who to make them believe what he pleased, made use of such things as
he found established and practiced amongst them, either by Tradition, or by
Writing: and it was as impossible, that the Jews should have Conspired in this
Imposture with any other, as it was, that they should have done it with Moses.

57. Here you have some small part of what may be said on this great Subject;
for it is not to be thought, that the proofs which the Pentateuch affords of
its truth, can be fully drawn forth: the more we meditate on it, the more
Evidence we still find of its Divine Original, for it is an inexhaustible
Spring of Light; and without being at the pains to unfold and set them forth,
if we read the Book it self, we cannot but feel, or sensibly perceive, that the
Language it speaks, is not the Language of Men, nor the product of their Wit:
That nothing is further removed from the Methods, not only of Impostors and
Deceivers, but also of the Prudent and Wise Men of the World; That it is of a
most peculiar character, and altogether different from that of Men acting by
their own Spirit: and that therein are not to be seen, either the common
passions, or the ordinary interests of Men, or the drifts of prudence and
forecast, which may easily be seen in other Books that are of humane composure:
and in fine, it may be sensibly perceived that it is impossible for any to put
off the Man so far, as were necessary for the production of such a work,
wherein so little of Man appears.

58. Nevertheless this Book is in being, we have it in our hands, and it was
not made by chance: It has been, and yet is the greatest and most considerable
object that ever was in the World, during the space of above Two Thousand
Years, the most singular and famous People in the World, have been so devoted
to it, and enamoured of it, that they have never suffered it to be out of their
sight: from this People it is come into the hands of Christians, that is to
say, it is spread abroad through the whole Universe; and after Sixteen Hundred
Years, these Two sort of People, irreconcilable Enemies to one another, do yet
look upon it with the same Veneration, dispute the one against the other for
the true meaning of it, and both of them find in it, the original Title of that
Right which they pretend to have unto the Heavenly Inheritance, in which both
of them believe, that the rest of Mankind have no part or portion.

59. Who then dare be bold to say, that it is free for him to stand Neuter, and
not to concern himself in a matter of this Importance, nay, who that rightly
considers it, can hinder himself from being concerned? who is there that can
let this Book pass as it is, not caring to know whether it be true or false, as
if it were a thing, whereof the truth were unsearchable and indifferent? or who
shall dare desperately to run-counter unto such abundance of truth and light,
as that Sacred Book holds forth, and without other help, than that of his own
Fancy, and wretched Reason, to Determine, from the bottom of that dark Dungeon,
where Nature has confined him, that there is no Being in the whole Universe,
able to work so many Miracles, and that they are but so many Fable and Visions?

60. But the reason why some persons are not moved and affected with these
proofs, which are so sensible unto others, is because their Interest and their
Passions have so much command of them, that they see other things but by
halves. This is the true Spring of all the Doubts that are moved against
Religion, because there is really nothing so contrary to their lusts, as the
manner of Life which it prescribes; and so it is no ways difficult, to conceive
that Men's Lusts should oppose a thing which does directly fight against them,
and can never be established but by their Extirpation and Ruin.

61. And indeed this may well be so, on the account of the contrariety that is
between Religion, and Men's Lusts, since we see the like even in natural things;
and if sometimes the mere imagination of a thing, which Men do not at all like,
(though it be impossible the thing should ever come to pass) makes them Act, as
if they really doubted it would come to pass, even when they cannot really
doubt; how much more may the necessary forsaking of all that is dear and near
to Men in the World, be apt to blind them, and to make them doubt of Religion,
unto the belief of which, the Heart and Will must contribute no less than the
Reason and Understanding.

62. To give an instance, there is a well known Person of great Wit, and of
great Judgment, but so much afraid of Death, that being one Day asked, if he
would not lay his Life, that there is such a City as Rome? thought the gain
were small to be got by the wager, he freely answered, That he would not; now
certainly such a doubt as that there may not be such a City as Rome, never came
into his thoughts before, and if the proposal had been made to him upon any
other terms, than the laying down of this Life, it had not been possible for
him to have made the least hesitation at the matter: but as soon as the Idea of
Death presented it self to his mind, it wholly took up his thoughts; all the
Evidences he had to prove it impossible, for Rome not to be, vanished and came
to nothing: and if there did not arise in his mind a formal doubt, that all
which has been said for the existence of Rome may be false, at least there
came something into his head, or rather into his heart, which made him Act, as
if he had indeed doubted of Romes existence.

63. I know very well, no Man will confess, that addictedness to Pleasures, or
love of Life, can thus far blind him; and that every one pretends his doubts,
are very sincere, and that the aversion he has from believing the things of
Religion, proceeds only from his Reason and Understanding; neither is it good
to press Men upon this point, since we cannot make them to see that in their
our own hearts, which they see not there of themselves: for the motions of the
Heart or Will, are not like the motions of the Head or Undestanding. These of
the Head arise, either by degrees, and a Series of ratiocinations, or else by a
certain quick and clear light, which makes us take up our Resolutions, and fall
to Action; and it is not possible that this should be unknown to us, and that
we should not feel it. But now as for that which we do by the Bias of the
Heart, it is far otherwise; for there it is certain Springs hidden in us, and
Born with us, which prompt us to this or that, without proceeding in a
discursive way of Reasoning, and almost without our knowledge; and hence it
comes to pass, that except we reflect frequently and attentively upon the
motions of the Heart, and timely accustom our selves so to do, it is almost
impossible not to be deceived in Judging of them; for the Heart (if one may so
say) does so mix it self with the Reason, or rather does so much master it,
that it becomes the principle of all the Actions, yet so as it is scarcely
perceived to have any influence upon them.

64. But let such doubting Persons, at least acknowledge, that they do not do
all that is in their power to get a clear Resolution of their Doubts: which
must needs be from some defect in the Will; they will easily grant this, if
they have the least measure of sincerity, since they cannot deny, but that the
whole Lifetime of Man should be employed in the search of so important a
truth, as that of Religion is, whereas they have scarcely thought upon it a few
Minutes, and of all things in the World, it may be, the truth of Religion is
that, on which they have made least reflection.

65. When Men are brought unto (...) sincere willingness, to apply themselves
unto the serious consideration of the proofs Religion, it will not be
difficult, yet further to set forth unto them, the Evidences of it, taking the
way which we have here chalked out; for besides the proofs taken from matters
of Fact, whereof we have given an Essay or Specimen, in this Discourse, there
is yet a very great number of proofs that depend upon sensible perception, and
which appear to us in great abundance when we read the Scriptures with
attention; and it is even these last sort that deserve chiefly to be minded,
because they have this advantage, that in persuading us to believe the truth,
they move us also to love it, without which all is unprofitable. It is true,
there are but few Persons duly qualified with the dispositions necessary to
their being feelingly moved and affected by them, that is to say, with a
certain Spiritual Gust of Truth, and an uprightness of Heart, which are rarely
to be met with; But we must at least endeavor to help others unto these
dispositions, and to awaken and stir up in them that Spiritual sense, which
shall be revived in them sooner or latter, if ever they believe in a saving
manner.

The End of the First Part.
THE SECOND PART; Containing An EXAMINATION Of a considerable part of Pere
Simon's Critical History of the OLD TESTAMENT. WHEREIN All his Arguments, with
the weightiest of Spinosa's against Moses's being the Author of the first Five
Books of the Bible, are fully and clearly answered, and several difficult
places of Holy Scripture are explained,

By W. L.

Sed quemadmodum apud eos, qui semel providentiam probe receperunt, non
minuitur aut perit fides providentiae ob ea quae non comprehenduntur; ita neque
scripturae divinitati per eam totam diffusae quidquam detrahitur ex eo, quod ad
singulas dictiones imbecillitas nostra non possit adesse arcano splendori
doctrinae qui in tenui and contempta locutione delitescit. Orig. Philoc. cap.
1. page 5. Edit. Cantabrig. 1658.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, 1682.

The Second Part.
WHat is contained in these following Sheets, was first intended for a Preface
unto the foregoing Discourse, Translated out of French into English, but when I
had finished it, I found it would be too long a Preface unto such a short
Discourse; and therefore upon Second thoughts, I concluded it would be better
to subjoin^ it thereunto by way of Appendix, or Second Part. Who was the Author
of the Discourse, I do not certainly know; but it is probable, that Monsieur du
Bois de la Cour, who wrote the Discourse on Paschal his Thoughts, or
Meditations on Religion, etc. was likewise the Author of this Discourse; for
they are frequently bound together, and were both Published, the one in 1671,
and the other in 1672, with the approbation of the same Doctors of the Sorbon,
excepting one whose name is not subscribed with the other Six, unto the
approbation of this Discourse. But who ever be the Author, he is a Man of
Parts, and has done worthily in this Discourse, in which he has showed his
high Veneration of the Holy Scriptures, and has irrefragably proved the truth
of the most Signal and Miraculous matters of Fact, contained in the Books of
Moses, and by that means he has proved the Divine Original and Authority of
all the Laws and Ordinances given by Moses unto the Israelites, and Recorded in
his Books: So that the Translation of it cannot but be of good use unto English
Readers, for confirming them in the Faith, and strengthening them against
Tentations, unto Infidelity in these Backsliding Times. The Discourse is so
well Penned by the Author, that it needs no Recommendation from any; its own
great Excellency and Usefulness will abundantly suffice to commend it unto any
ingenious Man, that shall be at the pains of spending half an Hour in Reading
of it. It would therefore have been altogether needless for me to have added
unto it what follows here in this Second Part, if there had not been lately
Published in English, a Book of P. Simon's, Entitled, A Critical History of
the Old Testament; where, Book 1. Chap. 5. Page 36. in the Contents of that
Chapter he has these very Words, Moses cannot be the Author of the Books which
are attributed to him. I had no sooner Read this in the contents of the
Chapter, but I was desirous to know what Arguments he used to prove such an
uncouth Assertion, as had seldom been heard of from any before, but such as
Hobs in his Leviathan, Pereyre in his Systema Praeadamiticum, and Spinosa in
his Tractatus Theologico-politicus, all Atheists or Infidels. And thereupon
having Read and Examined all he says to prove his Assertion, I thought it would
be necessary, together with the Precedent Discourse, to Publish a few short
Animadversions on what he has written in his Critical History, against the
Pentateuchs being written by Moses. And that what I have to say, may be the
better understood, and the more convincing and satisfactory unto the Reader, I
shall proceed in this Method,

First, I shall show what is the Truth to be believed, and what is the Belief
of the Christian Church.

Secondly, What is the opinion of P. Simon, and wherein he agrees with, or
differs from the common Faith of the Church in this matter.

Thirdly, Answer his Arguments, whereby he endeavors to prove his Opinion, That
Moses could not be the Author of the Books which are attributed to him.

Now for the First, The Truth to be believed, is (1.) That the whole Scripture
of the Old Testament, and consequently the Pentateuch, or first Five Books of
the Bible, were written by Divine Inspiration, and that God is the primary
Author thereof; this is proved from Luke 16. 29, 31. They have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them, etc. And Luke 24. 25, 27, 44, 45, 46. And from 2 Timothy 3. 16. where it is expressly said, That all Scripture, or the whole
Scripture, is given by Inspiration of God. And 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. where it is
expressly affirmed, that the first thing to be known concerning the Scriptures,
is this, That no Prophecy of the Scripture, is of any private Interpretation
(that is, of any Man's own Inventing:) for the Prophecy came not in old time by
the will of Man: but Holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost. The same Truth is clearly proved, from Psalm. 147. 19. compared with
Romans 3. 2. and 9. 4.

(2.) That this being first known and believed, and so the Divine Authority of
the Holy Scriptures secured, it matters not very much, whether we ever
certainly know the names of all the Holy Men whom God used as his Instruments,
in writing the several Books of Sacred Scripture; for there are some Books of
Scripture that bear the names of no Man, as Author of them under God, and yet
they are as much of Divine Authority, as those Books that have the name of some
Prophet, or Apostle, expressed in their Title; and the names which Books of
Scripture bear, do not always import, that the Man whose name the Book bears,
was the Writer of the Book, but that the Book was written of, and concerning
him, and his Acts. Thus the Book of Joshua is so called, because it was written
of, and concerning Joshua; though it is probable, it was not written by him,
but by some other Holy Man of God after his Death; see for this Bishop
Richardsons Observations on the Old Testament, page 45. the like may be said of
some other Books of Holy Scripture. That then which concerns us most, is to
know, whether God be the Author of the several Books in the Canon of Scripture;
and if we be once sure of this, we need not trouble our selves much about the
knowing of the names of the several Men by whom it pleased the Lord God to
consign them to Writing. Gregory the Great, in his Preface to his Exposition on
Job, has this Remarkable saying, [ Si Magni cujusdam viri susceptis Epistolis,
etc. If having received the Letters of some great Man, we should read the
Words, and enquire by what Pen they had been written, truly it would be
ridiculous if we should endeavor not to know the Author of the Letters, nor to
understand the sense, but to find out by what Pen the several words of them had
been written: since then we know the thing, and that the Holy Spirit is the
Author of it, what else do we in enquiring after the Writer, but in reading the
Letters, stand asking by what Pen they were written.]

Yet (3.) when a Book of Holy Scripture bears the name of its Author, and an
Universal Historical Tradition assures us that such a Man was indeed the Author
of it, we are bound to believe it, and cannot rationally disbelieve it, without
a demonstration to the contrary. Thus we know the Books of Plato, Aristotle,
and Cicero, to have been written by those Authors; and this is so clear and
certain a truth, ( Vt de istorum librorum Authoritatibus dubitare dementis sit,
utque ridendus sit non refellendus qui de iis questionem movet,) That none but
a Madman will doubt of the Authors of those Books, and he is to be laughed at,
and not confuted, who moves a Question concerning them; as holy August. writes,
contra Fanstum Manich. lib. 32. cap. 21. And as he says, That he knew the
writeings of the New Testament to be the writings of the Apostles, by the same
means that the Manichees knew the writeings of Manes, to be the writings of
Manes; so I say, That by what means we here in England know the late Critical
History of the Old Testament, to be the writing of Pere Simon a Priest of the
Oratory; by the like means we know the Pentateuch to be the writing of Moses;
and we ought not to disbelieve it, having the Universal Testimony of Jews,
Christians, Mahumetans, and many Heathens, to ground our Faith upon; unless it
be first clearly demonstrated to us, that it implies a contradiction, that
Moses should have written it; which I know, that neither Pere Simon, nor any
Man else can do. And the reasonableness of what I have now said will yet
further appear, if it be considered that our Lord Christ himself gives
Testimony unto the writings of Moses in general, (John 5. 46, 47. Moses wrote
of me, But if ye believe not his writeings, how shall ye believe my words?) and
both he and his Apostles frequently appeal unto them, and quote passages out of
them. This is the truth to be believed, and this is actually believed by the
Christian Church. Yet it is no matter of Faith, that there are no various
Lections in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, nay it is a matter
evident to Sense, that there are various Lections; it is no matter of Faith,
that through the length and injury of time, and Negligence of Transcribers and
Printers, there are no mistakes at all in the Originals of Holy Scripture; on
the contrary, we acknowledge that there may possibly be some mistakes, even in
the Pentateuch, through the length and injury of time, and the negligence of
Transcribers and Printers, but those mistakes we believe, do not at all hinder
the Holy Scriptures from being a perfect Rule of Faith and Life, in all things
necessary, to the Glorifying of God, and Saving of our Souls. Nor lastly, is it
matter of Faith, That Moses wrote every Word and Sentence, Chapter and Verse,
of the Pentateuch, with his own hand. It is sufficient that we believe he wrote
it himself, or by other persons, whose help he used in the writing of it; and
when it was written, he revised it and approved it, and in this he was assisted
by the Holy Spirit, inspiring, guiding and directing him. And if there be any
thing in the Pentateuch, besides the mistakes of Transcribers and Printers,
that was written after Moses's time, it was added upon good Reasons by Joshua
or Ezra, and the great Assembly, who were Men of a Prophetical Spirit, and
inspired by God, in what they did of that nature.

Now in the Second place let us see, what is the opinion of Pere Simon, and
wherein he agrees with, or differs from the common Faith of the Church, in this
matter.

And First, He agrees with us in these following particulars, (1.) That the
whole Scripture of the Old Testament, and consequently the Pentateuch, was of
Divine Inspiration, and that God was the primary Author thereof; this is
demonstratively proved from his own express words; in his Preface, page 4. [But
besides, that this Principle (of a Divine of Paris, That the whole Scripture is
not equally Divine and Canonical) is dangerous, it is directly opposite to the
Doctrine of the New Testament, which acknowledges every thing throughout the
whole Scripture for Prophetical, and to have been inspired; wherefore I thought
I ought to lay down some Principles, whereby we might ascribe every thing in
the whole Scriptures to Prophets or Persons inspired by God, even to the
alterations themselves, those only excepted, which had happened through length
of time, or negligence of Transcribers.] And Book 1. Chap. 1. Page 3. [I have
divided this work into Three Books, the First of which, Treats at large of the
Authors of the Bible, which I have called Prophets, with Josephus (contra App.)
and most of the Fathers, because they were in effect directed by the Spirit of
God, and that St. Peter calls the whole Scripture Prophecies. During the Hebrew
Commonwealth, there were from time to time among them, these sorts of Persons
inspired by God, were it to write Divine and Prophetic Books, as the same
Josephus has remarked, or as Eusebius says, to distinguish betwixt those that
were truly Prophetic, and others that were not.] And Page 4. [They (the
public Writers) had the liberty in collecting the Acts which were in their
Registeries, to add, diminish and change, according as they thought fit, and
the Books (as Eusebius says) which were declared Sacred, were reviewed by
Persons inspired by God, who Judged whether they were truly Prophetic or
Divine.] And Page 21. [I know it is expressly forbidden in Deuteronomy, either
to add or diminish any thing from the Word of God. But we may Answer with the
Author of the Book, Entitled, Cozri, that this prohibition relates only to
private Persons, and not to those whom God had expressly commanded to interpret
his Will; God promised to the Prophets, and to the Judges of the Sanhedrim, who
succeeded Moses, the same Grace, and the same Spirit of Prophecy, as those had
who lived in his time, and therefore they have held the same Power, not only of
Interpreting the Law, but also of making new Ordinances, which were afterward
writ and placed in the Registeries of the Republic.] And Page 22. [The Church
has not the Right of making Books Canonical and Divine, as the Prophets had in
the Old Testament, but only to declare them Canonical.] In fine, Book 1. Chap.
1. Page 1. [None can doubt, but that the truths contained in the Holy Scripture
are infallible, and of Divine Authority; since they proceed immediately from
God, who in this has only made use of the Ministry of Men to be his
Interpreters. So there is no Person, either Jew or Christian, who does not
acknowledge that the Scripture being the pure Word of God, is at the same time,
the first principle and foundation of Religion.] Here is clear and full proof
from his own express words, of his agreement with us in the first particular
before mentioned.

Secondly, He agrees with us in this, That though Men having been the
Depositories of these Sacred Books, as well as of all others, and in their
first Originals having been lost, it was in some sort impossible, but that
there must needs happen some changes, as well by reason of the length of time,
as the carelessness of Transcribers; as it is impossible, it may be, to find one
English Bible in all England, without some Letter, Syllable, or Word
Misprinted, yet God by his special Providence has taken such care of the
Sacred Scripture, as that it is preserved to this Day, perfect, entire and
incorrupt, in all things relating to Faith and Manners, and necessary to be
believed or practiced, in order to Salvation. This is proved also from his own
words, page 7. [The Fathers were persuaded, that these Errors that were crept
into the Bible by the means of these Transcribers, had no relation to Faith or
good Manners, or carried any weight to the framing of the Judgment which we
ought to make of the Scriptures in general. This does not hinder us, but that
we should acknowledge the Divine Providence, in the preservation of this Book,
which has past through so many hands, and so many Ages; a great many of these
Errors of Transcribers, relate to the Chronology and Genealogies in the Books
of the Old Testament: but we may say with S. Augustine, that these difficulties
are in the number of those of which we may speak freely, and we may be ignorant
of, Salva fide qua Christiani sumus. This same Providence has likewise not
permitted the Jews maliciously to corrupt the Holy Scriptures, as many Fathers
seem to reproach them. Origin, S. Jerome, and S. Augustine, have done them more
Justice; and those who at this day reproach the Jews with the same thing, have
not thoroughly examined the matter.] And page 9. [This Author (Mariana) shows
very plainly, that the intention of the Council of Trent in declaring the
Vulgar Translation Authentic, was not to exempt it from all sorts of Faults,
but only from Errors which might introduce a change, either in Faith or
Manners; which he confirms by several Authorities, and principally by the
Testimonies of Andrew de Vega, and Jacob Lanis, at that time superior of the
Order of Jesuits, who assisted at that Council.]

Thirdly, He agrees with us in this, That being sure that God is the primary
Author of the several Books of Scripture, it is no great matter whether we
certainly know or not, the names of the Men by whom God was pleased to commit
them to writing; this is proved from his own words; in his Preface, page 2.
[Having Established in the Hebrew Commonwealth the Prophets or Public Writers,
who took care of collecting faithfully the Acts of what past of most importance
in the State, we need not too curiously inquire, as usually Men do, who were
the Authors of each particular Book of the Bible, because it is certain that
they were all writ by Prophets, etc.] And in Book 1. Chap. 1. Page 3. [We ought
not to search with too much curiosity, who have been the particular Authors of
every Book of the Bible; it suffices, according to the Maxim of Gregory the
Great (praefat in lib. Job) that these Books were written by Prophets. Quis
haec scripserit, valde supervacue quaeritur, cum tamen Author libri, Spiritus
Sanctus fideliter credatur.]

Fourthly, yet farther, He agrees with us so far as to hold, That in a true and
good sense Moses may be the Author of the whole Peutateuch. This is clearly
proved from his own express words; in Book 1. Chap. 1. Page 3. [If these
Public Writers were in the Hebrew Commonwealth from the time of Moses, as is
extremely probable, it will be very easy to satisfy all difficulties that may
be brought to show, that the Pentateuch was not wholly written by Moses, which
is ordinarily proved by the manner of its writing, which seems to insinuate,
that some other than Moses collected the Acts, and put them down in writing:
supposing these Public Writers, to them we may attribute what relates to the
Historical part of these Books, and to Moses all that which belongs to the Laws
and Ordinances, and it is this which the Scripture calls the Law of Moses: thus
one may say in this sense, that the whole Pentateuch is truly Moses's, because
those who made the collection, lived in his time, and did not do it but by his
Order.] And Page 20. [According to this principle, we ought to expound that
passage, where it is said (that Moses wrote what God commanded him;) for there
is nothing more ordinary in the Scripture, than to ascribe unto one person what
he Orders another to do, chiefly when the thing is done in his name.] Thus we
see wherein Pere Simon agrees with us in the common belief of all Christians.
He agrees with us so far, as to acknowledge not only that the whole Scripture of
the Old Testament is of Divine Inspiration, and that it is incorrupt in all
things that relate to Faith and Life, and are necessary to be believed or done,
in order to Salvation: but also, that the whole Pentateuch is truly Moses's,
because if it was not all written by himself immediately, yet it was written by
others in his time, and in his name, and by his order; and then sure what was
so written, was reviewed and approved by himself. If P. Simon were sincere in
all this, and did not deny it again by his self-contradiction, we needed not
much to oppose him in this matter; for we are under no necessary obligation to
believe, that Moses wrote down with his own hand all the occurrences of every
Day, during the whole space of the Churches being in the Wilderness; he might
possibly appoint some other person or persons of known Integrity, to do that
for him, and in his name: and being so done, and then reviewed and approved by
himself, it was all one, as if he had done it with his own hand. But
notwithstanding this agreement, we shall find that there remains yet a
difference between P. Simon, and other Christians, as to this matter; and that
is it we are next to take into consideration. And

First, He differs from the whole Church of God, and from himself too, by
self-contradiction, in this, That he thinks Moses may have written the
Pentateuch by an humane and fallible Spirit. I prove this by consequence, from
his own words, Page 40. [It is true (says he) that the best Authors sometimes
fall into little mistakes, so likewise do we not pretend to draw from thence an
infallible consequence to prove that Moses could not be the Author of the
Pentateuch, in the Order that it is.] Here he manifestly supposes, that Moses
in writing the Pentateuch might fall into little mistakes, and so he might be
the Author of it, notwithstanding the disorder that is in it; and is not this
to suppose, that Moses might write it by an humane and fallible Spirit? for
none I think will say, that a Man writing by Divine Inspiration, can fall into
any mistakes, little or great; I am sure not into such disorderly mistakes, as
he pretends to find in the History of the Creation of Man.

Secondly, He differs from the whole Christian Church, in affirming, that for
so much of the Historical part of the Pentateuch as Moses wrote, or might
write, he copied it out of other ancient Books, or else committed to writing
what he had learned from, Oral Tradition. This difference is the same upon the
matter with the former, and I prove it also from his own express words, Book 1.
Chap. 3. Page 27. [A Book of the Wars of the Lord, of which mention is made in
the Numbers (Numb. 21. 14.) is an evident proof, that the Stories which are
related in the Five Books of Moses, have likewise been taken out of several
collections which have been lost.] And Page 54. most clearly, [We may likewise
apply (says he) to the Book of Genesis, what we have already said touching the
manner of the inregistering the public Acts in the time of Moses; this Book
contains the Creation of the World, and many things which happened many Ages
before him: and in all Genesis there is no observation of Gods dictating to
Moses what is there related, it is not likewise said, that he writ it by the
Spirit of Prophecy: but all these Histories and Genealogies are simply related,
as if Moses had taken them from some Authentic Books, or else had had a
constant Tradition.] And in the same place, [ Moses without doubt has had other
Records (than the fabulous Books of Adam, Seth, Sem, Abraham, etc.) were they
writ, or were they preserve viva voce down to him, in the Families which God
had chosen to be faithful to him in the Worship of true Religion.] Does not
this look too like unto what I mentioned before, that Moses might write the
Book of Genesis by an humane fallible Spirit? which is contrary unto Gal. 3. 8.
and 4. 21, 22, 30. Romans 4. 17. 23, 24. 1 Cor. 15. 45. James 2. 23. for these
Scriptures do plainly assert the Divine Original and Authority of the Book of
Genesis.

Thirdly, He differs from the generality of Jews and Christians, in that he not
only says, there may be some few things in the Books of Moses, as we now have
them, which were not written by Moses; but he positively and peremptorily
affirms, that there are de facto, a great many things now in the Books of
Moses, which could not be written by Moses. This is proved from his own words,
Page 4, 5. [The public Writers which were in his time, and writ out the
ancient Acts, have spoke of Moses in the Third Person, and have used several
other such like expressions, which could not be Moses's: but they for all that
have never the less Authority; because they can be ascribed only to persons,
which Moses had commanded to put into writing the most important Actions of his
time.] And Chap. 2. Page 19. [We shall distinguish in the Five Books of the
Law, what has been writ by Moses, from what has been writ by these Prophets or
public Writers. We may attribute to Moses the Commandments and Ordinances
which he gave to the People, and allow these same public Writers to be the
Authors of the greatest part of the History. Moses in quality of Legislator,
writ all which relates to the Statutes, and left to the Scribes or Prophets the
care of collecting the Acts of the most material Transactions which past, that
they might be preserved to Posterity.] And Page 20. [But if we consider with
never so little attention, the whole Body of the Pentateuch, we may observe
this diversity of Writers which I speak of, which will more appear in the
sequel of this Discourse, where I evidently make the falsity of the reasons
appear, which the Jews use to prove, that Moses is the Author of the whole
Law.] And as was observed in the beginning, in Page 36. Contents of Chap. 5. [
Moses cannot be the Author of the Books which are attributed to him.]

Thus I have given a faithful account of the Judgment of P. Simon, and showed
wherein he both agrees with, and differs from the common Faith of Gods Church.
And since he has the generality of Jews and Christians, yea Christ himself and
his Apostles against him, he had need of very clear and strong irrefragable
Arguments to support his singular opinion, to wit, that (in his sense) Moses
could not be the Author of the Books which are attributed to him.

And now we come in the Third place to consider the grounds of his Opinion, and
to answer the Arguments by which he endeavors to prove it.

His Arguments may be reduced to Three Heads; First, He argues from the
Repetitions that are in the Pentateuch. Secondly, From the Transpositions that
are in it. Thirdly, From several passages in it, where there are such
expressions, as seem to intimate, that Moses could not be the Author of them.

I begin with the First, His Argument from Repetitions, [There are (says he,
Page 37.) many Repetitions of the same thing in the Pentateuch, which are
apparently not Moses's, but rather theirs who have made a collection of the
Holy Scriptures, and have joined together several Readings or Explanations of
the same words, not thinking it convenient to leave out of their Copies what
might illustrate the Text.] And then he gives Instances of these Repetitions.
But before I come to examine his Instances in particular, I answer to all in
general. Since P. Simon acknowledges that those who made the collection of the
Holy Scriptures were Men of a Prophetical Spirit, and Divinely Inspired, as
Moses was, what greater absurdity is there in Moses his being the Author of
these Repetitions, than in any other Prophets their being the Authors of them?
Was not God as free to repeat the same thing over and over again for
illustrating the Text, by the Ministry of one Prophet, as by the Ministry of
another? P. Simon seems to be better acquainted with the Rules of Grammar, than
with the Rules of Reasoning; now I come to his particular Instances.

First, He begins with Genesis 7. v. 17, 18, 19, 20, 24. and v. 21, 22, 23. and
first finds fault with its being said Five times over in Five Verses, That the
Waters prevailed.

But I Answer, If his Self-conceit had not blinded him, he might have seen that
there was good reason for, and great Grace in this Repetition; for as the
Waters of the Flood prevailed gradually, and still rose higher and higher, so
it was fit that the words should be adapted to the thing.

First, The Waters increased so far on the Earth, that they bore up the Ark,
and set it a floating: and this is expressed as we have it in Verse 17.

Secondly, The Waters increased to that degree, that they set the Ark a going
or moving progressively from one place to another, and this is expressed, as in
Verse 18.

Thirdly, The Waters increased so exceedingly, that the highest Mountains in
the World were covered with them, and this is sutably expressed, Verse 19.

Fourthly, The Waters increased yet so wonderfully upwards, above the highest
Mountains, that they were Fifteen Cubits under Water, and this is expressed, as
in Verse 20.

And then Fifthly, and Lastly, Since the space of time, in which the Waters
prevailed upon the Earth, was One Hundred and Fifty Days, this is appositly
expressed, as in Verse 24, and last of the Chapter.

What now does this Man deserve, who quarrels with the Spirit of God for these
repeated expressions which carry such a Grace in them, being so well fitted to
the nature of the thing spoken of?

Next, he finds fault with the Repetitions in Verse. 21, 22, 23.

I Answer, Here indeed is a Repetition of the same thing, but it is in somewhat
different words, and who knows but it might be to assure us of the Truth of the
thing, which God foresaw some Men would not believe, to wit, That the Flood was
so Universal, as to destroy utterly every Living thing from off the Face of the
whole Earth, except Noah and them that were with him in the Ark; and whatever
be said of that, yet it cannot be denied, but it is free for God to express his
mind as he pleases, if there be nothing in the expressions but what is true, as
certainly there is not in this place. And it may be, that in expressing himself
thus, he condescended to accomodate himself to the genius of the Hebrew Tongue,
and to speak with his People in their own way of speaking. P. Simon himself,
confesses that there are some Repetitions which have their Grace in the Books
of Moses, as well as in the Poems of Homer. [And (says he, Page 40.) it may be,
that good part of these Repetitions belong to the genius of the Hebrew Tongue,
which is a very plain Language, and repeats often the same thing by different
terms, which appears in almost all the Books of Scripture, and which we find
even in the Ordinances of our Kings, and in the Style of the Chancery of Rome,
as well as in the Style of our Courts for Civil Affairs, where several words
are placed after one another, which signify but the same thing.] Thus he. And
this Answer may serve to his other Instances, from Exodus 31. 14, 15, 16. and
Exodus 32. 15. But why Exodus 16. 33. compared with Verse 36. and Levit. 6. 9.
should be objected, I can see no color of reason. Is it possible, that ever a
reasonable Man should think that these passages can afford so much as a
probable Argument, that Moses cannot be the Author of the Books attributed to
him! And if Pere Simon did not think that they could do him any Service in this
matter, why did he alledg them? And moreover, why any Man should find fault
with the expressions there used, I do not understand, unless it be a fault for
Almighty God so clearly and fully to express his mind, as that his People
cannot but understand his meaning; might not P. Simon have been afraid, least
God should say to him as it is written, Matthew. 20. 15. Is thine Eye Evil,
because I am Good?

Lastly, Under this head of Repetitions is alleged, Levit. 3. 3. and here he
finds fault with these expressions, (The Fat that covers the Inwards, and all
the Fat that is upon the Inwards,) pretending that there is no difference
between these two, (the Fat that covers the Inwards) and (all the Fat that is
upon the Inwards) but this critical Objection arises from his own
inadvertency, for if he had weighed and considered the words, he would have
seen a manifest difference between these two, (the Fat that covers the
Inwards) and (all the Fat that is upon the Inwards) and would have perceived
that the words are very significant; and give us plainly to understand, that
not only some of the Fat, but all the Fat on the Inwards of the Sacrifice must
be taken away, not only the outward covering of Fat that is upon the Inwards,
but every bit and crum of Fat that adheres most closely to the Inwards: here is
an inadequat distinction between these two, (the Fat, etc.) and (all the Fat,
etc.) as there is an inadequat distinction between the part and the whole, the
thing included, and the thing including.

I proceed to his Second Head of Arguments.

Secondly, He Argues from the Disorder and Transpositions that are in the
Pentateuch. To which I Answer in general, That no solid Argument can be drawn
from this pretended Disorder, to prove that Moses could not be the Author of
the Pentateuch; for if any other Man, writeing by Divine Inspiration might be
the Author of such passages as are pretended to be out of their proper places,
there can no reason be given why Moses might not as well be the Author of them;
surely it was as free for the Spirit of God to transpose things by the Pen of
Moses, as by the Pen of any other Man. But as we have showed, P. Simon
confesses that the whole Pentateuch, (except any little mistakes of
Transcribers that may be in it) was written by Men Divinely Inspired.

Secondly, I Answer, That in all such passages God may be supposed to have
accommodated himself to the genius of the Hebrew Tongue, and to have
condescended to write unto his People in their own usual way of writing; if it
be true that P. Simon says, Page 40, 41. in these words following, [It seems to
me that the Jews themselves did not much regard writing in Method, as it would
be easy to prove by the Style of the Epistles of Paul: and Haron a Caraite
Jew, who has made literal Commentaries on the whole Pentateuch, observes often
this confusion of Order, which he calls Haphuck, and says, That it is usual
enough in Scripture to begin with one thing, then to pass unto another, and
afterward to resume again the first.] If this be true, no reason can be given,
why God might not make choice of writeing to them by the Pen of Moses in this
very way and method, which was usual amongst them, there being nothing of
Falsehood in it. So much in general.

Now let us come to a particular Examination of the several Instances he gives
of this pretended disorder; and First, He begins with the History of the
Creation, and finds fault with its Order, [As that after the Man and Woman were
Created, Genesis 1. 27. The Woman is supposed not to be made, and in the following
Chapter, the manner how she was taken from Adams side is described;
nevertheless in the same Chapter it was before forbidden him, as he was her
Husband, whom she accompanied in the Garden, to eat the Fruit of a certain
Tree.] This is his first Argument, in which there are several Falsehoods
shuffled in, as if it were to make the History of the Creation seem ridiculous.
But if any Man will impartially, and in the fear of God, consider the words of
Moses in the Two first Chapters of Genesis, he will find no such disorder or
falsehood in them at all. For in the First Chapter, Man is generally considered
according to the common nature of both Sexes, and there it is affirmed, That on
the first Day after the other works of God were finished, God Created Man, Male
and Female, in his own Image. This is common to Adam and Eve, the Male and the
Female, that they were both Man, of the same specifical humane Nature, and that
they were both Created by God in his own Image, on the Sixth Day after the
other Works of God were finished. But in the Second Chapter, Man is considered
more particularly and distinctly, according to the proper differences of Sex;
and the way is described, how the Individuals of humane Nature were Created,
each in their own Sex; and (1.) The Spirit of God by Moses declares how Man was
Created in the Male-Sex, and that he was put into the Garden before Planted,
and that he was appointed to dress and keep it, and allowed to eat of the Fruit
of it, excepting the Fruit of one Tree only, which God forbad him to eat of,
under pain of Death. (2.) The Spirit of God by Moses relates how Man was
Created in the Female-Sex, out of a Rib of a Male-Sex, and then that the Female
being thus of the Male, was Married unto him, and made one Flesh with him for
his help and comfort. In all this appears no Disorder nor Transposition, nor is
there the least shadow of Falsehood or Contradiction.

But P. Simon Objects, First, That after Man and Woman were Created, as it is
written, Chap. 1. 27. the Woman is supposed not to be made, Chap. 2.

I Answer, He might have said as well that the Man is supposed not to be made
in Chap. 2. But the truth is, neither the Woman nor the Man are supposed to be
yet unmade, after they were really made; nor does the Second Chapter at all
contradict the First: for what the First and Second Chapters say of the
Creation of Mankind, relate to the same thing, and to the same time; with this
difference, that what the First Chapter relates of Man's Creation, is expressed
in a few general Words, which equally concern both Sexes: Whereas the Second
Chapter gives a full and particular account of the manner how, and of the order
of time in which each Sex were Created.

But he Objects farther, That before the Woman was made, it was forbidden the
Man as he was her Husband, whom she accompanied in the Garden to eat the
Fruit of a certain Tree.

I Answer, This is notoriously False, I appeal to common Sense, whether there
be any such thing in the Text of Moses, as that Adam was the Husband of Eve,
and that she accompanied him in the Garden before she was made of his Rib.
Adam indeed was forbidden to eat the Fruit of a certain Tree, before Eve was
Created; this is plain in the Text of Moses: but that he was then the Husband
of Eve, or considered as her Husband before she had a Being, there is not one
Syllable of this in the Text, nor any thing from whence it can ever be proved.
When Adam received that positive Command, he neither was her Husband, nor
considered as such, nor did she then accompany him in the Garden; but he rally
was the common Root of all Mankind, of whom the several individuals were to
spring; he was moreover (I believe) the federal principal and head of all his
Posterity, (excepting the Messiah) and as such he was considered in receiving
that Law, which the Lord God revealed unto Eve also after she was Created,
though it be not expressed in the Text: for she had it revealed unto her one
way or other, otherwise she had not actually sinned in transgressing it, and we
have her own confession related by the Sacred Historian, that God had revealed
it unto her, Chap. 3. 3. But whether God revealed it unto her immediately, or
by the mediation of her Husband, we find not in the Text, and therefore we
cannot certainly say, whether of the Two ways it was revealed unto her: but we
are sure that one of them it was, and that is enough.

Here P. Simon has discovered himself, and by this instance we may Judge what
Spirit he is of; an honest Heathen would have abhorred to have been guilty of
such a gross Falsification, that he might the better expose the Author of the
History of the Creation, whoever he was. Sure I am, that Longinus did not take
the Author of that History to have been a Fool, when having occasion to mention
the History of the Creation, he wrote thus of Moses whom he believed to be the
Author of it, [He that gave Laws unto the Jews, was a Man of no ordinary parts,
for he has both conceived and spoken worthily and becomingly of the power of
God. In the very beginning of his Laws, writing thus, (God said, but what?) Let
there be Light, and it was. Let the Earth be, and it was.] Such an high opinion
of the Sacred Historian had Longinus, as is to be seen in his Book De Sublimi
dicendi genere, extant in several Languages unto this Day.

Secondly, P. Simon Instances in Genesis 21. 3, 4, 5. and says, [That to
understand the Books of Moses, one must often join many Verses together, by
beginning with the last and coming up to the first.] That is in plain English,
we must read them backwards, or we cannot understand them. Thus, Verse. 5. And
Abraham was One Hundred Years old when his Son Isaac was born unto him. Verse.
4. And Abraham Circumcised his Son Isaac, being Eight Days old, as God had
commanded him. Verse. 3. And Abraham called the name of his Son that was born
unto him, whom Sarah bare to him, Isaac.

And then he gives his Reason, why these Three Verses should be read backwards,
in these numerical words, [This Order, methinks, the Historian ought to have
kept; for the Jews do not name their Children, till after their Circumcision.]

This is his Second Argument, under the head of Transpositions, to prove that
Moses could not be the Author of the Pentateuch. And is it not a goodly one?
Sure P. Simon must have very mean thoughts of the Learned Men of this Age, to
believe that he can persuade them by such ridiculous Reasoning as this, to be
of his opinion, that Moses could not be the Author of the Pentateuch. But it is
no wonder that he have mean thoughts of the Men of this Age, when he takes upon
him to teach the Sacred Historian, (whom himself acknowledges to have been a
Prophet) how he ought to have written. [This Order, methinks, the Historian
ought to have kept,] says P. Simon. And your reason, good Father, why the
Historian ought to have kept the Order that you fancy to be best. Why that we
have in the very next words, [For the Jews do not name their Children till
after their Circumcision.] Now Reader, I pray thee consider what a senseless
Reason this is. The Author of the Book of Genesis ought to have written in that
Order, as P. Simon would have it, and we ought to read the Three Verses
aforesaid, backwards, because the Jews in this Age do not name their Children
till after their Circumcision. But can P. Simon prove, that in Abraham's time,
Children were not named till after their Circumcision? might they not be
numbered at their Circumcision, yea, or before their Circumcision, in Abraham's
time? God left it free unto Abraham and his Posterity, to name their Children
at what time they pleased, before, at, or after their Circumcision; and no Man
living can prove, that in Abraham's time, People were bound to name their
Children after their Circumcision, or that they generally used so to do; such
Arguments as this of P. Simons deserves no Answer, but to be hissed at; and
his Immodesty, in saying, That the Sacred Historian ought to have kept the
Order he speaks of, is to be lamented by all that desire to fear God.

Thirdly, He Objects, Genesis 31. 46. [This Verse (says he) is methinks likewise
out of its Order, as well as all the Discourse which treats of the Covenant
between Jacob and Laban, because they did not eat till the Alliance was made.

Answer, Here is an Argument little better than the former, only it is more
modestly proposed. They did not eat till the Alliance was made; ergo all the
Discourse which treats of the Covenant between Jacob and Laban, is out of its
order. Any Man that attentively reads the Text of Moses, would conclude the
quite contrary, that seeing they did not eat till the Alliance was made,
therefore all the Discouse that treats of the Covenant, etc. is in its Order,
because it is all set down before the offering of Sacrifice or killing of
Beasts, and eating of Bread, mentioned, Verse. 54.

As for Verse. 46. there is nothing affirmed in it, but what is most true. It is
most true, that Jacob's Brethren gathered Stones, it is most true, that they
made an heap, and it is as true, that they did eat there upon the heap. But
says P. Simon, They did not eat till the Alliance was made. I Answer, Nor does
the Historian say in Verse. 46. that they did eat before the Covenant was made;
there he only says, That they did eat upon the heap, but does not say when; and
a little after, in Verse. 54. he tells us when it was they eat upon the heap, to
wit, after the Covenant was made. So that here is nothing to cavil at, and find
fault with, only the same thing is twice expressed in somewhat different words.

First, The matter of Fact is related in general, without telling what was
meant by it, (Verse. 46. They took stones and made an heap: and they did eat
there upon the heap.)

Secondly, The meaning of the heap of stones, and of their eating upon the
heap, is cleared up, and the time mentioned when they eat upon the heap; there
it is showed, that the heap of stones was by agreement between Jacob and Laban,
ordained to be a Witness or Token of the Covenant between them Two, and their
eating upon the heap is clearly employed, to have been a federal Feast,
signifying and sealing up a lasting Friendship between the Parties Covenanted;
and last of all, it is expressly declared when this Feast upon the heap of
stones, was, to wit, after the Covenant between Jacob and Laban was made and
confirmed by the Oaths of both Parties, Verse. 53, 54.

To conclude this Answer, Let it be considered, that Verse. 46, speaks only of
the place where they eat, without mentioning the time when. But Verse. 54,
speaks only of the time when they eat, without mentioning the place where, that
is, without mentioning that it was upon the heap of stones; and now why Moses,
yea, why Gods Holy Spirit might not be the Author of both these 46 and 54
Verses, and of all that comes between them, it is above my capacity to
understand. I dare challenge any Man to bring an Argument from this place to
prove that Moses could not be the Author of the Pentateuch, an Argument I say,
that any Man of Judgment would not be ashamed. of.

Fourthly, He Objects, Genesis 35. 28, 29. The Death of Isaac there related, seems
to be out of its place, (says P. Simon) because Isaac died not at that time,
and that Joseph was sold Twelve Years before the Death of Isaac: yet
nevertheless the History of Joseph begins but at the 37th. Chapter of the same
Book.

I Answer, The Death of Isaac has that place in the History which the wisdom
of God thought fit to assign unto it, and that we should account to be its
place, which Gods Wisdom by his Prophet has put it in. But says P. Simon,
Isaac died not at that time. I Answer, There is no other time of his Death
mentioned there, but that after he was One Hundred and Eighty Years Old, he
Died and was Buried: which is most true; but it is not at all said by the
Sacred Historian, that Isaac Died at that time, when his Son Jacob came unto
him, unto Mamre: for that had been false; and I desire this may be taken notice
of. But says P. Simon, Joseph was Sold Twelve Years before the Death of Isaac,
and yet the History of Joseph begins but at the 37th. Chapter of the same Book.
I Answer, This is indeed true, for Isaac was Sixty Years Old when Jacob was
Born, Genesis 25. 26. And Jacob was One Hundred and Thirty Years Old when he stood
before Pharaoh, Genesis 47. 9. Now 60 and 130. make One Hundred and Ninety, which
is but Ten Years more than the Years of the Age of Isaac, who Died when he was
One Hundred and Eighty Years Old, that is Ten Years before Jacob stood before
Pharaoh; so that Isaac must have Died about the time of Joseph's advancement in
Egypt., as appears from Genesis 41. 53, 54. compared with Genesis 45. 6. where we
see that Seven Years of Plenty, and Two Years of Famine, had passed from the
time of Joseph's advancement, until the time of Jacob's coming into Egypt.
Isaac then Living One Hundred and Eighty Years, could not Die till about the
time of Joseph's advancement, either the Year of his advancement, or the Year
before his advancement; and if it was the Year before his Advancement, that
Isaac Died, then it was about Twelve Years after Joseph was Sold, that Isaac
Died: for Joseph was Seventeen Years Old when he was Sold, Genesis 37. 2. and
Thirty Years Old when he was advanced in Egypt, Genesis 41. 46. and consequently
he was not advanced till the Thirteenth Year after he had been Sold; so that
Isaac Dying the Year before his advancement, he must have Died Twelve Years
after he was Sold. But what is all this to the purpose? this does not prove,
that the Relation of the Death of Isaac is out of its place: for as I have
said, that is its place which the Wisdom of God thought fit to assign unto it,
and there we find it in the end of the 35th. Chapter.

But says P. Simon, The History of the Selling of Joseph begins but at the
37th. Chapter of Genesis, and yet Joseph was Sold Twelve Years before the Death
of Isaac; ergo the Death of Isaac should be related after the Selling of
Joseph, but it is related before, and so is out of its place.

I Answer, By denying the consequence; it follows indeed, that therefore the
Death of Isaac was really after the Selling of Joseph; and there is nothing
contrary to this in Genesis 35. 28, 29. but it does not at all follow, that the
relation of the Death of Isaac must be placed in the History, after the
relation of the Selling of Joseph; for God was free to place it where he
pleased, and he thought fit to place it before the relation of the Selling of
Joseph in the end of the 35th. Chapter; And there was this good reason for it,
because the Sacred Historian was there to finish the History of the Life of
Isaac, and to speak no more of it afterward.

And having no more to say of him, but that (Isaac being One Hundred and Eighty
Years Old, Died and was Buried by his Sons Esau and Jacob,) the Sacred
Historian wisely Judged it better to place it where it is, than in the middle
of the History of Joseph.

Fifthly, He Objects, Genesis 38. 1. And it came to pass at that time, that Judah
went down from his Brethren, etc. [There is no Body (says P. Simon,) in reading
these words, but would at first believe that they were joined with those that
go before them, and that the time is related in which this Action passed.
Nevertheless, it is not so, and the most Learned Interpreters of the Scripture
agree, that it happened at another time.]

I Answer, Here is indeed something that looks like an Argument, and at first
sight there seems to be a great difficulty in it, not so much because it seems
to be out of its proper place, for that is easily Answered, as before, that
whatsoever is in the place assigned unto it by the Wisdom of God, is in its
own place; but because the thing here related is said to have come to pass (at
that time,) which at first sight seems plainly to refer unto the Selling of
Joseph: but it is not true that Judah was but newly Married to the Daughter of
Shuah, when Joseph was Sold into Egypt; for between the time of the Sale of
Joseph, and the time of Judahs going into Egypt with his Father Jacob, were
but Twenty Two, or Twenty Three Years, as evidently appears from hence, that
Joseph was Sold at the Age of Seventeen Years, and all his Fathers House went
down to him into Egypt, when he was Forty, or Thirty Nine Years Old. But it is
not possible, that within the compass of Twenty Two, or Twenty Three Years,
Judah should be Married unto the Daughter of Shuah, and beget on her Three
Sons, Er, Onan and Shelah; and that after the Death of Er and Onan, and after
the youngest of them Shelah, was Marriagable, Judah should commit Incest with
his Daughter in Law Tamar, the Widow of Er, and on her beget Pharez and Zerah;
and then Pharez should be Married and beget Two Sons, Hezron and Hamul, (Genesis
38. throughout, and Genesis 46. 12.) I say it is not possible in the ordinary
course of Nature, that all this could be done within the space of Twenty Three
Years. Therefore I conclude that the words [at that time] in Verse. 1 of Chap.
38 of Genesis, cannot refer unto what goes immediately before, to wit, the Sale
of Joseph into Egypt.

Some Answer, First, That the words [It came to pass at that time] do not refer
unto what goes immediately before them, but that they mediately refer unto the
time when Jacob came first into Canaan, after he had left Laban his Father in
Law in Mesopotamia; they do not know certainly where to fix the time referred
unto, but suppose it to have been about the time of Jacob's dwelling at
Succoth, or at Shalem, (Genesis 33. 17, 18.)

Secondly, Others Answer, That the words [at that time,] or according to the
Hebrew, Baeth Hahi, [in that time] do not at all refer unto any thing that went
before, either mediately or immediately, but that they are a manner of Speech
common to Jewish and other Writers, such as (diebus illis,) which signifies a
large compass of time, within which a thing came to pass, without determining
the Year: as if the meaning were no more, but that in such an Age, such a thing
came to pass.

But Thirdly, That which satisfies me most, and in which I acquiesce, is this,
That this difficulty is only in Translations, but not at all in the Original;
and therefore I humbly offer it unto the consideration of the Godly and
Learned, whether it be not expedient in this place to take some of the other
significations of the Hebrew Particle (Vau) (according to the prudent Advice of
that excellent Person, the Honorable Mr. Boil, in his Considerations touching
the style of the Scriptures, Page 64, 65.) and thus to translate the passage
under consideration, [Vaihi Baeth Hahi, Vaijered Jehudah, etc. -- Vaijar Sham,
etc. that is, And it came to pass at that time, When Judah went down from his
Brethren, and turned in, etc. that Judah saw there a Daughter, etc.] here I
render the (Vau) in Vaijerd, (When,) and I do it, First, Because the Particle
(Vau) admits of this signification, and accordingly is sometimes rendered in
our own Translation; as for instance, Exodus 18. 1. Vaijishma Jithro, etc. when
Jethro heard, etc. Secondly, Because the subject matter does require this
signification of (Vau) in Vaijered, for the better clearing up of the sense.
Thirdly, Because our own Translatours recede from the primary signification of
(Vau) in Vaijered, and render it (that,) why then may not we recede from the
primary signification, which is (And,) and render it (When,) since it is most
evident, that to render it (When) will suit better with the subject matter, or
thing spoken of, then to render it (That.) For if we render the (Vau) in
Vajered, (When,) and the (Vau) in Vajar, Verse. 2. (That,) with this little
variation of the sense of one Hebrew Syllable, the insuperable difficulty that
seemed to be in this place of Scripture, is evanished and come to nothing: for
the words [at that time] clearly refer unto Judah his going down from his
Brethren, and turning in to the Adullamite Hira; then and at that time it was,
that he saw the Daughter of Shuah, and took her to Wife: but in what Year this
came to pass is not revealed, and therefore we are not concerned to know it.

P. Simon might have made a better use of his Critical Faculty, in thus
clearing up the difficulty which seemed to be in this place of Scripture, than
in cavilling at and finding fault with the Holy Scripture it self, as he
frequently does: but that seems to have been none of his design, but rather to
lessen the esteem of the Sacred Writings in the minds of Christians.

Sixthly, He Objects, Exodus 18. and says, The History of Jethro related in the
beginning of that Chapter, seems not to be placed in the time wherein it was,
forasmuch as Jethro seems not to have come till the Second Year after the
finishing of the Tabernacle, as may be proved out of Duteronomy.

I Answer, First, That in stead of solid Reasoning, (which a thing of this
nature requires,) here is nothing but guessing and conjecturing, and one
conjecture may be very well Answered with another opposite conjecture; he says
it may be proved out of Deuteronomy, that Jethro came not nnto Moses till the
Second Year after the finishing of the Tabernacle; and I say again, that his
possible proof, may possibly be Answered; and when he has actually proved it,
which he has not yet attempted to do, he shall be actually Answered; that is,
his proof of it, shall be refuted, if it be false, or yielded unto and
acknowledged, if it appear to be true; and I am sure this is very fair, and in
reason no more can be required. I confess it is written, Numb. 11. 16, 17. that
the Lord said unto Moses, Gather unto me Seventy men of the Elders of Israel,
whom thou know to be the Elders of the People, and Officers over them; and
bring them unto the Tabernacle of the Congregation, that they moy stand there
with thee. And I will come down, etc. Now this must have been after the
Building of the Tabernacle. But it is not yet proved, that God gave this
Commandment unto Moses at the same time that Jethro his Father in Law gave him
the Council, Recorded in Exodus 18. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Nay the Judges that
Moses appointed over Israel, according to the advice of Jethro, Exodus 18. 24,
25, 26. seem to have been many more than Seventy; and it is not improbable,
that the Seventy Elders and Officers, mentioned Numb. 11. 16. were afterward
chosen out of those many Judges formerly by Jethro's advice set over Israel,
and presented unto the Lord at the Tabernacle of the Congregation, there to
receive from the Lord the Spirit of Government, to fit them for the due
Execution of the Office they were called unto.

But foreseeing what may be said for a transposition here, I Answer, Secondly,
That suppose it were granted unto P. Simon, That Jethro did not come unto Moes,
till the Second, Year after the finishing of the Tabernacle; what then? will it
follow that therefore Moses could not be the Author of the Pentateuch? I deny
that consequence; take that relation of Jethro's coming unto Moses, which way
you will, and suppose it to be before the giving of the Law, or after the
making of the Tabernacle, as you please; yet it is still true, there is not the
least shadow of falsehood in it: for Moses neither says that it was before, nor
that it was after the Building of the Tabernacle; all that he writes of the
time wherein it was, is, that when Jethro heard of all that God had done for
Moses and for Israel, etc. then he came unto Moses, etc. Exodus 18. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5.

But as for the Year in which Jethro heard of all that God had done for his
People: Moses is silent, and makes no mention of it. That whole narration then
being true, without any mixture of falsehood, why might not Moses be the Author
of it, where it is, as well as any other Prophet could be? But is it not in
that place of the Book of Exodus, where P. Simon would have had it to have
been? I Answer, Moses might have good reason not to place it there, but just
where it is. He had other things to write of in the following Chapters of
Exodus; all which things were to be linked together, and not to be separated by
the interposition of the narrative of that visit which his Father in Law gave
him in the Wilderness. As Scaliger says, and P. Simon himself out of him, Quo
ordine quid referatur, modo constet veritas, aut nihili aut parum interest, it
signifies nothing, or very little, in what Order things be related, provided
that we find them to be truly related.

Seventhly, He Objects, Genesis 46. and says he, [Where the Children of Israel are
numbered, who went into Egypt with him, these are counted among them, Joseph,
Manasseh, and Ephraim, who could not go with him into Egypt, because they were
there before him; and as that place mentions the Children of Israel, and his
Childrens Children, who came with him into Egypt, it is probable, for
brevity's sake, these Two things have been joined together, as if they had all
been Jacob's Children.]

I Answer, This Objection comes from P. Simons heedlesness and inadvertency in
reading the Holy Scripture, but has no ground in the Text of Moses. For as
Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, could not go with Jacob into Egypt, because they
were there before him: so for certain they are not there said to have gone with
him into Egypt; on the contrary it is clearly enough said, that they did not
go with him into Egypt; for

First, It is said, Verse. 20. And unto Joseph in the Land of Egypt were Born
Manasseh and Ephraim. And again, Verse. 27. And the Sons of Joseph which were
Born him in Egypt, [were] Two Souls. where it is manifestly employed, that
Joseph and his Two Sons were not then to go into Egypt, but that they were
there already.

Secondly, To make the thing yet clearer, it is expressly said, Verse. 26. That
all the Souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his Loins,
were Threescore and Six; here Jacob himself is not reckoned as one of those
Sixty Six, because he could not go with himself into Egypt, nor could he come
out of his own Loins: Joseph also and his Two Sons are not reckoned as any of
the Sixty Six, because though they came out of Jacob's Loins, yet they could
not go with him into Egypt, since they were already in Egypt before him. But
it may be Objected, That Verse. 27. it is expressly said, All the Souls of the
House of Jacob, which came into Egypt, were Threescore and Ten. In which
number, Joseph and his Two Sons must be included.

I Answer, True, they are included in the number Seventy, though they were not
included in the Number Sixty Six; yea, and Jacob himself is included in the
number Seventy, and these Four, Jacob, Joseph, Manasseh, Ephraim, being added
to Sixty Six, make up the number of Seventy Souls, all which came into Egypt;
the 66 came into Egypt with Jacob, and Jacob came with them, for if all the
Souls of the House of Jacob came, then Jacob himself came, being head of his
own House; Joseph also he came into Egypt before, when he was sold to the
Ishmaelites; and his Two Sons they came into Egypt in the Loins of their
Father Joseph, even as Levi paid Tithes unto Melchizedeck in the Loins of his
Father Abraham, (Heb. 7. 9.) Thus all the 70 Souls came into Egypt; but the
Text of Moses does not at all say, that all the 70 came into Egypt at the same
time and in the same way and manner.

Eighthly, He Objects, Genesis 35. 26. where Benjamin is counted amongst the
Children that Jacob had in Mesopotamia, and nevertheless Benjamin was not Born
there, but in the Land of Canaan.

I Answer, I do not understand by what Rules of Reasoning, P. Simon puts this
passage amongst the disorderly Transpositions which he pretends to be in the
Pentateuch; for surely, this seems rather to be a contradiction, it being said
in the same Chapter, Verse. 16, 17, 18. that Benjamin was Born at Ephrath. And
yet here is no real, but only a seeming contradiction; for to make a real
contradiction, it must have been said, [Benjamin was Born at Ephrath,) All
these are the Sons of Jacob, which were Born to him in Padan-Aram, but now it
is not said, (all these are the Sons of Jacob which were Born to him in
Padam-aram,) but only, (These are the Sons of Jacob, which were Born to him in
Padan-Aram) and this is most true, without including Benjamin in the number of
Jacob's Sons Born to him in Padan-Aram; for the other Eleven were Born in
Padan-Aram: and there was no need here to except Benjamin by name, because it
was so clearly said, but a little before in the same Chapter, That Benjamin was
Born at Ephrath in the Land of Canaan, that no Reader could mistake so grossly,
as to think he was Born with the rest of Jacob's Children in Padan-Aram, or
Mesopotamia; I pray mark the expression, it is not said, in v. 26. All these
are, etc. but, These are, etc.

P. Simon pretends that there are Transpositions, not only in the History, but
likewise in the Laws of Moses, and therefore, Ninthly, and Lastly, He Objects,
Exodus 22. 1, 3, 4. where (says he) to make a reasonable construction, what is
said of the Thief in the Third Verse, must be joined with the First, because
there is a Transposition; and then one ought to join the Fourth Verse with the
First: and moreover the words of the Fourth Verse, [if the Theft be certainly
found in his hand alive,] ought only to relate to the Ox and Sheep, which this
Verse makes mention of, and not to the Ass, although that is spoke of in the
same place with the Two other Animals.

I Answer, All this is gratis dictum, without one word of proof. The words of
the Law may be reasonably enough construed, and well enough understood, without
the help of Pere Simons imaginary Transposition. In the First Verse, the Lord
God determins in what proportion a Thief should make restitution for an Ox or a
Sheep, in case he have killed or sold them. In Verse. 2. The Lord God declares,
that if the Thief be found in the Act of breaking up, and be killed; the
killing of him shall not be accounted Murder, nor shall the killers Blood be
shed for him, provided it were in the Night, and before Sunrising.

But in the Third Verse, the Lord declares, That the killing of a Thief in the
Day time after Sunrising, should be accounted Murder, and that the Blood of
the slayer should be shed for the Blood of the slain Thief: and that for this
reason given in the same Third Verse, because he should not have been killed
for the Theft, but compelled to make full Restitution, if he was able, but if
he was not able, he should be sold for his Theft. And in Verse. 4. the Lord
shows in what proportion he should be obliged to make Restitution, in case the
Theft were found alive in his hand; not in a Five-fold, nor Fourfold, but in a
double proportion, for Ox, or Ass, or Sheep; and thus all is clear enough in
the Order wherein the Wisdom of God has placed things, and there is no need to
have recourse unto a Transposition; as to what he Objects, concerning the Ass
in the Fourth Verse, that though it be joined with the Ox and Sheep, yet what
is said of the Theft, its being found alive in the hand of the Thief, and of
his making double Restitution in that Case, ought not to relate unto the Ass,
but only to the Ox and Sheep.

I Answer, This is a bold Assertion, without any proof at all; and there is
reason to conclude the contrary, that because the Ass is joined with the Ox and
Sheep, therefore what here relates to the Ox and Sheep, ought also to be
referred unto the Ass; the Ass was a very useful Creature in those Eastern
Countries, and that may be the reason why it is joined with the Ox, both here,
and elsewhere, as in the Tenth Commandment. I know not what use P. Simon may
have for this Ass, but it seems by what he writes, that he would play the
Thief, and steal it out of this Fourth Verse of Exodus 22. which if he should
do, he would be guilty, not only of Theft, but of Sacrilege, for this Ass
stands upon Holy Ground. Thus I have Answered all his Arguments that fall under
the Second Head of Disorderly Transpositions. I pass to the Third and last head
of Arguments, taken from several passages of the Pentateuch, where he pretends
there are such expressions as seem to intimate, that Moses could not be the
Author of them.

First, He Objects, Numb. 21. 14. A Book (says he) of the Wars of the Lord, of
which mention is made, Numb. 21. 14. is an evident proof, that the Histories
which are related in the Five Books of Moses, have been taken out of several
Collections which have been lost.

I Answer, It is denied, that the citing of the Book of the Wars of the Lord,
in Numb. 21. 14. is an evident proof, or indeed any proof at all of any such
thing. For First, It is not so evident that it was a Book at all, some think it
was but a Song; the Hebrew word (Sepher) does not always signify a Book; but
Secondly, Granting that it was a Book, and not merely a Triumphal Song, it is
not evident that it was a Book then already written, it might be a Book to be
afterward written, which Moses foreseeing by the Spirit of Prophecy, refers
unto; this agrees with the Original words in the Text, which are [Al-ken
Jeamar,] wherefore it shall be said in the Book of the Wars of the Lord, etc.
yet Thirdly, Granting it to have been a Book already written, Moses his once
citing a Testimony out of it, does no more prove that he collected his History
out of such Books, then Paul's citing a Testimony out of Heathen Poets, (Acts
17. 28. and Tit. 1. 12.) does prove that he Transcribed his Sermons and
Epistles out of the writings of Heathen Poets.

Secondly, He Objects, That the names of Hebron and Dan, which are in the
Pentateuch, were not in being in the time of Moses.

Answer, It is said, but not proved, that the names of Hebron and Dan were not
in being in Moses his time; we will speak of each of them by it self, and

First, For Hebron, We find it frequently in the Pentateuch, as in Genesis 13. 18.
and 23. 2, 19. and 35. 27. and 37. 14. and Number. 13. 22. It was a City in the
Land of Canaan, it is probable it might be first called Mamre, (Genesis 13. 18.)
and afterward Arba, or Kirjatharba, and Hebron. When this City began first to
be called Hebron is uncertain; but it seems to have been called by that name
long before Moses: for it is said, Genesis 37. 14. that Jacob sent his Son Joseph
out of the Vale of Hebron, and Numb. 13. 22. we read that the Spies which Moses
sent to search out the Land of Canaan, ascended by the South, and came unto
Hebron, where the Children of Anak dwelt: and that Hebron was built Seven Years
before Zoan in Egypt. Here Hebron is spoken of as a City very ancient, and
that was ordinarily called by that name. Afterward Joshua gave it unto Caleb
the Son of Jephunneh for an Inheritance; and he drove the Anakims out of it,
and took possession of it; as we read in Josh. 14. 13, 14. and 15. 13, 14. But
it is no where said, that Caleb changed the name of it and first called it
Hebron. I confess it is written, that the name of Hebron before, was
Kirjatharba, Josh. 14. 15. and Jud. 1. 10. but the meaning of those words, is,
that it was called Kirjath-arba before Caleb drove out the Anakims, and took
possession of it; but this does not prove that it was not also called Hebron
before, and in the time of Moses. It is was certainly called Kirjath-arba by
the Canaanites, before Caleb took it from them; but at the same time it might
be called Hebron by the Israelites. I thus clearly show that it might be so; it
was a City situate on the side of a Hill, as appears from Josh. 14. 12, 13,
14. Caleb said unto Joshua give me this Mountain, Joshua granted him his
Request, and gave him Hebron. To me it seems probable, that the Hill was first
called Hebron, and so it was Kirjatharba upon Hebron; for certain, the Country
under the Hill was called the Valley of Hebron, and as is already observed, it
was so called in Jacob's time, Genesis 37. 14.

It may be the Hill was first called Hebron from Ephron the Hittite, of whom
Abraham bought the Cave of Machphelah for a Burying-place, (Genesis 23. 16, 17,
18, 19.); this Cave seems to have been in the Hill, and the Field to have been
at the foot of the Hill, before the Mouth of the Cave; now by an easy change
of letters of a like sound, it is come to be called Hebron, by the Posterity of
Abraham, because their Father Abraham bought it of Ephron; or which comes to
the same thing, Abraham's Posterity called it Hebron from (Habar,) because
Abraham and his Posterity did as it were enter into civil Society with the
Hittites, when he bought of Ephron that part of the Hill, with the Field and
Trees at the Foot of it, for himself and his Posterity. It was almost natural
for Abraham's Posterity to call it Hebron on these accounts, that so the very
name of it might be a lasting memorial of their right to it; but the Anakims
who afterward took possession of it without right, when the Israelites were in
Egypt, did not like that it should be called at all by that name of Hebron,
and therefore called it Kirjath-arba only, from Arba the Father of Anak, (Josh.
15. 13.)

If any should now say, that this only shows how the Hill with the Cave and
Field which Abraham bought for a Burying-place, came to be called Hebron; but
this is nothing to the City, which was distinct from the Hill, Cave and Field.
I Answer, First, The City it self was Built on the side of the Hill. Secondly,
It is probable, that in process of time, the City was so far enlarged as to
take in Abraham's Field, with the Cave and that part of the Hill in which the
Cave was; and this might give occasion unto the Israelites to call the City it
self by the name of Hebron. From all which it appears probable, that it was
called Hebron by the Israelites, at the same time that it was called
Kirjath-arba by the Canaanites; and that it was called by that name among the
People of God in the time of Moses: but after the Canaanites were driven out,
and Caleb was possessed of it, it lost the name Kirjath-arba, and retained only
the name Hebron. But against this it is Objected out of Jerome, that this City
had its name from Hebron the Son of Caleb, of whom we read in 1 Chronicles. 2. 42.
43.

I Answer, First, Masius in his Commentary on Joshua, Page 247. on the 15th.
Verse of the 14th. Chapter, declares, that he did not see any strength in this
Argument to prove that Kirjath-arba was not called Hebron in the time of Moses,
or that it was first so called from Hebron the Son of Caleb; but the truth is,
Masius himself seems to have been very much mistaken in Judging of the sense of
these words [the Father of Hebron,] in 1 Chronicles. 2. 42. for he seems plainly to
take Hebron there for the City, and that (Father of Hebron) signifies Governor,
or Lord of Hebron; whereas it is evident, that Hebron there is a Man's name:
for in the next Verse, this Hebron is said to have had Four Sons; we must
acknowledge then, that one of the Posterity of Caleb was called Hebron.

But then Secondly, I Answer, that it is not clear, that this Caleb the Father
of Hebron, was the same Man with the Caleb that first took Kirjath-arba from
the Anakims; for Caleb that first took Kirjath-arba from the Anakims, was the
Son of Jephunneh, Josh. 14. 6. and 1 Chronicles. 4. 15.

But it is expressly written of Caleb, said to be the Father of Hebron, that he
was the Son of Hezron, 1 Chronicles. 2. 9, 18, 19, 42. but Hezron went into Egypt
with Jacob, Genesis 46. 12. therefore his Son Caleb must have lived long before
Moses, and could not be the same with Caleb the Son of Jephunneh, who was but
Forty Years Old when Moses sent him to espy out the Land of Canaan, Josh. 14. 7.

Yet Thirdly, Granting that Caleb the Son of Jephunneh, and Caleb the Son of
Hezron, were one and the same Man, and that he is called the Son of Hezron only
in a large sense, because he was of the Posterity of Hezron; as Masius, Page
243. thinks that Hezron was but his Grandfather, or Great Grandfather, etc. I
say, this being granted, it will not follow that Kirjath-arba was first called
Hebron, from Hebron the Son of Caleb: on the contrary, Hebron the Son of Caleb
might take his name from the City Hebron, the Inheritance of his Father; the
like seems to have happened unto Gilead the Son of Machir, 1 Chronicles. 2. 21. he
seems to have received his name from Mount Gilead, the place of his Fathers
Inheritance, Deuteronomy. 3. 15. for certain it is, that he did not first give it its
name, because Jacob had done that long before, as appears from Genesis 31. 47, 48,
54.

Masius has one Objection which I must Answer, Kirjath-arba (says he) is an old
name of that City, therefore Hebron is a new name.

I Answer, This is but a weak conjecture, for it might have two old names, one
amongst the Canaanites, and the other amongst the Israelites; as it seems
Bethel had, of which Bethel it is said, Judge. 1. 23. the name of it before was
Luz; and yet it is probable, that the Israelites called that City by the name
of Bethel, long before the House of Joseph took it from the Canaanites. Some
part of the Country very near it was most certainly called Bethel from Jacob's
time, and it is not unlikely, that the City it self from that time forwards
began to be called, sometimes Bethel by Jacob's Posterity; even Jacob himself
seems to make Luz to be all one with Bethel, because Bethel strictly so called
was near Luz: Genesis 48. 3. says Jacob, God Almighty appeared to me at Luz in the
Land of Canaan, and Blessed me; but in Chap. 35. Verse. 1, 3. the same City is
called Bethel, and was so called at that time, both by God speaking unto Jacob
and by Jacob speaking unto his Family; says God unto him, arise, go up to
Bethel and dwell there: and says he to his Family, let us arise and go up to
Bethel; which they did, and so came to Luz, that is, Bethel, Verse. 6.

And Jacob there in Luz Built an Altar, and called the place of the Altar
[El-Bethel, Verse. 7.]

From all which it seems very evident, that the same City was in Jacob's time
called by two names, Bethel and Luz; its public name by which the Canaanites
called it, and by which it was generally known to the World, was Luz; but its
private name by which God and his People called it, was Bethel; the like may be
said, without any absurdity at all, of Kirjath-arba, and Hebron.

Secondly, For the name Dan, as to what he Objects, that it was not in Being
in the time of Moses, and yet it is found in the Pentateuch, Genesis 14. 14. and
Deuteronomy. 34. 1.

I Answer, First, It is freely confessed, that the City Leshem or Laish, was
not called by the name of Dan in the time of Moses. It was a long time after
Moses before the Danites took Laish, and changed its name from Laish to Dan,
after the name of Dan their Father, as appears from Josh. 19. 47. and Jud. 18.
29. But that therefore there was no other place called by the name of Dan in
the time of Moses, I deny the consequence; the Brook or Valley of Eshcol, was
first called Eshcol in the time of Moses, because of the Cluster of Grapes
which the Children of Israel cut down from thence, when the Spies searched out
the Land, Numb. 13. 24.

And yet in Abraham's time, Mamre the Amorite had a Brother whose name was
Eshcol, Genesis 14. 13. just so, though Laish was not called Dan till after Moses,
yet some other place might be called Dan, in the time both of Abraham and
Moses. Jerome, Swidas and Philostorgius, were of opinion, that a Springhead of
Jordan was called Dan, and the Hebrew Doctors think that the River Jordan was
so called, because it springs out of Dan; and if we may believe the Learned
Hofman, in his Lexicon universale, Page 526. there was another Dan yet distinct
from Laish-Dan; and it was an Hill in the Tribe of Ephraim, on the Rode from
Samaria to Sichem; if there were then several Dans, it may probably be
supposed, that even in Abraham's time, there might be some place called by the
name of Dan, if not the Hill Dan, on the Rode from Samaria to Sichem, at least
the Fountain Dan springing out of Mount Libanus.

I Answer, Secondly, Moses in the Spirit of Prophecy might call Laish Dan by an
Historical Prolepsis, as foreseeing that it would lose the name of Laish, and
be called and known only by the name of Dan, in after Ages. He might be moved
to do this, that his writings might then be the better understood by the
People, when the name of Laish should be forgotten by the Vulgar, and that City
should only be known by the name of Dan.

I Answer, Thirdly, Suppose we should grant with the Learned Masius, that some
Prophet after Moses did substitute the word Dan in the place of Laish, (and the
same may be said of Hebron) for to help the People the better to understand and
remember those passages of Holy Scripture where it occurs, it will not follow
from hence, that Moses cannot be the Author of the Pentateuch; as we say one
Swallow does not make the Spring, so one or two little alterations of a word,
and that by the same Holy Spirit of Truth by which Moses wrote; does not hinder
Moses from being justly accounted the Author of the Pentateuch; the changing of
a word or two by God's Spirit for the benefit of God's People in after Ages, is
no sufficient reason to change the name of the Book, and to denominate it anew
from the person by whom it pleased God to make such a change. But though I
write thus, yet I shall not easily grant that de facto, there has been such an
alteration made in the names before mentioned until it be first clearly and
certainly proved, which no Man that I know has yet done: I am sure P. Simon
has not done it.

Thirdly, He Objects, Genesis 36. 31. It is probable, (says P. Simon,) that Moses
could not have writ these words; [And these are the Kings that Reigned in the
Land of Edom, before there Reigned any King over the Children of Israel,] this
manner of speaking supposes the Establishment of Kings amongst the Hebrews.

Answer, (1.) This manner of speaking only supposes that Kingly Government was
to be Established amongst the Children of Israel; according to the express
promise of God unto Jacob at Bethel, Genesis 35. 11, 12. and this Moses knew very
well by the Spirit of Prophecy, as appears from Deuteronomy. 17. 14, 15, 18, 19, 20.)
and therefore he might well suppose it as a thing that should certainly come to
pass: but it not being yet come to pass, Moses here declares that Esau was
before hand with Jacob as to this matter, for whilst Jacob's Posterity was in
Servitude, under a Rod of Iron in Egypt, Esau his Posterity flourished under a
Kingly Government in the Land of Edom.

Answer, (2.) This may signify no more, but that the Persons there mentioned,
did Reign Kings in the Land of Edom, before the time of Moses, that the
Children of Israel were first formed into an Holy Kingdom and Commonwealth,
according to Exodus 19. 5, 6.) and Moses was set over them as their Head and
King under God; according to Deuteronomy. 33. 5. where it is said, that Moses was King
in Jeshurun. Thus it is evident, that there is no weight at all in this
Objection.

Fourthly, He Objects out of R. Moses Cotsi, Exodus 12. 40. where Moses says,
That the Sojourning of the Children of Israel in Egypt was Four Hundred Years,
and yet it is certain, that Kohath Son of Levi, who was one of them that went
into Egypt, lived but One Hundred Thirty Three Years, that Amram lived only One
Hundred Thirty Seven Years, and that Moses was but Eighty Years Old when God
spoke to him, which make in all but Three Hundred and Fifty.

Answer, This Objection contains a great Falsehood, in affirming, that Moses
says the Sojourning of the Children of Israel in Egypt was Four Hundred Years;
there is no such saying in the Text of Moses; the Text says not, that the
Children of Israel Sojourned Four Hundred Years in Egypt, but that the
Children of Israel who Sojourned or dwelt in Egypt, their Sojourning was Four
Hundred and Thirty Years; here it is not said how many of the Four Hundred and
Thirty Years were past in Egypt.

Indeed (there being some ambiguity in the Hebrew words of the Text,) if it
were not well known that they Sojourned in other places, both in their own
Persons, and in their Progenitors, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, (as Levi in
Abraham paid Tithes to Melchizedec, Heb. 7. 9.) it might be thought perhaps,
that they Sojourned the whole Four Hundred and Thirty Years in Egypt; but it
is a thing notorious to all, that they Sojourned in the Land of Canaan, and
elsewhere, before they went into Egypt: and therefore it is very unreasonable
to think, that the whole Four Hundred and Thirty Years Sojourning were past in
Egypt; what Pere Simon intended by this Objection, I do not well understand;
for if this were a good Argument, to prove that Moses could not be the Author
of the Pentateuch, it would equally prove, that no Prophet could be the Author
of it, (which yet is contrary to his own Judgment, if he believe what he
writes,) for as Moses could not, so no other Prophet could be the Author of any
Falsehood. I shall say no more to this Objection, because the Reverend and
Learned Dean of Paul's, has Answered it at large, in his excellent Letter to a
Deist, unto which I refer the Reader.

Fifthly, He Objects, Genesis 46. 27. where it is said, That all the Souls of the
House of Jacob who went into Egypt, were Seventy, and nevertheless in counting
the number there related, they are found to be but Sixty Nine.

Answer, This difficulty (if it deserve that name) has been cleared already,
where it was showed, that Jacob himself did make the Seventieth.

Let any Man count them, and setting aside Jacobs Sons Wives, and Er and Onan
who died in the Land of Canaan, he will find that the Sum Total, taking in
Jacob as head of his own House, is just Seventy.

Sixthly, He Objects, Numb. 3. 39. Where are reckoned Twenty Two Thousand, but
if we join all the numbers together, there remain Three Hundred above the
account.

I Answer, By distinguishing upon the words of the 39th. Verse, thus, All the
Males of the Levites that were numbered, and were to be Devoted unto the Lord,
in exchange for the Firstborn of the other Tribes, were Twenty Two Thousand,
and no more, I grant it, as being the genuine sense of the words of Moses. All
the Males of the Levites that were numbered, and were partly already Holy and
Devoted, and partly to be Devoted unto the Lord, were Twenty Two Thousand, and
no more, I deny it as not being the genuine sense of the words of Moses. I
ground my distinction upon this, That all the Males of the Levites, of what
sort soever, were numbered from a Month Old and upwards; now amongst them all,
of necessity there must be a certain number that were Firstborn Males, and all
such Firstborn Levites as had been Born from the time of Isreal's coming out of
Egypt, unto the time of that reckoning, were already Sanctified unto the Lord
in a peculiar manner, and were his own, Devoted unto him: as appears from Exodus
13. 2, 13. and from the 13th Verse of this same Third Chapter of Numbers. These
Firstborn Levites then could not be substituted in the stead of the Firstborn
of the other Tribes, and so become Holy and Devoted unto the Lord in a peculiar
manner; for as Firstborn they were already the Lords, they were Holy and
Devoted unto God; they therefore must have been excepted and left out of the
number of Levites that were to be exchanged for the Firstborn of the other
Tribes, and so to be appropriated unto God and his Service in a peculiar
manner: But we plainly see that Three Hundred Levites are left out, therefore
it was on this account that they were the Lords already, as they were
Firstborn. The rest that were not thus the Lords already, were fit matter to
be Sanctified, and Devoted to God and his Service, instead of the Firstborn of
the other Tribes, and the number of them all were Twenty Two Thousand, and no
more. There are Two things very observable in this Chapter, (1.) That it is
expressly said of these Twenty Two Thousand Levites, that they shall be the
Lords instead of the Firstborn amongst the Children of Israel, Verse. 45.
therefore surely the Firstborn of the Levites cannot be included in that
number of Twenty Two Thousand, since they were the Lords already, as well as
the Firstborn of the other Tribes, and so could not be given unto the Lord in
exchange for them. (2.) It is observable, that this number of Twenty Two
Thousand Levites is compared with the number of the Firstborn of the other
Tribes, and the number of the Firstborn of the other Tribes being found to
contain Two Hundred Seventy Three, more than the number of the Levites that
were to be exchanged for them, it is expressly ordered by God, that this Two
Hundred Seventy Three of the Firstborn of the other Tribes, should be redeemed
with Money, at Five Shekles apiece by the Poll, Verse. 46, 47.

Which is a demonstration, that the Three Hundred Levites left out of the
number of Levites which were to be exchanged for the Firstborn of the other
Tribes, were purposely left out in the casting up of the Sum Total, as not
being fit matter to be given unto the Lord in exchange, because they were the
Lords already, as they were Firstborn; if it had not been really thus, they
would not have been purposely left out, but would have been certainly included
in the Sum Total, as they were in the particular Sums; that so there might have
been enough (and more than enough) of Levites to be given in exchange for the
Firstborn of the other Tribes, and that there might be no need of giving Five
Shekels a piece for the redeeming of any of them.

But now if any ask, why then were these Three Hundred Firstborn Levites
numbered at all, why were they put into the particular Sums of the Males of the
several Families, as appears from Verse. 22, 28, 34. and yet left out of the
general Sum of the Males of the whole Tribe, as appears Verse. 39?

Answer, They were numbered, because God would have it a known truth upon
Record, that there were at that time so many Males of the whole Tribe of Levi,
and no more; they were put into the particular Sums, because the particular
Sums were to contain all the Males of the several Families, whether they were
Firstborn or not: but they were left out of the general Sum, because it was to
balance the general Sum of the Firstborn of the other Tribes, and so no
Firstborn Levites were to be taken into it.

Secondly, I Answer, That it becomes not us to call God to an account, and to
ask why he does such a thing, when we know certainly that he has done it; he
gives not account of any of his matters, Job 33. 13.

Even an Heathen King, when his Understanding returned unto him, had so much
Reason and Religion as to confess unto God's praise, That he does according to
his Will, etc. -- and none can say unto him, what do thou? Dan. 4. 35.

This is as true of God's way of Writeing his Word, as it is of his way of
Governing the World: But notwithstanding of some things that may be secret, and
to us unaccountable in both, yet we are sure in general, that God does all
things well and wisely in the one, and the other.

Seventhly, He Objects, Exodus 16. 35. where it is said, That the Children of
Israel did eat Manna Forty Years, until they came unto the Borders of the Land
of Canaan.

It is pretended that Moses could not write this Verse, because he died before
the Children of Israel left off eating of Manna, which was not before they came
to Gilgal in the Plains of Jericho beyond Jordan, as appears from Josh. 5. 10,
11, 12.

Answer, I deny the consequence of this Argument, that because the Children of
Israel continued to eat Manna after the death of Moses, therefore Moses could
not write this Verse; any strength that this Argument may seem to have, depends
upon a false supposition, that Moses was no Prophet, and knew no more than
other ordinary Men, or that he did not write by the Spirit of Prophecy; for if
Moses was a great Prophet (as certalnly he was, Numb. 12. 6, 7, 8. and Deuteronomy.
34. 10.) and if he knew more than other ordinary Men, (as certainly he did,
Dent. 31. from Verse. 1, to 8, and from Verse. 27, inclusively unto Verse. 30.)
then he might easily know by the Spirit of Prophecy, how long the Children of
Israel should eat Manna, and when and where the Manna should cease; and it is
most certain, that long before his death the Lord God revealed unto him, That
the Children of Israel should wander, or feed (as it is rendered on the Margin
of our Bible) in the Wilderness Forty Years; as is evident from Numb. 14. 26,
33. 34, 35. and he knew well enough without having it immediately revealed to
him, that they had nothing else but Manna to live upon in the Wilderness; yet
God might tell him that they should not be starved, but the Manna should be
continued to them and their Children, till their Children were entered within
the Borders of the Land of Canaan, and sufficiently provided for in an ordinary
way without Manna. Now Moses believing this, and knowing infallibly that it
would be so as the Lord had spoken; he might write of it before his death, in
the same manner as he would have done in case he had lived to see it all
fulfilled; he might write of it in the Preterit Tense, because the whole Forty
Years were almost expired before his death, and they had already eaten Manna
for many Years; and as for the short time that remained in which they were to
have the Manna continued to them; he was so sure of it, that the Manna should
be continued to them, and that they should eat of it till they passed over
Jordan, and entered into Canaan; that he needed not to alter the Tense, but
might very well express it altogether in one and the same Preterit Tense, for
the use of that, and succeeding Generations, to whom it would certainly be a
thing past.

After all the vain attempts made hitherto by P. Simon, to prove that Moses
could not be the Author of the Pentateuch, at last out come the Arguments that
Spinosa had formerly borrowed (as he says) from Aben Ezra, to prove his
position, that Moses could not be the Author of the Books attributed to him.

Eighthly, Then P. Simon Objects, Deuteronomy. 1. 1. And to put some color upon the
business. and to make the Objection seem to have some weight in it, he thus
renders the First Verse of Deuteronomy.] These be the words which Moses spoke unto all
Israel beyond Jordan in the Wilderness,] and then he Argues that the Book of
Deuteronomy could not be written by Moses, because he never went over Jordan.
but lived and died on this side Jordan in the Wilderness; he that wrote thus
must have been in the Land of Canaan, which therefore could not be Moses but
some Body after his death, that wrote thus of him, that he spoke such words
unto all Israel beyond Jordan.

Answer, It seems strange to me, that P. Simon who is such a Learned Hebrician,
was not ashamed of this Argument, whereof the whole strength lies on the
signification of the Hebrew word [Beeber;] indeed if Beeber signify only
(Trans,) beyond, then the Argument is good, but if (Beebers) signify also
[(Cis,) on this side,] as it is rendered in our English Bibles, then the
Argument is stark naught; we must therefore for clearing of this matter,
inquire what (Beeber) signifies;

And First, I grant that (Beeber) does some times signify (trans, beyond,) I
grant also that the Vulgar Latin, the Seventy, and that Edition of Munsters
Translation which I have, render it [beyond;] but that is no proof that
(Beeber) signifies always (beyond,) and that it should be so rendered in this
place; for P. Simon himself finds fault with all these Three Translations, and
acknowledges that they may be mended in several places: why then may not this
be one of the places that ought to be mended in these Translations?

For Secondly, It is not to be granted, because it is false, that (Beeber)
always signifies (beyond.) I demonstrate as clearly as any thing of this nature
can be demonstrated, that (Beeber) signifies also [Cis,) on this side,] and
that in some places it must do so, and cannot do otherwise; as for instance, in
Josh. 1. 14, 15. where the same words (Beeber, Haijarden,) are twice repeated,
and of necessity must be Translated (on this side Jordan) and cannot be
otherwise Translated. For whosoever he was that wrote the Book of Joshua, and
when or wheresoever it was written, yet still this is true, That before any of
the Israelites had passed over Jordan, here Joshua is brought in, making a
Speech to the Reubenites, Gadites, and half Tribe of Manasseh, in which Speech
he tells them, That Moses had given them their possession (Beeber, Haijarden,)
on this side Jordan; here (Beeber) must of necessity be rendered (on this
side,) and so Masius renders it; for it would have been notoriously false for
Joshua in that place, and at that time, to have said, that Moses had given them
their Inheritance beyond Jordan; it being evident to common sense that their
Inheritance lay on that side Jordan, on which Joshua was then speaking to them.

And in 1 Samuel 14. 4. (Mehaeber Mizze) i. e. Eber with the same prefixes twice
repeated in one Verse, signifies both (on the one side,) and (on the other
side.)

In fine, Moses speaking of himself in the first Person, uses the same
expression (Beeber Haijarden,) which must be rendered (on this side Jordan,)
Deuteronomy. 3. 8. otherwise it will be false; for Moses was in the Wilderness when he
uttered these words, and he spoke them of the Kingdoms of Og and Sihon, which
in respect of Moses, did then certainly lie on this side Jordan, and not beyond
Jordan; by all this it appears, that P. Simon's Argument is grounded on a false
bottom, that (Beeber) always signifies (beyond) which is notoriously untrue. In
our own English Translation it is here rightly rendered (on this side Jordan.)

Ninthly, He Objects the last Chapter of Deuteronomy, as that which could not
be written by Moses, because it gives an account of his Death and Burial, and
of some things that were done after his Death; and to those that say Moses
wrote that Chapter by the Spirit of Prophecy, P. Simon Answers, that we ought
not to believe them.

Answer, First, No Man who believes that Moses was a Prophet, and the greatest
Prophet that was before Christ, can disbelieve the possibility of Moses his
writing that Chapter; and if it be said that it is not probable he should do
it; I Answer, Undoubtedly Moses did as improbable things as that: he foretold
things at a greater distance of time, than was his own Death and Burial, and
the Israelites Mourning for him Thirty Days in the Plains of Moah.

But Secondly, I do not affirm that Moses wrote that Chapter, at least the
Eight last Verses of it: but suppose he did not write it, yet I deny that it
follows from thence that he was not the Author of the Pentateuch; for it may
very well be said that that Chapter is really no part of the Pentateuch, or
Five books of Moses, but an Appendix to it, written by some other hand, as by
Joshua, or some other Holy Man of God after the Death of Moses.

Tenthly, He Objects, Deuteronomy. 31. 22, 24. as if these Verses, and other parts of
Deuteronomy, could not be written by Moses, because Moses is there spoken of
in the Third Person.

Answer, What a pitiful Argument is this! is it not usual even with Profane
Authors to speak of themselves in the Third Person? and does not P. Simon
himself acknowledge this in Page 20. of his Book, [ Caesar (says he) speaks of
himself in the Third Person, in his Commentaries; Josephus does the same thing
in his History of the Wars of the Jews against the Romans: and moreover he
writes his own Elogy,] with what Conscience then did P. Simon produce this
passage, to prove that Moses could not be the Author of the Pentateuch: surely
any unprejudiced Man would think that this passage might be more pertinently
alleged, to prove that Moses was the Author, at least of the Book of
Denteronomy.

Eleventhly, He Objects Genesis 12. 6. upon which he says, [If Moses was the
Author of the Pentateuch, after the manner as it is at present, would he have
used this way of speaking, (The Canaanite was then in the Land,) it is known
that the Canaanites continued the possession of this Country here spoken of,
all the time of Moses, so that this could not be writ, but after they had been
driven out.]

Answer, And why might not Moses use that way of speaking, (the Canaanite was
then in the Land,) is there any falsehood in it? is it not a certain truth, That
the Canaanites were possessors of the Land of Canaan, when Abraham came first,
to Sojourn in it? But says P. Simon, It is known that the Canaanites continued
the possession of that Land, all the time of Moses. True; it is so,
understanding it of the Land beyond Jordan; but what then? why then says P.
Simon, This could not be writ but after they had been driven out. I deny that
consequence, for I know that all the Critics in the World cannot prove it.
This passage under consideration might very well be written by Moses, though it
was well known that the Canaanites continued possessors of the Land of Canaan
beyond Jordan, all the time of Moses. Moses did not write this passage to tell
the People that the Canaanites were possessors of Canaan beyond Jordan, all his
time, which none of them could be Ignorant of; but he wrote it to make the
common Ignorant People know, that the Canaanites had been possessors of that
Land even in the time of Abraham, and that their Father Abraham was but a
stranger in it, and had not at his first coming so much as a foot of Ground in
it that he could call his own, (Acts 7. 5.) and that it was of those Canaanites
that he afterward bought the Burying-place at Hebron, or Kirjatharba. Now this
was a truth, though most certain, yet not so evident, but that many of the
common People might possibly be Ignorant of it; and therefore Moses writing
this History for the benefit of the common People, he might put in this passage
once and again, that they might take special notice of it, and thereby know
with what People it was that Abraham lived after he had left his own Country,
and Fathers House, even with the Ancestors of those Canaanites whom they were
now to destroy and drive out of that Land; and likewise that they might thereby
be moved to admire the Faithfulness and Goodness of God toward them, in that
he was then putting them in actual possession of that good Land, which though
promised unto Abraham and his Seed, yet was never before actually possessed by
him or them, but was now to be given them according to promise. I find Aben
Ezra Answering this Objection another way; he says, It may be that the
Canaanites took that Laud from some other People that were possessors of it
before them. And R. Solomon positively affirms, That that Land fell to the
share and Portion of Shem, when Noah divided the whole World amongst his Sons;
and he proves it by this, That Melchizedeck (whom the Jews believe to be Shem)
was King of Salem; but he thinks that the Canaanites took it violently away
from Shem's Posterity, and therefore God promised to Abraham that he would give
it to him and his Seed, because they were of the Posterity of Sem, to whom it
did originally belong; if this were true and could be proved, it might be
thought that Moses his words here, had reference unto the Canaanites being then
in peaceable possession of the Land of Canaan, after they had driven out
another People that was there before them. But I leave it to the Jews to Answer
thus; I adhere to the Answer given above; to which I add, that the Canaanites
were actually driven out of the Two Kingdoms of Sihon and Og, which lay on the
East Side of Jordan, before the death of Moses; and shortly after his death
they were to be likewise driven out of those Kingdoms which lay on the
West Side of Jordan; therefore Moses might very well say, That the Canaanites
were then in the Land, as intimating thereby, that now they were partly turned
out, and partly as it were, a turning out of the Land, and in a short time it
might be truly said of them, The Canaanite is not now in the Land: By all
which, it plainly enough appears, that there is no weight in this Objection of
P. Simons.

Twelfthly, He Objects Genesis 22. 14. and says, [It is not likely that Moses was
the Author of this proverbial way of speaking, (in the Monnt of the Lord it
shall be seen) since he who has added this to the Text, tells us that it was an
usual Proverb in his time; besides that this Mount seems to be one of the
Mounts of the Country of Morea, and the name of Morea was not given it till a
long time after.]

Answer, First, What though Moses was not the Author of this proverbial way of
speaking? Abraham or Isaac might be the first Authors of the Proverb, and it
might be continued amongst God's People from Abraham or Isaac down to Moses's
time; and Moses writing the History of those times as he was guided by the
Spirit of God, amongst other memorable things, he relates this matter of Fact,
that that proverbial speech had been perpetuated in the Church of God, and was
used by the Godly in his time; so that whoever was the first Author of the
proverbial speech, (In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen, or in the Mount
the Lord shall be seen, i. e. in due time and place God will help and provide
for his faithful obedient Servants, and they shall see it: God will show
himself to be a present help unto his People that trust him, in their greatest
straits and difficulties,) I say whoever was the first Author of this
proverbial Speech, nothing hinders but Moses might be, and was under God, the
Author of the Historical Relation of it.

Answer, Secondly, But how does P. Simon prove that Moses was not the Author of
it? why (says P. Simon,) because he who has added this to the Text, tells us
it was an usual Proverb in his time. Answer, A rare way of proving that
Moses could not write it, because another has written it since Moses, and
added it to his Text. But good Father, this is begging not proving. It is the
thing in question, whether another than Moses vvrote it, and added it to his
Text; and how now do you prove that another vvrote it and added it to Moses's
Text? for that is to be proved and not taken for granted. And it will not
prove it, to say that he who vvrote it, tells us, that it was an usual
Proverb in his time. For suppose Moses himself had both been the first Author
of it, and also the writer of it, in this place of Genesis, he might tell us
that it was an usual Proverb in his time; he might have been the Author of it
at the Red Sea, when he said unto the People, (Exodus 14. 13.) Fear ye not,
stand still and see the Salvation of the Lord, which he will show you to Day;
he might then have put the People in mind of what God had done of Old for
their Father Abraham when he was going to Sacrifice his Son on the Mount,
which the Lord had told him of; and from thence he might take occasion to say
[In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen, or in the Mount the Lord shall be
seen, i. e. your extremity this Day, shall be Gods opportunity, to show
himself to be your present and powerful Helper and Deliverer;] from which Day
forvvard it might have been remembered, and so have passed into a Proverb among
the People, and Twenty or Thirty Years after, Moses might write it with his
own hand. What incongruity would there be in all this, suppose it had been
thus, That Moses had been the first Author, and likewise the Historical Relator
of the same proverbial Speech? for my part I can discern none at all; but this
I have said, only to show P. Simons pitiful lame way of reasoning; for I adhere
to what I have written before, that whoever was the first Author of the
Proverb, whether it was Abraham or Isaac, etc. yet Moses might be, and was the
Historical Relator of it.

But P. Simon Objects further, That this Mount seems to be one of the Mounts of
the Country of Morea, and the name of Morea was not given it till a long time
after.

I Answer, Granting what P. Simon says, That the Mount on which Abraham was to
have offered his Son, may seem to have been one of the Mounts of the Country
of Morea, and that the name of Morea was not given it till a long time after; I
deny that it can be proved from thence, that Moses was not the Author of the
Pentateuch, and of this passage in it; for the name of Morea might be given
unto that Country first by the All-knowing God, when he commanded Abraham to
go into it, and offer his Son upon one of its Mountains, (Genesis 22. 2.) and then
a long time after, the Inhabitants of it by common consent might give it the
very same name of Morea, and might be moved so to do, by hearing and believing
a credible report, That God himself speaking with Abraham, had a long time
before given their Country the name of Moriah; after which time it might be
commonly known in those parts of the World by the name of Moriah; whereas
before it might have been known under that name, only by Abraham, Isaac, and
some Devout People of Abraham's Posterity; by this I only intend to show the
inconsequence of P. Simon's Argument; he is still so unhappy in his reasoning,
that though the premises be granted him, yet the conclusion will not follow.
But now if by these words, [the name of Morea was not given it till a long time
after,] P. Simon means, That that Country was not called Moriah, till a long
time after Moses. I Answer, That he but begs the Question, and what he affirms
without Proof, I utterly deny, and give this good Reason for my denial of it;
because the Text says expressly, (Genesis 22. 2.) That God commanded Abraham to
take his only Son Isaac, and go into the Land of Moriah, and offer him there
for a Burnt-offering, etc. From which words it seems very evident, that if that
Land was not called by the name of Moriah before, yet then at least it began to
be called by that name among the Hebrews; for we see that God called it by that
name, and the signification of the name agreeing so admirably well with what
followed thereupon; it is not likely that ever it was wholly forgotten amongst
the Posterity of Abraham. If any should say, that it may seem the name Moriah
was given to that Land rather after, than before, the Lord had manifested
himself to Abraham on the Mount.

I Answer, First, That can never be proved; why might not the Lord God give it
that name beforehand, which should signify what he was there to do on the
behalf of Abraham? The Text says, That God bid Abraham get him into the Land of
Moriah, and their offer, etc.

I Answer, Secondly, Granting that it was given to that Land after the Lord had
manifested himself to Abraham on the Mount, yet it does not follow that
therefore it must be after Moses also, and in Solomon's time when the Temple
was Built upon Mount Moriah, 2 Chronicles. 3. 1.

Certainly it might have that name long before Moses, and yet not have it till
after Abraham had done offering the Ram instead of his Son; for as Abraham
immediately after called the name of that place Jehovah-jireh, the Lord will
provide; with respect to the Answer which he had given his Son, Verse. 8. My
Son, God will provide himself a Lamb for a Burnt-Offering: So he might at the
same time call that part of the Country the Land of Moriah, or the Land of
Vision, as the Vulgar Interpreter, and Symmachus render it, because there he
had seen God in a most signal manner, there God had given him a sensible and
most convincing demonstration of his special Providence, and of his peculiar
discriminating Grace and Love to him and his Seed.

Thirteenthly, and Lastly, P. Simon Objects, Deuteronomy. 3. 11. and thereupon says,
[If we diligently read what is writ concerning the Bed of Og King of Bashan, we
shall find that those who have collected these Books, have added some words, to
illustrate the words of the Text, by conforming them to the practice and
custom of their own times.]

Answer, I have diligently read what is there written concerning the Bed-stead
of Og King of Bashan, both in the Original, and in several Translations, and
yet I do not find by what I read there, either that any Body besides Moses
collected those Books, or that he who collected them, has added some words to
illustrate the words of the Text, by conforming them to the practice and
custom of his own time. I suppose P. Simon would have us believe, that the
last words, [Beammath Ish,] (after the Cubit of a Man) have been added to the
Text after the time of Moses: but he must first prove that there was no such
distinction of Cubits known in the World, in the time of Moses, and so that
Moses could not write these words, which express one Member of the distinction;
methinks it is very easily conceivable that Moses himself might be moved to add
this explication of his own words, if we consider that there might be diverse
sorts of Cubits than in use, of which some might be longer than others, now if
it had been only said, that Nine Cubits was the length, and Four Cubits the
breadth of the Giants Bed-stead, the Reader would not have known what Cubits he
meant, and consequently would have still remained ignorant of the exact measure
of the Bed-stead, therefore Moses to take away all ambiguity, adds for
explication of his own words, that it was the Cubit of a Man, i. e. the common
ordinary Cubit, which was then so well known amongst the Israelites that there
remained no more ground of doubting of what measure the Giants Bed-stead was;
and if any were so incredulous as not to believe Moses relation of the length
and breadth of the Giant Bed-stead, they might go themselves to Rabbath, and
there see it and measure it by the Cubit of a Man. But some may say, How came
King Og's Bed-stead to be at that time in Rabbath amongst the Ammonites? I
Answer, it might come to be there any of these Three ways, (1.) In time of War,
the Ammonites might have plundered the Country of Og King of Bashan, and might
have carried his Iron Bed-stead with other spoil into their own Country; or
(2.) King Og being to fight with Moses and the Israelites at Edrei, and fearing
the event of the Battle, as he had good reason, might send his own Iron
Bead-stead with many other necessary things to Rabbath to be secured for him
amongst the Ammonites, whither he might intend to flee, in case he should be
vanquished in the Battle at Edrei, and be able to make his escape; or (3.) the
Israelites having Conquered the whole Kingdom of Bashan, and utterly destroyed
all the Inhabitants, King Og and all his Subjects, taken all his Cities, to the
number of Sixty, and possessed themselves of all that belonged to him, or his
People; if this Bed-stead was in the whole Kingdom at that time, it must of
necessity fall into the hands of the Israelites: and Israel being at Peace with
the Ammonites, they might come and Trade with the Israelites, and especially at
such a time they might come to buy part of the Spoil, and amongst other things
their curiosity might prompt them to buy the Iron Bed-stead of the Giant Og,
and to carry it into their own Country, which in former times had been a Land
of Giants, as appears from Deuteronomy. 2. 19, 20, 21. and no doubt they might have
ancient Monuments of those Giants, whom they called Zamzummims, remaining
amongst them, and those that wanted might be desirous to have by them some such
Monuments of Giants to show, as well as their Neighbors; and this might be
done before Moses either spoke or wrote the words of that Verse Objected by P.
Simon. Thus you see that any of these Three ways, the Iron Bed-stead of Og
might come to be in Rabbath of the Children of Ammon, when Moses wrote the Book
of Deuteronomy.

There are yet Two Objections against Moses his being the Author of the
Pentateuch, which I remember I have read in Spinosa, his Tractatus Theologico
Politicus, and because I would omit nothing of any Moment, that the Adversaries
have written against the Truth which the Church of God believes, and I defend,
I shall here set them down, and Answer them, as I have done with P. Simon's.

Fourteenthly, Then, Spinosa Objects, Deuteronomy. 2. 12. where it is said, That the
Children of Esau destroyed the Horims, and dwelt in their stead, as Israel did
unto the Land of his Possession which the Lord gave unto them; now he pretends
that this could not be written by Moses, because Israel did not destroy the
Canaanites, and take possession of Canaan till after his Death.

I Answer, At this rate of arguing, a Man might prove, that our Lord Christ
when he instituted the Sacrament of the Eucharist, did not speak these words,
[This is my Blood which is shed for many, -- This is my Body which is given, or
broken for you,] because his Blood was not shed, nor his Body broken, till the
Day after; and yet it is most certain that he did speak those words when he
instituted the Holy Sacrament, the Night before his Death. But then you will
ask, why did our Lord speak so, why did he say, This is my Blood which is shed,
this is my Body which is broken, when neither was the one shed, nor the other
broken? I Answer, He did so, because it was an ordinary way of speaking amongst
the Jews, to express themselves in the Preterit or Present Tense, when they
were talking or writing of a thing that was shortly and certainly to come to
pass; and therefore the Vulgar Interpeter attending more to the sense, than to
the bare words of our Lord, renders them, Hic est sanguis meus qui pro multis
effundetur, hoc est corpus meum quod pro vobis tradetur; this is my Blood which
shall be shed, and my Body which shall be given; after the same manner may we
understand the words of Moses, [as Israel did, i. e. as Israel shall shortly
and certainly do to the Land of his Possession;] besides there was this good
reason why Moses should use the Preterit Tense, because the thing he was
writing of, was partly past already, Israel had already destroyed the
Inhabitants of Two Kingdoms, and taken actual possession of the Land; and it
was partly to be within a short time, Israel was shortly to do so by all the
other Inhabitants of the Land of his possession, which God had given him; Moses
then having reason to write as he did, Spinosa had no reason to cavil at the
manner of his expression.

Fifteenthly, He Objects, Deuteronomy. 3. 14. and from these words, [ Jair called them
after his own name, Bashan-havoth-jair, unto this Day,] infers that this must
have been written long after Moses.

Answer, Some think that these words, [VNTO THIS DAY,] have been after Moses
put in the Margin, and in process of time have crept into the Text, or else
that Ezdras has inserted them into the Text. But there is no necessity of
Answering thus; for First, Moses wrote the Book of Deuteronomy some Months
after Jair had taken the Country of Argob, and called it after his own name,
(Bashan-havoth-jair,) therefore Moses himself might very well say, that the
Country of Argob was called after the name of Jair unto this Day, that is from
the time of Jair his taking of it, and calling it Bashan-havoth-jair, unto the
Day of Moses writing that part of the Book of Deuteronomy; for there was
nothing but truth in his so saying. Secondly, Moses wrote the Book of
Deuteronomy not only for the present Generation, but also for the Generations
to come, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 102. 18. This shall be
written for the Generations to come; and consequently knew that these words,
(unto this Day,) would be further verified in after Ages: Therefore he might
purposely use these words, (unto this Day,) as intending thereby to signify
unto the Israelites in their several Generations, that the Country of Argob
was called after the name of Jair, (Bashan-havoth-jair,) from Jairs first
taking of it, unto their time; there being then no falsity nor absurdity in the
words, (unto this Day,) as here used, Moses himself might very well be the
Author of them: nay they are so significant with respect to future Generations,
as I have showed, that Moses his Wisdom appears in choosing to express himself
in such words as were actually true, when he first spoke and wrote them, and
yet were to be further verified in all succeeding Generations, so long as the
Hebrew-Commonwealth stood; so much for Answer unto Spinosa his Two Objections.

I have now gone through all that P. Simon has written to prove that Moses
could not be the Author of the Pentateuch, I have examined all his Arguments,
and Answered every one of them; there is not one good Argument amongst them
all, not one that can prove his position, That Moses cannot be the Author of
the Books attributed to him; and verily many of them are (I think) such pitiful
trifling things, that a reasonable Man and Christian should be ashamed of them.
The reason why I meddle with no more of his Critical History, than what
concerns the Pentateuch, is, First, Because this was defigned to accompany the
precedent Discourse, concerning the proofs of the Books of Moses; and therefore
I thought fit to deal with P. Simon only upon that point, wherein he seemed to
contradict what the Author of the excellent Discourse affirms and proves: that
so his Objections being all Answered, that Discourse may remain firm and
unshaken, and in its full strength, and that Infidels may not pretend that P.
Simon has confuted it; which is so far from being true, that the vain
succesless attempt of so great a Man (as P. Simon is accounted,) to prove that
Moses could not be the Author of the Pentateuch; is an Argument that the thing
is not practicable, it cannot be done: for if it could, P. Simon is counted as
able, and to me seems to have been as willing to have done it, as any other Man.

Secondly, Because if the Divine Truth and Authority of Moses and his Law, and
of Christ and his Gospel, be well secured, our Christian Religion is secured in
its main strength and fundamental grounds, against Atheists and Infidels. As
for the rest of P. Simon's Book, I doubt not but some Men of greater Abilities
for such a work, than I, will in due time thoroughly examine it, and separate
the Chaff from the Wheat, allowing him his due praise where he has done well;
and chastising him where he has done evil; you may guess by this, that it will
not be so difficult to do it, as some may apprehend. In the mean time, if his
vain Cavils at several expressions here and there in the Holy Scriptures,
should be a tentation unto any to think meanly of the Scriptures themselves; I
desire such, if they can, to read some part of Origens Philocalia, Chap. 1.
Page 4, and 5. in Spencers Edition at Cambridge, 1658. and to consider that, as
Origin says, Every one of the Works of God, do not equally, but some more and
some less, declare and show forth the Glory of God in his Being and
Providence; after the same manner all the parts of God's written Word, do not
equally, but some more clearly, and some more obscurely, evidence themselves to
be of God. And as there are some dark occurrences in Providence that tempt weak
and sinful Men to doubt of God's Being and Providence, just so there are some
dark and difficult passages in Holy Scripture, that tempt Men to doubt of the
Divine Verity and Authority of of the Scriptures; and yet as none but Fools,
(Psalm. 14. 1.) will disbelieve the Being and Providence of God, because there
are some things in his Nature and Providence which they cannot comprehend; so
no Wise Man will disbelieve the Holy Scriptures, because there are here and
there some passages in them which he cannot understand; Lo they have rejected
the word of the Lord, and what Wisdom is in them? says the Prophet Jeremiah,
(Jer. 8. 9.)

Indeed there can be no true Wisdom in them who reject the Word of the Lord;
for his Word believed and practiced, is our Wisdom and our Understanding, and
makes us a wise and understanding People, (Deuteronomy. 4. 5, 6,). The Testimony of
the Lord is sure, making Wise the Simple, (Psalm. 19. 7.) If ever then we would
be truly Wise, let us against all Tentations to the contrary, esteem highly of,
and adhere steadfastly unto the Holy Scriptures of Truth; for it is they that
are able to make us wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ
Jesus, (2 Timothy 3. 15.)

If what I have here written do contribute any thing toward the helping of
Christian Readers to keep up in their Souls a due esteem of, and reverend
regard unto the Holy Scriptures, and toward the strengthening of them against
Tentations to unbelief, I have obtained my end; and desire them to let me have
the help and benefit of their Prayers, but let him have all the Praise, who is
the Father of Lights, and the God of all Grace, unto whom be Glory in the
Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all Ages, World without End, Amen.

FINIS.

