I Appoint Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, to Print this Examination,
Narrative and Letter; Perused and Signed by me, According to the Order of the
HOUSE OF COMMONS; And that no other Person presume to Print them.

Wi WILLIAMS, Speaker.

THE EXAMINATION OF Captain William Bedlow Deceased, Relating to The Popish
Plot, Taken in his last Sickness, by Sir FRANCIS NORTH, Chief Justice of the
Court of Common Pleas. Together with the Narrative of Sir Francis North, at the
Council Board: And the Letter of Sir Francis North, to Mr. Secretary JENKINS,
Relating to this EXAMINATION.

Perused and Signed to be Printed, According to the Order of the House of
Commons, BY ME William Williams, Speaker.

C2R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
DIEV ET MON DROIT
royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1680.

The EXAMINATION OF Capt. WILLIAM BEDLOW, Taken upon Oath before the Lord Chief
Justice NORTH, AT BRISTOL, On Monday the 16th of August. 1680.
THe Examinant says, That the Duke of York has bin so far engaged in the
Plot, as he has seen by Letters in Cardinal Barbarini's Secretaries Study,
that no part that has bin proved against any man already, that has suffered,
but that to the full those Letters have made him guilty of it; all but what
tended to the Kings Death. And at Rome I asked Father Anderton, and Father
Lodge, two Jesuits, What would the Duke do with his Brother when he was King?
And they answered me, They would find a means for that: they would give him no
trouble about it. Then I told them, I believed the Duke loved his Brother so
well, he would suffer no Violence to be done to Him. They said, No: If the Duke
could be brought to that, as he had bin Religiously to every thing else, they
might do their work: their other business was ready; and they might do it
presently. But they knew they could not bring him to that Point: but they would
take care for that themselves. They had not begun with him, to leave him in
such scruples as that. But they would set him into his Throne; and there he
should Reign blindfold three or four days: for they had settled some they
should pitch the Action upon, should clear their Party. And then he should fly
upon them with the Sword of Revenge.

And this Examinant does further add, That the Queen is not, to this Examinants
knowledge, nor by any thing that he could ever find out, any way concerned in
the Murder of the King: but barely by Her Letters consenting and promising to
Contribute what Money she could to the Introducing the Catholic Religion. Nay,
'twas a great while, and it made Her weep, before she could be brought to that.

William Bedlow.
Jurat. 16. die Aug. 1680. Coram me,

Fra. North.



THE NARRATIVE OF Sir FRANCIS NORTH Lord Chief Justice OF THE COMMON PLEAS, At
the COUNCIL BOARD.
AT my first coming to Mr. Rumseys house, where I was to Lodge at Bristol, upon
Monday the 16th day of August in the Afternoon, being the First day of the
Assizes, Sir John Knight came to me, and said, That Mr. Bedlow lay dangerously
ill of a Fever, and had little hopes of Life; and desired that I would give
him a Visit, that he might Impart something of great Consequence to me before
his Death. I told him I would give him a Visit that night after Supper, about
Nine a Clock, if I might be satisfied of two things: First, That there was no
Infection in his Distemper: Secondly, That the time would not be inconvenient,
but he might Discourse to me without prejudice to his Condition. After a little
while, two Physicians came to me, and assured me, that there was no danger of
Infection, and that the time I had appointed would be most proper; for commonly
he took his repose in the Afternoon, and at Nine a Clock he would in all
probability be refreshed, and fit to Discourse with me. Thereupon I declared my
Resolution of going, and desired the Company of the Two Sheriffs, and my
brother Roger North, and appointed my Marshal William Janes to go with me. As
we were upon the way, Mr. Crossman, a Minister in that City, told me Mr. Bedlow
had desired him to come with me to him: I said, It was very well, and I should
be glad of his Company. Whereupon we went all together; and being come into the
Room where Mr. Bedlow lay, I saluted him, and said, I was extreme sorry to find
him so ill. I came to Visit him upon his own desires. I did imagine he had
something to impart to me as a Privy-Councellor; and therefore if he thought
fit, the Company might withdraw. He told me, That needed not yet, for he had
much to say, which was proper for the Company to hear: And having saluted the
Sheriffs, and Mr. Crossman, he discoursed to this purpose.

That he looked upon himself as a dying man, and found within himself that he
could not last long, but must shortly appear before the Lord of Hosts, to give
an account of all his Actions. And because many Persons had made it their
business to baffle and deride the Plot, he did, for the satisfaction of the
World, there declare upon the Faith of a dying Man, and as he hoped for
Salvation, That whatever he had Testified concerning the Plot, was True. And
that he had wronged no Man by his Testimony, but had Testified rather under
than over what was Truth. That he had nothing lay upon his Conscience upon that
Account. That he should appear cheerfully before the Lord of Hosts: which he
did verily believe he must do in a short time. He said, He had many Witnesses
to produce, who would make the Plot as clear as the Sun: and he had other
things to Discover, which were of great Importance to the King, and the
Country. Hereupon he making some pause, I told him, The Plot was so evidently
made out, that no reasonable man, no Protestant, I was sure, could doubt of the
Truth of it: But he ought not to have Concealed any thing that concerned the
King so highly. He ought to Discover his whole knowledge in matters of Treason,
that Traitors may be Apprehended and Secured; who otherwise may have
opportunity to Execute their Treasonable Designs. To this he replied, That much
of that which he had not Discovered was to Corroborate his former Testimony:
That he had Concealed nothing that was absolutely necessary to the Kings
Preservation. That he thought it not fit to Accuse more Persons, till he had
ended with those whom he had already Accused. He expressed great grief and
trouble at the Condition of his poor King and Country (so he termed them) whom
he knew at that time to be in Eminent danger from the Jesuits, who had Resolved
the Kings Death: and he was sure they would spare him no longer then he
continued to be kind to them. He said, He was privy to their Consultations at
Salamanca and Valladolid, where they used to observe the favorable Conjuncture
they had to Introduce their Religion into England: which consisted in their
having a Head, who must be set up whatever came of it: and, If they let slip
that opportunity, they should never have such another: For without a Head they
could do nothing. He said further, He knew the Wickedness and Resolution of the
Jesuits: they stuck at nothing to compass their own ends. They had attempted to
Poison him, but he had escaped.

When he had finished this Discourse, (which lasted about a quarter of an hour)
I asked him, If the Company should now withdraw? And he said, Yes: and Ordered
his Nurses to go out, and only his Wife to stay to tend him. And thereupon all
went out, saving Mrs. Bedlow, my self, and my servant William Janes. Then I
told him, I thought it convenient that what he should then say unto me; should
be upon Oath. He replied, That it was necessary it should be so: and called for
a Bible. But my Servant having brought a Book with him, Administered the Oath to
him; and laying his Paper upon a Chair by the Bedside, writ down his Deposition
as he delivered it.

When Mr. Bedlow had concluded, and said, That was all he had to Inform me of,
I took the Paper, and Read it over distinctly to him, and he approved it, and
Signed it, laying the Paper upon a Pillow.

I thought it not fit, considering his Condition, to perplex him with
Questions, but took his Information as he offered it, and held no Discourse
with him when the Company was withdrawn, but concerning the true setting down
his Depositions: and when he seemed to be weary, to mind him of taking
Cordials, which his Wife reached to him as he desired them.

The next day Mr Bedlows Brother came to me, and told me that his Brother
desired a Copy of the Deposition he made before me. But I told him, I had well
considered it, and could not give him a Copy without the Kings leave. But I
would move the King in it: and if He gave leave, I would take care to send one
to him. And Mr Bedlows Brother then told me, That it was his Brothers desire
that I should represent to His Majesty his Condition; and that his Sickness was
very Chargeable: and move His Majesty on his behalf for some Supply of money
for his Subsistence; which I promised to do.

This is all that I can recollect of what passed upon this Occasion, and is in
Substance true: but the very Words, or the Order, I cannot positively remember.

FRA. NORTH.

To the Right Honorable Sir LYONELL JENKINS, One of His Majesty's Principal
SECRETARIES of STATE.
Sir,
I Always intended to Write from hence, to pay my thanks for the whole Circuit,
which was much more pleasant, by your favor of holding Correspondence with me.
But now I have business of some Importance: For as soon as I came to this City,
I received a Message from Mr. Bedlow, by Sir John Knight, That he being very
ill, and in the judgment of Physicians in great danger of Death, had some
business of great moment to impart to me. I knowing the Man, and the season,
would not refuse the pains to give him a Visit: and being satisfied by
Physicians that there was no Contagious quality in his Distemper, (though I did
not much fear it) I went well accompanied; and in the presence of the Company
he Declared, That whatever he had said relating to the Plot, was True. And he
being a dying Man, had nothing lay upon his Conscience upon that score. The
greatest trouble he had, was the danger the KING (whom he loved above all
things) was in from the Papists at this time: who would attempt His Life as
soon as ever he should cease to be kind to them: and many other Expressions of
this kind. After this I asked if he had any thing to impart to me in private.
He told me, He had. And having made the Company withdraw, all but my Clerk, I
took the enclosed Examination upon Oath; you may imagine I was not curious to
perplex him with Questions. I took it just as he delivered it. Of what
signification it will be, I leave to wiser Men. I think my duty is to send it
to you, that you may Inform His Majesty of the Truth. I shall wait upon you at
Windsor upon Sunday next, to receive your further Commands.

Your most humble and faithful Servant, FRA. NORTH.
Ten at Night. The Copy enclosed is hastily and ill Taken. I shall bring the
Original with me.



FINIS.

