REPRESENTATION Of The Threatening Dangers, Impending Over PROTESTANTS In GREAT
BRITAIN.

With an Account of the Arbitrary and Popish Ends, unto which the Declaration
for Liberty of Conscience in England, and the Proclamation for a Toleration in
Scotland, are designed.

Neque enim satis amarint bonos Principes, qui malos satis non oderint.

Plin. in Panegyr. c. 53.

Sedem obtinet Principis, ue sit Domino locus. id. ibid. c. 55.

Tantum tibi licet, quantum per leges licebit, Pacat. ad Theodos. August.

THey are great strangers to the Transactions of the World, who know not how
many and various the attempts of the Papists have been, both to hinder all
endeavors toward a Reformation, and to overthrow and subvert it where it has
obtained and prevailed. For beside the innumerable Executions and Murders
committed by means of the Inquisition to crush and stiffle the Reformed
Religion in its rise and birth, and to prevent its succeeding and settlement in
Spain, Italy, and many other Territories; there is no Kingdom or State, where
it has so far prevailed as to come to be universally received and legally
established, but it has been through strange and wonderful conflicts with the
rage and malice of the Church of Rome. The Persecutions which the Primitive
Christians underwent by vertu' of the Edicts of the Pagan Empero^s, were not
more sanguinary and cruel, than what through the Laws and Ordinances of Popish
Princes, have been inflicted upon those, who have testified against the
Heresies, Superstitions, and Idolatries, and have withdrawn from the Communion
of the Papal Church. Nor were the Martyrs that suffered for the Testimony of
Jesus against Heathenism, either more numerous or worthier of esteem for
vertu', Justice and Piety; than they who have been slaughtered, upon no other
pretense, but for Endeavoring to restore the Christian Religion to the
simplicity and purity of its Divine and first Institution, and to recover it
from the corruptions, wherewith it was become universally tainted in Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline. How have all the Nations in Europe been soak't with
the Blood of Saints, through the Barbarous Rage of Popish Rulers, whom the
Roman Bishops and Clergy stirred up and instigated, in order to support
themselves in their secular grandeur, and in their Tyranny over the Consciences
of men, and to keep the World in Slavery under Ignorance, Errors, Superstition
and Idolatry, which the reducing Christianity again to the Rule of the Gospel,
would have redeemed mankind from, and been an effectual means to have
dissipated and subverted? They of the Roman Communion, having strangely
corrupted the Christian Religion in its Faith, Worship, and Discipline, and
having prodigiously altered it, from what it was in the Doctrines and
Institutions of our Savior and his Apostles; they found no other way whereby
to sustain their Errors and Corruptions, and to preserve themselves in the
possession of that Empire, which they had usurped over Conscience, and in the
enjoyment of the Wealth and secular Greatness, which by working upon the
Ignorance, Superstition, Lusts, and Prophanness of People, they had skrewed and
wound themselves into, but by adjudging all who durst detect or oppose them, to
fire and Sword, or to miseries, to which Death in its worst shape were
preferrable. Nor have they for the better obstructing the growth, and
compassing the Extirpation of the Reformed Religion, omitted either the Arts
and Subtlities of Julian, or the Fury and Violence of Gal^rius and Di^cletian.
Whosoever has not observed the Craft and Rage that have been employed and
exerted against Protestants for these 170. Years, must have been very little
Conversant in Histories, and strangely overlook't the conduct of affairs in
the World, and the Transactions in Churches and States, during their own time.
And tho the Papists do not think it fit, to put their Maxim's for preserving
the Catholic Religion, and converting Heretics, in Execution at all times,
and in every place, yet some of their Writers are so ingenuous, as to tell us
the reason of it, and that they do not forbear it upon Principles of
Christianity or good Nature, but upon motives of Policy and Fear, lest the
cutting one of our Throats might endanger two of their own. However they have
been careful not to suffer a period of twenty years to elapse since the
beginning of the Reformation, without affording us in some place or another,
renewed evidences of Papal Charity, and of the Roman method of hindering the
growth of Heresy, either by a Massacre, War, or Persecution, begun, and
executed, upon no other account or provocation, but merely that of our
Religion, and because we cannot believe and practice in the matters of God, as
they do. And having obtained of late, great Advantages for the pursuing their
malice against us, more boldly and avowedly than at an other Season, and that
not only through a strange concurrence and conjunction of Princes in the Papal
Communion, who are more intoxicated with their Superstitions and Idolatries, or
less wise, merciful, and humane, than some of their Predecessors of that
Fellowship were, but through having obtained a Prince entirely devoted unto
them, and under the implicit guidance of their Priests, to be advanced unto a
Throne, where such sometime used to sit, as were the Terror of Rome, the
Safeguard of the Reformed Religion, and the Sanctuary of oppresed Protestants;
they have thereupon both assumed a Courage of stirring up new and unpresidented
Persecutions in diverse places, against the most useful, best and loyallest of
Subjects, upon no other charge or Allegation, but for dissenting from the
Tridentine Faith, and denying Subjection to the Tripple Crown, and are raised
into a Confidence of wholly Extirpating Protestancy, and of reestablishing the
Papal Tyrannies and Superstition, in the several Countries whence they had been
expelled, or stood so depressed and discountenanced, as that the Votaries and
Partisans of their Church, had not the Sway and Domination. Nor need we any
other conviction both of their Design, and of their Confidence of Succeeding in
it, than what they have already done, and continue to pursue in France, Hungary
and Piedmont, wheretheir prospering to such a degree in their Cruel and
Barbarous Attempts, not only gives them boldness of entertaining thoughts of
taking the like Methods, and Acting by the same measures, in all places where
they find Rulers at their beck, and under their Influence, but to unite and
provoke all Popish Monarchs to enter into a holy War against Protestants every
where, that by Conquering and Subduing those States and Kingdoms, where the
Reformed Religion is received and established, they may extirpate it out of the
World, under the Notion of the Northern Heresy. If principles of humanity,
Maxim's of Interest, Rules of Policy, Obligations of Gratitude, Ties of Royal
and Princely Faith, or the repeated Promises, Oaths, Edicts, and Declarations
of Sovereigns, could have been a Security to Protestants, for the Profession of
their Faith and Exercise of their Worship, in the forementioned Territories and
Dominions, they had all that could be rationally desired, for their Safety and
Protection, in the free and open profession and Practice of their Religion;
whereas by a violation of all that is Sacred among men, of a binding virtue unto
Princes (except Chains and Fetters) or that confer a Right, Claim, and Security
unto Subjects, the poor Protestants in those Places, have been, and still are,
persecuted with a rage and Barbarity, which no age can parallel, and for which
it is difficult to find words proper and severe enough, whereby to stamp a
Character of infamy, upon the treacherous, cruel, and savage Authors,
Promoters, and Instruments of it. Nor does it proceed from a Malignancy of
Nature peculiar to the Emperor, the French King, and the Duke of Savoy, above
what is in other Princes of the same Communion, or that they are more
regardless of Fame, and less concerned how future generations will brand their
Memories, than other Papal Monarchs seem to be, that they have suffered
themselves to be prevailed upon, to violate the Promises and Oaths they were
bound by to their Protestant Subjects; seeing the Emperor is charactered for a
person of a meek and gentle temper, and of the goodness of whose Nature,
thereremain some shadows interwoven with the bloody streaks of the Hungarian
Persecution. And the French King tho he stand not much commended for sweetness
and Benignity of disposition, is known to be unmeasurably Ambitious, of having
his name transmitted to Posterity in Letters of Greatness and Honor, which his
behavior toward his Subjects of the Reformed Religion, is no way's adapted
unto, but calculated to make him hereafter listed with Nero and Julian. As to
the Duke of Savoy, there seems by the whole course of his other Actions, to be
a certain Greatness of Mind in him, not easily consisting with that savage and
brutal temper, which the Cruelties he has exercised upon the Protestants in
Piedmont, would intimate and denote. But it arises from the Mischievousness
and Pestilency of their Religion, their Bigottry in it, and their having put
themselves so entirely under the conduct of the Clergy, particularly of the
Jesuits, who are for the most part a set of men, especially the latter, that
through acting in the prospect of no other Ends, but the Grandeur, Wealth, and
Domination of the Church of Rome, do with an unlimited rage, and a peculiar
kind of Malice, persecute all that have renounced Fellowship with it, and care
not if they Sacrifice the Honor, Glory and Safety of Monarchs, and bring their
Kingdoms into contempt and desolation, by rendering them weak, poor, and
dispeopled, provided they may wreck their spleen, and revenge, upon those,
whose Religion is not only dissonant from theirs, but should it prevail to be
the Religion of the Legislators and Rulers of Nations, those springs of Wealth
would be immediately dried up, by which their Superior Clergy, and all their
Religious Orders are enriched and fed up in idleness. And should the People
come to be generally imbued with principles of Gospel, Light and Liberty, they
would immediately shake off a blind and slavish Dependence upon Pope and
Priests, and thereby subvert the Foundation upon which the Monarchick Grandeur
of the Romish Church and their whole Religion is superstructed and destroy the
Engine by which they are enabled to Lord it over the Bodies, Estates, and
Consciences of men. And if Protestants every where, especially under Popish
Rulers, were not under a strange Infatuation, they would look for no fairer
Quarter from Papists, than what their Brethren have met with in France and
Piedmont, nor would they rely upon the Faith of any King, that styles himself a
Roman Catholic, seeing Sacred Promises, tremendous Oaths, and the most
Authentic Declarations, are but Papal Arts, and Tricks sanctified at Rome,
whereby to full Subjects into a Security, and delude them into a neglect of all
means, for preserving themselves, and their Religion, till their Rulers can be
in a condition, of obeying the Decrees of the fourth Lateran Council, that
enjoins Kings to destroy and extirpate Heretics, under pain of
Excommunication, and of having both their Subjects absolved from Allegiance to
them, and their Territories given away to others; and till without running any
hazard, they may comply with the Ordinance of the Council of Constance, which
not only releaseth them from all Obligation of keeping Faith to Heretics, but
requires them to violate it; and accordingly made Sigismond break his Faith to
John Hus, whom in d^fiance of the Security given him by that King, they caused
to be condemned and burnt. Nor is the practice and late Example of the Great
Louis, designed for less than a pattern, by which all Popish Princes are to
act, and his proceedings are to be the copy and Moddel, which they who would
merit the name of Zealous Catholics, and be esteemed dutiful Sons of the
Church, are to transcribe and limn out in lines of force, violence, and Blood,
and for the better corresponding with the Original, to employ Dragoons for
Missionaries.

And tho I will not say, but that there may be some Popish Princes, who through
an extraordinary measure of good Nature, and from principles of Compassion,
woven into their Constitution, previously to all notices of Revelation whether
real, or pre^ended, and who through Sentiments im^ib'd from a generous
Education, and their ^oming afterward to be under the influence, and
Management, of wise and discret Counselors, may be able to resist the
malignant ^mpressions of their Religion, and so be preserved, from the
inhumanities toward those of different persuasions from them in the things of
God, which their Priests would lay them under Obligations unto, by the
Doctrines of the Romish Faith; yet there appears no reason why an understanding
man should be induced to believe, that the King of England, is likely to prove
a Prince, of that great and noble temper, there being more than enough, both to
raise a jealousy and beget a persuasion, that there is not a Monarch among all
those who are commonly styled Catholics, from whom Protestants, may justly
dread greater Severities, than from Him, or look for worse and more Barbarous
Treatments. I am not ignorant, with what candor, we ought by the Rules of
Charity and good manners, to speak of all men, whatsoever their Religion is,
nor am I unacquainted with what Veneration and Deference, we are to Discourse
of Crowned Heads; but as I dare not give those flattering Titles unto any, of
which there are not a few in some of the late Addresses, presented to the King,
by an inconsiderable and foolish sort of Dissenting Preachers; so I should not
know, how to be accountable to God, my own Conscience, or the World, should I
not in my station as a Protestant, and as a Lover of the Laws and Liberties of
my Country, offer something, whereby both to undeceive that weak and
short-sighted People, whom their own being accommodated for a Season by the
Declaration of Indulgence, has deluded into an Opinion, that His Majesty
cherishes no thoughts of subverting our Religion, and also further to
enlighten and confirm others, in the just apprehensions they are possessed
with, of the design carrying on in Grear Britain, and Ireland, for the
extirpation of Protestancy, and that the late Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience, is emitted in subserviency thereunto, and calculated by the Court;
toward the paving and preparing the way, for the more facile accomplishment of
it. And while Mercinary Sycophants, by their Flatteries infect and corrupt
Princes, and by their Representing them to the World, in Colors disagreable
from their tempers and dispositions, and in milder and fairer Characters, than
any thing observable in them, either deserves, or correspondeth with, do
delude Subjects, into such Opinions of them, as beget a neglect of means for
preserving themselves; it is become a necessary Duty, and an indispensable
Service to mankind, to deal plainly and above board, that so by describing
Kings as they are, and setting them in a true and just Light, we may prevent
the Peoples being further imposed upon, or if through suffering themselves to
be still deceived, they come to fall under miseries and persecutions, they may
lay all their Distresses, and Desolations, at the door of their own folly, in
not having taken care, how to avoid, what they were not only threatened with,
but whereof they were warned and advertised. For as I am not of Sr. Roger
l'Estranges mind, That if we cannot avoid being distrustful Hist. of the Times.
of our Safety, yet it is extremely vain, foolish, and extravagant to talk of
it; so I am very sensible how many of the French Ministers, by painting forth
their King more like a God than a Man, and by possessing their people with a
belief of Wisdom, Justice, Grace, and Mercy in Him, of which they knew him
destitute, they both emboldned him, to attempt what he has perpetrated, and
laid them under snares, which they know not how to disentangle themselves from,
in order to escape it. Nor would the King of England, have acted with that
neglect of the future Safety of the Papists, nor have exposed them to the
resentment, and hereafter revenge of three Nations, by the Arbitrary and
Illegal steps he has made in their favor, if he intended any thing less, than
the putting Protestants for ever out of capacity and condition, of calling them
to a reckoning, and exacting an account of them, which neither He, nor they
about him, can have the weakness to think they have sufficiently provided
against, without compelling us by an Order of a la mode France Missionaries to
turn Catholics, or by adjudging us to Mines and Galleys, according to the
Versailles President, for our Heretical Stubborness, or which is the more
expeditious way of converting three Kingdoms, to cause murder the Protestant
Inhabitants, according to the pattern, which his Loyal Irish Catholics,
endeavored to have set anno 1641. for the conversion of that Nation. Had his
Majesty been contented with the bare avowing, and publishing himself to be of
the Communion of the Church of Rome, and of challenging a Liberty, tho against
Law, for the Exercise of his Religion, it might have awakened our Pity, and
Compassion, to see him embrace a Religion, where there are so many impediments
of Salvation, and in doing whereof, he was become obnoxious unto the
imprecation of his Grandfather, who wished the curse of God, to fall upon such
of his Posterity, as should at any time turn Papists; but it would have raised
no intemperated heats in the minds of any against him, much less have alienated
them, from the Subjection and Obedience, which are due unto their Sovereign, by
the Laws of the several Kingdoms, and the Fundamental Rules of the respective
Constitutions. Or could he have been contented, with waving the rigorous
Execution of the Laws against Papists, of whatsoever Quality, Rank, or Order
they were, and with the bestowing personal, and private Favors, upon those of
his Religion, it would have been so far from begetting rancor or discontent in
his Protestant Subjects, that they would not only have connived at, and
approved such a procedure, and those little Benignities and Kindnesses, but had
the Papists quietly acquiesced in them, and modestly improved them, it might
have been a means of reconciling the Nation to more lenity towa(...) them for
the future, and might have i^ fluenced our Legislators, when God sh(...)
vouchsafe us a Protestant on the Throne, (...) moderate the Severities to which
by the Laws in being they are obnoxious, and (...) render their condition as
easy, and safe, (...) that of other Subjects, and only to take car(...) for
precluding them such places of power and trust, as should prevent their being
ab(...) to hurt us, but could bring no damage or i^ convenience upon
themselves. But the King instead of terminating here, an^ allowing only such
Graces and Immun(...) ties to the Popists, as would have been (...) nough, for
the placing them in the priva(...) Exercise of their Religion, with Security
(...) them, and without any threatening dange^ to us. He has not only suspended
all the penal Laws against Roman Catholics, but (...) has by an usurped
Prerogative, that is par(...) mount to the Rules of the Constitution, and (...)
all Acts of Parliament, dispensed with, an^ disabled the Laws that enjoin the
Oath of A(...) legeance and Supremacy, and which appoi(...) and prescribe the
Tests, that were the Fence^ which the Wisdom of the Nation ha(...) erected, for
preserving the Legislative A(...) thority, securing the Government, and keeping
places of Power, Magistracy and Offic(...) in the Hands of Protestants, and
thereby (...) continuing the Protestant Religion, and Engli(...) Liberties, to
our selves, and the generation that shall come after us. And as if this were
not sufficient, to awaken us to a consideration of the danger we are sin, of
havin^ our Religion supplanted and overthrown* He has not only advanced the
most viole(...) Papists, unto all places of Military comman(...) by Sea and
Land; but has established many of them, in the Chief Trusts and Offi(...) of
Magistracy, and Civil Judicature, so th(...) there are scarce any continued in
Power and Employment, save they who have (...) there promised, to turn Roman
Catholics, (...) who have engaged, to concur and assist (...) the subverting
our Liberties, and Religion, u^ der the Mask and disguise of Protestan(...)
(...) is already evident, that it is beyond the ^^lp, and relief, of all
Peaceable and Civil ^eans, to preserve and uphold the Protestant ^eligion in
Ireland, and that nothing but force and an intestine War, can retrieve it unto,
and reestablish it there, in any degree of safe(...). Nor is it less apparent,
from the Arbi^^ary and Tyrannous Oath, ordained to be ^^quired of His Majesty's
Protestant Subjects (...) Scotland, whereby they are to swear O^^dience to Him
without Reserve, that our Re^^gion is held only precariously in that King^^m;
and that whenever he shall please to ^^mmand the establishment of Popery, and
(...) enjoin the people to enter into the Com^union of the Church of Rome, He
expects (...) have his Will immediately conformed unto, and not to be disputed
or controlled. ^ut lest what we are to expect from the ^ing, as to the
extirpation of the Reformed ^eligion, and the inflicting the utmost Seve^ties
upon his Protestant Subjects, that Papal ^ge, armed with power, can enable him
un^^, may not so fully appear, from what has ^een already intimated, as either
to awa^en the Dissenters out of the Lethargy, into which the late Delaration
has cast them, or (...) quicken those of the Church of England, to that
zealous care, vigilance, and use of all Lawful means, for preserving
themselves, and the Protestant Religion, that the impen^ent danger, wherewith
they are threatened; ^equires at their hands; I shall give that farmer
Confirmation of it, from Topics and motives of Credibility, Moral, Political,
and ^istorical, as may serve to place it in the ^rightest light, and fullest
evidence, that a ^atter future and yet to come, which is on^^ the object of our
prospect and dread, and ^ot of our feeling and experience, is capa^le of.

It ought to be of weight upon the minds ^f all English Protestants, that the
King of ^eat Britain, is not only an open and avowed ^apist, but as most
Apostates use to be, a ^ery Bigot in the Romish Religion, and who (...) the
Liege Letter from a Jesuit to a Bro^^er of the Order tells us, is resolved
either to convert England to Popery, or to die a Martyr. Nor were the Jewish
zealots, of whose rageful transports, Josephus gives us so ample an account,
nor the Dervises among the Turks, and Indians, of whose mad attempts, so many
Histories make mention, more brutal in their fanatical Heats, than a Popish
Bigot uses to be, when favored with advantages, of exerting his animosity
against those who differ from him, if he be not carefully watched against, and
restrained. Beside the innumerable instances of the Tragical Effects of Romish
Bigottry, that are to be met with in Books of all kinds, we need go no further
for an evidence of it, than to consult the Life of Dominick, the great
Instigator and Promoter of the Massacre of the Waldenses, and the Founder of
that Order, which has the Management of the bloody Inquisition; together with
the Life of Henry the third of France, who contrary to the advice of Maximilian
the Emperor, and the repeated entreaties of the wisest of his own Counselors,
the Chancellor de l'Hospital, and the President de Thou, not only revived the
War and Persecution against his Reformed Subjects, after he had seen what
Judgments, the like proceedings had derived upon his Predecessors, and how
prejudicial they had proved to the Strength, Glory, and Interest of his Crown
and Kingdom, but he entered into a League with those that sought to depress,
abdicate, and depose him, and became the Head of a Faction for the destroying
that part of his Subjects, upon whom alone he could rely for the defense of his
person, and support of his Dignity. Nor were the Furies of the Duke de Alva
heretofore, or the present Barbarities of Louis the Fourteenth, so much the
effects of their haughty and furious tempers, as of their Bigottry in their
inhumane and sanguinary Religion. That the King of England, is second to none,
in a blind and rageful Popish Zeal, his behavior both while a Subject, and
since he arrived at the Crown, does not only place it beyond the limits of a
bare suspicion, but affords us such evidences of it, as that none in
consistency with principles of wisdom, and discretion, can either question or
contradict it. To what else can we ascribe it, but to an excessive Bigottry,
that when the Frigate wherein he was sailing to Scotland anno 1682. struck upon
the Sands, and was ready to sink, he should prefer the Lives of one or two
pitiful Priests, to those of men of the greatest Quality, and receive those
mushrom's into the Boat, in which himself escaped, while at the same time, he
refused to admit, not only his own Brother-in-Law, but diverse Noblemen of the
Supreamest Rank, and Character, to the benefit of the same means of
deliverance, and suffered them to perish, tho they had undertaken that Voyage
out of pure respect to his person, and to put an Honor upon him, at a Season,
when he wanted not Enemies. Nor can it proceed from any thing but a violent and
furious Bigottry, that he should not only disoblige and disgust the two
Universities, of whose Zeal to his service, he has received so many seasonable
and effectual Testimonies, but to the violation both of the Laws of God and the
Kingdom, offer force to their Consciences, as well as to their Rights and
Franchises, and all this in favor of Father Francis, whom he would illegally
thrust into a Fellowship in Cambridg, and of Mr. Farmer, whom he would
arbitrarily obtrude into the Headship of a College in Oxford, who as they are
too despicable to be owned, and stood for, in competition against two famous
Universities, whose greatest crime, has been an excess of zeal for his person,
and interest, when he was Duke of York, and a measure of Loyalty, and
Obedience, unto him, since he came to the Crown, beyond what either the Rules
of Christianity, or the Laws of the Kingdom, exact from them; so he has way's
enough of expressing kindness, and bounty, to those two little contemptable
Creatures, and that in methods as beneficial to them, as the places into which
he would thrust them, can be supposed to amount unto, and I am sure with less
scandal to himself, and less offense to all Protestants, as well as without
offering inj(...) to the Rights of the University, or of co^ pelling those
learned, grave, and vene(...) ble men, to perjure themselves, and act (...)
against their Duties and Consciences. T(...) late proceedings toward Dr.
Burnet, a(...) not only contrary to all the measures of J^ stice, Law, and
Honor, but argue a stran(...) and furious Bigottry in His Majesty for Po(...)
ry, there being nothing else into which (...) man can resolve the whole tenor
of his pr^ sent Actings against Him. Seeing setting (...) side the Doctor's
being a Protestant, and a M^ nister of the Church of England, and his havin^
vindicated the Reformation in England, from the Calumnies, and slanders,
wherewith (...) was aspersed by Sanders, and others, of the Roman Communion,
and the approving himself in some other Writings, worthy of the Character of a
Reformed Divine, and of tha^ esteem which the World entertains of him for
knowledge in History, and all other part(...) of good learning; there has
nothing occurred in the whole tenor and trace of hi^ Life, but what instead of
Rebuke and Censure, has merited acknowledgments, and the Retributions of
Favor and Prefermen^ from the Court. Whosoever considers, his constant
Preaching up passive Obedience to such a degree and height, as he has done,
May very well be surprised at the whole method of their present actings toward
him, and at the same time that they find cause to justify the Righteousness of
God, i^ making them the Instruments of his persecution, whom in so many way's
he had sought to oblige, they may justly conclude that none save a Bigoted
Papist could be the Author of so infutable, as well an illegal, and unrighteous
returns. For as to all whereof he is accused, in the Criminal Letters against
him, bearing date the 19. of April 1687. I my self am both able to assert his
innocence, and dare assure the World, that none of the persons whom he is
charged to have conspired with against the King, would have been so far void of
discretion, (knowing his principles) as to have transacted with (...) in
matters of that kind; but whether (...) Letters since that, to the Earl of
Middle(...), with the Paper, enclosed in one of (...)m, have administered any
Legal ground (...) their Second Citation, I shall not take up(...) me to
determine, and will only say, that (...) I heartily wish, he had not in those
Letters (...)orded them, any probable pretense, for (...)oceeding against him,
so there are excesses (...) Loyalty in them, to atone for the utmost
(...)discretions, his words are capable of being (...)rested unto, nor can any
thing but Papal Malice, and Romish Chicanerie, construe, and ^ervert them, so
far contrary to his inten(...)ons, as to make crimes, and much less to (...)ache
Treasons of them. Now as nothing, (...)n be of more portentous Omen to British
and Irish Protestants, than to have a Popish (...)igott exalted to Rule over
them; so through (...) concurrence of ill nature, and a deficien^y in
intellectuals, met in him with his fu^ious Zeal and Bigottry, they are the more
^o expect, whatsoever his Power inables him ^o inflict, that is severe and
dreadful. It Is possible, that a Ruler may be possessed with a ^ondness, and
Valuation of Popery, as the only Religion, wherein Salvation is to be obtained,
and thereupon in his private Judgment and Opinion, sentence all to eternal
Flames, who cannot herd with him in ^he same Society; and yet he may through a
great measure of Humanity, and from an extraordinary proportion of compassion,
and meekness, woven into his nature, hate the imbrucing his hands in their
Blood, or treating those with any harshness, whose supposed misbelief is their
only Crime; and that finding them in all other respects, virtuous, peaceable
and industrious, He may leave them to the decretive Sentence of the Sovereign
and infallible Judge, without disturbing, or meddling with them himself. Nor is
it impossible, but that there may be a Prince so far Bigoted in Popery, as to
have inclination, and propensity, to force all under his Authority, to be of
his Religion, or else to destroy and extirpate them, yet through being of that
largeness of Understanding and Political Wisdom, as to be able to penetrate
into the hazards of attempting it, and to foresee the Consequences that may
ensue upon it, in reference to the Peace and Safety of his Government, as well
as the Wealth and power of his Dominions, he may come to check and stiffle his
furious Inclinations, and choose rather, to leave his Subjects at quiet, than to
impoverish, weaken, and dispeople his Country, either by destroying them, or
by driving them to abandon his Territories, in order to find a Shelter, and
Sanctuary, in other places. But where (as in the King of England) a small
measure of Understanding, accompanied with a large share of a Morose, Fierce,
and ill Nature, and these attended with Insolency and pride, as they usually
are in weak and froward people, come to have a Bigottry in such a Religion as
Popery, superadded to them, whose Doctrines and Principles instigate, and
oblige, to Cruelty, toward all of other persuasions, there Protestants, do
find nothing, that may encourage to hope for security, and protection, under a
Prince of that temper and complexion; but all that does affect and impress
their minds, bidds them prepare for persecution, and to look for the utmost
rigours and severities, that pride, malice, brutal zeal, backed and supported
with force and power, can execute and inflict. And how much such a Princes
Religion, proves too weak to restrain him from uncleanness, and other
immoralities, by so much the more, is he to be dreaded, in that he thinks to
compound for and expiate Crimes of that nature, by his cruelty to Heretics,
and his offering them up in Sacrifices of Atonement to the Triple Crown. Nor
are the Priests either displeased with, or careful to diswade Princes, from
Offenses of that kind, tho they know them to be great provocations to God, and
of mischievous example to Subjects, seeing they are Masters of the Art of
improving them, to the Service of Holy Church, and the Advantage of the
Catholic Faith. For instead of imposing, upon those Royal Transgressors, the
little and Slavish Pennances, of Pilgrimages, whippings, and going barefoot;
they require them to make satisfactions for those and the like Crimes, by the
pious and meritorious Acts of murdering Protestants, and of extirpating the
Northern Heresy. And as one of the French Whore's of State is reported to have
been a person that has principally instigated to all the Cruelties against the
Reformed in France; so no doubt but as she did it under the influence and
conduct of her Confessors to compensate for her Adulteries, so she advised and
persuaded Louis to it upon motives of the same nature. Nor do they who have the
guidance of Consciences at Whitchal want matter of the same kind, to improve
and work upon, and as there are of the licentious Femal's that will be glad of
attoning for their filthy pollutions by Acts so agreeable to the Articles of
their Religion; so there are some who as they have influence enough upon the
King to council Him to the like Method's, so they will find Him sufficiently
disposed to compound for his Loathsome and Promiscuous scatterings at a rate so
suitable to his temper, as well as to the Doctrines of the Papal Faith.

If any be deluded into a good Opinion of His Majesty, and brought to flatter
themselves with expectations of their being protected in the profession of the
Protestant Religion, they may be easily undeceived and prevailed upon to change
their Sentiments, if they will but consider his behavior toward Protestants
in the post wherein he formerly stood, and what his carriage was to them, while
he was fixed in a meanner and more subordinate station than now he is. Tho
there have been many whose behavior in their private condition, would have
rendered them thought worthy to Rule, if their actions after their advancement
to Governing power had not confuted the Opinion entertained concerning them;
yet there have been very few that have approved themselves (...) just and
merciful after their attaining to Sovereignty, whose carriage in an inferior
station, had been to the damage, and general hurt of mankind, (...) far as
their narrow power and intere^^ would extend. It ought therefore to lay u^
under a conviction, what we are to expec^ from His Majesty on the Throne, when
w^ find the whole thread and series of his conduct while a Subject, to have
been a continued design against our Religion, and an uninterrupted plot for the
subversion of our Laws and Liberties. It Is sufficiently known how active he
alway's was to keep up and inflame the differences among Protestants, and how
he was both a great Promoter of all the severe Laws made against Dissenters,
and a continual instigator to the rigorou^ Execution of them: So that his
affirming it to have been ever his judgment that none ought to be oppressed and
persecuted for matters of Religion, nor to be hindered in Worshipping God
according to their several persuasions; serves only to inform us, either with
what little Honesty, Honor, and Conscience H^ acted, in concurring to the
making of the foresaid Laws, or what small faith and credit is now to be given
to his Declaration, and to what he has since the Emission of it repeated both
in his Speech to Mr. Penn, and in his Letter to Mr. Alsop. And to omit many
other Instances of his kindness and Benignity to the Fanatics, whom he now so
much huggs and caresseth; it may not be amiss to remember them, and all other
Protestants, of that Barbarous and illegal Commission issued forth by the
Council of Scotland, while He, as the late Kings High Commissioner, had the
management of the affairs of that Kingdom; by which every Military Officer
that had command over twelve men was empowered to impannel Juries, try,
condemn, and cause to be put to death, not only those who should be found to
disclaim the Kings Authority, but such as should refuse to acknowledge the Kings
new modelled Supremacy over that Church; in the pursuance and execution of
which Commission, some were shot to death, others were hanged or drowned, and
this not only during the conti(...) (...) o^ the Reign of his late Majesty, ^ut
(...) (...)e a year and a half after the pre^^nt King came to the Crown. But
what ^eed is there of insisting upon such little par^^culars, wherein he was at
all times ready (...) express his malice to Protestants, seeing (...)e have not
only Dr. Oates's Testimony, (...)d that of diverse others, but most
authen(...)ck proofs from Mr. Coleman's Letters, of (...)s having been in a
Conspiracy several years (...)r the subversion of our Religion, upon the
(...)eritorious and sanctified Motive of extir(...)ating the Northern Heresy.
Of which be(...)de all the Evidence that four Successive ^arliaments arrived
at, I know several who (...)nce the Duke of York ascended the Throne have had
it confirmed unto them by ^ivers foreign Papists, that were less re^^rved, or
more ingenuous than many of (...)hat Communion use to be. To question (...)he
Existence of that Plot, and his present Majesty's having been accessory unto,
and in (...)he head of it, argues a strange effrontery and (...)mpudence through
casting an aspersion of weakness, folly and injustice not only upon those three
Parliaments that seemed to have re^ained some zeal for English Liberties, but
by fastening the same imputations upon the (...)ong Parliament, which had showed
it self at all times more obsequious to the will of the Court, than was either
for their own Honor, or the safety and Interest of the Kingdom, and who had
expressed a Veneration for the Royal Family, that approached too much unto a
degree of Idolatry. Whosoever considers that Train of Councels wherein the King
was many years engaged, and whereof we felt the woeful effects in the burning of
London; the frequent Prorogation and Dissolution of Parliaments; the widening
and exasperating Differences among Protestants; the ^^irring up and provoking
Civil Magistrates and Ecclesiastical Courts, to persecute Dissenters; and the
maintaining Correspondencies with the Pope and Catholic Princes abroad, to the
dishonor of the Nation and danger of our Laws and Religion, cannot avoid being
apprehensive what we are now to look for at his hands, nor can he escape,
thinking that he esteems his Advancement to the Crown, both a reward from
heaven for what he has done and plotted against these three Kingdoms, and an
opportunity and advantage administered unto him for the perfecting and
accomplishment of all those Designs with which he has been so long bigg and
in travel for the destruction of our Religion, the subversion of our Laws, and
the reestablishment of Popery in these Dominions.

The conduct and guidance under which His Majesty has put himself, and the
fiery temper of that Order to whose Government he has resigned his Conscience,
may greatly add to our fears, and give us all the jealousy and dread that we
are capable of being impressed with in reference to matters to come, that there
is nothing which can be fatal to our Religion or persons, that we may not
expect the being called to conflict with and suffer. For tho most of the Popish
Ecclesiastics, especially the Regulars, bear an inveterate malice to
Protestants, and hold themselves under indispensable Obligations of eradicating
whatsoever their Church styles Heresy, and have accordingly been alway's
forward to stir up and provoke Rulers, to the use and application of force for
the destruction of Protestants, as a Company of perverse and obstinate
Heretics, adjuged and condemned to the Stake and Gibbet by the infallible
Chair; yet of all men in the Communion of the Romish Church, and of their
Religious Orders, the Jesuits are they who do most hate us, and whose Councels
have been most sanguinary, and alway's tending to influence those Monarchs,
whose Consciences they have had the guiding and conducting of, to the utmost
Cruelties and Barbarities toward us. What our Brethern have had measured out
to them in France through Father de la Chaise's influence upon that King', and
through the bewitching power and domination he has over him in the quality of his
Confessor, and as having the direction of his Conscience, may very well allarm
and inform us what we ought to expect from His Majesty of Great Britain, who
has surrendered his Conscience to the guidance of Father Peter's, a person of
the same Order, and of the like mischievous and bloody disposition that the
former is. It Is well observed by the Author of the Reasons against repealing
the Acts of Parliament concerning the Test, that Cardinal Howard's being of
such a meek and gentle temper that is able to withstand the Malignity of his
Religion, and to preserve him from concurring in those mischievous Councels,
which his purple might seem to oblige him unto, is the reason of his being shut
out from acquaintance with, and interest in the English affairs transacted at
Rome, and that whatsoever his Majesty has to do in that Court is managed by
his Ambassador under the sole direction of the Jesuits. So that it is not
without cause, that the Jesuit of Liege in his intercepted and lately printed
Letter, tells a Brother of the Order what a wonderful veneration the King has
for the Society, and with what profound submission he receives those Reverend
Fathers and hearkens to whatsoever they represent. Nor is His Majesty's being
under the influence of the Jesuits through having one of them for his Confessor,
and several of them for his Chief Counselors and principal Confidents, the
only thing in this matter that awakens our fear in what we are to expect from
his armed power, excited and stirred by that fiery Tribe; but there is another
ground why we ought more especially to dread him, and that is his being entered
and enrolled into the Order and become a Member of the Society, whereby he is
brought into a greater subjection and dependence upon them, and stands bound by
ties and engagements of being obedient to the Commands of the General of the
Jesuits, and that not only in Spirituals, but in whatsoever they shall pretend
to be subservient to the exaltation of the Church, and for upholding the glory
of the Triple Crown. This is a Mystery which few are yet acquainted with, and
which both His Majesty, and the Order judgd it their interest to have
industriously concealed, but whereof the World may ere long receive that
convictive intelligence, that there will be no room left for suspecting the
truth of it, and whereof a Jesuit in the late printed Letter from Liege has
given us already sufficient intimation, both in telling us, That the King of
England styles himself a Son of the Society, and how that he wrote to Father de
la Chaise, that he would account every injury done to the Jesuits to be a
wrong committed against himself. Neither is it so surprising as it may seem at
first view, that the King should list himself a Member of the Order, seeing
there have been four other Crowned Heads of whose Entrance and matriculation
into the Society, there is all the evidence and assurance imaginable. And tho
one of them is acknowledged to have been in the Classis of the Directors, while
the other three are generally believed to have been in the Form of the
Directed, yet such was the power of the Society over them all, that a great
part of the Cruelty exercised toward Protestants both in the last age and in
this, is to be ascribed to that implicit and blind Obedience which they were
bound to yield to the injunctions of the Order, and to the Commands of the
General. Philip the Second of Spain, who was the first King that entered into
the Order, and who did it upon motives of Policy in hopes by their means to
have compassed the Universal Monarchy which he was aspiring after, and who through
being in the Classis of Directors, had advantages of using and improving, and
not of being in that degree of servitude unto them which the others have been;
yet to what barbarous Cruelties did they overrule and instigate him, not only
to the destruction of unconceivable numbers of his Subjects, whose only Crime
was that they could not believe as the Church of Rome does, which issued in the
depopulating some of his Dominions, and his being deposed from the Sovereignty
in others but to the sacrificing his Son and Heir Prince Charles, whom to
gratify the Society, he caused upon an Accusation of his favoring the Low
Country Heretics, and the being himself tainted with Lutheranism to be
murdered in is own Court and Palace. Sigismond of Po(...)d, who was the second
crowned Head admitted into the Order, through complying with he Councels, and
serving the wrath, rage and passions of the Jesuits, in endeavoring ^o
suppress Religion in Swedland to which he was Heir, and in striving to subvert
their Civil Rights, drew upon himself the resentment and wrath of that Nation
to such a degree, that they abdicated him and his Heirs from the Government,
and advanced another to the Throne. Casimire who was also King of Poland is
reckoned to be the ^hird Sovereign Prince that entered into the Society, and he
through coming under the Domination of the Jesuits, and being bound to follow
their directions, and to execute whatsoever the General of the Order thought
fit to enjoin for the promotion and benefit of the Church, became not only an
Instrument of a severe persecution against all sort of Dissenters from the
Romish Faith, so that many were put to death, and more driven to abandon their
Country, but through committing many things in the course of his Government
that were prejudicial to the Rights, and thereupon disgustful to the Polish
Nobility, they conceived such an aversion and hatred for him, that to avoid the
effects of their resentment and indignation, he was forced to lay down his
Crown, and to choose to end his day's in France in no higher a Post, and under
no more glorious a Character, than that of Abbot of Saint German. There is a
fourth Prince, and who is yet in being, that is generally believed to be
enrolled into the Order, and the persecution he has carried on in Hungary,
contrary to his natural temper, and to all the: Rules of Interest and Policy,
and to the violation of his Promises and Oaths for continuing unto them the
Liberty of their Religion, is both too probable an evidence of it, and a strong
confirmation of the cruelties which the Jesuits instigate Princes unto over
whom they have influence, and whom they have wheedled into engagments of
obeying their commands and pursuing their injunctions. And as the desolating of
Hungary through a long and bloody War, and the tempting the Turks to invade the
Austrian Territories, are some of the effects that have ensued upon the
Emperor's complying with the fierce and heady Councels of the Jesuits; so we
have not seen all the mischiefs that the persecution, which they have engaged
him in against Protestants is like to issue in, tho beside the disgusting
several Electoral Princes and States in Germany, and the furnishing the Ottoman
Potentate with Encouragements of continuing the War, there are wonderful
advantages afforded by it, to embolden the French King in his encroachments
upon the Empire, which otherway's he would not have dared to attempt, and
whereof the result at last may prove fatal to the Imperial Dignity and to the
whole House of Austria. Now what the Protestants in Great Britain and Ireland
ought to dread from the King, upon his being entered into a Society that has
breathed nothing but fire and blood since its first Institution, I leave to the
serious consideration of all men who value their Lives, Liberties and Estates,
and that do not think of renouncing their Religion, and turning Papists. Nor is
it to be imagined that the King, before he can be supposed well settled on the
Throne, and while under a declining state of Body, as well as in an advanced
age, having the weight of four and fifty upon his shoulders, beside something
else that he is obliged to the Earl of Southesk for, which I shall not mention,
would have taken so many bold, wide, and illegal stepps for the supplanting our
Religion and Laws, and for the introduction and establishment of Popery and
Tyranny, and this not only to the losing and disobliging his former Votaries
and Partisans, but to the strange allarming and disgusting most persons of
honor, quality, and interest in the three Kingdoms, were he not beside the
being under the sway of his own Bigottry, and the strong balance of a large
measure of ill nature, bound by ties of implicit obedience to the Commands of
that extravagant and furious Society, to the promoting of whose passions and
malice, rather than his own safety and glory, or the lasting benefit of the
Roman Catholics themselves, the whole course of his Government hitherto seems
to have been shapen and adapted. The occasion and subject of the late contest
between him and the Pope, which has made so great a noise not only at Rome,
but through all Europe, may serve to convince us both of the Extraordinary zeal he
has for the Society, and of the transcendent power they have over him, and
that it is no wonder he should exact an obedience without reserve from his
Subjects in Scotland, seeing he himself yields an obedience without reserve to
the Jesuits. It Is known, how that by the Rules of their Institution no Jesuit
is capable of the Myter, and that if the Ambition of any of them should tempt
him to seek or accept the dignity of a Prelate, he must for being capacitated
thereunto, renounce his Membership in the Order. Yet so great is His Majesty's
passion for the Honor and Grandeur of the Society, and such is their domination
and absolute power over him, that no less will serve him, neither would they
allow him to insist upon less, than that the Pope should dispense with Father
Peter's being made a Bishop, without his ceasing to be a Jesuit, or the being
transplanted into another Order. And this the old Gentleman at Rome has been
forced at last to comply with, and to grant a Dispensation whereby Father
Peter's shall be capable of the Prelature, notwithstanding his remaining in the
Ignatian Order, the Jesuits through their Authority over the King not suffering
him to recede from his demand, and His Majesty's zeal for the Society not
permitting him to comply either with the prayers, or the Conscience and Honor
of the Supreme Pontiff.

Not only the Kings unthankfulness unto, but his illegal proceedings against,
and his arbitrary invading the Rights of those who stood by him in all his
dangers and difficulties, and who were the Instruments o^ preventing his
exclusion from the Crown, and the Chief means, both of his advanc(...) meant to
the Throne, and his being kept in are so many new evidences of the ill w(...)
he bears to all Protestants, and what they a to dread from him as occasions are
admin(...) stred of injuring and oppressing them: a(...) may serve to convince
all impartial a(...) thinking people, that his Popish malice to o(...) Religion
is too strong for all principles of H(...) nor and Gratitude, and able to
cancel t(...) Obligations, which Friendship for his pers(...) and service to
his interest, may be suppos(...) to have laid him under to any heretofor Had it
not been for many of the Church (...) England, who stood up with a zeal and
v(...) gour for preserving the succession in t(...) right line, beyond what
Religion, co(...) science, Reason, or Interest could co(...) duct them unto, he
had never been able (...) have out-wrestled the endeavors of thr(...)
Parliaments for excluding him from the I(...) perial Crown of England: and had
it n(...) been for their abetting and standing by (...) with their swords in
their hands upon th(...) Duke of Monmouth's descent into the Kingdom anno 1685.
he could nothave avoid(...) the being driven from the Throne, and th(...)
having the Scepter wrested out of his han^ Whosoever had the advantage of
knowin(...) the temper and genius of the late King, an(...) how affray'd he was
of embarking into an(...) thing that might import a visible hazard t(...) the
peace of his Government, and dra(...) after it a general disgust of his person;
wi(...) be soon satisfied that if all his Protestant Subjects had united in
their desires, and co^ curred in their endeavoures, to have ha(...) the Duke of
York debarred from the Crow(...) that his late Majesty would not have on^
scrupled the complying with it, and th(...) his Love to his dear Brother, would
have given way to the apprehension and fear (...) forfeiting a love for himself
in the hear(...) of his people, especially when what wa(...) required of him,
was not an invasion upon the fundamentals of the constitution of th(...)
English Monarchy nor dissonant from th(...) practice of the Nation in many
repeated i(...) stances. Nor can there be a greater evidence (...) the present
Kings ill nature, Romish By(...)ry, and prodigious ingratitude, as well (...)
of the design he is carrying on against our (...)ligion and Laws, than his
carriage and be(...)viour toward the Church of England; tho (...) cannot but
acknowledge it a righteous (...)gment upon them from God, and a just
(...)nishment for their being not only so un(...)ncerned for the preservation
of our Reli(...)n and liberties in avoiding to close with (...)e only methods
that were adapted there(...)to, but for being so passionate and indu(...)ious
to hasten the loss of them through put(...)g the Government into ones hands, who
(...)s they might have foreseen) would be (...)e to make a sacrifice of them to
his belo(...)d Popery, and to his inordinate lust after (...)spotical and
arbitrary power. And as the (...)ly example bearing any affinity to it, is
(...)t of Louis the 14th, who in recompense to (...) Protestant Subjects for
maintaining him (...) the Throne, when the late Prince of Con(...) assisted by
Papists would have wrested the (...)own from him, has treated them with
Barbarity, whereof that of A^^iochus to(...)ards the Jews, and that of
Diocletian and (...)aximian toward the primitive Christians (...)ere but
scanty and impersect draughts; so (...)ere wants nothing for completing the
pa(...)lel between England and France but a little (...)ore time and a
fortunate opportunity, and (...)en the deluded Church men will find that
(...)er Peter's is no less skilful at Whitehall for (...)nsforming their acts of
loyalty and merit (...)wards the King into crimes and motives (...) their ruin,
than Pere de la Chaise has shown (...)mself at Versailles, where by an Art
peculiar (...) the Jesuits, he has improved the loyalty (...)zeal of the
Reformed in France for the house (...) Bourbon, into a reason of alienating
that (...)onarch from them, and into a ground of (...) destroying that dutiful
and obedient peo(...). It will not be amiss to call over some (...) his
Majesty's proceedings toward the (...)urch of England, that from what has
(...)en already seen and felt, both they and all (...)glish Protestants may the
better know what they are to expect and look for hereafter. Tho it be a method
very unbecoming a Prince, yet it shows a great deal of spleen, to turn the
former persecution of Dissenters so maliciously upon the Prelatical and
conforming Clergy, as his Majesty does in his letter to Mr. Atsop in stiling
them a party of Protestants, who think the only way to advance their Church, is
by undoing those Churches of Christians that differ from them in smaller
matters. Whereas the severity that the Fanatics met with, had much of its
Original at Court, where it was formed and designed upon motives of Popery and
Arbitrariness; and the resentment and revengful humor of some of the old
Prelates and other Church men that had suffered in the late times was only laid
hold of, the better to justify and improve it. And tho it be too true that many
of the dignified Rank, as well as of the little Levites were both extremely
fond of it, and contentiously pleaded for it; yet it is as true that most of
them did it not upon principles of judgment and conscience, but upon
inducements of retaliation for conceived injuries, and upon a belief of its
being the most compendious method to the next preferment and benefice, and the
fairest way of standing recommended to the favor of the two Royal Brothers.
Nor is it unworthy of observation, that some of the most virulent writers
against liberty of conscience, and others of the most fierce Instigators to the
persecuting Dissenters, among whom we may reckon Parker Bishop of Oxford and
Cartwright Bishop of Chester, are since Adressing for the Declaration of
Indulgence became the means of being gracioully looked upon at Whitthall, turned
foreward promoters of it, tho their success in their Diocesses with their
Clergy has not answered their expectations and endeavoures. For as these two
Mytred Gentlemen will fall in with and justify whatsoever the King has a mind
to do, if they may but keep their Seas and enjoy their Revenues, which I dare
say that rather than lose they will subscribe not only to the Tridentine Faith
but to the Alcoran; so it is most certain that they two as well as the Bishop
of Durham have promised to turn Roman Catholics; and that as Crew has been
several times seen assisting at the celebration of the Mass, and that as
Cartwright paid a particular respect to the Nuncio at his solemn Entrance at
Windsor, which some Temporal Lords had so much conscience and honor as to scorn
to do, so the Author of the liege Letter tells us that Parker not only
extremely favors Popery, but that he brands in a manner all such for Atheists
who continue to plead for the Protestant Religion. It Is an Act of the same
candor and good nature in the King with the former, and another Royal effect of
his Princely breeding as well as of his Gratitude, when he endeavors to cast a
farther odium upon the Church of England, and to exasperate the Dissenters
against her, by saying in the forementioned letter to Mr. Alsop that the reason
why the Dissenters enjoyed not liberty sooner, is wholly owing to the
solicitation of the Conforming Clergy; whereas many of the learned and sober
men of the Church of England, could have been contented that the Nonconforming
Protestants should have had liberty long ago, provided it had been granted in a
legal way; and the chief executioners of severity upon them were such of all
ranks, orders, and stations as the Court both set on and rewarded for it. It Is
not their Brethrens having liberty that displeases modest and good men of the
Church of England; but it is the having it in the virtu' of an usurped
prerogative over the Laws of the Land, and to the shaking all the legal
foundations of the Protestant Religion it self in the Kingdom. And had the
Declaration of Indulgence imported only an exemption of Dissenters and Papists
from rigours and penalties, I know very few that would have been displeased at
it; but the extending it to the removing all the Fences about the Reformed
Doctrine and worship, and laying us open both to the tyranny of papists, and
the being overflowed with a deluge of their superstitions and Idolatries, as
well as the designing it for a means to overthrow the established Chur(...) is
that which no wise Dissenter no more t(...) a conformable man knows how to
digest. (...) I am not of Sr. Roger l'Estranges mind, w(...) after he has been
writing for many yea(...) against Dissenters with all the venom and m(...) lice
imaginable, and to disprove the wisdo(...) justice, and convenience of granting
th(...) liberty, has now the impudence (...) publi(...) that whatsoever he
formerly wrote; bears an exact conformity Proef. to h(...) Hist. of th(...)
Times. p. (...)
to the present Resolutions of State, in that the liberty now vouchsased is an
Act of Grace issuing from the supreme Magistrate, an(...) not a claim of Right
in the people. And as to r(...) cited expressions of the King, they are
onl(...) a papal trick whereby to keep up heats an(...) animosities among
Protestants, when both th(...) inward heats of men are much allayed, and
th(...) external Provocations to them are wholly removed, and they are merely
Iesuitick method's by which our hatred of one another may b(...) maintained,
tho the Laws inabling one part(...) to persecure the other, which was the
chie(...) spring of all our mutual rancour and bitterness, be suspended. It
would be the sport and glory of the Ignatian Order, to be able to make the
disabling of penal Laws as effectual to the supporting differences among
Protestants, a^ the Enacting and rigorous execution of them, was to the first
raising, and the continuing them afterward for many years. And if the
foregoing Topics can furnish the King arguments whereby to reproach the Church
of England, when he thinks it seasonable and for the interest of Rome to be
angry with them; I dare affirm he will never want pretenses of being
discontented with and of aspersing Fanatics, when he finds the doing so, to be
for the service of the papal cause. And if the forementioned instances of his
Majesty's behavior to the Church of England to which he stands so
superlatively obliged, be neither Testimonies of his ingenuity, evidences of
his Gratitude, nor effects of common, much less Royal justice; yet what remains
to be intimated, does carry more visible marks of (...)malice and design both
against the le(...) established Church and our Religion. For (...)ing satisfied
with the suspension of all (...) Laws, by which Protestants and they (...) the
national Communion might seem to be (...)urious to Papists in their persons and
E(...)tes, such as the Laws which make those, (...)ho shall be found to have
taken Orders in (...)e Church of Rome, obnoxious to death, or (...)ose other
Statutes by which the King has (...)ower and Authority for levying two thirds
of (...)eir Estates that shall be convicted of Recu(...)cy; but by an usurped
prerogative and an Absolute power he is pleased to suspend all (...)e Laws by
which they were only disabled (...)rom hurting us, through standing precluded
(...)rom places of power and trust in the Government. So that the whole
security we have in time to come for our Religion, depends upon the temperate
disposition and good nature of those Roman Catholics that shall be advanced to
Offices and Employments, and does no longer bear upon the protection and
support of the Law; and I think we have not had that experience of grace and
favor from Papists, as may give us (...)just confidence of fair and candid
treatment from them for the future. Now that we may be the better convinced,
how little security we have from his Majesty's promise in his Declaration, of
his protecting the Arch Bishops, Bishops and Clergy, and all other his subjects
of the Church of England, in the free exercise of their Religion as by Law
established, and in the quiet and full enjoyment of their possessions, without
any molestation or disturbance whatsoever, which is all the Tenor that is left
us; it is not unworthy of observation how that beside the suspending the Bishop
of London ab Officio, and the Vice Chanceller of Cambridg both ab Officio and
Beneficio, and this not only for Actions which the Laws of God and the Kingdom
make their duty, but through a sentence inflicted upon them by no legal Court of
Judicature, but by five or six mercinary persons supported by a Tyrannous and
Arbitrary Commission, his Majesty in his Proclamation for Toleration in
Scotland, ^earing date the 12. of February, does among many other Laws, cass,
disable and dispense with the Law enjoining the Scots Test, tho it was not only
enacted by himself while he represented his Brother as his high Commissioner;
but has been confirmed by him in Parliament since he came to the Crown. Surely
it is as easy to depart from a promise made in a Declaration, as it is to
absolve and discharge himself from the obligation of a Law which he first
concurred to the enacting of, and gave the creating Fiat unto as the late Kings
Commissioner, and has since ratified in Parliament after he was come to the
Throne. As there is no more infidelity, dishonor and injustice, so there is
less of absolute power and illegality, in doing the one than the other. Nor is
it possible for a rational man to place a confidence in his Majesty's Royal
word for the protection of our Religion, and the Church of England men's
enjoying their possessions; seeing he has not only departed from his promise
made to the Council immediately after his Brothers death, but has violated his
Faith given to the Parliament of England at their first Session, which we might
have thought would have been the more sacred and binding, by reason of the
grandeur, state and quality of the Assembly to which it was pledged.

If we consider how much protestants suffered, what number of them was burnt at
the stake as well as murderd in Goals, beside the vast multitudes, who to avoid
the rage and power of their Enemies, were forced to abandon their Country and
seek for shelter in foreign parts, and what endeavoures of all kinds were used
for the Extirpation of our Religion under QueenMary; we may gather and learn
from thence what is to be dreaded from James the II. who is the next popish
Prince to her that since the Reformation has sat on the Throne of England. For
tho there be many things that administer grounds of hope, that the Papists will
not find it so easy a matter to bring us in shoals to the stake, nor of that
quick and easy dispatch to suppress the protestant Religion, and set up
Popery, at this time as they found it then; yer every thing that occurs to our
thoughts, or that can affect our understandings, serves not only to persuade us
into a belief that they will set upon and endeavor it, but to work us up to an
assurance that his Majesty would take it for a di(...)ution of his glory, as
well as reflection upon his zeal for the Church of Rome, not to attempt what a
woman had both the courage to undertake, and the fortune to go through with. And
there is withal a concurrence of so many things both abroad and at home at this
juncture, which if laid in the balance with the motives to our hope of the
papists miscarrying, may justly raise our fears of their prospering to a very
sad and uncomfortable height. Whosoever shall compare these two Princes
together, will find that there was less danger to be apprehended from Mary, and
that not only upon the score of her Sex, but by reason of a certain gentleness
and goodness of nature which all Historians of judgment and credit ascribe unto
her; than is to be expected from the present King, in whom a sourness of
temper, fierceness of disposition, and pride joined with a peevishness of
humor not to bear the having his will disputed or controlled, are the
principal ingredients into his Constitution, and which are all strangely
heightened and enflamed by contracted distempers of Body, and through furious
principles of mind which he has imbibed from the Jesuits, who of all men
carry the obligations arising from the Doctrines of the popish Religion to the
most outrageous and inhumane excesses. Nor can I forbear to add, that whereas
the cruelty which that Princess was hurried into, even to the making her Cities
common shambles, and her streets Theaters of murder for innocent persons, for
which she became hated while she lived, and her memory is rendered infamous to
all Generations that come after, was wholly and entirely owing to her Religion,
which not only proclaims it lawful, but a necessary duty of Christianity, and
an act meriting a peculiar Crown of Glory in heaven, to destroy Heretics; it is
to be feared there will be found in the present King a spice of revenge against
us as we are Englishmen, as well as a measu(...) heap't up and running over of
furious (...) zeal against us as we are Protestants. (...) the wrath he bears
unto us for our depar(...) from the Communion of the Romish Chu(...) and our
rebellion against the triple Crow(...) the war wherein many of the Kingdom
were(...) engaged against his Father, and the issue of it in the execution of
that Monarch, is what he has been heard to say, that he hopes to revenge upon
the Nation. And all that the City of London underwent through that dreadful
conflagration 1666. of which he was the great Author and Promoter, as well as
the Rescuer and Protector of the Varlets that were apprehended in their
spreading and carrying on the fire, is but earnest in respect of what is
designed farther to be paid them, for the having been the great supporters of
that war, both by continued Recruites of men, and repeated Supplies of
treasure. Tho it was Queen Mary's misfortune, and proved the misery of
Protestants, that she was under the influence of popish Bishops, and of
Religious of several Orders, by whom she was whetted on and provoked to those
barbarities wherewith her Reign is stained and reproached; yet she had no
Jesuits about her, to whom all the other Orders are but punies in the arts of
wheedling and frighting Princes forward to cruelty. The Society being then but
in its infancy, and the distance between its Institution, which wasin the year
1540. and the time of her coming to the Crown, which was anno 1553. not
affording season enough for their spreading so far abroad as they have since
done, nor for the perfecting themselves to that degree in the methods of
butchery, and in the Topics whereby to delude Monarchs, to serve and promote
their sanguinary passions, as they have in process of time attained unto. Nor
have the Protestants now any security for their Religion, whereby it or
themselves may be preserved from the attempts of his Majesty for the
extirpation of both, but what our Predecessors in the same faith had in the
like kind, tho not to the same measure and degree, when Queen Mary arrived at
the Throne. For tho our Religion was of late Fenced about with more Laws, and
we had Royal promises oftener repeated for the having (...) preserved, and our
selves protected in the Profession of it; yet it is certain that it had not
only received a legal establishment under, King Edward the VI, but had the
Royal Faith of Queen Mary laid to pledge in a promise made to the men of
Suffolk, that nothing should be done toward its subversion, or whereby they
might be hindered in the free exercise of it. But as neither Law nor promise
could prove restraints upon Mary, to hinder her from subverting Religion, and
burning Protestants; so the obligation of gratitude that she was under to the
men of Suffolk for their coming in so seasonably to her assistance against the
Duke of Northumberland, who was in the field with an Army in the name of the
lady Jean Gray, whom the Council had proclaimed Queen, could not excuse them
from sharing in the severity that others met with, it being observed that more
of that County were burnt for Religion, than of any other Shire in England. And
it is greatly to be feared, that this piece of her example, will not escape
being conformed unto by the King in his carriage toward those that eminently
served him, as well as all the rest of it in his behavior toward Protestants
in general. Nor is it possible to conceive that the Papists living at that ease
and quietness which they did under his late Majesty, of whose being of their
Religion they were not ignorant, as appears by the proofs they have wouchsav'd
the world of it since his death, would have been in so many plots for
destroying him, and at last have hastened him to his Fathers, as can be
demonstrated whenever it is seasonable, had they not been assured of more to
be attempted by his Successor for the extirpation of Protestants, than Charles
could be wrought up unto, or prevailed upon to expose his person and Crown to
the danger and hazard of. For as 't is not merely a Princes being a Papist, and
mild, gentle, and favorable to Catholics, that will content the fiery zealots
of the Roman Clergy and the Regular Orders, but he must both gratify their
ambition in exalting them to a condition above all others, and serve their
inhuman lusts and brutal passions, in not suffering any to live in his
Dominions that will not renounce the Northern Heresy; so it is not more
i(...)edible that they should dispatch a Prince by an infusion in a cup of Tea
or Chocolate, whom tho they knew to be a Papist yet they found too cold and
slow in promoting their designs; than that they should have murdered another by
a consecrated dagger in the hand of Ravailac, the one being both more easy to
be detected, and likelier to derive an universal hatred and revenge upon them
than the other. And as the Kings being conscious of that parrici^^ committed
upon his Brother, plainly tells us that there is nothing so abominable and
Barbarous, which he has not a conscience that will swallow and digest, so the
promotion of the Catholic cause being the motive to that horrid crime, we may
be sure that what is hitherto done in favor of Papists, falls much short of
what is intended, there being something more meritorious than all this amounts
unto, needful to atone for so barbarous a villainy, which can be nothing else
but the extripating the protestant Religion out of the three Kingdoms. Nor is
it probable that the present King, who is represented for a person ambitious of
Glory, would lose the opportunities, wherewith the present posture of affairs
in the world presents him, of being the Umpire and Arbiter of Christendom, and
of giving check to the grandeur and usurpations of a neighboring Monarch, to
whom all Europe is in danger of becoming enslaved; if he were not swallowed up
in the thoughts of a conquest over the Consciences, Laws, and liberties of his
own people, and of subjugating his Dominions to the Sea of Rome, and had he not
hopes and assurances of aid and assistance therein from that Monarch, as he is
emboldned and encouraged thereunto by his pattern and example.

What the Papists have all along been endeavoring for the subversion of our
Religion during and under the Reigns of Protestans Princes, may yet farther
inform and confirm us, what they will infallibly attempt upon their having
gotten one into the Throne, who is not only in all things of the^ ^^n faith,
but of an humor agreeable unto their desires, and of a temper every way suited
and adapted to their designs. Tho the protestant Religion had obtained some
entrance into several States and Kingdoms, and had made some considerable
spread in Europe, before it came to be generally received, and established upon
foundations of Law in England; yet they of other Countries, were little able to
defend themselves from the power and malice of the Church of Rome, and of
Popish Princes, and many of them were very unsucceful in endeavors of that
nature, till England, in Queen Elizabeth's time by espousing their cause and
undertaking their Quarrel, not only wrought out their safety but made them
flourish. This the Court of Rome and the Priests grew immediately sensible of,
and have therefore molded all their Counsels ever since against England, as
being both the Bulwark of the protestant Religion, and the Balance of Europe.
All the late attempts for the extirpation of the protestant Religion in France
and elsewhere, are much to be ascribed to the confidence the Papists had in the
late King and his Brother of their giving no discouragement nor obstruction to
so holy a design; and thereupon as the first Edicts for infringing the liberty,
and weakening and oppressing Protestants in France, and the persecution in
Hungary, commenced and bore date with the Restoration of the Royal Family, and
multiplied, and increased from year to year as they grew into farther assurance
of the Royal Brothers approving as well as conniving at what was done; so that
for the abolition of the Edict of Nant's and the total suppression of the
Reformed Religion in France, was emitted upon his present Majesty's being
exalted to the Throne, and the encouragement he gave them to a procedure, which
as he now justifies he will hereafter imitate. It were to suppose English
Protestants exceedingly unacquainted with the History of their own Nation, to
give a long deduction of what the Papists have attempted for the extirpation of
our Religion, while we had Princes on the Throne whose belief and principles in
Christianity, led them to assert and defend the Reformation, and who had
courage as well as integrity to punish those that conspired against it. Their
many Conjurations against Queen Elizabeth's person, and their repeated
endeavors of bringing in Forraigners, and of betraying the Nation to the
Spaniards, who were to convert the Kingdom as they had done the West Indies by
killing the Inhabitants, are sufficiently known to all who have allowed
themselves leisure to read, or who have been careful to remember what they have
been often told by those that have inspected the Memoires of those times. The
Gunpowder plot with the motives unto it, and the extent of the mischief it was
shapen for, together with the insurrection they were prepared for in case it
had succeeded, and the foreign aid they had been soliciting and were
promised, and all for the extirpation of English Heretics, are things so
modern, and which we have had so many times related to us by our Fathers, that
it is enough barely to intimate them. The Irish Massacre in which above two
hundred thousand were murderd in cold blood, and to which there was no
provocation but that of hatred to our Religion, and furious zeal to extirpate
Heretics, ought at this time to be more particularly reflected upon, as that
which gives us a true scheme of the manner of the Church of Rome's converting
Protestant Kingdoms, and being the Copy they have a mind to write after, and
that in such Characters and lines of blood as may be sure to answer the
Original. At the season when they both entered upon and executed that hellish
conjuration, they were in a quiet and peaceable enjoyment of the private
exercise of their Religion, yea had many public meeting-places, through the means
of the Queen and many great friends which they had at Court, and were neither
disturbed for not coming to Church, nor suffered any severities upon the
account of their profession; but that ^ould not satisfy, nor will any thing
else (...)less they may be allowed to cut the (...)roats, or make bonefires, of
all that will (...)ot join with them in a blind obedience to (...)e Sea of
Rome, and of worshipping St. Pa(...)ick. The little harsh usarges which the
Papists at any time met with there or in England, they derived them upon
themselves (...)y their Crimes against the State, and for their Conspiracies
against our Princes and their Protestant Subjects. For till the Pope had taken
upon him to depose Queen Elizabeth, and absolve her Subjects from their
Allegiance, and till the Papists had so far approved that Act of his holiness
as to raise Rebellions at home and enter into treasonable confedaracies abroad,
there were no Laws that could be styled severe enacted in England against
Papists, and the making of them was the result of necessity in order to
preserve our selves, and not from an Inclination to hurt any for matters of
mere Religion. Such has always been the moderation of our Ru(...)ers, and so
powerful are the incitements to lenity which the generality of Protestants
through the influence and impression of their Religion, especially they of a
more generous education, have been under toward those of the Roman Communion,
that nothing but their unwearied restlessness to disturb the Government and
destroy Protestants, has been the cause either of enacting those Laws against
them that are styled rigorous, or of their having been at any time put into
execution. And notwithstanding that some such Laws were enacted as might appear
to savor of severity, yet could they have but submitted to have dwelt
peaceably in the land, they would have found that their mere belief and the
private practice of their worship, would not have much prejudiced or endangered
them, and that tho the Laws had been continued unrepealed, yet it was only as a
Hedge about us for our protection, and as Bonds of obligation upon them to their
good behavior. To which may be added, that more Protestants have suffered in
one year, by the Laws made against Dissenters, and to the utmost height of the
penalties which the violation of them imported, and that by the instigation of
Papis(...) and their influence over the late King and his present Majesty, than
there have Papists from the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign to this very
day, tho there was a difference in the punishments they underwent. However we
may from their many and repeated attemps against us, while we had Princes that
both would and could chasten their insolences, and inflict upon them what the
Law made them obnoxious unto for their outrages, gather and conclude what we
are now to expect, upon their having obtained a King imbued with all the
persecuting and bloody principles of Popery, and perfectly baptized into all
the Doctrines of the Councils of Lateran and Constance. And it may strengthen
our faith as well as increase our fear, of what is purposed against and impends
over us, in that they cannot but think that the suffering our Religion to
remain in a condition to be at any time hereafter the Religion of the State,
and of the universality of the people, may not only prove a means of retrieving
Protestancy in France, and of assisting to revenge the barbarities perpetrated
there upon a great and innocent people, but may leave the Roman Catholics in
England exposed to the resentment of the Kingdom, for what they have so
foolishy and impudently acted both against our Civil Rights, and Established
Religion, since James the II. came to the Crown; and may also upon the
Government's falling into good hands, and Magistrates coming to understand
their true Interest, which is for an English Prince to make himself the Head of
the Protestant cause and to espouse their quarrel in all places, give such a
Revolution in Europe as will not only check the present Career of Rome, but
cause them repent the method's in which they have been engaged. These things we
may be sure the Papists are aware of, and that having proceeded so far, they
have nothing left for their security from punishments because of crimes
committed, but to put us out of all capacity of doing our selves Right and them
justice; and he must be (...)ll who does not know into what that must
necessarily hurry them.

It being then as evident as a matter of this nature is capable of, what we are
to expect and dread from the King both as to our Religion and Laws; we may do
more than presume that the late Declaration for liberty of conscience, and the
Proclamation for a Toleration, are not intended and designed for the benefit
and advantage of the Reformed Religion, and that whatsoever motives have
influenced to the granting and emitting of them, they do not in the least flow
or proceed from any kindness and goodwill to Protestant Dissenters. And tho
many of those weak and easy people may flatter themselves with a belief of an
interest in the Kings favor, and suffer others to delude them into a
persuasion of his bearing a gracious respect toward them; yet it is certain,
that they are people in the world whom he most hates, and who when things are
ripe for it, and that he has abused their credulity into a serving his Ends as
far as they can be prevailed upon, and as long as the present Juggle can be of
any advantage for promoting the papal cause, will be sure not only to have an
equal share in his displeasure with their Brethren of the Church of England,
but will be made to drink deepest in the cup of fury and wrath that is mingling
and preparing for all Protestants. No provocation from their present behavior,
tho it is such as might warm a person of very cool temper, much less offenses
of another complexion administered by any of them, shall ever tempt me to say
they deserve it, or cause me to ravel into their former and past carriages, so
as to fasten a blott or imputation upon the party or body of them, whatsoever I
may be forced to do as to particular persons among them. For as to the
generality, I do believe them to be as honest, industrious, useful, and
virtuous a people (tho many of them be none of the wisest nor of the greatest
pr(...) spect) as any party of men in the Kingdo(...) and that wherein soever
their carriage (eve(...) abstracting from their differences with they(...)
fellow Protestants in matters of Religion has varied from that of other
Subjects they have been in the Right, and have act(...) most agreeably to the
interest and safety of th(...) Kingdom. But it can be no reflection upon(...)
them, to recall into their memories, tha(...) the whole tenor of the Kings
actings toward them both when Duke of York and since he came to the Crown,
has been such (...) might render it beyond dispute, that the(...) are so far
from having any singular room i(...) his favor, that he bears them neither
pit(...) nor compassion, but that they are the objects of his unchangeable
indignation. Fo(...) not to mention how the persecutions, tha(...) were
observed alway's to relent both upon his being at any distance from the late
King^ and upon the abatement of his influence (...) any time into Counsels,
were constantl(...) revived upon his return to Court, and were(...) carried on
in degrees of severity proportionable to the figure he made at Whitehall
an(...) his Brothers disposedness and inclination t(...) hearken to him; surely
their memories can not be so weak and untenacious, but the(...) must remember
how their sufferings were(...) never greater, nor the Laws executed wit(...)
more severity upon them, than since hi(...) Majesty came to ascend the Throne.
As it is no(...) many years since he said publicly in Scotland, that it were
well if all that part of th(...) Kingdom, (which is above half of the Nation)
where the Dissenters were known t(...) be most numerous, were turned into a
hunti(...) field, so none were favored and promote(...) either there or in
England, but such as were(...) taken to be the most fierce and violent of a(...)
others against Fanatics. Nor were me preferred either in Church or State for
the learning, vertu' or merit, but for the passionate heats and brutal rigours
to Dissenters. And whereas the Papists from the ve(...) first day of his
arrival at the Governmen(...) had beside many other marks of his Grac(...)
(...)s special Testimony of it, of not having (...)e penal Statutes to which
they stood liable (...)t in execution against them; all the Laws (...) which
the Dissenters were obnoxious, ^ere by his Majesty's Orders to the Judges,
(...)stices of the peace, and all other Officers (...)vil and Ecclesiastical
most unmercifully exe(...)ted. Nor was there the least talk of lenity
Dissenters, till the King found that he (...)uld not compass his Ends by the
Church of (...)gland, and prevail upon the Parliament (...)r Repealing the
Tests, and cancelling the (...)her Laws in force against Papists, which if
(...)ey could have been wrought over unto, (...)e Fanatics would not only have
been left (...)ttiless, and continued in the hands of the (...)rious Churchmen
to exercise their spleen (...)pon, but would have been surrendered as a
(...)crifice to new flames of wrath, if they of (...)e prelatical Communion had
retained (...)eir wonted animosity, and thought it for (...)eir interest to
exert it, either in the old or (...) fresh method's. But that project not
suc^eeding, his Majesty is forced to shift hands, (...)d to use the pretense of
extending com^assion to Dissenting Protestants, that he may ^he more plausibly
and with the less hazard, ^^spend and disable the Laws against Papists, and
make way for their admission into all ^ffices Civil and Military, which is the
first (...)ep, and all that he is yet in a condition to (...)ke, for the
subversion of our Religion. And ^ll the celebrated kindness to Fanatics, is
^nly to use them as the Catt's paw, for ^ulling the Chestnut out of the fire to
the Monkey, and to make them stales under whose ^hroud and covert, the Church
of Rome may undermine and subvert all the legal foundations of our Religion,
which to suffer themselves to be instrumental in, will not in the issue turn to
the commendation of the Dissenters wisdom or their honesty. Nor is there more
truth in the Kings declaring it to have been his constant opinion, that
conscience ought not to be constrained, nor people forced in matters of mere
Religion, than there is of justice in that malicious insinuation, (in his
Letter to Mr. Alsop) against the Church of England, that should he see cause to
change his Religion, he should never be of that party of Protestants, who think
the only way to advance their Church, is by undoing those Churches of
Christians that differ from them in smaller matters: forasmuch as he is in ^^e
mean time a member of the most persecuting and bloody Society, that ever was
clothed with the name of a Church, and whose cruelty toward Protestants he is
careful not to arraign, by fastening his offense at severity upon differences in
smaller matters, which he knows that those between Rome and us are not, nor so
accounted of by any of the papal Fellowship. It were to be wished that the
Dissenters would reflect and consider, how when the late King had emitted a
Declaration of Indulgence anno 1672. upon pretended motives of tenderness and
compassion to his Protestant Subjects, but in truth to keep all quiet at home,
when in conjunction with France he was engaging in an unjust war against a
Reformed State abroad, and in order to steal a liberty for the Papists to
practice their Idolatries, without incurring a suspicion himself of being of
the Romish Religion, and in hope to wind up the prerogative to a paramount
power over the law; and how when the Parliament condemned the illegality of it,
and would have the Declaration recalled, all his Kindness to Dissenters not
only immediately vanished, but turned into that Rage and fury, that tho both
that Parliament addressed for some favor to be showed them, and another voted
it a betraying of the Pretestant Religion to continue the execution of the
penal laws upon them, yet instead of their having any mercy or moderation
exercised toward them, they were thrown into a Furnace made seven times
hotter, than that wherein they had been scorched before. And without pretending
to be a Prophet, I dare prognosticate and foretell, that whenever the present
King has compassed the Ends, unto which this Declaration is designed to be
subservient, namely the placing the Papists both in the open exercise of their
Religion, and in all public Offices and Trusts, and the getting a power to be
acknowledged vested in him over the Laws; that then instead of the still voice
calmly whispered from Whitehall, they will both hear and feel the blasts of a
mighty rushing wind, and that upon pretended occasions arising from the abuse
of this Indulgence, or for some alleged crimes wherein they and all other
Protestants are to be involved, (tho their supiness and excess of Loyalty
continue to be their greatest offenses) this liberty will not only be withdrawn
and the old Church of England severities revived, but some of the new a la mode
a France treatments come upon the stage, and be pursued against them, and all
other perverse and obstinate British Heretics.

The Declaration for liberty of Conscience, being injurious to the Church of
England, and not proceeding from any inward and real good will to the
Dissenters; it will be worth our pains to inquire into and make a more ample
deduction of the Reasons upon which it was granted, that the grounds of
emitting it being laid under every man's view, they who have Addressed may come
to be ashamed of their simplicity and folly, they who have not may be farther
confirmed both of the unlawfulness and inconveniency of doing it, and that all
who preserve any regard to the protestant Religion and the Laws of England, may
be quickened to the use of all legal and due means for preventing the
mischievous effects, which it is shapen for, and which the Papists do promise
themselves from it. The motives upon which his Majesty published the
Declaration may be reduced to three, of which as I have already made some
mention, so I shall now place every one of them in its several and proper
light, and give such proofs and evidence of their being the great and sole
inducements for the Emitting of it, that no rational man shall be able
henceforth to make a doubt of it. The first, is the Kings winding himself into
a Supremacy and Absoluteness over the Law, and the getting it acknowledged, and
calmly submitted unto and acquiesced in by the Subjects. The Monarchies being
legal and not Despotical, bounded and regulat(...) by Laws, and not to be
exercised acco^ding to mere will and pleasure, was th(...) which he could not
digest the though(...) of when a Subject, and had been hea(...) to say that he
had rather Reign a day in th(...) absoluteness that the French King does,
th(...) an Age tied up and restrained by Rules as (...) Brother did. And
therefore to persuade t(...) Prince of Orange to approve what He h(...) done in
dispensing with the Laws, and (...) obtain Him and the Princess to join wi(...)
his Majesty and to employ their inter(...) in the Kingdom for the Repealing the
T(...) Acts, and the many other Statutes ma(...) against Roman Catholics, he
used this Arg^ment in a Message he sent to their Roy(...) Highnesses upon that
errand, that the ge(...) ting it done would be greatly to the a^vantage and for
the increase of the prorog(...) tive; but this these two noble Prince(...) of
whose ascent to the Throne all Pr^testants have so near and comfortable
prospect, were too generous as well (...) wise to be wheedled with, as
knowin(...) that the Authority of the Kings and Quee(...) of England is great
enough by the Rul(...) of the Constitution, without grasping at new prerogative
power, which as the La(...) have not vested in them, so it would b(...) of no
use but to enable them to do hur(...) And indeed it is more necessary both
fo(...) the honor and safety of the Monarch, an(...) for the freedom and
security of the peopl(...) that the prerogative should be confined withi(...)
its ancient and legal Channels, than be left t(...) that illimited and
unbounded latitude, whic(...) the late King and his present Majesty have
e^deavoured to advance and screw it up unto(...) That both the Declaration for
liberty of Conscience in England, and the Proclamation for Toleration in
Scotland, are calculated for ra^sing the Sovereign Authority to a transce^dent
Power over the Laws of the two Kingdoms, may be demonstrated from the Papers
themselves, which lay the Dispensin(...) Power before us in terms that import
n(...) less than his Majesty's standing free an(...) solved from all ties and
restraints, and (...) being clothed with a Right of doing ^hatsoever he will.
For if the Style of (...)yal Pleasure to suspend the execution of (...)ch and
such Laws, and to forbid such (...)d such Oaths to be required to be taken,
(...)d this in the virtu' of no Authority decla(...)d by the Laws, to be
resident in his Ma(...)sty, but in the virtu' of a certain vagrant (...)d
indeterminate thing called Royal prero(...)tive, as the power exercised in the
English ^eclaration is worded and expressed, be not (...)ough to enlighten us
sufficiently in the (...)atter before us; the Style of Absolute Power which all
the Subjects are to obey without re^^rve, whereby the King is pleased to chalk
before us the Authority exerted in the Scots ^roclamation, for the stopping,
disabling, and (...)spensing with such and such Laws as are (...)ere referred
unto, and for the granting (...)e toleration with the other liberties,
immu^^ties, and Rights there mentioned, is more (...)an sufficient to set the
point we are dis^oursing beyond all possibility of rational ^ontrol. As it is
one and the same Kind ^f Authority that is claimed over the Laws and Subjects
of both Kingdoms, tho for some ^ertain reasons it be more modestly desig^ed and
expressed in the Declaration for a ^iberty in England, than it is in the
Proclama^ion for a Toleration in Scotland; so the utmost that the Czar of
Mosco, the great Mo^ull, or the Turkish Sultan ever challenged over their
respective Dominions, amounts only to an Absolute Power, which the King both
owns the Exertion of, and makes it the fountain of all the Royal Acts exercised
in the forementioned Papers. And as the improving this challenged Absolute
Power into an obligation upon the Subjects to obey his Majesty without reserve,
is a paraphrase upon Despotical Dominion, and an advancing it to (...) pitch,
above what any of the ancient or modern Tyrants ever dreamed of, and beyond
what the most servile part of Mankind was ever acquainted with till the present
French King gave an instance of it, in making his ^eer will and pleasure to be
the ground and argument upon which his Reformed Subjects were to renounce their
Religion, and to turn Roman Catholics; so it is worth considering whether His
Maj. who glories to imitate that foreign Monarch, may not in a little time
make the like application of this Absolute power, which his Subjects are bound
to obey without Reserve; and whether in that case, they who have Addressed to
thank him for his Declaration, and thereby justified the Claim of this Absolute
power, being that upon which the Declaration is superstructed, and from which
it emergeth, can avoid paying the Obedience that is demanded as a Duty in the
Subject inseparably annexed thereunto. That which more confirms us, that the
English Declaration and the Scotts Proclamation, are not only designed for the
obtaining from the Subjects an acknowledgment of an Absolute power vested in
the King, but that no less than the Usurpation and exercise of such a power,
can warrant and support them, are the many Laws and Rights, which a
jurisdiction is challenged over and exerted in reference unto in the Papers
styled by the forementioned Names. All confess a Royal prerogative settled on
the Crown, and appertaining to the Royal Office; nor can the Supreme
Magistrature be executed and discharged to the advantage and Safety of the
Community, without a power affixed unto it of superceding the Execution of some
Laws at certain junctures, nor without having an Authority over the Rights of
particular men in some incident cases; but then the received Customs of the
respective Nations, and the universal good, preservation and safety of the
People in general, are the measures by which this prerogative in the Crown is
to be regulated, and beyond which to apply or exert it, is an Usurpation and
Tyranny in the Ruler. All the Power belonging to the Kings and Queens of
England and Scotland, arises from an agreement and concession of the People,
wherein it is stipulated what Rights, Liberties and Privileges they Reserved
unto themselves, and what Authority and Jurisdiction they delegated and made
over unto the Sovereign, in order to his being in a condition to protect and
defend them, and that they may the better live in Peace, Freedom, and Safety,
which are the Ends for which they have chosen Kings to be over them, and for
the compassing whereof they originally submitted unto, and pitched upon such a
Form of Civil Administration. Nor are the Opinions of particular men of what
Rank or Order soever they be, to be admitted as an exposition of the extent of
this Prerogative, seeing they through their dependencies upon the King, and their
obnoxiousness to be influenced by selfish and personal Ends, may enlarge it
beyond what is for the benefit of the Community; but the immemorial course of
Administration, with the sense of the whole Society signified by their
Representatives in Parliament upon emerging occasions, are to be taken for the
sense, paraphrase, and declaration of the Limits of this Royal and prerogative
Power; and for any to determine the bounds of it from the Testimonies of
Mercinary Lawyers, or Sycophant Clergymen, in cases wherein the Parliament have
by their Votes and Resolutions settled its boundaries, is a crime that deserves
the severest animadversion, and which it is to be hoped a true English
Parliament will not let pass unpunished. Now a Power arising from Royal
prerogative to suspend, and disable a great number of Laws at once, and they of
such a nature and tendency, as the great security of the people consists in
their being maintained, and which the whole Community represented in
Parliaments have often disallowed and made void Princes meddling with, so as to
interrupt their execution and course, is so far from being a Right inherent in
the Crown, that the very pretending unto it, is a changing of the Government,
and an overthrowing of the Constitution. Fortescue says, that Rex Angliae
populum De Laudib. Leg. Angl. c. 9.
Gubernat non mera potestate Regia, sed politica; quia populus iis legibus
gubernatur quas ipse fert; the King of England does not so properly Govern by a
power that is Regal, at by a power that is p^litical, in that he is bound to
Rule by the Laws^ which the people themselves choose and Enact. An^ both Bracton
and Fleta tell us, that Rex Angliae habet superiores, Bract. lib. (...) cap.
16. Fle(...) lib. 1. c. 17.
viz. legem per quam factus est Rex, ac Comites and Barons qui debent ^i
fraenum ponere; the King of England has for Superiors, both the Law by
whi(...) he is constituted King, and which is the measur(...) of his Governing
Power, and the Parliament which is to restrain him, if he do amiss. And
thereupon we have not only that Lib. 3(...) cap. 9(...)
other saying of Bracton, that nihil aliud potest Rex, nisi id solum quod jure
potest; the King can do nothing, but wha^ he can do by law: but we have that
famous passage in our Parliament Rolls, non est ulla Regis prerogativa, quae ex
Roll. Parl. 7. Hist. 4* Number. 59.
justitia and aequitate quicquam derogat; that there is no prerogative belongs
to the King by which he can decline from acting according to Law and justice*
So careful were our Ancestors both in England and Scotland to preserve their
Laws from being invaded and superceded by their Kings; that they have not only
by diverse Parliamentary Votes and Resolutions, and by several St(...) tutes,
declared all dispensations by the King* from Laws and enjoined Oaths, to be
null and void, and not admittable by the Judges or other Executors of Law and
Justice; but they have often impeached, arraigned, and condemned those to one
penalty or another, that have been found to have counseled and advised Kings
to an usurpation of Power over, the Laws, and to a violation of established and
enacted Rules. It would draw this Discourse to a length beyond what is
intended, should I mention the several Laws against Papists as well as against
Dissenters, that are suspended, stopped, disabled, and dispensed with, in the two
forementioned Royal Papers, and it would be an extending it much more, should
I make the several Reflections that the matter is capable of, and which a
person of a very ordinary understanding cannot be greatly to seek for; I shall
therefore only take notice of two ^r three Efforts which occur there of this
^oyal prerogative and Absolute power, which ^s they are very bold and ample
exertions ^f them for the first time; so should the ^ext exercises of them be
proportionable, (...)ere will be nothing left us of the Protestant ^eligion, or
of English Liberties, and we must ^e contented to be Papists and Slaves, or
else (...) stand adjudged to Tyburn and Smithfield. One is the suspending the
Laws which en(...)in the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and the prohibiting
that these Oaths be at any (...)me hereafter required to be taken; by which
^^ngle Exercise of Royal prerogative and Absolute ^ower, the two Kingdoms are
not only a^ain subjected to a foreign Jurisdiction, the miseries whereof they
groaned under for several Ages; but as the King is hereby deprived of the
greatest security, he had from ^is Subjects both to himself and the Government,
^o the Crown is robbed of one of its chiefest ^ewels, namely an Authority over
all the Sub^ects, which was thought so essential to Sove^aignty and Royal
Dignity, that it was annexed to the Imperial Crown of England, and adjudged
inherent in the Monarch, before the Reformed Religion came to be received and
established. And it concerns their Royal Highnesses of Orange, to whom the
Right of succeeding to the Crown^ of Great Britain unquestionably belongs, to
consider whether his Majesty may not by the same Authority, whereby he
alienates and gives away so considerable and inherent a Branch of the Royal
Jurisdiction, transferr the Succession it self, and dispose the Inheritance of
the Crown to whom he pleases. Nor will they about him, who thrust the last
King out of the Throne to make room for his present Majesty, much scruple to
put a Protestant Successor by it, if they can find another Papist as Bigoted
as this to advance unto it. However were they on the Throne to morrow, here is
both a Foreign Jurisdiction brought in and set up to Rival and control
theirs, and they are deprived of all means of being secured of the Loyalty and
Fealty of a great number of their Subjects. Nor will His Majesty's certain
knowledge and long experience (whereof he boasts in the Scots Proclamation) that
the Catholics, as it is their principle, to be good Christians, so it is to be
dutiful Subjects, be enough for their Royal Highnesses to rely upon, their
Religion obliging them to the contrary toward Princes, whom the Church of Rome
has adjudged to be Heretics. A second Instance wherein this pretended Royal
Prerogative is exercised paramount to all Laws, and which nothing but a claim
of Absolute Power in his Majesty can support, and an acknowledgment of it by
the Subj^st^ make them approve the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, and
the Proclamation for Toleration; is the stopping, disabling and suspending the
Statutes whereby the Tests were enacted, and thereby letting the Papists in to
all Benefices, Offices, and Places of Trust, whether Civil, Military, or
Ecclesiastic. I do not speak of Suspending the Execution of those Laws,
whereby the being Priests, or taking Orders in the Church of Rome, or the being
Reconciled to that Church, or the Papists meeting to celebrate Mass, were in
one degree, or another made punishable, (tho the Kings dispensing with them by
a challenged claim in the Crown be altogether illegal) for as diverss of these
Laws were never approved by many Protestants, so nothing would have justified
the making of them, but the many Treasons and Conspiracies that they were from
time to time found guilty of against the State. And as the Papists of all men
have the least cause to complain of the injustice, rigor, and severity of
them, considering the many Laws more cruel and sanguinary that are in Force in
most Popish Countries against Protestants, and these enacted and executed
merely for their Opinions and Practices in the matters of God, without their
being chargeable with crimes and offenses against the Civil Government under
which they live, so were it necessary from principles of Religion and Policy to
relieve the Roman Catholics from the forementioned Laws, yet it ought not to
be done but by the Legislative Authority of the Kingdoms, and ^or the King to
assume a power of doing it in the virtue of a pretended prerogative, is both a
high Usurpation over the Laws, and a Violation of of his Coronation Oath. Nor
is it any commendation either of the humanity of the Papists, or of the
meekness and Truth of their Religion, that while they elsewhere treat those who
differ from them in Faith and Worship with that Barbarity, they should so
clamorously inveigh against the severities which in some Reformed States they
are liable unto, and which their Treasons gave the rise and provocation unto at
first, and have been at all times the motives to the infliction of. But they
alone would have the allowance to be cruel wherein they act consonantly to
their own Tenets; and I wish that some provision might be made for the future,
for the security of our Religion, and our safety in the profession of it,
without the doing any thing that may unbecome the merciful principles of
Christianity, or be unsuitable to the meek and generous temper of the English
Nation, and that the property of being Sanguinary may be left to the Church of
Rome as its peculiar Privilege and Glory, and as a more distinguisting
Character than all the other Marks which she pretends unto. That which I am
speaking of, is the suspending the Execution of those Laws, by which the
Government was secured of the Fidelity of its Subjecte, and by which they in
whom it could not confide were merely shut out from places of power and trust,
and were made liable to very small damages themselves, and only hindered from
getting into a condition of doing mischief to us. All Governments have a Right
to use means for their own preservation, provided they be not such as are
inconsistent with the Ends of Government, and repugnant to the will and
pleasure of the Supreme Sovereign of mankind, and it is in the power of every
Legislative Assembly to declare who of the Community shall be capable or
incapable of public Imploys, and of possessing Offices, upon which the Peace,
Welfare, and Security of the whole Politic Body does depend. Without this
n(...) Government could subsist, nor the People b(...) in safety under it; but
the Constitution woul(...) be in constant danger of being subverted^ and the
Privileges, Liberties, and Religion of the Subjects laid open to be
overthrown. And should such a power in Legislators, be upon weak suspicions and
il(...) grounded jealousies, carried at any tim^ too far, and some prove to be
debarre^ from Trusts, whose being employed would import no hazard; yet the
worst of that would be only a disrepect shown to individual persons, who might
deserve more favor and esteem, but could be of no prejudice to the Society,
there being alway's (...) sufficient number of others, fit for the discharge of
all Offices, in whom an entire confidence may be reposed. And it is remarkable,
that the States General of the Unite^ Provinces, who afford the greatest
Liberty to all Religions, that any known State i^ Europe gives; yet they
suffer no Papists to come into places of Authority and Judicature* nor to bear
any Office in the Republic tha^ may either put them into a condition, o^ lay
them under a temptation of attempting any thing to the prejudice of Religion,
o^ for the betraying the Liberty of the Provinces* And as it is lawful for any
Government to preclude all such persons from public Trusts, of whose enmity,
and ill will to the Establishment in Church or State, they have either a moral
certainty, or just grounds of suspicion; so it is no less lawful to provide
Tests for their discovery and detection, tha^ they may not be able to mask and
vizo^ themselves in order to getting into Offices, and thereupon of promoting
and accomplishing their mischievous and malicious intentions. Nor is it
possible in such a case, but that the Tests they are to be tried by, must
relate to some of those principles by which they are most eminently
distinguished from them of the National Settlement, and in reference whereunto
they think it most piacular to dissemble their Opinion* Nor have the Papists
cause to be offended, that the Renouncing the Belief of Transubstantia^^on
should be required as the distinguishing ^ark whereby upon their refusal, they
may ^e discerned, when all the penalty upon their ^eing known, is only to be
excluded from a ^^are in the Legislation, and not to be admitted ^o Employments
of Trust and profit; seeing it ^ath been and still is their custom, to require
^he; belief of the Corporal presence in the Sacra^ent, as that upon the not
acknowledgment whereof we are to be accounted Heretics, and to stand condemned
to be burnt, which is ^omewhat worse than the not being allowed ^o sit in the
two Houses of Parliament, or ^o be shut out from a Civil or Military ^ffice.
Neither are they required to Declare ^uch less to Swear, that the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is false, or that there is no (...)ch thing as
Transubstantiation, (as is affirmed (...)n a scurrilous Paper written against
the Loyalty of the Church of England) but all that is enjoined in the Test
Acts, is that, (...) A. B. do declare, that I do believe that there (...) not
any Transubstantiation in the Sacrament (...) the Lords Supper, or in the
Elements of Bread and Wine, at or after the Consecration thereof by any Person
whatsoever. Tho the Parliament ^as willing to use all the care they could, for
^he discovering Papists, that the provision for ^ur security, unto which those
Acts were de^igned, might be the more effectual; yet ^hey were not so void of
understanding, as ^o prescribe a Method for it, which would ^ave exposed them
to the world for their ^olly, It Is much different to say, swear, or ^eclare,
that I do believe there is not any Transub^^antiation, and the saying or
declaring that ^here is not a Transubstantiation; the former ^eing only
expressive of what my sentiment or opinion is, and not at all affecting the
Doctrine it self, to make, or unmake it, other ^han what it is, independently
upon my judgment of it; whereas the latter does prima^ily Affect the Object and
the determination of its existence to such a mode as I conceive ^t; and there
are a thousand things which I can say that I do not believe, but I dare not say
that they are not. Now as it is the dispensing with these Laws that argues the
Kings assuming an Absolute Power; so the Addressing by way of thanks for the
Declaration wherein this Power is exerted, is no less than an owning and
acknowledging of it, and that it rightfully belongs to him. There is a third
thing which shame or fear would not suffer them to put into the Declaration for
liberty of Conscience in England, but which they have had the impudence to
insert into the Proclamation for a Toleration in Scotland, which as it carries
Absolute Power written in forehead of it, so it is such an unpresidented
exercise of Despoticalness, as hardly any of the Oriental Tyrants or even the
French Leviathan would have ventured upon. For having stopped, disabled, and
suspended all Laws enjoining any Oaths, whereby our Religion was secured, and
the preservation of it to us and our posterity was provided for; he imposes a
new Oath upon his Scots Subjects, whereby they are to be bound to defend and
mantain Him, his Heirs and Lawful Successors in the Exercise of their Absolute
Power and Authority against all deadly, The imposing an Oath upon Subjects has
been always looked upon as the highest Act of legislative Authority, in that it
affects their Consciences, and requires the approbation, or disapprobation of
their Minds and Judgments, in reference to whatsoever it is enjoined for;
whereas a Law that affects only men's Estates may be submitted unto, tho in the
mean time they think that which is exacted of them to be unreasonable and
unjust. And as it concerns both the wisdom and justice of Lawgivers to be very
tender in Ordaining Oaths that are to be taken by Subjects, and that not only
from a care that they may not prostitute the name of God to profanation when
the matter about which they are imposed, is either light and trival, or dubious
and uncertain; but because it is an exercise of Jurisdiction over the Souls of
men, which is more than if it were only exercised over their Goods, Bodies, and
Privileges; so never any of our Kings pretended to a Right of enjoining and
requiring an Oath that was not first Enacted and specified in some Law; and it
would have been heretofore accounted a good plea for refusing such or such an
Oath, to say there was no Statute that had required it. It was one of the
Articles of high Treason (and the most material) charged upon the Earl of
Strafford, that being Lord Deputy of Ireland, he required an Oath of the Scotts
who inhabited there, which no Law had ordained or prescribed; which may make
those Counselors who have advised the King to impose this new Oath, as well as
all others that shall require it to be taken upon his Majesty's bare Authority,
to be a little apprehensive, whether it may not at some time rise in judgment
against them, and prove a forefeiture of their lives to justice. And as the
imposing an Oath not warranted by Law is a high Act of Absolute Power, and in
the King an altering of the Constitution; so if we look into the Oath it self,
we shall find this Absolute Power strangly manifested and displayed in all the
parts and branches of it, and the people required to swear themselves his
Majesty's most obedient Slaves and Vassalls. By one Paragraph of it, they are
required to swear that it is unlawful for Subjects on any pretense or for any
Cause whatsoever to rise in Arms against him, or any Commissioned by him; and
that they shall never resist his power or Authority; which as it may be
intended for a foundation and means of keeping men quiet when he shall break in
upon their Estates and overthrow their Religion, so it may be designed as an
encouragement to his Catholic Subjects, to set upon the cutting Protestants
throats, when by this Oath their hands are tied up from hindering them. It is
but for the Papists to come Authorized with his Majesty's Commission, which
will not be denied them for so meritorious a work, and then there is no help
nor remedy, but we must stretch out our necks, and open our breasts, to their
consecrated swords, and sanctified daggers. Nay if the King should transfer the
Succession to the Crown from the Rightful Heir to some zealous Romanist, or
Alienat and dispose his Kingdoms in way of donation and gift to the Pope, or to
the Society of the Jesuits, and for the better securing them in the possession
hereafter, should invest and place them i^ the enjoyment of them while he
lives; the Scotts are bound in the virtue of this Oat^ tamely to look on, and
calmly to acquiesc^ in it. Or should his Physicians advise him to (...) nightly
variety of Matron's and Maids, as the best remedy against his malignant and
venomous heats; all of that Kingdom are boun^ to surrender their Wives and
daughters to him with a du'tiful silence and a profound veneration. And if by
this Oath he can secur^ himself from the opposition of his dissenting Subjects
in case through recovery of their Reason a fit of ancient zeal should surprise
them* he is otherway's secured of an Asiatick tameness in his prelatical
people, by a principl^ which they have lately imbibed, but neithe^ learned from
their Bibles nor the Statutes o^ the Land. For the Clergy upon thinking that
the wind would alway's blow out of one quarter, and being resolved to make that
a duty by their learning, which their interest at that season made convenient;
have preached up the Doctrine of passive Obedience to such a boundless height,
that they have done what in them lies, to give up themselves and all that had
the weakness to believe them, fettered and bound for sacrifices to popish rage
and Despotical Tyranny. But for my self (and I hope the like of many others) I
thank God I am not tainted with that slavish and adulatory doctrine, as having
alway's thought that the first duty of every member of a Body politic, is to
the Community, for whose safety, and good, Governors are instituted, and that
it is only to Rulers as they are found to answer the main ends they are
appointed for, and to Act by the legal Rules that are Chalcks out unto them.
Whether it be from my dullness, or that my understanding is of a perverser make
than other men's, I cannot tell; but I could never yet be otherway's minded,
than that the Rules of the Constitution and the Laws of the Republic or
Kingdom, are to be the measures both of the Sovereigns Commands, and of the
Subjects obedience; and that as we are not to invade what by concessions and
stipulations belongs unto the Ruler, so we may not only lawfully, but we ought
to defend what is reserved to our selves, if it be invaded and broken in upon.
And as without such a Right in the Subjects, all legal Governments, and mixed
Monarchies, were but empty names, and ridiculous things; so wheresoever the
Constitution of a Nation is such, there the Prince who strives to subvert the
Laws of the Society is the Traitor and Rebel; and not the people who endeavor
to preserve and defend them. There is yet another branch of the foresaid Oath,
that is of a much more unreasonable strain than the former, which is, that they
shall to the utmost of their Power assist, defend, and maintain him in ^he
exercise of this Absolute Power and Authority; which being tack't to our
Obeying without reserve, make us the greatest Slaves, that either are, or ever
were in the universe. Our Kings were heretofore bound to Govern according to
law (and so is his present Majesty, if a Coronation Oath, and faith to
Heretics, were not weaker than Sampson's cords proved to be) but instead of
that, here is a new Oath imposed upon the Subjects by which they are bound to
protect and defend the King in his Ruling Arbitrarily. It had been more than
enough to have required only a calm submitting to the exercise of Absolute
Power; but to be injoined to swear to assist and defend his Majesty and
Successors in all things wherein they shall exert it, is a plain destroying of
all natural as well as Civil Liberty, and a robbing us of that freedom that
belongs unto us both as we are men, and as we are born under a free and legal
Government. For by this we become bound to dragg our Brethren to the Stake, to
cut their Throats, plunder their Houses, embrew our hands in the Blood of our
Wives and Children, if his Majesty please to make these the Instances wherein
he will exert his Absolute Power, and require us to assist him in the exercise
of it. As it was necessary to Cancel all other Oaths and Tests, as being
directly inconsistent with this; so the requiring the Scotts to swear this
Oath, is the highest reveng he could take for their Solemn league and Covenant
and for all other Oaths, that lust after Arbitrariness, and Popish Bigottry,
will pronounce to have been injurious to the Crown. But no words are sufficient
to express the mischiefs wrapped up in that new Oath, or to declare the
abhorrency that all who value the Rights and liberties of mankind ought to
entertain for it, nor to proclaim the villainy of those who shall by Addresses
give thanks for the Proclamation. There may a fourth thing be added, whereby it
will appear that his Majesty's assuming Absolute Power, stands recorded in
Capital Letters in his Declaration for liberty of Conscience. For not being
contented to omit the requiring the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy and the
Test Oaths to be taken, nor being satisfied to suspend for a season the
enjoining any to be demanded to take them; he tells us that it is his Royal
will and pleasure that the foresaid Oaths shall not at any time hereafter be
required to be taken, which is a full and direct Repealing of the Laws in which
they are Enacted. It has hitherto passed for an undoubted Maxim, that eorum
est tollere, quorum est condere, they can only abrogate Laws, who have Power
and Authority to make them, and we have heretofore been made believe, that the
Legislative power was not in the King alone, but that the two Houses of
Parliament had at least a share in it; whereas here by the disabling and
suspending Laws for ever, the whole legislative Power is challenged to be
vested in the King, and at one dash the Government of England is subverted and
changed. Tho it has been much disputed whether the King had a liberty of
Refusing to Assent to Bills relating to the benefit of the public that had
passed the two Houses, and if there be any sense in those words of the
Coronation Oath of his being bound to Govern according to the Laws quas vulgus
Elegerit, he had not; yet none till now, that his Majesty does it, had the
impudence to affirm that he might abrogate Laws without the concurrence and
assent of the Lords and Commons. For to say that Oaths enjoined by Laws to be
required to be taken, shall not at any time hereafter be required to be taken,
is a plain Cancelling and repealing of these Laws, or nothing of this World
ever was or is, nor can the wisdom of the Nation in Parliament assembled, find
words more emphatical to declare their Abrogation, without saying so, which at
this time it was necessary to forbear, for fear of allarming the Kingdom too
far, before his Majesty be sufficiently provided against it. For admitting them
to continue still in being and force, tho the King may promise for the
nonexecution of them, during his own time, (which is even a pretty bold
undertaking) yet he cannot assure us that the Oaths shall not be required to be
taken at any time hereafter, unless he have provided for an eternal Line of
popish Successors, which God will not be so unmerciful as to plague us with, or
have gotten a lease of a longer life than Methusalah's, which is much more than
the full Century of years wished him in a late Dedication by one that styles
himself an Irishman, a thing he might have foreborn telling us, because the
Size of his understanding fully declares it. However here is such a stroke and
exercise of Absolute Power as dissolves the Government, and brings us all into
a State of Nature, by discharging us from the ties, which by virtue of
fundamental Stipulations, and Statute Laws we formerly lay under; forasmuch as
we know no King but a King by Law, nor no Power he has but a legal Power. Which
through disclaiming by a challenge that the whole legislative Authority does
reside in himself, he has thrown the Gantles to three Kingdoms, and provokes
them to a trial, whether he be ablest to maintain his Absoluteness or they to
justify their being a free People. And by virtu' of the same Royal will and
pleasure, that he annulls (which he calls Suspending) the Laws enjoining the
Tests and the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and commands that none of
these Oaths and Declarations shall at any time hereafter be required to be
taken; he may in some following Royal Papers, give us whitehall, or Hampton
Court Edicts, conformable to those at Versailles, which at all times hereafter
we shall be bound to submitt unto, and stand obliged to be Ruled by instead of
the Common Law and Statut^ Book Nor is the taking upon him to stamp us new
Laws, exclusively of Parliamentary concurrence, in the virtu' of his Royal
prerogative, any thing more uncouth' in it self, or more dissagreeable to the
Rules of the Constitution and what we have been constantly accustomed unto,
than the cassing, disabling and abrogating so many old ones, which that
absolute, out of date, as well as ill favored thing upon Monarchs, called a
Parliament, had a share in the Enacting of. I will not say that our Addressers
were conscious, that the getting an Absolute Power in his Majesty, to be owned
and acknowledged, was one of the Ends for which the late Declaration was
calculated and emitted, but I think I have sufficiently demonstrated both that
such a power it issues and flows from, and that such a power is plainly
exercised in it. Which whether there coming now to be told and made acquainted
with it, may make them repent what they have done, or at least prevent their
being accessory to the support of this Power in other mischievous effects that
are to be dreaded from it, I must leave to time to make the discovery, it being
impossible to foretell what a People fallen into a phrenzie may do in their
paroxism's of distraction and madness.

Nor was the Serving himself into the possession of an Absolute power, and the
getting it to be owned by at least a part of the people, the only Motive to the
publishing the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience in England, and the
Proclamation for a Toleration in Scotland; but a second inducement, tha^ swayed
unto it, was the undermining an subverting the Protestant Religion, and the
opening a door for the introduction and establ^^hment of Popery. Nor was it
from any compassion to Dissenters, that these two Roya^ Papers were emitted,
but from his Majestie^ tender love to Papists, to whom as there arise many
advantages for the present, so the whole Benefit will be found to redound to
them in the issue. We are told (a^ (...)ave already mentioned) that the King is
^esolved to convert England, or to die a Martyr; and we may be sure that if he
did not think ^he suspending the penal Laws, and the dis^ensing with requiring
of the Tests, and the ^ranting Liberty and Toleration, to be means admirably
adapted thereunto, he would not have acted so inconsistently with himself, nor
in that opposition to his own designs, as to have disabled these Laws, and
vouch saved the Freedom that results thereupon. Especially when we are told by
the Liege Jesuit, that the King being sensible of his growing old, finds
himself thereby obliged ^o make the greater have, and to take the larger steps,
lest through not living long enough to effect what he intends, he should not only
lose the glory of converting three Kingdoms, but should leave the Papists in a
worse condition than he found them. His Highness the Prince of Orange very
justly concludes this ^o be the thing aimed at by the present Indulgence, and
therefore being desired to approve the Suspension of the Test Acts, and to
cooperate with his Majesty for the obtaining their being Repealed; was pleased
to Answer, that while he was, as well as prosesseth himself a Protestant, he
would not Act so unworthily as ^o betray the Protestant Religion, which he
necessarily must, if he should do as he was desired. Her Royal Highness the
Princess of Orange, has likewise the same apprehension of the tendency of the
Toleration and Indulgence, and therefore was pleased to say to some Scotts
Ministers that did themselves the honor, and performed the duty that became
them, in going to wait upon her, that She greatly commended their having ^o
accession to the betraying of the Protestant Religion, by their returning home
to take the benefit of the Toleration. What an indelible Reproach will it be to
a Company of men, that pretend to be set for the defense of the Gospel, and who
style themselves Ministers of Jesus Christ, to be found betraying Religion,
through justifying the Suspension of so many Laws whereby it was established and
supported, and whereby the Kingdoms were Fenced about, and guarded against
Popery; while these two Noble Princes to the neglect of their own Interest in
His Majesty's Favor, and to the provoking him to do them all the prejudice he
can in their Right of Succession to the Imperial Crowns of Great Britain, do
signify their open dislike of that Act of the King, and that not only upon the
account of its illegality and Arbitrariness, but by reason of its tendency to
supplant and undermine the Reformed Religion. And they are strangely blind that
do not see how it powerfully operates, and conduces to the effecting of this,
and that in more way's and method's than are easy to be recounted. For thereby
our divisions, are not only kept up at a time, when the united Councels and
strength of all Protestants is too little against the craft and power of Rome;
but they who have Addressed to thank the King for his Royal Papers, are become
a listed and enrolled Faction, to abet and stand by the King in all that
naturally follows to be done for the maintaining his Declaration, and
justifying of the usurped Authority from which it issues. It Is matter of a
melancholy consideration, and turns little to the credit of Dissenters, that
when they of the Church of England, who had with so great indiscretion promoted
things to that pass, which an easy improvement of would produce what has
since ensued, are through being at last enlightened in the designs of the Court,
come so far to recover their wits, as that they can no longer do the service
they were wont, and which was still expected from them; there should be a new
Tribe of men mustered up to stand in their room, and who by their vows and
Promises made to the King in their Addresses, have undertaken to perform, what
others have the Conscience, and Honesty, as well as the Wisdom, to refuse and
decline. Nor are the Divisions among Protestants only hereby upheld and
maintained; but our Animosities and rancours are both continued and enflamed.
For while they of the Established way are provoked and exasperated to see all
the legal Foundations both of the Protestant Religion and their Church
subverted; the Addressing-Dissenters are emboldned, to revenge themselves upon
the National Clergy, in Terms of the utmost opprobry, virulence, and reproach,
for their accession to the sufferings which they had endured. Surely it would
have been not only more generous, but much more Christian, and becoming good as
well as wise men, to have made no other Retaliations but those of forgiveness
and pardon for the injuries they had met with, and to have offered all the
assistances, they could give, to their conformable Brethren, for the stemming
and withstanding the deluge of Popery and Tyranny that is impetuously breaking
in upon the Kingdoms. And as this would have united all Protestants in bonds of
forbearance and love not to be dissolved through petty differences about
Discipline, Forms of Worship, and a few Rites, and Ceremonies; so it would in
the sense and judgment of all men, have given them a more triumphant victory
over those that had been their imprudent and peevish Enemies, than if they were
to enjoy the spoils of the conformable Clergy, by being put into possession of
their Cures and Benefices. The Relation I have stood in to the Dissenting
party, and the Kindness I retain for them above all other, make me heartily
bewail, their losing the happiest opportunity, that was ever put into their
hands, not only of improving the compassion, which their calamities had raised
for them in the hearts of the generality, into friendship and kindness, but of
acquiring such a merit upon the Nation, that the utmost favoures which a true
English Protestant Parliament could hereafter have showed them, would have been
accounted but slender as well as just Recompenses. Nor can I forbear to say,
that I had rather have seen the Furnace of afflictions made hotter for them,
tho it should have been my own lot to be thrown into the most scorching flames,
than to have beheld them guilty of those excesses of folly toward themselves,
and of treachery to Religion, and the Laws of their Country, which their
present ease, and a shor^ opportunity afforded them of acquiring gain, have
hurried and transported so many of them into. It plainly appears with what
aspect upon our Religion the Declaration for liberty of Conscience was emitted,
if we do but observe the advantages the Papists have already reapt by it. How
is the whole nation thereupon, not only overflowed with swarms of Lo^^sts, and
all places filled with Priests and Jesuits, but the whole executive Power of
the Government, and all preferments of honor, interest, and profit are put into
Roman Catholic hands? So that we are not only exposed to the unwearied and
restless importunities of Seducers, but through the advancement of Papists to
all Offices Civil, and Military, if not Ecclesiastic; the covetous become
bribed, the timorous threatened, and the profane are baited with temptations
suitable to their lusts, and they that stand resolved to continue honest are
laid open not only to the bold affronts of Priests and Friars, the insolences
of petulant Popish Justices, the chicaneries and oppressions of the Arbitrary
Commission Court, but to the rage of his Majesty, and the danger of being
attaqu'd by his Armed Squadrons. To which may be added, that by the same
Prerogative and Absolute Power that his Majesty has suspended the Laws made
for the Protection of our Religion; he may disable and dispense with all the
Laws by which it is set up and established. And as it will not be more illegal
and Arbitrary to make void the Laws for Protestancy, than to have suspended
those against Popery; so I do not see how the Adressers that have approved the
one, can disallow or condemn the other. For the King having obtained an
acknowledgment of his Absolute Power, and of his Royal prerogative paramount to
Laws on his exercising it in one Instance; it now depends merely upon his own
will (for any thing these Thanksgiving Gentlemen have to say against it)
whether he may not exert it in another, wherein they are not likely to find so
much of their ease and gain.

There is a third Inducement to the Emitting those Royal Papers, which tho at
the first ^iew, it may seem wholly to regard Forraig^ers, yet it ultimately
terminates in the sub^ersion of our Religion at home, and in the Kings putting
himself into a condition of ^xercising his Absolute Power in whatsoever Acts he
pleases over his own Subjects, whether after the French fashion in commanding
them to turn Catholics because he will ^ave it so, or after the manner of the
Grand ^eignior to require them to submit their Necks to the Bow string; because
he is jea^ous of them, or wants their Estates to pay ^is Janissaries. The united
Provinces are they whom he bore a particular spleen and indignation unto, when
he was a subject, and upon whom he is now in the Throne, he resolves not only
to wreak all his old malice, but by conquering and subduing them (if he can) to
strengthen his Absoluteness over his own People, and to pave his way for
overthrowing the protestant Religion in great Britain, without lying open to
the hazards that may otherwise attend and ensue upon the attempting of it. And
instead of expecting nothing from him, but what may become a brave and generous
Enemy, they ought to remember the encouragement that he gave heretofore to two
varlets, to burn that part of their Fleet which belonged to Amsterdam, an
action as ignominious as fraudulent, and that might have been fatal to all the
Provinces, if through a happy and seasonable detection and the apprehension of one
of the miscreants, it had not been prevented. He knows that the States General
are not only zealous assertors of the protestant Religion, but alway's ready to
afford a Sanctuary and a place of Refuge to those, who being oppressed for the
profession of it elsewhere, are forced to forsake their own Countries, and to
seek for shelter and relief in other parts. And as he is not unsensible, how
easy the withdrawment and flight is into these Provinces, for such as are
persecuted in his Dominions; so he is aware, that if multitudes, and especially
men of condition and Estates, should for the avoiding his cruelty betake
themselves thither, that they would not be unthoughtful of all ways and means,
whereby they might Redeem their Country from Tyranny, and restore themselves to
the quiet enjoyment of their Estates and liberties at home. But that which most
enrages him is the Figure which the two Princes do make in that State (of whose
Succession to the Crown the Protestants in Britain have so near a prospect)
and the Post which the Prince fills in that Government, so that he dare
neither venture to difinherit Them, nor impose upon, them such Terms, and
Conditions, as their Consciences will not suffer them to comply with, while
either these States remain Free, or while such English and Scotts as retain a
zeal for Religion and the ancient Laws and Rights of their respective
Countries, can retreat thither under hopes of Admission and Protection. And so
closely are the interests of all Protestants in England and Scotland, woven and
inlaid with the interest of the united Netherlands, and such is the singular
regard that both the one and the other bear to the Reformed Religion, the
liberty of Mankind and their several Civil Rights; that it is impossible for
his Majesty to embarque in a design against the One, without resolving at the
same time upon the ruin of the Other. Neither will the One be able to subsist,
when once the Other is subdued and enslaved. As Philip the II. of Spain, saw no
way so compendious for the restoring himself to the Sovereignty and Tyrannous
Rule over the Dutch, as the subjugating of England that hel'p to support and
assist them, which was the ground of rigging out his formidable Armado, and of
his design against England in 1588. so his British Majesty, thinks no method
so expeditious for the enslaving his own People, as the endeavoring first to
subdue the Dutch. And as upon the one hand it would be of a threatening
consequence to Holland, could the King subjugate his own People, extirpate the
protestant Religion out of his Dominions, and advance himself to a Despotical
Power; so upon the other hand, could he conquer the Dutch, we might with the
greatest certainty Date the woeful Fate of great Britain, and the loss of all
that is valuable to them as men and Christians, from the same moment and Period
of time. They are like the Twins we read of, whose Destiny was to live and die
together; and which soever of the two is destroyed first, all the hope and
comfort that the other can pretend unto, is to be last devoured. Now after the
advances which his Majesty has made toward the enslaving his Subjects, and
the subverting the Reformed Religion in his Kingdoms, he finds it necessary
before he venture to give the last and fatal stroke at home, and to enter upon
the plenary exercise of his Absolute Power, in laying Parliaments wholly aside,
in cancelling all Laws to make way for Royal Edicts or Declarations of the
complexion of the former, and in commanding us to turn Roman Catholics, or to
be dragoon'd; I say he thinks it needful before he proceed to these, to try
whether he can subdue and conquer the Dutch, and thereby remove all hopes of
shelter, relief, comfort, and assistance from his own People, when he shall
afterward fall upon them. And how much soever the Court endeavoures to conceal
its design, and strives to compliment the States General into a confidence that
all Alliances between them and the Crown of England shall be maintained and
preserved; yet they not only speak their intentions by several open and visible
actions, but some of them cannot forbear to tell it, when their blood is heated
and their heads warmed with a liberal glass and a lusty proportion of wine.
Thence it was that a Governing Papist lately told a Gentleman after they two
had drunk hard together, that they had some Work in England that would employ
them a little time, but when that was over they would make the Dutch fly to the
end of the World, to find a resting place. Delenda est Carthago is engraven
upon their hearts, as being that without which Rome cannot arrive at the
universal Monarchy that it aspires after. It was upon a formed design of a war
against the united Provinces, that the King has for these two years stir(...)
up and incited, as well as countenanced a(...) protected the Algerines in their
Piracies, th(...) through their weakening and spoiling the Du(...) before hand, it
may be the more easy a ma^ter for him to subdue them, when he sh(...) think
fit to begin his hostilities. It Is in o^der to this, that he has entered into
ne^ and secret Alliances with other Princes, the purport of which is boldly
talked of in London, but whether believed at the Hague I cannot tell. For as
Monsr. Barrillion and Mons^ Bonrepos present Transactions at Whitehal relate to
something else than merely to the a^fair of Hudsons Bay; so Prince Georges
erran^ to Denmark, is of more importance than bare visit, or a naked
compliment to hi^ Brother. It Is upon this design that all tha^ great Marine
preparation has been so lon^ making in the several ports of England; bu^ to
the hindering the execution whereof some unexpected and not foreseen accidents
have interposed. And it is in subserviency not to be disquieted at home, while
he is carrying on this holy war abroad, that the Declaration for liberty of
Conscience in England, and the Proclamation for a Toleration in Scotland, are
granted and published. It Is well enough known how that after the French King
had, among many other severities exercised against Protestants, made them
incapable of Employments and commands; yet to avoid the consequences that might
have ensued thereupon, while he was engaged in war against the Emperor, the
King of Spain, and the States of Holland, and to have the aid' of his Reformed
Subjects; he not only intermitted and abated in many other rigours toward
them, but in Anno 1674. restored them to a capacity of being employed and
preferred. And that this did not flow from any compassion, tenderness or good
will, toward them, his carriage since the issue of that war, and the miserable
condition he has reduced them unto, does sufficiently testify and declare. Nor
can we forget, how that the late King, after a rigorous execution of the penal
Laws for several years against Dissenters; yet being to enter into an unjust
^ar against the united Provinces Anno 1672. ^ot only forbore all proceedings of
that kind, ^ut published a Declaration for suspending the ^xecution of all
those Laws, and for the al^owing them liberty of Assembling to wor^hip God in
their separate meetings, without being hindered or disturbed. What ^rinciple
that proceeded from, and to what and it was calculated, appeared in his
beha^iour to them afterward, when neither the ^anger the Nation was in from
the Papists, ^or the application of several Parliaments ^ould prevail for
lenity toward them, much less for a legal Repeal of those impo^itick and
unreasonable Statutes. Nor does ^he present Indulgence flow from any kindness
to Fanatics, but it is only an artifice to stiff their discontents, and to
procure their assistance for the destroying of a Foreign Protestant State. And
it may not be unworthy of observation, that as the Declaration of Indulgenct
Anno 1672. bore date much about the same time with the Declaration of war
against the Dutch; so at the very season that his present Majesty emitted his
Declaration for liberty of Conscience, there were Commissions of Reprisal
prepared and ready to be grantrd to the English East India Company against the
Hollanders, but which were suppressed upon the Courts finding that they whom
the suspending the Execution of so many Laws, and the granting such liberties,
Rights and immunities to the Papists, had disgusted and provoked, were far more
numerous and their resentments more to be apprehended, than they were, whose
murmurings and discontents they had silenced and allayed by the liberty that
was granted. Now as it will be at this juncture, when the Protestant Interest
is so low in the World, and the Reformed Religion in so great danger of being
destroyed, a most wicked as well as an imprudent Act, to contribute help and
aid to the subjugating a people, that are the chief Protectors of the
protestant Religion that are left, and almost the only Asserters of the Rights
and liberties of Mankind, so it may, fill the Addressers with confusion and
shame that they should have not only justified an Act of his Majestys that is
plainly designed to such a mischievous End, but that they should by the
promises and vows that they have made him, have emboldned his Majesty to
continue his purposes and Resolutions of a war against the Dutch. Which as it
must be funestous and fatal to the Protestant Cause, in case he should prosper
and succeed; so howsoever it should issue, yet the Addressers, who have done
what in them lies to give encouragement unto it, will be held betrayers of the
Protestant Religion, both abroad and at home, and judged guilty of all the
blood of those of the same Faith with them, that shall be shed in this Quarrel.

That Liberty ought to be allowed to men in matters of Religion, is no Plea
whereby the Kings giving it in an illegal and Arbitrary manner, can be
maintained and justified. Since ever I was capable of Exercising any distinct
and coherent Acts of Reason, I have been alway's of that Mind, that none ought
to be persecuted for their Consciences toward God in matters of Faith and
Worship. Nor is it one of those things that lie under the power of the
Sovereign and Legislative Authority, to grant or not to grant; but it is a
Right settled upon mankind antecedent to all Civil Constitutions and Humane
Laws, having its foundation in the Law of Nature, which no Prince or State can
legitimately violate and infringe. The Magistrate as a Civil Officer can
pretend or claim no power over a people, but what he either derives from the
Divine Charter, wherein God, the Supreme Instituter of Magistracy has chalk't
out the duty of Rulers in general, or what the people upon the first and
original Stipulation, are supposed to have given him in order to the
protection, peace and prosperity of the Society. But as it does no where appear
that God has given any such power to Governors, seeing all the Revelations in
the Scripture, as well as all the Dictates of Nature, speak a contrary
language, so neither can the People upon their choosing such a one to be their
Ruler, be imagined to transferr and vest such a power in him, for as much as
they cannot divest themselves of a power, no more than of a Right, of believing
things, as they arrive with a credibility to their several and respective
Understandings. As it is in no man's power to believe as he will, but only as he
sees cause; so it is the most irrational imagination in the world, to think
they should transferr a Right to him whom they have chosen to Govern them, of
punishing them for what it is not in their power to help. Nor can any thing be
plainer, than that God has reserved the Empire over Conscience to himself, and
that he has circumscribed the power of all humane Governore to things of a
civil and inferior nature. And had God conveyed a Right unto Magistrates of
commanding men to be of this or that Religion, and that because they are so,
and will have others to be of their mind; it would follow that the People may
conform to whatsoever they require, tho by all the lights of sense*, Reason and
Revelation, they are convinced of the falsehood of it: seeing whatsoever the
Sovereign rightfully Commands, the Subjects may lawfully obey. But tho the
persecuting people for matters of mere Religion, be repugnant to the light of
Nature, inconsistent with the fundamental Maxims of Reason, directly contrary
to the temper and genious, as well as to the Rules of the Gospel, and not only
against the safety and interest of Civil Societies, but of a tendency to fill
them with confusion, and to arm Subjects to the cutting of one another
throats; yet Governors may both deny Liberty to those whose principles oblige
them to destroy those that are not of their mind, and may in some measure
Regulate the Liberty which they vouch save to others, whose opinions tho they
do not think dangerous to the peace of the Community, yet through judging them
erroneous and false, they conceive them dangerous to the Souls of men. As
there is a vast difference betwixt Tolerating a Religion, and approving the
Religion that is Tolerated; so what a Government does not approve, but barely
permitts and suffers, may (...) brought under Restrictions as to time,
plac(...) and number of those professing it, that sha(...) assemble in one
meeting; which it were(...) an undecency, to extend to those of th(...)
justified and established way. Now wha(...) soever Restrictions, or
Regulations, are E(...) acted, and ordained by the Legislative A^thority, in
reference to Religions or Religio(...) Assemblies; they are not to be stopped,
disable(...) or suspended, but by the same Authority th(...) Enacted and
ordained them. The King say (...) very truly, that Conscience ought not to
(...) constrained, nor people forced in matters of me(...) Religion; but it
does not from thence follo(...) (unless by the Logic of Whitehal) th(...)
without the concurrence of a Parliamen(...) he should suspend and dispense with
the Law(...) and by a pretended preroragtive, relieve an(...) from what they
are obnoxious unto by th(...) Statutes of the Realm. His saying, that th(...)
forcing people in matters of Religio(...) spoils Trade, depopulates Countries,
discour(...) geth Strangers, and answers not the End (...) beinging all to an
Uniformity, for which it (...) employed; would do well in a Speech to th(...)
Houses of Parliament, to persuade them t(...) Repeal some certain Laws, or
might do we(...) to determine his Majesty to assent to suc(...) Bills as a
Parliament may prepare and offe(...) for relieving persons in matters of
Co(...) science; But does not serve for what it (...) alleged, nor can it
warrant his suspending th(...) Laws by his single Authority. And by th(...)
way, I know when these very Argument(...) were not only despised by His
Majesty, an(...) ridiculed by those who took their Cue fro(...) Court, and had
wit to do it, as by the pr^sent Bishop of Oxford in a very ill nature(...) Book,
called Ecclesiastical Polity; but when(...) the daring to have mentioned them,
woul(...) have provoked the then Duke of York's i(...) dignation, and have
exposed the party th(...) did it to discountenance and disgrace. T(...)
question is not, what is convenient to (...) done in some measure and degree,
and (...) reference to those whose Religion does n(...) oblige them to destroy
all that differ fro(...) ^om, when they have opportunity for it; (...)t the
point in debate is, who has the le^^l power of doing it, and of fixing its
bounds ^^d limits. It was never pretended that the (...)ing ought to be shut
out from a share in spending and Repealing Laws; but that the ^^le Right of
doing it belongs to him, is that cannot be allowed, without changing (...)e
Constitution, and placing the whole Le(...)slative Authority in His Majesty.
And as it is (...) Usurpation in the King to challenge it, and (...) treachery
in English Subjects to acknowledge(...); so the inconveniences, that this, or
that ^arty, are in the mean time exposed unto, (...)to the Laws remaining in
force, are ra^^er to be endured, than that a power of (...)ving case and relief
(farther than by con(...)vance) should be confessed to reside in ^^y one, in
whom the Laws of the Com^unity have not placed it. It Is better to ^^dergo
hardships under the Execution of ^^just Laws; than be released from our
^roubles, by a power Usurped over all Laws. ^or by the one, the measures of
Government, (...) well as the Rights and Privileges of a Na(...)on, are
destroyed; whereas by the other, ^^ly a part of the people are afflicted and
^^duly dealt with. While we are Governed (...) Laws, tho several of them may be
in(...)st and inconvenient, yet we are under a ^^curity as to all other things
which those ^aws have not made liable; but when we ^ll under an illimited
prerogative and Abso(...)e Power, we have no longer a Title (...), or a hedge
about any thing, but all lies ^^en to the lust and pleasure of him, in whom we
have owned that power to be (...)ated. A Liberty is what Dissenters have (...)
Right to Claim, and which the Legislative ^uthority is bound by the Rules of
Justice (...)d Duty as well as by Principles of Wisdom (...)d Discretion to
grant. And I am sorry (...)at while they stood so fair to obtain it (...) a
Legal and Parliamentary way, any of (...)em by acknowledging a Right in another
(...) give it, and that in a manner so subver(...)e of the Authority of
Parliaments, should (...)ve rendered themselves unworthy to receive it from
them, to whom the power of bestowing it does belong. Not but that a Toleration
will be alway's due to their Principles, but I know not whether the particular
men of those Principles, who have by their Addresses betrayed the Kingdom, may
not come to be judged to have forfeited all share in it, for their crime
committed against the Constitution, and the whole Politic Society. Nor is
there any thing more just and equal, than that they who surrender and give away
the Rights both of Legislators and Subjects; should lose all grace and favor
from the former, and all portion among the latter.

And how much soever some Protestant Dissenters, may please themselves with the
Liberty, that at present they enjoy in the virtue of the two Royal Papers; yet
this may serve to moderate them in their transports of gladness, that they have
no solid Security for the continuance of it. For should a Parliament null and
make void the Declaration for Liberty, and impeath the judges for declaring a
power vested in the King to suspend so many Laws, and for forbearing upon the
Kings Mandat to execute them; the freedom that the Dissenters possess, would
immediately vanish, and have much the same destiny that the Liberty had, which
was granted unto them by the Declaration of Indulgence anno 1672. Or should the
Parliament be willing to grant ease and Indulgence to all Protestants, by a
Bill prepared for Repealing of all the Laws formerly made against them, and
should only be desirous to preserve in force the Laws relating to the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Statutes which enjoin the Tests, of whose
Execution we never more wanted the benefit in order to our preservation from
Popery, and which an English Parliament cannot be supposed willing to part
with, at a time when our Lives, Estates, and Religion, are so visibly threatened
to be swallowed up, and destroyed by the Papists; in that case we may
confidently believe, that the King instead either of Assenting to such a Bill
for separate favor to Protestants, or persevering in his Compassion and
Kindness of continuing the Suspension of the Laws against Dissenters, he would
from an inveterate enmity as well as from a new contracted resentment, be
stirred up and enraged to the putting the Laws in execution with greater rigor
and severity, than has been seen, or felt heretofore. And all that the
Addressers would then reap by the Declaration; would be to undergo the furious
effects of brutal rage in their Persecutors, and to be unpittyed by the
Kingdom, and unlamented by their fellow Protestants. Or should His Majesty in
favor to his good Catholics, resolve against the meeting of a Parliament, or
to adjourn and prorogue them whenever he shall find, that instead of
confirming what he has done, they shall make null his Declaration, vote his
pretended prerogative illegal and arbitrary, and fall upon those mercinary and
perjured Villains, who have allowed him a power transcendent to Law; yet even
upon that supposal, which is the best that can be made to support men's hopes in
the continuance of the present Liberty, the Protestant Dissenters would have
but slender Security, all the tenure they have for the duration of their
Freedom being only precarious, and depending merely upon the Kings Word and
promise, which there is small ground to rely upon. Nor can he be true to them,
without being false to his Religion, which not only gives him leave to break
his Faith with Heretics, but obliges him to it, and to destroy them to boot,
and that both under the pain of damnation, and of forfeiting his Crown and
losing his Dominions. And how far the Promise and Royal Word of a Catholic
Monarch is to be trusted unto, and depended upon, we have a modern proof and
evidence in the behavior of Louis de Grand toward his Reformed Subjects, not
only in repealing the many Edicts made and confirmed by himself, as well as his
Ancestors, for the free exercise of their Religion; but in the method's he has
alway's observed, namely to promise them protection in the profession of their
Faith, and practi^^ of their Worship, when he was most ste^ fastly resolved to
subvert their Religion, a(...) was about making some fresh advan(...) and
taking some new step for its extirpati^^ Thus when he had firmly purposed, not
(...) suffer a Minister to continue a year in t^^ Kingdom, he at the same time,
publish^^ an Edict, requiring Ministers, to serve b(...) three years in one
place, and not to retur^ to the Church, where they had first officiate^ till
after the expiration of twenty years. (...) the same manner, when he had
resolve^ to Repeal the Edict of Nantes, and had giv^ injunction for the
Draught, by which it w^^ to be done; he at the same season, gave the
Protestants, all assurances of Protection, an^ of the said Edicts being kept
inviolabl^^ To which may be added, that shameful an^ detestable Chicanery, in
passing his Sacre^ and Royal Word, that no violence should be offered any for
their Religion, tho at th^^ very moment, the Dragoons were upon their march,
with orders of exercising a(...) manner of cruelties, and barbarities, upon
them. So that His Majesty of Great Brit(...) tain, has a pattern lately set
him, an^ that by the Illustrious Monarch, whom h^ so much admires, and whom he
makes i^ his ambition, and glory, to imitate. No^ are we without proofs
already, how insigni ficant the Kings promises are, (except to de lude) and
what little confidence, ought t^ be put in them. The disabling, and suspen
ding, the 13th Statute of his late Parliame^^ in Scotland, wherein the Test was
confirmed and his departing from all his Promises Registered in his Letter, as
well as from those contained in the Speech made by the Lord Commissioner,
pursuant to the Instruction^ which he had undoubtedly received, together with
his having forgotten and recede^ from all his Promises made to the Church o^
England both when Duke of York, and since he came to the Crown, are undeniable
evidences, that his Royal Word, is no more Sacred, nor binding, than that of
some other Monarchs; and that whosoever of the (...)rotestants, shall be so
foolish, as to rely upon it, will find themselves as certainly ^isappointed,
and deceived, as they of the (...)ormed Religion elsewhere, have been. (...)d
while they of the established way, find (...) small security by the Laws, which
the ^ing is bound by his Coronation Oath to ob^erve; the Dissenters cannot
expect very ^uch, from a naked Promise, which as it ^ath not a solemn Oath to
enforce it, so it is ^oth illegal in the making, and contrary to (...)he
principles of his Religion to keep. Nor is (...) unworthy of observation, that
he has ^ot only departed from his promises, made ^o the Church of England; but
that we are told, (...) a late Popish Pamphlet, Entitled, A New Test (...) the
Church of Englands Loyalty, published (...)as it self says) by Authority, that
they were (...)ll conditional (to wit by virtue of some ^^ntal Reservation in
his Majesty's breast) and that the Conformable Clergy, having fai(...)ed, in
performing the Conditions, upon which they were made; the King, is ab^olved,
and discharged, from all Obliga^ion, of observing them. The Church of England
(says he) must give his Majesty leave ^ot to nourish a Snake in his bosom, but
rather ^o withdraw his Royal protection, which was pro^ised, upon the account,
of her constant fidelity. Which as it is a plain threatening of all the Legal
Clergy, and a denunciation of the un^ust and hard measure, thy are to look for;
So it shakes the Foundation, upon which all credit unto, and relyance upon, his
Majesty's Word, can be any way's placed. For tho Threatenings may have tacit
Reserves, because ^he right of executing them, resides in the Threatner; yet
Promises are incapable of all ^atent conditions, because every Promise vests
(...) Right in the Promise, and that in the vir^ue of the words in which it is
made. But (...) is the less to be wondered at, if His Majesty (...)y to
Equivocations and Mental Reserves, being ^oth under the conduct of that Order,
and a Member of the Society, that first taught and ^racticed this treacherous
piece of Chica^erie. However it may inform the Dissen(...)s, that if they be
not able to answer the End, for which they are depended upon; or be not willing
in the manner and degree, that is expected; or if it be not for the interest,
of the Catholic cause, to have them indulged; in all these cases, and many
more, the King may be pronounced, acquitted, and discharged, from all the
Promises, he has given them, as having been merely stipulatory, and
conditional. And as he will be sure then, finem facere ferendae alienae
personae, to lay aside the disguise that he has now put on; so if they would
reflect either upon his temper or upon his Religion, they might now know, hand
gratuitam in tanta superbia comitatem, that a person of his pride would not
stoop to such flattery, (as his Letter to Mr. Alsop expresses) but in order to
some design. But what need other proof, of the fallaciousness of the two Royal
Papers and that no Protestants can reasonably depend upon the Royal Word, there
laid to pledge for the continuation of their Liberty; but to look into these two
Papers themselves, where we shall meet expressions, that may both detract from
our belief, of His Majesty's sincerity, and awaken us to a just jealousy, that
the Liberty, and Toleration, granted by them, are intended to be of no long
standing and duration. For while He is pleased to tell us, that the granting
His Subjects, the free use of their Religion for the time to come, is an
addition to the perfect enjoyment of their property, which has never been
invaded by His Majesty since his coming to the Crown; he does in effect say,
that His Fidelity, Truth, and Integrity, in what he grants in reference to
Religion, is to be measured, and judged, by the verity that is in what He tells
us, as to the never having invaded our property. And that I may borrow an
expression from Mr. Alsop, and to no less a person than to the King himself,
namely, that tho we pretend to no refined intellectualls, nor presume to
philosophise upon Mysteries of Government, yet we make some pretense to the
sense of feeling, and whatever our dullness be, can discern, between what is
exacted of us according to Law, and what we are robbed of by an exercise of
Arbitrary Power. For not to sist upon the violent seizure of men's Goods, by
Officers, as well as Soldiers, in all parts of England, which looks like an
invasion upon the properties of the Subject; nor to dwell upon his keeping an
Army on foot in time of peace, against the Authority, as well as without the
countenance of Law, which our Ancestors would have styled an Invasion upon the
whole property of the Kingdom; I would sain know, by what name we are to call
his levying the customs, and the Additional Excise, before they were granted
unto him by the Parliament, all the legal establishment of them upon the
nation, having been only, during the late Kings life, till the settlement of
them upon the Crown was again renewed by Statute. It were also worth his
Majesty's telling us, what Titles are due to the suspending the vice Chancellor
of Cambridg a beneficio, and the turning the President of Maudlins in Oxford
out of his Headship, and the suspending Dr. Fairsax from his Fellowship, if
they be not an Invasion upon our property; seeing every part of this, is
against all the known Laws of the Kingdom, and has been done by no legal
Court, but by a Set of mercinary villains, armed with an Arbitrary Commission,
and who do as Arbitrarily Exercise it. And as the End unto which that
Inquisition Court was instituted, was to robb us of ours Rights and Privileges
at the mere pleasure of the King; so the very Institution of it, is an Invasion
both upon all our Laws, and upon the whole property of the Nation, and is one
of the highest Exercises of Despotical Power, that it is possible for the most
Absolute and unlimited Monarch to exert. Among all the Rights reserved unto the
Subjects by the Rules of the Constitution, and whereof they are secured by many
repeated Laws and Statutes, there are none that have been hithero less
disputed, and in reference to which our Kings have been farther from claiming
any Power and Authority, than those of levying money without the grant as well
as the consent of Parliament, and of Absolving and discharging Debtor; from
paying their Creditors, and of acquitting (...) from being sued and imprisoned
in case of no(...) payment; and yet in defiance of all Law and to the
subverting the Rights of the peo(...) ple and the most essential Privilege and
I(...) risdiction of Parliaments, and to a plain chan(...) ging the ancient
legal Constition into an Absolute and Despotical Governing Power, the King
(they say) is assuming to himself a(...) Authority, both of imposing a Tax of
five pound per annum upon every Hackney Coach, and of Releasing and discharging
all Debtors, of whom their Creditors cannot claim and demand above ten pound
Sterling; which as they will be signal Invasions upon property, and lea^ing
Cases for the raising money in what other instances he pleases, by a Hamp^on
Cour^ or a Whitehall Edict, without standing in need of a Parliament, or being
obliged to a dependence upon their Grant, for all Taxes to be levied upon the
Subjects, as his Predecessors have heretofore been; so they may serve fully to
instruct us what little security either the Dissenters have as to being long in
the possession of their present liberty, or Protestants in general of having a
freedom continued unto them of professing the Reformed Religion, if we have
nothing more to rely upon for preventing our being abridged and denied the
liberty of our Religion, than we have had for preserving our Property from
being Invaded and broken in upon. We may subjoin to the Clause already
mentioned, that other Expression, which occurs in the foresaid Declaration,
viz. that as he freely gives them leave to meet and serve God after their own
may and manner, so they are to take special care, that nothing be preached or
taught amongst them, which may any ways ^end to alienate the hearts of the
people from his Majesty, or his Government; which words as they import the
price at which the Dissenters are to purchase their freedom (whereof we shall
discourse anon) so they admirably serve to furnish the King with a pretense, of
retrenching their liberty whenever he pleases, nor are they inserted there
for any other End, but th^^ (...)on a plea, of their having abused his
Gra(...)us Indulgence to the alienating the hearts of (...) his people from
him, they may be adjud(...)d to have thereby deservedly forfeited, (...)th all
the benefits of it, and of his Royal (...)our. Nor is it possible for a
Protestant (...)nister to preach one Sermon, which a (...)ish Critic, or a
Romish Bigot, may not (...)ily misconstrue, and pervert, to be an (...)enation
of the peoples hearts, from the Kings (...)son, and Government. And of which as
we (...)ve heard many late Examples in France, so (...) will be easy to draw
them into president, (...)d to imitate them in England. I might add, (...)e
observation of the ingenious Author of (...)e Reflections on his Majesty's
Proclamation for (...) Toleration in Scotland; namely, that where(...)s the
King gives all assurance to his Scotts ^ubjects, that he will not use
invincible necessity against any man, on the account of his per^uasion, he does
thereby leave himself at a li^erty, of Dragooning, torturing, burning, and
^oing the utmost violences, all these being ^incible to a person of an ardent
love to God, and of a lively faith in Jesus Christ; and which accordingly many
thousands have been ^riumphantly victorious over. Nor is it likely that this
new and uncouth phrase of ^ot using an invincible nec(...), would have found
room in a Paper of that nature, if it had not been first to counceal some
malicious, and mischievous design, and then to justify the consistency of its
execution, with what is promised in the Proclamation. Moreover, were there that
security intended by these two Royal Papers, that protestant Dissenters might
safely rely upon; or did the King act with that sincerity, which he would
delude his people into a belief of, there would then be a greater agreeableness
than there is, betwixt the Declaration for liberty of Conscience in England,
and the Proclamation for a Toleration in Scotland. The principle his Majesty
pretends to act from, that Conscience ought not to be constrained, and that
none ought to be persecuted for mere matters of Religion, would obliege him to
act uniformly, and with an equal extention of favor to all his Subjects, whose
principles are the same; and against whom he has no exception, but in matters
merely Religious. Whereas the disparity of grace, kindness, and freedom, that
is exercised in the Declaration, from that which is exerted in the
Proclamation, plainly shows, that the whole is but a Trick of State, and done
in s^bserviency to an end, which it is not yet seasonable to discover and avow.
For his circumscribing the Toleration in Scotland, to such Presbyterians as he
styles moderate; is not only a taking it off from its true bottom, matters of
mere Religion, and a founding it upon an internal quality of the mind, that is
not discernable, but it implies the reserving a liberty to himself of
withdrawing the benefits of it from all Scots Dissenters, through fastening upon
them a contrary Character, whenever it shall be seasonable to revive
persecution. And even as it is now exerted to these moderate ones, it is
attended with Restrictions, that his Indulgence in England is no ways clogged
with. All that the Declaration requires from those that are indulged, is that
their Assemblies, be peaceably, openly, and publicly held, that all Persons be
freely admitted to them, that they signify and make known to some Justice of
the peace, what places they set apart for these uses; and that nothing be
preached or taught amongst them, which may any ways tend to alienate the bear^s
of the people from the King or his Government; whereas the Proclamation, not
only restrains the meetings, of the Scots Presbyterians to private Houses,
without allowing them either to build meeting Houses, or to use outhouses or
Barns; but it prohibits the hearing any Ministers, save such as shall be
willing to swear, that they shall to the utmost of their Power, assist, defend,
and maintain the King, in the exercise of his Absolute power against all
deadly. Nor is it difficult to assign the reason, of the difformity that
appears in His Majesty's present Actings, toward his dissenting Protestan^
Subjects in those two Kingdoms. For should there be no Restriction upon the
Toleration in Scotland, to hinder the greatest part of the Presbyterians from
taking the advantage of it; the Bishops and Conforming Clergy would be
immediately forsaken by the generality if not all the people, and so an ^ssue
would not only be put to the division among Protestants in that Kingdom, but
they would become an united, and thereupon a formidable, Body against Popery,
which it is not for the interest of the Roman Catholics to suffer, or give way
unto. Whereas the more unbounded the Liberty is, that is granted to Dissenters
in England, the more are our divisions not only kept up, but increased and
promoted, (especially through this Freedom's arriving with them in an illegal way,
without both the Authority of the Legislative Power, and the approbation of a
great part of the People) it being infallibly certain, that there is a vast
number of all ranks and conditions, who do prefer the abiding in the Communion
of the Church of England, before the joining in fellowship with those of the
Separate and dissenting Societies. Upon the whole, this different method of
proceeding toward Dissenting Protestants in matters merely Religious, shows
that all this Indulgence, and Toleration, is a Trick to serve a present
juncture of Affairs; and to advance a Popish and Arbitrary design; and that the
Dissenters have no security for the continuance of their Liberty, but that when
the Court and Jesuitick end, is compassed and obtained, there is another course
to be steered toward them; and instead of their hearing any longer, of Liberty
and Toleration, they are to be told, that it is the interest of the Government,
and the safety, and honor of his Majesty, to have but one Religion in his
Dominions, and that all must be Members of the Catholic Church, and this
because the King will have it so, which is the Argument that has been made use
of in the making so many Converts in France. They who now suffer themselves to
be deluded into a confidence in the Royal word, will not only come to
understand what Mr. Coleman meant, in his telling Pere de la Chaise, that the
Catholics in England had a great work upon their hand, being about the
extirpation (...) that Heresy, which has born sway so long (...) this
Northern part of the world; but they wi^^ also see and feel, how much of the
desig(...) of Rome was represented in that passage (...) the Popes Nuncio's
Letter dated at Bruxel(...) Aug. 9. 1674. wherein upon the confidenc^ which
they placed in the Duke of York, which is not lessened since he came to the
Crown he takes the confidence to write, that the^ hoped speedily to see the
total and final ruin (...) the Protestant Party.

And as Protestant Dissenters, have no secu* rity by the Declaration, and
Proclamation, for the continuance of their Liberty, so the^ that have by way of
thanksgiving Addresse^ to the King for those Royal Papers, have no^ only acted
very ill in reference both to the Laws and Rights of the Kingdoms, and of
Religion in general, but they have carried very unwisely in relation to their
own interest, and the avoiding the effects of that resentment, which most men
are justly possessed with, upon the illegal Emission of these Arbitrary and
Prerogative Papers. I shall not enter upon any long Discourse, concerning this
new practice of Addressing in general, it having been done elsewhere some years
ago, but I shall only briefly intimate, that it was never in fashion, unless
either under a weak and precarious Government, or under one that took illegal
courses, and pu^sued a different interest from that of the People and
Community. As he who Rules according to the standing Laws of a Country, over
which he is set, needs not seek for an Approbation of his Actions from a part
of his Subjects; the Legality of his proceedings being the best Justification
of him that Governs, and giving the truest Satisfaction to them that are Ruled;
so he who enjoy's the love of all his people, needs not look for promises of
being assisted, stood by and defended, by any one Party or Faction among them;
there being none from whom he can have the least apprehension of opposition and
danger. It was the want of a Legal Title in Oliver Crom^el, and his Son Richard
to the Government, that first begot this (...)vice of Addressing, and brought
it upon (...)e stage in these British Nations; and it was (...)e Arbitrary
procedures of the late King, as (...)is of his present Majesty, and their
acting (...)on a distinct bottom from that of the three (...)ingdoms, that has
revived, and does con(...)nue it. Nor is there any thing, that has (...)ndred
those two Princes more contempti(...)e abroad, and proclaimed them weaker (...)
home, than their recurring unto, and (...)lliciting, the flatteries and aid, of
the (...)ercinacy, timorous, servile, and for low (...)nd personal ends biased
part of their (...)ubjects, and thereby telling the World, (...)at neither the
generality nor the most ho(...)orable of their People have been united in
(...)heir Interest, nor approvers of the Coun(...)else that have been taken and
pursued. And (...)f any thing did ever cast a dishonor upon (...)he English
Nation, it has been that loath(...)ome flattery, and slavish Sycophancy,
wherewith the Addressers, both now, and ^or some years past, have stuff't their
ap^lications to the two Royal Brothers. The Thr^n^ that is sustained and upheld
by the Pillars of Law and Justice, needs not to (...)hew out unto its self
other Supporsers, nor (...)lean upon the crooked and weak s(...)lts, of the
insignificant, and for the most part de(...)ceitful as well as b^ib'd Vows, of
a sort of men, who will be as ready upon the least disgust, to cry cruci^y to
morrow, as they were for being gratified, may be in their ^usts, humors, and
revenges, and at the best in some separate concern, to cry Hosanna to day. I
shall decline prosecuting what concerns the honor, or dishonor, of him, to whom
the Adresses are made, or how politic, or impolitick, the countenancing and
encouraging them is; and shall apply my self to this new set of Addressers, and
endeavor to show how foolish as well as criminally they have acted. Nor is it
an argument either of their prudence or honesty, or of their acting with any
consistency to themselves, that having so severely inveighed against the
Addresses, that were in fashion a few years ago, and having fastened all the
imputations and reproaches upon those that were accessory to them, which that
rank of Addressers could be supposed to have deserved, they now espouse the
practice which they had condemned, and in reference to as Arbitrary and an
unjustifiable an Act of His present Majesty, as the most illegal one the late
King was guilty of, or the worst exercise of prerogative, for which any
here^ofore either commended, or promised to stand by him. For tho the matter
and subject of the A^bitrary Act of him now upon the Tbrone, be not as to every
branch of it so publicly scandalous, as some of the Arbitrary proceedings of
the late King were, (as relating to a favor which mankind has a just claim
unto) yet it is every way as illegal, being in reference to a privilege, which
His Majesty has no Authori^y to grant and bestow. And were it not that there
are many Dissenters, who preserve themselves innocent at this juncture, and
upon whom the temptation that is administered makes* no impression; the world
would have just ground to say, that the Phanaticks are not governed by
Principles, but that the measures they walk by, are what conduces to their
private and personal benefit, or what lies in a tendency to their loss and
prejudice. And that it was not the late Kings usurping, and exerting, an
Arbitrary and illegal power, that offended them; but that they were not the
Objects in whose favor it was exercised. It Is also an aggravation of their
Folly as well as their Offer^c^, that they should revive a practice which the
Nation was grown ashamed of, and whereof they who had been guilry begun to
repent, through having seen that all the former Declarations, Assurances, and
Promises of the Royal Brothers, which tempted to applications of that kind,
were but so many juggles, peculiar to the late Breed of the Family, for the
deceiving of mankind; and that never one of them was performed and made good.
But the transgression, as well as the imprudence, of the present Addressers, is
yet the greater, and they are the more criminal and inexcusable before God and
men, in that they might have enjoyed all the benefits of the Kings Declaration,
without acknowledging the Justice of the Authority by which it was granted, or
making themselves the scorn and contempt of all that are truly honest and
wise, by their servile Adulations, and their gratulatory Scribles unbecoming
Englishmen and Protestants. They had no more to do, but to continue their
meetings, as they had sometimes heretofore used to do, without taking notice
that the present Suspension of the Laws, made their Assembling together more
safe, and freed them from apprehension of fines and imprisonments. Nor could
the King, how much soever displeased with such a conduct, have at this time
ventured upon the expressing displeasure against them; seeing as that would
have been both to have proclaimed his hypocrisy, in saying, that Conscience
ought not to be constrained, nor people forced in matters of mere Religion, and
a discovering the villainous design in subserviency to which the Declaration had
been emitted; so it were not possible for him, after what he has published, to
single out the Dissenters from amongst other Protestants; and to fall upon all,
before matters are more ripe for it, might be a means of the abortion of all
his Popish Projections, and of saving the whole Reformed interest in Great
Britain. Neither would the Church of England men, have envied their
tranquillity, or have blamed their carriage; but would have been glad that
their Brethren had been eased from oppressions, and themselves delivered from
the grievous and dishonorable task of prosecuting them, which they had formerly
been forced unto by Court injunctions and commands. And as they would have by a
Conduct of this nature had all the Freedom which they now enjoy, without the
guilt and reproach which they have derived upon themselves by Addr^ssing; so
such a carriage, would have wonderfully recommended them to the Favor of a
true English Parliam(...) which tho it will see cause to condem(...) the Kings
usurping a power of suspending t(...) Laws, and to make void his
Declaratio(...) yet in gratitude to Dissenters for such a behavior, as well as
in pity and compassio(...) to them as English Protestants, such a Parliament
would not fail to do all it could to give them relief in a legal way. Where as
if any thing inflame and exasperate t(...) Nation, to revive their sufferings,
it wi(...) arise from a resentment of the unworth(...) and treacherous carriage
of so many (...) them, in this critical and dangerous ju(...) cture. But the
Terms, which through their A(...) dressing, they have owned the receivi(...) their
Liberty and Indulgence upon, does in peculiar manner enhance their guilt
again(...) God, and their Country, and strangely ad(...) to the disgust and
anger, which lovers (...) Religion, and the Laws of the Nation have(...)
conceived against them. For it is Hot onl(...) upon the acknowledgment of a
preroga(...) in the King over the Laws, that they have(...) received and now
hold their Liberty; b(...) it is upon the condition, that nothing be
preach(...) or taught amongst them that may any ways tend (...) alienate the
hearts of the People from his Majesti(...) person and Government. He must be of
an u(...) derstanding* very near allied unto, and approaching to that of an
Irish man, who do(...) not know what the Court sense of that clau(...) is; and
that his Majesty thereby intends, th(...) they are not to preach against
Popery, nor t(...) set forth the Doctrines of the Romish Church i(...) terms
that may prevent the peoples being i(...) ^ected by them, much less in colors
th(...) may render them hated and abhorred. T(...) accuse the Kings Religion of
Idolatry, or (...) affirm the Church of Rome to be the Apoc(...) lyptick
Babylon, and to represent the Articl(...) of the Tridentine Faith, as faithful
Ministers (...) Christ ought to do; would be accounted a(...) alienating the
hearts of their hearers from t(...) King and his Government; which as they
(...) in the foresaid Clause required no^ to do, (...) they have by their
Addressing confessed t(...) Justice of the Terms, and have undertaken (...)
(...)old their liberty by that Tenor. And to give (...)em their due, they have
been very faithful (...)itherto, in conforming to what the King (...)xacts, and
in observing what themselves have (...)ented to the equity of. For
notwithstan(...)ing all the danger from popery, that the Na(...)on is exposed
unto, and all the hazard that (...)e Souls of men are in, of being poisoned
(...)ith Romish principles; yet instead of prea(...)ing or writing against any
of the Doctrines of (...)e Church of Rome, they have agreed among
(...)emselves, and with such of their Congre(...)ations as approve their
procedure, not so (...)uch as to mention them; but to leave the (...)rovince of
defending our Religion, and of (...)etecting the falsehood of papal Tenets, to
the (...)astors and Gentlemen of the Church of Eng(...)nd. And being asked (as
I know some of (...)em that have been) why they do not preach (...)against
Antichrist, and confuse the papal Do(...)rines; they very gravely reply, that
by prea(...)ing Christ, they preach against Antichrist; (...)nd that by
Teaching the Gospel, they Re(...)te Popery; which is such a piece of
fraudu(...)ent and guilful sub^erfuge, that I want words (...)o express the
knavery and criminalness of it. What a reserve and change have I lived to see
(...)n England, from what I beheld a few years (...)go. It was but the other
day, that the Con(...)rmable Clergy were represented by some of (...)he
Dissenters, not only as favorers of (...)opery, but as endeavoring to hale it
in upon (...)s by all the methods and ways that lay within (...)heir circle;
and yet now the whole defense of (...)e Reformed Religion must be entirely
de(...)olved into their hands; and when all the (...)ces are pulled up, that
had been made to (...)inder Popery from overflowing the Nation, (...)ey must be
left alone, to stemm the inun(...)ation, and prevent the deluge. They among
(...)e Fanatics that boasted to be the most avo(...)ed and irreconcilable
Enemies of the Church (...)f Rome, are not only become altogether si(...)ent,
when they see the Kingdom pesterd with (...) swarm of busy and seducing
Emissaries; but (...)e both turned Advocats for that Arbitrary (...)aper
whereby we are surrendered as a prey (...)nto them, and do make it their
business to detract from the reputation, and discourage the labors of the
National Ministers, who with a zeal becoming their Office, and a learning which
deserves to be admired, have set themselves in opposition to that croaking fry,
and have done enough by their excellent, and unimitable Writings to save people
from being deluded and perverted, if either unanswerable consutations of
Popery, or demonstrative Defenses of the Articles and Doctrines of the Reformed
Religion, can have any efficacy upon the minds of men. Among other fulsom
flatteries adorning a Speech made to his Majesty by an Addressing Dissenter, I
find this hypocritical and shameful adulation, namely, that if there should
remain any seeds of disloyalty in any of his Subjects, the transcendent
goodness exerted in his Declaration would mor^isie and kill them; to which he
might have added with more truth, that the same transcendent goodness had
almost destroyed all the seeds of their honesty, and mortied their care and
concernment for the interest of Jesus Christ, and for the Reformed Religion.
Their old strain of zealous preaching against the Idola^ry of Rome, and
concerning the coming out of Babylon my people, are grown out of fashion with
them in England, and are only reserved, and said by, to recommend them to the
kindness, and acceptance of foreign Protestants, when their occasions and
conveniences draw them over to Amsterdam. Whosoever comes into their
Assemblies, would think for any thing that he there hears delivered from their
pulpits, that She which was the Whore of Babylon a few years ago, were now
become a chaste Spouse; and that what were heretofore the damnable Doctrines of
Popery, were of late turned innocent and Harmless opinions. The Kings
Declaration, would seem to have brought some of them to a melius inquirendum,
and as they are already arrived to believe a Roman Catholic the best King,
that they may in a little time come to esteem Papists for the best Christians.
The keeping back nothing that is profitable to save such as hear them, and the
declaring the whole Counsel of God; that are the Terms upon which they receiyed
their Commission from Jesus Christ, and wherein they have Paul's practice and
example for a pattern, would seem to be things under the Power of the Royal
prerogative, and that the King may supercede them by the same Authority, by
which he dispenses with the penal Statutes. Which as it is very agreeable unto,
and imported in his Majesty's Claim of being obeyed without reserve; so the
owning this Absolute Power with that annex of challenged obedience, does acquit
them from all obligations to the Laws of Christ, when they are found to
interfere with what is required by the King. But whether Gods Power, or the
Kings, be superior, and which of the two can cassate the others Laws, and whose
wrath is most terrible; the judgment day will be able and sure to instruct
them, if all means in this world prove insufficient for it. The Addressers know
upon what conditions they hold their Liberty; and they have not only observed
how several of the National Clergy have been treated for preaching against
Popery; but they have heard how diverse of the Reformed Ministers in France
(before the general suppression) were dealt with, for speaking against their
Monarchs Religion; and therefore they must be pardoned, if they carry so, as
not to provoke his Majesty, tho in the mean time through their ^^lence, they both
betray the Cause of their Lord and Master, and are unfaithful to the Souls of
those, of whom they have taken upon them the spiritual guidance. As for the
Papers themselves that are styled by the name of Addresses, I shall not meddle
with them, being as to the greatest part of them, fitter to be exposed and
ridiculed, either for their dullness and pedantry, or for the adulation and
sycophancy with which they are fulsomly stuff^; than to deserve any serious
consideration, or to merit reflections that may prove instructive to Mankind.
Only as that Address wherein his Majesty is thanked for his restoring God to
his Empire over Conscience, deserves a rebuke for its blasphemy; so that other
which commends him for promising, to force the Parliament to ra^i^y his
Declaration, (tho by the way all he says is, that he does not doubt of their
concurrence, which yet his ill succ(...) upon the closetting of so many
Member(...) and his since Dissolving that Parliament shows that there was some
cause for the doub(...) ting of it) I say that other Address, merits severe
Censure for its insolency against th(...) legislative Authority. And the
Authors of (...) ought to be punished, for their crime com(...) mitted against
the Liberty and Freedom (...) the two Houses, and for encouraging th(...) King
to invade and subvert their most essen(...) tial and fundamental Privileges,
and withou(...) which, they can neither be a Council, Judi(...) cature, nor
Lawgivers.

After all, I hope the Nation will be so in(...) genuous, as not to impute the
miscarriages (...) some of the nonconformists, to the whole part(...) much less
to ascribe them to the principles o(...) Dissenters. For as the points wherein
the(...) differ from the Church of England, are purel(...) of another Nature,
and which have no re(...) lation to Politics, so the influence, that the(...)
are adapted to have, upon men as member(...) of Civil Societies, is to make
them in a specia(...) manner regardful, of the Rights, and Fran(...) chises, of
the Community. But if some nei(...) there understand the tendency of their
ow(...) principles, nor are true and faithful unto them these things are the
personal faults of those(...) men, and are to be attributed to their ig(...)
norance, or to their dishonesty; nor are they(...) carriages to be counted the
effects of they(...) Religious Tenets, much less are others of the party to be
involved under the reproach an(...) guilt of their imprudent and ill
conduct(...) Which there is the more cause to acknow(...) ledg, because tho the
Church of England, ha(...) all the reason of the World, to decline Addressing,
in that all her legal Foundation, a(...) well as Security, is shaken by the
Declaration yet there are some of her Dignitaries and C(...) gy, as well as
diverse of the Members of he(...) Communion, who upon motives of Ambition
Covetousness, Fear, or Courtship, have(...) enrolled themselves into the Li^^ of
Addre(...) sers; and under pretense of giving thanks (...) the King, for his
promise of protecting (...) Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy, and a(...)
(...)erof the Church of England in the free Exer(...) of their Religion, as by
Law established; (...)ve cut the throat of their Mother, at (...)ose breasts
they have sucked till they are (...)own fat, both by acknowledging the usur(...)
prerogative upon which the King assumes (...) Right and Authority of Emitting
the De(...)ration; and by exchanging the legal stand^^g, and Security of their
Church, into that (...)ecarious one of the Royal word, which (...)ey fly unto
as the bottom of her Subsistence, (...)d trust to as the wall of her defense.
And (...) most of the Members of the Separate So(...)ties, are free from all
accession to Ad(...)essing, and the few that concurred were (...)eerly drawn in
by the wheedle and impor(...)nity of their Preachers; so they who are (...) the
chiefest Character, and greatest repu(...)tion for Wisdom and Learning among
(...)e Ministers, have preserved themselves (...)om all folly and treachery of
that kind. The Apostle tells us, that not many wise, not ^any noble are called;
which as it is verified (...) many of the Dissenting Addressers, so it ^ay
serve for some kind of Apology, for their (...)ow and sneaking, as well as for
their in(...)iscret and imprudent behavior in this mat^er. And it is the more
venial in some of them, as being not only a means of ingra(...)iating
themselves (as they fancy) with ^he King, who heretofore had no very good
^pinion of them; but as being both an easy and compendious method of Attoning
for Offenses against the Crown, of which they were strongly suspected; and a
cheap and expenceless way of purchasing the pardon of their Relations, that had
stood actually (...)ccused of high Treason. Nor is it to be doubted, but that
as the King will retain very little favor and mercy for Fanatics when once he
has served his Ends upon them; so they will preserve as little kindness for the
Papists, if they can but obtain relief in a legal way. And as there is not a
people in the Kingdom, that will be more (...)oyal to Princes, while they
continue so to govern, as that fealty by the Laws of God (...)or man remains
due to them; so there are none of what principles or communion soever, upon
whom the Kingdom it its whole interest come to ly at stake, may more assuredly
and with greater confidence depend, than upon the generality of Dissenting
Protestants, and especially upon those that are not of the Pastoral Order. The
severities that the Dissenters lay under before, and their deliverance from
oppression and disturbance now, seconded with the Kings expectation and demands
of thanksgiving Addresses, were strong temptations upon men void of generosity
and greatness of spirit, and who are withal of no great Political Wisdom, nor
of prospect into the Consequences of Councils and tricks of State, to act as
illegally, in their thanks, as His Majesty had done in his bounty. So that
whatsoever animadversion they may deserve, should they be proceeded against,
according to their demerit; yet it is to be hoped, that both they, and the
Addressers of the former stamp, may all find room in an Act of Indemnity, and
that the Mercy of the Nation toward them, will triump over and get the better
of its Justice. As it would argue a strange and judicial infatuation, should
they proceed to farther excesses, and think to escape the punishment due to one
Crime, by comitting and taking Sanctuary in another, through improving their
compliments into actions of treachery; so all their hope of pardon, as well as
of lenity and moderation, from a true Protestant and rightly constituted
Authority, depends upon their conduct and behavior henceforward, and their not
suffering themselves to be hurried, and deluded, into a cooperation with the
Court, for the obtaining of a Popish Parliament. All their endeavors of that
kind would but more clearly detect, and manifest, their treachery to Religion
and the Kingdom, it not being in their power to ontvote the honest English part
of the People, so as to help the King to such a House of Commons as he desires;
and were it possible, that through their assistance, in conjunction with violence
and tricks used in Elections and Returns by the Court, such a ^ouse of Commons
might be obtained, as would be serviceable to Arbitrary and papal Ends; yet
neither the King nor they, would be the ne^rer the compassing what is aimd at;
it being demonstrable that the Majority of the House of Lords, are never to be
wrought over to justify this illegal Declaration; or to grant the King a Power
of Suspending Laws, at his pleasure; nor to give their Assent to a Bill for
Repealing the Test Acts, and the Statutes that enjoin and require the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy. And if they should be so far left of God, and betrayed
by those among themselves whom the Court has gained, as to become guilty of so
enormous an Act of folly and villainy; and should the Election of the next
Parliament, be the happy juncture they wait for, and the improving their
interest, as well as the giving their own votes, for the Choice of Papists into
the House of Commons, be what they mean by an essential proof of their Loyalty
and of the sincerity of their humble See Mr. Alsops Speech to the King.
Addresses, and that whereby they intend to demonstrate, that the greatest
thing they have promised, is the least thing they will perform for his
Majesty's service and satisfation: as in that case, they will deserve to
forfeit all hopes of bei(...) forgiven; so it would be an infidelity to Go(...)
and Men, and a cruelty to our selves (...) our Posterity, not to abandon them
as betray(...) of Religion; expunge them out of the Roll (...) Protestants;
strip them of all that where(...) free Subjects have a Legal Right; and not
(...) condemn them to the utmost punishment(...) which the Laws of the Kingdom
adjudg th(...) worst of Traitors and Malefactors unto* There are some, who through
hating of them do wish their miscarrying and offending t(...) so unpardouable a
degree, that they ma(...) hereafter be furnished with an advantage both of
ruining them, and the whole Di^senting party for their sakes. But as the
lov(...) that I bear unto them, and the perswasio(...) and belief I have of the
truth of their Religious principles, do make me exceeding solic(...) tous to
have them kept and prevented, from being hurried and transported into so
fata(...) and criminal a behavior; so I desire (...) make no other excuse for
my plain dealin(...) toward them, but that of Solomon, who tell us, that
faithful are the wounds of a friend, whi(...) the kisses of an Enemy are
deceitful; and that h(...) who rebukes a man, shall find more favor
afterward, than he who flattereth with the tongu(...)

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the foregoing Sheets went to the press, and while they were Printing
off, there is come to my hands a new Proclamation Dated at Windsor the 28. of
June 1687. for granting further Liberty in Scotland, and which was published
there by an Order of the privy Council of that Kingdom bearing Date at
Edinburgh the 5. of July. This Super^^tation of one Proclamation after another
in reference to the same thing, is so apportio^ed and parallel to the late
French method of Emitting Edicts in relation to those of the Reformed Religion
in that Kingdom, that they seem to proceed out of one mint, to be calculated
for the same End, and to be designed for the compassing and obtaining the like
effects. For as soon as an Alarm was taken at the publishing of some
unreasonable and rigorous Edict, there used often to follow another of a milder
strain, which was pretended to be either for the moderating the severities of
the former, or to remove (...)d rectify what they were pleased to call
(...)isconstructions unduly put upon it; but (...)e true End whereof was only
to stiffle and (...)tinguish the jealousies and apprehensions (...)at the other
had begotten and excited, and which had they not been calmed and allayd,
(...)ight have awakened the Protestants there (...) provide for their safety by
a timely with^rawing into other Countries, if they had ^ot been provoked to
generous endeavoures ^f preventing the final suppression of their ^eligion, and
for obviating the ruin which (...)at Court had projected against them and ^as
hastening to involve them under. Nor (...)es my suspicion of his Majesty's
pursuing ^e same design against Protestants, which ^e great Louis glories to
have accompli(...)ed, proceed merely from that conjun(...)ion of Counsels that
all the world observes ^etween Whitehall and Versailles; nor meer^^ from the
Kings abandoning his Nephew and Son in Law the Prince of Orange, and not (...)
much as interposing to obtain satisfaction (...) be given him, for the many
injuries, dam(...)ages, spoils, and robberies, as well as (...)fronts done him
by that haughty Monarch; ^hen one vigorous application could not (...)il to
effect it; nor yet merely from that ^greeableness in their procedures, through the
^ing of Englands imitating that foreign Po(...)ntate, and making the whole
course that (...)ath been taken in France the Pattern of (...)ll his actings in
Great Britain; but I am ^uch confirmed in my fears and jealousies (...)y
remembering a passage in one of Mr. Cole(...)ans Letters, who as he very well
knew what (...)e then Duke of York, had been for many (...)ears engaged in,
against our Religion and (...)ivil Liberties, and under what Vows and
(...)romises he was, not to desist from prose(...)ting what had been resolved
upon and un(...)ertaken; so he had the confidence to say (...)at his Masters
design and that of the King of (...)ance, was one and the same; and that this
^as no less, as he farther informs us than (...)e ex^^^pating the Northern
Heresy. Had the ^ing of England acted with sincerity from (...)at noble
principle, that conscience ought not to be constrained, nor people forced in
matters of mere Religion, as he would delude weak and easy people to believe;
and had not all his Arbitrary and illegal proceedings in granting Liberty to
Dissenting Protestants, been to subserve and promote other designs, which it
is not yet seasonable and convenient to discover and avow; he would have then
acted with that conformity to the Principle he professes to be under the
influence and Government of, and with that consonancy and harmonious
agreeableness, in all the degrees of Indulgence, vouchsased to those of the
Reformed Religion in England and Scotland, that differ from them of the
established way, that there would have needed no second Proclamation apporting
new measures of Liberty and favor to Scotts Dissenters, seeing they would have
had it granted them at first in the same latitude and illimitedness, that it
was bestowed upon the English nonconformists. But when Princes carry on and
pursue mischievous designs, under the palliations of Religion, public good,
and the Right of Mankind; it comes often to pass through adapting their methods to
what they mean and intend, and not to what they pretend and give out, that
their crafty projections, by being not sufficiently accommodated to their
purposes, prove ineffectual to the compassing what was aimed at; and this
forces them to a new game of falsehood and subtilety, but still under the old
varnish and gloss, and obliges them to have recourse to means that may be more
proportioned than the former were, for their reaching the End that they
ubtimately drive at. Thence it is that those Rulers, who are engaged in the
prosecution of wicked and unjustifiable designs, are necessitated not only to
apply themselves to opposite Methods toward different parties, and those such
as must be suited and apportioned to their discrepant interests, without the
accommodating of which they can neither hope to mould them to that tame and
servile compliance, nor work them up to that active and vigorous abetting of
their malicious and crasty projections as is necessary for the rendering them
succesful; but they are forced to vary their proceedings toward one and the
same Party, and that as well when the ways they have acted in toward them are
found inadequate to the End unto which they were calculated, as when the
mischief hid under them comes to be too soon discovered. This weak and
short-sighted people fancy to arise from an uncertainty in Princes councels,
and from their being at no consistency with themselves; but they who can
penetrate into affairs and that do consider things more narrowly, can easily
discern, that all this variation, diversity, and shifting of methods in Rulers
actings, proceed from other causes, and that it is their stability and
perseverance in an illegal and wicked design, that compels them to those
crooked and contrary Courses, either for the gaining the unwary and ill applied
concurrence of their Subjects, to the hastening distress and desolation upon
themselves, or for the throwing them into that lethargy, and under that
supiness, as may hinder them from all endeavors of obstructing and diverting
the evils, that their Governors are seeking to bring upon them. Nor is there a
more certain indication, of a Princes being engaged in a design, contrary to
the good and happiness of the Society, over which he is set; than his betaking
himself to illegal ways, upon pretense of promoting the ease and benefit of his
people; or according as he finds his Subjects to differ in their particular
interests, his applying himself to them in methods, whereof the contrariety of
the one to the other, renders them the more proper and adapted to ensnare the
divided factions, through accosting each of them with something that they are
severally fond of. Legal means are always sufficient to the pursuing and
compassing legal Ends: and whatsoever is for the general good of the Community,
may either be obtained by courses, wherein the generallity find their united
interest and common felicity, or else by application to a Parliament freely and
duly chosen, which as it represents the whole politic Society, so there may be
expected most compassion and tenderness, as well as wisdom and prudence, for
redressing the grievances, easing the troubles, and providing for the benefit
and safety of all that are wrapped up in and represented by them. And as every
Prince, who sincerely seeks and pursues the advantage of his People, will so
adjust and attemper all his actions toward them, that his whole carriage shall
be uniform, and all the exercises of his Governing power, meet in the benefit
of the Community, as so many lines from a circumserence uniting in their
Center; so there needs no other proof that these two or three late Actions of
His Majesty, which a foolish sort of men are apt to interpret for favors, and
to account them effects of compassion and kindness; are but to conceal his
malice, and to subserve as well as cover some fatal and pernicious design, that
he is carrying on against his Protestant Subjects, than that while he is
gratifying a few of them in one thing, he is at the same time robbing all of
them of many; and that while he is indulging the Dissenters with a Freedom from
the penal Laws for matters of Religion, he is invading the properties, and
subverting the Civil Rights of the three Nations, and changing the whole
Constitution of the Government. He that strips us of what belongs unto us as we
are English and Scotts men: cannot mean honestly in the savours he pretends to
vouchsafe us as we are Christians; nor can he that is endeavoring to enslave
our persons, and to subject our Estates to his Arbitrary lust and pleasure,
intend any thing else by this kindness granted to Fanatics in matters of
Religion, than the dividing them from the rest of the People, in what concerns
the Civil Interest and external happiness of the Community, and to render them
an engaged Faction to assist and abet him in enthralling the Kingdoms.
Whosoever considers the whole Tenor of his Majesty's other Actings, in
proroguing and dissolving Parliaments, when he finds them uncompliant with his
(...)pish and despotical Ends; his keeping on (...)ot a formidable Ar^^,
against all the (...)aws of the Land, and upon no other in(...)ention, but to
maintain him in his Usurpa(...)ons over our Rights, and to awe us into
(...)tame and servile submission to his Preroga(...)ve will; His filling all
places of Judicature, ^ith weak as well as Treacherous persons, who instead of
administering Justice may be ^he Instruments of Tyranny; his robbing men of
their Estates, by judicial forms, and under ^retence that nullum tempus
occurris R^gi, after they have been quietly enjoyed by the Subjects for several
hundred years; his advan^ing none to Civil or Military Employs, but whom he
has some confidence in, as to the finding them ready to execute his despotical
^njunctions; and his esteeming no persons Loyal and faithful to himself, save
those who ^re willing to be^^^y their Country, and be Rebels and Traitors
against the Legal Constitution: I say whosoever considers all this, and a great
deal more of the same Hue and complexion, cannot imagine (unless he be under a
judicial blindness and a strange insatuation) that any thing arriving from the
King, tho it may be a matter wherein they may find their present ease and
advantage should proceed from compassion and good will to his Protestant
Subjects, but that it must be only in order to promote a distinct interest from
that of his people, and for the better and more easy accomplishing of some
wicked and unjustifiable design. And tho his Majesty would have us believe,
that the reasons moving him to the Emission of this 2^^ Proclamation, were the
s(...)istruous Interpretations which either have, or may be made, of some
Restrictions in his former; yet it is not difficult even without being of his
privy Council, to assign a truer motive, and a more real and effectual cause of
it. For as that of the 12th of February, came forth attended with so many
limitations, not casie to be digested by men of wisdom or honesty, lest if it
had been more unconfined and extensive, and should have opened a Door for all
Scotts Dissenters to have gone in and taken the benefit of it, the generality
of Protestants in that Kingdom, abstracting from the Bishops, Cura^es, and a
few others, should have joined in the separate interest, and thereby have
become an united Body against popery; but upon finding that hardly any would
purchase their freedom from the penal laws, at so dear a rate, as to do things
so unbecoming Men and Christians, as the conforming to the Terms therein
prescribed obliged them unto; and that as they of the National Communion were
alarmed and disgusted, so few or none of the Dissenting fellowships were
pleased; and that both were not only angry at the many illegal favors, and
threatening advantages, bestowed upon the Papists, but were grown so sensible of
the design carrying on against the Protestant Religion, and the liberties and
privileges of the Subject, that tho they could not renounce their respective
tenets in the matters wherein they differed, yet they were willing to stifle
their heats and animosities, and to give that encouragement, aid, and
assistance to one another, as was necessary for their common safety: upon these
considerations, his Majesty (if he would have spoken sincerely) ought to have
said, that he had published this new Proclamation, in order to hinder Scots
Protestants from uniting, for their mutual defense, against Turkish Tyranny,
and Romish Idolatry, and in hopes thereby to continue and exasperate their
undue and passionate heats, and to keep them not only in divided and opposite
interests, but to make them contribute to the suppressing and ruining each
other, or at least to look on unconcernedly, till he have ripened his designs
against them both, and be prepared for extirpating the Reformed Religion, and
for subverting the fundamental as well as Statute Laws, and for bringing such
to the stake and Gibbet, as shall have the integrity to assert the one, or the
courage to plead for the other. And yet in this last Proclamation, wherein he
grants a more illimited freedom, than in the former, and promises to Protect
all in the exercise of Their Protestant Religion, as he disdainfully and
ignominiously calls it; there is a clause that may discourage all honest men
from owning their Liberty to the Authority that bestows it, and from which it
is derived and conveyed to them. For not being satisfied to superstruct his
pretended Right, of Suspending, S(...)pping, and Disabling Laws, upon his
Sovereign Authority and Prerogative Royal, but as knowing that these give no
such pre-eminence and Jurisdiction over the Laws of the Kingdom, he is pleased
to challeng unto himself an Absolute Power, as the source and spring of that
exorbitant and Paramount Claim, which he therein exercises and exerts. And
forasmuch as Absolute Power, imports his Majesty's being loose and free from
all ties and restraints, either by fundamental Stipulations, or superadded
Laws; it is very natural to observe, that he allows the Government under which
we were born, and to which we were sworn and stood bound, to be hereby
subverted and changed, and that thereupon we are not only absolved and
acquitted, from the Allegiance and fealty, we were formerly under to his
Majesty, but are indispensably obliged by the ^ies and engagements that are
upon us, of maintaining and defending the Constitution and Government, to apply
our selves to the use of all means and endeavors against him, as an Enemy of
the people, and a subverter of the legal Government, wherein all the interest
he had, or could lawfully claim, was an official Trust, and no^ an Absolute
(...) or a despo^icat Dominion, the first whereof he has deposed and abdicated
himself from, by challenging and usurping the latter. And should any Scots
dissenter, either in his entrance upon the Liberty granted by this
Proclamation, or in addressing by way of thankfulness for it, take the least
notice of this freedom's flowing from the King, which cannot be done, without
Recognizing this Absolute Power in his Majesty as the fountain of it, he is to
be looked upon as the worst of Traitors, and deserves to be proceeded against
both for his aecession unto, a(...) justifying the subversion of the Laws,
Libe(...) ties, and Government of his Country, an^ for betraying the Rights of
all free-bor^ men. For those few Reflections in the fore going Sheets, which
this New Proclamation may not only seem to render useless and frustrate the end
whereunto they were intended, but may make the publishing an^ animadversions
upon that, which the Kin^ by departing from, does himself Censure an^ condemn,
be esteemed both a faileur i^ in genuity and candor, and a want of rega(...) to
those Measures of Justice, which ough^ to be observed toward all men, and more
especially toward Crowned Heads; I shall only say that as the Proclamation
arrived wi(...) me too late, to hinder and prevent the communication of them to
the public; so I have this farther to add in justification o^ their being
published, that it will thereby appear, that what his Majesty styles
sinistruo(...) Interpretations made of some Restrictions mentioned in his
former, are no other than the just, natural, genuine, and obvious
constructions, which they ly open unto, and are capable of, and which a man
cannot avoid fastening upon them, without renouncing all Sense and Reason. And
while the King continues to disparage and asperse all sober and judicious
Reflections upon that Royal Paper, by charging upon them the unjust and
reproachful Character of sinistruous Interpretations; it is necessary as well
as equal, that the whole matter should be pl^i^ly and impartially represented
to the World, and that the (...) ^be re(...)tted and l^^t to the understanding
and(...) ass'(...) part of mankind who are the calumniators and Slanderers,
they who accuse the Proclamation of importing such principles, consequences,
and tendencies, or he and his Ministers, who think they have avoided and
answered the imputations fastened upon it, when they have loaded them with hard
and uncivil terms. For tho he be pleased to assume to himself an Absolute
Power, which all are bound to obey without reserve, and in the virtue of which
(...)e Suspends, Stops, and Disables what Laws he ^leaseth, yet I do not know
but that his (...)ntellectuals being of the size of other men's, (...)nd that
seeing neither his Soveraignity, (...)or Catholicalness, have vested in him an
(...)nerrability, why we may not enter our (...)lea and demurr to the dictates
of his Judgment, tho we know not how to withstand the efforts of his Power. Nor
shall I sub(...)oin any more, save that whereas his Ma(...)esty Declares so
many Laws to be disabled to (...)ll Intents and purposes, he ought to have
remembered, that beside other intents and purposes that several of them may
hereafter serve unto as the Papists may possibly come to have experience; there
is one thing in reference to which, he cannot even at present, hinder and
prevent their usefulness and efficacy, and that is not only their raising and
exciting all just resentments in the minds of freeborn and generous men, for
his challenging a Power to Suspend and Cassate them, but their remaining and
continuing Monuments of his Infidelity to the Trust reposed in him, of his
departure from all promises made at and since his entering upon the Government,
and of his invading and subverting all the Rules of the Constitution.

FINIS.
Page 4 col. 2. lin. 3. after Court put. ibid. lin. 41. r. knew. P. 5. col. 1.
l. 3. r. account. ibid. l. 30. r. inpemperate. ibid. col. 2. l. 35. r. in. P.
6. col. 2. l. 18. aite^ Order put. P. 7. col. 2. l, 39. for an^. as. P. 11.
col. 1. l. 32. r. stirred up. ibid. l. penult. 1. judge. P. 25. col. 2. in the
margin r. Rot. Parl. 7. Hen. 4. P. 31. col. 2. l. 11. r. obsole^e. P. 40. col.
1. l. 38. r. Promisee. P. 47. col. 1. l. 27. r. reverse.


